The works of Geffray Chaucer newlye printed, with diverse works which were
never in print before: As in the table more plainly does appear.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum Solum.

Printed by Wyllyam Bonham, dwelling at the sign of the Kings arms in Paul's
Churchyard. 1542.



To the Kings highness, my most gracious sovereign lord Henry the eight,
by the grace of God King of England France, and Irelande, defendour of the
Faith, and in earth supreme heed of the church of England and Irelande.
Among all other excellencies, most gracious sovereign lord, where with
almighty God has endowed mankind, above the resydue of erthly creatures, as
an outward declaration of reason or reasonableness, wherein consysteth the
symilitude of man unto Angels, and the dyfference between the same and brute
beestes, I verily suppose, that speech or langage is not to be reputed among
the smallest or inferiors. For thereby is expressed the conceyte of one to
another in open and plain sentence, which in the resydue of lively creatures,
lacks and is not showed among them, but by certain covert and derke signs,
and that in sewe things having course and operacion only of nature. This
speech or langage, after the confusyon of tongues, sent by gods punishment
for pride and arrogance of people, has been be a certain instyncte and
dysposytion natural dyuysed and invented in sundry parts of the world, as
felowshyppes or co^panyenges of folks one with another chanced, much to the
outward expressing of the thing in word or sound, according to that whereof
it had meaning or sygnificacyon. But in process of time, by dilygence or
policy of people, after diverse fourmes, fygures, and impressyons in metal
barks of trees, and other matter used for memory and knowledge of things then
present or passed, sundry letters or carectes were first among the Phenices
dyuysed and found, with such knyttynges and ioynynges of one to another by a
marvelous subtilte and craft, as counterueyled was and is equiuaualent to the
same langages. So as the conceyte of man's mind, which at the beginning was
used to be declared by mouth only, came to such point, that it was as
sensybly and vyuely expressed in writing. Hervpon ensewed a great occasyon and
courage unto them that should write, to compone and adorn the rudeness and
barbariete of speech, and to form it to an eloquent and ordynate perfection,
where unto many and many great poets and orators have hyghly employed their
studyes and corages, leaving thereby notable renoume of them selves, and
exsample perpetuel to their posterite. Among other the Greeks in all kinds
of sciences, seemed so to prevail and so to ornate their tongue, as yet by other
of right noble langages can not be perfytelye ymitated or followed. The Latyns
by exsample of the Greeks, have gotten or won to them no small glory, in the
fourmynge, order, and vttrynge of that tongue. Out of the which two, if it be
well serched, that is to say Greek and Latin (though by corruption of speech
it should seem much otherwise) have been deryued ye resydue of the langages
that be written with the letters or carectes of either of them both: But of
all speches, those which most approach to the latinite, be the Italian and
Spaynyshe tongues, of whom the one by corruption of the Goths and Longobardes
had her beginning, as latin spoken by strangers of a barbare understanding.
The other being also latin was by Vandales, Goths, Moors, Saracenes, and
other so many times blemyshed, as maruayle it is to se now unto what
perfection these two formed out of the latin and barbare speches be reduced.
Next unto them in similitude to the latin is the French tongue which by
diligence of people of the same, is in few years passed so amended, as well
in pronunciation as in writing, that an English man by a small time exercysed
in that tongue has not lacked ground to make a grammar or rule ordynarye
thereof. Though of troth (which some shall scarselye believe) the Germayns have
so fourmed the order of their langage, that in the same, is both as much
plenty as nere concordau^ce to the phrase of the latin, as the French tongue
has. And verily, like as all these and the rest have been thus vigilant and
studious to meliorate or amend their langages: so has there not lacked
among us English men, which have right well and notablye endeavored and
employed them selves, to the beautifyenge and betterynge of thenglyshe tongue.

Among whom most excellent prince, my most redoubted and gracious
sovereign lord, I your most humble vassal, subject and servant Willyam
Thynne, chief clerk of your kechyn, moved by a certain inclinacion and zele,
which I have to hear of any thing soundynge to the laud and honor of this
your noble realm, have taken great delectation, as the times and laysers might
sustre, to read and hear the books of that noble and famous clerk Geffray
Chaucer, in whose works is so manifest comprobacion of his excellent learning
in all kinds of doctrines and sciences, such frutefulnesse in words, well
according to the matter and purpose, so sweet and pleasant sentences, such
perfection in meter, the composition so adapted, such freshness of invention,
compendiousnesse in narration, such sensyble and open style, lacking neither
majesty ne mediocrite couenable in dysposition, and such sharpness or
quycknesse in conclusyon, that it is much to be maruayled, how in his time,
when doutlesse al good letters were laid a sleep throughoute the world, as
the thing which either by the dysposition and influence of the bodies above,
or by other ordinance of God, seemed like and was in danger to have utterly
peryshed, such an excellent poet in our tongue should as it were (nature
repugnyng) spring and arise. For though it had been in Demosthenes or Homerus
times, when al learning and excellency of sciences floryshed among the
Greeks, or in ye season that Cicero prince of eloquence among latyns lived,
yet had it ben a thing right rare and strange and worthy perpetual laud,
that any clerk by learning or wit could then have framed a tongue before so
rude and imperfyte, to such a sweet ornature and composition, lykely if he had
lived in these days, being good letters so restored and reuyued as they be,
if he were not empeched by the envy of such as may tolerate nothing,
which to understand their capacite does not exte^de, to have brought it unto
a full and fynall perfection. Wherefore gracious soueraygne lord, taking such
delight and pleasure in the works of this noble clerk (as is before mentioned)
I have of a long season much used to read and vysite the same: and as books
of diverse impryntes came unto my hands, I easily and with out great study,
might and have deprehended in them many errors, falsyties, and deprauations,
which evidently appeared by the contrarietees and alteracions found by
collacion of the one with the other, whereby I was moved and styred to make
dilligent search, where I might find or recover any true copies or exe^plaries
of the said books, whereunto in process of time, not without cost and pain I
attained, and not only unto such as seem to be very true copyes of those
works of Geffray Chaucer, which before had been put in print, but also to
diverse other never till now imprinted, but remaining almost unknown and in
oblivion, whereupon lamenting with my self, the negligence of people, that
have been in this realm, who doutlesse were very remysse in the setting
forth or auaunceme^t either of the hystories thereof, to the great hynderau^ce
of ye renoume of such noble princes and valiant conquerours and capitayns as
have been in the same or also of the works or memory of the famous and
excellent clerks in all kinds of sciences that have floryshed therein. Of
which both sorts it has pleased God as hyghly to nobilitate this isle as any
other region of christendom: I thought it in manner appertenau^t unto my
duty, and that of very honesty and love to my country I ought no less to
do, then to put my helpyng hand to the restauracion and bringing again to
light of the said works, after the true copyes and exemplaryes aforefayde.
And deuysynge with my self, who of all other were most worthy, to whom a
thing so excellent and notable should be dedicate, which to my conceyte seems
for the admiration, noueltye, and strangeness that it might be reputed to be
of in the time of the author, in comparison, as a pure and fine tried precious
or polyced jewel out of a rude or indigest mass or matter, none could to my
thinking occur, that syns, or in the time of Chaucer, was or is suffycient,
but only your majesty royal, which by discrecyon and judgment, as most
absolute in wisdom and all kinds of doctrine, could and of his innate
clemence and goodness, would add or give any authorite her unto.

For this cause most excellent and in all virtues most prestant prince, I as
humbly prostrate before your kynglye estate, lowly supply and beseech the same,
that it woll vouchsafe to take in good part my poor study and desirous mind,
in reducyng unto light this so precious and necessary an ornament of the tongue
of this your realm, over pytous to have been in any point lost, falsified, or
neglected: So that under the shylde of your most royal protectyon and defense
it may go forth in publyke, and prevail over those that would blemyshe,
deface, and in many things clearly abolyshe the land, renoume, and glory
hertofore compared, and meritoriously adquired by diverse princes, and other of
this said most noble isle, whereunto not only strangers under pretexte of
high lernyng and knowledge of their malycyous and peruers minds, but also some
of your own subjects, blinded in folly and ignorance, do with great study
contend. Most gracious, victorious, and of god most elect and worthy prince
my most dradde soueraygne lord, in whom of very merit, dewtie, and succession,
is renewed the glorious tytell of Defensor of the christen faith, which by
your noble, progenytour, the great Constantyne, sometime king of this realm,
and emperor of Rome was next god and his apostels, chefely maynteyned,
corroborate, and defended, almighty Jesus send to your highness the contynuall
and everlasting habundau^ce of his infynite grace. Amen.

Thus ends the preface.
A Table of all the names of the works contained in this volume.
The Preface.
THe Caunterbury tales I. The Romant of the Rose ij. Troylus and Creseyde iij.
The testament of creseyde iiij. The legende of good women, with a balade v.
Boethius the Consolatione philosophy vi. The dream of Chaucer, with a balade
vij. The assemble of Fowls viij. The flour of Curtesy, with a balade ix. How
pity is deed and beryed in a gentyl heart x. Labelle dame sauns mercy xi.
Annelyda and false Artyte xij. The assemble of Ladies xiij. The conclusyon of
the Astrolabye xiiij. The complaynt of the black knight xv. A preyse of women
xvi. The house of Fame xvij. The testament of Love xviij. The lamentacio^ of
Mary Magdaleyn xix. The remedy of Love xx. The complaynt of Mars and Venus xxi.
The complaynt of Mars alone xxij. The complaynt of Venus alone xxiij. The
letter of Cupyde xxiiij. A balade of our Lady xxv. A balade to king Henry the
fourth xxvi. Of the Cuckowe and the Nightyngale xxvij. Scogan unto the young
lords and gentylmen of the kings house xxviij. A balade of good consaile by
Chaucer xxix. Diverse other goodly balades etc.xxx.
Thus ends the first table, and here follows the second.
In this table ye may find any thing that ye woll have in this volume by the
Folio, as follows.
The Prologes of the Caunterbury tales.
THe knights tale. Fol. I. The Myllers tale Fol. xij. The Reues tale Fol. xvi.
The Cokes tale Fol. xix. The man of laws tale F. xx. The Squyers tale F.
xxviij The Merchants tale Fol. xxxi. The wife of Bathes prologue Fol. xxxvj.
The wife of Bathes tale Fol. xl. The Freres tale Fol. xliij. The Sompners tale
Fol. xlv. The Clerk of Oxenfordes tale Fol. xlviij. The Frankeleyns tale Fol.
lv. The second Nuns tale Fol. lx. The prologe of ye Chano^s yoman Fol. lxij.
The tale of the Chanons yoman Fol. lxiij. The Doctor of Phisykes tale Fol.
lxviij. The Pardoners Prologue Fol. lxx. The Pardoners tale Fol. lxxj. The
Shypmans tale Fol. lxxiij. The Priores Prologue Fol. lxxvi. The priores tale
Fol. eodem The ryme of sir Topas Fol. lxxviij. The tale of Chaucer Fol. lxxxv.
The Monks Prologue Fol. lxxxix. The Monks tale Fol. xc. The tale of the
Nuns priest Fol. xciiij. The Manciples tale Fol. xcviij. The Persons Prologue
Fol. C. The Persons tale Fol. eodem. The Plowmans tale Fol. C.xix. Explicit
Caunterbury tales.

The Romaunt of the Rose Fol. C.xxviij. Troylus and Creseyde is divided in to
five books.
The first book begins Fol. c.lxvij The second book begins Fol. c.lxxiij
The third book begins Fol. c.lxxxiij The fourth book begins Fol. c.xciij
The fyfth book begins Fol. cc.ij Explicit Troylus and Creseyde.

The Testament of Creseyde Fol. cc.xij The complaynte of Creseyde Fol. cc.xv
The legende of good women has all these following. First.
The Prologue. Fol. cc.xx. The legende of Cleopatras Fol. cc.^ix. The leg. of
Thysbe of Babyloyne Fol. cc.xx The legende of queen Dydo Fol. cc.xxj The leg.
of Hipstphile and Medea Fol. cc.xxiij The leg. of Lucrece of Rome Fol.
cc.xxiiij The legende of Aryadne Fol. cc.xxv The legende of Philomene Fol.
cc.xxvii The legende of Phillys Fol. cc.xxviij The legende of Hypermestra Fol.
cc.xxix. Explicit the legende of Good women.

Boethius de Consolatione is divided into five books.
The first book begins Fol. cc.xxxij The second book begins Fol.
cc.xxxvij The third book begins Fol. cc.xliij The fourth book begins
Fol. cc.lvij The fyfth book begins Fol. cc.lxi. Explicit Boethius de
consolatione.

All these works following be works by them self.
THe dreme of Chaucher F. cc.lxvij The assemble of fowls F. cc.lxxiij The
flour of Curtesy F. cc.lxxviij How Pity is deed and beryed in a gentle heart.
Fol. cc.lxxix La belle dame sans mercy Fol. cc.lxxx Annelyda and false Arcyte
Fol. cc.lxxxvi The assemble of Ladies Fol. eodem. The conclusion of thastrolaby
Fol. cc.xci The co^playnt of the black knight Fol. ccc A preyse of women Fol.
ccc.iiij
The house of Fame is divided in to three books.
The first book begins Fol. ccc.v. The second book begins Fol. ccc.viii
The third book begins Fol. ccc.xi Explicit the house of Fame.

The Testament of Love is divided in to three books.
The first book begins Fol. ccc.xv. The second book begins Fol. ccc.xxv.
The third book begins Fol. ccc.xlj.
All these works following be works by them self.
THe lamentacyon of Marye Magdalayne Fol. ccc.l. The remedy of Love Fol.
ccc.lv. The co^playnt of Mars and venus fol. ccc.lviij The complaynt of Mars
alone Fol. ccc.lix. The complaynt of Venus alone Fol. ccc.lx. The letter of
Cupyde Fol. ccc.lx. A balade of our lady Fol. ccc.lxiij. A balade of king H.
the fourth Fol. ccc.lxiiij. Of ye cuckowe and ye nyghtingale Fol. ccc.lxvij.
Scogan unto the young lords and gentylmen of the kings house Fol. ccc.lxix.
Diverse other balades of Chaucer. etc.

Thus ends the table of all the works.
Eight goodly questions, with their aunsweres.
Sometime in Greece that noble region
There were eightclerkes of great science
Philosophers of notable discretion
Of whom was asked, to prove their prudence
Eight questions, of derke intellygence
To which they answered after their intent
As here does appear plain and euydent
The first questyon, what erthly thing
Is best, and to god most commendable
The first clerk answered without tarying
A man's soul, ever ferme and stable
In right, from truth not varyable
But now alas full sore may we weep
For couetyse has brought truth a sleep
The second, what thing is most odious
A double man said the philosophre
with a virgyn face and a tail venomous
with a fair vieu, and a false profre
A corrupt caryen in a golden tree
It is a monster in natures lynage
One man to have a double vysage
The third, what is the best dower
That may be to a wife appropriate
A clean life, was the cleckes answer
without sin, chaste, and inuyolate
From all disceytes, and speches inoruate
Or countenance, which shall be to dispyse
No fire make, and no smoke woll arise
The fourth questyon, what mayde^ may
Be called clean in chastyte
The fourth clerk answered, which always
Every creature is a shamed on to lie
Of whom every man reports great honest
Good maidens keep your chastyte forth
And remember that good name is gold worth
Who is a poor man ever full of woe
A couetouse man, which is a nygon
He that in his heart can never say ho
The more good, the less distributyon
The richer, the worse of condityon
Men in this cost, clepen him a nygarde
Sir Guy the bribour is his steward
Which is a rich man withouten fraud
He that can to his good suffyse
what soever he has, he yeueth god the land
And keeps him clean from all couetyse
He desires nothing in ungoodly wise
His body is here, his mind is above
He is a rich man, for god does him love
Who is a fool, is the seventh demand
He that would hurt, and has no powere
Might he mykell, much would he command
His malice great, his might naught were
He thretteth full fast, full little may he dear
Thinks not how men have said beforne
God sends a shrewde cow a short horn
Who is a wise man, is the eight question
He that might noye, and does no noyau^ce
Might punyshe, and leaves punyssyon
A man merciful without vengeance
A wise man puts in remembrance
Saying, had I venged all mine harm
My cloak had not be furred half so warm.
Explicit.
To the kings most noble grace, and to the lords and knights of the garter.
TO you well of honor and of worthynesse
Our Christen king, the heir and successor
Unto Justinians devout tenderness
In faith of Jesus our redemptour
And to you lords of the garter flower
Of cheualry, as men you clepe and call
The lord of virtue, and of grace author
Grant the fruit of your rose never appal
O liege lord that have eke the likeness
Of Constantyne, thensample and myrrour
To princes all, in humble buxumnesse
To holy church o very sustaynour
And pyller of our faith, and werryour
Again the heresies bitter galle
Do forth do forth, continue your socour
Hold up Christ's baner let it not fall
This isle or this had been but hethnesse
And be of your faith the force and vigor
And yet this day the fendes crabbydnesse
weueth fully to catch a time and hour
To have on us your lieges a sharp shoure
And to his seruytude us knytte and thralle
But aye we trust in you our protector
On your constaunce we awayten all
Commands that no wight have hardiness
O worthy king, our Christen Emperor
Of the faith to dispute more or less
Openly among people: Her error
Spryngeth all day, and engenders rumor
Makes such law, and for ought may befall
Observe it well, there to be ye dettour
Does so, and god in glory shall you stall
Ye lords eke, shynyng in noble fame
To which appropred is the mayntenaunce
Of Christ's cause, in honor of his name
Shoue on, and put his foes to vttraunce
God would so, so would eke your legiaunce
To tho two prycketh you your duite
who so not keeps this double obseruaunce
Of merit and honor naked is he
Your style says, ye be foes to shame
Now kyth of your faith the perseueraunce
In which an hepe of us be halte and lame
Our christen king of England and of France
And ye my lords with your alyaunce
And other faithful people that there be
Trust I to god, shall quench all this noysau^ce
And this land set in high prosperity
Conquest of high prowess is for to tame
The wild woodnesse of these myscreaunce
Right to the rote repe ye that same
Sleep not this, but for gods plesaunce
And his mother, and in sygnifyaunce
That ye ben of saint Georges lyuere
Does him service and knyghtly obeysaunce
For Christ's cause is his, well known ye
Stiff stand in that, and ye shall grieve and grame
The foe to peace, the norice of distaunce
That now is ernest, turn it in to game
Now kythe of your believe the constaunce
Lord liege, and lords have remembrance
Lord of all is the blysfull Trinyte
Of whose virtue the mighty habundaunce
You heart and strength in faithful unity.
Explicit.
When faith fails in priests sawes
And lords hestes are holden for laws
And robbery is holden purchase
And lechery is holden solace
Than shall the land of Albion
Be brought to great confusyon
It falls for every gentylman
To say the best that he can
In man's absence
And the sothe in his presence
It comes by kind of gentle blood
To cast away all heaviness
And gader together words good
The work of wisdom bears witness
FINIS.
The Caunterbury tales.

The Prologues.
WHen that Apryll with his shoures sote
The drought of March had perced the rote
And bathed every vain in such lycoure
Of which virtue, engendered is the flower
When zephirus eke with his sote breath
Enspyred has every holte and heth
The tender croppes, and the young son
Has in the Ram half his course yronne
And small fowls maken melodye
That slepen al night with open eye
So prycketh hem nature in her courage
Than longen folk to go on pilgrimage
And palmers to seken strange strondes
To serve halowes couth in sundry lands
And specially fro every shyres end
Of England to Caunterbury they wend
The holy blysfull martyr for to seek
That hem has helped, when they were seek.
IT befell that season on a day
In Southwarke at the taberde as I lay
Ready to go in my pilgrimage
To Caunterbury with devout courage
That night was come into that hostelry
Well nine and twenty in a company
Of sundry folk by adventure yfall
In felyshyp, and pilgrims were they all
That toward Caunterbury would ride
The chambres and stables weren wide
And well weren they eased at the best
And shortly when the son was at rest
So had I spoken with hem euerychone
That I was of her felyshyp anon
And made forward early for to rise
To take our way there as I you deuyse
But netheles, while I have time and space
Or that I ferther in this tale pace
Me think it accordaunt to reason
To tell you all the condycyon
Of each of hem so as it seemed me
And which they were, and of what degree
And eke in what array that they were in
And at a knight then will I first begin.
The knight. i.
A knight there was, and that a worthy man
That fro the time that he first began
To ryden out, he loved cheualrye
Troth, honor, fredom, and curtesye
Full worthy was he in his lords war
And thereto had he rydden no man far
As well in christendom as in Hethynesse
And ever had honor for his worthynesse
At Alysaundre he was, when it was won
Full often time he had the dourde begone
Abouen all nations in Pruce
In Lettowe had he rydden and in Luce
No christen man so often of his degree
In Garnade at the syege had he be
At Algezer, and rydden in Belmarye
At Leyes was he, and also at Satalye
When they were won, and in the great see
At many a noble army had he be
At mortal battaylles had he been fyftene
And foughten for our faith at Tramyssene
In lystes thries, and aye slain his fo
This ylke worthy knight had been also
Sometime with the lord of Palathye
Against another hethen in Turkye
And evermore he had a sovereign pryse
And though he was worthy he was wise
And of his port as meke as is a maid
He never yet no vylanye ne said
In all his life, unto no manner wight
He was a very perfyte gentle knight
For to tell you of his array
His horse were good, but he was nothing gay
Of fustyan he wered a gyppon
All besmottred with his haubergion
For he was late come fro his vyage
And went for to done his pylgrimage.
The Squire. ij.
With him there was his son a yo^gesquyre
A lover and a lusty bachelere
With his locks crul as they were laid in press
Of twenty year of age he was I guess
Of his stature he was of even length
And wonderly deliver, and of great strength
And he had be sometime in chyuauchye
In Flaundres, in Artoys, and in Pycardye
And borne him well, as of so little space
In hope to stand in his ladies grace
Enbrouded was he, as it weren a mede
All full of fresh flowers, white and read
Singing he was, or floytynge all the day
He was fresh as is the month of May
Short was his gown, with sleues long and wide
Well could he sytte on a horse, and feign ride
He could songs make, and well endyte
Just and eke dance, portray and well write
So hot he loved, that by nyghter tale
He slept no more then does the nyghtyngale
Curteys he was, lowly and seruysable
And kerft before his father at the table.
The Squyers yoman. iij.
A Yoman had he and servants no mo
At that time, for him list to ride so
And he was clad in cote and hode of grene
A shefe of pecocke arowes bright and sheue
Under his belt he barelfull thryftely
Well could he dress his tackle yomanly
His arowes drouped not with feathers low
And in his hand he bare a mighty bow
A not heed had he, with a brown vysage
Of wodde craft well couth he all the usage
Upon his arm he bare a gaye bracer
And by his side a swearde and a bokeler
And on that other side a gay dagger
Harueysed well, and sharp as point of spear
A Christofer on his breast of silver shene
An horn he bare, the baudrycke was of grene
A foster was he sothly as I guess.
The Prioresse. iiij.
There was also a Nonne a Prioresse
That of her smiling was simple and coye
Her greatest oath was by saint Loye
And she was called dame Eglentyne
Full well she song the service deuyne
Entewned in her voycefull semely
And French she spoke full fetously
After the schole of Stratforde at bow
For french of Paris was to her unknow
At meat was she well ytaught wythall
She let no morsel fro her lyppes fall
Ne wete her fyngers in her sauce deep
Well couth she carry a morsel and well keep
That no drop ne fell upon her breast
In curtesye was set full much her lest
Her ouerlyp wyped she so clean
That in her cup was no ferthynge seen
Of greece, when she dronken had her draught
Full semely after her meat she taught
And sykerly she was of great dysporte
And full pleasant, and amyable of port
And payned her to counterfete chere
Of court, and to be statelythe of manner
And to been holden dygne of reverence.
But for to speak of her conscience
She was so charitable and so pytous
She would weep if that she saw a mous
Caught in a trappe, if it were deed or bledde
Of small hounds had she that she fed
With roste flesh, milk, or wastell breed
But sore wept she if any of hem were deed
Or if men smote hem with a yard smerte
And all was conscience and tender heart
Full semely her wymple pynched was
Her nose tretes, her eyes gray as glass
Her mouth small, and thereto soft and reed
But sekerly she had a fair forheed
It was almost a spanbroede I trow
For hardely she was not under grow
Full fetyse was her cloak as I was ware
Of small coral about her arm she bare
A pair of hedes, gauded all with grene
And thereon honge a broche of gold full shene
On which there was first written a crowned. A
And after that (Amor vineit omnia)
Another Nonne with her has she
That was her chapeleyn, and priests three.
The Monk. v.
A Monk there was fair for the maystry
An out ryder, that loved venery
A manly man to been an abbot able
Full many a deynte horse had he in stable
And when he rode men might his bridle here
Gyngelynge in a whystlynge wind as clear
And eke as loud, as does the chapel bell
There as this lord way keeper of the cell
The rule of saint Maure and of saint Benet
Because it was old and somdele streyt
This ylke monk let old things pace
And held after the new world the space
He yaue not of the text a pulled hen
That says, that hunters be not holy men
Ne that a monk when he is rechelesse
Is lykened to a fyshe that is waterlesse
This is to say, a monk out of his cloystre
This ylke text held he not worth an oystre
And I say his opinion was good
Whereto should he study, and make him self wood
Upon a book always in cloystre to power
Or swynke with his hands, or labowre
As Austyn bid, how should the world be served
Let Austyne have his swynke to him reserved
Therefore he was a prycksoure a right
Greyhou^des he had as swyft as foul of flight
Of pryckynge and of hunting for the hare
was all his lust, for no cost would he spare
I saw his sleues pursled at the hand
with Grice, and that the fynest in a land
And for to fast his hoode under the chynne
He had of gold wrought a curious pynne
A love knot in the greater end there was
His heed was balde, and shone as any glass
And eke his face, as he had been anoynte
He was a lord full fat and in good point
His eyes sleep, and rollynge in his heed
That stemed as a furneys of a leed
His boots sowple, his horse in great estate
Now certainly he was a fair prelate
He was not pale as a forpyned ghost
A fat swane loved he best of any roast
His palfray was as brown as is a very
The Friar. vi.
A Friar there was a wanton and a merry
A lymytour, a full solemn man
In all the ordres four is none that can
So much of daliaunce and fair langage
He had made full many a marriage
Of young women at his own cost
Until his order he was a noble post
Full welbyloued and famylyer was he
with frankeleyns over all in his country
And with worthy women of the town
For he had power of confessyoun
As he said himself, more then a curate
For of his order he was lycenciate
Full swetely herd he confession
And pleasant was his absolucyon
He was an easy man to pyue penance
There as he wist to have a good pytaunce
For unto a poor order for to give
Is sign that a man is well yshryue
For if he gave, he durst make auaunt
He wist that a man was repentaunt
For many a man is so hard of heart
That he may not weep though him smerte
Therefore instead of weeping and prayres
Men mote give silver to the poor freres
His typpet was aye fassed full of knyues
And pynnes, for to give fair wives
And certainly he had a merry note
well could he sing and playen on a rote
Of yeddynge he bare utterly the price
His neck was white as the flower delyce
Thereto strong he was as a champioun
And knew the tauernes well in every town
And every hosteler and tapster
Bet then a lazer or a beggar
For unto such a worthy man as he
Accords naught, as by his faculte
To have with lazers such acquayntaunce
It is not honest, it may not auaunce
For to deal with such porayle
But all with rich, and sellers of vytayle
And over all there as profit should arise
Curteys he was, and lowly of seruyse
There has no man no where so virtuous
He was the best beggar in his house
And gave a certain ferme for the grant
None of his brethren came in his haunte
For though a wydowe had but a shoo
(So pleasant was his In principio)
Yet would he have a ferthynge er he went
His purchase was better then his rent
And rage he couth as it were a whelpe
In love days there could he mykell help
For there he was not like o cloystrere
with a threde bare cope, as a poor friar
But he was like a master or a pope
Of double worstede was his semy cope
So rounded was as a bell out of press
Somewhat he lysped for his wantonness
To make his English sweet upon his tongue
And in harpynge, when he had song
His eyes twynkeled in his heed aryght
As done the stars in a frosty night
This worthy friar was called Huberd^
The Merchant. vij.
A merchant was there with a long berde
In motley, on high on his horse he sat
Upon his head a Flaundres beuer hat
His botes clasped fair and ferously
His reasons he spoke full solempnely
Showing always the increase of his wynnyng
He would the Sea were kept for any thing
Betwyxe Myddelborough and Orewell
Well could he in eschaunge sell
This worthy man full well his wit byset
There wist no wight that he was in det
So stately was he of his governance
With his bargayns, and with his cheuysau^ce
Forsooth he was a worthy man wythall
But sothly to said, I not what men him call.
The clerk of Oxenforde. viij.
A clerk there was of Oxenforde also
That unto logyke had long ygo
As lean was his horse as a rake
And he was nothing fat I undertake
But looked holowe, and thereto soberly
Full thredebar^ was his ouercourtpy
For he had yet getten him no benefyce
Ne was naught worthy to have none office
For him was lever to have at his beds heed
Twenty books, cladde with black or reed
Of Aristotle, and of his philosophy
Then robes rich, or fyddell or gaye sa^^ry
But all be that he was a phylosophre
Yet had he but a little gold in cofre
But all that he might of his friends hente
On books and on learning he it spente
And besely began for the souls pray
Of hem that helpen him to scholaye
Of study took he most cure and head
Not a word spoke he more then need
And that was said in form and reverence
And short and quycke, and of hye sentence
Sownyng in moral virtue was his speech
And gladly would learn, and gladly teache
The sergiaunte at law. ix.
A sergiaunt of law, ware and wise
That often had been at the peruyst
That was also full rich of excellence
Dyscrete he was, and of great reverence
He seemed such, his words were so wise
Justice he was full often in assyse
By patent, and by plain commyssyoun
For his science, and his hye renoun
Of fees and robes had he many one
So great a purchasour was no where none
All was fee simple to him in effect
His purchasing might not be to him suspecte
Nowhere so besy a man as he there nas
And yet he seemed besyer then he was
In terms had he case and domes all
That fro the time of king Wylliam was fall
Thereto he could endyte, and maken a thing
There could no wight pynche at his writing
And every statute could he plain by rote
He rode but homely in a medley cote
Gyrte with a saint of syl^^, with bars small
Of his arraye, tell I no longer tale.
The Frankeleyn. x.
A Frankeleyn there was in his company
White was his berde as is the deysye
And of his complexion he was sanguyne
Well loved he by the morrow a soppe in wine
To lyuen in delight was ever his won
For he was Epycures own son
That held opinion, that plain delight
Was very felicitye perfyte
An householder, and that a great was he
Saint Julian he was in his country
His breed, his ale, was always after one
A better byended man was no where none
Without bake meat was never his house
Of fyshe and flesh, and that so plenteous
It showed in his house of meat and drink
Of all deyntes that men could think
After the sondrye seasons of the year
So changed he his meat, and his suppere
Full many afa^^e par^ryche had he in mewe
And many a dreme, and many a l^^e in stewe
Woe was his coke, but his ^^uce were
Poynante and sharp, and ready all his gere
His table dor^naunt in his hall always
Stood ready covered all the long day
At cessions there was he lord and sire
Full often time he was knight of the shyre
An anelace and a gepsere all of sylke
Hynge at his gyrdell, white as morrow milk
A shyryfe had he been, and a countour
Was nowhere such a worthy vauesour.
The Haberdassher. xi.
An Haberdassher there was and a carpenter
A web, a dyer, and a tapyser
All they were yclothed in o lyuere
Of a solemn and a great fraternity
Full fresshe and new her gear ipyked was
Her knyues ychaped nere not with bras
But all with silver wrought full clean and well
Her gyrdels and her pouches euerydele
Well seemed eueryche of hem a fair burgeys
To sytten at a yield hal, on the hye deys
Eueryche for the wisdom that he can
Was shape lyche for to ben an alderman
For catayle had they right enough and rent
And eke her wives would it well assent
And else certain they were to blame
It is full fair to ben yeleped madame
And gone to vigylles al before
And have a mantel royal yche ybore.
The Coke. xii.
A Coke they had with hem for the nones
To boil the chykens and the mary bones
And powder merchaunt, tarte, and galyngale
Well could he know a draught of London ale
He couthe rosthe, sethe, boy^e, and frye
Make mor^reys, and well bake a pie
But great harm was it, as it thought me
That on his shynne a mormal had he
And blynke manger made he with the best.
The Shypman. xiij.
A Shipman was there, wonnyng fer by west
For aught I wete, he was of Detchemouthe
He rode upon a rowney, as he couthe
In a gown of faldyng to the kne
A dagger hangyng by a lace had he
About his neck, under his arm down
The hot summer had made his hew a brown
And certain he was a good felawe
Full many a draught of wine had he draw
From Burdeux ward, whiles ye chapmen sleep
Of nyce conscience took he no keep
If that he faught, and had the higher hand
By water he sent hem home to every land
But of his craft, to reckon well his tides
His streams and his dangers him besides
His herbrough, his moon, and his lodemanage
There was none such from Hul to Cartage
Hardy he was, and wise to undertake
With many a tempest had his berde be shake
He knew all the havens as there were
Fro Scotland to the Cape de fenestere
And every creke in Britayne and in Spain
His barge was called the Maudelayne.
De doctor of Phisyke. xiiij.
With us there was a doctor of phisyke
In this world ne was there none him like
To speak of phisyke, and of surgerye
For he was grounded in Astronomye
He kept his pacyent a full great del
In hours, by his magyke naturel
Well couthe he fortune the assendent
Of his image for his pacyent
He knew the cause of every maladye
Were it of cold, hete, moist, or dry
And whereof engendered what humor
He was a very perfyte practysour
The cause yknowe, and of his harm the rote
A none he gave to the sick man his bote
Full ready had he his apotecaries
To send him dregs and his lectuaries
For each of hem made other for to win
Her frendshyp was not new to begin
Well knew he the old Esculapius
And Dioscorides, and eke Ruffus
Old Hippocrates, Haly, and eke Gallen
Serapion, Rasis, and also Auicen
Auerroys, Damasceue, and Constantyn
Bernarde, Gatisden, and Gylbertyn
Of his dyete meserable was he
For it was of no superfluyte
But of great nourysshynge, and digestyble
His study was but little on the Bible
In sangwyne and in perce he clad was al
Lyned with Taffata, and with sendal
And yet he was but easy of dispense
He kept that he wanne in time of pestylence
For gold in Physyke is a cordyal
Therefore he loved gold in specyal.
The wife of Bathe.xv.
A good wife there was beside Bathe
But she was somdel dese, and that was scathe
Of clothe making she had such an haunte
She passed hem of Ipre, or of Gaunte
In all the parysshe wife ne was there none
That to the offrynge before her should gone
And if there did, certain right wroth was she
That she was al out of charity
Her kerchers full fine were of ground
I durst swear they wayden ten pound
That on a Sunday were upon her heed
Her hosen were of fine scarlet reed
Full strayte ystrayned, and shoesful new
Bold was her face, and reed was her hew
She was a worthy woman al her live
Husbands at the church door had she five
Withouten other company in youth
But thereof needs not to speak as nouthe
And thryse had she ben at Jerusalem
She had passed many a strong streme
At Rome had she ben, and at Boloyne
In Galys at saint James, and at Coloyne
She couth much of wandrynge by the way
Gat tothed was she sothely for to say
Upon an ambler easily she sat
Ywympled well, and on her heed an hat
As broad as is a bokeler or a targe
A foot mantel about her hyppes large
And on her fete a pair of spurs sharp
In felyshyp well couth she laughe and carpe
Of remedies of love she could perchance
For the couth of that art the old dance.
The Person. xvi
A Good man there was of relygyoun
And was a poor person of a town
But rich he was of holy thought and work
He was also a learned man, and a clerk
That Christ's gospels truly would preche
His parissheus devoutly would he teache
Benygne he was and wonder dilygent
And in aduersyte full pacyent
And such he was proved often sythes
Full loathe were him to cursed for his tithes
But rather would he yeuen out of doubt
Unto his poor paryssheus about
Of his offrynge, and of his substance
He couth in little thing have suffysaunce
Wide was his parisshe, and houses far a sondre
But he ne left neither for rayn ne thondre
In syckenesse ne in myschefe for to vysyte
The ferrest in his parysshe, much or lyte
Upon his fete, and in his hand a staf
This noble ensample to his sheep he yaf
That first he wrought, and afterward taught
Out of the gospel he the words caught
And this figure he radde eke thereto
That if gold ruste, what should iron do
For if a priest be foul, on whom we trust
No wonder is a leude man to rust
And shame it is, if a priest take keep
To se a shytten shepherde, and a clean sheep
Well ought a priest ensample for to give
By his clennesse, how his sheep should live
He set not his benefyce to hyre
And let his sheep acombre in the mire
And run to London to saint Poules
To seken him a chauntry for souls
Or with a brotherhede to be with hold
But dwelte at home, and kept well his fold
So that the wolf ne made hem not miscarye
He was a shepeherde, and not a mercenarye
And though he holy were and virtuous
He was not to sinful men dispytous
Ne of his speech dangerous ne digne
But in his techyng discrete and benign
To drawn folk to heaven with fayrnesse
By good ensample, this was his business
But if it were any person obstynate
Whether he were of hye or low estate
Him would he shybbe sharply for the nonis
A better priest I trow no where none is
He wawed after no pomp ne reverence
Ne maked him no spyced conscience
But Christ's lore, and his Apostels twelve
He taught, but first he followed it him selue.
The Plowman. xvii
With him there was a Plowma^ his brother
That had yladde of donge many a sother
A true swynker and a good was he
Living in peace, and parsyte charity
God loved be best with all his heart
At all times, though him gamed or smerte
And than his neighbors right as him self
He would thresshe, and thereto dyke and delfe
For Christ's sake, for every poor wight
withouten hyre, if it lay in his might
His tithes paid he full fair and well
Both of his propre swynke, and of his catel
In a tabarde he rode, upon a mare
There was also a Reave, and a Myllare
A Sompnour, and a Pardoner also
A Mansyple, and my self, there was no mo.
The Myller. xviii.
The Myller was a stout earl for ye nones
Full bygge he was of brawne, and eke of bones
That proved well, for over al there he came
At wrastlyng, he would have away the Ram
He was short sholdred, a thick gnarre
There nas no door, but he would heue of the bar
Or break it, at a rennyng with his heed
His berde as any sow or fore was reed
And thereto broad, as it were a spade
Upon the coppe right of his nose he hade
A werte, and thereon stood a tufte of heeres
Reed as the bristels of a sowes eeres
His nostrels black were and wide
A sword and a bokelet bare he by his side
His mouth as great was as a furneys
He was a iangler and a golyerdeys
And that was most of sin and of harletryse
Well couthe he steal corn, and told it thryse
And yet he had a tomb of gold parde
A white cote and a blewe hoode weared he
A bag pype well couthe he blow and sown
And therewith al brought he us out of town.
The Manciple. xix.
A gentle Manciple there was of the temple
Of which al catours might taken ensemple
For to ben wise, in byeng of vitayle.
For whether he paid, or took by tail
Algate he waited so in his asshate
That he was aye before, in good estate
Now is not that of god a full fair grace
That such a leude man's wit shall pace
The wisdom of an heap of learned men
Of masters had he mo than thryse ten
That were of law expert, and curyouse
Of which there was a doseyn in that house
Worthy to ben stewardes of rent and land
Of any lord that is in England
To maken him live by his propre good
In honor detlesse, but if he were wood
Or live as scarssy as him list desire
And able to helpen al a shyre
In any ease that might fallen or hap
And yet the Manciple set all her cappe.
The Reave. xx.
The Reave was a sclender colerike man
His berde was shave as nigh as ever he can
His here was by his eeres round yshorne
His top was docked like a priest byforne
Full long were his legs and full lene
I like a staff, there was no calfe ysene
Well couth he keep a garner and a bynne
There was non auditour could on him wyn
Well wist he by the drought, and by the rain
The yeldynge of his seed, and of his grain
His lords sheep, his neet, and his deyrie
His swyne, his horse, his store, and his pultrie
Were holy in his Reuys gouernynge
And by his covenant yaue he reckoning
Sith his lord was twenty year of age
There could no man bring him in a rerage
There nas baylly, heerd, ne none other hyne
That he ne knew his sleyght and his couyne
They were a drad of him as of the death
His dwelling was full fair upon an hethe
With grene trees shadowed was his place
He couthe better than his lord purchase
Full rich he was astored pryuely
His lord he could well please subtylly
To give and leave him of his own good
And have a thank, and yet a cote and hode
In youth he had learned a good mystere
He was a well good wryght, a carpentere
This Reave sat upon a right good slot
That was al pomel gray, and hight Scot
A long surcote of perce upon he hade
And by his side he bare a rusty blade
Of Norfolk was this Reave, of which I tell
Beside a town, men clepen it Baldeswel
Tucked he was, as is a friar about
And ever he rode hynderest of the route.
The Sompnour. xxi.
A Sompnour was there with us in yt place
That had a fire red cherubyns face
For sausfleme he was, with eyes narowe
Al hot he was, and lecherous as a sparowe
With skaled brows black, and pylled berde
Of his vysage children were sore aferde
There nas quicksyluer, lytarge, ne brymstone
Borace, ceruse, ne oil of tarter none
Ne oyntement that would cleanse or byte
That him might help of his whelkes white
Ne of his knobbes sitting on his chekes
Well loved he garlyke, onyons, and eke lekes
And for to drink strong wine reed as blood
Then would he speak and cry as he were wood
And when he had well ydronke the wine
Than would he speak no word but latyne
A few terms had he, two or three
That he had learned out of some degree
No wonder is, he herd it all the day
And ye known well eke how that a iaye
Can clepe what, as well as can the pope
But who so couthe in other thing him grope
Than had he spent al his philosophye
(A question quid iuris) would he cry
He was a gentle harlot and a kind
A better felawe should a man not find
He would suffer for a quarte of wine
A good felawe to have his concubyne
A twelve monthe, and excuse him at the full
Full privily eke a synche couthe he pull
And if he fond o where a good felawe
He would teache him to have none awe
In such case, of the archedekyns curse
But if man's soul were in his purse
For in his purse he should ypunyshed be
Purse is the archedekeus hell, said he
But well I wot he lied right in deed
Of cursyng ought each synful man dread
For cursyng wol slay, right as assoylyng saves
And also ware him of a Significauit
In danger had he at his own gyfe
The young gyrles of the diocyse
And knew her counsel, and was of her reed
A garlonde had he set upon his heed
As great as it were for an alestake
A buckeler had he maked him of a cake.
The Pardoner. xxii.
With him there rode a gentle Pardonere
Of Rounceual, his friend and his compere
That straight was come fro the court of Rome
Full loud song he, come hither love tome
This Sompnour bare him a styffe bourdoun
was never trompe of half so great a soun
This Pardoner had here as yelowe as were
But smothe it hynge, as does a stryke of flexe
By ounces hynge his locks that he had
And therewith he his sholders ouersprad
But thynne it lay by culpons one and one
But hode for iolyte weared he none
For it was trussed up in his walet
Him thought he rode all the new iet
Dissheuylde save his cappe he rode al bare
Such glaryng eyes had he as an hare
A vernacle had he sowed upon his cappe
His wallet beforne him in his lap
Brette full of pardone come from Rome al hot
A voice he had as small as has a got
No berde had he, ne never should have
As smoth it was as it were new shave
I trow he were a geldyng or a mare
But of his craft fro Berwyke unto ware
Ne was there such another pardonere
For in his male had he a pyllowe here
Which as he said, was our ladies veyle
He said he had a gobbet of the seyle
That saint Peter had when that he went
Upon the sea till Jesus Christ him hent
He had a cross of laten full of stones
And in a glass he had pigs bones
But with these relykes when that he fond
A poor person dwelling vplonde
Upon a day he gate him more money
Than that person gate in months twey
And thus with feigned flateryng and ^apes
He made the person and the people his apes
But trewly to tellen at the last
He was in church a noble ecclesyast
Well couthe he read a lesson or a story
But alderbest he sange an oftytorie
For well he wist, when that song was song
He must preche, and well afyle his tongue
To win silver as he well could
Therefore he song so meryly and loud.
Now have I told you sothly in a clause
The state, the array, each no^bre, and eke the cause
Why that assembled was this company
In Suthwerke at this gentyl hostelry
That hight the Tabarde fast by the Belle
But now is time to you for to tell
How that we baren us that ylke night
When we weren in that hostry a light
And after wol I tell of our vyage
And all the remenaunt of our pilgrimage
But first I pray you of your curtely
That ye ne arette it not my folly
Thouhg that I plainly speak in this matere
To tellen you her words and eke her chere
Ne though I speak her words properly
For this ye known as well as I
Who shall tellen a tale after a man
He mote reherce as nigh as ever he can
Euerych word, if it be in his charge
Al speak he never so rudely ne large
Or else he mote tellen his tale untrue
Or feyne thing is, or find words new
He may not spare although he were his brother
He mote as well say o word as another
Christ spoke him self full broad in holy writ
And well I wotte no vyllayne is itte
Eke Plato says, who so can him read
The words mote ben cosyn to the deed
Also I pray you for give it me
A! have I not set folk in her degree
Here in this tale as they should stand
My wit is short ye may well understand.
GReat chere made our host us euerychon
And to the supper set he us anon
And served us with vitayle at the best
Strong was the wine, and well drink us lest
A semely man our host was with all
For to ben a marshal in a lords hall
A large man he was with eyes stepe
A fayrer burgeys is there none in chepe
Bold of his speech, wise and well ytaught
And of manhood him lacked right naught
Eke thereto he was a right merry man
And after supper playen he began
And spoke of myrthe among other things
When that we had made our rekenynges
And said thus, now lordynges trewly
Ye ben to me welcome right hertely
For by my truth if I should not lie
A saw not this year so merry a company
Atones, in this herborowe as is now
Feign would I don you mirth and I wist how
And of a myrthe I am right now bethought
To done you ease, and it shall cost naught
Ye gone to Canterbury god mote you speed
The blysful martyr quyte you your mede
And well I wot as ye gone by the way
Ye shapen you to talken and to play
For trewly comfort ne myrthe is there none
To ryden by the way as dombe as a stone
And therefore would I maken you disporte
As I said erst, and done you some comfort
And if you like al by one assent
For to stonden at my judgment
And for to worchen as I shall you say
To morrow when we ryden on the way
Now be my fathers soul that is deed
But ye be merry I wol give you mine heed
Hold up your hands without more speech
Our counsel was not long for to seche
Us thought it was not worth to make it wise
And granted him without more auyse
And badde him say his verdit as him lest
Lordinges (quod he) now herkene for the best
But take it not I pray you in disdain
This is the point to speak it platte and plain
That each of you to short with others way
In this vyage, shall tell tales tway
To Canterbery ward I mean it so
And homwardes he shall tell tales other two
Of auentures whilom that han befall
And which of you that bears him best of all That is to said, that tellen in this case
Tales of best sentence and most solace
Shall have a supper at our alder cost
Here in this place syttyng by this post
When that we commen again from Canterbery
And for to make you the more merry
I wol my seluen goodly with you ride
Right at mine own cost and be your gyde
And who that wol my judgment withsay
Shall pay all that we spend by the way
And if ye vouchsafe that it be so
Tell me anon without words mo
And I woll early shape me therefore
This thing was granted and our oaths swore
With full glad heart, and prayden him also
That he would vouchsafe for to do so
And that he would ben our governor
And of our tales judge and reportour
And set a supper at a certain prise
And we woollen ben demed at his deuyse
In hye and low, and thus by one assent
We ben accorded to the judgment
And there upon the wine was fette anon
We dronken, and to rest went ylke one
Withouten any longer taryeng
A morrow when they began to spryng
Up rose our host, and was our alder cock
And gadered us al in a flock
And forth we ryden a little more than paas
Unto the wateryng of saint Thomas
And there our host began his horse arest
And said: lords herkene if you lest
Ye wot your forward, and I it record
If euesonge and morrow song acorde
Let se now who shall tell the first tale
As ever I mote drink wine or ale
Who so is rebel to my judgment
Shall pay for all that by the way is spent
Now draws cut or that ye farther twyn
The which that has the shortest shall begin.
Sir knight (quod he) my master and my lord
Now draws cut, for that is mine acorde
Comes nere (quod he) my lady prioresse
And ye sir clerk, let be your shamefastness
Ne studyeth not, lay hand thereto every man
Anon to draw every wight began
And shortly for to tellen as it was
Were it by adventure, or by shorter caas
The sothe is this, the cut fill to the knight
Of which full blyth and glad was every wight
And tellen he must his tale as it was reason
By forward, and by composytion
As ye han herd, what needs words mo
And when this good man saw yt it was so
As he that wise was and obedyent
To kepen his forward by his free assent
He said, sithen I shall begin the game
What welcome cut a goddeshame
Now let us ride, and herkeneth what I say
And with that word we ryden forth our way
And he began with right a merry chere
His tale anon, right as ye shall here.
Thus end the prologues of the Caunterbury tales, and here follows the
knights tale.
Here begins the Knights tale.
WHylom, as old stories tellen us
There was a duke that hight Theseus
Of Athenes he was lord and governor
And in his time such a conqueror
That greater was non under the son
Full many a rich country had he won
What with his wysedom, and his cheualry
He conquered all the reign of Feminy
That whylom was icleped Cythea
And wedded the queen Ipolyta
and brought her home with him, in to his contre
With mykell glory and solempnyte
And eke her young suster Emely.
And thus with victory and melody
Let I this worthy duke to Athenes ride
And all his host, in arms him be side
And certes, if it nere to long to here
I would have told fully the manner
How wonnen was the reygne of Feminy
By Theseus, and by his cheualry
And of the great battle for the nones
Between Athenes and Amasones
And how beseged was Ipolyta
The young hardy queen of Cythea
And of the feast, yt was at her wedding
And of the tempest at her home coming
But al yt thing, I mote as now forbere
I have god wotte, a large field to ere
And weked ben the oxen in the plowe
The remenaunt of my tale is long ynowe
I will not letten eke, non of this rout
Let every fellow tell his tale about
And let se now, who shall the supper wyn
And there I left, I will again begin.
This duke, of whom I make mencyoune
When he was come, almost to the town
In all his well and his most pride
He was ware, as he cast his eye aside
where that there kneled in the high wey
A company of ladys, twey and twey
Each after other, cladde in clothes blake
But such a cry and such a woe they make
That in this world, nys creature lyuinge
That ever herd such a waymentynge
And of this cry, they nolde never stynten
Till they the reins of his bridell henten
What folk be ye, yt at mine home coming
Perturben so my feast with cryeng
Quod Theseus? Have ye so great envy
Of mine honor, that thus compain and cry?
Or who has you mysbode, or offended?
Now tells me, if it may be amended.
And why that ye be clothed thus in blake?
The oldest lady of them all spoke
When she had swowned with adeedly chere
That it was ruthe for to se and here
She said lord, to whom fortune has give
Vyctory, and as a conqueror to live
Naught greueth us your glory and honor
But we beseke you of mercy and socour
And have mercy on our woe and distress
Some drope of pity, through thy ge^tylnesse
Upon us wretched wymen, let thou fall
For certes lord, there nys none of us all
That she ne has be a duchess or a queen
Now be we caytyses, as it is well isene
Thanked be fortune, and her false whele
That non estate assures for to be well.
Now certes lord, to abide your presence
Here in this temple of the goddess Cleme^ce
We have be waytyng all this fourtenyght
Help us lord, sithe it lies in thy might.
I Wretch, that weep and wayle thus
whylom wife to king Campaneus
That starfe at thebes, cursed be ye day
And all we that been in this array
And maken all this lamentacyon
We losten all our husbondes at that town
while that the syege there about lay
And yet the old Creon (well away)
That lord is now of Thebes cite
Fulfilled of ire and of iniquite
He for dispyte, and for his tyranny
To done the deed bodies vyllanye
Of all our lords, which that been slawe
Has all the bodies on an heap ydrawe
And will not suffer hem, by none assent
Neither to be buried, ne to be brent
But makes hounds to eat hem in dyspyte
And with that word, without more respyte
They fallen grossly, and cryen pytously
Have on us wretched wymen some mercy
And let our sorrow synke in thyn heart
This gentle duke down from his horse stert
With heart pytous, wha^ he herd hem speak
Him thought that his heart would break
When he saw hem so pytous and so mate
That whylom were of so great astate
And in his arms, he hem all up hent
And hem comforted in full good intent
And swore his oath, as he was true Knight
He would don so ferforthly his might
Upon the tyrante Creon hem to wreake
That all the people of Greece should speak
How Creon was of Theseus yserued
As he that had his death full well deserved
And right anon wythouten more abode
His baner he displayed, and forth rode
To Thebes ward, and all his host beside
No nere Athenes nolde he go ne ride
Ne take his ease fully half a day
But onward on his way that night he lay
And sent anon Ipolita the queen
And Emely her young sister shene
Unto the town of Athenes to dwell
And forth he rydeth, there nys no more to tell.
THe red statu of Mars with spear and targe
So shyneth in his white baner large
That all the feldes glyttren up and down
And by his baner, borne is his penon
Of gold full rych, in which there was ybete
The mynotaure, that he wan in C^rte
Thus rydeth this duke, this conqueror
And in his host of chyualry the flour
Till that he came to Thebes, and alyght
Fair in a field, there as he thought to fight
But shortly for to speken of this thing
With Creon, which was of Thebes King
He faught, and slew him manly as a Knight
In plain battle, and put his folk to flight
And at a saute he wan the cite after
And rent adowne wall, sparre, and rafter
And to the ladies, he restored again
The bodies of her husbands yt were slain
To done obsequies, as tho was the gyse
But it were al to long for to deuyse
The great clamor, and the weymentyng
That the ladies made at the brennyng
Of the bodies, and the great honor
That Theseus, the noble conqueror
Does to ye ladies, when they from him went
But shortly to tellen is mine intent
When yt this worthy duke, this Theseus
Has Creon slain, and wan Thebes thus
Still in the field he took al night his rest
And did with all the country as him lest
To ransake in the taas of bodies deed
(Hem for to strype of harneys and of wede)
The pyllours did her business and cure
After the battle and the discomfyture.
And so befell, that in the taas they found
Through gyrt with many a grievous wound
Two young knights lyeng by and by
Both in arms same, wrought full richely
Of which two, Arcyte hight that one
And that other hight Palamon
Not fully quycke, ne fully deed they were
But by her cote armours, and by her gere
The haraudes knew hem best in special
As the that weren of the blood ryall
Of Thebes, and of systren two yborne
Out of the taas yt pyllours has hem torn
And han hem carried soft in to the tent
Of Theseus, and he full sone hem sent
To Athenes, to dwellen there in prison
Perpetual, he nolde hem not raunson
And when this worthy duke had thus idon
He took his host, and home he gothe anon
With laurer crowned, as a conqueror
And there he lives in joy and honor
Term of his life, what needs words mo?
And in a town, in anguysse and in woe
Dwells Palamon, and his fellow Arcyte
For evermore, there may no gold hem quyte.
THus passes year by year, and day by day
Til it fell ones in a morrow of May
That Emely, yt fayrer was to seen
Than is the lylly, upon the stalk grene
And fresher than May, with flowers new
For with the rose color strofe her hew
I not which was the fayrer of hem two.
Er it was day, as was her won to do
She was arysen, and all ready dyght
For May wol have no slogardy a night
The season pricketh every gentell heart
And makes it out of her sleep sterte
And says atyse, and do May obseruaunce
This makes Emely to have remembrance
To don horror to May, and for to rise
I clothed was she fresshe for to deuyse
Her yelowe hear was broyded in a trese
Behind her back, a yerde long I gase
And in the gardyn at son vpryst
She walks up and down as herryst
She gadreth flowers, party whyt and reed
To make a subtell garlande for her heed
And as an angel, heavenly she song
The great tour, that was so thick and strong
Which of the castle was ye chief dungeon
Wherein the Knights were in pry^on
Of which I told you, and tell shall
Was even ioynaunt to the garden wall
There as this Emely had her playeng
Bright was the son, and clear the morning
And Palamon, this woeful prisoner
As was his won, by leave of his gayler
Was risen, and romed in a chamber on high
In which he all the noble cite syghe
And eke the gardyn, full of branches grene
There as this fresshe Emely the shene
was in her walk, and romed up and down
This sorrowful prisoner, this Palamon
Gothe in his chamber romyng to and fro
And to him self complaynyng of his woe
That he was borne, full often said alas
And so befell by adventure or caas
That through a window thick of many a bar
Of yren great, and square as any spar
He cast his eyes upon Emelia
And therewith he blent and cried, ha.
As though he slongen were to the heart
And with that cry Arcite anon up sterte
And said, Cosyn mine, what eyleth the
That art so pale and deedly for to se?
why cryest thou: who has do the offense?
For gods love, take all in patience
Our prison, for it may none other be
Fortune has yenen us this aduersyte,
Some wicked aspect or disposycion
Of Saturn, by some constellacion
Has yeuen us this, although we had it sworn
So stood the heaven, when yt we were born
we mote endure, this is short and plain.
This Palamon answerde, and said again:
Cosyn forsooth, of this opinyon
Thou have a vain ymagynacyon
This prison caused me not to cry
But I was hurt right now through mine ey
Into mine heart, that woll my bane be
The fayrnesse of a lady that I se
Yonde in the gardyn, coming to and fro
Is cause of all my cryeng and woe
I not where she be woman or goddess
But Venus it is, sothly as I guess
And therwyth all on knees down he fyl
And said: Venus, if it be thy will
You in this gardyn, thus to transfigure
Beforne me, sorrowful wretched creature
Out of this prison help that we may escape
And if our desteny be so ishape
By eterne word, to dyen in prison
Of our lynage have some compassion
That is so low ybrought by tyranny.
And with that word Arcyte began espy
Where as the lady romed to and fro
And with that sight her bewte hurt him so
That if that Palamon were wounded sore
Arcyte was hurt as much as he, or more
And with a syghe he said pitously
The fresshe beutie sleeth me suddenly
Of her that rometh in the yonder place
And but I have her mercy and her grace
That I may seen her at the least way
I nam but deed, there nis no more to say.
This Palamo^, wha^ he these words herd
Dispytously he looked, and answered:
Whether say thou this in ernest or in play
Nay quod Arcite, in ernest by my fay
God help me so, me list full yuell to pley
This Palamo^ began knyt his brows twey
It were (quod he) to the no great honor
To be false ne for to be traitor
To me, that am thy cosen and thy brother
I sworn full deep, and each of us to other
That never for to dyen in the pain
Till that the death depart us twain
Neither of us in love to hyndre other
Ne in none other case my leave brother
But that thou should truly further me
In every case, as I should further the
This was thyn oath, and mine also certain
I wot it well, thou dare it not withsayn
Thus art thou of my counsel out of doubt
And now thou would falsely ben about
To love my lady, whom I love and serve
And ever shall, till that mine heart sterue
Now certes false Arcite thou shall not so
I loved her first, and told the my woe
As to my counsel, and to my brother sworn
To further me, as I have told beforne
For which thou art thounden, as a knight
To helpen me, if it lie in thy might
Or else art thou false, I dare well said
This Arcite full proudly spoke again.
Thou shall (quod he) be rather falls than I
And thou art false I tell the utterly
For paramour I loved her first or thou
what will thou sayn, thou wist it not or now
Whether she be woman or goddess
Thine is affection of holiness
And mine is love, as to a creature
For which I told the mine adventure
As to my cosyn, and my brother sworn
Suppose that thou love her byforne
Wost thou not well the old clerks saw?
That, who shall give a lover any law?
Love is a gretter law by my pan
Than maybe yeuen to any erthly man
And therefore posityfe law, and such decre
Is broken all day for love in each degree
A man more needs love maugre his herd
He may not fleen it though he should be deed
All be she maid, wydowe, or wife
And eke it is not lykely all thy life
To stonden in her grace, no more shall I
For well thou wodst thy self verily
That thou and I be dampened to prison
Perpetual, us gayneth no raunson
We stryuen, as did the hounds for ye bone
That faughte al day, and yet her part was non
There came a cur, while yt they were so wroth
And bare away the bone from hein both
And therefore, at kings court my brother
Each man for him self, there is non other
Love if thou list, for I love and ay shall
And sothly lefe brother this is all
Here in this prison more we endure
And eueryche of us taken his adventure
Great was the strife betwix hem twey
If that I had leyser for to fry
But to theffect, It happed on a day
To tell it you shortly as I may.
A worthy duke that hight Perithous
That fellow was to duke Theseus
Sith thylke day yt they were children lyte
Was come to Athenes, his fellow to visyte
And for to play, as he was wont to do
For in this world he loved no man so
And he loved him as tenderly again
So well they loved, as old books said
That when that one was deed, sothly to tell
His fellow went and sought him down in hell
But of that story list me not to write
Duke Perithous loved well Arcite
And had him know at Thebes year by year
And finally at request and prayere
Of Peithous, withouten any raunson
Duke Theseus let him out of prison
Freely to you, whither him list over all
In such agyfe, as I you tellen shall.
This was the forewarde, plainly to endyte
Betwyx duke Theseus and him Arcite
That if so were, that Arcite were yfounde
Ever in his life, by day, night or stounde
In any country of this duke Theseus
And he were caught, it was accorded thus
That with a sword he should lose his heed
There nas none other remedy ne reed
But takes his leave, and homward him sped
Let him beware, his neck lies to wedde
How great sorrow suffers now Arcite
The death he feleth through his heart smite
He wepeth, wayleth, and cries pyteously
To sleen him self he wayteth privily
And said, alas the day that I was borne
Now is my preson worse then beforne
Now is me shappen eternally to dwell
Not in purgatory, but in hell
Alas that ever I knew Perithous
For else had I dwelt with Theseus
I fetered in his prison ever mo
Then had I be in bliss, and not in woe
Only the sight of her, whom that I serve
Though that I never her grace may deserve
would have suffysed right enough for me
O dear cosyn Palamon (quod he)
Thine is the victory of this adventure
Full blysfull in prison may thou endure
In prison, Nay certes but in paradyse
well has fortune to the turned the dyse
That have the sight of her, and I thabsence
For possible is, sythnes thou have her presence
And art a knight, a worthy man and able
That by some case, syn fortune is chaungeable
Thou may some time to thy desire attain
But I that am exiled, and barayne
Of all grace, and in so great dyspeyre
That there nys water, earth, fire, ne air
Ne creature, that of hem maked is
That may me heal, or done comfort in this
well ought I sterue in wanhope and dystresse
Farewell my life, my lust and my gladness
Alas, why playnen men so in comune
Of purueyaunce of God, or of fortune
That yeueth hem full often in many a gyse
well bette then hem self can deuyse
Some man desires to have richesse
That cause is of her murdre or sycknesse
And some man would out of his prison feign
That in his house, is of his meyne slain
Infinite harms been in this matere
we wot not what thing we prayen here
we faren as he, that drunk is as a mouse
A dronken man wot well, he has an house
But he wot not, which the right way thither
And to a dronken man the way is slyder
And certes in this world so faren we
we seken fast after felicite
But we go wrong full often truly
Thus may we say al, and namely I
That wenden, and had a great opinion
That if I might escape fro prison
Th^^ had I been in joy and parfyte hele
There now I am exiled fro my well
Sith that I may not seen you Emely
I nam but deed, there nys no remedy
Upon that other side Palamon
when that he wist Arcite was gone
Such sorrow he makes, that the great tour
Resowned of his yellynge and clamor
The pure fetters on his shynnes great
were of his bitter salt tears wete
Alas (quod he) Arcite cosyn mine
Of all our strife, god wot the fruit is thine
Thou walk now in Thebes at large
And of my woe, thou yeuest little charge
Thou may, sith thou have wisdom and ma^hed
Assemble all the folk of our kynred
And make war so sharp in this country
That by some adventure, or by some treat
Thou may have her to lady and to wife
For whom I must needs lose my life
For as by way of possibilite
Sith thou art at thy large of prison fre
And art a lord, great is thine advantage
More then is mine, that sterue here in a cage
For I may weep and wayle, whiles yt I live
with all the woe that prison may me give
And eke with pain, that love yeueth me also
That doubleth al my tourment and my woe
Therwyth the fire of ielousy up stert
within his breast, and hent him by the heart
So woodly, that he lykely was to behold
The box tree, or the ashen deed and cold
Then said he. O cruel gods, that govern
This world with your word eterne
And written in the table of Athamant
Your parliament and eterne grant
what is mankind more unto you yholde
Then is the sheep, that rouketh in the fold?
For slain is man, right as another be
And dwells eke in prison, and in arrest
And has sycknesse, and great aduersite
And often time gyltlesse parde
What governance is in this prescience
That gyltlesse turmenteth innocence?
And increases thus all my penance
That man is bounden to his obseruaunce
For gods sake, to letten of his will
There as a be may all his lusts fulfill
And when a be is deed, he has no pain
But after his death man mote weep and plain:
Though in this world he have care and woe
without doubt it may standen so.
The answer of this let I to divines
But well I wot, in this world great pyne is
Alas I se a serpent or a thief
That many a true man has do myschefe
Gone at his large, and where him list may turn
But I mote been in prison through Saturn
And eke through Juno, ielous and eke wood
That has stroyed well nigh all the blood
Of Thebes, with his wast walls wide
And Venus sleeth me on that other side
For ielousye, and fear of him Arcite.
Now will I slynte of Palamon a lyte
And let him in his prison still dwell
And of Arcite forth woll I you tell
The summer passes, and the nyghtes long
Increases double wise the pains strong
Both of the lover, and of the prisoner
I not which has the wofuller myster
For shortly to say, this Palamon
Perpetual is dampened to prison
In ^haynes and feters to the deed
And Arcite is exiled on his heed
For evermore as out of that country
Or never more shall his lady se
You lovers ask I now this question
Who has the wo^se, Arcite or Palamon?
That one may se his lady day by day
But in prison mote he dwell always
That other where him list may ride or go
But seen his lady shall he never mo
Now demeth as ye list, ye that can
For I woll tell forth my tale as I began
When that Arcite to Thebes comen was
Full often a day he swelte and said alas
For seen his lady shall he never mo
And shortly to conclude all his woe
So mykell sorrow made never creature
That is or shall be, while the world may dure
His sleep, his meat, his drink is him byraft
That lean he wareth, and dry as a shaft
His eyes holowe, and grysly to behold
His hew pale, and falowe as asshen cold
And solitary he was, and ever alone
And waylynge all the night, making moan
And if he herd song or instrument
Then would he weep, he might not stent
So feeble were his spirits, and so low
And changed so, yt no man could him know
His speech ne his voice, though men it herd
As in his gyre, for all the world it ferde
Naught comely like to lovers maladye
Of Hereos but rather like many
Engendered of Humors melancolyke
Beforne his fell fantastyke
And shortly was turned all up so down
Both habyte and dysposicion
Of him, this woeful lover Arcyte
what should I all day of his woe endyte?
When he endured had a year or two
This cruel torment, and this pain and woe
At Thebes in his country, as I said
Upon a night in sleep as he him laid
Him thought how that the wynged Mercury
Beforne him stood, and bad him to be merry
His slepy yerde in hand he bare vpryght
An heart he wered upon his hears bright
Arrayed was this god, as he took keep
As he was, when Argus took his sleep
And said him thus: to Athenes shall thou wend
There is the shapen of thy woe an end
And with that word Arcite awoke and stert
Now truly how sore that me smert
Quoth he, to Athenes right now will I fare
Ne for no dread of death shall I spare
To se my lady, that I love and serve
In her presence recke I not to sterue
And with that word he caught a great myrrour
And saw that changed was al his color
And saw his vysage all in another kind
And right anon it ran him in his mind
That sith his face was so dysfygured
Of maladye, the which he had endured
He might well, if that he bare him low
Live in Athenes evermore unknow
And seen his lady well nyghe day by day
And right anon he changed his array
And clad him as a poor labourer
And all alone, save only a squire
That knew his priuitie and all his caas
which was dysgysed poorly as he was
To Athenes is he gone the next way
And to the court he went upon a day
And at the gate he proffered his service
To druge and draw, what so men would deuyse
And shortly of this matter for to said
He fell in office with a chamberlayne
The which was dwelling with Emelye
For he was wise, and sone couth espy
Of every servant, which that served here
Well couthe he hewn wodde, and water bear
For he was young and mighty for the nones
And thereto he was strong and bygge of bones
To done that any wight can him deuyse.
A year or two he was in this seruyse
Page of the chamber, of Emely the bright
And Phylostrate he said that he hight
But half so well beloved man as he
Ne was there none in court, of his degree
He was so gentle of condicyon
That through all the court was his renoun
They said that it were a charity
That Theseus would enhauncen his degree
And put him in a worship full seruyse
There as he might his virtue exercise
And thus wtin a while his name is spronge
Both of his deeds, and of his good tongue
That Theseus had taken him so nere
That of his chamber he made him squyere
And yafe him gold to maynteyn his degree
And eke men brought him out of his coutre
Fro year to year full privily his rent
But honestly and slyly he it spent
That no man wondered how he it had
And three year in this wise his life he ladde
And bare him so in peace and eke in werre
There was no man that Theseus has der.
And in this bliss let I now Ar^yte
And speak I woll of Palamon a lyte.
In derknesse horrible and strong prison
This seven year has sytten this Palamon
Forpyned, what for woe and distress
who feleth double sore and heaviness
But Palamon: that love distrayneth so
That wode out of his wit, he gothe for woe
And eke thereto he is a prisonere
Perpetual, and not only for a year.
Who could ryme in English properly
His martyrdom* forsooth it am not I
Therefore I pass as lightly as I may
It befell that in the seventh year in May
The third night, as old books said
(That all this story tellen more plain)
were it by adventure or by destayne
As when a thing is shapen, it shall be
That soon after mydnight, Palamon
By helpyng of a friend brake his prison
And fleethe the cite, as fast as he may go
For he had give his gayler drink so
Of a clarrey, made of certain wine
With narcotise and opye, of Thebes fine
That al yt night, though me^ would him shake
The gayler slept, he mught not awake
And thus he flees as fast as he may.
The night was short, and fast by the day
That needs cost he mote him self hyde
And to a grove fast there beside
with dreadful foot than stalketh Palamon
For shortly this was his opinyon
That in yt grove he would him hyde al day
And in the night then would he take his way
To Thebes ward, his ^rendes for to prey
On Theseus to help him to warrey
And shortly, either he would lose his life
Or win Emelye unto his wife
This is theffecte, and his intent plain.
Now woll I torn to Arcite again
That little wist how nigh was his care
Till yt fortune had brought him in her share
The merry lark, messanger of day
Saleweth in her song the morrow gray
And fiery Phoebus aryseth up so bright
That all the oriso^^ laugheth of the sight
And with his streams, dries in the greues
The silver dropes, hangyng in the leaves
And Arcite, that in the court ryall
with Theseus his squier principal
Is risen, and looks on the merry day
And for to don his obseruaunces to May
Remembryng on the point of his desire
He on his courser, startlyng as the fire
Is rydden in to the feldes him to play
Out of the court, were it a mile or twey
And to the grove, of which I you told
By adventure, his way he began hold
To maken him a garlonde of the greues
were it of wodbynde, or of hauthorn leaves
And loud he song against the son shene.
May, with all thy flowers and thy grene
welcome be thou, fair fresshe May
I hope that I some grene get may
And from his courser, with a lusty heart
In to the grove full hastily he sterte
And in a pathe he romed up and down
There, as by adventure this Palamon
was in a busshe, that no man might him se
For sore aferde of his death was he
Nothing ne knew he, that it was Arcite
God wot he would have trowed full lyte
But sothe is said, go sythen many years
That field has eyes, and wodde has eres
It is full fair a man to bear him even
For all day men mete at unset steuyn
Full little wot Arcyte of his felawe
That was so nyghe to harken of his saw
For in the busshe sytteth he now full still
When that Arcyte had romed all his fill
And songen all the roundell lustely
In to a study he fell suddenly
As don these lovers in their quyent gyres
Now in the croppe, and now down in ye brires
Now up now down, as boket in a well
Right as the friday, sothly for to tell
Now it rayneth, now it shyneth fast
Right so began gery Venus over cast
The hertes of her folk, right as her day
Is geryfull, right so changes she array
Selde is the friday all the weke tlyke
When ye Arcite had song, he began to syke
And set him down wythouten any more
Alas (quod he) the day that I was bore
How long Juno through thy cruelte
Wylt thou warren Thebes the cite*
Alas ybrought is to confusyon
The blood ryall of Cadmus and Amphyon
Of Cadmus, which was the first man
That Thebes buylt, or first the town began
And of the cite first was crowned king
Of his lynage am I, and of his offspring
By very line, as of the stock ryall
And now I am so caytise and so thrall
That he that is my mortal enemy
I serve him, as his squire poorly
And yet does me Juno well more shame
For I dare not be know mine own name
But there as I was wont to hight Arcyte
Now hight I Philostrat not worth a myte
Alas thou fell Mars, alas thou Juno
Thus has your ire our lynage all for do
Save only me, and wretched Palamon
That Theseus martreth in prison
And over all this to sleen me utterly
Love has his fiery darte so bremyngly
I stycked through my true careful heart
That shapen was my death erst my sherte
Ye sleen me with your eyes Emelye
Ye ben the cause wherefore I dye
Of all the remenaunt of mine other care
Ne set I not the mountaunce of a tare
So yt I could do ought to your plesaunce
And with yt word he fell down in a trance
A long time, and afterward he up stort
This Palamon thought ye through his heart
He felt a cold sword suddenly glyde
For ire he quoke, no longer would he abide
And when that he had herd Arcites tale
As he were wood, with face deed and pale
He sterte him up, out of the busshes thycke
And said: Arcyte false traitor wycke
Now art thou hent, that love my lady so
For whom that I have th^^ pain and woe
And art my blood, and to my counsel sworn
As I have full often told the here beforn
And have be taped here duke Theseus
And falsely have changed thy name thus
I will be deed, or else thou shall dye
Thou shall not love my lady Emelye
But I woll love her only and no mo
For I am Palamon thy mortal for
Though yt I have no weapen in this place
But out of prison am assert by grace
I dread not, that either thou shall dye
Or thou ne shall not louen Emelye
These which thou will, or ye shall not assert
This Arcite, with full dispytous heart
When he him knew, and had his tale herd
As sters as a lion, pulled out his sword
And said: By god that sytteth above
Ne were it yt thou art syck, and wood for love
And eke yt thou no wepen have in this place
Thou should never out of this grove pace
That thou ne should dyen of mine hand
For I defye the s^^etie and the bond
Which yt thou say yt I have made to the
What very fool, think well that love is fre
And I will love her maugre all thy might
But for as much as thou art a knight
And wylnest to darrayne here by battle
Have here my troth, to morrow I will not fail
without wetyng a^ any other wight
That here I well be founden as a knight
And bryngen harneys, right enough for the
And chese the best, and leave the worst for me.
And meat and drink, this night will I bring
Enough for the, and clothes for thy beddyng
And if so be that thou my lady wyn
And slay me in this wodde there I am in
Thou may well have thy lady as for me.
This Palamon answerde: I grant it the
And thus they ben departed till a morrow
wha^ each of hem had laid his faith to borowe
O Cupyde out of all charity
O regne, yt would have no fellow with the
Full soth is said, that love ne lordshyp
woll not his thanks have any felyshyp
we find that of Arcite and of Palamon
Arcite is ryden anon into the town
And on the morrow or it were day light
Full privily two harneys has he dyght
Both sufficient and mete to darreygne
The battle in ye field betwyre hem tweine
And on his horse, alone as he was borne
He caryeth all his harneys him beforne
And in the grove, at time and place yset
This Arcite and this Palamon been met
To chaungen began the color in her face
Right as the hunter, in ye regne of Trace
That ^^andeth at a gappe with a spear
when ^unted is the lion or the bear
And hereth him rushynge in the leaves
And breaks the bows in the greaues
And thiketh, here comes my mortal enemy
without fail, he must be deed or I
For either I more slay him at the gappe
Or he more slay me, if me myshappe
So ferden they, in chaungynge of her hew
As far as euerych of other knew
There nas no good day, ne no saluyng
But straight, without word or rehersyng
Eueryche of hem helps for to arm other
As friendly, as he were his own brother
And after that, with sharp spears strong
They foynen each at other wonder long
Thou myghtest wene, that this Palamon
In his fighting, were a wood Lion
And as a cruel Tygre was Arcyte
As wild bores began they fight and smite
That frothen white as some for ire wood
^^p to the ancle foughten they in her blood
^^d in this wise, I let hem fyghtyng dwell
And forth I wol of Theseus you tell.
The destenye and the minister general
That executes in the world over all The purueyau^ce that god has said beforne
So strong it is, yt though ye world had sworn
The contrary of thing he yea or nay
Yet sometime it shall fall on a day
That fell never yet in a thousand year
For certainly our appetytes here
Be it of war, peace, hate, or love
Al is ruled by the sight above
This mean I now by mighty Theseus
That for to hunt is so desirous
And namely at the great heart in May
That in his bed there daweth him no day
That he nys clad, and ready for to ride
With hunt and horn, and hou^des him beside
For in his huntyng has he such delight
That it is all his joy and appetyte
To been him self the great hertes bane
For after Mars, he serves now Dyane
Clear was the day, as I have told or this
And Theseus, with al joy and blys
With his Ipolita, the fair queen
And Emely, yclothen all in grene
An hunting ben they rydden ryally
And to the grove, that stood there fast by
In which there was an heart, as me^ him told
Duke Theseus the straight way has hold
And to the land, he rydeth him full right
For thider was ye heart wo^t to have his flight
And over a broke, and so forth on his way
This duke wol houe a course at him or twey
With hou^des, such as him list command
And when ye duke was comen into ye launde
Under the son he looked, and that anon
He was ware of Arcyte and Palamon
That foughte^ breme, as it were bulls two
The bright swords wenten to and fro
So hydously, that with the least stroke
It seemed, that it would have fellen an oak
But what they weren, nothing he ne wot
This duke with his sporres his courser smote
And at a sterte he was bytwyxt hem two
And pulled out his sword, and cried, ho
No More, on pain of lesyng of your heed
By mighty Mars, he shall anon be deed
That smyteth any stroke, that I may seen
But tells me, what myster men ye been
That been so hardy for to fyghten here
Without judge, or other offycere
As though it were in lystes rially.
This Palamon answered hastily
And said: sir, what needs words mo*
We have the death deserved both two
Two woeful wretches ben we and caytyues
That been encombred of our own lives
And as thou art a ryghfull lord and judge
Ne give us neither mercy ne refuge
But slay me first, for saint charity
But slay my fellow as well as me
Or slay hi^ first, for though thou know it lite
This is thy mortal foe, this is Arcite
That fro thy land is banyshed on his heed
For which he has deserved to be deed
For this is he, that came unto thy yate
And said, that he hight Philostrate
Thus has he iaped full many a year
And thou have made him thy chief squire
And this is he, that loves Emely.
For sithe the day is come that I shall dye
I make plainly my confession
I am thylke woeful Palamon
That has thy prison broke wyckedly
I am thy mortal foe, and he am I
That loves so hot Emelye the bright
That I wol dye here present in her sight
wherefore I ask death and my iewyse
But slay my fellow in the same wise
For both we have deserved to be slain
This worthy duke answerde anon again
And said, this is a short conclusyon
Your own mouth, by your confession
Has dampened you, and I woll it record
It needs not to pyne you with a cord
Ye shall be deed by mighty Mars the reed
The queen anon, for very woman heed
Began for to weep, and so did Emelye
And all the ladies in the company
Great pity was it, as thought hem all
That ever such a chance should befall
For gentylmen they were of great estate
And nothing but for love was this debate
And saw her blody wounds wide and sore
And all cryden both less and more
Have mercy lord upon us wymen all
And on her bare knees down they fall
And would have kyst his fete there he stood
Till at the last, a slaked was his mode
For pity renueth sone in gentle heart
And though he first for ire quoke and sterte
He has consydred shorthly in a clause
The trespass of hem both, and eke the cause
And al though his ire her gylt accused
Yet in his reason he hem both excused
As thus: he thought well that every man
woll help him self in love all that he can
And eke deliver him self out of a prison
And eke his heart, had compassyon
Of wymen, for they wepen every in one
And in his gentle heyte he thought anon
And soft unto him self he said: fie
Upon a lord, that woll have no mercy
But be a lion, both in word and deed
To hem that been in repentance and in dread
As well as to a proud dispytous man
That will maintain that he first began
That lord has little of discretyon
That in such case can no diffynition
But wayeth pride and humblesse after one
And shortly, when his ire was thus agone
He began to loken up with eyes light
And spoke these words al on hight
The god of love, ah, benedicite
How mighty, and how great a lord is he
Again his might there gayneth no obstacles
He may be cleaped a god for his miracles
For he can maken at his own gyse
Of euerych heart, as him list deuyse
Lo here this Arcyte, and this Palamon
That quitely were out of my prison gone
And might have lived in Thebes ryally
And known I am her mortal enemy
And that her death is in my power also
And yet has love, maugre her eyes two
Brought hem hither both for to dye
Now looks, is not this a great folly*
Who may be a fool, but if he love*
Behold for gods sake, that sytteth above
Se how they blede, be they not well arayde
Thus has her lord, ye god of love hem paid
Her wages and her fees for her seruyse
And yet they wenen to be full wise
That serve love, for aught that may be fall
But yet is this the best g^me of all
That she, for whom they have this iolyte
Can hem therefore, as much thank as me
She wotte no more of all this hot face
By God, than wotte a cokowe or an hare
But all mote ben assayed hot and cold
A man mote ben a fool other young or old
I wot it by my self full yore agone
For in my time, a servant was I one
And therefore sith I know of loves pain
I wot how sore it can a man distrayne
As he that often has be caught in her laas*
I you foryeue all holy this trespaas
At the request of the queen, ye kneleth here
And eke of Emely, my sister dear
And ye shall both anon anto me swear
That ye shall never more my country dear
Ne make war upon me night ne day
But ben my friends in all that ye may
I you for yene this trespass every dele
And they him swace his asking fair and well
And him of lordshyp and of mercy prayde
And he hem granted grace, and thus he said.
To speak of worthy lynage and richesse
Though ye she were a queen, or a princess
Ilke of you both is worthy doutles
To wedde when time is, but netheles
I speak, as for my sister Emely
For whom ye have this strife and ielowsy
Ye wot your self, she may not wedde two
At ones, though ye fyghten ever mo
But one of you, all be him loath or lefe
He mote go pype in an yue lefe
This is to say, she may not have both
Ne ben ye never so ielous, ne so wroth
And therefore, I you put in this degree
That each of you shall have his destyne
As him is shape, and harken in what wise
Lo here your end, of that I shall deuyse
My will is this, for plat conclusion
Without any replicacion
If that you lyketh, takes it for the best
That euerych of you shall go where him list
Freely, without ransom or daungere
And this day fyftye wekes, far ne nere
Euerych of you shall bring an.C. knights
Armed for the lystes up all ryghtes
Al ready to darreyne here by battle
And this behote I you wythouten fail
Upon my troth, as I am true knight
That whether of you both, has that might
That is to say, that whether he or thou
May with his hundred, as I spoke of now
Slay his contrary, or out of lystes drive
Him shall I yene Emely to wyue
To whom yt fortune yeueth so fair a grace.
The lystes shall I maken in this place
And god so wisely on my soul rewe
As I shall even judge be and true
Ye shall none other end with me make
That one of you shall be deed or take
And if ye thynken, this is well ysayd
Says your advise, and hold you well apayd
This is your end, and your conclusion.
Who looks lightly now but Palamon
Who spryngeth up for joy but Arcite
Who could tell, or who could endyte
The joy that is made in this place
When Theseus had done so fair a grace
But down on knees went every manner wight
And thanked him, with al her heart and might
And namely these Thebans many sithe
And thus with good hope and heart blythe
They taken her leave, and ho^ward began they ride
To Thebes ward, with old walls wide
I trow men would deem it negligence
If I foryetten to tell the dyspence
Of Theseus, that goes so busely
To maken up the lystes royally
That such a noble Theater, as it was
I dare well say, in this world there nas
The circute a mile was about
Walled with stone, and dyched al about
Round was the shape, in manner of a compass
Full of degrees, the heygth of fyrty paas
That when a man was set on one degree
He let not his fellow for to s^
Estward there stood a gate of marble white
westward right such another in thopposite
And shortly to conclude, such a place
was none in earth, as in so little space
For in the land, there nas no crafts man
That gemetry, or arsmetyke can
Ne portriture, ne caruer of images
That Theseus ne gave him mete and wages
The theater for to make and deuyse
And for to do his ryte and sacrifyce
He estwarde has upon the yate above
In worship of Venus, gods of love
Do make an auter, and an oratory
And on the westsyde, in memory
Of Mars, he has maked such another
That cost of gold largely a fother
And northwarde, in a turret in the wall
Of alabastre white, and read coral
An oratorye, rich for to se
In worship of Diane, gods of chastity
Has Theseus do wrought in noble wise
But yet had I foryetten to deuyse
The noble caruynges and the portratures
The shap, the countenance, and the fygures
That weren in the oratories three
First in the temple of Venus thou may se
wrought on the wall, full pytously to behold
The broken slepes, and the syghes cold
The sault tears, and the waymentyng
The fire strokes, and the desyryng
That loves servants in this life enduren
The oaths, that her couenauntes assuren
Plesaunce and hope, desire, fool hardynesse
Beauty and youth, baudry and richesse
Charms and sorcery, leasynges and flatery
Dyspence, business, and ielousy
That weared of yelowe goldes a garlande
And a cokowe sitting on her hand
Feestes, instruments, carolles, and daunces
Iustes and array, and all the circumstaunces
Of love, which I reken and reken shall
By order, were painted on the wall
And mo then I can make of mention
For sothly all the mount of Cytheron
Where Venus has her principal dwelling
was showed on the wall in portreyng
with all the joy, and the lustynesse
Naught was foryete^ the portresse ydelnesse
Ne Narcissus the fair of yore agon
Ne yet the folly of king Solomon
Ne yet the great strength of Hercules
Thenchauntement of Medea and Circes
Ne of Turnus, with his hardy fyers courage
The rich Cresus caytyfe in seruage
Thus may ye seen, that wisdom ne richesse
Beauty ne sleyght, strength ne hardynesse
Ne may with Venus hold champartye
For as her list the world may she gye
Lo, al these folk so caught were in her laas
Till they for woe full often said alas
Suffyseth here one ensample or two
And though I could reken a thousand mo
The statue of Venus glorious to se
was maked fletynge in the large see
And fro the nauyll down al covered was
with wawes grene, and bright as any glass
A cytriole in her right hand had she
And on her heed, full semely for to se
A rose garlande, fresh and well smelling
Above her heed doves flytterynge
Beforne her stood her son Cupido
Upon his shoulders wings had he two
And blind he was, as it is often seen
A bow he had, and arowes bright and kene
why should I not as well tellen all The purgatory that was therabout over al
within the temple of mighty Mars the read
Al painted was the wall in length and in bread
Like to the Estris of the grysly place
That hight ye great temple of Mars in Trace
In thylke cold frosty regyon
There Mars has his sovereign mancion
First on the wall was painted a forest
In which there wonneth another man ne be
With knotty and knarry trees old
Of stubbes sharp, and hydous to behold
In which there was a romble and a show
As though a storm should break every bow
And downward under an hyl under a bent
There stood the temple of Mars armipotent
wrought all of burnt stele, of which thentre
was long and straight, and ghastly for to se
And there out came such a rage and such a vyse
That it made all the gates for to rise
The northren light in at the doors shone
For wyndowe on the wall was there none
Through which me^ might any light discern
The doors were al of athamant eterne
Yclensed ouerthwarte and endlonge
with yren toughe, for to maken it strong
Every pyller, the temple to sustene
was tonne great, of yren bright and shene
There saw I first the derke ymagynyng
Of felony, and eke the compassyng:
The cruel ire, red as any glede
The pyckpurse and eke the pale dread
The smyler, with the knyfe under the cloak
The shepen brennynge with ye black smoke
The treason of the murdrynge in the bid
The open war, with wounds all be blede
Co^teke with blody knyues, and sharp manace
All full of chyrkyng was that sorry place
The fleer of him self yet saw I there
His heart blood has bathed all his here
The nail ydriuen in the shode on hight
with cold death, with mouth gapyng upright
Amyddes of the temple sat Myschaunce
with Discomfort, and sorry Countenance
Yet saw I wodnesse, laughyng in his rage
Armed complaynte on theft and fyers courage
The carrayne in the bushe, with throat ycorne
A thousand slain, and not of qualme ystorne
The tyrant with the pray by force yraft
The town distroyed there was nothing ylaft
Yet saw I brent the ships hoppesteres
The hunter ystrangled with ye wild bears
The sow frettyng the child in the cradyll
The coke yscaulded, for all his long ladyll
Naught was foreten yt in fortune of Mart
The carter over rydden by his own carte
Under the whele full low he lay a down
There were also of Martes diuysyon
The harbor, the boucher, and the smyth
That forgeth sharp swords on the styth
And all above depaynted in a toure
Saw I Conquest, syttyng in great honor
with the sharp sword over his heed
Hangyng by a subtyl twyned threde
Depaynted was there, ye slaughter of Julius
Of great Nero, and of Anthonius
Al be that thylke time they were unborn
Yet was her death depaynted there beforne
By manacynge of Mars, right by figure
So was it showed in that portreture
As is depaynted in the certres above
Who shall be deed or else slain for love
Suffyseth one ensample in stories old
I may not reken them al, though I would
The statue of Marce upon a carte stood
Armed, and looked grym as he were wode
And over his heed there shynen two fygures
Of sterres, that been cleped in scryptures
That one (Puella) hight, yt other (Rubeus)
This god arms was arrayed thus
A wolf there stood beforne him at his fete
With eyes reed, and of a man he ete
with subtyl pensyl was painted this story
In redoutynge of Marce and of his glory.
Now to the temple of Dyane the chaste
As shortly as I can I wol me haste
To tell you all the dyscriptyoun
Depaynted ben the walls up and down
Of huntyng and of shamfast chastyte
There saw I how woeful Calistope
when that Dyane grieved was with her
was turned fro a woman to a bear
And afterward was she made ye lode sterre
Thus was it painted, I can say no far
Her s^^ne is eke a sterre, as men may se
There saw I Dane turned unto a tree
I mean not the goddess Dyane
But Venus daughter, which ye hight Dane
There saw I Atheon an heart ymaked
For vengeance yt he saw Dyane al naked
I saw how yt his hou^des have him caught
And freten him, for they knew him naught
Yet ypaynted was a little ferthermore
How Athalant hunted the wild bore
And Meliager, and many other mo
For which Dyane wrought him care and woe
There saw I many another wonder storye
which me list not to draw in memory
This goddess full well up an heart she is sete
with small hounds al about her fete
And underneath her fete, she had a moon
waryng it was, and should wane soon
In gaudy grene, her statue clothed was
with bow in hand, and arowes in a caas
Her eyes cast she full low adoun
There Pluto has his dark regioun
A woman trauelynge was her before
But for her child, so long was vnbore
Full pytously Lucyna began she call
And said help, for thou may best of al
well could he paynte lyuelye that it wrought
with many a floreyn he the hewes bought
Now then these lystes made, and Theseus
That at his great cost has arrayed thus
The temples, and the theater euerydel
When it was done, it lyked him wonder well
But stynte I wol of Theseus a lyte
And speak of Palamon and of Arcyte
The day approaches of her returning
That euerych should an.C. knights bring
The battle to darreyne, as I you told
And to Athenes, her couenautes to hold
Has euerich of hem brought an.C. knights
well armed for the war, at al ryghtes
And sykerly, there trowed many a man
That never sythnes the world began
As for to speak of knyghthode, of her hand
As far as god has made see or land
Nas of so few, so noble a company
For every wight, that loved chyualry
And would his thanks have a passing name
Has prayed, that he might be of that game
And well was him, that thereto chosen was
For if there fell to morrow such a caas
Ye know well, that every lusty knight
That loves paramours, and has his might
were it in England, or else where
They would feign wyllen to be there
To fight for a lady, ah, benedicite
It were a lusty sight for to se
And right so farde^ they with Palamon
with him there went knights many on
Some would ben armed in an habergeon
And in a breast plate, with a light gyppion
And some would have a pair of plates large
And some would have a pruce sheld or a targe
Some would be armed on his legs well
And have an axe, and some a mace of stele
There nas none new gyse, that it nas old
Armed were they, as I have you told
Euerych after his opinion
There may you se coming with Palamon
Lygurge him self, the great king of Trace
Black was his berde, and ma^ly was his face
The sercles of his eyes in his heed
They glouden betwyxte yelowe and reed
And like a lion looked he about
with kemped heeres on his brows stout
His lymmes great, his brawnes strong
His shoulders broad, his arms round and long
And as the gyse was in his country
Full hye upon a chare of gold stood he
with four white bulls in the trays
Instead of a cote armure, over his harnays
with nails yelowe, and bright as any gold
He has a bears skyn, cole black for old
His long hear was kempt behynd his back
As any ravens fether it shone for black
A wreth of gold arm great, of huge weight
Upon his heed, set full of stones bright
Of fine rubyes and of dyamandes
About his chare there went whyt allaundes
Twenty and mo, as great as any stere
To hunten at the lion, or at the wild bear
And followed him, with mosel fast ybounde
Colers of gold, and ^orrettes yfyled round
An hundred lords had he in his route
Armed full well, with hertes stern and stout
With Arcite, in stories as men find
The great Emetrius, the king of Ynde
Upon a stead bay, trapped in steel
Covered with a cloth of gold diapred well
Came rydyng like the god of arms Marce
His cote armure was of cloth of Trace
Couched with perle, white, round and great
His sadel was of brent gold new ybet
A mantel upon his shoulders hangyng
Bret full of rubyes, reed as fire sparklyng
His cryspe here like rings was yronne
And yt was yelowe, and gletering as ye Son
His nose was hye, his eyes bright cytryn
His lyppes ruddy, his color was sanguyn
A few frekles in his face yspreynte
Betwexte yelowe, and somdele black ymeynte
And as a lion he his eyes ceste
Of five and twenty year his age I geste
His berde was well begone for to spring
His voice was as a trompet sownynge
Upon his heed he weared of laurer grene
A garlande fresh and lusty for to seen
Upon his hand he bare for his delight
And Egle tame, as any lylly white
An hundred lords had he with him there
Al armed save her heedes in her gere
Full rychely in all manner things
For trusts well, that earls, dukes, and kings
were gathered in this noble company
For love, and for encreace of chyualrye
About this king there ran on every part
Full many a tame lion and lyberte
And in this wise, these lords al and some
Ben on the sunday to the city come
About prime, and in the town alyght.
This Theseus, this duke this worthy knit
when he had brought hem into his cite
And inned hem, euerych after his degree
He feesteth hem, and does so great labor
To easen hem, and done hem al honor
That yet men wenen that no man's wit
Of none estate could amend it
The mynstralcye, the service at the feast
The great gifts, to the most and leest
The rich array, throughout Theseus paleys
Ne who sat first ne last upon the deys
what ladies fairest ben or best dau^cyng
Or which of hem can best dance or sing
Ne who most felyngly speaks of love
Ne what hawks sytten or perchen above
Ne what hounds lyggen on ye flower adoun
Of al this now make I no mention
But all the effect, that thinks my the best
Now comes ye point, herkeneth if you lest
The sunday at night, or day began to spryng
when Palamon the lark herd sing
Although it were not day by hours two
Yet song the lark, and Palamon right tho
with holy heart and with an hye courage
He rose up towenden on his pylgrimage
Unto the blysful Cytherea benygne
I mean Venus honorable and dygne
And in her hour, he walks forth a paas
Unto the lystes, there the temple was
And down he kneleth, and with humble chere
And heart sore, he said as ye shall here
Fairest of fair: O lady mine Venus
Daughter of Jove, and spouse to Vulcanus
Thou glader of the mount of Cytheron
For thylke love thou had to Adon
Have pity of my bitter tears smerte
And take my humble prayer at thine heart
Alas, I ne have no langage to tell
The effect, ne the turment of mine hell
Mine heart may not mine harms bewraye
I am so confused, that I can not say
But mercy lady bright, that wost well
My thought, and see what harms yt I feel
Consider al this, and rue upon my sore
As wysly as I shall for evermore
Emforth my might, thy true servant be
And hold war always with chastity
That make I mine auowe, so ye me help
I keep not of arms for to yelpe
Ne I ne ask to morrow to have victory
Ne renome in this case, ne vain glory
Of pryse of arms, to blown up and down
But would have fulle possessyoun
Of Emely, and dye in her service
Find thou yt manner how, and in what wise
I retche not, but it may better be
To have victory of hem, or they of me
So that I have my lady in mine arms
For though so be that Mars is god of arms
Your virtue is so great in Heaven above
That if you list, I shall well have my love
Thy temple shall I worship ever mo
And on thyn auter, where I ride or go
I wol don sacrifyce, and fyres beat
And if ye wol not so, my lady sweet
Than pray I you, to morrow with a spear
That Arcyte me through the heart bear
Than recke I not, when I have lost my life
Though Arcyte win her to wife
This is the effect and end of my prayere
Give me my lady, thou blysful lady dear
when the orison was done of Palamon
His sacrifyce he did, and that anon
Full pytously, with all cyrcumstaunces
Al tell I not as now his obseruaunces.
But at the last, the statue of Venus shoke
And made a sign, whereby that he took
That his prayere accepted was that day
For though the sign showed a delay
Yet wist he well, that granted was his bone
And with glad heart he went him hom full sone
The third hour in equal that Palamon
Began to Venus temple for to gone
Tp rose the son, and up rose Emelye
And unto the temple of Dyane began hye
Her maidens, the which thither were lad
Full redely with hem the fire they had
The ensence, the clothes, and the remenaunt all That to the sacrifyce longen shall
The horns full of meethe, as was the gyse
There lacked naught to don her sacrifyce
Smokyng the temple, full of clothes fair
This Emely, with heart debonayre
Her body wyshe, with water of a well
But how she did right I dare not tell
But it be any thing in general
And yet it were a game to here it all
To him that means well, it were no charge
But it is good a man be at his large
Her bright hear was vnke^pt and vntressed all
A crown of a grene oak vnseryall
Upon her heed set full fair and mete
Two fyres on the altar began she beat
And did her things, as men may behold
In Stace of Thebes, and these books old
when kenled was the fire, with pitous chere
Unto Dyane she spoke as ye may here
O chaste goddess of the woddes grene
To whom both heaven and earth and see is seen
Queen of the reygne of pluto, derke and low
Goddess of mayde^s, yt mine heart has know
Full many a year, and woste what I desire
As keep me fro the vengeance of thyn ire
That Acteon abought cruelly
Chaste goddess, well woste thou that I
Desire to ben a maid al my life
Ne never wol I be love ne wife
I am thou (woste well) of thy company
A maid, and love huntyng and venery
And for to walken in the woddes wild
And not for to ben a wife, and ben with child
Naught will I know company of man
Now help me lady sithe ye may and can
For tho three forms that thou haste in the
And Palamon, that has such a love to me
And eke Arcyte, that loves me so sore
This grace I pray the, withouten more
And send love and peace bytwyxt hem two
And fro me turn away her hertes so
That al her hot love, and her desire
And al her busy turment, and al her fire
Be queynt, or turned in an other place
And if so be thou wolte not do me that grace
Or if so be my desteny be shapen so
That I shall needs have one of hem two
As send me him that most desires me.
Behold goddess of clean chastyte
The bitter tears, that on my chekes fall
Syn thou art a maid, and keeper of us all
My maydenhede thou keep, and well co^serue
And while I live, a maiden wol I yt serve.
The fyres brenne upon the auter clear
while Emely was thus in her prayere
But suddenly she saw a thing queynte
For right anon, one of the fyres queynte
And quycked again, and after that anon
That other fire was queynte, and al agon
And as it queynte it made a whystlyng
As don these wete brondes in her brennyng
And at the brondes end, out ran anon
As it were bloddy drops many one
For which so sore agaste was Emelye
That she was well nigh mad, and began to cry
For she ne wyste what it sygnyfyed
But only for the fear thus she cried
And wept, that it was pity for to here
And therwithal Dyane began to apere
With bow in hand, right as an hunteresse
And said daughter, stynte thyn heaviness
Among the gods hye it is affyrmed
And by eterne word, written and confyrmed
Thou shall be wedded to one of tho
That have for the so much care and woe
But unto which of hem I may not tell
Farewell, for I may no longer dwell
The fyres, which on mine auter brenne
Shall declaren, er that thou gone hen
This adventure of love, as in this case
And with ye word, the arowes in the case
Of the gods, clatteren fast and ring
And forth she went, and made vaneshynge
For which this Emely astonyed was
And said: what mounteth this, alas
I put me under thy protection
Dyane, and under thy dysposycion
And home she goth the next way
This is the effect, there is no more to say.
The next hour of Mars following this
Arcite unto the temple walked is
On fyers Mars, to done his sacrifyse
with all the might of his paynem wise
with pytous heart, and hye devotion
Right thus to Mars he said his orison
O strong god, that in the reygnes cold
Of trace honored art, and lord yholde
And have in every reygne and every land
Of arms, all the bridle in thine hand
And hem fortunest, as thy list deuyse
Accept of me my pytous sacrifyce
If so be my thought may deserve
And that my might be worthy for to serve
Thy godhede, that I may ben one of thine
Then pray I the, that thou rue on my pyne
For thylke pain, and thylke hot fire
In whech thou brentest whylom for desire
when thou vsedest the fair beauty
Of fair young fresh Venus fre
And had her in thine arms, at thy will
Al though thou ones on a time myssyll
when Vulcanus had caught the in his laas
And found thy lyggynge by his wife alas
For thylke sorrow, that was in thine heart
Have ruth as well on my pains smerte
I am young and vnconning, as thou wost
And as I trow, with love offended most
That ever was any lives creature
For she that does me al this woe endure
Ne retcheth never, where I synke or flete
And well I wot, or she me mercy hete
I mote with strength wyn her in this place
And well I wot, without help or grace
Of the, ne may my strength not avail
The^ help me lord to morrow in my battle
For thylke fire, that whylom brent the
As well as the fire now brenneth me
And do, that I to morrow have vyctorye
Mine be the travail, and thyn be the glory
Thy sovereign temple wol I most honouren
Of any place, and always most labouren
In thy pleasaunce, and in thy ^raftes strong
And in thy temple, I wol my baner honge
And all the arms of my company
And evermore, until the day I dye
Eterne fire I wol beforne the find
And eke to this auowe I will me bind
My berd, my hear, yt hongeth low adoun
That never yet felt offensioun
Of rasour ne of shere, I wol the give
And been thy true servant while I live
Now lord have ruth upon my sorrows sore
Give me the victory, I ask the no more
The prayer stynte of Arcite the strong
The rings on the temple door they ronge
And eke the doors clatren full fast
Of which Arcite somewhat him aghast.
The fyres brennen upon the auter bright
That it began all the temple light
A sweet smell anon the ground up yase
And Arcite anon his hand up hase
And more ensence into the fire he cast
with other rytes mo, and at the last
The statue of Mars began his hauberk ryng
And with that sou^de he herd a murmuryng
Full low and dym, that said thus: victory
For which he yaue to Mars honor and glory
And thus with joy, and hope well to fare
Arcite anon into his ynne is fare
As feign as foul is of the bright son
And right anon such a strife is begone
For thylke granting, in the heaven above
Bytwyrt Venus, the gods of love
And Mars the stern god armypotent
That Jupiter was busy it to stynte
Till that the pale Saturnus the cold
That knew so many auentures old
Found in his experience and art
That he full sone has pleased every part
And soth is said, elde has great advantage
In elde is both wisdom and usage
Men may the old out ren, but not out read
Saturn anon, to stynte^ strife and dread
Al be it that it be again his kind
Of al this stryffe he can remedy find
My dear daughter Venus, quod Saturn
My course that has so wide for to turn
Has more power then wot any man
Mine is the drenchynge in the sea so wan
Mine is the prison in the derke cote
Mine is ye stra^glyng and ye ha^gyng by ye throat
The murmr, and the churles rebellyng
The groynyng, and the privy enpoysonyng
I do vengeance and plain correction
while I dwell in the sign of the lion
Mine is the ruin of the hye halles
The falling of the toures and of the walls
Upon the mynor, or upon the carpenters
I slew Sampson shaking the pyllers
And mine ben the maladyes cold
The derke treasons, and the castles old
My lokynge is the father of pestilence
Now weep no more, I shall do my diligence
That Palamon, that is thine own knight
Shall have his lady, as thou him behyght
Though Mars shall help his knit natheles
Betwixt you it mote sometime be pees
Albe ye not of one complexion
That causes al day such division
I am thine ayle, ready at thy will
weep no more, I wol thy lust fulfill
Now wol I stynte^ of these gods above
Of Mars, and of Venus gods of love
And plainly I wol tellen you as I can
The great effect, of which that I began.
Great was ye feast in Athenes that day
And eke that lusty season in May
Made every wight to ben in such pleasau^ce
That all that day iusten they and dance
And spenten it in Venus hye service
But because that they shulden arise
Erly, for to se the great sight
Unto her rest went they at night
And on the morrow when day began spring
Of horse and harneys, noise and claterynge
There was in the hostelryes al about
And to the palace rode there many a route
Of lords, upon stedes and palfreys
There may thou se deuysyng of harneys
So uncouth, so rych, and wrought so well
Of goldsmethry, of braudry, and of stele
The sheldes bright testers and trappers
Gold hewe^ helmes, hauberkes and cot armers
Lords in paramentes, on her coursers
Knights of retenue, and eke squyers
Naylynge the spears, and helmes bokeling
Gyggyng of sheldes with layners lacynge
There as need is, they were nothing ydel
The fominge stedes on the golden brydel
Gnawyng, and fast the armurers also
with fyle and hammer, rydyng to and fro
Yemen on foot, and comunes many one
with short staves, thycke as they may gone
Pypes, trompes, nakoners, and clarions
That in the battle blown blody sowns
The palace full of people up and down
Here three, there ten, holding her question
Deuinyng of these Theban knights two
Some said thus, some said it should be so
Some held with him with ye black berde
Some with the balled, some with the thick herd
Some said he looked grym, and would fight
He has a sparth of twenty pound of weight
Thus was the hal full of deuinynge
Long after the son began to spring
The great Theseus of his sleep began wake
with mynstralsye and noise that they make
Held yet the chamber of his palace rich
Till that the Theban knights, both yliche
Honored weren, and into the place yfette.
Duke Theseus is at the wyndowe set
Arrayed right as he were a god in trone
The people preased thyderwarde full sone
Him for to seen, and done him hye reverence
And eke for to here his hest and his sentence
An heraude on a scaffolde made an oo
Till all the noise of the people was ydo
And when he saw the people of noise still
Thus showed he the mighty dukes will.
The lord has of his hye dyscrecion
Consydred, that it were dystruccion
To gentle blood, to fyghten in this gyse
Of mortal battle, now in this empryse
wherefore to shapen, that they shall not dye
He wol his first purpose modefye
No man therefore, up pain of loss of life
No manner short, polaxe, ne short knyfe
In to the lystes send, or thytherbrynge
Ne short sword to stycke with point bytynge
No man ne draw, ne bear it by his side
Ne no man shall to his fellow ride
But one course, with a sharp grou^den spear
Foyne if him list on foot, him self to were
And he that is at myschefe, shall be take
And not slain, but brought to the stake
That shall been ordained on either side
But thither he shall by force, and there abide
And if so fall, that the chieftayne be take
On either side, or else sleene his make
No longer shall the turnament last
God speed you, goes and lays on fast
with swords and long mases fyghte^ your fyl
Goth now your way, this is the lords will
The voice of the people touched heaven
So loud cried they with merry steven
God save such a lord, that is so good
He wylleth no destruction of blood.
Up goes the trompes and the melodye
And to the lystes, rydeth so the company
By ordinance, throughout the city large
Ho^ged with cloth of gold, and not with sarge
Full like o lord this noble duke began ride
These two Thebans on every side
And after rode the queen and Emelye
And after that an other company
Of one and other, after her degree
And thus they passen throughout the city
And to the lystes comen they be by time
It nas not of the day yet fully pryme
when set was Theseus full rich and hye
Ipolita the queen, and Emelye
And other ladies in degrees about
Unto the seats preaseth all the route
And westward, through ye yates under mart
Arcite and eke an hundred of his part
with baner reed, is entered right anon
And in the selue momet entered Palamon
Is, under Venus, estwarde in that place
with baner white, and hardy chere and face
And in all the world, to seken up and down
So even without variacion
There nas such companyes twey
For there nas none so wise that could sey
That any had of other advantage
Of worthynesse, ne of estate, ne age
So even were they chose to guess
And in to the renges fair they hem dress
when that her names red were euerychone
That in her nombre, gyle were there none
Tho were the gates shyt, and cried was loud
Do now your deuer young knights proud
The heraudes left her prycking up and down
Now ryngen trompes loud and clarioun
There is no more to say, este and weste
In goth the sharp speres sadly in the arrest
In goth the sharp spurs into the side
There se men who can just, and who can ride
There shyueren shaftes, upon sheldes thycke
He feleth through the heart spoune the pryck
Up springs ye sper^s, twenty foot on hight
Out goth the swords, as the silver bright
The helmes they to heawe, and to shrede
Out burst ye blood, with stern stremes read
with mighty maces, the bones they to break
He through ye thyckest of ye thro^ge began threke
There stomblen stedes strong, and down gone al
He rolled under the foot as does a bal
He foyneth on his fete with a tronchoun
And he hurleth with his horse adoun
He through the body is hurt, and sith ytake
Maugre his heed, and brought unto the stake
As forward was, right there he must abide
An other is ladde on that other side
And sometime does hem Theseus to rest
Hem to refeshe, and drink if hem lest
Full often a day have these Thebans two
Together met, and done each other woe
Unhorsed has each other of hem twey
There was no tygre, in the vale of Galaphey
when her whelpe is stole, when it is lyte
So cruel on the hunte, as is Arcite
For ielous heart, upon this Palamon
Ne in Belmary, there is no fell lion
That hunted is, or for his honger wood
Ne of his prey, desires so the blood
As Palamon to slay his foe Arcite
The jealous strokes on her helmes byte
Out renneth ye blood on both her sides read
Sometime an end there is of every deed
For er the Sun unto the rest went
The strong king Emetrius gone hente
This Palamon, as he fought with this Arcite
And made his sword deep in his flesh byte
And by force of twenty is he take
Un yolden, and drawn to the stake
And in the rescous of this Palamon
The strong king Lygurge is borne adoun
And king Emetrius, for all his strength
Is borne out of his sadle a swords length
So hurt him Palamon or he were take
But al for naught, he was brought to ye stake
His hardy heart might him help naught
He must abide, when that he was caught
By force, and eke by composycion
Who soroweth now but woeful Palamon
That more no more gone again to fight
And when that Theseus had seen ye sight
He cried hoe: no more, for it is don
Ne none shall longer to his fellow gone
I wol be true judge, and not party
Arcite of Thebes shall have Emelye
That by his fortune has her fair ywonne
Anon there is a noise of people bygonne
For joy of this, so loud and hye withal
It seemed that the lystes should fall
What can now fair Venus done above?
What says she now? what does ye queen of love
But wepeth so, for wa^tyng of her will
Till that her tears on the lystes fill
She said: I am a shamed doutles
Saturn said: daughter hold thy pees
Mars has al his will his knit has his bone
And by mine heed, thou shall be eased sone
The trompes with the loud mynstralcye
The heraudes, that so loud yel and cry
Ben in her well, for love of dan Arcyte
But harkeneth me, and stynteth noise a lyte
which a miracle there byfell anon
The fyers Arcyte had his helm of ydon
And on a courser, for to show his face
He pricketh endlonge the large place
Lokyng upward upon Emelye
And she again him cast a friendly eye
(For women, as to speak in comune
They folowen all the favor of fortune)
And was all his chere, as in his heart
Out of the ground a fire infernal sterte
From Pluto sent, at the request of Saturn
For which his horse for fear began to turn
And lepe a side, and foundred as he lepe
And er that Arcyte may taken keep
He pyght him on the pomell of his heed
That in the place he lay, as he were deed
His breast to brosten with his sadel bow
As black he lay as any cole or crow
So was the blood yronne in his face
Anon he was brought out of the place
with heart sore, to Theseus paleys
Tho was he coruen out of his harneys
And in a bed ybrought full fair and blyue
For he was yet in memory, and on live
And always cryeng after Emelye.
Duke Theseus, with all his company
Is comen home to Athenes his cite
with all bliss and great solempnyte
Al be it that this adventure was fall
He would not discomforte hem all
Men said eke, that Arcyte should not dye
He should ben yhealed of his maladye
And of an other thing they were as feign
That of hem al there was none slain
Al were they sore hurt, and namely one
That with aspere was thronled his breast bone
Two other wounds, and two broken arms
Some had salues, and some had charms
Fermaces of herbs and eke save
They dronken* for they would her lyeues have
For which this noble duke, as he well can
Comfort and honors every man
And made revel all the long night
Unto the strange lords, as it was right
Ne there nas hold no discomfortyng
But as iustes or a tourneyng
For sothly there nas no discomfyture
For falling is hold but an adventure
Ne to be ladde by force unto a stake
vnyolden and with twenty knights take
One person a lone withouten any mo
And haryed forth by arm, foot, and too
And eke his stead driven forth with staves
With footmen, both yemen and knaves
It was ar^tted him no vilanye
There may no man cleape it cowardye
For which anon, duke Theseus did cry
To stynten al rancour and envy
They great as well of one side as of other
And either side ylyke, as others brother
And yaue him ryghtes after her degree
And fully held a feast days three
And coueyed the Knights worthyly
Out of his town, a days journey largely
And home went every man the right way
There was no more, but farwell and have good day.
Of this battle, I wol no more endyte
But speak of Palamon and Arcyte
Swells the breast of Arcyte, and the sore
Increases at his heart more and more
The clotered blood, for any leche craft
Corrumped, and is in his body lafte
That neither veynbloode, ne ventousyng
Ne drink of herbs, may be helpyng
By virtue expulsed, or anymall
For thylke virtue cleaped natural
Ne may the venym void, ne expel
The pypes of his longes began to swell
And every lacerte, in his breast adown
Is shent with venym and corruption
Him gayneth neither, for to get his life
Vomyte upward, ne downwarde laxatyfe
All is to bruste thylke regyon
Nature has no domynacyon
And certainly there as nature w^l not wirche
Farwell phisyke, go bear the corse to church
This is al and some, that Arcyte must dye
For which he sends after Emelye
And Palamon his cosyn dear
Than said he thus, as ye shall after here.
Naught may my woeful spyrit in my heart
Declare a point of al my sorrows smerte
To you my lady, that I love most
But I bequethe the service of my ghost
To you abouen any creature
Syn that my life may no longer dure
Alas the woe, alas my pains strong
That I for you have suffered and so long
Alas the death, alas mine Emely
Alas the partyng of our company
Alas mine hertes queen, alas my lives wife
Mine hertes lady, ender of my life
What is the world, what asken me^ to have
Now with his love, now in his cold grave
Alone withouten any company
Farwell my sweet foe, mine Emely
And soft take me in your arms twey
For the love of god, herkeneth what I sey.
I have here with my cosyn Palamon
Had strife and rancour, many a day agon
For love of you, and for my ielousye
And Jupiter so wyssely my soul gye
To speken of a servant properly
with cyrcumstaunces al trewly
That is to say, troth, honor, and knyghthede
wysedom, humblesse, estate, and hye kynrede
Fredom, and all that longs to that art
So Jupiter have of my soul part
As in this world right now know I non
So worthy to be loved as Palamon
That serves you, and woll don all his life
And if that ye shall ever ben a wife
For yet not Palamon, the gentle man
And with that word his speech fail began
For from his fete unto his breast was come
The cold of death, that had him nome
And yet more over, for in his arms two
The vytal strength is lost, and al ago
Save only the intellecte, without more
That dwelled in his heart sick and sore
Began faylen, when the heart felt death
Dusked his eyes two, and failed brethe
But on his lady, yet cast he his eye
His last word was, mercy Emelye
His spyrit changed, and out went there
whytherwarde I can not tell, ne where
Therefore I stynte, I am no diuynystre
Of souls find I not in this regystre
Ne me list not thylke opinyon to tell
Of hem, though they written where they dwell
Arcyte is cold, that Mars his soul gye
Now woll I speak forth of Emelye.
Shright Emely, and howlen Palamon
And Theseus his suster up took anon
Swounyng, and bare her fro his corse away
what helps it to tarry forth the day
To tellen how she wept both eue^ and morrow
For in such case women have such sorrow
when that her husbands ben fro hem go
That for the more part they sorowen so
Or else fallen in such maladye
That at the last, certainly they dye
Infinyte ben the sorrows and the teres
Of old folk, and folk of tender years
In all the town, for death of this Theban
For him there wepeth both child and man
So great weeping was there not certain
when Hector was brought, al fresh islayn
To Troy alas, the pity that was there
Cratchyng of chekes, rentyng eke of here
why would thou be deed, thus women cry
And had gold enough, and Emelye?
No man might glade Theseus
Saving his old father Egeus
That knew this worlds transmutacion
As he had seen it, both up and down
Joy after woe, and woe after gladness
And showed him ensamples and lyknesse
Right as there dyed never man, quod he
That he ne lived in earth in some degree
Right so there lived never man, he said
In all this world, that sometime he ne deyde
This world is but a thorowfare full of woe
And we ben pilgrims, passing to and fro
Death is an end of every worlds sore.
And over al this yet said he much more
To this effect, full wisely to exhort
The people, that they should hem recomfort
Duke Theseus with all his busy cure
Casts now, where that the sepulture
Of good Arcyte, shall best ymaked be
And eke most honorable of degree
And at the last he took conclusyon
That there as Arcyte and Palamon
Had for love, the battle hem between
That in the same selue grove, sweet and grene
There as he had his amerous desires
His complaynte, and for love his hot fyres
He would make a fire, in which the offys
Funeral he might hem al accomplys
He has anon commanded to hacke and hew
The oaks old, and lay hem al on arewe
In culpons, well arrayed for to brenne
His officers with swyfte foot they run
And right anon at his commandment
And after Theseus has ysente
After a beer, and it all over spradde
With clothe of gold, the rychest that he had
And of the same suit he clothed Arcyte
Upon his hands his gloves white
Eke on his heed a crown of laurer grene
And in his hand a sword full bright and kene
He loyde him bare the visage on the bear
Therewith he wept, that pity was to here
And for the people should seen him all
When it was day, he brought him to ye hall
That roreth of the cry and of the sorrows soun
Tho began this woeful theban Palamon
with glytering berde, and ruddy shynyng here is
In clothes black, dropped al with teres
And passing other of weeping Emely
The rufullest of all the company.
And in as much as the service should be
The more noble, and rich in his degree
Duke Theseus let forth the stedes bring
That trapped were in steel all gleteryng
And covered with the arms of dan Arcyte
Upon these stedes great and white
There saten folk, of which one bare his sheld
Another his spear, in his hand held
The third bare with him a bow turks
Of brent gold was the case and eke the harnes
And ryden forth a pace with sorry chere
Toward the grove, as ye shall after here.
The noblest of the greeks, that there were
Upon her shuldres carried the bear
With slack pace, and eyes reed and wete
Throughout the cite, by the master street
That sprad was al with blak, and that wonder hye
Right of the same is the street ywrye
Upon the right hand went Egeus
And on the other side duke Theseus
With vessels in her hand, of gold full fine
Al full of honey, milk, blood, and wine
Eke Palamon, with full great company
And after that, came woeful Emely
With fire in hand, as was yt time the gyse
To don the office of funeral seruyse
Hye labor, and full great apparaylyng
Was at service, and at fire making
That with his grene top the heaven raught
And twenty fadome of bread arms straught
This is to sayn, the bows were so broad
Of straw first there was laid many a lode.
But how the fire was maked up on height
And eke the names, how the trees heyght
As oak, fur, beche, aspe, elder, elm, popelere
Wyllo, holm, plane, box, chesteyn, laulere
Maple, thorn, beche, ewe, hasel, whipultre
How they were field, shall not be told for me
Ne how the gods run up and down
Disheryted of her abytacioun
In which they wonned in rest and pees
Nymphs, Fauny, and amadriades
Ne how the beeste, ne the birds all
Fledden for fear, when the trees fall
Ne how the ground aghast was of the light
That was not wont to se the son bright
Ne how the fire was couched first with stre
And than with dry styckes cloven a three
And than with grene wodde, and spicery
And than with clothe of gold and perry
And garlondes ha^gyng with many a flower
The myrre, the ensence, with sweet odoure
Ne how Arcyte lay among all this
Ne what richesse about his body is
Ne how that Emely, as was the gyse
Put in the fire of funeral seruyse
Ne how she swouned wha^ maked was ye fire
Ne what she spoke, ne what was her desire
Ne what iewelles men in the fire cast
When that the fire was great and brent fast
Ne how some cast her sheld, and some her spear
And of her vestementes, which yt they were
And cups full of wine, milk, and blood
In to the fire, that brent as it were wood
Ne how the greeks with a huge route
Thryse rydden all the fire about
Upon the left hand, with a loud showtyng
And thryse with her spears clateryng
And thryse how the ladies began cry
Ne how that ladde was homwarde Emelye
Ne how that Arcite is brent to asshen cold
Ne how the lyche wake was hold
All that night, ne how the greeks play
The wake plays, keep I not to say
Who wrestled best naked, with oil anoint
Ne who bare him best in every point
I woll not tellen how they gone
whom to Athenes, when the play is done
But shortly to the point than woll I wend
And make of my long tale an end.
By process and by length of years
All stynten is the morning and the teres
Of greeks, by one general assent
Than seemed me there was a parliament
At Athenes, upon a certain point and caas
Among the which points yspoken was
To have with certain countres alyaunce
And have of Thebans fully obeysaunce
For which this noble Theseus anon
Let send after this gentyl Palamon
Vnwyste of him what was ye cause and why:
But in his black clothes sorowfully
He came at his commandment on hye
Tho sent Theseus after Emelye.
When they were set, and hushte was yt place
And Theseus abydden has a space
Or any word came from his wise breast
His eyes set he there him lest
And with such a sad vysage, he syked still
And after that, right thus he said his will.
The first mouer of the cause above
When he first made the fair chain of love
Great was theffecte, and hye was his entente
Well wyste he why, and what thereof he mente
For with that fair chain of love he bond
The fire, the air, the water, and the land
In certain bonds, that they may not fle
That same prince and that mouer, quod he
Has stablisshed i^ this wretched world ados^
Certain days and duracion
To all that are engendered in this place
Over the which day they may not pace
Al mow they yet the days abredge
There needs none auctorite to ledge
For it is proved by experyence
But that me list declaren my sentence
Than may men by this order discern
That thylke mouer stable is and eterne
well may men know, but he be a fool
That every party is deryued from his hole
For nature has not taken his beginning
Of one part or cantell of a thing
But of a thing that perfyte is and stable
Discendyng so, till it be corrumpable
And therefore of his wise purueyaunce
He has so well byset his ordinance
That spaces of things and progressyons
Shullen endure by successyons
And not eterne, without any lie
Thus may thou understand and se at eye.
Lo the oak, that has so long a norishyng
Fro the time that it begins first to spring
And has so long a life, as ye may se
Yet at the last, wasted is the tree
Consydreth eke, how that the hard stone
Under our fete, on which we reeade and gone
Yet wastes it, as it lies in the wey
The broad river sometime wexeth drey
The great towns, se we wave and wend
Than ye se that al this thing has end
And man and waman se shall we also
That needs in one of the terms two
That is to said, in youth orels in age
He mote be deed, a king as well as a page
Some in his bed, some in the deep see
Some in the large field, as ye may se
It helps not, al gothe that ylke wey
Than may ye se that al thing mote dey
what makes this, but Jupiter the King?
That is prince, and cause of al thing
Conuertyng al to his propre will
From which it is deryued sothe to tell
And here again, no creature on live
Of no degree, avails for to strive
Than is it wisdom, as thinks me
To make virtue of necessyte
And take it well, that we may not eschew
And namely that to us al is dew
And who so grutcheth aught, he does folly
And rebel is to him that al may gye
And certainly, a man has most honor
To dyen in his excellence and flour
when he is syker of his good name
Tha^ has he don his friends ne him no sham
And gladder ought his friends be of his death
when with honor y yolde is up the breath
Than when his name apalled is for age
For all foryeten is his vassellage
Than is it best, as for a worthy same
To dyen, when he is best of name
The contrary of al this is wylfulnesse
why grutchen we* why have we heaviness
That good Arcite, of cheualry the flower
Departed is, with duty and with honor
Out of this foul prison, of this life
why grutchen here his cosyn and his wife
Of his welfare, that loves him so well?
Can he hem thank? nay god wot never a dele
That both his soul, and eke hem offend
And yet they mow not her lusts amend?
what may conclude of this long story
But after sorrow, I read us be merry
And thank Jupiter of al his grace
And er we departen from this place
I read we maken of sorrows two
One perfyte joy, lastyng ever mo
And look now where most sorrow is heryn
There wol I first amend and begin.
Suster quod he, this is my full assent
With all the people of my parliament
That gentle Palamon, your own knight
That serves you with will, heart, and might
And ever has done, sithe ye first him knew
That ye shall of your grace upon him rewe
And take him for husbonde and for lord
Lene me your hand, for this is our accord.
Let se now of your womanly pity
He is a kings brother son parde
And though he were a poor bachelere
Syn he has served you so many a year
And had for you so great aduersyte
It must ben consydred, leueth me
For gentle mercy ought to passen right.
Than said he thus to Palamon ye Knight
I trow chere need little sarmonyng
To make you to assenten to this thing
Comes nere, and takes your lady by ye hand
Bytwyxt hem was maked anon the bond
That hight matrimony or marriage
By all the counsel of the baronage
And thus with all bliss and melodye
Has Palamon ywedded Emelye.
And god that all this world has wrought
Send him his love, yt it has so dear bought
For now is Palamon in all well
Living in bliss, in richesse, and in hele
And Emelye him loves so tenderly
And he her serves so gentelly
That never was there no word he^ between
Of ielousye, or of any other tene
Thus ends Palamon and Emelye
And god save al this fair company.
Here ends the Knights tale, and here follows the Myllers Prologue.
When that the knight had thus his tale ytolde
In all the company nas there young ne old
That he ne said, it was a noble story
And worthy to be drawn in memory
And namely the gentyls euerychone
Our host lough and swear, so mote I gone
This gothe a right, vnbokled is the male
Let se now who shall tell another tale
For truly, the game is well begone
Now tells sir monk if ye done
Somewhat, to quyte with the knights tale
The myller for dronken was al pale
So that uneaths upon his horse he satte
Ne nolde auale neither hoode ne hatte
Ne abide no man for his curtesye
But in Pylates voice he began to cry
And swore by arms, blood, and bones
I can a noble tale for the nones
with which I wol now quyte ye Knight his tale
Our host saw that he was dronke^ of ale
And said: abide Robyn leave brother
Some better man shall tell us first an other
Abide, and let us wirche thriftely.
By gods soul (quod he) that wol not I
For I wol speak, or else go my way
Our host answerde: tell on a dyuelway
Thou art a fool, thy wit is overcome
Now herkeneth quod you myller, al and some
But first I make protestacion
That I am drunk, I know it by my soun
And therefore if I mispeke or say
wit it the ale of Sothwarke, I you pray
For I wol tell a legende and a life
Both of a carpenter and his wife
How that a clerk set a wrightes cappe.
The Reave answerde and, said, stynte thy clap
Let be thy lend dronken harlottry
It is a sin, and eke a great folly
To apayren any man, or him defame
And eke to bring wives in such blame
Thou may ynouge of other things sayn.
This dronke^ myller spoke full sone again
And said: leave brother Oswolde
who has no wife is no cokolde
But I say not therefore that thou art one
There ben full good wives many one
why art thou angry with my tale now
I have a wife parde, as well as thou
Yet nolde I for all the oxen in my plough
Take upon me more than enough
To demen of my self that I am one
I wol believe that I am none.
An husbonde should not ben inquisytyse
Of gods priuete, ne of his wife
For so he find gods foyson there
Of the remenaunt, needs not to enquere.
what should I more say, but this Myllere
He nolde his words for no man forbere
But told his chorles tale in this manner
Me forthynketh I shall reherce it here
And therefore, every gentle wight I pray
Demeth not for gods love, that I say
Of yuel intent, but that I mote reherce
Her tales al, ben they better or werse
Or else fa^^en some of my matere
And therefore, who so list it not to here
Turn over the lefe, and chose another tale
For ye shall find ynowe great and small
Of hystorial thing, that touches gentilnesse
And eke moralite, and holiness
Blame not me, if that ye chose amys
The Myller is a chorle, ye know well this
So was the Reave eke, and other mo
And harlotry they told eke both two
Auyse you, and put me out of blame
And eke men should not make ernest of game.
Here ends the Myllers prologue, and here after follows his tale.
WHylom there was dwelling in Oxenforde
A rich gnoffe, yt gestes held to board
And of his craft he was a carpenter
With him there was dwelling a poor scoler
Had ylerned art, but al his fantasye
Was turned to learn Astrologye
And could a certain conclusyons
To demen by interogacions
If that men asked him in certain hours
when yt men should have drought or shoures
Or if men asked him what should befall
Of every thing, I may not reken al.
This clerk was cleped hende Nycholas
Of derne love he could and of solas
And thereto he was slye and right prive
And ylyke to a maiden meke to se
A chamber had he in that hostelry
Alone, withouten any company
Full fetously dight with herbs sote
And he him self as sweet as is the rote
Of lycores, or of any sytuwale
His almagiste, and books great and small
His after lagour, longyng for his art
His augrym stones lyeng fair a part
On shelues couched at his beds heed
His press ycouered with a foldyng reed
And al above there lay a gay sautrye
On which he made on nyghtes melodye
So swetely, that all the chamber ronge
And Angelus ad virginem he song
And after that he song the kings note
Full often blessed was his merry throat
And thus the sweet clerk his time spente
After his friends finding and his rent.
This carpenter had wedded new a wife
which that he loved more then his life
Of eyghtene year she was of age
Ielous he was, and kept her strayte in cage
For she was wyld, and young: and he was old
And demed him self to ben a cokewolde
He knew not Cato: for his wit was rude
That bad men wedde her similitude
Men should wedde after her astate
For youth and elde is often at debate
But sith he was fallen in the snare
He must enduren, as other folk his care
Fair was this yo^ge wife, and therwithal
As any wysele her body gentle and small
A seynte she weared, barred al with sylke
A barme clothe, as white as morrow milk
Upon her lendes, full of many a gore
whyt was her smock, and embrouded al before
And eke behind on her colere about
Of cole black sylke, within and eke without
The tapes of her white volypere
were of the same suit of her colere
Her fylet broad of sylke, and set full hye
And sykerly, she had a lykerous eye
Full small ypulled were her brows two
And tho were bent, and black as any slo
She was much more blysful for to se
Then is the new Perienet tree
And softer then the wol is of a wether.
And by her gyrdel honge a purse of lether
Tassed with sylke, and perled with latoun
In all this world, to seken up and down
There nys no man so wise, yt couth thenche
So gay a popelote, or so gay a wenche
Full bryghter was the shynyng of her hew
Then in the tower the noble forged new
But of her song, it was so loud and erne
As any swalowe sitting on a berne
Thereto she couth skyppe, and make a game
As any kydde or calfe following his dame
Her mouth was sweet, as braket or ye methe
Or horde of apples, lyeng in hey or hethe
wynsynge she was, as is a ioly colte
Long as a maste, and vpryght as a bolte
A broche she bare on her low collere
As broad as the bosse of a bokelere
Her shoes were lased on her legs hye
She was a primrole, and a pyggeskye
For any lord to lyggen in his bed
Or yet for any good yoman to wedde.
Now sir and efte sire, so byfel the caas
That on a day this hende Nycholas
Fell with this young wife to rage and pley
while that her husbonde was at Oseney
As clerks ben full sotel and queynte
And privily he caught her by the queynte
And said: I wys but I have my will
For derne love of the lemman I spyll
And held her fast by the haunche bones
And said: lemman love me well at ones
Or I wol dyen also god me save
And she spronge as a colte in a traue
And with her heed she wrieth fast away
And said: I wol not kesse the by my say
why let be quod she, let be Nycholas
Or I wol cry out harrowe and alas
Do way your hands for your curtesye
This Nycholas began mercy for to cry
And spoke so fair, and proffered him so fast
That she her love granted him at last
And swore her oath, by s. Thomas of Kent
That she would been at his commandment
when that she may her leyser well aspye
My husbonde is so full of ielousye
That but ye wait well, and be prive
I wotte right well I nam but deed, quod she
Ye mote ben full derne as in this caas.
Nay thereof care ye not, quod Nycholas
A clerk had lytherly byset his while
But if he couth a carpenter begyle
And thus they were accorded, and ysworne
To awayten a time, as I have said byforne
And when Nicholas had don thus every dele
And thacked her about the lendes well
He kyssed her sweet, then takes his sautry
And plays fast, and makes melody
Then fell it thus, that to ye parysh cherche
(Christ's own works for to werche)
This good wife went upon an holydaye
Her forheed shone as bright as any day
So was it wash, when she let her work
Now was there of ye chirch a parysh clerk
The which that was cleaped Absolon
Croulle was his hear, and as gold it shon
And strouted as a fan large and broad
Full straight and even lay his ioly shode
His rode was read, his eyes gray as goos
with Poules wyndowes corue^ on his shoos
In hosen read he went fetously
Gyrde he was full small and properly
Al in a kyrtel of light waget
Full fair and thycke ben the points set
And thereupon he had a gay surplyse
As white as is the blosome on the rise
A merry child he was, so god me save
well could he let blood, clyppe, and shave
And make a chartre of land, and a quytaunce
In twenty manner could he tryp and dance
After the skole of Oxenforde tho
And with his legs casten to and fro
And play songs on a small rybyble
Thereto he song sometime a loud quinyble
And as well couth he play on a geterne
In all the town nas brewhouse ne tavern
That he ne vysyted with his solas
There any gay tapstere was
But soth to say he was somewhat squaimous
Of fartynge, and of speech dangerous.
This Absolon, that was ioly and gaye
Goth with a censer on the sunday
Cencyng the wives of the paryshe fast
And many a lovely look on hem he cast
And namely on this carpenters wife
To look on her him thought a merry life
She was so propre, and sweet as lycorous
I dare well ^ayne if she had been a mous
And he a catte, he would have her hente anon
This paryshe clerk, this ioly Absolon
Has in his heart such a love longing
That of no wise took he none offering
For curtesye he said he would none
The moon, when it was night bright shone
And Absolon his geterne has ytake
For paramours he thought for to wake
And forth he goes, ielous and amerous
Till he came to the carpenters house
A little after the cocks had ycrowe
And dressed him by a shot wyndowe
That was upon the carpenters wall
He syngeth in his voice gentle and small
Now dear lady, if thy will be
I pray you that ye wol rewe on me
Full well according to his geternynge.
This carpenter awoke, and herd him sing
And spoke unto his wife anon
what Alyson, here is thou not Absolon
That chau^teth thus under our boures wall?
And she aunswerd her husband there withal
Yes god wot, I here him every dele
This passes forth, what will ye bet the^ well
Fro day to day, this ioly Absolon
So woeth her, that him was woe bygon
He waketh all the night, and all the day
He ke^beth his locks broad, and made him gay
He woeth her by means and brocage
And swore, he would ben her own page
He syngeth brokkyng as a nyghtyngale
He sent her pyment, meth, and spyced ale
And wafres pypynge hot out of the glede
And for she was of town, he profred her mede
For some folk wol be won for richesse
And some for strokes, and some with ge^tlenesse
Sometime to show his lyghtnes and mastrye
He plays Heraudes on a skaffolde hye
But what avails him, as in this caas?
So loves she this hende Nicholas
That Absolon may blow the buckes horn
He ne had for his labor but askorne
And thus she makes Absolon her ape
And al his request turns to a iape
Forsooth this proverb it is no lie
Men say thus always, the nigh slye
Makes the far love to be loath
For though ye Absolon be wood or wroth
Because that he far was from her sight
Thus nigh Nycholas stood in his light
But now bear the well hende Nycholas
For Absolon may wayle and sing alas
And so byfel it on a saterbay
This carpenter was gone to Osnay
And hende Nicholas and Alyson
Accorded were to this conclusion
That Nycholas should shapen hem a wyle
This sely ielous carpenter to begyle
And if so be the game went aryght
She should sleep in his arms al night
For this was his desire, and hers also
And right anon, without words mo
This Nycholas no longer would tarry
But does full soft unto his chamber carye
Both meat and drink, for a day or twey
And to her husband bade her for to sey
If that he asked after Nycholas
She should say she nyst where he was
Of all that day she saw him not with cite
She trowed he was in some maladye
For no cry that her maid could call
He nolde answer, for naught yt might befall
Thus passes forth all the ylke saturday
That Nycholas still in his chamber lay
And ete, drank, and slept, and did what him list
Till sunday, that the Sun goes to rest
This sely carpenter has great maruayle
Of Nicolas, or what thing might him eyle
And said: I am a drad by saint Thomas
It stondeth not aryght with Nycholas
God shylde that he dyed suddenly
This world is now full tykel sekerly
I saw to day a corse borne to cherche
That now on mo^day last I saw him werche
Go up (quod he unto his knave) anon
Cleape at his door, and knock fast with a stone
Look how it is, and tell me boldly.
This knave went up full sturdely
And at the chamber door, while that he stood
He cried and knocked as he were wood
What how? what do ye master Nicholay?
How may ye sleep all this long day?
But al for naught, he herd not aworde.
An hole he found full low upon a board
There as the catte was wont in to crepe
And at that hole he looked in full deep
And at the last he had of him a sight
This Nicholas sat ever gapyng upright
As he had keyked on the new moan
A down he gothe, and told his master sone
In what array he saw this ylke man
This carpenter to blyssen him began
And said: now help us saint Frideswyde
A man wot little what shall him betyde
This man is fallen, with his Astronomye
In some woodnesse, or in some agonye
I thought aye well how it should be
Men shulden not know of gods priuete
Ye blessed be always the leude man
That naught but only his believe can.
Right so ferde another clerk with astronomy
He walked in to the feldes for to pry
Upon the sterres, to wete what should befall
Till he was in a marlpyt yfal
He saw not that, yet by saint Thomas
Me reweth sore on hende Nicholas
He shall be arated out of his studyeng
If that I may, by Jesus heaven king.
Get me a staff, that I may vnderspore
While that thou Robyn heuest up the door
He shall out of his studyeng, as I guess
And to the chamber door he began him dress
His knave was a strong carle for the nones
And by the haspe bare up the door at ones
Into the store the door fell anon.
This Nicholas sat as still as any stone
And ever gaped upward into the air.
This carpenter wend he were in dispeyre
And hente him by the shulders myghtyly
And shoke him hard, and cried spytously
what Nicholas, what how look adowne
Awake, and think on Christ's passion
I crouche yt from elues and from wicked wightes
Therewith the nightspel he said anonrightes
On four halues of the house about
And on the thresholde of the door without
Jesus Christ, and saint Benedyght
Bliss this house from every wicked wight
Fro the nyghtes mare the wit Pater noster
where wonnest thou saint Peter's suster?
And at the last this hende Nicholas
Began for to syke sore, and said alas
Shall all this world be lost estsones now?
This carpe^ter answerde: what say thou?
what think on god, as we do men yt swynke
This Nicholas answerde: fetch my drink
And after wol I speak in priuete
Of certain things, that touches the and me
I wol tellen it none other man certain.
This carpe^ter goth down, and comes again
And brought of mighty ale a large quarte
And when that each of hem had dronke^ his part
This Nicholas, his door fast shette
And down the carpenter by hem set
And said: John host mine lefe and dear
Thou shalt upon thy truth swear me here
That to no wight thou shall my counsel wrey
For it is Christ's counsel that I say
And if thou tell it any man, thou art forlore
For this vengeance thou shalt have therefore
That if thou wray me, thou shall be wood.
Nay Christ it forbid for his holy blood
Quod tho this sely man, I am no blabbe
Ne though I say it, I am not lefe to gabbe
Say what thou wolte, I shall it never tell
To child ne wife, by him that harowed hell.
Now John (quod Nicholas) I wol not lie
I have yfounden in mine astrologye
As I have looked in the moon bright
That now on monday next, at quarter night
Shall fall a rain, and that so wild and wood
That half so great was never Noes floode
This world (he said) in less than in an hour
Shall al be dreynte, so hydous is the shoure
Thus shall mankind drenche, and lose her life.
This carpe^ter answered and said: alas my wife
And shall she drenche? Alas mine Alyson
For sorrow of this he fell almost adoun
And said: Is there no remedy in this caas?
Yes yes full good (quod hende Nicholas)
If thou wolt werche after lore and read
Thou may not werche^ after thyn own head
For thus says Solomon, yt was full true
work al by counsel, and thou shall not rewe
And if thou wylt werken by good counsel
I undertake, without mast or sail
Yet shall I save her, and the and me
Have thou not herd how saved was Noe?
when yt our lord had warned him byforne
That al ye world with water should be lorne
Yes (quod the carpenter) full yore ago
Have thou not herd (quod Nicholas) also?
The sorrow of Noe with his feloshyp
Or that he might get his wife to ship
Him had lever, I dare well undertake
At thylke time, then al his wethers blake
That she had a ship herself alone
And therefore wost thou what is best to done?
This asks haste, and of an hasty thing
Men may not preche ne make taryenge
Anon go get us fast into this inn
A knedyng trow or else a kemelyn
For each of us, but look that they ben large
In which me mow swymme^ as in a barge
And have therein vytayles sufficiante
But for a day, fie on the remenante
The water shall aslake and gone away
About prime upon the next day
But Robyn may not wete^ of this thy knave
Ne eke thy maid Gylle, I may not save
Ask not why; for though thou ask me
I wol not tell gods priuete
Suffyseth the, but if thy wits be mad
To have as great a grace as Noe had
Thy wife shall I well save out of doubt
Go now thy way, and speed the here about
But when thou have for her, and the, and me
Ygetten us these knedynge tubbes three
Then shall thou hang hem in ye rofe full hye
That no man of our purueyaunce espy
And when you have done thus as I have said
And have our vytayle fair in hem ylayde
And eke an axe to smite the cord a two
when yt the water comes, that we may go
And break an hole on hye upon the gable
Unto the garden ward, over the stable
That we may freely passen forth our way
when that the great shoure is gone away
Then shall you swym as merry I undertake
As does ye whyt ducke after her drake
Then wol I clepe, how Alyson, how John
Be merry: for the floode wol pass anon
And thou wolt sayn, hayle master Nicholay
Good morrow: for I se well that it is day
And then we shul be lords al our life
Of all the world, as was Noe and his wife
But of one thing I warn the full right
Be well auysed on that ylke night
That we be entered into the ships board
That none of us ne speak not a word
Ne clepe ne cry, but ben in his prayer
For it is gods own heste dear.
Thy wife and thou mot ha^ge far a twinne
For that betwyxte you shall be no sin
No more in lokynge then there shall in deed
This ordinance is said, go God the speed
To morrow at night, when men be al aslepe
Into our knedynge tubbes wol we crepe
And sytten there, abiding gods grace
Go now thy way, I have no longer space
To make of this no longer sermonyng
Men said thus: send ye wise, and say nothing
Thou art so wise, it needs the not to teache
Go save our lives, and that I the beseech
This sely capenter goes forth his way
Full often he said, alas and welawaye
And to his wife he told his priuete
And she was ware, and knew it bet then he
what al this queynt cast was for to sey
But natheles, she ferde as she would dry
And said: alas, go forth thy way anon
Help us to skape, or we be deed echone
I am thy true very wedded wife
Go dear spouse, and help to save our life
Lo, which a great thing is affection
Men may dye of ymagynacion
So deep may impression be take.
This sely carpenter begins to quake
Him thinks verily that he may se
Noes stood come waltrynge as the sea
To drenchen Alyson, his honey dear
He wepeth, waileth, and makes sorry cher^
He syketh, with many a sorry thought
He gothe, and gets him a knedyng trough
And after a tubbe, and a kemelyn
And privily he sent hem to his in
And hynge hem in the rofe full privily
His own hand, he made him ladders three
To clymben by the ronges, and by the stalks
Into the tubbes hongyng by the balkes
And hem vitayled, both trough and tubbe
with breed and chese, and good ale in a tubbe
Suffysyng right ynowe, as for a day
But er that he had made al this arraye
He sent his knave, and eke his wenche also
Upon his need to London for to go
And on ye monday, when it drowe to night
He shette his door, without candel light
And dressed al thing, as it should be
And shortly clomben up al three
They sytten still not fully a furlonge way
Now pater noster clum, said Nicolay
And clum quod Johan, and cluom said Alison
This carpenter said his devotion
And still he sit, and byddeth his prayere
Awaytynge on the rain, if he it here.
The deed sleep, for weary business
fell on this carpenter, right as I guess
About curfewe time, or little more
For travail of his ghost he groneth sore
And efte he routeth, for his heed myslay
And down of ye ladder the^ stalketh Nicolay
And Alyson full soft after she spedde
without words mo they went to bed
There as the carpenter was woned to lie
There was the revel, and the melodye
And thus lies Alyson and Nycholas
In business of mirth and solas
Till that the bell of lauds began to ring
And freres in the chaunsel gone to sing.
This parysh clerk, this amerous Absolo^
That is for love always so woe bygon
Upon the monday was at Osenay
with company, him to dysporte and play
And asked upon a case a cloysterere
Full privily, after John the carpentere
And he drew him a part out of the church
And said I not: I saw him not here wyrche
Sith saturday, I trow that he be went
For tymbre, there our Abbot has him sent
For he is wont for tymbre for to go
And dwellen at the grange a day or two
Or else he is at his house certain
where that he be, I can not sothly said.
This Absolon, full ioly was and light
And thout, now is my time to walk alnight
For sekerly, I saw him not sterynge
About his door, sith day began to spring
So mote I thrive, I shall at cocks crow
Full privily knock at his wyndowe
That stant full low upon his boures wall
To Alyson wol I now tellen al
My love longing: for yet I shall not mysse
That at the leest way I shall her kiss
Some manner comfort shall I have parfaye
My mouth has ytched al this long day
That is a sign of kissing at the leest
Alnyght me met eke, that I was at a feast
Therefore I wol go sleep an hour or twey
And all the night then wol I walk and pley.
When yt the first cock has crow anon
Up ryst this ioly lover Absolon
And him arayeth gay, and in queynt deuyce
But first he cheweth greyns and lycoryce
To smellen sote, or he had kempt his here
Under his tongue a trueloue he bear
For thereby he wend to ben graciouse
He rometh to the carpenters house
And still he stante under the shotwyndowe
Unto his breast it raught, it was so low
And soft he knocked, with a semely soun.
what do ye honycombe, sweet Alysoun?
My fair bird, my sweet synamome
Awaketh lemman mine, and speaks to me
Full little thynken ye upon my woe
That for your love I swelt there as I go
No wonder is though I swelte and sweet
I morn as does the lamb after the tete
I wys lemman, I have such love longyng
That like a turtle true is my morning
I may not eaten no more then may a maid
Go fro the wyndowe Jack fool, she said
As help me God and sweet saint Iame
I love another, or else I were to blame
well bet then the (by Jesus) Absolon
Go forth thy way, or I wol cast a ston
And let me sleep, a twenty dyuelway
Alas quoth Absolon, and welaway
That true love was ever so yuel bysette
Then kiss me, syn it may be no bette
For Jesus love, and for the love of me.
wylt you then go thy way therewith quod she?
Ye certes lemman, quoth this Absolon
Then make the ready (quod she) I come anon
And unto Nycholas she said still
Now peace, and thou shall laugh thy fyl
This Absolon down set him upon his knees
And said: I am a lord at al degrees
For after this I hope there comes more
Lemman thy grace, and sweet bird thy nore.
The wyndowe she vndoth, and that in haste
Have do (quod she) and speed the fast
Let not our neighbors the aspye.
This Absolo^ began wype his mouth full dry
Derke was the night, as pytche or cole
And at ye wyndow she put out her ers hole
And Absolon him felt neither bet ne wers
But with his mouth he kyst her bare ers
Full sauerly, or he were ware of this.
A back he sterte, and thought it was amys
For well he wyste, a woman has no berde
He felt a thing al row, and long herd
And said: fie, alas what have I do?
Te he quod she, and clapte the wyndowe to
And Absolon gothe forth a sorry paas
A berde a berde, said hende Nycholas
By gods corpus, this gothe fair and well.
This sely Absolon herd it every dele
And on his lyppe he began for anger byte
And to him selue he said, I shall the quyte
who rubbeth now, who froteth now his lips
with dust, with sonde, with straw, with chyps
But Absolon? that says full often alas
My soul betake I to Sathanas
But me were lever tha^ all this town, quod he
Of this dispyte avenged for to be.
Alas (quod he) alas yt I ne had ybleynt
His hot love is cold, and al yqueynt
For fro the time that he had kyste her ers
Of paramours he set not a kers
For he was healed of his maladye
Full often paramoures he began defye
And weep as does a child that is ybete
A soft pace he went over the street
Unto a smythe, men callen dan Gerueys
That in his forge smyteth plowe harneys
He sharpeth shares, and culters besyly
This Absolon knocks al easily
And said undo Gerneys, and that anon
What who art thou? It am I Absolon
What Absolon, what for Christ's sweet tree
Why rise ye so rathe^ey benedicite
what eyleth you? some gay gyrle god it wot
Has brought you thus on the berytote
By saint note, ye wot well what I mean
This Absolon ne raught not a been
Of al his play no word again he gasse
He has more towe on his distaffe
Than Geruays knew, and said friend so dear
The hot cultre, in the chymeney here
As lene it me, I have therewith to done
I will bring it the again full sone.
Gerueys answerde: certes were it gold
Or in a poke nobles al untold
Thou should it have, as I am true smyth
Eye cristes foot, what wol ye don therewith?
Thereof (quod Absolon) be as be may
I shall well tellen the by to morrow day
And caught the culter by the cold stele
Full soft out at the door began he stele
And went unto the carpenters wall
He coughed first, and knocked there withal
Upon the wyndowe, right as he did ere.
This Alyson answerde: who is there
That knocks so? I wara^te he his a thief.
Why nay (quod he) god wot my sweet lefe
I am thyn Absolon, thyn own derlyng
Of gold (quod he) I have ye brought a ryng
My mother yaue it me, so god me save
Full fine it is, and thereto well ygraue
This wol I give the, if thou me kiss.
This Nycholas was ryssen for to pysse
And thought he would amenden all the iape
He should kiss his ers er that he skape
And up the wyndowe did he hastily
And out his ers he put full privily
And over the buttockt, to the haunche boon
And therewith spoke this clerk, this Absolon
Speak sweet bird, I not where thou art.
This Nycholas anon let fleen a farte
As great as it had been a thunder dent
That with the stroke he was welny yblent
And he was ready with his iron hot
And Nycholas in the arse he smote.
Of gothe the skyn an hondbrede about
The hot cultor brende so his toute
And for the smerte he wend for to dye
As he were wood, he began for to cry
Help, water, water, for gods heart
This carpenter out of his slomber sterte
And herd one cry water, as he were wood
And thought, alas now comes Noes flood
And set him up without words mo
And with an axe, he smote the cord a two
And down gothe al, he found neither to sell
Breed ne ale, but down shortly he fell
Upon the flore, and there a swowne he lay
Up sterte than Alyson and hende Nycholay
And cried out, and harrowe in the street
The neighbors, both small and great
In run, for to gauren on this man
That a swoune lay, palyshe and wan
For with that fall brosten has he his arm
But stonden he must unto his own harm
For when he spoke, he was yborne adoun
With hende Nycholas, and Alysoun
They told every man, that he was wood
He was agaste so of Noes floode
Through fantasye, that of his vanyte
He has getten him knedyng tubbes three
And has hem honged in the rofe above
And that he prayed hem for gods love
To sytten in the roof par company
The folk began laughen at his fantasye
And in to the roof they kyken and they gape
And turned al his ernest in to a iape
For what so this carpenter answerde
It was for naught, no man his reason herd
With oaths great, he was ysworne adowne
For eueryche clerk anon held with other
They said ye man was wood, my leave brother
And every wight began laughen at this strife.
Thus swyued was the carpenters wife
For all his keeping, and his ielousye
And Absolon has kyst her neither eye
And Nycholas is skalded in the toute
This tale is done, and God save all the route.
Here ends the Myllers tale, and here after follows the Reues Prologue.
When folk had laughed at this nyce caas
Of Absolon and hende Nycolas
Diverse folk dyuersly they said
But for the more part they loughe and playde
Ne at this tale I saw no man him grieve
But it were only Oswolde the reave
Because he was of carpenters craft
A little ire in his heart ylafte
He began to grutchen and blamen it a lyte
Sothly quod he, full well couthe I ye quyte
With bleryng of a proud myllers eye
If that me list to speak of rybaudrye
But eke I am old, me lust not play for age
Grass time is done, my fodder is forage
This white top writes mine old years
For sometime yolow was, now white be^ mine here is
But yet I fare as does an open ers
That ylke fruit is ever longer the wers
Till it be ^otten in molloke, or in stre
we old men, I dreden so fare we
Till we be rotten can we not be ripe
we hoppe^ always, while the world wol pype
For in our will there styketh ever a nail
To have an hoar heed and a grene tail
As has a leke, for though ourmight be gone
Our will desires folly ever in one
For wha^ we may not don, tha^ wol we speke^
Yet in our asshen old, is fire yreken.
Four gledes han we, which I shall deuyse
Auauntyng, lyeng, anger, and couetyse
These four sparkles longen on to elde
Our old lymmes mow well ben vnwelde
But will ne shall not fail, that is sothe
And yet have I always a coltes tothe
As many a year as it is passed hen
Syn that my tappe of life began to run
For sikerly, when I was borne anon
Death drowe the tappe of life, and let it gone
And ever syns has the tappe yronne
Till that almost al empty is the tonne
The streme of life now droppeth on ye chimb
The sely tongue may well ringe and clymb
Of wretchedness, that passed is full yore
with old folk save dotage is no more
when yt our host had herd this sermoning
He began to speak as lordly as a king
And said: what amounts al this wit?
what shall we speak al day of holy writ?
The dyuel made a Reave to preche
Or a souter a shypman, or a leche.
Say forth thy tale, and tarry not the time
Lo Depforde, and it is half way pryme
Lo Grenewyche, that many a shrewe is in
It were time thy tale for to begin
Now sirs quod this Oswolde the Reave
I pray you al, that ye not you grieve
That I answer, and somdele set his house
For leful it is with force, force of shoufe
This dronken myller has ytolde us here
How that begyled was a carpentere
Parauenture in skorne, for I am one
And by your leave, I shall him quyte anon
Right in his churles terms wol I speak
I pray to God his neck mote break
He can well in mine eye seen a stalk
But in his own he can not seen a balke
Here ends the Reues Prologue.
Here begins the Reues tale.
AT Trompynton, not far fro Cambridge
There gothe a broke, and over that a bridge
Upon the which broke there stant a mell
And this is very sothe, as I you tell
A myller was there dwelling many a day
As any pecocke he was proud and gay
Pypen he couthe, and fysshen, and nets beat
And turn cups, and well wrestle and shere
Aye by his belte he bare a long pauade
And of a sword full trenchaunt was ye blade
A ioly popere bare he in his pouche
There was no man for peril durst him touch
A Shefelde thwytel bare he in his hose
Round was his face, and camysed was his nose
As pylled as an ape was his skull
He was a market beater at the full
There durst no wight hand on him ledge
But he ne swore he should abedge
A these he was for sothe, of corn and mele
And that a slye, and vsaunt for to stele
His name was hoten deynous Symkyn
A wife he had, comen of noble kyn
The parson of the town her father was
with her he yafe full many a pan of bras
For that Symkym should in his blood alye
She was yfostred in a nonnerye
For Symken would no wife, as he said
But she were well ynourisshed, and a maid
To sauen his astate of yomanrye
And she was proud, and perte as a pie
A full fair sight was it upon hem two
On holy days byforne her would he go
with his typet wounden about his heed
And she came after in a gyte of reed
And Symken had hosen of the same
There durst no wight clepen her but dame
was none so hardy, that went by the way
That with her ones durst rage or play
But if he would be slain of Symkyn
with pauade, or with knyfe, or bodkyn
For ielous folks ben perilous euermo
Algates they would her wives wend so
And eke for she was somdele smoterlyche
She was as dygne as water in a dyche
And as full of hoker, and of besmare
As though that a lady should her spare
what for her kyndred, and her nortelrye
That she had learned in the nonnerye.
A daughter had they bytwyxt hem two
Of twenty year, withouten any mo
Saving a child yt was of half year of age
In cradell it lay, and was a propre page
This wenche thick and well ygrowen was
with camysed nose, and eyes gray as glass
with buttockes broad, and breasts round and hye
But right fair was her hear, I wol not lie
The parson of ye town, for she was so fair
In purpose was to maken her his heir
Both of his catell, and his mesuage
And strange he made it of her marriage
His purpose was to be stowen her hye
Into some worthy blood of auncetry
For holy churches good mote ben dispended
Oh holy churches blood that is descended
Therefore he would, his holy blood honor
Though that he holy church should devour
Great soken has this Myller out of dout
with whete and malte, of all the land about
And namely there was a great college
Men clepen it the Solere hall of Cambrege
There was her whete, and eke her malt igrou^de
And on a day it happed in a stounde
Sick lay the Manciple, on a malady
Men wenden wisely that he should dye
For which this myller stale both whete and corn
An hundred time more than besorn
For there before, he stale but curteysly
But now he was a thief outrageously
For wiche the warden chydde and made fare
But thereof set the Myller not a tare
He craked, bosted, and swore it nas not so
Tha^ were there young poor scholars two
That dwelten in the hall, of which I say
Testife they were, and lusty for to play
And only for her myrthe, and her reuelrye
Upon the warden bestly they cry
To give hem leave, but a little stounde
To gone to my^, to seen her corn ygrounde
And hardely they durst lay her neck
The myller should not steal hem half a pecke
Of corn by sleyght, ne by force hem reave.
And at the last the warden yaue hem leave
Johan hight that one, and Aleyn hight ye other
Of o town they were both, yt hight Strother
Far in the north, can I not tell where.
This Aleyn makes al ready his gere
And on a horse, the sack he cast anon
Forth goth Aleyn the clerk, and also John
With good sword and bockeler by her side
John knew the way, him needs no gyde
And at the myl door the sack down he layth
Aleyn spoke first: al hayle Symke^ in faith
How fares thy fair daughter, and thy wife?
Aleyn welcome (quod Symken) by my life
And John also: how now? what do ye here?
By god Simo^d (quod John) need has no pere
Him behooves serve him self yt has no swain
Or else he is a fool, as clerks said
Our Manciple I hope he will be deed
Swa works aye the wanges in his heed
And therefore is I come, and eke Alayne
To grynde our corn and carry it home again
We pray you speed us heme in that ye may
It shall be don, quod Symkyn, be my fay
what wol ye don, while it is in hand
By god, right by the hopper wol I stand
Quoth John: and sen how gates ye corn goth in
Yet saw I never by my father kyn
How that the hopper wagges to and fra
Alayne answered: Johan will thou sa
Than wol I be byneth by my crown
And se how the mele falls adowne
Into the troughe, that shall be my disporte
Quoth Johan, in fay I may ben one of your sort
I is as ill a myllere as is ye.
This Myller smyleth at her nycite
And thought al nys done but for a wyle
They w^ne that no man may hem begyle
But by my thryfte, yet shall I blere her eye
For all the sleyght in her philosofye
The more queynte clerks that they make
The more wol I steal when I take
Instead of flower yet wol I give hem bre^ne
The greatest clerks ben not the wysest men
As whilom to the wolf spoke the Mare
Of al her art count I not a tare.
Out at the door he gothe full privily
When that he saw his time, subtelly
He looked up and down, till he had yfounde
The clerks horse, there as he stood ybounde
Behind the Mylle, under a lessel
And to the horse he gothe him fair and well
He strypeth of the bridel right anon.
And wha^ ye horse was loce, he began to gone
Toward the fen, there wild mares rynne
And forth with wehe, through thick and thynne
The myller gothe again, no word he said
But does his note, and with these clerks playde
Till yt her corn was fair and well ygrounde
And when the meal was sacked and ybounde
This John goth out, and fond her horse away
And began to cry, harowe and welaway
Our horse is lost Aleyne for gods banes
Step on thy fete man, come forth al atanes
Alas our wardeyn has his palfray lorne.
This Aleyn al forgate both mele and corn
Al was out of mind his husbondrye
what, whylke way is he gone? he began to cry.
The wife came leapyng inward at a rene
She said alas, he gothe to the fenne
with wild mares, as fast as he may go
Vntha^ke come on his hand, yt bond him so
And he yt better should have knyt the reyne.
Alas quod John, Aleyn for Christ's pain
Lay down thy sword, and I shall mine alswa
I is full swyfte God wafe as is a raa
By gods sale he shall not skape us bathe?
why ne had thou put the capel in ye lathe?
Il heyle Aleyn by god thou is a fonne.
These sely clerks han full fast yronne
Toward the fenne, Aleyn and eke John
And when the myller saw yt they were ago^
He half a busshel of her flower has take
And bade his wife knede it in a kake
He said, I trow the clerks were a ferde
Yet can a myller make a clerks berde
For all her art, yet let hem gone her way
Lo where they gone, let the children play
They get him not so lightly by my crown
These sely clerks rennen up and down
With keep keep, iossa wartherere
Ga whystle thou, and I sal keep him here
But shortly, till it was very night
They couth not though they did al her might
Her caple catch, he ran away so fast
Till in a dyche they caught him at the last
^ery and wete, as beestes in the rain
Comes sely John, and with him comes Alayn
Alas (quod John) the day that I was borne
Now are we driven to hethe^ and to skorne
Our corn is stole, men wol us fools call
Both the warden, and our fellows al
And namely the myller, waylaway
Thus playneth John, as he gothe by yt way
Toward the myll, and bayarde in his hand
The myller syttyng by the fire he fond
For it was night and ferther might they naught
But for the love of god they him besought
Of herbrough and ease, as for her penny
The myller said again, if there ben any
Such as it is, yet shall ye have your part
My house is strayte, but ye have learned art
Ye can by argument make a place
A mile broad, of twenty foot of space
Let se now if this place may suffyse
Or make it ro^mer with speech, as is your gyse
Now Symo^d (said John) by saint Cutberde
Aye is thou merry, and that is fair answerde
I have herd sai, me^ should taken of two things
Swylk as he fyndes or swilke as he bringes
But specially I pray the host dear
Get us some meat and drink, and make us chere
And we will pay trewly at the full
With empty hand, men may no hawks tul
Lo here our silver ready for to spend.
The myller to ye town his daughter send
For ale and breed, and roasted hem a goos
and bound her horse he should no more go loos
And in his own chamber he made a bed
With shetes and with chalons fair yspredde
Not from his own bed, ten foot or twelve
His daughter had a bed al by her selue
Right in the same chamber, by and by
It might be no bette, and the cause why.
There was no rowmer herbrowe in yt place
They soupen, and they speken of mirth and solace
And dronken ever strong ale at best
About mydnight went they to rest.
Well has this myller vernyshed his heed
Full pale he was for dronken, and nothing reed
He galpeth, and he speaks through his nose
As he were in the quacke, or in the pose
To bed he gothe, and with him his wife
As any Iay was she light and iolyfe
So was her ioly whystel well ywette
The cradell at the beds fete was set
To rocken, and to give the child to souke
And when yt dronken was al in the crouke
To bed went the daughter right anon
To bed gothe Aleyn and eke John
There nas no more, hem neded no dwale
This myller has so wisely bybbed ale
That as an horse he snorteth in his sleep
Ne of his tail behind he took no keep
His wife bare to him a bordon well strong
Men might hem here route a forlonge.
The wenche routeth eke par company.
Aleyn the clerk, that herd this melody
He poked on John, and said slepest thou?
Herdest thou ever swylke a sange er now
Lo Nuylke a couplyng is ytwyxt hem all
A wild fire on her bodies fall,
Who herd ever swylke a ferly thing?
Ye, they shall have the flower of yuel endyng
All this lange night tides me no rest
But yet naforce, al shall be for the best
For Johan (said he) as ever mote I thrive,
If that I may, yon wenche wol I swyue
Some esement has law shapen us
For John there is a law that says thus
That if a man in one point ben a grieved
That in an other he shall be releued
Our corn is stolen, sothly it is no nay
And we have had an yuel fyt to day
And syn I shall have none amendment
Again my loss I will have mine esement
By gods sale, it shall none other be.
This Johan answerde: Aleyn, auyse the
The myller is a peryllous man, he said
And if that he out of his sleep abrayde
He might don us bathe a vilonye.
Aleyn answered: I count him not worth a fly
And up he ryste, and by the wenche he crept.
This wenche lay upright, and fast slept
Till he so nigh was, er she might aspye
That it had been to late for to cry
And shortly for to said, they were at on
Now play Aleyn, for I wol speak of John.
This John lay still a forlonge way or two
And to him self he makes routh and woe
Alas (quod he) this is a wicked iape
Now may I say, I is but an ape
Yet has my fellow somewhat for his harm
He has the myllers daughter in his arm
He auntreth him, and has his need yspedde
And I lie as a draffe sack in my bed
And when this iape is told a another dey
I shall be hold a daffe, or a cokeney
I wol arise, and auntre me it by my fay
Vnhardy is vnsely, thus men say.
And up he cose, and softely he went
Unto the cradel, and in his arm it hent
And bare it softely to his beds fete
Sone after the wife her routyng let
And began awake, and went her out to pysse
And came again, and began the cradell mysse
And groped here and there, but she found none
Alas (quod she) I had almost mysgone
I had almost gone to the clerks bed
Eye benedycite, than had I foul yspedde
And forth she gothe, till she the cradel fond
She gropeth always further with her hand
And found ye bed, and thought not but good
Because that the cradel by it stood
And nyste where she was, for it was derke
But fair and well she crepte in by the clerk
And lies full still, and would have caught a sleep
within a while this John the clerk up lepe
And on this good wife he laid full sore
So merry a fyt had she naught full yore
And pricked hard and deep, as he were mad
This ioly life have these two clerks ladde
Till that the third cock began to sing.
Aleyn wax weary in the dawnyng
For he had swonken all the long night
And said, farwell Malyn sweet wight
The day is comen, I may no longer bide
But euermo, where so I go or ride
I am thyn own clerk, so have I hele.
Now dear lemman (quod she) go, farwele
But or thou go, one thing I wol the tell
Wha^ thou wendest homwarde by the Mell
Right at the enter of the door behind
Thou shall a cake of half a busshel find
That was ymaked of thyn own mele
Which that I help my sire to stele
And good lemman god the save and keep
And with yt word she began almost to weep.
Aleyn vprist, and thought er it dawe
He would go crepen in by his felawe
And found the cradel with his hand anon
By god thought he, al wrong have I gone
My heed is totty of my swynke to night
That makes me that I go not aryght
I wot well that by ye cradel I have mysse go
Here lies the Myller and his wife also
And forth he gothe on twenty dyuel way
Unto the bed, there as the myller lay
He wend have cropen by his fellow John
And by the Myller he crepte in anon
And caught him by the neck, and soft he spoke
And said: Johan, thou swynesheed awake
For Christ's soul, and here a noble game
For by that lord, that called is saint Iame
As I have thrice in this short night
Swyued the myllers daughter bolt upright
whiles thou haste, as a cowarde ben agaste.
Ye false harlot (quod the myller) haste
A false traitor, false clerk (quod he)
Thou shalt be deed by gods dignyte
who durst be so bold to disparage
My daughter, that is come of such lynage
And by the throat bolle he caught Alayn
And he him hent dispytously again
And on the nose he smote him with his fest
Down ran the blood streme upon his breast
And in the flore, with mouth and nose ybroke
They walowen, as does pigs in a poke
And up they gone, and down again anon
Till that the myller spurnde on a stone
And down he fyl backwarde upon his wife
That wyste nothing of this nyce strife
For she was fall a sleep a little wight
with John the clerk, yt waked had alnyght
And with the fall, out of her sleep she brayde
Help holy cross of Bromholme she said
In manus tuas, lord to the I call
Awake Symonde, the fend is on me fall
My heart is broken, help I am but deed
There lies one on my womb and on my heed
Help Symkyn, for these false clerks fight
This john stert up, as fast as ever he might
And graspeth by the walls to and fro
To find a staff, and she stert up also
And knew the e^tres bet tha^ did this John
And by the wall she found a staff anon
And saw a little shemeryng of a light
For at an hole in shone the moon bright
And by that light she saw hem both two
But sykerly she nyste who was who
But as she sey a white thing in her eye
And when she began this white thing aspye
She wend the clerk had weared a voluper
And with the staff she drowe always ner and ner
And wend have hit this Aleyn at full
And smote the myller on the pylled skul
That down he gothe, and cried, harowe I dye
These clerks beat him well, and let him lie
And arayeth hem, and took her horse anon
And eke her meal, and on her way they gone
And at the mylle door they took her cake
Of half a bushel flower, well ybake.
Thus is the proud myller well ybete
And has ylost the gryndyng of the whete
And paid for the supper every dele
Of Aleyn and of Johan, that beat him well
His wife is swyued, and his daughter als
Lo such it is a Myller to be falls
And therefore this proverb is full sothe
Him dare not well wene that yuel does
A gylour shall him self begyled be
And god that sytte hye in majesty
Save all this company, great and small
Thus have I quyt the myller in his tale.
Here ends the Reues tale, and here follows the Cokes prologue.
THe Coke of London, while that the Reave spoke
For joy him thought he claude him on the bake
A ha (quod he) for Christ's passion
This myller has a sharp conclusyon
Upon his argument of herby gage
Well said Solomon in his langage
Ne bring not every man in to thyn house
For herbrowyng by night is perelous
Well ought a man auysed for to be
Whom that he brought in to his pryuete
I pray to god so give me sorrow and care
If ever sythen I hight Hodge of ware
Herd I myller bette ysette awerke
He had a iape of malice in the derke.
But god forbid that we stynten here
And therefore if ye vouche safe to here
A tale of me, that am a poor man
I wol you tell as well as I can
A little iape, that fell in our cite
Our host said, sir a grant it the
Now tell on Rodger, look that it be good
For many a pasty haste thou letten blood
And many a Jack of Dover have thou sold
That has be twyse hot and twyse cold
Of many a pilgrym have thou Christ's curse
For of thy parsse yet fare they the worse
That they have eaten with thy stobel goos
For in thy shop is many a slye loos
Now tell on gentle Rogere by thy name
But yet I pray the be not wroth for game
A man may say full sothe in game and play.
Thou say full sothe (quod Roger) by my say
But soth play, quade play, as ye sleming says
And therefore Henry Baylly by thy faith
Be thou not wroth, or we departen here
Though that my tale ben of an hostelere
But nathelesse, I wol not tellen it yet
But er we part, ywys thou shalt be quyt
And therwithal he lough and made chere
And said his tale, as ye shullen after here.
Here ends the Cokes prologue, and here follows his tale.
APrentise whilom dwelte in our cite
And of the craft of vitaylers was he
Galiard he was, as goldfynch in the shawe
Brown as a bery, a proper short felawe
with locks blake, kempt full fetously
Dance he couthe full well and ioltly
He was called Perkyn Reuelour
He was as full of love and paramout
As is the hyue full of honey sweet
well was the wenche with him might mete
At every bridal would he sing and hoppe
He loved bette the tauernes than the shop
For when any ridyng was in chepe
Out of the shop thider would he lepe
Till that he had all the sight iseyn
And daunced well, he would not come ageyn
And gather him a meyny of his sort
To hop and sing, and make such disporte
And there they setten steuyn for to mete
To playen at the dise in such a street
For in the cite nas there no prentise
That fayrer couthe casten a pair of dise
Than Perken couthe, and thereto he was fre
Of his dispense, in place of priuyte
That found his master well in his chafare
For oftymes he found his bore full bare
For sikerly, a prentise reuelour
That haunteth dise, riotte, or paramour
His master shall it in his shop abye
Al have he no part of the mynstralcy
For theft and riotte, they ben conuertible
Al can he play on gettron or on ribible
Revel and truth, as in low degree
They ben full wroth al day, as men may se
This ioly prentise, with his master abode
Till he were nigh out of his prentishode
Al were he snybbed both early and late
And sometime led with revel to Newgate
But at the last, his master him be thought
Upon a day, when he his paper sought
Of a proverb, that says this same word
welbette is rotten apple out of horde
Than that it rote all the remenaunt
So fares it by a riottous servant
It is much less harm to let him pass
Than he shende all the servants in the place
Therefore his master gave him a quitaunce
And badde him go, with sorrow and myschaunce
And thus this ioly prentise had his leave
Now let him riot all the night or leave
And for there is no thief without a louke
That helps him to waste or to souke
Of that he bribe can, or borowe may
Anon he sent his bed and his array
Unto a compere of his own sort
That loved dice, revel, and disporte
And had a wife, that held for countenance
A shop, and swyued for her sustenaunce.
Here ends the Cokes tale, and here follows the man of laws prologue.
Our host saw well, that the bright son
The arc of his artifyciall day has run
The fourth part, and half an hour more
And though he were not deep expert in lore
He wyste it was the eyghtene day
Of Apryl, that is the messanger to May
And saw well, that the shadow of every tree
Was as in length, the same quantyte
As was the body erecte, that caused it
And therefore by the shadow he roke his wit
That Phoebus, which yt shone clear and bright
Degrees was forty clomben of hight
And for that day, as in latitude
It was ten of the clock, he began conclude
And suddenly he plight his horse about.
Lordynges (quod he) I warn you al ye route
The fourth part of this day is gone
Now for the love of God and of saint John
Leseth no time, as ferforth as ye may
Lordinges the time wastes both night and day
And steals from us, what privily slepyng
And what through negligence in our wakyng
As does ye streme, that turns never again
Discendynge fro the mountain in to ye plain
Well can Seneke, and many a phylysofre
By waylen time, more than gold in cofre
For loss of catel may recovered be
But loss of time shendeth us (quod he)
It wol not come again withouten dread
No more than wol Malkyns maydenhede
When she has lost it in her wantonness
Let us not mowlen thus in ydelnesse.
Sir man of law (quod he) so have I blys
Tell us a tale anon, as forward is
Ye ben submytted, through your fre assent
To stonden in this case at my judgment
Aquyteth you now of your beheste
Than have ye done your deuer at the least.
Host (quod he) de pardeuxied assent
To break forward is not mine intent
Byheste is debt, and I wol hold feign
Al my behest, I can no better said
For such law as a man yeueth an other wight
He should him selue vsen it by right
Thus wol our text: But natheles certain
I can right now no thrifty tale said
That Chaucer (though he can but leudly
On metres and in rymyng craftily)
Has said hem, in such English as he can
Of old time, as knows many a man
And if he have not said hem leave brother
In one book, he has said hem in another
For he has told of lovers up and down
Mo than Ouyde made of mencioun
In his Epystels, that been full old
what should I telle^ hem, sythen they ben told
In youth he made of six al a lone
And sythen he has spoken of euerychone
These noble wives, and these lovers eke
who so that wol his large volume seek
Cleped the saints lives of Cupyde
There may he se the large wounds wide
Of Lucresse, and of Babylon Thisbe
The sword of Dydo for the false Enee
The tree of Phillis for her Demophoon
The playnte of Deianire, and of Hermyon
Of Artadna, and of Hysiphilee
The ba^ayne isle stondyng in the sea
That dreynte Lyandre for his Hero
The tears of Heleyn, and eke the woe
Of Brisets, and of Laodomia
The cruelty of queen Media
The little children hongyng by the hals
For the Jason, that was of love so falls
Of Hypermistra, Penelope, and Alceste
Your wyfehode he commends with the best
But certainly no word ne writes he
Of thylke wicked ensample of Canace
That loved her own brother synfully
Of such cursed stories I say fie
Or else of Tyro Appolloneus
How that the cursed king Antyocus
Byrafte his daughter of her maydenhede
That is so horrible a tale for to read
when he her drew upon the pament
And therefore he of full auisement
Nolde never write in uon of his sermons
Of such unkind abominations
Ne I ne wol non reherce, yef that I may
But of my tale how shall I don this day
Me were loathe be lykened doutles
To Muses, that men clepeth Piryades
Methamorphoseos wotte what I mean
But natheles I reche not a been
Though I come after him with Haubake
I speak in prose, and let him rymes make
And with that word, he with a sobre chere
Began his tale, as ye shullen after here.
Here ends the man of laws Prologue, and here follows his tale.
O Hateful harm, condycio^ of pouert.
With thurst, with cold, with hu^gre so co^fou^ded
To asken help, the shameth in thyn heart
If thou non ask, with need thou art so wounded
that very need vnwrapeth al thy wou^des hid
Maugry thyn heed, thou must for indygence
Or stele, or beg, or borowe thy dispense
Thou blamest Christ, and say full bytterly
He misdeparteth richesse temporal
Thy neighbor thou wytest synfully
And say, tyou haste to little, and he has all
Parfay, say thou, sometime he reken shall
when that his tail shall brenne in glede
For he naught helps nedeful in her need
Harken what is the sentence of the wise
Better is to dyen, than to have indygence
Thine self neygbour wol the dispyse
If thou be poor, farwell thy reverence
Yet of the wise man take this sentence
All the days, poor men ben wycke
Beware therefore or thou come to the prick
If thou be poor, thy brother hates the
And al thy friends flees fro the, alas
O rich merchants full of well be ye
O noble prudent folk, as in this caas
Your bags ben not fylde with ambes aas
But with cyse synke, yt renneth for your chance
At Christenmasse, merry may ye dance
Ye seken loud and see for your wynnynges
As wise folk ye known all the state
Of reigns, ye ben fathers of tidings
And tales, both of peace and debate
I was right now of tales desolate
Nere that a merchant, gone is many a year
Me taught a tale, which ye shullen here.
IN Surrey whilo^ dwelte a company
Of chapmen rych, and thereto sad and true
That wide were senten her spicery
Clothes of gold, and satin rich of hew
Her chafare was so thryfty and so new
That every wight has deyntie to chafare
With hem, and eke to sellen hem her ware
Now fell it, that the masters of that sort
Han shapen hem, to Rome for to wend
Were it for chapmanhode, or for disporte
No^ other messangere would the thither send
But come^ hem self to Rome, this is ye end
And in such place as thought he^ advantage
For her intent, they taken her herbygage
Soiourned ha^ these merchants in ye town
Certain time, as fell to her pleasaunce
But so byfel, that the excellent renown
Of the emperors daughter dame Custau^ce
Reported was, with every cyrcumstaunce
Unto these surreyn merchants, in such wise
Fro day to day, as I shall you deuyse
This was the comen voice of every man
Our emperor of Rome, god him se
A daughter has, yt sythen the world began
To reke^ as well her goodness as her beauty
Nas never such a another as is she
I pray to god in honor her sustene
And would she were of al Europe the queen
In her is hye beauty, without pride
Youth, without grenhede or folly
To al her works virtue is her gyde
Humblesse has slain in her al tyranny
She is a myrrour of al curtesye
Her heart is very chamber of holiness
Her hand mynistre of fredom and alms
And all this voice was soth, as god is true
But now to our purpose let us turn again
These marcha^tes han do^ fret her ships new
And wha^ they han this blisful maiden seyn
Home to Surrey ben they went ageyn
And done her needs, as they han done yore
And lyuen in wealth, I can say no more.
Now fell it, yt these marcha^tes stode^ in grace
Of him that was the Soudon of Surrye
For wha^ yt they came from any strange place
He would of his benygne curtesye
Maken hem good chere, and besyly aspye
Tidings of sundry realms for to lere
The wonders that they might seen or here
Among other things specially
These marchantes have him told of dame Custaunce
So great noblesse, in ernest ceryously
That this Soudo^ has caut so great plesa^ce
To han her figure in his remembrance
And al his lust, and al his besy cure
was for to love her, while his life may dure
Parauenture in that ylke large book
Which that cleped is the heaven, twritten was
with sterres, when that he his birth took
That he for love should han his death, alas
For in the sterres, clerer than is the glass
Is written god wot, who so could it read
The death of every man withouten dread
In sterres many a winter there before
was written the death of Hector and of Achilles
Of Pompey and Julius, or they were bore
The strife of Thebes, and of Hercules
Of Sampson, Turnus, and of Socrates
The death: but that men's wits ben so dull
That no wight can well read it at the full
This Soudo^ for his prive counsel seen
And shortly of this matter for to pace
He has to hem declared al his intent
And said he^ certain, but if he might have grace
To have Custau^ce, withyn a little space
He nas but deed, and charged hem to hye
To shapen for his life some remedy.
Diverse men, diversely they sayden
The argument they casten up and down
Many a subtell reason forth they layden
They speken of Magike, and abusyoun
But finally, as in conclusyoun
They can not seen in that non advantage
Ne in non other way, save in marriage
Than saw they therein such difficulte
By way of reason, to speak al plain
Because that there was such diuersyte
Bitwene her both laws, that they said
They trow yt no christen prince would feign
wedden his child under our laws sweet
That us was taught, by Mahounde our prophet
And he answerde: rather than I lose
Custaunce, I wol be christen doutels
I mote ben hers, I may non other chese
I pray you hold your arguments in pees
Saves my life, and be not recheles
To getten her, that has my life in cure
For in this woe, I may not long endure
what needs greater delatatyon
I say, by treaty and ambassadrye
And by the popes meditation
And all the church, and all the cheualry
That in destruction of Maumetry
And in increase of Christ's law dear
They ben accorded, as ye shall here.
How that the Soudon and his baronage
And al his lieges, should ichristned be
And he shall han Custaunce in marriage
And certain gold, I not what quantite
And her to find sufficient surete
The same accord was sworn on either side
Now fair Custau^ce, almighty god ye gyde
Now wolde^ some men waiten, as I guess
That I should tellen all the purueyaunce
That the Emperor of his noblesse
Has shapen for his daughter dame Custa^ce
Well may men known, that so great ordyna^ce
May no man tellen in a little clause
As was arayde for so high a cause
Bishops ben shape^ with her for to we^de
Lords and ladies, and knights of renown
And other folk ynowe, this is the end
And notifyed is throughout the town
That every wight, with great deuotioun
Should pray Christ, that he this marriage
Receive in gree, and speed this voyage
The day is come of her departing
I say the woeful day natural is come
That there may be no lengre tarieng
But forward they hem dress al and some
Custaunce, that with sorrow is al overcome
Full pale arist, and dressheth her to wend
For well she sey, there is non other end
Alas, what wondre is it though she wept
That shall be sent to a strange nation
Fro friends, that so tenderly her kept
And to be bounden under subiectyon
Of one, she knows not his condityon
Husbondes ben al good and han ben yore
That known wives, I dare say no more
Father (she said) thy wretched child custa^ce
Thy young daughter, fostred up so soft
And ye my mother, my sovereign pleasance
Over al thing (out take Christ on lofte)
Custaunce your child her commands often
Unto your grace: for I shall to Surrye
Ne shall I never more se you with eye
Alas, unto the Barbary nation
I must anon, sithen it is your will
But Christ that starfe for our redemption
So give me grace, his hestes to fulfill
I wretched woman no force though I spyll
women are borne to thraldom and penance
And to ben under man's governance
I trow at Troy, wha^ Thurus brake ye wall
Of Ilyon, ne when burnt was Thebes cite
Ne Rome for the harm of Hanybal
That Romans has ine^queshed times three
Nas herd, such tender weeping for pity
As was in the chamber for her departing
But forth she mote, wheder she weep or sing
O first mouyng cruel firmament
With thy diurnal swegh, that croudest aye
And hurtleste al fro Eft to Occident
That naturally would hold another way
Thy croudyng set the heaven in such array
At the beginning of this feirs voyage
That cruel Mars has slain this marriage
O unfortunate assendent tortuous
Of which the lord is helpelesse fall, alas
Out of his angle, into his derkest house
O Mars, O occiser, as in this caas
O feeble Move, unhappy ben thy paas
Thou knittest yt there thou nart not received
There thou were well, fro thence art you wayued
Imprudent emperor of Rome, alas
was there no philosofer in thy town?
Is no time bette than other in such cas?
Of voyage, is there none electiowne?
Namely to folk of hye conditioun
Not when a rote is of a birth iknowe
Alas we ben to leude, or to slow
To ship is brought this woeful fair maid
Solempnely, with every cyrcumstaunce
Now Jesus Christ be with you al (she said)
There nys no more, but fare well fair Custa^ce
She payneth her to make good countenance
And forth I let her sail in this manner
And turn I wol again to my matere.
Explicit prima pars: et sequitur pars secunda.
THe mother of the Soudon, well of vices
Aspyed has her sons plain intent
How he (...) let his old sacrifyces
And right anon, she for her counsel sent
And they ben comen, to know what she meant
And when assembled was this folk in fere
She set her down, and said, as ye shall here.
Lords (quod she) ye known euerichone
How that my son is in point to let
The holy laws of our Alkaron
Yeuen by gods messangere Machomete
But one auowe to great God I hete
The life shall rather out of my body stert
Or Machomettes law go out of my heart
What should us tyden of this new law
But thraldom to our bodies and penance
And afterward in hell to ben draw
For we reneyed Mahounde our creaunce?
But lords, wol ye make assurance
As I shall say, assentyng to my lore
And I shall make us safe for evermore
They sworen, and assenten every man
To live with her and dye, and by her stand
And eueriche in the best wise that he can
To strengthen her, shall his friends fond
And she has this emprise take in hand
Which ye shall here, that I shall devise
And to hem al she spoke in this wise.
we shul us first feign, christendom to take
Cold water shall not grieve us but a lyte
And I shall such a revel and a feast make
That as I trow, I shall the Soudon quyte
For tho his wife be christened never so white
She shall have need to wash away the read
Though she a font full of water with her led
O Soudonnesse, rote of iniquite
Virago, thou Symyram the secounde
O serpent under femenynete
I like to the serpent deep in hell ybounde
O feigned woman, all that may counfounde
Virtue and innocence, throug thy malice
Is bredde in the, a nest of every vice.
O Satan enuyous, syn thylke day
That thou were chased from our heritage
well knew thou to women the old way
Thou made Eve to bring us in seruage
Thou wolte fordone this christen marriage
Thine instrument, so welaway the while
Make thou of women, wha^ thou woltbegile
This Soudonesse, who^ I blame and weary
Let privily her counsel gone her way
what should I in this tale longer tarry?
She rydeth to the Soudon on a day
And said him, that she would renye her lay
And christendom of prestes hondes fonge
Repentyng her, she hethen was so long
Besechyng him, to done her that honor
That she might have ye Christian folk to feste
To plesen hem, I wol don my labor
The Soudo^ says, I wol don at your heste
And knelyng, thanketh her of that request
So glad he was, he nyst not what to say
She kissed her son, and home she goth her way
Aryued ben these christen folk to land
In Surre, with a great Solemn route
And hastily this Soudon sent his sonde
First to his mother, and all the reygne about
And said, his wife was comen out of doubt
And prayde^ hem for to ryden against ye queen
The honor of his reygne for to sustene
Great was the prese, and rich was the raye
Of Surreyens, and Romans ymette yfere
The mother of the Soudon, rich and gay
Receives her with all glad chere
As any mother might her daughter dear
Unto the next cite there beside
A soft paas solempnely they ride
Naught trow I, the triumph of Iulyus
Of which that Lucan makes such a bost
was royaller, and more curious
Than was thassemblyng of this blisful host
But this Scorpyon, this wicked ghost
The sodonnesse, for all her flatteryng
Cast under al this, full mortally to styng
The Soudon comes himself sone after this
So ryally, that wonder is to tell
He welcometh her with much joy and blys
And thus in myrthe and joy I let hem dwell
The fruit of every tale is for to tell
When time come, me^ thought it for the best
That revel stynte, and men gone to rest
The time come, this old Soudo^nesse
Ordened has ye ferst, of which I told
And to the feast, christen folk hem dress
In general, both young and old
There may men feast and ryalte behold
And deyntes mo then I can deuyse
But al to dear they boughten it or they rise
O Soudon, woe yt ever thou art successor
To worldly bliss, springed with bytternesse
The end of joy, of our worldly labor
woe occupyeth the end of our gladness
Harken this counsel, for thy sekernesse
Upon thy glad day have thou in mind
The unware woe or harm, yt comes behind
For shortly for to tellen at a word
The Soudon, and the christen euerychone
Ben al to hew, and stycked at the board
But it were only dame Custaunce alone
This old Soudonnesse, curled crone
Has with her fre^des done this cursed deed
For she her self would all the country led
Ne there was surreyn none yt was converted
That of the counsel of the Soudon wot
That he nas al to heawe, er he asterted
And Custau^ce han they taken anon fotehot
And in a ship al sternelesse (god wot)
They han her set, and bydden her learn to sail
Out of Surrey ayenwarde to Itayle
A certain tresour, that she thither ladde
And soth to said, vytayle great plente
They han her yeuen, and clothes eke she had
And sorth she sailed in the salt se
O my custaunce full of benignite
O Emperors young daughter dear
He that is lord of fortune, be thy stere
She blesses her, and with full pytous voice
Unto the cross of Christ, tho said she
O clear, o welful altar, holy croice
Reed of the lambs blood, full of pity
That wash ye world fro ye old iniquite
Me fro the fend, and fro his clawe keep
That day that I shall drenchen in the deep.
Victorious tree, protection of true
That only worthy were for to bear
The king of heaven, with his wou^des new
The white lamb, that hurt was with a spear
Flemere of fendes, out of him and here
On which thy lymmes, faithfully extenden
Me keep, and give me might my life to ame^de^
Years and days fleteth this creature
Thrughout ye see of Greece, unto the strayte
Of Marocke, as it was her adventure
O, many a sorry mele may she bayte
After her death full often may she wait
Or that the wild waves would her drive
Unto the place there she should aryue.
Men mighte^ aske^, why she was not slain
Eke at the feast, who might her body save?
I answer to that demand again
who saved Daniel in that horrible cave?
There every wight, were he master er knave
was with the lion frette or he asterte
No wight but god, that he bare in his heart
God list to show his wonderful miracle
In her, for she should seen his mighty works
Christ that is to every harm tryacle
By certain means often, as known clerks
Does thing for certain end, yt full derke is
To man's wit, that for our ignorance
Ne can not know his prudent purueyau^ce
Now sith yt she was not at ye feast yslawe
who keeps her fro the drenchyng in the sea?
who kept Jonas in the fyshes mawe
Till he was spouted out at Neniue?
well may me^ know, it was no wight but he
That kept ye people Ebrake from drenchyng
with dry fete, through the sea passing
Who has the four spirits of ye tempeste
That power had, both to anoye land and see
Both north and south, and also west and este
Anoyeth nether see, ne land, ne tree
Sothly the co^maunder thereof was he
That fro ye tempest aye this woman kept
As well when she woke as when she slepte
where might this woman mete and drink have
Three year and more, how lasts her vitayle
who fed the Egipcyan Marye in the cave
Or in deserte (none but Christ sans fail)
Five thousand folk it was as great marvel
With loves five and fysshes two to feed
God sent his toyson at her great need.
She drives forth in to our Occian
Throughout the wild see, till at the last
Under an hold, that nempne I ne can
Fer in Northumberlo^de, the wave her cast
And in the sand her ship stycked so fast
That thence nolde it not of al a tide
The will of Christ was yt she should there bide
The constable of the castle down is fare
To seen this wrecke, and all the ship he sought
And fond this weary woman full of care
He found also the tresoure that she brought
In her langage, mercy she besought
The life out of her body for to twyn
Her to deliver of woe that she was in
A mauer latin corrupt was her speech
But algates thereby was she understand
The constable, wha^ him list no longer seche
This woeful woman brought he to land
She kneleth down, and tha^keth gods sonde
But what she was, she would no man sey
For soul ne fair, though she should dey
She said she was so mased in the sea
That she foryate her mind, by her truth
The constable of her has so great pity
And eke his wife, that they wepen for routh
She was so dyligent withouten slouthe
To serve and plese eueryche in that place
That al her louen, that loken in her face
The constable, and dame Hermegilde his wife
Were paynems, and that co^tre every where
But Hermegylde loved her right as her life
And Custaunce has so long soiourned there
In orisons, with many a bitter tere
Till Jesus has converted through his grace
Dame Hermegylde, co^stablesse of that place.
In all that land durst no christen route
Al christen folk ben fled from that country
Through paynems, that conquered al about
The plages of the North, by land and see
To wales fled the christianyte
Of old Bretons, dwelling in that I Will
There was her refuge, for the mean while
But yet nas there never christian breto^ so exiled
That there nas some in her priuete
Honored Christ, and heathen folk begyled
And nigh the castle such there dwellen three
That one of him was blind, and might not se
But it were with thylke eyes of his mind
with which men seen, after they ben blind
Bright was the son, as in summers day
For which the constable, and his wife also
And Custaunce, han taken the right way
Toward the sea, a furlong way or two
To playen, and to romen to and fro
And in her walk, three blind men they met
Crooked and old, with eyes fast yshette
In ye name of Christ, cried this blind breto^
Dame hermegylde, give me sight again
This lady ware a frayde of the soun
Lest that her husbonde, shortly for to said
would her for Jesus Christ's lore have slain
Til Custa^ce made her bold, and bad her werch
The will of Christ, as daughter of his cherch
The constable wore abashed of that sight
And said: what amounts al this fare?
Custance answerde: sir it is Christ's might
That helps folk out of the fendes snare
And soferforth she began our law declare
That she the constable, er that it was eve
Converted has, and on Christ made him bileue
This constable was nothing lord of this place
Of which I speak, there he Custaunce fond
But kept it strongly, many a winter space
Under Alla, king of Northumberlonde
That was full wise, and worthy of his hand
Again the Scotts, as men may well here
But turn I wol again to my matere.
Satan, that ever us wayteth to begyle
Saw of Custaunce al her perfectioun
And cast anon how he might quyte her wyle
And made a young knight, yt dwelt in the town
Love her so hot, of foul affectioun
That verily, him thought yt he should spyll
But he of her ones might have his will
He woeth her, but it aueyled naught
She would do no sin by no wey
And for dispyte, he compassed in his thought
To maken her on shamfull death to dey
He wayteth when the constable is awey
And privily on a night he crepte
In to Hermegildes chamber while she slept
Weary forwaked in her orisons
Slepeth Custaunce and Hermegylde also
This knight, through Satan's te^ptacions
Al softely is to the bed ygo
And cut the throat of Hermegylde a two
And laid ye blody knyfe by dame Custau^ce
And went his way, there god give him myschaunce.
Sone after comes ye constable home again
And eke Alla, that king was of that land
And saw his wife dyspytously yslayne
For which he wept and wrong his hand
And in the bed the blody knyfe he fond
By dame Custa^ce, alas what might she say?
For very woe, her wit was al away
To king Alla was told all this myschau^ce
And eke the time, and where, and in what wise
That in a ship was fou^den this Custau^ce
As here before ye han herd me deuyse
The kings heart, for pity began arise
when he saw so benygne a creature
Fall in disease and in mysaduenture
For as ye la^be toward his death is brought
So stante this innocent beforne the king
This false knight, yt has this treso^ wrought
Bears her on hand, yt she has don this thing
But nathelesse there was great morning
Among the people, and said they can not guess
That she had done so great a wickedness
For they han seen her ever so virtuous
And loving Hermegylde, right as her life
Of this bare witness eueryche in that house
Save he that Hermegyld slow with his knyfe
This gentle king has caught a great motyfe
Of this wytnes, and thought he would enquere
Deper in this case, the troth to lere
Alas Custaunce, thou have no champion
Ne fight can thou not, so welaway
But he that starft for our redemption
And bond Satan, and yet lyth there he lay
So be thy strong champion this day
For but if Christ on the miracle kyth
without gylt thou shall be slain aswyth
She set her down on knees, and thus she said
Immortal god, that sauedest Susanne
Fro false blame, and thou mercyful maid
Marye I mean, daughter to saint Anne
Byforne whose child angels sing Osanne
If I be gyltlesse of this felonye
My socoure be, or else shall I dye
Have ye not seen sometime a pale face
(Among a prees) of him that has been lad
Toward his death, where as him get no grace
And such a color in his face has had
That me^ might know his face yt was bystad
Among all the faces in that route
So stands Custaunce, and looks her about
O queen's, living in prosperity
Duchesses, and ye ladies euerychone
Have some routh on her aduersite
An emperors daughter stante alone
She has no wit, to who^ to make hermone
O blood royal, that stondeth in this dread
Far ben thy friends at thy great need
This Alla king, has such compassioun
As gentle heart is full of pity
That from his eyes ran the water down
Now hastily do fette a book (quod he)
And if this knight wol swear, how that she
This woman llowe, yet wol we us auyse
whom that we wol shall ben our iustyse
A breton book, written with Euangeles
was fette, and thereon he swore anon
She gylty was, and in the mean whiles
An hand him smote on the neck bone
That down he fyl atones, as a stone
And both his eyes brast out of his face
In sight of every body in that place
A voice was herd, in general audience
That said: Thou have dysclandred gyltles
The daughter of holy church, in hye presence
Thus have thou done, and yet I hold my pees
Of this maruayle, aghast was all the prees
As dysmayde folk, they stoden euerychone
For dread of wreche, save Custaunce alone
Great was ye dread, and eke the repentance
Of hem that hadden wrought suspection
Upon this sely innocent Custaunce
And for this miracle, in conclusion
And by Custaunces mediation
The king, and many another in that place
Converted was, thanked by gods grace
This false knight was slain for his untroth
By judgment of Alla hastily
And yet Custau^ce, had of his death great roth
And after this, Jesus of his mercy
Made Alla wedden full solempnely
This holy maid, that is so bright and shene
And thus has christ made Custau^ce a queen
But who was woeful, if I should not lie
Of this weddyng? but Donogelde and no mo
The kings mother, full of tyranny
Her thought her cursed heart brast a two
She would not her son had do so
Her thought a despyte, that he should take
So strange a creature unto his make
Me list not of the chafe ne of the stree
Make so long a tale, as of the corn
what should I tell of the royalte
Of ye marriage, or which course goth besorne
who blows in a trompe or in an horn
The fruit of every tale is for to say
They eaten and drynken, dance and play
They gone to bed, as it was skyl and right
For though ye wives ben full holy things
They must take in patience anyght
Such manner necessaries, as ben pleasynges
To folk that han wedded hem with rings
And lay a little her holiness aside
As for the time, it may none other betyde
On her he gatte a man child anon
And to a bishop, and to his constable eke
He took his wife to keep, when he is gone
To Scotlandwarde, his fo men for to seek
Now fair Custa^ce, yt is so humble and meke
So long is gone with child till that still
She halte her chamber abiding Christ's will
The time is come, a man child she bare
Mauricius at fontstone they him call
This constable does forth come a messanger
And wrote to his king, yt cleped was All
How that this blysful tydynge is byfal
And other tidings nedeful for to say
He takes the letter, and forth he goth his way
This messanger to done his anauntage
Unto the kings mother rydeth swythe
And salueth her full fair in his langage
Madame (quod he) ye may be glad and blythe
And thanketh god an hundred thousand sithe
My lady queen has child, wythoute^ doubt
To joy and bliss of all this reygne about
Lo here the letters sealed of this thing
That I mote bear, in all the have I may
If ye wol ought unto your son the king
I am your servant both night and day
Donegylde answerde, as at this time nay
But here I wol al night thou take thy rest
To morrow wol I say the what my lest
This messa^ger dronke sadly both ale and wine
And stolen were his letters privily
Out of his bore, while he slepte as a swyne
And counterfeted was full subtelly
Another letter, wrought full synfully
Unto the king dyrecte of this matere
Fro his constable, as ye shall after here
The letter sp^ke, the queen delivered was
Of so horrible a fendlyche creature
That in the castle none so hardy was
That any while durst therein endure
The mother was an else by adventure
I come, by charms or by sorcery
And every wight hates her company
woe was this king, when he yt letter had seyn
But to no wight he told his sorrows sore
But with his own hand he wrote ageyn
welcome the sonde of Christ for evermore
To me, that am new learned in his lore
Lord, welcome be thy lust and thy pleasaunce
My just I put al in thine ordinance
Keeps this child, al be it foul or fair
And eke my wife, unto mine home coming
Christ when him list, may send me an heir
More agreeable then this, to my liking
This letter he seals privily weeping
which to the messangere was taken sone
And forth he goth, there nys no more to done
O messanger, fulfilled of drunkenness
Strong is thy breath, thy lymmes faltre^ aye
And thou bewrayest al secretnesse
Thy mind is lorne, thou ianglyst as a iaye
Thy face is turned in a new array
There drunkenness reyneth in any route
There nys no counsel hyd wythoute^ doubt
O Donegild, I ne have no englysh digne
Unto thy malice, and thy tyranny
And therefore to the fend I the resygne
Let him endyte of thy traytrye
Fie mannyshe fie: O nay by god I lie
Fie fendyshe spirit^ for I dare well tell
Though thou here walk, thy spirit is in hell
This messa^ger comes fro ye king again
And at the kings mothers house he light
And she was of this messanger full feign
And pleased him in all that ever she might
He drunk, and well his gyrdel under pyght
He slepeth, and he snorteth in his gyse
Al night, till the son began arise
Efte were his letters stolen euerychon
And counterfeted letters in this wise:
The king commands his constable anon
Up pain of hongyng on an hye iewyse
That he ne should sustren in no wise
Custaunce, within his realm for to abide
Three days, and a quarter of a tide
But in the same ship, as he her fond
Her and her young son, and al her gere
He should croude, and put fro the land
And charge her, that she neue^ eft come there
O Custaunce, well may thy ghost have fere
And slepynge in thy dream, ben in penance
when Donegylde, cast al this ordinance
This messa^ger on ye morrow when he woke
Unto the castle halte the next way
And to the Constable he the letter took
And when that he this pytous letter sey
Full often he said (alas) and welaway
Lord Christ (quod he) how may this world endure
So full of sin is many a creature
O mighty god, if that it be thy will
Syn thou art ryghtful judge, how may it be?
That thou wylt suffer innocence to spyl?
And wicked folk to raygne in prosperity
O, good custaunce (alas) so woe is me
That I mote be thy tourme^tour, or else dey
On shames death, there nys none other wey
Wepen both young and old in that place
when that the king this cursed letter sent
And Custaunce with a deadly pale face
The fourth day, toward her ship she went
But nathelesse, she takes in good intent
The will of Christ, and knelyng in the stronde
She said Lord, aye welcome be thy sonde
He that me kept fro that false blame
whiles I was on the land among you
He can me keep fro harm, and eke fro shame
In the salt see, al though I se not how
As strong as ever he was, he is now
In him trust I, and in his mother dear
That is to me, my sail and eke my stere
Her little child lay weeping in her arm
And knelynge pytously, to him she said
Peace little son, I wol do the none harm
with that her kercher of her heed she brayde
And over his little eyes she it laid
And in her arm, she lulleth it full fast
And into heaven her eyes up she cast
Mother (quod she) and maid bright Mary
Soth is, that through woman's eggement
Mankind was lorne, and dampened aye to dye
For which thy child was on cross yrent
Thy blysful eyes saw al his turment
Then is there no comparison between
Thy woe, and any woe that man may sustene
Thou se thy child yslayne before thyn eyes
And yet now lives my little child parsaye
Now lady bright, to whom al woeful cryen
Thou glory of womanheed, thou fair may
Thou haven of refute, bright sterre of day
Rewe on my child, of thy gentylnesse
That rewest on every ruful in dystresse
O little chelde (alas) what is thy gylte?
That never wroughtest sin, as yet parde
why wol thine hard father have the spylte?
O mercy: dear constable (quod she)
As let me little child dwell here with the
And if thou dare not sauen him fro blame
So kiss him ones in his fathers name
Therwyth she looks backward to ye lord
And said: farewell husband routhlesse
And up she ryst and walked down the stronde
Toward the ship, her follows all the prees
and ever she prays her child to holde^ his pees
And takes her leave, and with an holy intent
She blesses her, and into ye ship she went
Vitayled was the ship, it is no dread
Habundantly, sor her full long space
And other necessaries that should need
She had inowe, heried be gods grace
For wind and weder, almighty god purchase
And bring her home, I can no better say
But in the sea, she drives forth her way
Alla the king comes home sone after this
Unto his castle, of which I told
And asks where his wife and his child is
The constable began about his heart to cold
And plainly all the manner him told
As ye han herd, I can tell it no better
And shows the king his seal and his letter
And said: lord as ye commanded me
Up pain of death, so have I done certain
This messanger turmented was till he
Must beknowen, and tell plat and plain
Fro night to night, in what place he had lain
And thus by wit and subtel enqueryng
ymagened was, by who^ this harm ga^ spring
The hand was known, yt the letter wrote
And all the venym of this cursed deed
But in what wise, certainly I note
The effect is this, that Alla out of dread
His mother slow, that may men plainly read
For that she traytoure was to her alegaunce
Thus ends old Douegild with mischau^ce
The sorrow that this Alla night and day
Makes for his child, and for his wife also
There is no tongue that it tell may
But now wol I to Custaunce go
That fleteth in the sea, in pain and woe
Five year and more, as lyked Christ's sonde
Or that her ship aproched unto land
Under an hethen castle, at the last
Of which the name in my text I not find
Custaunce and eke her child the set up cast
Almighty god, that saves al mankind
Have on Custa^ce, and on her child some mind
That fallen is in hethen hand efte sone
In point to spyl, as I shall tell you sone
Down fro the castle comes there many a wight
To gauren on this ship, and on Custaunce
But shortly fro the castle on a night
The lords steward, god give him mischau^ce
A thief, that had renyed our ^ceaunce
Came into the ship alone, and said he should
Her lemman be, whether she would or nolde
Woe was the wretched woman tho bygo^
Her child cried, and she cried pitously
But blysful Marye help her anon
For with her stroglyng, well and mightyly
The thief over the board al suddenly
And in the sea he drenched for vengaunce
And thus has christ vnwe^med kept Custa^ce
O soul lust of luxure, lo thyn end
Not only that thou fayntest man's mind
But verily, thou wolt his body shende
The end of thy work, or of thy lusts blind
Is co^playning: how many one may me^ find
That not for work sometime, but for the^tent
To don this sin, ben either slain or shent
How may this weke woman have yt strength
Her to defend against this renegate?
O Golyas, unmeasurable of length
How might David make the so mate?
So young, and of armure so desolate
How durst he look on thy dredful face?
well may men (...), it is but gods grace.
Who yaue Judith courage or hardynesse
To sleen him Holofernes in his tente
And to deliver out of wretchydnesse
The people of God? I say for this intent
That right as God, spyrite and vygore sent
To hem, and saved hem out of mischaunce
So sent he might and vigore to Custaunce
Forth goth her ship through ye narow mouth
Of Subalter and septe, fletyng aye
Sometime weste, and sometime north and south
And sometime este, full many a weary day
Till Christ's mother, yblessed be she aye
Has shapen, through her endless goodness
To make an end of al her heaviness.
Explicit secunda pars: et sequitur pars tertia.
NOw let us stynte of Custance but a throw
And speak we of the Romayne Emperor
That out of Surrey has by letters know
The slaughter of christen folk, and dishonor
Done to his daughter, by a false traitor
I mean the cursed wicked Soudonnesse
That at the feast, let sleen both more and less
For which this Emperor has sent anon
His senator, with royal ordinance
And other lords, god wot many one
On Surreyns to done hye vengeance
They brenne^, sleen, and bringe^ hem to mischa^ce
Full many a day: but shortly this is the end
Homward to Rome, they shape^ hem to we^de
This senator repayreth with victory
To Rome ward, saylyng full royally
And met the ship dryuyng, as says the story
In which Custaunce, sat full pitously
Nothing knew he what she was, ne why
She was in such array, ne she nolde sey
Of her estate, thoug she should dey
He brings her to Rome, and to his wife
He yaue her, and her young son also
And with the senator she ladde her life
Thus can our lady bring out of woe
Woeful Custaunce, and many another mo
And long time dwelled she in that place
In holy works ever, as was her grace.
The senators wife her aunte was
But for all that, she knew her never the more
I wol no longer tarry in this caas
But to king Alla, ye which I spoke of yore
That for his wife wepeth, and syketh sore
I wol return, and let I will Custaunce
Under the senators governance.
King Alla, which yt had his mother slain
Upon a day fell in such repentance
That if I shortly tellen al shall, and plain
To Rome he comes, to receive his penance
And putten him in the churches ordinance
In hye and in low, and Jesus Christ besought
Foryeue his wicked works, yt he wrought
The fame anon through Rome town is born
How Alla king, shall come on pilgrymage
By herbegers that wenten him byforne
For which the senator, as was usage
Rode him again, and many of his lynage
As well to shown his hye magnifycence
As to done any king reverence.
Great chere does this noble senator
To king Alla, and he to him also
Eueryche of hem does other great honor
And so byfel, that on a day or two
This senator is to king Alla go
To feast, and shortly if I shall not lie
Custaunces son went in his company
Some me^ would said, at ye request of Custance
This senator had ladde this child to feast
I may not tellen every circumstaunce
Be as be may, there was he at least
But sothe it is, right at his mothers heste
Byforn Alla, during the meat space
The child stood, lokyng in the kings face
This Alla king, has of this child great wonder
And to the senator he said anon
whose is ye fair child, that stondeth yonder?
I not (quod he) by god and by saint John
A mother he has, but father has he non
That I of wot, but shortly in a stounde
He told Alla, how the child was found
But God wot (quod this senator also)
So virtuous a liver in my life
Ne saw I never, as she, ne herd of mo
Of wordly woman, maiden, ne of wife
I dare well say, she had lever a knyfe
Through her breast, than ben a woman wycke
There is no man couthe bring her to you prick
Now was the child as like Custaunce
As possible is, a creature for to be
This Alla has the face in remembrance
Of Dame Custaunce, and thereon mused he
Give that the childs mother were aught she
That is his wife, and privily he sight
And spedde him fro the table, that he might
Parfay he thought, ye fantome is in mine heed
I ought deem of skillful judgment
That in the salt see my wife is deed
And afterward he made his argument
What wot I, if Christ has hither sent
My wife by see? as well as he her sent
To my country, fro thens yt she was went
And after anon, home with the senator
Goes Alla, for to se this wonder chance
This senator does Alla great honor
And hastily he sent after Custaunce
But trusts well, her lust not to dance
when she wist wherefore was that sonde
Uneath upon her fete might she stand.
When Alla saw his wife, fair he her great
And wept, that it was rough for to se
For at the first look he on her set
He knew well verily that it was she
And for sorrow, as dombe stante as a tree
So was her heart shet in dystresse
when she remembers his unkindness
Twyse she sowned in her own sight
He wepeth and him excuses pytously
Now god (quod he) and his hallowes bright
So wylly on my soul have mercy
That of your harm, as gyltlesse am I
As is Maurice my son, so like your face
Else the fend me fetch out of this place.
Long was ye sobbyng, and the bitter pain
Or that her woeful heart might cese
Great was the pity to here hem complain
Through which plaintes began her woe encrese
I pray you al my labor to relese
I may not tell her woe, till to morrow
I am so weary to speak of her sorrow
But finally, when that ye soth is wyste
That Alla gyltlesse was of her woe
I trow an hundred times ben they kyste
And such a bliss is there bytwyxt hem two
That save the joy, that lasts euermo
There is no like, that any creature
Has seyen or shall, while ye world may dure
Tho prayed she her husband mekely
In relesynge of her pytous pain
That he would pray her father specially
That of his majesty he would enclyne
To vouchsafe somdaye with him to dyne
She prayed him eke, he should by no way
Unto her father no word of her to say
Some me^ would say, yt the child Maurice
Does this message until this Emperor
But as I guess, Alla was not so nyse
To him that was of so soueraygne honor
As he that is of christen folk the flour
Sent any child, but it is bette to deem
He went him self, and so it may well seem
This Emperor granted gentelly
To come to dinner, as he him bysought
That al was ready he looked besely
Upon this child, and an his daughter thought
Alla goes to his ynne, and as him ought
Arrayde for this feast in every wise
As farforth as his conning may suffyce
The morrow came, and Alla began him dress
And eke his wife, the Emperor for to mete
And forth they ride in joy and in gladness
And when she saw her father in the street
She light a down and falls him to fete
Father (quod she) your young child Custaunce
Is now full clean out of your remembrance
I am your daughter Custaunce (quod she)
That whylom ye han sent into Surrye
It am I father, that in the salt see
was put alone, and dampened for to dye
Now good father, I you mercy cry
Send me no more into hethennesse
But thanken my lord here of his kyndnesse
who can the pytous joy tellen al
Bytwyxt hem three syn they be^ thus ymette
But of my tale make an end I shall
The day goth fast, I wol no longer let
This glad folk to dinner ben set
In joy and bliss, at meat I let hem dwell
A thousand fold welmore then I can tell
This child Mauris was sythin emperor
Made by the pope, and lived christenly
To Christ's church he did great honor
But I let al this story passen by
Of Custaunce is my tale specially
In old Romayne iestes men may find
Maurys life, I bear it not in mind
This king Alla, when he his time sey
with this Custau^ce, his holy wife so sweet
To England ben they come the right wey
where as they live in joy and in quyete
But little while it lasts I you hete
Joy of this world, for time wol not abide
Fro day to night, it changes as the tide
Who lived ever in such delight a day
That he ne meued either in conscience
Or ire, or tallent of some kyn affraye
Envy or pride, or passion, or offense?
I ne say, but for this end, and this sentence
That little while in joy or in pleasaunce
Lasts the bliss of Alla with Custaunce
For death, yt takes of hye and low his rent
when passed was a year, even as I guess
Out of this world king Alla he hente
For whom Custau^ce has full great heaviness
Now let us prayen god his soul bless
And dame Custaunce, finally to say
Toward ye town of Rome goes her way
To Rome is come this holy creature
And fyndeth her father hole and sound
Now is she skaped al her adventure
And when that she her father has yfounde
Down on her knees goes she to ground
weeping for tenderness in heart blythe
She heryeth god, an hundred thousand sithe
In virtue and holy almesdede
They lyuen al, and never a sonder wend
Till death departen hem, this life they led
And fares now well, my tale is at an end
Now Jesus christ, yt of his might may send
Joy after woe, govern us in his grace
And keep us al, that been in this place
Thus ends the man of laws tale, and here follows the Squyers prologue.
Our host on his styroppes stood anon
And said: good men herkeneth euerychone
This was a thryfty tale for the nones
Sir parysh priest (quod he) for gods bones
Tell us a tale, as was thy forward yore
I se well that ye learned men in lore
Can much good, by gods dignite
The parson him answerde, benedicite
what cyleth the man, so synfully to swear?
Our host answered, O Ienkyn be ye there
Now good me^ (quod our host) herkeneth to me
I smell a loller in the wind (quod he)
Abides for gods dygne passion
For we shall have a predication
This loller here, wol prechen us somewhat.
Nay by my fathers soul, that shall he not
Said the Squire, here shall he not preche
Here shall he no gospel gloss ne teache
we leueth al in the great god (quod he)
He would sown some dyffyculte
Or spring cockel in our clean corn
And therefore host, I warn the byforne
My lolly body, shall a tale tell
And I shall ryngen you so merry a bell
That I shall waken al this company
But it shall not ben of philosofye
Ne phisyke, ne terms queynte of law
There is but little laten in my mawe
Here ends the Squyers prologue, and hereafter follows his tale.
AT Sarra, in the land of Tartary
There dwelt a king that warred Surry
Through which there died many a douty man
This noble king was called Cambusca^
Which in his time was of so great renoun
That there nas no where, in no regioun
So excellent a lord in all thing
Him lacked naught that longed to a king
As of the sect, of which he was borne
He kept his lay, to which he was sworn
And thereto he was hardy, wise, and rich
And pytous and just always ylyche
True of his word, benygne and honorable
Of his courage, as any center stable
Young, fresh, and strong, in arms desirous
As any bacheler of al his house
A fair person he was, and fortunate
And kept always so royal astate
That there nas no where such another man
This noble king, this tartre, this Ca^busca^
Had two sons by Eltheta his wife
Of which the eldest hight Algarsyfe
That other was cleped Camballo.
A daughter had this worthy king also
That youngest was, and hight Canace
But for to tell you al her beauty
It lies not in my tongue, ne in my conning
I dare not undertake so hye a thing
Mine English eke is insufficient
It must be a rethor excellent
That couth his colors, longyng for ye art
If he should dystryue here every part
I am none such I must speak as I can
And so byfel, that this Cambuscan
Has twenty winter borne his dyademe
As he was wont, fro year to year I deem
He let the feast of his natiuite
Done cryen throughout Sarra his cite
The last ydus of March, after the year
Phoebus the son, full ^oly was and clear
For he was nigh his exaltation
In Martes face, and in his mantion
In Aries, the collorike, the hot sign
Full lusty was the wether and benygne
For which the fowls, against ye son shene
what for the season, and the young grene
Full loud song her affections
Hem seemed han getten hem protections
Again the sword of winter kene and cold.
This Ca^busca^, of which I have you told
In royal vestementes, sit on his deys
with dyademe, full hye in his paleys
And held his feast so royal and so rich
That in this world nas there none it lyche
Of which, if I shall tell of all the array
Then would it occupye a summers day
And eke it needs not to deuyse
At every course, the order of her service
I wol not tell of her strange sewes
Ne of her swannes, ne of her heronsewes
Eke in that land, as tellen knights old
There is some meat, that is full dainty hold
That in this land men retche of it but small
There is no man that may reporten all.
I will not tarry you, for it is pryme
And for it is no fruit, but loss of time
Unto my first purpose I wol have recourse
And so byfel that after the third course
whyse that this king sit thus in his noblay
Herkenyng his minstralles her things play
Beforne him at his board delicyously
In at the half door al suddenly
There come a knight on a stead of brass
And in his hand abroad myrrour of glass
Upon his thombe he had of gold a ring
And by his side a naked sword hongynge
And up he rydeth to the hye board
In all the hall ne was there spoke a word
For maruayle of ye knight, him to behold
Full besely they wayten young and old
This strange knight yt come thus suddenly
Al armed save his heed, full royally
Salued king and queen, and lords al
By order, as they sytten in the hall
with so hye reverence and obeysaunce
As well in speech as in countenance
That Gawyn with his old curtesye
Though he come again out of fair
Ne could him not amend of no word
And after this, before the hye board
He with a manly voice said his message
After the form used in his langage
without vice of syllable or of letter
And for his tale should seem the better
Accordant to his words was his chere
As teaches art of speech hem that it lere
Al be that I can not sown his style
Ne I ne can not clymben so hye a style
Yet say I thus, as to my comen entente
Thus much amou^teth all that ever he mente
If it so be, that I have it in my mind
He said: The king of Araby and of Ynde
My liege lord, on this solemn day
Salueth you, as he best can and may
And sends you, in honor of your feast
By me that am ready at your heest
This stood of brass, that easily and well
Can in the space of a day naturel
This is to say, in four and twenty hours
where so ye list, in drought or in shoures
Beren your body into every place
Into which your heart wylleth to pace
without weme of you, through foul or fair
Or if ye list to fleen in the air
As does an Egle, when him list to sore
This same stead shall bear you evermore
withouten harm, till ye ben there you lest
Though that ye slepen on his back and rest
And turn again with ye writhyng of a pyn
He that it wrought could full many a gyn
He waited full many a constellation
Or he had done this operatyon
And knew full many a seal and many a bond.
This myrrour eke yt I have in mine hand
Has such a might, that men may in it se
when there shall fallen any aduersite
Unto your reygne, or to your self also
And openly se, who is your friend and foe
And over al this, if any lady bright
Has set her heart on any myner wight
If he be false, she shall the treason se
His new love, and al his subtylte
So openly, that there shall nothing hyde
Wherefore again this lusty summer tide
This myrrour and this ring, that ye may se
He has sent to my lady Canace
Your excellent daughter that is here
The virtue of this ring, if ye woll here
Is this, that if she list it for to were
Upon her thombe, or in her purse it bear
There is no foul, that flees under heaven
That she ne shall understand his steven
And know his meaning openly and plain
And answer him in his langage again
And every grass that grows upon rote
She shall well know, and whom it wol do bote
Al be his wou^des never so deep and wide
This naked sword, yt hangs by my side
Such virtue has, yt what man so ye smite
Throughout his armure it wol karue and byte
were it as thycke as a braunched oak
And what man that is wounded with you stroke
Shall never be hole, till that you list of grace
To stricken him with ye platte in thylke place
There he is hurt, this is as much to said
Ye mote with the platte sword again
Stricken him in the wound, and it wol close
This is very soth wythouten gloss
It fails not, whiles it is in your hold.
And when this knit has thus his tale told
He rydeth out of the halle, and down he light
His stead, which that shone as son bright
Stante in the court still as any stone
The knight is into chamber ladde anon
He is unarmed, and to the meat ysette
And all that harneys byforne him set
This is to said, the swerd and eke ye myrrour
Al borne was into the hye tour
with certain officers ordained therefore
And to Ca^ace the ring is bore
Solemnly, there she sat at the table
But sekerly without any fable
The horse of brass, yt may not be remeued
It slante, as it were to the ground yglewed
There may no man out of the place it drive
For none engyne, or wyndlas, or polyue
And cause why, for they can not the craft
And therefore in the place they hau it lafte
Till yt the knit has taught hem ye manner
To voyden him, as ye shall after here.
Great was ye prees, that swarmed to and fro
To gauren on the horse, that stands so
For it so hye was, and so broad and long
So well proporcioned for to ben strong
Right as it were a stead of Lumbardye
Therwyth so horsly, and so quycke of eye
As it a gentle courser of Poyle were
For certes, fro his tail to his ere
Nature ne art could him not amend
In no degree, as all the people wend
But evermore her most wonder was
How that it couth gone, and was of bras
It was of fayrie, as the people seemed
Diverse folk dyuersly they demed
As many heedes, as many wits there ben
They murmr, as does a swarm been
And made of skylles after her fantesyes
Rehersynge of the old poetryes
And sayden it was ylyke the Pegase
The horse that had wings for to flee
Or else it was the Greeks horse Synon
That brought Troy to dystruccion
As men in this old books read.
Mine heart (quod one) is evermore in dread
I trow some men of arms ben therein
That shapen hem this city for to win
It were right good, yt such things were know
An other rowned to his fellow low
And said he lied, for it is rather ylyke
An appearance made by some magyke
As iogglours playen at these feasts great
Of sundry thoughts, thus they ia^gle and trete
As leude people demeth comenly
Of things that been made more subtelly
Then they can in her lewdness comprehend
They demen gladly to the badder end.
And some of them wondren on ye myrrour
That borne was up to the master toure
How men might in it such things se.
And other answered, certes it might well be
Naturally by composicyons
Of angels and of slye reflections
And sayden in Rome was such on
They speken of Alocen and Vitilion
And Aristote, that writes in her lives
Of queynte myrrours, and of prospectiues
As known they that han her books herd.
And other folk han wo^dred on ye sword
That would perce through every thing
And fell in speech of Telophus the king
And of Achylles for his queynte spear
For he couth with it heal and dear
Right in such wise as me^ may with the sword
Of which right now ye have your selue^ herd
They speken of sundry hardyng of metal
And speken of medicines eke wythal
And how, and when it should hardened be
which is unknow algate to me.
Tho speak they of Canaces ring
And sayden al, that such a wonder thing
Of craft of rings herd they never non
Save that Moses, and king Solomon
Had a name of conning of such art
Thus sayen the people, and drawn hem aparte
But nathelesse, some sayden that it was
wonder to maken o^ serve ashen, glass
And yet is glass not ^yke ashen of fern
But so they han known it so fern
Therefore they sesen her ia^glyng and her wonder
As sore wondren some on cause of tho^der
On ebb and fludde, on gossomer, and on myste
And on al thing, till the cause is wyste.
Thus ianglen they, and deme^ and deuyse
Till that the king began fro his board arise.
Phoebus has left the angle merydional
And yet ascendyng was the beast royal
The gentle Lion with his Aldrian
When that this tartre King Cambuscan
Rose from his board, there as he sat full hye
Byforne him gothe the loud mynstralcye
Till he came to his chamber of paramentes
There as they sownen diverse instruments
That is like an heaven for to here
Now dauncen lusty Venus children dear
For in the fyshe her lady sat full hye
And looks on hem with a friendly eye.
This noble king is set upon his trone
This strange knight is fet to him full sone
And in the dance he gothe with Canace
Here is the revel and the iolyce
That is not able a dull man to deuyse
He must hau know love and her seruyse
And ben a feestlyche man, as fresshe as May
That should you deuyse such array.
who could you tellen the form of dau^ces
So uncouth and so fresh countenaunces
Such subtle lokynges and dissimulinges
For dread of ialouse men's apperceyuynges
No man but Lancelot, and he is deed
Therefore I pass over all this lusty heed
I say no more, but in this iolynesse
I let hem, till men to supper dress.
The steward byddeth spyces for to hye
And eke the wine, in all this melodye
The vshers and the squyers ben ygone
The spyces and the wine is comen anon
They eten and dronke^, and wha^ this had an end
Unto the temple, as reason was, they wend
The service is done, they soupen al by day
what needs it to rehersen her array?
Each man wot well, that at a kings feast
Is plenty, to the most and to the leest
And deyntes mo, than ben in my knowing.
And after supper gothe this noble king
To seen this horse of brass, with all his route
Of lords and of ladies him about
Such wo^drig there was on his horse of bras
That sythen the great siege of Troy was
There as men wondered on an horse also
He was there such a wondering, as was tho
But finally, the king asks the knight
The virtue of this horse and the might
And prayde him to tellen of his governance.
The horse anon began to tryppe and dance
wha^ yt this knightlayde hand on his rain
And said, sir there is no more to said
But when you list to ryden any where
Ye mote tryll a pyn, stante in his ere
which I shall tell you between us two
Ye mote nempne him to what place also
Or to what country you list to ride
And when ye come there you list abide
Bydde him discende, and trylle a another pyn
For therein lies the effect of all the gyn
And he wol down discende, and don your will
And in that place he wol abide still
Though al ye world had the contrary sworn
He shall not thens be ythrowe ne yborne
Or if you list bydde him thens gone
Tryl this pyn, and he wol vanyshe anon
Out of the sight of every manner wight
And come again, be it day or night
when that you list to clepen hem again
In such a gyse, as I shall to you said
Bytwyxt you and me, and that full sone
Ride wha^ you list, there nis no more to done
Enfourmed wha^ ye king was of ye knight
And has conceived in his wit aright
The manner and the form of al this thing
Full glad and full blythe, the noble king
Repayreth to his revel, as byforne
The brydel is in to the toure yborne
And kept among his jewels lose and dear
The horse vanysshed, I not in what manner
Out of her sight, ye get no more of me
But thus I let in lust and iolyte
This Cambyscan, his lords festyng
Till well nigh the day began to spryng.
Explicit prima pars^et se quitur pars secunda.
THe nortee of digestyon, the sleep
Began on hem wynke, and bad hem take keep
That mirth, drink, and labor wol have rest
And with a galping mouth hem al he keste
And said, it was time to lie adoun
For blood was in his domynacyoun
Cherysseth blood, natures friend (quod he)
They thanke^ him galpyng, by two by three
And every wight began draw him to his rest
As sleep hem bade, they took it for the best.
Her dremes shul not now ben it old for me
Full were her heedes of fumosyte
That causes dremes, of which there is no charge
They slepen, till it was pryme large
The most part, but it were Canace
She was full mesurable, as women be
For of her father had she take her leave
To gone to rest, sone alter it was eve
Her list not appalled for to be
Nor on the morrow, vnfestlyche for to se
And slept her first sleep, and awoke
For such a joy she in her heart took
Both of her queynt Ring, and of her myrrour
That twenty times she changed her color
And in her sleep, right for impressyon
Of her myrrour, she had a visyon
Wherefore, or the son up began glyde
She cleped her maistresses her beside
And said, her lust for to arise.
These old women, that been gladly wise
As is her maystresse, answerde her anon
And said: madame, whither wol ye gone
Thus erly^ for folk ben al in rest.
I wol (quod she arise) for me lest
No longer for to sleep, but walken about.
Her maystresse cleped women a great route
And up they rise, well ten or twelve
Up ryseth fresshe Canace her selue
As ioly and bright, as the young son
That in the Ram is four degrees up run
No higher was he, when she ready was
And sorthe she walks an easy paas
Arrayed after the lusty season sote
Lightly for to playen, and to walken on fete
Naught but five or six of her meyne
And in a trenche, fer in the park gethe she.
The vapor, which yt fro the earth glode
Makes the son to seem ruddy and broad
But nathelesse, it was so fair a sight
That it made al her hertes for to light
What for the ceason, and for the morownyng
And for the souls that she herd sing
For right anon, she wyste what they meant
Right by her song, and knew al her intent
The knotte why, that every tale is told
If it be tarried till lust be cold
Of hem that han it herkened after yore
The savor passes, ever longer the more
For fulsomnesse of prolixite
And by the same reason thinks me
I should unto the same knot condiscende
And make of her walkyng sone an end.
Amydde a ti^, for dry as whyt as chalk
As Canace was playeng in her walk
There sat a fauron over her heed full hye
That with a pytous voice began to cry
That all the wodde resowned of her cry
And beaten had her self so pytously
With both her wings, till the reed blood
Ran endelonge the tree, there as she stood
And ever in one, she cried and shright
And with her beck, her seluen so she pyght
That there nas Tygre, ne cruel best
That dwells in wodde, either in foreste
That nolde ha^ wept, if that they weep could
For sorrow of her, she shright always so loud
For there nas never yet man on live
If that he couthe a faucon well discryue
That herd of such another of fayrenesse
As well of plumage, as of gentylnesse
Of shappe, of all that might trekened be
A faucon peregryn than seemed she
Of scrude land, and evermore as she stood
She swouned now and now, for lack of blood
Till welny is she fall fro the tree.
This fair kings daughter, this Canace
That on her finger bare the queynte ring
Through which she understood well every thing
That any foul may in his leden said
And could answer him in his leden again
Has understand, what this faucon seyde
And welny for routhe almost she deyde
And to the tree she gothe full hastily
And on this faucon looks full pytously
And held her lap abrod, for well she wyste
The faucon must fallen from the twyste
Wha^ yt she swouned next, for lack of blood
A long while to wayten there she stood
Till at the last she spoke in this manner
Unto the hawk, as ye shalen after here.
What is the cause, if it be for to tell
That ye ben in this furyal pain of hell
Quod Canace, unto this hawk above
Is this for sorrow of death, or loss of love?
For as I trow, these ben causes two
That causen most a gentle heart woe
Of other harm it needs not to speak
For ye upon your self you wreke
Which proves well, that either ire or dread
Mote ben encheson of your cruel deed
Syu that I se none other wight you chase
For the love of god, so does your self grace
Or what may be your help, for west or est
Ne saw I never er now, no bird ne be
That farde with him selue so pytously
Ye slay me with your sorrow verily
I have of you so great compassioun
For gods love come fro the tree adowne
And as I am a kings daughter true
If that I verily the causes knew
Of your disease, if it lay in my might
I would amend it, certes or it be night
As wisely help me great god of kind
And herbs shall I right ynowe find
To hele with your hurtes hastily
Tho shright this faucon yet more spitously
Than ever she did, and fell to ground anon
And lies a swoune deed as is a stone
Till Canace has in her lap itake
Unto the time she began of swoune awake
And after that she of swoune began abreyde
Right in her hawks leden thus she said
That pite renneth soon in gentyl heart
(Felyng his semilitude in pains smerte)
Is proved al day, as men may se
As well by work as by authorite
For gentle heart keeps gentilnesse
I se well, that ye have of my distress
Campassyon, my fair Canace
Of very womanly benignyte
That nature in your principles has set
But for none hope for to fare the bette
But for to obey unto your heart free
And for to make other beware by me
As by the whelpe, chastised is the Lion
Right for that cause, and for that conclusyon
While that I have a leyser and a space
Mine harm I wol confessen or I pace
And ever while that one her sorrow told
That other wept, as she to water would
Till that the Faucon badde her to be still
And with a sike, thus she said her till.
There I was bredde, alas that ilke day
And fostred in a roche of marble gray
So tenderly, that nothing eyleth me
I ne wist not what was aduersyte
Till I could fly, full hye under the sky
There dwelte a Terselet me fast by
That seemed well of al gentylnesse
Al were he full of trayson and of falsnesse
It was so wrapped under humble chere
And under hew of troth, and in such manner
Under pleasaunce, and under busy pain
That no wight coud have wede he coud fain
So deep in greyne he dyed his colors
Right as a serpent hides him under flours
Till he may se his time for to byte
Right so, this God of loves ipocrite
Does so his serymones and obeysaunce
with his dissimulynge, and fair assemblaunce
That sowneth unto gentilnesse of love
As in a tomb is all the fair above
And under the cors, such as ye wot
Such was this ipocrite cold and hot
And in this wise he served his intent
That save the fend, non wist what he meant
Till he so long had weped and complained
And many a year his service to me yfayned
Till that mine heart, to pitous and to nyce
Al innocent of his cruel malice
For ferde of his death, as thought me
Upon his oaths and his suretee
Granted him love, upon this condition
That evermore mine honor and my renoun
were saved, both preuy and apert
This is to say, that after his desert
I yaue him al mine heart and all my thought
God wot, and in other wise naught
And took his heart in change of mine for aye
But sothe is said, gone sythen many a day
A true wight and a thief thinks not one
And when he saw the thing so fer ygone
That I granted him fully my love
In such a gyse, as I have said above
And yeuen him my true heart as fre
As he swore he yafe his heart to me
Anon this Tygre, full of doubleness
Fill on his knees with so devout humblesse
with hye reverence, and eke by his chere
So like a gentyl lover, as of manner
So rauyshed, as it seemed for joy
That never Troylus, ne Paris of Troy
Jason certes, ne non other man
Syn Lamet was, that alderfyrst began
To louen two, as written folk beforne
Ne never sythen Adam was borne
Ne couthe man by twenty thousand part
Counterfete the sophymes of his art
Ne were worthy to vnbocle his galoche
There doubleness or faynyng should aproche
Ne so couth thank a wight, as he did me
His manner was an heaven for to se
Till any woman, were she never so wise
So paynteth he his chere point deuyse
As well his words, as his countenance
And I so loved him for his obeysaunce
And for the truth that I demed in his heart
That if so were, that any thing him smert
Al were it never so lyte, and I it wist
Me thought I fetel death at my heart twyst
And shortly, so ferforth this thing went
That my will was his wylles instrument
That is to say, my will obeyed his will
In all thing, as far as reason fyl
Keeping the bounds of my worship ever
Ne never had I thing so lefe ne so lever
As him god wot, ne never shall no mo
This last longer than a year or two
That I supposed of him nothing but good.
But finally, thus at the last it stood
That fortune would that he most twyn
Out of that place, which that I was in
where me was woe, it is no questyon
I can not make of it discriptyon
For o thing dare I tell boldly
I know what the pain of death is thereby
Such harm I felt, that he ne might believe
So on a day of me he took his leave
So sorowfully eke, that I wend verily
That he had felt as much harm as I
wha^ that I herd him speak, and saw his hew
But natheles, I thought he was so true
And eke that he repair should again
withyn a little while sothe to said
And reason would eke, that he must go
For his honor, as often happeth so
That I made virtue of necessite
And took it well, sithe it must needs be
As I best might, I hid fro him my sorrow
And took him by ye hond, seit John to borow
And said thus: lo I am yours al
Beth such as I have been to you and shall
what he answerde, it needs not reherce
who can sayn bet than he, who can do wers?
when he had al well ysaid, than has he done
Therefore behooves him a long spone
That shall eten with a fend, thus herd I say
So at the last he mote forth his way
And forth he sle^th til he come there him lest
when it come him to purpose for to rest
I trow he had thylke text in mind
That al thing repayring to his kind
Gladeth him selue, thus sayn men as I guess
Men louen of kind newfanglenesse
As briddes don, that men in cages feed
For though you night and day take of hem head
And straw her cage fair and soft as sylke
And give hem sugre, honey, breed and milk
Yet right anon as his door is up
He with his fete would sporne adown his cup
And to the wood he would, and worms eat
So newfangled ben they of her meat
And louen nouelries of proper kind
No gentylnesse of blood may hem bind
So ferde this Tercelet, alas the day
Tho he were gentel borne, fresh and gaye
And goodly for to se, and humble and free
He saw upon a time a kyte flee
And suddenly he loved this kyte so
That al his love is clean fro me goo
And has his truth falsed in this wise
Thus has the kyte my love in her service
And I am lorne without remedy.
And with ye word this faucon began to cry
And swouned often in Canaces barme
Great was ye sorrow for that hawks harm
That Canace, and all her women made
They nyst how they might her faucon glade
But Canace home bears here in her lap
And softely in playsters began her wrappe
There as she with her beck had hurt her selue
Now can not Canace but herbs delue
Out of the ground and make salues new
Of herbs precious and fine of hew
To helen with the hawk fro day to night
She does her business, and all her might
And by her beds heed she made a mewe
And covered it with veluettes blewe
In sign of truth, that is in women seen
And al withouten ye Mewe is peynted grene
In which were peynted al these false fowls
As ben these tydefes, tercelettes, and owls
Right for dispyte were peynted hem beside
Pyes on hem for to cry and chyde
This leave I Canace her hawk keeping
I wol no more as now speak of her ring
Till it come efte to purpos for to sayn
How that this faucon gate her love again
Repentant, as the story tells us
By mediatyon of Camballus
The kings son, of which I of told
But hensforthe I wol my process hold
To speken of auentures, and of batayls
That yet was never herd of so great marue^ls
First wol I tell you of Cambuscan
That in his time many a cite wan
How that he wan Theodora to his wife
And after wol I speak of Algarsyfe
For whom full often in great peril he was
Ne had he ben helped by the horse of bras
And after wol I speak of Camballo
That fought in listes with the brethern two
For Canace, er that he might her wyn
And there I left, I wol again begin.
Explicit secunda pars.
Apollo whirleth up his chare so hye
Till that the god Mercurius house he slye.
There can be found no more of this foresaid tale, which has been sought in
diverse places

Here follows the words of the Merchant to the Squire, and the words of the
Host to the Merchant.
IN faith Squire, thou have the well iquyt
And gentelly, I praise well thy wit
Quod the Merchant, consydryng thine youth
So felyngly thou spekest I the alouth
As to my dome, there is non that is here
Of eloquence, that shall be thy pere
If that thou live, God give the right good chance
And in virtue send the perseueraunce
For of thy spekyng I have great deynte
I have a son, and by the Trinite
I had lever tha^ twenty pou^desworth land
(Though it now were fallen in my hand)
He were a man of such discressyon
As that ye ben: fie on possessyon
But if a man be virtuous with all
I have my son shybbed, and yet shall
For he to virtue lysteth not to entende
But for to play at dyse, and to spend
And lose all that he has, is his usage
And he had lever talk with a page
Than to common with any gentyl wight
where he might learn gentelnesse aryght
Straw for your gentylnesse (quod our host)
what merchant, pardy well thou wost
That each of you mote tellen at the lest
A tale or two, or breken your behest
That know I well (quod the marcha^t) certain
I pray you have me not in disdayn
Though I to this man speak a word or two
Tell on thy tale withouten words mo
Gladly sir host (quod he) I wol obey
Unto your will, now herkeneth what I say
I wol you not contray in no wise
As far as my wits may suffyse
I pray to god that it may plesen you
Than wotte I well, it is good ynow.
Thus end the words of the host and the merchant, and here follows the
Merchants prologue.
Weeping and waylyng, care and other sorrow
I have ynowe, both even and eke a morrow
Quod the Merchant, and so have other mo
That wedded be, I trow that it be so
For well I wot it fares so by me
I have a wife, the worst that may be
For though the fend coupled to her were
She would him ouermatch I dare well swear
What should I reherce in special
Her high malice: she is a shrewe at all
There is a long and a large difference
Betwyxt Grisyldes great patience
And of my wife the passing cruelte
Were I unbound, also mote I the
I would never efte come in the snare
We wedded men live in sorrow and care
Assay who so wol, and he shall find
That I say sothe, by saint Thomas of Inde
As for the more part, I say not al
God shield that it should so befall
Ah good sir host, I have wedded be
These months two, and more not parde
And yet I trow he that all his life
Has wedded be, thoug men him ryfe
In to the heart, ne couthe in no manner
Tell so much sorrow, as I now here
Could tell, of my wives cursednesse
Now quod our host merchant, so god yt bless
Syn ye be so much know of that art
Full hertely I pray you tell us part
Gladly quod he, but of mine own sore
For sorry heart I tell may no more.
Here ends the Merchants prologue, and here follows his tale.
WHylo^ there was dwelling in Lombardy
A worthy knight, that borne was at Pauy
In which he lived in great prosperyte
And syxty year a wyfeles man was he
And followed aye his bodily delight
On women, there as was his appetyte
As don these foles that been seculeres
And when that he was past sixty years
were it for holiness or dotage
I can not sayn, but such a great courage
Had this knight to ben a wedded man
That day and night he does all that he can
To espy, where that he wedded might be
Prayeng our lord to graunten him that he
Myghten ones known of that blysful life
That is bitwixt an husband and his wife
And for to lyuen under that holy bond
with which god first man and woman bond
Non other life (said he) is worth a bean
For wedlock is so easy and so clean
That in this world it is a paradise
Thus says this old knight that is so wise.
And certainly, as sothe as god is king
To take a wife, it is a glorious thing.
And n^mely when a man is old and hoar
Than is a wife the fruit of his tresore
Than should he take a young wife and a fair
On which he might engendren him an heir
And led his life in joy and in solace
where as these bachelors syngen alas
when that they fynden any aduersyte
In love, which nys but chyldes vanyte
And trewly it sytte well to be so
That bachelors han often pain and woe
On brotel ground they bylden brotelnesse
They find freelte, wha^ they wene^ secrenesse
They live but as bryddes or beestes
In lyberte, and under nyce arestes
There as a wedded man in his estate
Lives a life blisfully and ordinate
Under the yoke of marriage ybounde
well may his heart in joy and bliss habounde
For who can be so buxome as a wife?
who is so true and eke so tentife
To keep him sick and hole? as is his make
For well ne woe she nyl him not forsake
She nys not weary him to love and serve
Though that he lie bedreed till he sterue
And yet some clerks sayn, that it is not so
Of which Theophrast is one of tho
what force though Theophrast list to lie
Ne take no wife (quod he) for hysbondrye
As for to spare in household thy dispense
A true servant does more dilygence
Thy good to keep, than thyn own wife
For she wol claim half part al her life
And if that thou be sick, so god me save
Thy very friends or a true knave
wol keep the better, the^ she that wayteth aye
After thy good, and has done many a day
And if thou take a wife, to the untrue
Full often time it shall the sore rewe
This sentence, and an hundred sithes worse
writes this man there, god his bones curse
But take no keep of such vanyte
Defyeth Theophrast, and herkeneth me.
A wife is gods yefte verily
Al other manner yeftes hardely
As lands, rentes, pasture, or common
Or mouables, al ben yeftes of fortune
That passen, as a shadow on a wall
But dread not, if plainly speak I shall
A wife wol last and in thine house endure
well longer then the list parauenture
Marriage is a full great sacrament
He which has no wife I hold him shent
He lives helples, and al desolate
I speak of folk in secular estate.
And herkneth why, I say not this for nout
A woman is for man's help ywrought
The hye god, wen he had Adam maked
And saw him alone belly naked
God of his great goodness said than
Let us make an help to this man
Like to himself, and then he made Eve
Here may ye se, and hereby may ye preue
That a wife is man's help and comfort
His paradyse terrestre and his dysporte
So buxome and so virtuous is she
They must needs live in unity
One flesh they ben, and two souls as I guess
Not but one heart in well and in dystresse
A wife, ah saint Mary, benedicite
How might a man have any aduersite
That has a wife, certes I can not sey
The bliss that is betwyxte hem twey
There may no tongue tellen or heart think
If he be poor, she helps him to swynke
She keeps his good, and wastes never a dei
All that her husband lust, her lyketh well
She says not ones nay, when he says ye
Do this (says he) al ready sir (says she)
O blysful order of wedlock precious
Thou art so merry, and eke so virtuous
And so commended, and so approved eke
That every man, that halte him worth a leke
Upon his bare knees ought all his life
Thanken god, that him has sent a wife
Or pray to god him for to send
A wife, to last unto his lives end
For then his life is set in sekernesse
He may not be dysceyued, as I guess
So that he werche after his wives read
Then may he boldly bear^n up his head
They ben so true and also wise
For which, if thou wolt werchen as ye wise
Do always so, as women wol the read
Lo how that Jacob, as these clerks read
By good counsel of his mother Rebecke
Bound the kydde skin about his neck
For which his fathers benison he wan
Lo Iudyth, as the story tell can
By wise counsel gods people kept
And slew him Holofernes while he slept
Lo Abigail by counsel, how she
Saved her husband Nabal, when that he
Should have be slain. And look Hester also
By good counsel delivered out of woe
The people of God, and made him Mardochere
Of Assuere enhaunsed for to be.
There nys nothing in gree superlatyfe
(As says Senec) above an humble voyfe
Suffer thy wynes tongue, as Caton byt
She shall command, and thou shall sustre it
And yet she wol obey of curtesye
A wife is keeper of thine husbondrye
well may the sick man wayle and weep
There as there nys no wife ye house to keep
I warn the, if wisely thou wylt werche
love well thy wift, as christ loves his cherch
If thou love thy self, thou love thy wife
No man hates his flesh: but in his life
He fostreth it, and therefore bid I the
Cheryshe thy wife, or thou shall never ithe
Husband and wife, what so men iape or play
Of worldly folk hold the seker way
They be so knit, there may none harm betide
And namely upon the wives side
For which this January, of which I told
Consydred has in his days old
The lusty life, the virtuous quiet
That is in marriage honey sweet
And for his friends on a day he sent
To tellen hem theffecte of his intent.
with face sad, his tale has he hem told
He said friends, I am hoore and old
And almost (god wot) on the pyttes brynke
Upon my soul somewhat must I think
I have my body folyshly dyspended
Blessed be god, it shall ben amended
For I wol ben certain a wedded man
And that anon in all the have I can
Unto some maid, fair and tender of age
I pray you shapeth for my marriage
All suddenly, for I wol not abide
And I wol fonden to espy on my side
To whom I may be wedded hastily
But for as much as ye ben more then I
Ye shullen rather such a thing espyen
Then I, and there me lust best to alyen
But one thing war^e I you my fre^des dear
I wol none old wife have in no manner
She shall not pass fyftene year certain
Old fyshe and young flesh wol I have feign
Better is (quod he) a pyke then a pykerel
And better then old befe is the tender veel
I wol no woman of thyrty winter age
It nys but be anstrawe and great forage
And eke these old wedowes (god it wot)
They connen so much craft in wades bote
So much broken harm when hem list
That with hem should I never live in rest
For sondrye schools makes subtel clerks
A woman of many schools half a clerk is
But certainly a young thing may men gye
Right as me^ may warm war with hands ply
wherefore I say you plainly in a clause
I nyl none old wife have for this cause
For if so were that I had myschaunce
And in her couth have no pleasaunce
Then should I led my life in auoutry
And so straight to the deuel when I dye
Ne children should I none upon her geten
Yet had I lever hounds had me eten
Then that mine heritage should fall
In strange hands: and thus I tell you al
I dote not, I wot the cause why
Men should wedden: and forthermore wot I
There speaks many a man of marriage
That wot no more of this the^ does my page
For which cause men should take a wife
If he may not lyuen chaste his life
Take him a wife with great devotion
Because of leful procreation
Of children, to the honor of god above
And not only for paramour or for love
And for they shulden lechery eschew
And yield her dettes when that it is dew
Or for that each man should helpen other
In myschefe, as a suster should the brother
And live in chastity full heavenly
But syrs (by your leave) that am not I
For god be thanked, I dare make auaunt
I feel my lymmes hole and sufficiaunt
To done all that a man belongs to
I wot my self best what I may do
Though I be hoar, I fare as does a tree
That blossometh er that fruit ywoxe be
The blossomed tree is neither dry ne deed
I feel no where hoar but on my heed
Mine heart and my lymmes been as grene
As laurel is through the year to seen
And sythen that ye have herd al mine intent
I pray you to my will ye wol assent
Diverse men dyuersly him told
Of marriage many ensamples old
Some blames it, some prayseth it certain
But at the last, shortly for to ta sayn
(As al day falls altereacion
Betwyxt friends in dysputation)
There fell a strife betwyxt his brethren two
Of which that one was cleped Placebo
Iustynus sothly called was that other
Placebo said: O January brother
Full little need han ye my lord so dear
Counsel to axe of any that is here
But that ye ben so full of sapience
That you ne lyketh for your hye prudence
To vain fro the word of Solomon
This word says he unto euerychone
work al thing by counsel, thus said he
And then shall thou not repent the
But tho that Solomon speak such a word
Mine own dear brother and my lord
So wisely god my soul bring to ease and rest
I hold your own counsel for the best.
For brother mine, take of me this motyfe
I have been now a court man al my life
And god wot, though I now unworthy be
I have standen in full great degree
Abouen lords in full great estate
Yet had I never with none of hem debate
I never hem contraryed truly
I wot well that my lord can more then I
That he says, I hold it ferme and stable
I say the same, or else thing semblable
A full great fool is any counsaylour
That serves any lord of hye honor
That dare presume, or ones think it
That his counsel should pass his lords wy^
Nay, lords be no fools be my fay
Ye have your self spoken here to day
So hye sentence, so holy and so well
That I consent, and conferme every del
Your words al, and your opinyon
By god there nys no man in all this town
Ne in Itayle, could bette have said
Christ holds him of this full well a paid
And trewly it is an hye courage
Of any man that is stopen in age
To taken a young wife, by my father kyn
Your heart hongeth on a ioly pyn
Does now in this matere right as you lest
For finally I hold it for the best.
Iustynus that aye satte and herd
Right in this wise to Placebo he answerde
Now brother mine be pacye^t I you pray
Since ye have said, now herkeneth what I say
Senec among other words wise
Says, that a man ought him well auyse
To whom he yeueth his land or his catel
And sythens I ought auyse me right well
To whom I give my good away fro me
well much more I ought auysed be
To whom I give my body: for always
I warn you well it is no childs play
To take a wife wichout auysement
Men must enquere (this is mine assent)
whether she be sobre, wise, or dronkelwe
Or proud, or other ways a shrewe
A chider, or a waster of thy good
Other rich or poor, or else a man is wood
Al be it so, that no man find shall
Non in this world, that trotteth hole in all
Ne man, ne be, such as men can deuyse
But natheles, it ought enough suffyse
with any wife, if so were that she had
Mo good thewes, than her vices badde
And al this asks layser to enquere
For god wotte I have wept many a tere
Full preuely, sithe I had a wife
Praise who so wol a wedded man's life
Certain I find in it but cost and care
And obseruaunces of all blysses bare
And yet god wot, my neighbors about
And namely of women many a rout
Sayn that I have the most steadfast wife
And eke the mekest one that bears life
But I wot best, where wryngeth me my sho
Ye may for me, right as you list do
Auyse you, ye ben a man of age
How that ye entren into marriage
And namely with a young wife and a fair
By him that made water, earth, and air
The youngest man that is in all this rout
Is besy ynowe to bring it about
To have his wife alone, trusts me
Ye shall not pleasen her years three
This is to sayn, to don her plesaunce
A wife asks full much obseruaunce
I pray you that ye be not yuel apayde
well (quod this January) and have thou al said?
Straw for thy Sense, and for thy proverbs
I count it not worth a pannyer full of herbs
Of schole terms, wiser men than thou
As thou have herd, assenteth it right now
To my purpose Placebo, what say ye?
I say it is a cursed man (quod he)
That lets matrymony sekerly
And with that word they risen suddenly
And ben assented fully, that he should
Be wedded when him list, and where he would
High fantasy and curiousness
Fro day to day, began in the soul empress
Of January, about his marriage
Many fair shappe, and many fair visage
There passes throug his heart night by night
Al who so took a myrrour polysshed bright
And set it in a comen market place
Than should he se many a figure pace
By his myrrour, and in the same wise
Began January within his thought deuyse
Of maidens, which that dwellen beside
He wist not where he might abide
For if that one had beauty in her face
Another stout so in the peoples grace
For her sadness and her benignyte
That of the people grettest voice had she
And some were rich, and had badde name
But natheles bitwixt ernest and game
He at last appointed him on one
And let al other from his heart gone
And chese her of his own authorite
For love is blind al day, and may not se
And when yt he was in his bed ybrought
He purtreyde in his heart and in his thought
Her fresh beauty, and her age tender
Her middle small, her arms long and slender
Her wise governance, and her gentylnesse
Her womanly bearyng, and her sadness
And wha^ that he was on her condiscended
Him thought his choice might not be^ amended
For when that he him self concluded had
Him thought each other man's wit so bad
That impossyble it were to reply
Against his choice, this was his fanta^y
His friends sent he to, at his instaunce
And prays hem to don him that plesaunce
That hastily they would to him come
He would abrydgen her labor al and some
Needs no more for him to go ne ride
He was appointed there he would abide
Placebo came, and eke his friends sone
And alder first he bad hem al a bone
That none of hem none arguments make
Against his purpose that he has ytake
which purpose was pleasant to god (said he)
And very ground of his prosperity.
He said there was a maiden in the town
which of beauty has great renown
Al were it so, she were of small degree
Suffyseth him her youth and her beauty
which maid he said, he would have to wife
To leden in ease and in holiness his life
And thanked god, yt he might haven her all That no wight his bliss parten shall
And prays hem to labor in this need
And shapeth that he fail not to speed
For then he said, his sprete was at ease
Then is (quod he) nothing may me dysplease
Save o thing prycketh in my conscience
The which I wol reherce in your presence.
I have (quod he) herd said full yore ago
There may no man have parfyte blysses two
This is to say, in earth and eke in heaven
For though he kept him fro the sins seven
And eke from every branch of thylke tree
Yet is there so parfyte prosperity
And so great ease and lust in marriage
That ever I am aghast now in mine age
That I shall led now so merry a life
So delycate without woe or strife
That I shall have mine heaven in earth here
For sythen very heaven is bought so dear
with tribulation and great penance
How should I then living in such pleasau^ce
As al wedded men done with her wives
Come to ye bliss, there christ eterne on live is
This is my dread, and ye my brethren twey
Assoyleth me this question I you prey.
Justinius, which that hated his folly
Answered anon right in his iapery
And for he would his long tale abrege
He would none authorite allege
But said: sir, so there be none obstacle
Other then this, god of his hye miracle
And of his mercy may for you so wyrche
That er ye han your ryghtes of holy church
Ye may repent of wedded man's life
In which ye sayen is neither woe ne strife
And else god forbede, but if he sent
A wedded man grace him to repent
well ofter, rather then a syngle man
And therefore sir, the best read that I can
Dyspayreth you not, but have in memory
Parauenture she may be your purgatory
She may by gods mean and gods whip
Then shall your soul up to heaven skip
Swyfter the^ does an arowe out of a bow
I hope to god here after ye shall know
That there nys none so great felicite
In marriage, ne never none shall be
That you shall let of your salvation
So that ye use it as skyl is and reason
The lusts of your wife attemperatly
And that ye please her not to amorously
And that ye keep you eke fro other syn
My tale is done, for my wit is thyn
Beth not aghast hereof my dear brother
But let us wade fro this matter to another
The wife of Bath, if ye understand
Of marriage, which ye have in hand
Declares full well in a little space
Fares now well, god have you in his grace
And with this word, Iustyne and his brother
Han take her leave, and each of hem of other
For when they saw it must needs be
They wrought so by wise and slye treat
That she this maid which May hight
As hastily as ever that she might
Shall wedded be to this January
I trow it were to long to you to tarry
If I you told of every escrite and bond
By which she was fested in his land
Or for to harken of her rich arraye
But finally ycomen is the day
That to church both ben they went
For to receive the holy sacrament
Forth comes ye pressed, with stole about his neck
And badde her be like Sara and Rebecke
In wisdom and troth of marriage
And said his orisons, as is the usage
And crouched hem, and bad god should hem bles
And made al seker ynowe with holiness
Thus ben they wedded with solempnite
And at feast sytteth he and she
with other worthy folk upon the deys
Al full of joy and bliss is the paleyes
And full of instruments and of vytayle
The most deyntes of al Itaile
Beforne him stood instruments of such sown
That Orpheus, ne of Thebes Amphion
Ne made never such a melody.
At every course came loud mynstralcy
That never Ioab tromped for to here
Neither Theodomas yet half so clear
At Thebes, when the city was in doubt
Bacchus the wine hem skynketh al about
And Venus laugheth on every wight
For January was become her knight
And would both assayen his courage
In liberty, and eke in marriage
And with her fire bronde in her ho^de about
Daunceth before the bryde and all the rout
And certainly, I dare well sayen right this
Emenius that god of wedding is
Saw never in his life, so merry a wedded man
Hold thou thy peace thou poet Marcian
That wrytest us that ylke wedding merry
Of her philology and him Mercury
And of the songs that the Muses song
To small is both thy pen and eke thy tongue
For to dyscriuen of this marriage
when tender youth has iwedded stouping age
There is such mirth, yt it may not be written
Assayeth your self, then may ye wytten
If that I lack or none in this matere
May that sytte, with so benign a chere
Her to behold, it seemed fayrey
Queen Hester looked never with such an eye
On Assuere, so meke a look has she
I may you not deuyse al her beauty
But thus much of her beauty tell I may
That she was like ye bright morrow of May
Fullylde of al beauty, and of pleasaunce
This January is rauyshed in a trance
And at every time he look in her face
But in his heart, he began her to manace
That he yt night, i^ his arms would her strein
Harder, then ever Paris did Heleyn
But natheles, yet had he great pity
That ylke night offend her must he
And thought, alas, O tender creature
Now would god ye might well endure
Al my courage, it is so sharp and kene
I am aghast ye shall it not sustene
But god forbede, that I did al my might
Now would god that it were wax night
And that the night would last ever mo
I would that al these people were ago
And finally he does all his labor
As he best might, saving his honor
To have hem fro the meat in subtel wise
The time came, that reason was to rise
And after that men dauncen, and drink fast
And spices all about the house they cast
And full of joy and bliss is every man
Al but a squire, that hight Damian
which carfe before the knight many a day
He was so rauyshed on his lady May
That for very pain he was ny wode
Almost he swelte, and souned there he stood
So sore has Venus hurt him with her brand
So fresh she was, and thereto so lycande
And to his bed he went him hastily
No more of him at this time speak I
But there I let him weep ynowe and plain
Till ye fresh May wol rewen on his pain.
O perilous fire, yt in the bedstraw bredeth
O famyler foe, that his service bedeth
O servant traitor, false homely hew
Like to the adder slye in bosom untrue
O January dronken in plesaunce
God shylde us al from your iniquitaunce
Of marriage, se how this Damian
Thine own squire and thy borne man
Entendeth to done the villainy
God grant the thine homely foe to espy
For in this world nys wers pestilence
Then homely foe, al day in thy presence
Parfourmed has the son his arc dyurne
No longer may the body of him soiourne
On orisont, as in that latitude
Night with his mantel, that is dark and rude
Began for to sprede, the hemyspery about
For which departed is the lusty rout
Fro January, with thank on every side
Home to her houses lustely they ride
There as they done her things, as am lest
And when they saw her time to go to rest
Sone after this lusty January
wol go to bed, he would no longer tarry
He drynketh ypocras, clarrey, and vernag^
Of spyces hot, to increase his courage
And many a lectuary had he full fine
Such as the cursed monk dan Co^stantyne
Has written in his book of Coitu
To eaten hem al he nolde nothing eschew
And thus to his preuy friends said he
For gods love, as soon as it may be
Let void all this house in curteys wise sone
Men drinke^, and the trauers drew anon
So hasted January, it must be done
The bryd was brought to bed as still as ston
And when the bed was with ye priest yblessed
Out of ye chamber has every wight he^ dressed
And January has fast in arms take
His fresh May, his paradyse, his make
He lulleth her, he kysseth her full often
with thycke brystels of his berde vnsofte
I like ye skyn of Hou^dfysh, as sharp as brere
For he was shave al new in his manner
He rubbeth her upon her tender face
And said thus: Alas, I mote trespace
To you my spouse, and you greatly offend
Or time come, that I wol down dyscende
But natheles, consydreth this (quod he)
There nys no workman, what so ever he be
That may both wyrche well and hastily
This wol be done at leyser parfytly
It is no force how long that we play
In true wedlock coupled be we tway
And blessed be the yoke that we been in
For in our acts we mow do no syn
A man may do no sin with his wife
Ne hurt him self with his own knyfe
For we have leave to play us by the law
Thus labors he, till the day began dawe
And then he takes a soppe in fine clarre
And vpryght in his bed then sytteth he
And after that he syngeth full loud and clear
And kyst his wife, and makes wanto^ chere
He was al coltyshe, and full of ragery
And full of gergon, as is a flecked pie
The slack skin about his neck shakes
while that he song, so chau^teth he and craketh
But god wot what May thought i^ her heart
when she him saw, vpsyttyng in his sherte
In his night cappe, with his neck lene
She prayseth not his playeng worth a been
Then said he thus: my rest wol I take
Now day is come, I may no longer wake
And down he laid his heed, and slept til prime
And afterward, when that he saw his time
Up ryseth January, but the fresh May
Holds her chamber to the fourth day
As usage is of wives for the best
For every labor sometime mote have rest
Or else long may he not endure
This is to say, no lives creature
Be it fyshe or be, brydde or man
Now wol I speak of woeful Damian
That langureth for love, as ye shall here
Therefore I speak to him in this manner.
I say, O sely Damian, alas
Answer to this demand, as in this caas
How that thou to thy lady fresh May
Tell thy woe? she wol always say nay
Eke if thou speak, she wol thy woe bewray
God be thyn help, I can no better say
This sick Damian in Venus fire
So brenneth, that he dies for desire
For which he put his life in adventure
No longer might he in this wise endure
But privily a penner began he borowe
And in a lettre wrote he al his sorrow
In manner of a complaynt or a lay
Unto this fair and fresh lady May
And in a purse of sylke, ho^gyng on his shert
He has it put, and laid it at his heart
The moon at noone tide that ylke day
(That January has ywedded fresh May)
Out of Taure was in the Cancre gleden
So long has May in her chamber bydden
As custom is, unto these nobles al
A bryde shall not eaten in the hal
Till days four, or three at the leest
I passed been, then let her gone to feast
The fourth day co^plete fro noon to noone
when that the hye mass was ydone
In hal sat this January and May
As fresh as is this bright summers day
And so befyl, how that this good man
Remembers him upon this Damian
And said: saint Mary how may this be
That Damian entendeth not to me?
Is he aye sick: or how may this betyde?
His squyers which that stode^ him beside
Excused him, because of his sycknesse
which let him to done his business
None other cause might make him tarry
That me forthynketh (quod this January)
He is a gentle squire be my truth
If that he dyed, it were harm and routhe
He is as wise, dyscrete, and secre
As any man that I wot of his degree
And thereto manly and seruysable
And for to be a thryfty man right able
But after meat, as soon as ever I may
I wol my self vysete him, and eke May
To done him all the comfort that I can
And for that word, him blessed every man
That of his bounte and of his gentylnesse
He would so comforten in his dystresse
His squire, for it was a gentle deed
Dame (quod this January) take good head
That after meat, ye and your women al
(when ye have been in chamber out of this hal)
That al ye gone to se this Damian
Does him dysporte, he is a gentyl man
And tells him that I wol him visit
Have I nothing but rested me a lyte
And speed you fast, for I wol abide
Till that ye sleep fast by my side
And with that word he began to him call
A squire, that was Marshal of his hal
And told him certain thing that he would
This fresh May has straight her way ihold
with all her women, unto this Damyan
Down by his beds side sat she then
Confortyng him as goodly as she may
This Damyan, wha^ that he his time say
In secret wise, his purse and eke his byl
(In which he had written al his will)
Has put in to her hand withouten more
Save that he syghed wonders deep and sore
And sothly, to her right thus said he
Merry, and that ye discover not me
For I am deed, if that this thing be kydde
This purse has she in her bosom hid
And went her way, ye get no more of me
But unto January icome is she
And on his beds side she sytte full soft
He takes her, and kysseth her full often
And laid him down to sleep, and that anon
She feigned her, as that she must gone
There as ye wot, yt every wight has need
And when she of this byl has taken head
She rent it al to cloutes, and at last
In to the preuy, sothly she it cast.
who studieth now but fair fresshe May?
And adown by January she lay
That slepte, till the cough has him awaked
Anon he prayde her to stripe her al naked
He would of her (he said) have some pleasau^ce
He said her clothes did him encombraunce
And she obeys be she lose or loathe
But lest that precious folk be with me wroth
How that he wrought, I dare not to you tell
Or whether she thought it paradise or hell
But I let hem worche in her wise
Till euynsong ryng, that they must arise
Were it by desteny or by adventure
were it by influence, or by nature
Or constellation that in such estate
The heaven stood, that time fortunate
(Was for to put a byl of Venus warkes)
For all thing has time, as sayn clerks
To any woman for to get her love
I can not say, but the great god above
That knows, that non act is causeles
He demeth al, for I wol hold my pees.
But sothe is this, how yt this fresh May
Has take such impressyon that day
Of pity, on this sick Damyan
That fro her heart she drive ne can
The remembrance for to down him ease
Certain (thought she) whom this thing displease
I recke not, for this I him assure
I love him best of any creature
Though he no more had than his shert.
Lo pity renneth soon in gentyl heart
Here may ye se, how excelent franchise
In women is, when they hem narow auyse
Some tyrant is, as there ben many one
That has an heart as hard as any stone
Which would have let him sterue in ye place
well rather tha^ have granted him her grace
And her reioysed in her cruel pride
And not have retched to been an homycide.
This gentyl may, fulfilled of al pity
Right so of her hand a lettre made she
In which she grants him her very grace
There lacks naught, but only time and place
where that she might to his lust suffyse
For it shall be, right as he wol deuyse
And when she saw her time upon a day
To visit this Damya^ goth this fair May
And subtelly this lettre down she thryst
Under his pyllowe, read it if him list
She takes him by ye hond, and herd him twist
So secretly, that no wight of it wist
And badde him ben al hole, and forth she went
To January, when that he for her sent.
Up ryseth Damyan the next morrow
Al passed was his sickness and his sorrow
He kembeth him and proy^eth him a piketh
And does all that his lady lust and lyketh
And eke to January he gothe as low
As ever did a dog for the bow
He is so plesaunt to every man
For craft is al, who that it can
That every wight is fayn to speke^ him good
And fully in his ladies grace he stood
Thus let I Damyan about his need
And in my tale, forth I wol proceed.
Some clerks holden that felycite
Stont in delight, and therefore certain he
This noble January with all his might
In honest wise, as longs to a knight
Shope him to live full delyciously
His housyng, his array, as honestly
To his degree, was made as a kings
Among other of his honest things
He had a garden walled al with stone
So fair a garden was there never none
For out of dout, I verily suppose
That he that wrote the Romant of the Rose
Ne couth of it the beauty well deuyse
Ne Priapus, ne might not suffyse
Though he be god of gardens, for to tell
The beauty of the garden, and of the well
That stont under a laurer always grene
Full often time king Pluto and his queen
Proserpina, and al her fayrie
Disporten hem, and maken melodye
About that well, and daunced as men told
This noble knight, this January the old
Such deynte has, in it to walk and play
That he wol suffer no wight to bear the kay
Save he him self, for the small wicket
He bare always of silver a clycket
with which, when that him list vnshet
And when that he would pay his wife her det
In somer season, thider would he go
And May his wife, and no wight but they two
And things which yt were not don a bed
He in the garden parfourmed hem and spedde
And in this wise, many a merry day
Lived this January and this fresh May
But worldly joy may not always endure
To January, ne to no lyueng creature.
O sudden hap, O thou fortune unstable
Like to the Scorpion disceyuable
That slatrest with thy heed wha^ you wolt stynge
Thy tail is death, through thyn enuenomyng
O brotel joy, O sweet poison queynt
O monster, that so suddenly can peynt
Thy gifts, under the hew of steadfastness
That thou discryuest both more and less
why have thou January thus desceyued?
And had him for thy friend received
And now thou have beraft him both his eyes
For sorrow of which desires he to dyen
Alas, this noble January that is so fre
Amydde his lust and his prosperity
Is woren blind, and al suddenly
His death therefore desires he utterly
And therwithal, the fire of ielousy
(Lest that his wife should fall in some folly)
So brent his heart, that he would feign
That some man, both him and her had slain
For never after his death, ne in his life
Ne would he that she were love ne wife
But ever live a wedowe in clothes blake
Sole, as the turtle does yt has lost her make
But at the last, after a mouth or tway
His sorrow began to swage, sothe to say
For when he wist it might non other be
He patiently took his aduersyte
Save out of dout may he not for gone
That he nas ielous ever more in one
which ielousy, it was so outrageous
That neither in hal ne in non other house
Ne in non other place never mo
He nolde suffer her, neither ride ne go
But if that he had hand on her always
For which full often wepeth fresh May
That loves Damyan so benignely
That she mote either dye suddenly
Or else she mote have him at her lest
She wayteth when her heart should to breast
Upon that other side Damyan
Become is, the sorowfullest man
That ever was, for neither night ne day
Ne might he speak a word to fresh May
As to his purpose of no such matere
But if that January must it here
That had an hand upon her ever mo
But natheles, by writing to and fro
And preuy signs, wist he what she meant
And she knew all the signs of his intent.
O January, what might the it avail?
Tho thou might se, as fer as ships sail
For as good is a blind man disceyued be
As to be disceyued, when that a man may se.
Lo Argus, which had an hundred eyes
For all that ever he couthe pore and prien
Yet was he blent, and god wotte so ben mo
That wenen wisely that it is not so
Pass over is an ease, I say no more
This fresh May, of which I spoke of yore
In warm wax has printed this clycket
That January bare of that small wicket
By which unto his garden often he went
And Damyan that knew her intent
The clycket counterfayted privily
There nys no more to say, but hastily
Some wonder by this clycket shall betyde
which ye shul heren, if ye wol abide.
O noble Ouide, soth say thou god wot
what slight is it, though it be long and hot
That he nyl find it out in some manner
By Pyrramus and Thisbe, may men lere
Though they were kept full long streyt over al
They ben accorded, rownyng through a wall
There nis no wight couth find such a slight
But now to purpose, er yt days eight
Were passed, er the month of Iule befyll
That January has caught so great a will
Through egging of his wife, him for to play
In his garden, and no wight but they tway
That in a morrow, unto this May said he
Rise up my wife, my love, my lady free
The turtel voice is herd my lady sweet
The winter is gone, with all his raynes wete
Come forth now with thyn eyes columbyne
Now fayrer ben thy breasts than is wine
The garden is enclosed al about
Come forth my white spouse out of dout
Thou have me wounded in my heart, o, wife
No spotte in the nas in all thy life
Come forth and let us taken our disport
I chese the for my wife and my confort
Such old leude words used he
On Damyan a sign made she
That he should go before with his clicket
This Damyan has opened this wicket
And in he stert, and that in such manner
That no wight might it se ne here
And still he sat under a busshe anon.
This January, as blind as is a ston
with May in his hand, and no wight mo
In to his fresh garden is he go
And clapte to the wicket suddenly.
Now wife (quod he) here nys but thou and I
That art the creature that I best love
For by that lord that sytte us al above
I had lever dyen on a knyfe
Than the offend, dear true wife
For gods sake think how I the chees
Not for couetise, ne other good doutlees
But only for the love I had to the
And though that I be old and may not se
Be to me true, and I woll tell you why
Certes, three things shall ye wyn thereby
First love of Christ, and to your self honor
And al mine heritage, town and toure
I give it you, makes charters as ye list
This shall be don to morrow er son ryst
So wisely god my soul bring to bliss
I pray you on covenant that ye me kiss
And though yt I be ielous wite me naught
Ye ben so deep enprented in my thought
That when I consider your beauty
And therwithal, the unlikely elde of me
I may not certes, though I should dye
Forbere, to ben out of your company
For very love, this is withouten dout
Now kiss me wife, and let us rome about
This fresh May, wha^ she these words herd
Benygnely to January answerde
But first and forward she began to weep
I have (quod she) a soul for to keep
As well as ye, and also mine honor
And of wyfehode thilke tender flour
which that I have ensured in your hand
when that the priest to you my body bond
wherefore I wol answer in this manner
By the leave of you my lord so dear
I pray god that never dawe that day
That I ne sterue, as foul as woman may
If ever I do to my kynne that shame
Or else that I empayre so my name
That I be false, and if I do that lack
Do stripe me, and put me in a sack
And in the next river do me drenche
I am a gentyl woman, and no wenche
why speak ye thus, but men ben ever untrue
And women have reprofe of you, aye new
Ye can non other co^munyng, I leave
But speak to us of untrust and repreue
And with ye word she saw where Damia^
Sat in the bushe, and knele he began
And with her finger signs made she
That Damyan should clymbe up on a tree
That charged was with fruit, and up he went
For verily he knew al her intent
And every sign that she couth make
welbet than January her own make
For in a letter she had told him al
Of this matter, how that he worch shall
And thus I let him sytte in the pery
And January and May romyng full merry.
Bright was the day, and blewe ye fyrmament
Phoebus of gold down has his stremes sent
To gladen every flour with his warmness
He was that time in Geminy, as I guess
But little fro his declynation
The causer of Iouis exaltation
And so byfel that bright morrow tide
That in the garden, on the farther side
Pluto, that is the king of Fayrye
And many a lady in his company
Following his wife, the queen Proserpyne
Each after other right as a line
whiles she gadred flowers in a mede
In Claudian ye may the story read
How in his grisely carte he her fette
This king of Fayry down him set
Upon a benche of turues fresh and grene
And right anon thus said he to his queen
My wife (quod he) that may not say nay
The experience so proves it every day
The treason, which that women does to man
Ten hundred thousand tell I can
Notable, of your untruth and brotelnesse
O Solomon, richest of al richesse
Fulfylde of sapience, and of worldly glory
Full worthy ben thy words in memory
To every wight, that wit and reason can
Thus prayseth he the bounte of man
Among a thousand men yet fond I one
But of al women fond I never none
Thus says ye king, yt knows your wickedness
And Jesus filius Sirach, as I guess
Ne speaks of you but selde reverence
A wild fire, a corrupt pestilence
So fall upon your bodies yet to night
Ne se ye not this honorable knight?
Because (alas) that he is blind and old
His own man shall maken him cokolde
Lo where he sytte, the lechour in the tree
Now wol I grant of my majesty
Unto this old blind worthy knight
That he shall have again his eye sight
when that his wife would don him villainy
Than shall he know al her harlotry
Both in represe of her and other mo.
Yea shall (quod Proserpyne) and wol ye so?
Now be my mothers soul sir I swear
That I shall yeuen her sufficient answer
And al women after her sake
That though they ben in any gylte itake
with face bold, they shullen hem selue excuse
And bear him down, that would hem accuse
For lack of answer, non of hem shul dyen
Al had he sey a thing with both his eyes
Yet should we women so visage it hardely
And weep and swear, and chide subtelly
That ye shall ben as leude as gees
What recketh me of your auctoritees?
I wotte well this jew, this Solomon
Found of us women foles many one
But though he ne fond no good woman
Yet there has ifonde many an other man
women full true, full good, and full virtuous
witness of hem that dwell in Christ's house
with martyrdom, they preued her constaunce
The Romain iestes eke make remembrance
Of many a very true wife also
But sir, be not wroth that it be so
Though that he said he fond no good woman
I pray you take the sentence of the man
He meant thus, that in souerayn bounte
Nys non but god, that sytteth in trynyte.
Eye, for very god that nys but one
what make ye so much of Solomon?
what though he made a temple gods house
what though he were rich and glorious?
So made he a temple of false goddis
How might he don a thing ye more forbode is
Parde as fair as ye his name enplaster
He was a lechour, and an idolaster
And in his elde, very god forsook
And if that god nadde (as says the book)
Yspared him for his fathers sake, he should
Have lost his reygne sooner than he would
I set not of all the villainy
That ye of women write, a butterflye
I am a woman, needs mo^e I speak
Or else swel, till mine heart break
For sythen he said, that we ben iangleresses
As ever more I hole broke my tresses
I shall not spare for no curtesy
To speak hem harm, that would us villainy
Dame (quod this Pluto) be no longer wroth
I give it up: but sithe I swore mine oath
That I would grant him his sight again
My word shall stand, yt warn I you certain
I am a king, it sytte me not to lie.
And I (quod she) a queen of Fayrie
Her answer she shall have I undertake
Let us no mo words hereof make
Forsooth I wol no longer you contrary.
Now let us turn again to January
That in the garden with this fair May
Syngeth merier than the popyngay
You love I best, and shall, and other non
So long about the aleyes is he gone
Till he was comen against thylke pery
where as this Damyan sytteth full merry
On hye, among these fresh leaves grene.
This fresh May, that is so bright and shene
Began for to sike, and said: alas my side
Now sir (quod she) for ought that may be tide
I must have of these peers that I here se
Or I more dye, so sore longs me
To eten of the small peers grene
Help for her love that is heuyn queen
I tell you well a woman in my plyte
May have to fruit so great an appetyte
That she may dyen, but she it have
Alas (quod he) that I ne had here a knave
That couth clymbe, alas, alas (quod he)
For I am blind, ye sir no force (quod she)
But would ye vouchsafe for gods sake
The pety in your arms for to take
For well I wotte that ye mystrust me
Than should I clymbe well enough (quod she)
So I may foot might set upon your back
Forsooth said he, in me shall be no lack
Might I you help with mine heart blood
He stoupeth down, and on his back she stood
And caught her by a twist, and up she goth
Ladies I pray you be not wroth
I can not gloss, I am a rude man
And suddenly anon this Damyan
Began pullen up the smock, and in he thronge
A great tent, a thrifty and a long
She said it was the meryest fytte
That ever in her life she was at yet
My lords tent serves me nothing thus
It foldeth twifolde by sweet Jesus
He may not swyue worth a leke
And yet he is full gentyl and full meke
This is lever to me than an euynsong
And when that Pluto saw this wrong
To January he gave again his sight
And made him se as well as ever he might
And when he had caught his sight again
Ne was there never man of thing so fayn
But on his wife his thought was ever mo
Up to the tree he cast his eyes two
And saw how Damian his wife had dressed
In such manner, it may not be expressed
But if I would speak vncurtesly
And up he ya^ a roryng and a cry
As does the mother when the child shall dye
Out help, alas (harowe) he began to cry
For sorrow almost he began to dye
That his wife was swyued in the pery
O strong lady hoar what do thou?
And she answered: sir what ayleth you?
Have patience and reason in your mind
I have you helped of both your eyes blind
Up peril of my soul, I shall not lain
As me was taught to help with your eyes
was nothing bette for to make you se
Than strogle with a man upon a tree
God wot I did it in full good intent
Strogle (quod he) yea algate in it went
Styffe and round as any bell
It is no wonder though thy belly swel
The smock on his breast lay so theche
And ever me though he poynted on ye breche
God give you both on shames death to dyen
He swyued the, I saw it with mine eyes
And else I be honged by the halse
Than is (quod she) my medicyn false
For certain, if that ye might se
Ye would not say theke words to me
Ye have some glymsyng, and no parfite sight
I se (quod he) as well as ever I might
Thanked be god, with both mine eyes two
And by my troth me thought he did so
Ye mase ye mase, good sir (quod she)
This thank have I for that I made you se
Alas (quod she) that ever I was so kind
Now dame (quod he) let al pass out of mind
Come down my lefe, and if I have missayde
God help me so, as I am yuel apayde
But by my fathers soul, I wend have seyn
How that this Damyan had by the leyn
And that thy smock had lain upon his breast
Ye sir (quod she) ye may wene as ye lest
But sir, a man that waketh out of his sleep
He may not suddenly well taken keep
Upon a thing, ne se it parfitely
Till that he be adawed verily
Right so a man that long has blind be
Ne may not suddenly so well yse
First when the sight is new comen again
As he that has a day or two ysayn
Till that your sight istabled be a while
There may full many a sight you begyle
Beware I pray you, for by heaven king
Full many a man weneth to se a thing
And it is al another than it seems
He that mysconceyueth often mysdemeth
And with that word she lepe down fro ye tree
This January, who is glad but he?
He kysseth her, he clyppeth her full often
And on her womb he stroketh her full soft.
And to his paleys home he has her ladde
Now good men I pray you, beth ye al glad
Thus ends here my tale of January
God bless us al, and his mother Mary.
Thus ends the Merchants tale, and here follows the wife of Bathes
prologue.
EXperience, though none authorite
Were in this world, is right ynowe for me
To speak of woe that is in marriage
For lordinges, since I twelve year was of age
Thonked be god, that is eterne on live
Husbondes at church door have I had five
If I so often might have wedded be
And al were worthy men in her degree.
But me was told not long ago twys
That sythen Christ went never but onys
To weddyng, in the cave of Galilee
That by thylke ensample taught he me
That I ne should wedded be, but ones.
Lo here, which a sharp word for ye nones
Beside a well, Jesus god and man
Spoke in rep^efe of the Samaritan
Thou have had five husbands (quod he)
And that ilke man that now has the
Is not thine husbonde: thus said he certain
what he meant thereby I can not sayn
But that I ask, why the fyfte man
was n^^ husbonde to the Samaritan
How many might she have in marriage?
Yet herd I never tellen in mine age
Upon this nombre true diffynition
Men may deuyne, and glosen up and down
But well I wotte express without lie
God badde us for to wexe and multiply
That gentyl text can I well understand
Eke well I wotte (he said) mine husbonde
Should leave father and mother, and take to me
But of nombre no mention made he
Of bigamye or of octogamye
Why shul men speak of it villainy?
Lo he the wise king Solomon
I trow had wives mo than one
As would god it leful were to me
To be refreshed half so often as he
which a gift of god had he, for all his wyuis
No man has such, yt in this world a live is
God wotte this noble king, as to my wit
The first night had many a merry fytte
with each of hem, so well was him and live
Blessed be god, I have had five
welcome the syxte when ever he shall
For sothe I wol not keep me chaste in all
when mine husbonde is fro the world ygon
Some christian man shall wedde me anon
For than the apostel says, that I am fre
To wedde a godde shall be, where it lyketh me
He says, that to be wedded is no sin
Better is to be wedded then to brynne
What recketh me though folk say villainy
Of shrewde Lameth, and of his bigamy
I wotte well Abraham was an holy man
And Jacob eke, as fer as ever I here can
And each of hem had wives mo than two
And many another holy man also
Where can ye say in any manner age
That ever god defended marriage
By express words? I pray you tell me
Or where commanded he virginyte?
I wotte as well as ye, it is no dread
The Apostel, when he spoke of maydenhede
He said, thereof precept had he none
Men may counsel a woman to be one
But counsaylyng is no commandment
He put it in our own judgment
For had god commanded maydenheoe
Tha^ had he dampened weddyng out of dread
And certes, if there were no sede ysowe
Virginite than whereof should it grow?
Poule durst not comaunde at the least
I thing, of which his master yafe none heste
The darte is set up for virgynite
Catch who so may, who renneth best let se.
But this word is not take of every wight
But there as god list give it of his might
I wotte well that the apostel was a maid
But nathelesse, though that he wrote and said
He would that every wight were such as he
Al nys but counsel to virginite
And for to ben a wife he yaue me leave
Of indulgence, so it be not to repreue
To wedde me, if that my make dye
without exception of bygamye
Al were it good no woman for to touch
He meant as in his bed or in his couche
For peril is, both fire and towe to assemble
Ye know what this ensample may resemble
This is al and some, he held virginite
More parfyte than weddyng in freelte.
Freelte clepe I, but if that he and she
would led her life al in chastyte
I grant it well, I have none envy
Though maydenhede prefer bygamye
It lyketh hem to be clean in body and ghost
Of mine estate I wol make no boste
For well ye know, a lord in his household
Has not every vessel al of gold
Some ben of tree, and don her lord service
God clepeth folk to him in sundry wise
And eueriche has of god a proper gift
Some this, some that, as him lyketh shifte
Virginyte is great perfection
And contynence eke with devotion
But Christ, that of perfection is well
Badde not every wight he should go sell
All that he had, and give it to the poor
And in such wise follow him and his lore
He spoke to hem, that would live parfitly
And lordinges (by your leave) that am not I
I wol bestow the flower of al mine age
In the acts and fruit of marriage
Tell me also, to what conclusyon
were members made of generation?
And of so parfite wise a wight iwrought
Trusts well, they were not made for nout
Gloss who so wol, and say up and down
That they were made for purgatioun
Of vryne, and other things small
And eke to know a female from a male
And for non other cause, what say ye no?
The experience wotte well it is not so
So that the clerks be not with me wroth
I say that they were maked for both
This is to sayn, for office and for ease
Of engendrure, there we not god displease
why should men else in her books set
That man should yield to his wife her debt
Now wherewith should he pay his payment?
It he ne used his sely instrument
Than were they made upon a creature
To purge vryn, and eke for engendrure
But I say not, that every wight is hold
That has such harness, as I to you told
To gone and vsen hem in engendrure
Than should men take of chastity no cure
Christ was a maid, and shapen as a man
And many a saint, sythen the world began
Yet lived they ever in parfyte chastity
I nyl envy no virginyte
Let he^ with bredde of pure whete be fed
And let us wives eat barley bredde
And yet with barley bred, Mark tell can
Our lord Jesus refreshed many a man
In such a state as god has cleped us
I wol persevere, I nam not precious
In wifehode wol I use mine instrument
As freely as my maker has it sent
If I be dangerous, god give me sorrow
My husbo^d shall it have both even and morrow
when that him list come forth and pay his det
An husband wol I have I wol not let
which shall be both my dettour and my thral
And have his tribulation with all
Upon his flesh, while that I am his wife
I have the power during al my life
Upon his proper body, and not he
Right thus the apostle told to me
And badde our husbondes for to love us well
All this sentence me lyketh every del.
Up stert the Pardoner, and that anon
Now dame quod he, by god and by saint John
Ye ben a noble prechour in this caas
I was about to wedde a wife, alas
what, should I bye it on my flesh so dear?
Yet had I lever wedde no wife to year
Abide quod she, my tale is not begone
Nay, thou shall drink of another ton
Er that I go, shall sauer worse then ale
And when that I have told forth my tale
Of tribulation that is in marriage
Of which I am expert in all mine age
This is to say, my self have been the whyp
Then may thou chese whyther you wylt syp
Of thylke tonne, that I shall set abroche
Beware of it, er thou to nere aproche
For I shall tell ensamples mo then ten
who so wol not beware by other men
By him shall other men corrected be
These same words writes Ptholome
Read in his almagest, and take it there.
Dame I wol pray you, if your will were
Said this pardoner, as ye began
Tell forth your tale, spares for no man
And teach us young men of your practycke
Gladly (quod she) if it may you like
But that I pray to al this company
If that I speak after my fantasy
As takes not agrefe of that I say
For mine intent is not but to play
Now syrs, then shall I tell forth my tale?
As ever mote I drink wine or ale
I shall say soth, tho husbondes that I had
Three of hem were good, and two were bad
The three good men were rich and old
Uneaths might they the statute hold
In which they were bounden unto me
Ye wot well what I mean of this parde
As god me help, I laugh when I think
Now pirously a night I made hem to swinke
But by my faye, I told of it no store
They had me give her land and her tresore
Me neded no longer to do diligence
To win her love, and hem reverence
They loved me so well by god above
That I ne told no deynte of her love
A wise woman wol besy her ever in one
To get her love, there as she has none
But sythen I had hem holly in my hand
And that they had give me al her land
what, should I take keep hem for to please?
But if it were for my profit and mine ease
I set hem so a work by my faye
That many a night they songen well away
The bacon was not fet for hem I trow
That some men have in Essex at Do^mowe
I governed hem so well after my law
That each of hem full blysful was and fawe
To bring me gaye things fro the fair
They were full feign when I spoke hem fair
For god it wot, I chydde hem spytously
Now herkeneth how I bear me properly.
Ye wise wives that can understand
Thus shul ye speak, and bear hem on hand
For half so boldly there can no man
Swear and lie, as a woman can
I say not this by wives that been wise
But if it be, when they hem mysse auyse
A wise wife shall, if that she can her good
Bear hem in hand the cow is wode
And take witness of her own maid
Of her assent: but herkeneth how I said.
Sir old steynarde, is this thyn array
why is my neighbors wife so gay?
She is honored over al where she goth
I sytte at home, and have no thryfty cloth
what do thou at my neighbors house?
Is she so fair art thou so amorous?
what rownest thou with our maid benedicite
Sir old lechour, let thy iapes be
And if I have a gossyp or a friend
(without gylt) thou chydest as a fend
If that I walk or play unto his house
Thou come home as dronke^ as a mouse
And prechest on thy benche with euel prefe
Thou say to me, it is a great myschefe
To wedde a poor woman for costage
And if that she be rych of high parage
Then say thou, it is a very tourmentry
To suffer her pride and her melancoly
And if that she be fair, thou very knave
Thou say that every holour wol her have
She may no while in chastity abide
That is assailed on every side
Thou say some folk desyre^ us for richesse
Some for our shape, and some for our fairness
And some, for she can either sing or dance
And some for gentylnesse or for daliaunce
Some for her hands and her arms small
Thus goes al to the deuel by thy tale
Thou say me^ may not keep a castle wall
It may so long assailed be over all
And if that she be foul, thou say that she
Coueteth every man that she may se
For as a spaneyl, she wol on hem lepe
Till yt she find some man yt would her chepe
Ne none so gray gese goth there in the lake
(As say thou) wol ben without her make
And say, it is a hard thing for to welde
A wight, that no man wol his thank held
Thus say thou lorel, when you ghost to bed
That no wyseman needs for to wedde
Ne no man that entendeth unto heaven
with wild thunder dent and fire leven
Mote thy wicked neck be to broke.
Thou say, droppyng houses, and eke smoke
And chydyng wives, maken men to flee
Out of her own house, ah, benedicite
what ayleth such an old man for to chyde?
Thou say, we wives wol our vices hyde
Till we be fast, and then we wol hem show
well may this be a proverb of a shrewe.
Thou say, yt oxen, horse, asses, and hounds
They ben assayde at diverse stoundes
Basyns, lauers, er that men hem bye
Spones, stoles, and al such husbondrye
And so be pottes, clothes, and arrayes
But folk of wives maken none assayes
Till they ben wedded, old dottarde shrewe
And say, how we wol the^ our vices show
Thou say also, that it dyspleaseth me
But if that thou wylt praise my beauty
And but thou pore always on my face
And clepe me fair dame in every place
And but thou make a feast on that yske day
That I was borne, and make me fresh and gay
And but thou done to my norice honor
And to my chamberer within my bour
And to my fathers folk, and his alyes
Thus say thou old barel full of lies
And yet of our prentyse Ienkyn
For his cryspe here, shynyng as gold fine
And for he squyreth me both up and down
Have thou caught a false suspectioun
I wol him not, tho you were deed to morrow.
But tell me this, why hidest thou with sorrow
The keys of thy chest away fro me?
It is my good as well as thine parde
what, wenest you make an ydiot of our dame
Now by ye lord, yt called is saint Iame
Thou shall not both though you were wode
Be master of my body and of my good
That one you shall forgon maugre thine eyes
what helps it of me to enquere and spyen?
I trow thou would lock me in thy chyst?
Thou should say: wife, go where you list
Take your dysporte, I wol leave no tales
I know you for a true wife dame Ales
we love no man, that takes kept or charge
where that we go, we wol be at our large
Of al men yblessed mote he be
The wise astrologien dan Ptholome
That says this proverb in his almagest
Of al men his wisdom is the best
That recketh not who has ye world in hand
By this proverb thou shall understand
Have thou ynowe, what dare ye recke or care
How merely that other folk fare
For certes, old dottarde by your leave
Ye shall have queynte ynowe at eve
He is to great a nygarde that wol werne
A man, to light a candel at his lantern
He shall have never the less light parde
Have thou ynowe, thou dare not plain the
Thou say also, that if we make us gaye
with clothes, or with precious arraye
That it is peril of our chastity
And yet with sorrow, thou must enforsen the
And say these words in the apostels name
In habyte made with chastity and shame
Ye women should appareyle you (quod he)
And not in tressed heir, and gaye perre
As perle, ne with gold, ne clothes rich
After the text, ne after thy rubryche
I nyl not worche as much as a gnatte.
Thou say also, I was like a catte
But who so would senge the cattes skin
Then would the catte dwellen in his ynne
And if the cattes skyn be slicke and gaye
She nyl not dwell in house half a day
But forth she wol or any day be dawed
To show her skyn, and gone a carrewaued.
Thus thou say, if I be gay sir shrewe
I wol ren out, my borel for to show
Sir old fool, what helps the to spyen
For though thou play Argus with his. C. eyes
To be my wardcors, as he can best
In faith he shall not keep me but me lest
Yet couth I make his berde, so mote I the
Thou say eke, yt there ben things three
The which troublen al this earth
And that no wight may endure the ferth
O, lefe sir shrewe, Jesus short thy life
Yet prechest thou, and say: an hateful wife
I rekened is, for one of these myschaunces
Ben there none other resemblaunces?
That ye may lyken your parable to
But if a sely wife be one of tho.
Thou lykenest eke, women's love to hell
To barayn land, there water may not dwell
Thou lykenest it also to wild fire
The more it brenneth, the more it has desire
To consume any thing that brent would be.
Thou say, right as worms shende^ a tree
Right so a wife distroyeth her husbonde
This known they that been to wives bond
Lordi^ges, right thus as ye have understood
Bare I stiffely mine old husband on hand
That thus they sayden in her dronknesse
And al was false, but as I took witness
Of Ienkyn, and of my nece also
O lord the pain I did hem, and the woe
Full gyltles by gods sweet pyne
For as an horse, I couth both byte and whyne
I couth plain, though I were in the gylte
Or else often time I had been spylte
who so first to myl comes, first grynt
I playned first, and so was our war islynt
They were full glad to excusen hem blyue
Of thing, that they a gylt never in her live
Of wenches wol I bear hem on hand
when yt for sick, uneaths might they stond
Yet tickled I his heart, for that he
Wend I had of him so great cheerte
I swore, that al my walkyng out by night
Was for to espy wenches, that he dight
Under that color had I much myrthe
For all such wit, is given us in our birthe
Disceite, weeping, spynnyng, god has give
To women, kyndly while that they live
And thus of o thing I may auaunt me
At the end I had the best in each degree
By sleyght or force, or by some manner thing
As by contynual murmr or grutchyng
Namely a bed had they mischaunce
There would I chide, and don be^ no plesaunce
I would no longer in the bed abide
(If I felt his arm over my side)
Till he had made his raunsom unto me
Than would I suffer him do his nycete
And therefore, every man this tale I tell
wyue who so may, al ben for to sell
with empty hondes men may no haukeslure
For wynnyng would I al his lust endure
And make me than a feigned appetite.
And yet in bacon had I never delight
That maked me ever yt I would hem chide
For though the pope had sytten hem beside
I would not spare hem at her own board
For be my troth I quit hem word for word
As help me very god omnypotent
Tho I right now should make my testament
I ne owe hem a word, but it is quytte
I brought it so about by my wit
That they must give it up, as for the best
Or else had we never ben in rest
For though he looked as wode as a lion
Yet should he fail of his conclusyon.
Than would I say, good let take keep
How mekely looks wylken sheep
Come nere my spouse, and let me kiss your cheke
Ye should be al pacient and meke
And have aswete spiced conscience
Sith ye so preche of Jobs pacyence
Suffers always, sith ye so well can preche
And but if you do, we shall you teache
That it is fair to have a wife in pees
One of us two mote obeyen doutles
And sith a man is more reasonable
Than a woman is ye must ben sufferable
what ayleth you to grutche thus and groan?
Is it for ye would have my queynt alone?
why take it al, lo, have it every del
Peter I shrewe you, but ye love it well.
For if I would sell my belechose
I couth walk as fresh as any rose
But I wol keep it for your own toth
Ye be to blame by god, I say you soth
Such manner words had we on hand
Now wol I speak of my fourth husbonde.
My fourth husbonde was a reuelour
This is to say, he had a paramont
And I was young and full of ragery
Stubburne and strong, and ioly as a pie
well could I dance to an harp finale
And sing ywis, as a nyghtingale
Wha^ I had dronke^ a draught of sweet wine
Metellus, the soul churl the swyne
That with a staff byrafte his wife her life
For she droke wine: though I had be his wife
Ne should he not have daunted me fro drink
And after wine of Venus must I think
For also seker, as cold engenders hayle
A lycorus mouth must have a lecherous tail
In women vynolent is no defense
This know lechours by experience.
But lord Christ, when it remembers me
Upon my youth, and my iolyte
It tickleth me about mine heart rote
Unto this day it does mine heart bote
That I have had my world, as in my time
But age alas, that al wol enuenyme
Has me birafte my beauty, and my pith
Let go farewell, the deuel go therwyth
The flower is gone, there nys no more tell
The bran (as I best can) now mote I sell
But yet to be right merry wol I fond
Now forth to tell of my fourth husbonde.
I say I had in heart great dyspyte
That he of any other had delight
But he was quyte, by god and by saint Ioce
I made him of the same wode a troce
Not of my body in no foul manner
But certainly, I made folk such chere
That in his own greece I made him fry
For anger, and for very ielousy
By god, in earth I was his purgatory
For which I hope his soul be in glory
For god it wot, he satte full often and song
when that his shoe full bytterly him wrong
There was none, save god and he, that wist
In many wise, how sore that I him twyst
He dyed when I came fro Jerusalem
And lies in grave under the Rode beem
Al nys his tomb so curious
As was the sepulture of him Darius
which that Appelles wrought so subtelly
It is but wast to bury him preciously
Let him farwell, god give his soul good rest
He is now in his grave and in his chest.
Now of my fyfth husband wol I tell
God let never his soul come in hell
And yet was he to me the most shrewe
That feel I on my rybbes al by rewe
And ever shall, unto mine ending day
But in our bed he was so fresh and gay
And therwythal, he couth so well me gloss
when that he would have my bele chose
That though he had me beat on every bone
He couth win again my love anon
I trow I loved him the better, for that he
was of his love so dangerous to me
we women have, if that I shall not lie
In this matere, a queynt fantasy
wait what thing we may not lightly have
Thereafter wol we alday cry and crave
Forbid us thing, and that desyren we
Prese on fast, and then wol we flee
with danger vttren we al our chaffare
Great prees at market makes dear ware
And to great chepe is hold at to little price
This knows every woman that is wise.
My fyfth husband, god his soul bless
which I took for love and no richesse
He sometime was a clerk of Oxenforde
And had left schole, and went at home to board
with my gossyp, dwelling in our town
God have her soul, her name was Alysoun
She knew my heart, and eke my priuety
Better then our paryshe priest so mote I the
To her bewrayed I my counsel al
For had my husband pyst against the wall
Or done a thing, yt should have cost his life
To her, and another worthy wife
And to my nece, which that I loved well
I would have told his counsel every dell
And so I did full often god it wot
That made his face full often reed and hot
For very shame, and blamed him often, for he
Had told to me so great a preuyte.
And so befyl, that ones in a lent
So often time I to my gossyp went
For ever yet I loved to go gaye
And for to walk in March, Apryll, and May
Fro house to house, to harken sundry tales
That Ienke^ clerk, and my gossep dame Ales
And I my self, into the feldes went
My husbonde was at london all that lent
I had the better layser for to pleye
And for to se, and eke for to be sey
Of lusty folk, what wist I where my grace
was shapen for to ben, or in what place?
Therefore made I my visytations
To vigilles, and to processions
To preaching eke, and to pilgrymages
To plays of miracles, and to marriages
And weared on my gay skarlet gytes
The worms, these moghtes, ne these mites
Upon my parel frette hem never a del
And wost thou why? for they were used well
Now wol I tell forth what happed me
I say, that in the feldes walked we
Till truly we had such daliaunce
This clerk and I, that of my purueyaunce
I speak to him, and said how that he
If I were wedowe, should wedde me
For certainly, I say for no bobaunce
Yet was I never without purueyaunce
Of marriage, ne of other things eke
I hold a mousses wit not worth a leke
That has but one hole to sterten to
And if that fail, then is al ydo.
I bare him on hand he had enchau^ted me
My dame taught me forsooth that subtylte
And eke I said, I met of him al night
He would a slain me, as I lay vpryght
And al my bed was full of very blood
But yet I hope truly he should do me good
For blood betokens gold, as I was taught
and al was falls, I dremed of him right naut
But as I followed aye my dames lore
As well of that, as of other things more.
But now sir let me se, what shall I said?
Aha, by god I have my tale again
when yt my fourth husband was on bear
I wept algate, and made sorry chere
As wives moten, for it is usage
And with my kerchefe covered my vysage
But for that I was pu^ueyed of a make
I wept but small, and that I undertake
To church was my husband borne on morrow
with neighbors, that for him made sorrow
And Ianken our clerk was one of tho
As help me god, when that I saw him go
After the bear, me thought he had a pair
Of legs and of fete, so clean and so fair
That al my heart I yaue unto his hold
He was I trow, twenty winter old
And I was forty, if that I shall say sothe
But yet I had always a coltes tothe
Gaptothed I was, and that bycame me well
I had the printe of dame Venus seele
As help me god, I was a lusty one
And fair, rich, and young, and well bygone
And truly, as mine husband told me
I had the best queynte that might be
For certes I am al fully Venetian
In feeling, and my heart is Marcian
Venus me yaue my lust and my lycorousnesse
And Mars yaue me my sturdy hardynesse
Mine ascendent was Taure, and Mars therein
Alas alas, that ever love was syn
I followed aye mine inclination
By virtue of my constellation
That made me I couth not wythdrawe
My chamber of Venus from a good felawe
Yet have I Martes mark upon my face
And also in another preuy place
For god so wysly be my salvation
I loved never by no dyscretion
But ever followed mine appetyte
Al were he short, long, black, or white
I took no keep, so that he lyked me
How poor he was, ne eke of what degree.
what should I say* but at ye months end
This ioly clerk Ianken, that was so hende
Has wedded me with great solempnite
And to him ya^e I all the land and fee
That ever was yeuen me here before
But afterward repented me full sore
He nolde suffer nothing of my list
By god he smote me ones with his fyst
For that I rent out of his book a lefe
That of that stroke, my eres wext defe
Stubborn I was, as is a lioness
And of my tongue a very tangleresse
And walk I would, as I had done byforne
Fro house to house, although he had it sworn
For which full often time would he preche
And me of old Romayne iestes teache
How he Sulpicius Gallus left his wife
And her forsook term of his life
Not but for open heed he her sey
Lokynge out at his door on a dey
An other Romayne told he me by name
That for his wife was at a summer game
without his wetynge, he forsook her eke
And then would he upon his Bible seek
That ylke proverb of Ecclesiaste
where he cumaundeth, and forbyddeth fast
A man shall not suffer his wife go royle about
The^ would he say right thus out of donte
who so buyldeth his house al of falowes
And pricketh his blind horse over ye falowes
And suffers his wife for to seche hallowes
He is worthy to be hanged on the gallows
But al for naught, I set not an hawe
Of his proverbs, ne of his old saw
Ne I would not of him corrected be
I hate him that my vices tells me
And so do mo (god wotte) then I
This made him wood with me al utterly
I nolde not forbere him in no caas
Now wol I say you soth by saint Thomas
why that I rent out of his book a le^e
For which he smote me that I was defe
He had a book, that gladly night and day
For his dysporte, he would read always
He cleped it Valery, and Theophrast
At which book he lough always full fast
And eke there was a clerk sometime at Rome
A cardinal, that hight saint Jerome
That made a book against Iouinian
In which book there was eke Tertulian
Crisyppus, Trotula, and Helowys
That was abbess not far fro Paris
And eke the parables of Solomon
Ouydes art, and books many one
And al these were bounden in one volume
And every night and day was his custom
(when he had leyser and vacatioun
From other worldly occupatioun)
To reden in this book of wicked wives
He knew of hem mo legendes and lives
Than ben of good women in the Bible
For trusts well, it is an impossyble
That any clerk would speak good of wives
But if it ben of holy saints lives
Ne of non other woman never the mo
Who peynted the lion, tell me who?
By god, if women had written stories
As clerks han, within her oratories
They would have written of men more wickedness
Than all the mark of Adam may redress
The children of Mercury and Venus
Ben in her workyng full contrarious
Mercury loves wysedom and science
And Venus loves riot and dispense
And for her diverse disposition
Each falls in others exaltation
And thus god wotte, Mercury is desolate
In Pisces, where Venus is exaltate
And Venus falls where Mercury is raised
Therefore no woman of no clerk is preysed
The clerk when he is old, and may naught do
Of Venus works, not worth his old shoe
Than sytte he down, and write in his dotage
That women can not keep her marriage
But now to purpose, why I told the
That I was beten for a book parde
Upon a night I enken, that was our sire
Read upon his book, as he sat by the fire
Of Eve first, that for her wickedness
was al mankind brought to wretchedness
For which yt Jesus christ him self was slain
That bought us with his heart blood again
Lo here express of women may ye find
That woman was the loss of al mankind
Tho rad he me how sa^pson lost his heeres
Slepyng, his lema^ cut hem with her sheres
Through which treson lost he both his eyes
Tho rad he me, if that I shall not lain
Of Hercules, and of his Deianyre
That caused him to set him self a fire
Nothing forgate he the care and the woe
That Socrates had with his wives two
How that Xantippe cast pysse on his heed
This sely man satte still, as he were deed
He wyped his heed, no more durst he sayn
But er the thonder stynt there comes rayn
Of Pasiphae, that was queen of Crete
For shreudnesse him thought that tale sweet
Fie, speak no more, it is a grisely thing
Of her horrible lust and her lykyng
Of Clytennestra for her lechery
That falsely made her husband for to dye
He rad it with well good deuosion
He told me eke, for what occasyon
Amphiaraus at Thebes lost his life
My husbonde had a legende of his life
Eriphilem that for an ouche of gold
Has preuely unto the greeks told
where that her husbonde hyd him in a place
For which he had at Thebes sorry grace
Of Lyma told he me, and of Lucy
They both made her husbondes for to dye
That one for love, that other was for hate
Lyma her husbonde on an even late
Enpoysoned had, for that she was his foe
Lucia lykerous loved her husbonde so
That for he should always upon her think
She gave him such a love manner drink
That he was deed, er it were morrow
And thus algates husbondes han sorrow
Than told he me, how one Latumeus
Complained to his fellow Arius
That in his garden growed such a tree
On which (he said) that his wives three
Honged hem self for hertes dispitous
O lefe brother (quod this Arius)
Give me a plant of this blysful tree
And in my garden planted shall it be.
Of later date of wives has he read
That some han slain her husbondes in bed
And let her lechour dight hem all the night
whiles that the cors lay in slore upright
And some had drive nails in her brain
whiles they sleep, and thus they have he^ slain
Some have give hem poison in her drink
He spoke more harm than heart may think
And therwithal he knew mo proverbs
Than in this world there grows grass or herbs
Bette is (quod he) thine habitation
Be with a lion, or a foul dragon
Than with a woman vsyng for to chyde
Bette is (quod he) high in the rofe to abide
Than with an angry wife down in an house
They ben so wicked and so contrarious
They haten, that her husbondes louen aye
He said, a woman cast her shame away
when she cast of her smock: and farther mo
A fair woman, but she be chaste also
Is like a gold ryng on a sowes nose
who could wene, or who could suppose
The woe, that in mine heart was and pyne
And when I saw he would never fine
To reden on this cursed book al night
Al suddenly three leaves have I plyght
Out of his book, right as he radde, and eke
I with my fyst so took him on the cheke
That in the fire he fell backwarde a down
And up he stert, as does a wode lyoun
And with his fyst he smote me on mine heed
That in the flore I lay as I were deed
And when he sey how still that I lay
He was a gast, and would have fled away
Till at the last out of my swoun I brayde
Oh, have thou slain me false thief I said
For my loud thus have thou murdered me?
Er I be deed, yet wol I ones kiss the
And nere he came, and kneled fair a down
And said: dear suster, sweet Alysoun
As help me god I shall the never smite
That I have don, it is thy self to wit
Foryeue it me, and that I the beseke
And yet efte sons I hytte him on the cheke
And said: thief, thus much am I be wreke
Now wol I dye, I may no longer speak.
But at the last, with mokel care and woe
we fell accorded within our seluen two
He yaf me all the brydel in mine hand
To have the governance of house and land
And of his tongue, and of his hand also
And made him bren his book anon tho
And when I had gotten unto me
By maistry, all the soueraynte
Than he said: mine own true wise
Does as thou list, the term of al thy life
Keep thine honor, and eke mine estate
Alter that day we had never debate
God help me so, I was to him as kind
As any wife fro Denmark unto Inde
And also true, and so was he to me
I pray to god, that sytte in majesty
So bliss his soul, for his mercy dear
Now wol I say my tale if ye wol here.
The friar lough when he had herd all this
Now dame (quod he) so have I joy or bliss
This is a long preamble of a tale
And when the Sompner herd yt friar gale
Lo (quod this sompner) by gods arms two
A friar wol entermete him euermo
Lo good men, a fly and eke a friar
wol fall in every dishe and eke matere
what spekest thou of preambulation?
what amble or trot, either peace or sit a dou^
Thou let our disporte in this matere.
Yea wolt thou so sir So^pner (quod ye Friar)
Now by my faye I shall, er that I go
Tell of a Sompner, such a tale or two
That all the folk shul laugh in this place.
Now else friar I beshrewe thy face
(Quod this sompner) and I be shrewe me
But if I tell tales two or three
Of freres, er I come to Sittyngburne
That shall make thine heart for to murne
For well I wotte thy patience is goon.
Our Host cried peace, and that anoon
And said: Let the woman tell her tale
Ye faren as folk, that dronken ben of ale
Do dame, tell forth your tale, and that is best
Al ready sir (quod she) right as you lest
If I have license of this worthy friar
Yes dame, tell forth your tale, I wol it here.
Here ends the wife of Bathes prologue, and here begins her tale.
I In the old days of king I^toure
(Of which the Bretons speken great honor)
Al was this land fulfilled of fairy
The Elfe queen, with her ioly company
Daunsed full often in many a grene mede
This was the old opinyon as I read
I speak of many an hundred year a go
But now can no man se none elfes mo
For now the great charity and prayers
Of lymytours and other holy freres
That serchen every land and every streme
As thick as motes in the son beme
Blissyng halles, chambres, kichens, and boures
Cities borowes, castelles, and hye toures
Thropes, bernes, shepens, and deyties
This makes, that there ben no fayries
For there as wont to walk was an elfe
There walks now the lymitour him self
In vndermeles, and in mornings
And says his matyns, and his holy things
As he gothe in his lymitacioun
women may go safely up and down
In every bushe, and under every tree
There nys none other incubus but he
And he ne will done hem no dishonor
And so fell it, that this king Arrour
Had in his house a lusty bacheler
That on a day come rydyng fro the river
And happed, that alone as he was borne
He saw a maid walkyng him byforne
Of which maid anon, maugre her head
(By very force) he berafte her maydenhede
For which oppression was such clamor
And such pursuit unto king Artour
That dampened was this knight to be deed
By course of law, and should have lost his heed
Peradventure such was the statute tho
But that the queen, and other ladies mo
So long prayden the king of grace
Till he his life granted in that place
And yaue him to the queen, al at her will
To chese where yt she would him save or spil
The queen tha^keth ye king with al her might
And after this, thus spoke she to the knight
when she sey her time on a day
Thou stand yet (quod she) in such array
That of thy life yet haste thou no suerte
I grant yt thy life, if that thou caust tell me
what thing is it, that women most desyren
Beware, and keep thy neck bone from yren
And if thou canste not tell it me anon
Yet wol I give the leave for to gone
A twelve month and a day, to seek and lere
An answer suffycient in this matere
And suertie wol I have, er that thou pass
Thy body for to yield in this place.
woe was the knight, and soroufully he syketh
But what? he may not done al as him lyketh
And at last he chese him or to wend
And come again, right at the years end
with such answer, as god would him puruay
And takes his leave, and we^deth forth his way
He seeks every house and every place
where as he hops for to find grace
To learn, what thing women louen most
But he ne couthe aryuen in no coost
where as he might find in this matere
Two creatures according yfere
Some said, women loved best richesse
Some said honor, some said iolynesse
Some said rich array, some said lust a bed
And often time to ben wydowe and wedde.
Some said, that our heart is most y esed
when that we ben flatered and yplesed
He gothe full nigh the sothe, I wol not lie
A man shall win us best with flaterye
And with attendaunce, and with business
Ben we ilymed both more and less.
And some men sayn, how yt we louen best
For to ben fre, and do right as us lest
And that no man repreue us of our vice
But say that we be wise, and nothing nyce
For trewly there nys none of us al
If any wight wol clawe us on the gall
That we nyl kyke, for that he says us sothe
Assay, and he shall find it, that so does
For be we never so victous within
we wol be holden wise and clean of syn
And some men sayn, yt great delight have we
For to ben hold stable and eke secre
And in o purpose steadfastly to dwell
And not bewray thing that men us tell
But that tale is not worth a rake stele
Parde we women con nothing hele
witness of Midas, wol ye here the tale
Ouyde, among other things small
Said, Midas had under his long heeres
Growyng on his heed, two asses eeres
The which vice he hid, as he best might
Full subtelly from every man's sight
That save his wife, there wist of it no mo
He loved her most, and trusted her also
He prayde her, that to no creature
She nolde tellen of his disfygure.
She swore him, not for all ye world to win
She nolde do that villainy, ne that syn
To make^ her husbonde have so foul a name
She nolde not tell it for her own shame
But natheles, her thought that she did
That she so long should a counsel hyde
Her thought it swole so sore about her heart
That nedely some word she most a stert
And sith she durst tellen it to no man
Down to a marris fast by she ran
Till she came there, her heart was on a fire
And as a byttour bumbeth in the mire
She laid her mouth unto the water adown
Bewray me not thou water with thy sown
Quod she, to the I tell it, and to no mo
My husbonde has long Asses eres two
Now is mine heart al hole, now it is out
I might no longer keep it out of dout.
Here mow ye se, though we a time abide
Yet out it mote, we can no counsel hyde
The remenaunt of the tale, if ye will here
Redeth Ouyde, and there ye may it lere.
This knight, of which my tale is specially
when that he saw, he might not come thereby
This is to say, what women louen most
Within his heart sorrowful was his ghost
But home he gothe, he might not soiourne
The day was come, he must home return
And in his way, it happed him to ride
In all his care, under a foreste side
Where he saw upon a dance go
Of ladies four and twenty, and yet mo
Toward the dau^ce he drowe him, and yt yerne
In hope that some wisdom should he learn
But certainly, er that he came fully there
Vanyshed was the dau^ce, he niste not where
No creature saw he that bare life
Save in ye grene, he saw sytting an old wife
A fouler wight there may no man deuyse
Again the knight the old wife began arise
And said: sir knight, here forth lies no way
Tell me what ye seken by your fay
Parauenture it may the better be
This old folk conne much thing (quod she)
My life mother (quod this knight) certain
I nam but deed, but if that I can said
what thing it is, yt women most desire
Could ye me wilse, I would quite well your hyre
Plight me thy troth here in my ho^de (quod she)
The next thing that I require the
Thou shalt it do, if it be in thy might
And I wol tell it you, or it be night.
Have here my troth (quod ye knight) I grant
Than quod she, I may me well auaunt
Thy life is safe, for I wol stand thereby
Upon my life, the queen will say as I
Let se, which is the proudest of hem all That wears on a kerchefe or a call
That dare say nay, of that I shall you teache
Let us go forth without longer speech.
Tho rowned she a pistel in his ere
And bade him to be glad, and have no fere.
wha^ they ben come^ to ye court, this knight
Said, he had hold his day, as he had hight
And ready was his answer, as he said
Full many a noble wife, and many a maid
And many a wydowe, for that they be wise
The queen her self, syttyng as a iustyse
Assembled ben, his answer for to here
And afterward this knight was bode apere
To every wight commanded was silence
And that the knight should tell in audyence
That thing that worldly women loved best
This knight ne stood not still as does a best
But to his question anon answerde
with manly voice, that all the court it herd
My liege lady: generally, quod he
women desyren to have soueraynte
As well over her husbondes as her love
And for to ben in maistrye hem above
This is your most desire, though ye me kyl
Does as you list, I am here at your will.
In all the court nas there wife ne maid
Ne wydowe, that contraried, that he said
But said, he was worthy han his life.
And with ye word, up sterte the old wife
which yt the knight fond syttyng on ye grene
Mercy (quod she) my sovereign lady queen
Er that your couete depart do me right
I taught this answer unto this knight
For which he plight me his truth there
The first thing I would of him requere
He would it do, if it lay in his might
Before the court tha^ pray I the sir knight
(Quod she) that thou me take unto thy wife
For well thou woste, that I have kept thy life
If I say false, say nay upon thy fay
This knight answered, alas and welaway
I wot right well, that such was my beheste
For gods love chese a new request
Take al my good, and let my body go.
Nay quod she, than I shrewe us both two
For though that I be foul, old and poor
I nolde for all the metal ne the ore
That under earth is grave, or lythe above
But if I thy wife were and thy love.
My love (quod he) nay my dampnation
Alas that any of my nation
Should ever so foul disparaged be
But al for naught, the end is this, that he
Constrained was, yt needs must he her wedde
And takes this old wife, and gothe to bed
Now wolden some men say parauenture
That for my negligence, I do no cure
To tellen you the joy and the array
That at the feast was that ylke day.
To the which thing answer shortly I shall
I say there was no joy ne feast at al
There nas but heaviness and much sorrow
For privily he wedded her on a morrow
And al day after hid him as an oule
So woe was him, his wife looked so foul
Great was ye sorrow ye knight had i^ his thout
when he was with his wife a bed ibrout
He waloweth, and turns to and fro.
His old wife lay smylyng euermo
And said: O dear husbonde, O benedicite
Fares every knight thus as ye?
Is this the law of king Artours house
Is every knight of his love so daungerouse
I am your own love, and eke your wife
I am she, which that saved has your life
And certes yet did I never you unright
why fare ye thus with me the first night
Ye ^acen like a man that had lost his wit
Fie, what is my gilte: for gods love tell me it
And it shall be amended if I may.
Amended (quod this knight) alas nay nay
That wol not ben amended never mo
Thou art so lothly, and so old also
And thereto comen of so low a kind
That litel wonder is though I walow and wind
So would god (quod he) mine heart would breast.
Is this (quod she) the cause of your onrest?
Ye certainly quod he, no wonder nys.
Now sir (quod she) I couthe amend all this
If that me list, er it were days three
So well ye might bear you unto me.
But for ye speak of such gentylnesse
As is descended out of old richesse
That therefore shullen ye be gentilmen
Such errogaunce is not worth an hen,
Lo who that is most virtuous always
Preuy and aperte, and most entendeth aye
To do the gentyl deeds, that he can
Take him for the greatest gentylman.
Christ would we claymed of him our gentylnesse
Not of our elders, for our old richesse
For though they give us al her heritage
For which we claymen to ben of hye parage
Yet may they not byquethe, for no thing
To none of us, her virtuous living
That made hem gentylmen ycalled be
And badde us folowen hem in such degree.
Well can the wise poet of Florence
That hight Daunte, speak in this sentence
Lo in such manner ryme is Dauntes tale
Full selde up ryseth by his branches small
Prowess of man: for god of his goodness
wol that we claim of him our gentylnesse
For of our elders may we nothing claim
But temporal thing, yt me^ may hurt and maym
Eke every wight wot this as well as I
If gentilnesse were planted naturally
Unto a certain lynage down the line
Preuy and aperte, than would they never fine
To done of gentilnesse the fair office
They might don no vilanye ne vice.
Take fire and bear it in to the derkest house
Bytwixt this and the mount Caucasus
And let men shytte the doors, and go then
Yet wol the fire as fair lie and brenne
As twenty thousand men might it behold
His office natural aye wol it hold
Up peril of my life, ^yl that it dye.
Here may ye se well, how that gentrye
Is not annexed to possession
Sythen folk don not her operacion
Always as does the fire, lo in his kind
For god it wotte, men may full often find
A lords son done shame and vilanye
And he that wol have praise of his gentrye
For he was borne of a gentil house
And had his elders noble and virtuous
And nyl him self don no gentil deeds
Ne follow his gentil auncetre that deed is
He nys not gentyl, be he duke or earl
Fie vilaynes, synful deeds makes a cherle
For gentilnesse nys but the renomie
Of thine aunceters, for her high bounty
Which is a strong thing to thy person
The gentylnesse comes fro god alone
Than comes our very gentylnesse of grace
It was nothing byqueth us with our place.
Thinks how noble, as says Valerius
was thylke Tullius Hostilius
That out of poverty rose to hye noblesse
Redeth Senek, and redeth eke Boece
There shall ye seen express, no dread is
That he is gentil, that does gentil deeds
And therefore dear husbonde, I thus conclude
All were it that mine aunceters were rude
Yet may that hye god, and so hope I
Grant me grace to live virtuously
Than am I gentil, when I begin
To live virtuously, and leven sin
And there as ye of poverty me repren^
The hye god, on whom that we believe
In wylful pouerte chese to lead his life
And certes every man, maid, and wife
May understand, Jesus heaven king
Ne would not chese a viciouse living
Glad pouert is an honest thing certain
This wol Seneke and other clerks said
who so would hold him paid of his pouerte
I hold him rich, al had he not a sherte
He that coueyteth is a full poor wight
For he would han, that is not in his might
But he yt naught has, ne coueyteth to have
Is rych, al though ye hold him but a knave
Very pouert is sin properly
Iuuenal says of pouert merrily
The poor man, when he gothe by the way
Byforne thieves, he may sing and play
Pouert is hateful good^and as I guess
A full great bringer out of business
A great amendet eke of sapience
To him that takes it in patience
Pouert is, al though it seem elenge
Possession, that no wight wol-chalenge.
Pouerte full often, when a man is low
Makes his god and eke him self to know
Pouert a spectacle is, as thinks me
Through which one may his very friends se
And therefore, syn that I you not grieve
Of my pouert, no more me repreue
Now sir, eke of elde ye repreued me
And certes sir, though none autorite
Were in no book, ye gentiles of honor
Said that men should an old wight honor
And clepe hem father for her gentilnesse
And autours shall I find, as I guess.
Now there as ye sayn, yt I am foul and old
Than dread you not to ben a coke would
For fylthe, elthe, and foul, also mote I the
Ben great wardeyus upon chastity
But natheles, syn I know your delight
I shall fulfill your worldly appetyte
Chese now (quod she) one of these things tw^y
To have me foul and old, till that I dry
And be to you a true humble wife
And never you displease in all my life
Or else wol ye have me young and fair
And take your adventure of the repair
That shall come to your house, because of me
Or in some other place, may well be*
Now chese your selue^, whether yt you lyketh
This knight auyseth him, and sore syketh
But at the last, he said in this manner:
My lady and my love, and wife so dear
I put me in your wise governance
Cheseth your self, which may be more plesau^ce
And most honor to you and me also
I do no force whether of the two
For as you lyketh, it suffyseth me.
Tha^ have I got of you ye maistry (quod she)
Syn I may chese, and govern as my lest
Ye certes wife, quod he) I hold it for the best.
kiss me (quod she) we ben no longer wroth
For by my truth, I wol be to you both
This is to say, to be both fair and good
I pray to god that I mote sterue wood
But I to you be also good and true
As ever was wife sythe^ ye world was new
And but I be to morrow as fair to seen
As any lady, empress, or queen
That is between the Este and eke the weste
Does with my life right as you lest
Cast up the courteyn, and look how it is.
And when the knight saw all this
That she so fair was, and so young thereto
For joy he hente her in his arms two
His heart bathed in a bathe of bliss
A thousand times a row he began her kiss
And she obeyed him in every thing
That might done him pleasure or lykyng
And thus they lived unto her lives end
In parfyte joy: and Jesus Christ us send
Husbondes meke, young, and fresh a bed
And grace to ouerlyue hem that we wedde.
And eke I pray to god, to short her lives
That will not be governed by her wives
And old, and angry nygardes of dispense
God send hem sone a very pestylence.
Here ends the wife of Bathes tale and here begins the streres prologue.
THis worthy lymytour, this noble friar
He made always a manner lourynge chere
Upon the Sompner, but for honest
No vilaynes word as yet to him spoke he
But at the last, he said to the wife
Dame, god give you right good life
Ye have touched here, also mote I the
In schole matter, a full great diffyculte
Ye have said much thing right well I say
But dame, here as we ryden by the way
Us needs not to speken but of game
And let auctorites a gods name
To prechyng, and to schole of clargy.
But if it like unto this company
I wol you of a Sompner tell a game
Parde ye may well know by the name
That of a Sompner may no good be said
I pray, that none of you be yuel a paid
A sompner is a renner up and down
with maundementes, for fornycation
And is ybeate at every towns end.
Tho spoke our host and said: sir ye should ben hende
And curteys, as a man of your estate
In this company we wol no debate
Tells your tale, and let the sompner be
Nay (quod the Sompner) let him say to me
what so him list: when it comes to my lote
By god I shall him quite every grote
I shall him tell which a great honor
It is, to be a flatteryng lymytour
And eke of many an other manner crime
which needs not to rehersen at this time
And his office I shall him tell iwys
Our host answerde: peace, no more of this
And afterward he said unto the friar
Tell forth your tale, mine own master dear.
Here ends the Freres prologue, and here after follows his tale.
WHylom there was dwelling in my country
An archedeken, a man of hye degree
That boldly did execution
In punishyng of fornication
Of withcrafte, and eke of baudrie
Of defamacion, and aduoutrie
Of church reues, and of testamentes
Of contractes, and lack of sacraments
Of usure, and of symonye also
But certes lechours did he much woe
They shulden sing, if they weren hente
And small tythers, they were foul ishent
If any person would upon hem plain
There might asterte hem no pecunyal pain
For small tithes, and small offrynge
He made the people pitously to sing
For er the bishop caught hem with his hoke
They were in the archedekens book
And than had he (through his iurdictyon)
Power to done on hem correction
He had a Sompner ready to his hand
A slyer boy was there none in England
For subtelly he had his espiayle
That taught him where he might avail.
He couthe spare of lechours one or two
To techen him to four and twenty mo
For though this so^pner wode were as an hare
To tell his harlotrye I wol not spare
For we ben out of his correction
They have of us no iurdiction
Ne never shullen, term of al her lives.
Peter so ben women of the stews
(quod this Sompner) yput out of our cure
Peace with mischau^ce, and with misauenture
Said our host, and let him tell his tale
Now tells forth, and let the Sompner gale
Ne spares not, mine own master dear.
This false thief, this So^pner (quod the friar)
Had always baudes ready to his hand
As any hawk to lure, in England
That tells him all the secre that they knew
For her aquayntau^ce was not come of new
They weren his aprouers privily
He took him self a great profit thereby
His master knew not always what he wan
Without maundement, a leude man
He could sommon, on pain of christ's curse
And they were glad to fyllen his purse
And made him great feestes at the nale
And right as Judas had purses small
And was a thief, right such thief was he
His master had but half his deutie
He was (if I shall yeuen him his laud)
A thief, a sompner, and eke a baude.
He had eke wenches of his retinue
That whether sir Roberde, or sir Hue
Or Johan, or Rafe, or who so that it were
That lay by hem, they told it in his eere
Thus were ye wenches and he of one assent
And he would fetch a feigned maundement
And sommon hem to the chapitre both two
And pylle the man, and let the wenche go
Than would he say, friend I shall for thy sake
Do stryken the out of our letters blake
The dare no more as in this case travail
I am thy friend, there I may the avail
Certain he knew of bribries mo
Than possible is to tell in years two
For in this world nys dog for the bow
That can an hurt dear from an hole know
Bet than the Sompner knew a slye lechour
Or auoutrer, or else any paramour
For that was the fruit of al his rent
Therefore on it he set al his intent.
And so befyl that ones on a day
This Sompner waiting ever on his pray
Rode for to sommo^ an old wedowe a ribybe
Faynyng a cause, for he would have a bribe
And happed that he saw beforn him ride
A gay yoman under a forest side
A bow he bare, and arowes bright and shene
He had upon him a courtpye of grene
An hatte upon his heed with strings blake
Sir quod this sompner, hail and well ytake
Welcome quod he, and every good felawe
whider ridest you under this grenwode shawe
Said this yoman, wolte thou far to day?
This sompner him answered, and said nay
Here fast by (quod he) is mine intent
To ryden, for to reysen up a rent
That longs to my lords dewte.
Art thou than a bailey: ye (quod he)
He durst not than, for very fylth and shame
Say that he was a Sompner, for the name
Depardieur, quod this yoman, lefe brother
Thou art a bailey, and I am another
I am unknown, as in this country
Of thine acquaintance I wol pray the
And eke of brotherhed, if that thou list
I have gold and silver in my chist
If that ye hap to come in our shyre
Al shall be thine, right as thou wolt desire
Grant mercy quod this sompner, by my faith
Euerich in other his truth laythe
For to be sworn brethern, till they dey
And with yt word they riden forth her wey
This sompner with that, was as full of ia^gles
As full of venym, as ben these wariangles
And ever enquyring upon every thing
Brother quod he, where is your dwelling
Another day, if that I should you seche?
This yoman him answerde in soft speech
Brother quod he, far in the North country
where as I hope sometime I shall the se
Or we depart, I shall the so well wysse
That of mine house thou shalt never mysse
Now brother quod this sompner, I you pray
Teache me, while we ryden by the way
Since that ye ben a baylye, as am I
Some subtelte, tell me faithfully
In mine office, how I may most win
And spares not for conscience ne for sin
But as my brother, tell me how don ye
Now by my troth brother dear said he
As I shall tellen the a faithful tale
My wages ben full strait and small
My lord is hard to me and dangerous
And mine office full laborous
And therefore, by extortion I leave
Forsothe all that men wol me give
Algate by sleyght or by violence
From year to year, I wyn al my dispense
I can no better tellen faithfully
Now certes quod this sompnour, so fate I
I spare not to take god it wot
But if it be to heavy or to hot
That I may getten in counsel privily
No manner conscience of that have I
Nere mine extorcion I might not lyuen
Of such iapes wol I not be shriuen
Stomach ne conscience know I non
I shrewe al these shrift fathers euerichon
well be we met by god and sweet saint Iame
But lefe brother, tell me thy name
Quod this sompner, in this mean while
This yoman began a little for to smyle
Brother quod he, wolte thou that I the tell?
I am a fend, my dwelling is in hell
And here I ride about my purchasyng
To wete where I may get any thing
My purchase is theffecte of al my rent
Look how thou ridest for the same intent
To wine good, thou reckest never how
Right so fare I, for ride wol I now
Unto the worlds end for a pray
Ah, quod this sompner, benedicite, what ye say
I wend ye were a woman trewly
Ye have a man's shappe as well as I
Have ye a figure than determynate
In hell, there ye ben in your estate?
Nay certainly quod he, there have we non
But when us lyketh, we can take us one
Or else make you seem we ben shape
Sometime like a man or like an ape
Or like an Angel can I ride or go
It is no wonder thing though it be so
A lousy iuggler can disceyue the
And parde yet can I more craft than he
why quod the Sompnour, ride ye tha^ or gone
In sondrie shappe, and not always in one?
For we quod he, wol us such form make
As most able is our prays for to take
what makes you to have all this labor?
Full many a cause lefe sir Sompnour
Said this fend, but al thing has time
The day is short, and it is passed pryme
And yet ne got I nothing in this day
I wol enrende to wynnyng, if that I may
And not entende our wits to declare
For brother mine, thy wits ben al to bare
To understand al, though I would tell he^ the
But for thou ask why laboren we
For sometime be we gods instruments
And means to don his commandments
what that him lust on his creatures
In diverse art and in diverse fygures
withouten hem we have no might certain
If that him list to stonden there again
And sometime at our pray have we leave
Only the body, and naught the soul to grieve
witness of Job, whom we deden woe
And sometime have we might of both two
This is to sayn, of body and soul eke
And sometime we ben suffered for to seek
Upon a man, and don his soul unrest
And not his body, and al is for the best
when he withstandeth our temptation
It is a cause of his salvation
Al be it that it was not our intent
He should be safe, but that we would him hent
And sometime be we servants unto man
As the archbysshoppe saint Dunstan
And to the Apostel eke servant was I
Yet tell me quod this Sompnour faithfully
Make ye you new bodies thus always
Of elements* the fend answered nay
Sometime we fayn, and sometime we arise
with deed bodies in sondrie wise
And speak as renably, fair and well
As the Phitonesse did to Samuel
And yet would some men say it was not he
I do no force of your deuynite
But o thing I warn the, I wol not iape
Thou wolte algates wete how we be shape
Thou shall herafterwarde (my brother dear)
Come, where the needs not of me to lere
For thou shall by thine own experience
Conne in the chare read of this sentence
Bette than Vergyl, while he was on live
Or Daunt also. Now let us ride blyue
For I wol hold company with the
Till it be so that thou forsake me
Nay quod this sompnour, yt shall not betide
I am a yoman known full wide
My troth wol I hold to yt, as in this caas
For though thou were the devil Sathanas
My troth wol I hold to my brother
As I am sworn, and each of us to other
For to be true brother in this caas
And brother, we gone to our purchaas
Take thou thy part, that men wol the give
And I shall mine, and thus shall we both leave
And if that any of us have more than other
Let him be true, and part it with his brother
I grant quod the devil, by my fay
And with that word they riden forth her way
And right at thentrynge of the rownes end
(To which ye sompner shope him for to we^d)
They saw a carte, that charged was with hay
which that a carter drove forth on his way
Deep was the way, for which the carte stood
This carter smote, and striued as he were wode
Heit scot heit brok, what spare ye for ye stones
The fend quod he, you fetch both body and bones
As ferforth as ever ye were yfoled
So much woe as I have for you tholed
The devil have al, both horse, carte, and hay
quod this sompnour, here shall we have a pray
And nere ye fend he drew, as nout ne were
Full preuily, and rowned in his ere
Harken brother harken, by thy faith
Herest thou what the carter says?
Hent it anon, for he has give it the
Both hay and carte, and eke his caples three
Nay quod the devil, god wotte never a dele
It is not his intent trust me well
Ask him thy self, if thou trowest not me
Or else stynt a while and thou shalt se.
This carter thacked his horse on ye croupe
And they begone to draw and to stoop
Heit now quod he, that Jesus christ you bless
And al his hondy work both more and less
That was well ytwight mine own lyard boy
I pray god save the and saint Loye
Nywe is my carte out of the slow parde.
Lo brother quod the fend, what told I the
Here may ye seen mine own dear brother
The carle spoke o thing but he thout another
Let us go forth about our viage
Here wyn we nothing upon carriage
wha^ yt they come^ somewhat out of ye town
This Sompner to his brother began to rown
Brother quod he, here wonneth an old rebecke
That had almost as lefe to lose her neck
As for to give a penny of her good
I wol have.xij. pens tho that she were wood
Or I wol sompne her to our office
And yet god wotte of her know I no vice
But for thou can not, as in this country
win thy cost, take here ensample of me.
This So^pner clappeth at ye wedowes gate
Come out he said, thou old veritrate
I trow thou have some friar or priest with the
who clappeth there said this wife, benedicite
God save you sir, what is your sweet will
I have quod he, of sommo^s of the here a byl
Up pain of cursyng look that thou be
To morrow before our Archdeacons kne
To answer to the court of certain things
Now lord quod she, Jesus king of kings
So wisely help me, as I ne may
I have been sick, and that full many a day
I may not go so far, quod she, ne ride
But I be deed, so pricketh it in my side
May I not ask a lybel sir Sompnour
And answer there by my proctour
To such thing as men would apposen me?
Yes quod this Sompnour, pay anon let se
Twelfe pens to me, and I will the acquyte
I shall no profit have thereof but lyte
My master has the profit, and not I
Come of and let me ryden hastily
Give me.xii. pens I may no longer tarry
Twelf pens quod she, lady saint Mary
So wisely help me out of care and sin
This wide world though I should it win
Ne have I not.xij. pens within my hold
Ye know well, that I am poor and old
Kyth your alms on me poor wretch
Nay than quod he, the foul fend me fetch
If I the excuse, though thou should be spylt
Alas quod she, god wotte yet have I no gylt
Pay me quod he, or by sweet saint Anne
I wol bear away thy new pan
For debt, which thou owe me of old
when thou made thine husbonde cokolde
I paid at home for thy correction
Thou lie quod she, by my salvation
Ne was I never er now, wedowe ne wife
Sompned unto your court in all my life
Ne never I nas but of my body true
Unto the devil black and rough of hew
Give I thy body and my pan also.
And when the devil herd her curse so
Upon her knees, he said in this manner
Now mably, mine own mother dear
Is this your will in ernest that ye sey?
The devil quod she, fette him er I dey
And pan and al, but he wol him repent.
Nay old stotte, that is not mine intent
Quod this Sompner, for to repent me
For any thing that I have had of the
I would I had thy smock and every clothe.
Now brother quod the devil, be not wroth
Thy body and this pan is mine by right
Thou shall with me to hell yet to night
where thou shalt known of our preuyte
More than a master of deuynite
And with ye word the foul fend him he^t
Body and soul, he with the devil went
where that Sompnours have their heritage
And god that made after his image
Mankind, save and gyde us al and some
And leave the sompnour good man to become
Lordi^ges I coud have told you, quod this friar
Had I had leyser, of this Sompnour here
After the text of Christ, Poule, and John
And of other doctors many one
Such peynes, as your hertes might agryse
Albeit so, that no tongue may it deuyse
Though yt I might a thousand winter tell
The peynes of that cursed house of hell
But for to keep us fro that cursed place
Wake, and prays Jesus of his grace
So keep us from the temptour Sathanas
Herkeneth this word, beware as i^ this caas
The lion sytteth in his awayte always
To slay the innocent, if that he may
Disposes aye your hertes to withstonde
The fend, yt you would make thral and bond
He may not tempte you over your might
For Christ wol be your champion and knight
And prays, that this sompnour him repe^te
Of his misdede, er that the fend him hente.
Here ends the Freres tale, and begins the Sompners prologue.
THis Sompner in his styropes hye stood
Upon this friar, his heart was so wode
That like an aspe^ lefe he quoke for ire
Lordynges (quod he) but one thing I desire
I you beseech, that of your curtesy
Sythens ye han herd this false friar lie
As suffers me I may my tale tell
This friar bosteth that he knows hell
And god wot that is little wonder
Freres and fendes ben but little a sonder
For parde, ye han often time herd tell
How that a friar rauyshed was to hell
In spyrit ones by a visyoun
And as an angel led him up and down
To show him the pains that there were
In all the place saw he not a friar
Of other folk he saw ynowe in woe
Unto the aungel spoke the friar tho
Now sir quod he, han freres such a grace
That none of hem shall come in this place?
Yes quod this aungel, many a myllyoun
And unto Sathanas ladde he him adoun
And now has Sathanas such a tail
Brother than of a Caryke is the sail
Hold up thy tail thou Sathanas (quod he)
Show forth thyn erse, let the friar se
where is the neste of freres in this place
And er that half a forlonge way of space
(Right as bees swarmen out of an hyue)
Out of the dyuels erse they began drive
Twenty thousand freres on a route
And throughout hell swarmed al about
And comen again, as fast as they might gone
And into his erse they crepten euerychon
He clapte his tail again, and lay still.
This friar, when he looked had his fyl
Upon the turmentes of this sorry place
His spyrite god restored of his grace
Unto his body again, and he awoke
But natheles, yet for fere he quoke
So was the dyuels erse aye in his mind
That is his heritage of very kind
God save you al, save this cursed friar
My prologue wol I end in this manner.
Here ends the Sompners prologue, and follows his tale.
LOrdynges there is in Yorkshyre as I guess
A marshy country called Holdernesse
In which there went a lymytour about
To preach, and eke to beg, it is no doubt
And so byfel that on a day this friar
Had preched in a church in his manner
And specially abouen every thing
Exited he the people in his prechyng
To trentals, and to yeuen for gods sake
wherewith men might holy houses make
There as divine service is honored
Not there as it is wasted and devoured
Ne there it needs not for to be yeuen
As to possesseioners that mowen else lyuen
Thonked be god, in well and haboundaunce
Trentals delyuereth (said he) fro penance
Her friends souls, as well old as young
If that they by hastily isonge
Not for to hold a priest ioly and gay
(He syngeth not but one mess a day)
Delyuereth out (quod he) anon the souls
Full hard it is with flesh hoke or with oules
To ben yelawed, or to brenne or bake
Now spedeth you hastily for Christ's sake.
And when this friar had said al his intent
with qui cum patre, forth his way he went
when folk i^ church, had give him what he^ lest
He went his way, no ^enger would he rest
with scryppe and typped staff, ytucked hye
In every house he began to pore and prye
And begged mele and chese, or else come
His fellow had a slasse typped with horn
A pair of tables al of Iuory
And a poyntel polished fetously
And wrote always the names as he stood
Of al folk, that yaue him any good
Askaunce as he would for hem prey
Give us a bushel wheat, malte or rey
A gods kychel, or a tryppe of chese
Or else what ye list, I may not chese
A gods halfpeny, or a mass penny
Or give us of your brawne, if ye have any
A dagon of your blanket, leave dame
Our suster dear, lo here I write your name
Bacon or befe, or such thing as ye find
A sturdy harlot went hem ay behind
That was her hosts man, and bare a sack
And that me^ yaue hem, laid it on his back
And when he was out at the door anon
He planed away the names euerychone
That he before had written in his ^ables
He served hem with ny^les and with fables
Nay there thou lie So^pner (quod the friar)
Peace (quod our host) for Christ's mother dear
Tell forth thy tale, and spare it not at al
So thrine I quod the Sompner, so I shall
So long he went fro house to house til he
Came to an house, there as he was wont to be
Refreshed more than in an hundred placis
Sick lay the good man, whose the place is
Bedred upon a couche low he lay
Deus hic (quod he) O Thomas friend good day
Said this friar, curtessy and soft
Thomas god yield it you, full often
Have I upon this benche faren full well
Here have I eaten many a merry mele
And fro the benche he drove away the catte
And laid adowne his potent and his hatte
And eke his scryppe, and set him soft adowne
His fellow was go walked in to the town
Forth with his knave, in to that hostelrye
where as he shope him that ilke night to lie.
O dear master, quod this syke man
How have ye faren sythen March began
I saw you not this fourtenight and more.
God wot (quod he) labored have I full sore
And specially for thy salvation
Have I said many a preciouse orison
And for our other friends* god hem bless
I have this day ben at your church at mess
And said a sermon, after my simple wit
Not al after the text of holy writ
For it is hard to you, as I suppose
And therefore I wol teache you all the gloss
Glosyng is a glorious thing certain
For letter sleeth, as we clerks said
There have I hem taught to ben charitable
And spend her good there as it is reasonable
And there I saw our dame, a where is she?
Yonder in the yerde, I trow she be
Said this man, and she wol come anon
Eye master welcome ye be by saint John
Said this wife, how fare ye hertely?
This friar aryseth up full curtessy
And her enbraseth in his arms narowe
And kysseth herswetely, and cherketh as a sparowe
with his lips, dame (quod he) right well
As he that is your servant every dele
Thanked be god, that you yaue soul and life
Yet saw I not this day so fair a wife
In all the church, so god save me
Ye god amend al fautes sir (quod she)
Algates welcome ye be, by my fay
Grant mercy dame, yt have I found always
But of your great goodness, by your leave
I wol pray you, that ye not you grieve
I wol with Thomas speak a little throw
These curates ben full neglygent and slow
To gropen tenderly a man's conscience
In schrift, and in prechyng is my diligence
And to study on Peter's words and Poules
I walk to fyshe christen men's souls
To yield Jesus Christ his propre rent
To sprede his words, is al mine intent.
Now by your leave dear master (quod she)
Chydeth him well for saint charity
He is as angry as a pysse mire
Though that he have all that he can desire
Though I hi^ wry anight, and make hi^ warm
And over him lay my leg or mine arm
He groneth like our bore yt lies in the stye
Other dysporte of him right none have I
I may not please him in no manner caas
O Thomas, ie vous die, Thomas Thomas
This makes ye fend, this must ben amended
Ire is a thing that god hyghly defended
And thereof wol I speak a word or two.
Now master (quod the wife) er that I go
what wol ye dyne? I wol go there about.
Now dame (quod he) i^ vous die sans doubt
Have I not of a capon but the liver
And of your white breed, but a shyuer
And after that a roasted pigs heed
(But I nolde not for me no be were deed)
Then had I ynowe for my suffysaunce
I am a man of little sustinaunce
My spirit has his fosteryng in the bible
My body is aye so ready and so penyble
To wake, that my body is dystroyde
I pray you dame, be ye naught anoyde
Though I so friendly you my counsel show
By god, I nolde have told it but a few.
Now sir (quod she) but one word er ye go
My child is deed, within these wekes two
Sone after that ye went out of this town
His death saw I by reuelacioun
Said this friar, at home in our dortoure
I dare well said, er that half an hour
After his death, I saw him borne to bliss
In mine auisioun, god me so wysse
So did our sexten, and our fermerere
That han ben true freres this fyftye year
They may now, god be thanked of his lone
Maken he^ iubely, and wa^ken alone
And up I arose, and al our couente eke
with many a teere tryllynge on our cheke
wythouten noise or claterynge of belles
Te deum was our song, and nothing else
Save that to Christ I said an orison
Thanking him of my reuelacion
For sir and dame, trusts me right well
Our orisons ben more effectuel
And more we seen of Christ's secret things
The^ borel folk, although they were kings
we live in pouerte, and in abstinence
And borel folk in richesse and dyspence
In meat and drink, and in her foul delight
we han this worldly lust al in dyspyte
Lazar and Dives, lyueden dyuersly
And diverse guerdons had they thereby
who so wol pray, he must fast and be clean
And fat his soul, and make his body lene
we fare as says the apostle, cloth and food
Suffyseth us, though they be not full good
The clennesse and the fasting of us freres
Makes that Christ accepts our prayeres.
Lo Moses, forty days and forty night
Fasted, er that the hye god of his might
Spoke with him in the mount of Synay
with empty womb, fasting many a day,
Received he the law, that was written
with gods finger, and Hely well ye witten
In mount Horeb, er he had any speech
with the high god, that is our souls leche
He fasted long, and was in contemplaunce.
Aaron, yt had the temple in governance
And eke the other prestes euerychone
Into the temple when they should gone
To prayen for the people, and done service
They nolde drink in no manner wise
No drink, that drunk might hem make
But there in abstinence pray and wake
Lest that they deden take heed what I say
But they be sobre that for the people pray
ware that I say, no more for it suffyseth
Our lord Jesus, as holy write deuyseth
Yaue us ensample of fasting and prayers
Therefore we mendicantes, we sely freres
Ben wedded to pouerte and continence
To charity, humbleness, and abstinence
To persecution for ryghtwysnesse
To weeping, mysericorde and clennesse
And therefore may ye se that our prayeres
(I speak of us mendicant, we freres)
Ben to the hye god more acceptable
Then yours, with your feast at your table.
Fro Paradyse first, if I shall not lie
was man outchased for his glotonye
And chaste was man in paradyse certain
But harken you Thomas what I shall sayn
I have no text thereof, as I suppose
But I find it in manner of a gloss
That specially our sweet lord Jesus
Spoke this by freres, when he said thus
Blessed be they that poor in spirit been
And so forth all the gospel may ye seen
whether it be lyker our perfection
Or hers that swymmen in possession
Fie on her pomp, and on her glotonye
And in her lewdness, I hem defye
Me thinks they be like Iouinian
Fat as a whale, and walking as a swan
As vinolent as botel in the spen^e
Her prayers is of full little reverence
when they for souls say ye psalm of David
Lo bouffe they sayn (Cor meum eructauit)
who follows Christ's gospel and his love
But we that humble be, chaste, and poor
werkers of gods word, and not auditors
Therefore right as an hawk at a sours
Up spryngeth into the air, so prayeres
Of charitable and chaste busy freres
Maken her sours to gods eeres two
Thomas Thomas, so mote I ride or go
And by that lord that cleped is saint Yue
Ne you our brother were, you should not thryue
For in our chapter pray we day and night
To Christ that he the send health and might
Thy body for to welden hastily.
God wore quod he, nothing thereof feel I
As help me Christ, as in few years
Have I spended upon diverse manner freres
well many a pound, yet fare I never the bette
Certain my good have I almost besette
Fare well my good, for it is almost ago.
The friar answered, o Thomas do you so?
what needs the diverse freres seche?
what needs him that has a parfyte leche
To sechen other leches in the town?
Your inconstaunce is your confusioun
Hold ye me then, or else our covent
To prayen for you insufficient?
Thomas, that tape nys not worth a myte
Your maladye is for we have to lyte
A, give that covent half a quarter otes
And give that covent four and twenty grotes
And give that friar a penny, and let him go
Nay nay Thomas, it may nothing be so
what is a ferthyng worth parted in twelve?
Lo, each thing that is oned in him selue
Is more strong then when it is so scatered
Thomas, of me thou shall not ben yflatered
Thou wolst have al our labor for naught
The hye god yt al this world has wrought
Says, yt the workman is worthy his hyre
Thomas, naught of your treasoure I desire
As for my self, but that al our covent
To pray for you is aye so dyligent
And for to buylden Christ's own church
Thomas, if ye wol learn for to wyrche
Of building up of chyrches may ye find
If it be good, in Thomas life of Inde.
Ye lyggen here full of anger and of ire
with which ye deuel sets your heart on fire
And chyden here this holy innocent
Your wife, that is so meke and pacient
And therefore trow me Thomas if you lest
Ne chyde not with thy wife, as for the best
And bear this word away by thy faith
Touching such thing, lo what ye wise says
within thy house be thou no lion
To thy subjects do thou none oppression
Ne make not thine acquayntaunce to ^^e
And yet Thomas, eftsoon charge I the
Beware of her that in thy bosom slepeth
ware the of the serpent, that so slyly crepeth
Under the grass, and styngeth full subtelly
Beware my son, and harken patiently
That twenty thousa^de me^ han lost her lives
For stryuinge with her le^mans and her wives
Now sens ye have so holy and meke a wife
what nebeth you Thomas to make strife?
There nys ywysse no serpent so cruel
(when me^ treden on his tail) ne half so fell
As a woman is, when she has caught an ire
Vengeance is then al her desire.
Ire is a sin, one of the greatest of seven
Abominable unto the high god of heaven
And to him self it is a dystruction
This every leude vycare and person
Can say, how ire engenders homecyde
Ire is in soth the executour of pride
I could of ire say so much sorrow
That my tale should last till to morrow
And therefore I pray god both day and night
That to an yrous man he send little might
It is great harm, and eke great pity
To set an yrous man in hye degree
Whylom there was an yrous potestate
As says Seneke, that during his estate
Upon a day out rydden knights two
And as fortune would it should be so
That one of hem came home, yt other naught
Anon the knight before ye judge is brought
That said thus: thou have thy fellow slain
For which I deem the to the death certain
And to another knight commanded he
Go led him to the death I charge the
And it happened as they went by the wey
Toward the place where he should dey
The knit came, which me^ we^de had be deed
Then thought they it was the best read
To lead them both to the judge again
They sayde^ lord, the knight has not slain
His fellow, here he stante hole alive.
Ye shullen be deed (quod he) so mote I thryue
That is to say, both one, two, and three,
And to the first knight, right thus spoke he.
I dampened the, thou must algate be deed
And thou must also lose needs thine heed
For thou art cause why thy fellow deyth
And to ye third knight, right thus he seyth
Thou have not done that I commanded the
And thus he did hem slain al three.
Irouse C^^hyses was eke dronkelewe
And aye dely^ him to ben a shrewe
And so byfel a lord of his meyne
That loved well virtuous moralite
Said on a day betwyxt hem two right thus
A lord is lost, if he be aught vicious
And drunkenness eke is a foul record
Of any man, and namely of a lord
There is many an eye and many an eere
Awaytynge on a lord, he notte where
For gods love drynketh more temporatly
wine makes a man to lose wretchedly
His mind and his lymmes euerychone.
The reuers shalt thou se (quod he) anon
And preue it by thine own experience
That wine ne does to folk no such offense
There nys no wine byreueth me my might
Of hand, of foot, ne of mine eye sight
And for dispyte he drunk mochel more
An hundred times then he did before
And right anon, this cursed yrouse wretch
Let this knights son byforne him fetch
Co^mau^ding him he should byforne him sto^de
And suddenly he took his bow in hand
And up the string he pulled to his eere
And with an arowe he slough ye child there
Now whether have I a seker ho^de or none
quod he is al my might and mind agone?
Has wine byreued me mine eyes sight?
what should I tell the answer of ye knight
His son was slain, there is no more to say
Beware therefore, with lords how ye play
Sing Placebo, and I shall if I can
But if it be unto a poor man
To a poor man, one should his vices tell
But not to a lord, though he should go to hell.
Lo yrous Cirus, thylke Per^ien
How destroyed he the river of Gysen?
For that an horse of his was dreynt therein
when he went Babylon to win
He made that the river was so small
That men might ride and waden over al.
Lo, what said he, that so well teache can
Ne be no fellow to none yrous man
Ne with no wode man walk by the way
Lest thou repent, I wol no farther say.
Now thomas leave brother, leave thyn ire
Thou shall me find as just, as is a squyre
Hold not the dyuels knyfe aye in thine heart
Thine anger does the al to sore smerte
But show to me al thy confession.
Nay (quod the sick man) by saint Simon
I have be shryue this day of my curate
I have told him al mine estate
It needs no more to speak of it, says he
But if me list, of mine humilite.
give me the^ of thy gold, to make our cloistre
quod he, for many a muskle and many an oystre
when other men have been full well at ese
Has been our food, our cloystre for to rese
And yet god wot, uneath the foundament
Parfourmed is, ne of our pauement
Is not a tyle yet within our wones
By god we owe forty pound for stones
Now help thomas, for him ye harowed hell
For else mote we our books sell
And if you lack our predication
Then goes this world al to dystruction
For who so wol fro this world us byreue
So god me save, Thomas by your leave
He would byreue out of this world the son
For who can techen and worchen, as we conne
And that is not of little time (quod he)
But sith Helye was, or Helyse
Han freres ben, that find I of record
In charity, ythanked be our lord
Now Thomas, for saint charity
And down anon he sytteth on his kne
This sick man woxe nigh wood for ire
He would the friar had been a fire
with his false dyssimulation
Such things as ben in my possessyon
(quod he) that may I give, and none other
Ye sayn me thus, how yt I am your brother
Ye certes (quod this friar) trusts me well
I took our dame our lettre and our sele.
Now (quod he) well, and somewhat shall I give
Unto your holy covent while I live
And in thine hand, thou shall it have anon
On this condition, and other none
That thou depart it so, my leave brother
That every friar, have as much as other
This shall thou swear on thy profession
without fraud or cauelacion.
I swear it (quod the trere) by my faith
And therwithal his hand in his he laythe
Lo here my faith, in me shall be no lack.
Then put thine hand down by my back
Said this man, and grope well behind
Byneth my buttocke, there thou shall find
A thing, that I have hid in priuyte
Ah, thought the friar, that shall go with me
Adowne he shofth his hand to the clyste
In hope to find there some good gift
And when this sick man felt this friar
About his towel, gropynge here and there
Amyd his hand, he let the friar and farte
There nys no capel, drawing in a carte
That might have let a farte of such a soun.
The friar up starte, as does a wode lion
A false churl (quod the friar) for gods bones
This have thou in dyspyte do, for the nones
Thou shalt abye this farte, if I may
His meyny, that herd of this afraye
Came leapyng in, and chased out the friar
And forth he goes, with a full angry chere
And fette his fellow, there as lay his store
He looked as he were a wild bore
He grynted his teth, so was he wroth
A sturdy pace, down to the court he gothe
where as there wo^ned a man of great honor
To whom that he was always confessor
This worthy man was lord of that vylage
This friar came, as he were in a rage
where as this lord sat catyng at his board
Uneaths might the friar speak o word
Till at the last he said, god you se.
This lord began look, and said benedicite
what friar Iho^, what manner a world is this
I se well that somthynge is amys
Ye look as though ye wod were full of thieves
Sit down, and tell me what your grefe is
And it shall be amended, if that I may.
I have (quod he) had a dyspyte to day
God yield it you, adowne in your village
That in this world, is none so poor a page
That he nolde have abhominacioun
Of that I have received in your town
And yet me greueth nothing so sore
As that the old churl, with locks hoar
Blasphemed has our holy covent eke.
Now master (quod this lord) I you beseke
No master sir (quod he) but seruitour
Though I haue^ had in schole that honor
God lyketh not, that men us Raby call
Neither in market, ne in your large halle
No force (quod he) but tell me of your grefe
Sir (quod this friar) an odious myschefe
This day is betyde, to mine order, and to me
And so per consequens to each degree
Of holy church, god amend it sone.
Sir (quod the lord) ye wot what is to done
Dystempre you not, ye ben my confessor
Ye ben the salt of the earth, and the savor
For gods love your patience now hold
Tells me your grefe: and he anon him told
As ye han herd before, ye wot well what
The lady of the house, aye still satte
Till she had herd what the friar said
Eye gods mother (quod she) and blysful maid
Is there naught else, tell me faithfully
Madame (quod he) how thinks ye thereby
How that me thinks: so god me speed
I say a churl has done a churles deed
what should I say, god let him never the
His sick heed is full of vanite
I ho^de him in a manner of frenesye.
Madame (quod he) by god I shall not lie
But I in any wise may ben on him awreke
I shall slander him over al, where I speak
That false blasphemour, that charged me
To part it, that might not departed be
To every man ylyche, with myschaunce
The lord sat still, as he were in a trau^^^
And in his heart he rolled up and down
How that this churl had ymaginacioun
To show such a problem to the friar
Never erst or now ne herd I such a matere
I trow the dyuel put it in his mind
In all Arsmetryke, there shall no man find
Byforne this day, of such a question
who should make a demonstracion?
That every man should ilyke have his part
Of a sown or sauoure of a farte
O nyce proud churl, I shrewe thy face
Lo syrs (quod the lord) with hard grace
Who ever heard of such a thing or now?
To every man ylyke tell me how?
It is an impossyble, it may not be
E^y nyce churl, gyd let him never the
The rumblyge of a farte, and every son
Nys but of air reuerberacyoune
And ever it wastes little and little away
There is no man can demen, by my fay
If that it were departed equally
what? lo my churl: lo, yet how shreudly
Unto my confessor to day he spoke
I hold him certain a demoniake.
Now eteth your meat, and let ye churl go play
Let him go hongen him self a deuel way.
Now stood the lords squire at the board
That carfe his meat, and herd word by word
Of al thing of which I have you said
My lord (quod he) be not euel apayde
I couth tell for a gown cloth
To you sir friar, so that ye ben not wroth
How that this farte should even ydeled be
Among your covent, if it lyketh the.
Tell on (quod ye lord) and thou shall have anon
A gown clothe, by god and by saint Ihon
My lord (quod he) when yt the weder is fair
wythouten wind, or perturbynge of air
Let bring a carte whele here into this hall
But look he have his spokes all
Twelve spokes has a carte whele commonly
And bring me the^.xij. freres, wot ye why?
For thyrtene is a covent as I guess
your confessor here, for his worthynesse
Shall perform up the nombre of his coue^t
The^ shulle^ they knelen adowne by one asse^t
And to every spokes end, in this manner
Full sadly lay his nose shall a friar
Your noble confessor there, god him save
Shall hold his nose vpryght under ye naue
Then shall this churl, with belly styffe and tought
As any tabour, hither ben ybrought
And set him on the whele, right of this carte
Upon the naue, and make him let a farte
And ye shullen se, up peril of my life
By prefe, which is demonstratyfe
That equally the sown of it will wend
And eke the stynke, unto the spokes end
Save yt this worthy man your confessor
(Because he is a man of great honor)
Shall have the first fruits, as reason is
The noble usage of freres yet is this.
The worthest man of hem shul first be served
And certainly, he has it well deserved
He has to day taught us so much good
with prechynge in the pulpet there he stood
That I may vouchsafe, I say for me
He had the first smell of fartes three
And so would al his brethren hardely
He bears him so fair and holyly.
The lord, ye lady, and each man, save ye friar
Said that Iankyn spoke in this matere
As well as Ouyde did or Ptholome
Touching the churles said subtylte
And hye wit made him speak as he spoke
He nys no fool, ne no demoniake
And Iankyn has ywonne a new gown
My tale is done, we ben almost at town.
Here ends the Sompners tale, and here follows the clerk of Oxenfordes
prologue.
SIr clerk of Oxforde, our host said
Ye ride as still and coye, as does a maid
were new spoused, sitting at the board
This day ne herd I of your mouth a word
I trow that ye study about some sophyme
But Solomon says, al thing has time
For gods sake, bethe of better chere
It is no time now to study here
Tell us some merry tale by your faye
For what man is entered into a play
He needs mote unto that play assent
But precheth not, as freres done in lent
To make us for our old sins to weep
Ne that thy tale make us not to sleep
Tell us some merry thing of auentures
Your terms, your fygures, and your colors
Keep hem in store, till so be that ye endyte
High style, as when men to kings write
Speaks so plain at this time, I you pray
That we may understand what ye say.
This worthy clerk benyngly answerde
Host (quod he) I am under your yerde
Ye have of us as now the governance
And therefore wol I do you obeysaunce
As far as reason asks hardely
I wol you tell a tale, which that I
Learned at Padowe, of a worthy clerk
As preued is by his words and his work
He is now deed, and nailed in his cheste
I pray to God send his soul good rest.
Fraunces Petrarke, the laureat poet
Hight this clerk, whose rhetoryke sweet
Enlumined al I tail of poetrye
As Lyuian did of Philosophye
Or law, or other art perticulere
But death ye wol not suffer us dwellen here
But as it were the twynklynge of an eye
Hem both has slain, and al we shall dye.
But for to tellen of this worthy man
That taught me this tale, as I first began
I say that he first with hye style endyteth
(Or he the body of his tale writes)
A proheme, in which discriueth he
Piemount, and of Saluce the country
And speaks of Apenniny the hills hye
That been the bounds of west Lumbardye
And of mount Vesulus in special
where as the Poo, out of a well small
Takes his first spring and his sours
That estwarde ever increseth in his course
To Emelle ward, to Ferare, and to Venyse
The which a long time were to deuyse
And truly, as to my judgment
Me thinks it a thing inpartinent
Save that him list convey his matere
But this is his tale as ye shullen here.
Here ends the prologue of the clerk of Oxenforde, and here follows his
tale.
THere is, in the west side of Itayle
Down at the rote of Vesulus the cold
A lusty plain, habundaunt of vitayle
where many a town and tour thou may behold
That founded were, in time of fathers old
And many a another delectable sight
And Saluces, this noble country hight
A Marks whylom was in that land
As were his worthy elders him before
And obeysaunt aye ready to his hand
were al his lieges, both less and more
Thus in delight he lived, and has done yore
Beloved and drad, through favor of fortune
Both of his lords and of his commune
Therewith he was, as to speak of lynage
The gentylest yborne of al Lomberdy
A fair person, and strong, and young of age
And full of honor and curtesye
Discrete ynowe, his country for to gye
Save in some things he was to blame
And walter was this young lords name
I blame him thus, that he consydred nou^^
In time coming, what him might betyde
But on his lust present was al his thought
And for to hawk and hunt on euerysyde
welny al other cures let he slide
And eke he ne would, that was worst of al
wedde no wife, for ought that might befall
Only that point his people bare so sore
That flockmele on a day to him they went
And one of hem, that wisest was of lore
(Or else that the lord would best assent
That he should tell him what his people me^t
Or else could he show such matere)
He to the Marks said, as ye shullen here.
O noble Marquis, your humanyte
Assures us, and yeueth us hardynesse
As often time as is necessyte
That we may to you tell our heaviness
Accepts lord of your gentylnesse
That we to you with pitous heart plain
And let your ears not my voice disdain
Al have I not to done in this matere
More than another has in this place
Yet for as much, as ye my lord so dear
Have always showed me favor and grace
I dare the better ask of you a space
Of audience, to shown our request
And ye my lord to done right as you lest
For certes lord: so well us lyketh you
And al your works, and ever have don, ye we
Ne could our own self deuysen how
we might more lyuen in felycite
Save one thing lord, if it your will be
That for to be a wedded man, you lest
Tha^ were your people in souerayn hertes
Boweth your neck under the blisful yoke
Of soueraynte, and not of seruyse
which men clepen spousayle or wedloke
And thi^keth lord, among your thoughts wise
How that our days passen in sundry wise
For though we sleep or wake, run, or ride
^ye ^leeth the time, it wol no man abide
And though your grene youth flower, as yet
In crepeth age always as still as stone
And death manaseth every age, and smite
In each estate, for there escapes none
And also certain, as we known echone
That we shul dye, and uncertain we al
Ben of that day, that death shall on us fall
Accepts than of us the true intent
That never yet refused your heste
And we wol al lord, if ye wol assent
Chief you a wife in short time, at the lest
Borne of the gentillest and of the meste
Of all this land, so that it aught seem
Honor to god and you, as nere as we ca^ deem
Deliver us out of all this busy dread
And take a wife, for hye gods sake
For if it so befell, as god forbede
That through death, your lineage should slake
And that a strange successor should take
Your heritage, O, woe were us on live
wherefore we pray you hastily to wyue.
Her meke prayere and her pytouse chere
Made the Maikes for to have pity
wol ye (quod he) mine own people dear
To that I never erst thought, constrayne me
I me rejoiced of my lyberte
That seldom time is found in marriage
There I was free, I mote ben in seruage
But natheles, I se your true entente
And trust upon your wit, and have done aye
wherefore of my fre will I wol assente
To wedden me, as soon as ever I may
But there, as ye have profred me to day
To chese me a wife, I you relese
That choice, and pray you of that profer cese
For god it wot, that children often been
Unlike her worthy elders, hem before
Bounte comes al of god, and not of the streen
Of which they ben engendered and ibore
I trust in gods bounte, and therefore
My marriage, mine estate, and rest
I him be take, he may don as him lest
Let me alone in chesynge of my wife
That charge upon my back I wol endure
But I you pray, and charge upon your life
That what wife I take, ye me ensure
To worship her, whiles her life may dure
In word and work, here, and else where
As she an Emperors daughter were
And furthermore, thus shall ye swear, yt ye
Against my choice shall never grutch ne strive
For sithe I shall for go my lyberte
At your request, as ever mote I thryue
There as mine heart is set, there wol I wyue
And but ye wol assent, in such manner
I pray you speaks no more in this matere
With herty will they sworen and assent
To all this thing, there said no wight nay
Besechyng him of grace er they went
That he would hem grant a certain day
Of his spousaile, as soon as ever he may
For yet always the people somewhat dredde
Lest this Marks would no wife wedde
He granted hem a day, such as him lest
On which he would be wedded sekerly
And said he did all this at her request
And they with humble intent full buxomly
Knelyng upon her knees full reverently
Him thonked al, and thus they han an end
Of her intent, and home again they wend
And here upon he took his officers
Commaundyng for the feast to puruay
And to his privy knights and squyers
Such charge yaue, as he list on hem lay
And they to his commandment obey
And each of hem does his dilygence
To done to the feast reverence.
Explicit pars prima: et incipit pars secunda.
Naught far fro thylke place honorable
where as this Marks shope his marriage
There stood a thrope, of sight full delectable
In which poor folk of that village
Hadden her beestes and her^ygage
And of her labor took her sustenaunce
After that the earth yaue hem habundaunce
Among this poor folk, there dwelled a man
which that was holden poorest of hem all
But hye god sometime send can
His grace unto a little ox stall
Ianycola, men of that thrope him call
A daughter had he, fair ynough^ to sight
And Grisylde this young maiden hight
But for to speak of virtuous beauty
Than was she one the fairest under son
And full poorly yfostred was she
No lykerouse lust was in her heart ironne
well ofter of the well than of the tonne
She drunk, and for she would virtue plese
She knew well labor, but not ydel ese
But though this maid were tender of age
Yet in the breast of her virginite
There was enclosed, sad and ripe courage
And in great reverence and charity
Her old poor father fostred she
A few sheep spynnyng on the field she kept
She would not ben idel till she slept
And wha^ she homward came, she would bring
wortes and herbs, times full often
which she shradde and sethe for her living
And made her bed full hard, and nothing soft
And aye she kept her fathers life on lofte
with every obeysaunce and dilygence
That child might do to the fathers reverence
Upon Grisylde the poor creature
well often has the Marks set his eye
As he an huntyng rode parauenture
And when it fell, that he might her aspye
He (not with wanton lokyng of solye)
His eyes cast upon her, but in sad wise
Upon her chere, he would him often auyse
Commending in his heart her woma^hode
And eke her virtue, passing every wight
Of so young age, as well in chere as in deed
For though the people have no great insyght
In virtue ^he consydred full right
Her bounte, and disposed that he would
Her wedde, if he ever wedde should.
The day of weddyng com, but no wight ca^
Tell, what woman it should be
For which marvel, wondered many a man
And sayden, when they were in her priuete
wol not our lord yet leave his vanyte
wol he not wedde, alas alas the while
why wol he thus him self and us begyle
But nathelesse this Marks has do make
Of gemmes, set in gold and in asure
Broches and rings, for Grisyldes sake
And of her clothyng, took he the mesure
Of a maiden like to her statute
And eke of other ornaments all That to such a weddyng should fall
The time of vndren, in the same day
Approached, that the weddyng should be
And all the paleys put was in array
Both halle and chamber, each in his degree
Houses of offices stuffed with great plente
There may thou se of daynteous vitayle
That may be found, as fer as lasts Itayle
This royal Marks, rychely arayde
Lords and ladies in his company
The which that to the feast were prayde
And of his retinue the bachelery
with many a sown of sondrie melodye
Unto the village, of which I told
In this array, the right way has hold.
Grisylde (god wotte of this full innocent
That for her was shape all this array)
To fetch water at a well went
And comes home as soon as ever she may
For well she herd say, that ylke day
That ye Marks should wedde, and if she might
She would feign seen some of that sight
She thought: I would with other maidens sto^de
That been my fellows in our d^re and se
The Marks, and thereto wol I fond
To done at home, as soon as it may be
The labor, which that longs to me
And than may I at leyser it behold
If she the way to the castle hold
And as she would over the thresholde gone
The Marks came, and began her for to call
And she set down her water pot anon
Beside the thresholde of the ore stal
And down upon her knees she began to fall
And with sad countenance kneled still
Till she had herd what was the lords will
This thoughtful Marks spoke to ye maid
well soberly, and said in this manner
where is your father Grisylde, he said?
And she with reverence and meke chere
Answerde, lord he is al ready here
And in she gothe, without longer let
And to the Marks she her father fette
He by the hand than took this old man
And said thus, when he had him aside
Ianycola, I neither may ne can
Longer the pleasaunce of mine heart hyde
If that thou vouchsafe, what so ever betyde
Thy daughter wol I take, or that I wend
As for my wife, to my lives end
Thou love me, I wotte well certain
And art my faithful liege man ybore
And all that lyketh me, I dare well said
It lyketh the, and specially therefore
Tell me that point, that I have said before
If that thou wolt to this purpose draw?
To take me for thy son in law
This sudden case, the man astoned so
That reed he wext abashed, and al quakyng
He stood, ne uneath said he words mo
But only thus (quod he) lord my wyllyng
Is as ye wol, ne against your lykyng
I wol nothing, ye be my lord so dear
Right as you list, govern this matere
Than wol I thus (quod this Marks) sothly
That in thy chamber, I, you, and she
Have a collation, and wost thou why?
For I wol ask her, if her will be
To be my wife, and rule her after me
And all this shall she done in thy presence
I wol not speak out of thyn audyence
And in the chamber, while they were about
The treties, which ye shall after here
The people came into the house without
And wondered hem, in how honest manner
So tentifly she kept her father dear
But utterly Grisylde wonder might
For never erste saw she such a sight
No wonder is though she be astoned
To se so great a gest come into that place
She was never to such gestes woned
For which she looked with full pale face
But shortly fro this matter for to pace
These weren the words yt the Marks said
To this benygne and very faithful maid
Grisylde he said, ye shall well understand
It lyketh unto your father and me
That I you wedde, and eke it may so stand
As I suppose, that ye wol that it so be
But these demaundes I ask first (quod he)
That sythen it shall be done in hasty wise
wol ye thereto assent, or else you auyse
I say thus, be ye ready with good heart
To al my lust, and that I freely may
As me best likes, though ye laugh or smerte
And never ye to grutche, night ne day
when I say ye, that ye say not ones nay
Neither in word, ne by frowning cou^tena^ce
Swear this, and here I swear our aliaunce
Wo^dryng upon these words, quakyng for dread
She said: lord, indigne and unworthy
Am I, to thylke honor that ye me bid
But right as ye wol, so wol I
And here I swear, that never wyllyngly
In word, work, ne thout, I nil you disobey
For to be deed, though me were loath to dey.
This is enough Grisylde mine (quod he)
And forth he gothe with a sobre chere
Out at the door, and after came she
And to the people, he said in this manner
This is my wife (quod he) that stondeth here
Honors her, and loves her, I you pray
who so me loves, there nys no more to say
And for that no thing of her old gere
She should bring in to his house, he badde
That women should dispoyle her right there
Of which these ladies were nothing glad
To handle her clothes, in which she was clad
But nathelesse, this maiden bright of hew
Fro foot to heed they clothed han al new
Her here han they kembed, yt lay vntressed
Full rudely, and with her fyngres small
A crown on her heed they han idressed
And set it full of ouches great and small
Of her array, what should I make a tale
Uneath the people her knew for her fairness
when she transfourmed was in such richesse
This Marks has her spoused with a ringe
Bought for the same cause, and than her set
Upon an horse snow white, well amblynge
And to his paleys, or he longer let
with joyful people, that her ladde and met
Conveyed her, and thus the day they spend
In revel, till the son began discende
And shortly forth this tale for to chase
I say, that to this new Markessesse
God has ysent such favor of his grace
That it seemed not, as by her lykelynesse
That she was borne and fed in rudeness
As in a cote, or in an ox stal
But norished in an emperoures hal
To every wight, she woxen is so dear
And worship full, ye folk there as she was bore
And fro her birth, knew her year by year
Uneath trowed they, but durst have swore
That to Ianycola, of which I spoke before
She daughter nas, for as by conjecture
Hem thought she was a another creature
For though that ever virtuous was she
She was increased in such excellence
Of thewes good, set in hye bounte
And so discrete, and fair of eloquence
So benygne, and digne of reverence
And could the peoples hertes so enbrace
That each her loved that looked in her face
Not only of Saluce in the town
Publyshed was the bounty of her name
But eke beside, in many a regioun
If one said well, an other said the same
So spradde of her bounty the same
That men and women, both young and old
Gone to Saluces her to behold.
This walter lowly, and full royally
Wedded has with fortunate honest
In gods peace: lives full easily
At whom, and outward grace enough had he
And for he saw that under low degree
was honest virtue hyd, the people him held
A prudent man, and that is seen well selde.
Not only this Grisylde, through her wit
Couthe all the feate of wifely humblesse
But eke, when the case required it
The comen profit could she redress
There nas discord, rancour, ne heaviness
In all the land, that she ne couthe apese
And bring hem al wisely in rest and ese
Though her husbond absent were or none
If gentylmen, or other of her country
were wroth, she would bring hem at one
So wise and ripe words had she
And judgment of so great equite
That she fro heaven sent was, as men wend
People to save, and every wrong to amend.
Not long time after this Grisylde
Was wedded, she a daughter had ybore
Al had she lever have borne a man child
Glad was ye Marks and his folk therefore
For though a maid child came al before
She may to a man child attain
By lykelyhode, sythens she is not barayne.
Explicit pars secunda: et incipit pars tertia.
THere fell, as it befalls often times mo
Wha^ that this child had sucked but a throw
This Marks in his heart lo^ged so
To tempte his wife, her sadness to know
That he ne might out of his heart throw
This marvelous desire, his wife to assaye
Nedelesse god wot, he thought her to affray
He had assayed her enough before
And fond her ever good, what needs it
Her for to tempte and always more and more
Though some man praise it for a subtyl wit
But as for me, I say full yuel it sit
To assay a wife, when that it is no need
And put her in anguyshe and in dread
For which this Marks wrout in this manner
He came alone a night there as she lay
with stern face, and right ugly chere
And said thus: Grisylde (quod he) that day
That I the took out of thy poor array
And put the in estate of hye noblesse
Thou have not that forgoten, as I guess
I say Grisylde, the present dignyte
In which I have put the, as I trow
Makes not the foryetful for to be
That I the took in poor astate full low
For any well, thou must thy self know
Take heed of every word what I sey
There is no wight that hereth but we twey
Thou wottest thy self, how yt thou came here
In to this house, it is not long ago
And though to me thou be both lefe and dear
Unto my gentyls thou art nothing so
They say, to hem it is great shame and woe
For to ben subiette and ben in seruage
To the, that borne art in so small a village
And namely sith thy daughter was ybore
These words have they spoken doutles
But I desire, as I have done before
To live my life with hem, in rest and pees
I may not in this case be recheles
I mote done with thy daughter, for the best
Not as I would, but as my gentyls lest
And yet god wot, this is full loathe to me
But nathelesse without thy wetyng
I wol naught do, but thus I wol (quod he)
That thou to me assent, as in this thing
Show now thy patience, in thy werkyng
That thou me hight and swore in our village
That day that maked was our marriage
wha^ she had herd all this, she not ameued
Neither in word, in chere, ne in countenance
For as it seemed, she was not agreued
She said lord, al lies in your plesaunce
My child and I, with hertely obeysaunce
Ben yours al, and ye may save or spyl
with your own, works your own will
There may nothing, so god my soul save
Lykyng to you, that may displese me
Ne I desire nothing for to have
Ne dread for to lose, save only ye
This will is in my heart, and aye shall be
No length of time, or death it may deface
Neither change my courage into another place
Glad was the Marks of her answering
But yet he feigned as he were not so
Al drery was his chere, and his lokyng
when that he should out of the chamber go
Sone after this, a forlonge way or two
He privily had told al his intent
Unto a man, and to his wife him sent
In manner of a sergea^t was this privy man
The which he faithful often found had
In things great, and eke such folk well can
Done execucyon of things badde
The lord knew well, he him loved and dradde
And when this sergeant wist his lords will
In to the chamber he stalked him full still
Madame he said, ye mote foryeue it me
Though I do thing, which I am constrained
Ye be full wise, and full well know ye
That lords hestes may not be feigned
They may well bewailed and complained
But men must needs unto her lust obey
And so wol I, there nis no more to sey
This child I am commanded to take
And spoke no more, but up the child he hent
Dispitously, and began a chere to make
As though he would have slain it or he went
Grisylde must al suffer, and consent
And as a lamb, she sytteth meke and still
And let this cruel sergeaunt do his will
Suspecte was the fame of this man
Suspecte his face, suspecte his word also
Suspecte the time in which he this began
Alas her daughter, that she loved so
She wend he would have slain it right tho
But nathelesse, she neither wept ne syked
Confyrmyng her to that the Marks lyked
But at the last to speak she began
And mekely she the sergeaunt prayde
(So as he was a worthy gentilman)
That she might kiss her child er yt it deyde
And in her barme, this little child she leyde
with full sad face, and began the child bliss
And lulled it, and after began it kiss
And thus she said in her benygne voice
Farwell my child, I shall the never se
But sythen I have marked you with the croyce
Of thylke father yblessed mote thou be
That for us dyed upon the rode tree
Thy soul little child, I him betake
For this night shalt thou dyen for my sake
I trow that to a norice in this caas
It had been hard, this routhe for to se
Well might a mother than cry alas
But nathelesse, so sad and steadfast was she
That she endured al her aduersyte
And to the sergeaunt mekely she said
Have here again your little young maid
And goth now (quod she) and does my lords hest
And o thing would I pray you of your grace
But if my lord forbid it you at the least
Buryeth this little body in some place
That no beestes ne birds it do race
But he no word to that purpose would say
But took the child, and went anon his way.
This sergeaunt came to the lord again
And of Grisyldes words, and of her chere
He told him word by word, short and plain
And him presented with his daughter dear
Somewhat this lord had routh i^ his manner
But nathelesse, his purpose held he still
As lords done, wha^ they wol have her will
And badde the sergeaunt that full privily
He should this child well soft wynd and wrappe
with all the circumstaunce tenderly
And carry it in a cofre, or in a lap
But on pain of his heed of to swappe
That no man should know of his intent
Ne whence he came, ne whyther he went
But at Boleyne* to his suster dear
That thilke time of Pauye was countess
He should it take, and show her this matere
Besechyng her to done her business
This child to fostre in all gentylnesse
And whose child yt it was, he bade her hyde
From every wight, for ought ye might betyde
This sergeaunt gothe, and has fulfilled this thing
But to this Marks now return we
For now gothe he full often ymaginyng
If by his wives chere, he might se
Or by her words, perceive that she
were changed, but he never could find
But ever in one ilyke sad and kind
As glad, as humble, as busy in seruyse
And eke in love, as she was wont to be
was she to him, in every manner wise
Ne of her daughter one word spoke she
None accident, for none aduersyte
Was seen in her, ne never her doghters name
Nempned she, for ernest ne for game.
Explicit tertia pars: et incipit pars quarta.
IN this estate, passed ben four year
Er she with child was, but as god would
A man child she bare by this waltere
well gracious, and fair to behold
And when folk it to the father told
Not only he, but all the country merye
was for the child, and god they thonke and herye
when it was two year old, and from the breast
Departed from his noryce on a day
This Marks caught yet another lest
To tempten his wife efte sons, if he may
Onedelesse was she tempted, I dare well say
But wedded men ne conne no mesure
when they find a pacient creature
wife (quod this Marks) ye have herd or this
My people heuely bareth our marriage
And namely sythen my son borne is
Now is it worse then ever in our age
The murmr sleeth my heart and my courage
For to mine eeres comes ye voice so smerte
That it well nigh destroyed has my heart.
Now say they thus, when walter is agone
Then shall the blood of Iamcula succeed
And ben our lord, for other have we none
Such words say my people, it is no dread
well ought I of such murmr take heed
For certainly I dread such sentence
Though they not plainly speak i^ my audience
I would live in peace, if that I might
wherefore I am dysposed utterly
As I his sister served by night
Right so I think to serve him privily
Thus warn I you, that ye not suddenly
Out of your self, for no woe should outraye
Beth pacient, and thereof I you pray.
I have (quod she) said, and ever shall
I wol ^yl nothing certain
But as you list: Naught greueth me at al
Though yt my daughter and my son be slain
At your commandment: this is to said
I have had no part of children twain
But first sycknesse, and after woe and pain.
Ye ben our lord, does with your own thing
Right as you list, and takes no read of me
For as I left at home my clothyng
when I came first to you, right so (quod she)
Left I my will, and al my lyberte
And took your clothing: wherefore I you pray
Do your will, I wol to it obey
And certes, if I had prescience
Your will to know, er ye your lust me told
I would it done, without negligence
But now I wot your lust, and what ye would
Al your plesaunce, fyrme and stable I hold
For wyste I yt my death would done you ese
Gladly would I suffer it you to please.
Death may make no comparisoun
Unto your love: And when this Marks say
The constau^ce of his wife, he cast adoun
His eyes two: and wondered how she may
In such patience, suffers al this array
And forth he goes, with drery countenance
But to his heart, it was full great pleasau^ce.
This eygre sergeant, in the same wise
That he her daughter caught, right so he
Or worse, if he could werse deuyse
Has hente her son, yt was full of beauty
And ever in one so pacient was she
That she no chere made of heaviness
But kysseth her child, and after began him bless
Save this she prayed him, if that he might
Her little son he would in earth grave
His tender lymmes, delycate to sight
Fro fowls and fro beasts to save
But she none answer of him might have
He went his way as he nothing rought
But to Boleyne he tenderly it brought.
This Marks wo^dred ever le^ger ye more
Upon her patience, and if that he
Ne had sothely known there before
That parfytly her children loved she
He would have wend, yt for some subtelte
And of malice, or cruel courage
That she had suffered this with sad vysage.
But he knew well, yt next him self certain
She loved her children best, in every wise
But now of women would I ask feign
If these assayes mayght not suffyse
what could a sturdy husbonde more deuyse
To preue her wyfehode, and her steadfastness
But be contynuynge ever in sturdynesse
But there be folk of such condition
That when they han a certain purpose take
They couth not stynte of her entencion
But as they were bounden to a stake
They wol not of that purpose slake
Right so this Marks, has fully purposed
To te^pte his wife, as he was first dysposed
He wayteth, if by words or countenance
She were to him changed of courage
But never could he find variaunce
She was aye in one heart and vysage
And ever the further that she was in age
The more truer (if it were possible)
She was to him in love, and more penyble.
For which it seems thus, that of hem two
There nas but one will: for as walter lest
The same lust was her pleasaunce also
And god be thanked, al fell for the best
She showed well, for no worldly vnreste
A wife, as for her self, nothing should
wyllen in effect, but as her husbonde would
The sclau^der of walter, wonder wide sprad
That of cruel heart, full wretchedly
(For he a poor woman wedded had)
Has murdered both his children privily
which murmr was among hem comenly
No wonder was: for to the peoples ere
There ca^e no word, but yt they murdered were
For which, there as his people there before
had loved him well, disclau^dred of his defame
Made hem, that they hated him therefore
To ben a murderer is an hateful name
But nathelesse, for ernest ne for game
He of his cruel purpose would not stent
To tempt his wife, was al his intent.
when yt his daughter.xii. year was of age
He to the court of Rome, in subtel wise
(Enfourmed of his will) sent his message
Co^maundyng hem, such bylles to deuyse
As to his cruel purpose may suffyse
How that the pope, for his peoples rest
Bade him wedde another, if that him lest.
I say he bade, they should countrefete
The popes bulle, making mention
That he has leave, his first wife to let
As by the popes dyspensacion
To stynte rancoure and dyscencion
Betwyxt his people and him, thus spoke yt bull
The which they han publyshed at the full
The rude people, as no wonder nys
wenden full well it had been right so
But when these tidings come to Grisyldes
I deem, that her heart was full woe
But she was lyche sad euermo
Dysposed was this humble creature
The aduersite of fortune to endure
Abiding ever his lust and his pleasau^te
To whom she was yeuen, heart and all
As to her worldly suffysaunce
But certainly, if I this story tell shall
This Marks ywritten has in special
A letter, in which he showed his intent
And privily, he it to Boloyne sent
To the earl of Pauy, which that had the
wedded his sister: he prayde specially
To bryngen him again his children two
In honorable estate al openly
But one thing he him prayde al utterly
that he to no wight, though me^wold enquire
Should tellen whose children they were.
But say yt the maiden should wedded be
Unto the Marks of Saluce anon
And as the earl was prayde, so did he
For at a day ysette, he on his way is gone
Toward Saluce, and lords many one
In rich array, this maiden for to gyde
Her young brother riding by her side.
Arrayed was toward her marriage
This maiden fresh, full of gemmes clear
And her brother, that seven year was of age
Arrayed was eke freshely in his manner
And thus in great noblesse and glad chere
Toward Saluce, shapen her iournay
Fro day to day, riding forth her way.
Explicit quarta pars: Et sequitur pars quinta.
Among al this, after his wicked usage
This Marks his wife yet to tempte more
To the vtterest proof of her courage
Fully to have experience and lore
If that she were as steadfast (as before)
He on a day in open audience
Full boystously has said her this sentence.
Certes Grisylde, I had enough of plesau^ce
To han you to my wife, for your goodness
And for your troth, and your obeysaunce
Not for your lynage, ne for your richesse
But I now know in very sothfastnesse
That in great lordshyp, if I me well advise
There is great servitude in sundry wise
I may not done, as every ploughma^ may
My people me constrayneth for to take
Another wife, and cryen day by day
And eke the pope, this rancoure for to slake
Consents it, that dare I undertake
And truly, thus much I wol you say
My new wife is coming by the way.
Be strong of heart, and void anon her place
And thylke dowry that ye brought to me
Take it again, I grant it of my grace
Retourneth to your fathers house (quod he)
No man may always have prosperity
with even heart, I read you to endure
The stroke of fortune, or of adventure.
And she again answerde in patience:
My lord (quod she) I wot and wist always
How that bytwyxte your magnificence
And my pouert, no man can ne may
Maken no comparison, it is no nay
I held me never dygne in no manner
To ben your wife, ne yet your chamberere
And in this house, there ye me lady made
(The hye god take I, as for my witness
And also wisely, as he my soul glade)
I held me neither lady ne maystresse
But humble servant to your worthynesse
And ever shall, while my life may endure
Abouen every worldly creature.
That ye so long of your benignite
Have hold me in honor and nobley
(where I was not worthy for to be)
That thank I god and you, to whom I prey
So yield it you, there is no more to sey
Unto my father gladly would I wend
And with him dwell to my lives end.
There I was fostred of a child full small
Till I be deed, my life there wol I led
A wydowe clean in heart, body and al
For sythen I yaue to you my maydenhede
And am your true wife, it is no dread
God shylde such a lords wife to take
Another man, to husbonde or to make.
And of your new wife, god of his grace
So grant you wealth and high prosperity
For I wol gladly give her my place
In which I was blysful wont to be
For sythen it lyketh you my lord (quod she)
(That whylom weren al my hertes rest)
That I shall gone: I shall go when you lest.
But there as ye me profred such dowayre
As I first brought, it is well in my mind
It were my wretched clothes, nothing fair
The which to me now were full hard to find
Oh, good god: how gentel and how kind?
Ye seemed by your speech and your vysage
The day that maked was our marriage?
But soth is said, algate I find it true
For in effect it is proved now on me
Love is not old, as when it is new
For certes lord, for none aduersite
To dyen in this case, it shall never be
That ever in word or work I shall repent
That I you yaue mine heart in good intent
My lord ye wot, that in my fathers place
Ye did me strype out of my poor wede
And rychely ye cladde me of your grace
To you brought I naught else out of dread
But faith, nakedness, and maydenhede
But here again your clothing I restore
And eke my wedding ring for evermore
The remenaunt of your jewels ready be
within your chamber, dare I safely said
Naked out of my fathers house (quod she)
I came: and naked I mote turn again
Al your pleasaunce would I follow feign
But yet I hope it be not your intent
That I smocklesse out of your paleys went
Ye could not do so dyshonest a thing
That ylke womb, in which your children lay
Should before the people, in my walkinge
Be seen al bare: wherefore I you pray
Let me not like a worm go by the way
Remembers you mine own lord so dear
I was your wife, though I unworthy were
Wherefore in reward of my maydenhede
Which I to you brought, and not again bear
As vouchesafe to give me to my mede
But such a smock as I was wont to were
That I therewith may wrie ye womb of here
That was your wife: and here I take my leave
Of you, mine own lord, lest I you grieve
The smock (quod he) yt thou have on thy bake
Let it be still, and bear it forth with the
But well uneath that word he spoke
But went his way, for routhe and pity
Before the folk her self strypeth she
And in her smock, with foot and heed al bare
Toward her fathers house forth is she fare
The folk followed weeping in her wey
And fortune ever they cursed as they gone
But she fro weeping kept her eyes drey
Ne in this time, word spoke she none
Her father, that this tydinges herd anon
Cursed the day and time that nature
Shope him to ben a lives creature
For out of doubt, this old poor man
Was ever suspecte of her marriage
For ever he demed, sythen it began
That when the lord ifylled had his courage
Him would think it was a disparage
To his estate, so low for to alyght
And voyden her, as soon as ever he might.
Against his daughter hastily gothe he
(For he by ye noise of folk knew her coming)
And with her old cote, as it might be
He covered her, full sore weeping
But on her body might he it not bring
For rude was the clothe, and she more of age
By days feel than was her marriage.
Thus with her father, for a certain space
Dwells this flower of wisely patience
That never by her words, ne by her face
Before the folk, ne eke in absence
Ne showed she, that her was done offense
Ne of her hye estate no remembrance
Ne had she, as by her countenance
No wonder is, for in her great estate
Her ghost was ever in plain humylite
No tender mouth, ne heart delycate
Ne pomp, ne semblaunce of royalte
But full of patience and benygnyte
Discrete, and pridelesse, and aye honorable
And to her husbonde ever meke and stable
Men speak of Job, and most of his hu^blesse
As clerks (when hem list) can well endyte
Namely of men: but in sothfastnesse
Though clerks praise women but a lyte
There can no man in humblesse hem aquyte
As women can: ne be half so true
As women ben, but it befall of new.
Explicit quinta pars: et sequitur pars sexta.
FRo Boloyne is the earl of Pauy come
Of which the fame spronge to more and less
And to the peoples eeres, al and some
was couthe eke, how a new Marquesesse
He with him brought, in pomp and such richesse
That was never seen with man's eye
So noble array, in west Lumbardye*
The Marks, that shope a knew all this
Er yt this earl was come, sent his message
To thylke poor and sely Grisyldis
And she with humble heart, and glad vysage
Not with swellyng heart in her courage
Came at his heste, and on her knees her set
And reverently and wisely she him grette.
Grisylde (quod he) my will is utterly
This maid, that wedded shall be unto me
Received be to morrow al so royally
As it is possible in my house to be
And eke that every wight in his degree
Have his estate in syttyng and seruyse
And also plesaunt, as ye can best deuyse
I have no woman suffycient certain
The chambres for to array in ordinance
After my lust: and therefore would I feign
That thine were al such governance
Thou know eke of old al my plesaunce
Though thyn array be badde, and yuel besey
Do thou thy deuer at the least wey.
Not only lord that I am glad (quod she)
To done your lust, but I desire also
You for to please, and serve in my degree
withouten faynyng, and shall ever mo
Ne never for no well, ne for no woe
Ne shall the ghost within my heart stent
To love you best, with all my true intent
And with yt word, she began ye house to dyght
And tables to set, and beds to make
And payned her to done all that she might
Prayenge the chamberers for gods sake
To hasten hem, and fast swepe and shake
And she the most seruisable of hem al
Has every chamber arrayed, and his hal.
Abouten vndren began this earl alyght
That with hi^ brought these noble children twey
For which the people ran to se that sight
Of her array, so rychely besey
And then at erste among hem they sey
That walter was no fool, though him lest
To change his wife: for it was for ye best.
For she is fayrer, as they demen al
Then is Grisylde, and more tender of age
And fayrer fruit between hem shall fall
And more pleasaunce, for her hye lynage
Her brother eke, so fair was of his age
That hi to seen ye people had caut plesau^ce
Comendyng now the Marks governance
O stern people, vnsad and untrue
Aye indiscreet, and chaungynge as a fane
Delytynge ever in rumer that is new
For like the moon ever wax ye and wane
Ever full of clappynge, dear enough a jane
Your dome is false, your co^sta^ce euel preueth
A full great fool is he that on you leueth
Thus sayden sad folk in that cite
when that the people gased up and down
For they were glad, right with the nouelte
To have a new lady of her town
No More of this make I now mencioun
But to Grisylde again wol I me dress
And tellen her constau^ce, and her business
Well busy was Grisylde on every thing
That to the feast was appertinent
Right naut was she abashed of her clothing
Though they were rude, and somewhat to rent
But with glad chere, to the yate is went
with other folk, to greten the Marquesesse
And after does she forth her business
with right glad chere, ye gestes she receives
And buromly, euerych in his degree
That no man defaute there perceyueth
But ever they wondren, what she might be
That in so poor array was for to se
And could such honor, and reverence
And worthily they praysen her prudence
In all the mean while she ne stente
This maiden and eke her brother to co^me^de
with al her heart, and benygne entente
So well, that no man could her pryse amend
But at the last, when these lords wend
To sytten adowne to meat, he began to call
Grisylde, as she was busy in the hal.
Grisylde (quod he) as it were in his play
How lyketh the my wife, and her beauty
Right well my lord (quod she) for in good fay
A fayrer saw I never none then she
I pray to god so give you prosperity
And so hope I, that he wol to you send
Plesaunce enough, unto your lives end.
But one thing I beseech, and warn also
That ye prycke with no turmentynge
This tender maiden, as ye han do mo
For she is fostred in her noryshynge
More tenderly, in my supposing
She could not aduersite endure
As could a poor fostred creature.
And when this walter saw her patience
Her glad chere, and no malice at al
And he so often has done her offense
And she aye constante, and stable as a wall
Contynuyng ever her innocence over al
This sturdy Marks, began his heart dress
To rewe upon her wifely steadfastness
This is enough, Grisylde mine (quod he)
Be no more agaste, ne yuel apayde
I have thy faith, and thy benignite
As well as ever woman was assayde
In great estate, or poorly arrayde
Now know I dear wife thy steadfastness
And her in arms took, and began to kesse
And she for wonder, took thereof no keep
She herd not what thing he to her said
She fared as she had sterte out of her sleep
Till she out of her masednesse abrayde
Grisylde (quod he) by god that for us deyde
Thou art my wife, and none other I have
Ne never had, as god my soul save.
This is thy doghter, which you have supposed
To ben my wife, and none other faithfully
And this shall be^ mine heir, as I have dysposed
Thou bare hem in thy body truly
At Boleyne have I kept hem sekerly
Take hem again, for now may thou not say
That you have lorne any of thy children tway
And folk, that other wise han said of me
I warn hem well, yt I have done this deed
For no malice, ne for no cruelte
But for to assaye in the thy womanhede
And not for to slay my children, god forbede
But for to kepen hem privily and still
Till I thy purpose knew, and al thy will
when she this herd, a sown down she falls
For pytous joy, and after her sownynge
She both her young children to her calls
And in her arms, pytously weeping
Enbrased hem both, tenderly kissing
Full like a mother, with her salt teeres
She bathed both her vysage and her heeres
O which a pytous thing it was to se
Her sownynge, and her pytous voice to here
Grant mercy lord, god thank it you (quod she)
That ye have sailed me my children dear
Now recke I never to be deed right here
Sythe^ I stand in your love, and in your grace
No force of death, ne when my spirit pace
O tender, O dear, O young children mine
Your woeful mother wend steadfastly
That cruel hou^des, or some foul vermyne
Had eaten you, but god of his mercy
And your benign father, so tenderly
Has done you keep: and in that same stounde
Al suddenly she swapte down to the ground
And in her swounyng, so sadly holds she
Her children two, when she began hem enbrace
That with great sleyght and dyfficulte
The children from her arms they began to race
O many a tere, on many a pytous face
Down ran, of hem that stoden there beside
Uneath about her might no man abide.
walter her gladdeth, and her sorrow slaketh
She ryseth up al abashed from her trance
And every wight her joy and feast makes
Till she has caught again her countinaunce
walter her does so faithfully plesaunce
That it was deynty to seen the chere
Betwyxt hem two, when they were met yfere
These ladies, when they her time sey
Han taken her, and into chamber gone
And strypen her out of her rude arrey
And in a cloth of gold, that bright shone
with a crown of many a rich stone
Upon her heed, they her into hal brought
And there she was honored as she ought
Thus has this pytous day a blysful end
For every man and woman does his might
This day in mirth and revel to dyspende
Till on the welken shone the sterres bright
For more solemn in every man's sight
This feast was, and greater of costage
Then was the revel of her marriage
well many a year, in hye prosperity
Lyuen these two, in concord and in rest
And rychely his daughter married he
Unto a lord, one of the worthyest
Of al Itayle, and then in peace and rest
His wives father in his court he kept
Till that his soul out of his body crepte
His son succedeth in his heritage
In rest and peace, after his fathers day
And fortunate was eke in marriage
Al put he not his wife in great assaye
This world is not so strong, it is no nay
As it has been in old times yore
And herkneth what thautour says therefore
THis story is said, not for ye wives should
Felowe^ Grisyld, in all humilite
For it were importable, tho they would
But that every wight in his degree
Sulde be constante, in all aduersite
As was Grisild, wherefore Petrarke writes
This story, which with hye style he endyteth.
For sithe a woman was so pacient
Unto a mortal man, well more we ought
Receive al in gree that God us sent
For great skyll he preueth that he wrought
But he ne tempts no man that he bought
As says saint Iame, if ye his pystel read
He preueth folk but a day, it is no dread
And suffers us as for our exercise
with sharp scourges of aduersyte
well often to be beaten, in sundry wise
Not for to know our will, for certes he
Or we were borne, knew al our frelte
And for our best, is al his governance
Let us live then in virtuous suffraunce*
But one word herkneth lordynges or ye go
It were full hard to find now a days
In all a country Grisyldes three or two
For if they were put to such assayes
The gold of hem has so bad a lays
with brass, for though it be fair at eye
It would rather braste a two then plye
For which here, for ye wives love of Bathe
whose life and sect, mighty god mayntene
In high maystry, or else were it skathe
I will with lusty heart, fresh and grene
Say you a song, to glade you I wene
And let us stynte of ernest matere
Herkeneth my song, yt says in this manner
Lenuoye de Chaucer a les mariz de nostre temps.
GRisylde is deed, and eke her patience
And both at ones buried in Itayle
For which I cry in open audience
No wedded man be so hardy to assail
His wives patience, in trust to find
Grisyldes, for in certain he shall fail.
O noble wives, full of hye prudence
Let no humilite your tongue nail
Ne let no clerk have cause ne deligence
To write of you a storye of such maruayle
As of Grisylde, pacient and kind
Lest Chechiface swalow you in her entraile
Follows Ecco, that holds no silence
But ever answers at the country tail
Beth not adaffed for your innocence
But sharply takes on you the gouernayle
Enprinteth well this lesson in your mind
For common profit, sythnesse it may avail
Ne dredeth hem not, does hem no reverence
For though thyn husband armed be in mayle
The arrows of thy crabbed eloquence
Shall perce his breast, and eke his aduentayle
In ielousye eke, look thou him bind
And yt shall make him couch as does a quayle
If you be fair, there folk been in presence
Show thou thy vysage, and thine apparayle
If thou be foul, be fre of thy dyspence
To get the friends aye do thy travail
Be aye of chere, as light as lefe on lynde
And let him care, weep, wrynge, and wayle
Ye archwyues, sto^deth aye at your defense
Sith ye be strong, as is a great camayle
Ne suffers not, that men do you offense
And ye sklendre wives, feeble as in battle
Beth eygre as any tygre is in Inde
Aye clappeth as a myl, I you counsel.
Here endech the clerks tale of Oxforde, and here follows the words of our
host.
This worthy clerk, when ended was his tale
Our host said and swore by cocks bones
Me were lever then a barel of ale
My wife at home had herd this lege^de ones
This is a gentle tale for the nones
As to my purpose, wyste ye my will
But thing that wol not be, let it be still.
Here end the words of our host, and here follows the Frankeleyns prologue.
THese old ge^tyll Britons in her days
Of diverse auentures maden lays
Rymed first in her mother tongue
which lays, with her instruments they song
Or else reden hem for her pleasaunce
And one of hem have I in remembrance
which I shall say, as wyllinge as I can
But syrs, because I am a borel man
At my beginning first I you beseech
Have me excused of my rude speech
I learned never rethorike certain
Thing that I speak, mote be bare and plain
I slepte never on the mount of Pernaso
Ne learned never Marcus Tullius Cicero
Colors ne know I none, withoute^ dread
But such colors as grown in the mede
Or else such as men dyen or paynte
Colors of rhetoryke, ben to me quaynte
My spirit feleth not of such matere
This is my tale, if ye wol it here.
Here ends the Frankeleyns prologue.
Here begins the Frankeleyns tale.
IN Armorike, ye called is britain
There was a knight, that loved and did his pain
To serve ladies in his best wise
And many a labor, and many a great empryse
He for his lady wrought, er she were won
For she was one the fairest under son
And eke thereto common of hye kynrede
That well uneath durst this knyt for dread
Tell her his woe, his pain, and his dystresse
But at the last, she of her worthynesse
And namely for his meke obeysaunce
Has such a pity caught of his penance
That privily she fyl of his accord
To take him for her husbonde and her lord
Of such lordship, as me^ have over her wives
And for to lead in the more bliss her lives
Of his fre will, he swore her as a knight
That never in all her life, day ne night
Ne should he take upon him no maystry
Again her will, ne kythe her ielousye
But her obey, and follow her will in all
As any lover to his lady shall
Save that the name of soueraynte
That would he have, for shame of his degree.
She thanked him, and with full great humblesse
She said: sir, sith of your gentylnesse
Ye profred me to have so large a rain
Ne would god never betwyxte us twain
As in my gylt, were it either war or strife
Sir, I wol be your true humble wife
Have here my troth, till that my heart breast
Thus ben they both in quiet and in rest.
For one thing syrs, safely dare I seyne
That friends, eueryche other must obeyne
If they wol long holden company
Love wol not be constrained by maystry
when maystry comes, the god of love anon
Beats his wings, and farewell he is gone
Love is a thing, as any spirit free
women of kind desyren lyberte
And not to be constrained as a thral
And so done men, if I sothe say shall
Look who that most pacient is in love
He is at his advantage al above
Patience is an hye virtue certain
For it vaynquysheth, as these clerks said
Things that rygour shall never attain
For every word me^ may not chyde or plain
Lerneth to suffer, or else so mote I gone
Ye shall it learn, whether ye wol or none
For in this world certain ^o wight there is
That he ne does or says sometime amys
Ire, sycknesse, or constellacion
wine, woe, or chaungynge of complexion
Causes full often to done amysse or speken
On every wrong, a man may not be wreken
After the time must be temperaunce
To every wight that can of governance
And therefore, has this worthy wise knight
To live in ease, suffraunce her hight
And she to him full wisely began swear
That never should there be defaut in here
Here may men se, humble and wise accord
Thus has she take her servant and her lord
Servant in love, and lord in marriage
Than was he both in lordship and seruage
Seruage: nay, but in lordshyp above
Sythen he has both his lady and his love
His lady certes, and his wife also
The which that law of land accords to
And when he was in this prosperity
Home with his wife he goth, in to his country
Not fer fro De^marke, there his dwelling was
where as he lives in joy and in solas
who could tell, but he had wedded be
The joy, the ease, and the prosperity
That is bitwixt an husband and his wife
Evermore lasted this blysful life
Till that this knight, of which I speak thus
That of Caere Judah, was cleped Arueragus
Shope him to dwell, a year or twain
In England, that cleped was Britayne
To seken in arms worship and honor
For all his lust he set in such labor
And dwelt there two year, the book says thus
Now wol I stynt of this Arueragus
And speak I wol of Dor^gen his wife
That loves her husbonde as her hertes life
For his absence, wepeth she and syketh
As don these noble wives when hem lyketh
She mourns, wayleth, fasteth, and playneth
Desire of his presence, her so constrayneth
That all this wide world set she at naught
Her friends, which knew her heavy thout
Conforten her, in all that ever they may
They prechen her, and tellen her night and day
That causeles she slew her self, alas
And every comfort possible in this caas
They don to her, with all her business
And al for to maken her leave her heaviness.
By process, as ye known euerychone
Men mowen so long graven in a stone
Till some figure therein printed be
So long han they comforted her till, she
Received has by hope and by reason
The enprintyng of her constellacion
Through which her great sorrow ga^ aswage
She may not always induren such a rage
And eke Aruyragus in all this care
Has sent his letters home of his welfare
And that he wol come hastily again
Or else had this sorrow her heart slain.
Her friends saw her sorrow began to slake
And prayden her on knees, for gods sake
To come and romen in her company
Away to driven her derke fantasye
And finally she granted that request
For well she saw it was for the best.
Now stood her castle fast by the sea
And often with her friends walked she
Her to disporte on the banks hey
where as she may ships and barges sey
Salyng her course, where hem list go
But yet was that a parcel of her woe
For to her self full often alas said she
Is there no ship, of so many as I se
wol bring home my lord* tha^ were my heart
warished of these bitter pains smerte.
Another time, would she sytte and think
And cast her eyes downward fro the brinke
But when she saw the grysly rocks blake
For very fear, so would her heart quake
That on her fete she might not her sustene
Than would she sytte adown upon the grene
And pitously in to the sea behold
And say right thus, with sorouful sykes cold
Eterne god, that through thy purueyau^ce
Ledest this world, by certain governance
In idle as me^ sayn, doste thou nothing make
But lord, these grisly fendely rocks blake
That semen rather a foul confusyon
Of work, than a fair creacion
Of such a parfyte god, wise and full stable
why have ye wrout this work unreasonable
For by this work, north, south, west, ne este
There nys fostred, man, bird, ne best
It does no good, but anoyeth
Se ye not lord, how ma^kinde it distroyeth
An hundred thousand bodies of mankind
Have rocks issayn, al be they not in mind
Sin mankind is so fair aparte of thy work
That thou it made like thyn own work
Than seemed it ye had a great cherte
Toward mankind, but how tha^ may it be
That ye such menes maken it to distroyen?
which menes don no good, but ever anoyen.
I wot well clerks wol said as hem lest
By arguments, that al is for the best
Though I ne can not the causes well know
But thilke god, yt made the wind to blow
As keep my lord, this is my conclusyon
To clerks let I al this dysputacion
And would God that al these rocks blake
were sonken in to hell for his sake.
These rocks slay mine heart for fear
Thus would she say with many a pytous tear
Her friends saw it was for her no dysport
To romen by the sea, but dyscomfort
And shapen hem to playen somwhere else
They leden her by ryuers and by wells
And eke in other places delytables
They dauncen and they playen at the tables
So on a day, right in the morrow tide
Unto a gardeyne, that was there beside
In which that they had made her ordinance
Of vytayles, and other purueyaunce
They gone and playen hem all the long day
And this was in the syxte morrow of May
which May has paited with his soft shoures
This gardayne full of leaves and of flowers
And craft of man's hand so curiously
Arrayed had this garden truly
That never nas there garden of such pryse
But if it were the very paradyse
The odor of flowers, and the fresh sight
would have made any heart light
That ever was borne, but if to great sickness
Or to great sorrow held it in dystresse
So was it full of beautye, with pleasaunce.
And after dinner gone they dance
And sing also, save Dorigene alone
That yet unto her self made her moan
For she ne sey him on the dance go
That was her husband, and her love also
But nathelasse, she must her time abide
And with good hope, let her sorrow slide.
Upon this dance, among other men
Daunced a squire before Dorigen
That fresher was, and iolyer of array
As to my dome, then is the month of May
He syngeth and daunseth, passing every man
That is or was, sythen the world began
And therwythal, and men should him dyscriue
One of the best farynge men on live
Young, strong, virtuous, rich, and wise
And well-beloved, and holden of great pryse
And shortly, if I the soth tell shall
Vnwetynge of this Dorigene at al
This lusty squire, servant to Venus
which yclypped was Aurelius
Had loved her best of any creature
Two year and more, as was his adventure
But never durst he tell her his greuaunce
wythouten cup he drunk al his penance
He was dyspayred, nothing durst he say
Save in his so^ges, somewhat would he wray
His woe, as in general complayninge
He said he loved, and was beloved nothing
Of which matter made he many lays
Songs, complayntes, roundels, verilayes
How that he durst not his sorrow tell
But languyshe, as does a fury in hell
And dye he must (he said) as did Ecco
For Narcissus, that durst not tell his woe
In other manner then ye herd me say
Ne durst not he to her his woe bewray
Save perauenture sometime at daunces
There young folk kepen her obseruaunces
It may well be, he looked on her face
In such a wise, as men that asken grace
But nothing wist she of his intent
Nathelesse it happed, er they thence went
Because that he was her neighbor
And was a man of worship and honor
And had known him of times yore
They fell in speech, and so forth more and more
Unto his purpose then drowe Aurelius
And when he saw his time he said thus.
Madame (quod he) by god yt this world made
So yt I wyste, yt I might your heart glade
I would that day, that your Aruyragus
went over the sea, that I Aurelius
Had went there yt I should never come again
For well I wot my service is in vain
My guerdon nys but bresting of mine heart
Madame rueth upon my pains smerte
For with one word ye may me slay or save
Here at your foot god would yt I were grave
I ne have as now no leyser more to sey
Have mercy sweet, or ye wol do me dey.
She began to look upon Aurelius
Is this your will (quod she) and say ye thus?
Never erste (quod she) ne wist I what ye mente
But now I know Aurelius your entente
By thylke god, that yaue me soul and life
Ne shall I never be untrue wife
In word ne i^ w^rke, as far as I have wit
I wol be his to whom I am knyt
Take this for a fynal answer of me
But after this in play thus said she.
Aurelius (quod she) by god above
Yet wol I grant you to ben your love
(Sythen I se you so pytously complain)
Look what day that endelonge Britayne
Ye remeue all the rocks, stone by stone
That they ne let ship ne bote to gone
I say when ye have made these costs so clean
Of rocks, that there nys no stone ysene
Then wol I love you best of any man
Her^ have my troth, in all that ever I can.
Is there none other grace in you (quod he?)
No by that lord (quod she) that maked me
For well I wot that it shall never betyde
Let such folly out of your heart glyde
what deyntye should a man have in his life
For to go love another man's wife?
That has her body when so that him lyketh
Aurelius full often sore syketh
Woe was Aurely, when he this herd
And with a sorrowful chere he thus answerde.
Madame (quod he) this were impossible
Then mote I dye on sudden death horrible
And with that word he turned him anon.
Tho come her other friends euerychone
And in the aleyes romeden up and down
And nothing wist of this conclusioun
But suddenly began to revel new
Till that the bright son lost his hew
For the orizont has re^te the son his light
This is as much to say, as it was night
And home they gone in joy and in solas
Save only wretched Aurelius, alas
He to his house is gone with sorrowful heart
He said he might not from his death astarte
Him seemed, that he felt his heart cold
Up to heaven his hands began he hold
And on his knees bare, he set him adoun
And in his rauynge said this orisoun
For very woe out of his wit he brayde
He ne wist what he spoke, but thus he said
with pitous heart has his co^playnt begone
Unto the gods, and first unto the son
He said: God Appollo and governor
Of every plant, herb, tree, and flour
That yeuest after thy declinacion
To ylke of hem his time and ceson
As thine herberowe changes low and hye
Lord Phoebus, cast thy merciable eye
On wretched Aurelius, which am but lorne
Lo lord, my lady has my death ysworne
without gylte, but thy benignite
Upon my deadly heart have some pity
For well I wot lord Phoebus, if ye lest
Ye may me help save my lady best
Now vouche ye save, that I you deuyse
How that I may be helped and in what wise
Your blysful suster Lucina the shene
That of the sea is goddess and queen
Though Neptunus has deite in the sea
Yet empress abouen him is she
Ye known well lord, right as her desire
Is to be quyckened and lyghted of your fire
For which that she follows you full besely
Right so the sea desires naturally
To folowen her that is goddess
Both of the sea, and ryuers more and less
wherefore lord Phoebus, this is my request
Do this miracle, or do mine heart breast
That now next at this opposicion
which in sign shall be the lion
As prays her so great a floode to bring
That five fadome at the lest, it over spring
The highest rock in Armoryke Britayne
And let this floode dure years twain
Then rertes to my lady may I say
Holds your heste, the rocks ben away
This thing may ye lightly done for me
Pray her to gone no faster course then ye
I say thus, prays your s^ster that she go
No faster course then ye in years two
Then shall she be at the full always
And spryng floode lastyng both night and day
And but she vouchsafe in such manner
To grant me my sovereign lady dear
Pray her to synken every rock adoun
In to her own dark regioun
Under the ground, there pluto dwells in
Or never more shall I my lady wyn
Thy temple in Delphos, wol I barefote seek
O lord Phoebus, se the teres on my cheke
And on my pain have some compassioun
And with ye word, in swoune he fell adoun
And long time he lay in a trance
His brother, which yt knew of his penance
Up caught him, and to bed him brought
Dyspayred in this turme^t and this thought
Let I this woeful creature lie
Chese he whether he wol live or dye.
Aruyragus with heal and great honor
(As he that was of chyualry the flower)
Is comen home, and other worthy men
O blysful art thou now Dorigen
That have thy lusty husbo^de in thine arms
That fresh knight, ye worthy man of arms
Thot loves the, as his own hertes life
Nothing list him to be ymaginatyfe
If any wight had spoken (while he was out)
To her of love, thereof had he no dout
He entendeth not to such matere
But da^ceth, lusts, and makes her good chere
And thus in joy and bliss let him dwell
And of woeful Aurelius wol I tell
In langour and in tourment dyspitous
Two year and more, lay wretched Aurelius
Er any foot on earth he might gone
Ne comfort in this time had he none
Save of his brother which was a clerk
He knew of al this woe and al this work
For to none other creature certain
Of this matter durst he no word said
Under his breast he bare it more secre
Then ever did Pamphilus for Galathe
His breast was hole without for to seen
But in his heart aye, was the arowe kene
And well ye known that of a sursanure
In surgery, is perlous the cure
But me^ might touch ye arow or come thereby
His brother wepeth and wayleth privily
Till at the last him fell in remembrance
That while he was at Orliau^ce in France
(As these clerks young that been lykerous)
To reden arts they ben curiouse
Seken in every halke and in every herne
Particular science for to learn
He him remembered that upon a dey
At Orliaunce in study a book he sey
Of magyke naturel, which his felawe
That was in that time a bacheler of law
Al were he there to learn another craft
Had privily upon his dear ylafte
which book spoke of mochel aperacions
Touching the.xxiiij. mansions
That longen to the moon, and such folly
As in our days is not worth a fly
For holy church says in our believe
Ne sustreth none illusyon us to grieve
And when this book was in his remembrance
Anon for joy his hyrte began dance
And to him self he said privily
My brother shall be waryshed sykerly
For I am syker that there be sciences
By which men maken diverse aparences
Such as these subtel tregetores play
For often at feestes have I well herd say
That tragetors, within an hal large
Have made come in water and a barge
And in the hall rowen up and down
Sometime has seemed a grym lyoun
And sometime flowers spring as in a meede
Sometime a vine, and grapes white and read
Sometime a castle of lyme and stone
And when him lyked, voyden hem anon
Thus seemed it to every man's sight.
Now then conclude I thus, if yt I might
At Orliaunce some old fellow find
That had this moons mansions in mind
Or other magyke naturel above
He should well make my brother have his love
For with an apparaunce a clerk may make
To man's sight, that all the rocks blake
Of Britayne, were yuoyded euerychone
And ships by the brynke to comen and gone
And in such form enduren a year or two
Then were my brother waryshed of his woe
Then must she needs hold her behest
Or else he shall shame her at the lest.
what should I make a longer tale of this
Unto his brothers bed he comen is
And such comfort he yaue him for to gone
To Orliaunce, that he up sterte anon
And on his way then is he forth yfare
In hope to ben lessed of his care.
when they were comen almost to ye cite
(But if it were a two furlonge or three)
A young clerk roming by him self they met
which that in latin thryftely hem great
And afterward he said a wonder thing
I know the cause of your coming
And er they farther any foot went
He told hem all that was in her entente.
This Breton clerk asked him of fellows
The which he had known in old days
He answered him, that they deed were
For which he wept often full many a tere
Down of his horse Aurelius light anon
And with this magicien forth is he gone
Home to his house, and made him well at ese
Hem lacked no vytaile that hem might plese
So well arrayed an house as there was one
Aurelius in his life saw never none.
He showed him, or he went to suppere
Forestes and parkes, full of wild dear
He saw there hertes, with her horns hye
The greatest that ever were seen with eye
He se of hem an hundred slain with hou^des
And some of arowes bled with bitter wou^des
He saw, when voyded were the wild dear
These fauconers, upon a fair ryuere
That with the hawks han the heron slain
Tho saw he knights iustyng in a plain
And after this he did him such pleasaunce
That he him showed his lady in a dance
On which him self dau^ced as him thought
And wha^ this master, yt this magike wrout
Saw it was time, he clapped his ho^des to
And farwell our revel, al was ago
And remeued never out of his house
while they saw all this sight merueylouse
But in his study there his books be
They saten still, no wight but they three
To him this master called his squire
And said him thus, is ready our supper
Almost an hour it is, I undertake
Sythen I you bade our supper ready make
when that these worthy men went with me
Into my study, there as my books be
Sir (quod the squier) when it lyketh you
It is al ready, though ye wol right now.
Go we suppe than (quod he) for the best
These amerous folk sometime mote have rest
And after supper fell they in trete
what sum should this masters guerdon be
To remeue all the rocks of Britayne
And eke from Gironde to the mouth of said
He made it strange, and swore so god him save
Less tha^ a thousand pound would he not have
Ne gladly for that sum nolde he it don.
Aurelyus with blysful heart anon
Answerde thus: Fie on a thousand pound
This wide world, which men say is round
I would it give, if I were sorde of it
This bargayne is full drive, for we be knyt
Ye shall be paid truly by my truth
But look now for no negligence or slouthe
Ye taryen us here no longer than to morrow
Nay (quod this clerk) here my troth to borow
To bed is gone Aurelius when him lest
And well nigh alnight he had his rest
what for his labor, and his hope of bliss
His woeful heart of penance had a lysse*
Upon the morrow when that it was day
To Britayne took they the right way
Aurelius, and this magicyen him beside
And ben descended there they would abide
And this was, as the book does remember
In the cold frosty ceson of Decembre.
Phoebus waxed old, and hewed ilyke laton
That before in his hot declynacion
Shone as ye bre^ning gold with stremes bright
But now in Capricorn adowne he light
where as he shone full pale, I dare well said
The bitter froste, with the slidder rain
Distroyed has the grene in every yerde
Ianus sit by the fire with double berde
And drinks of his bugle horn the wine
Biforn him stont braune of the tusked swyne
And nowel cries every lusty man.
Aurelius, in all that ever he can
Does to this master chere and reverence
And prays him to don his dyligence
To bryngen him out of his pains smerte
Or with a sword that he would slyt his heart
This clerk such routhe has on this man
That night and day he spedeth him that he can
To wait a time of his conclusyon
This is to say, to make illusyon
Or such an appearance or iogelrye
I ne can no terms of astrologye
That she and every wight should wene and say
That of Britayne the rocks were away
Or else they were sonken under the ground
Till at the last he has his time yfounde
To make his iapes and his wretchydnesse
Of such superstycious cursydnesse
His tollytan tables he forth brought
Full well corrected, him lacked naught
Neither his collecte, ne his expans years
Ne his roots, ne his other geres
As been his centrys, and his arguments
And his proporcionel conuenyences
For his equacions in every thing
And by his eight speres in his werkyng
He knew full well how far alnath was shoue
Fro the heed of thylke six Aries above
That in the nynthe spear consydred is
Full subtelly he had calked all this
And when he had found his first mansyon
He knew the remenaunt by proporcion
And knew the rysyng of the moon well
And in such face, the term and every dele
And knew also his other obseruaunces
For such illusyons and such mischaunces
As hethen folk used in thylke days
For which ne maked he no longer delays
But through his magike, for a weke or tway
It seemed that all the rocks were away.
Aurelius, which that dispayred is
whether he shall have his love, or fare amys
Awayteth night and day on this miracle
And when he knew there was non obstacle
But yt voyded were these rocks euerychon
Down to the masters fete he fell anon
And said, I woeful wretch Aurelius
Thank you lord and lady mine Venus
That me has helped fro my cares cold
And to ye temple his way forth has he hold
where as he knew he should his lady se
And when he saw his time, anon right he
with dredful heart, and with humble chere
Salued has his sovereign lady dear.
My rightful lady (quod this woeful man)
whom I serve and love, as I best can
And lothest were of all this world displese
Nere it that I for you have such disese
That I must dye here at your fete anon
Naught would I tell you how women is bego^
But certes either must I dye or plain
Ye slay me gyltlesse for very pain
But of my death though ye have no routhe
Auysen you, er that ye breken your truth
Repents you, for that ylke god above
For ye slay me, because that I you love
For madame, well ye wot that ye have hight
Not that I challenge any thing of right
Of you my souerayn lady, but of your grace
But in a garden yonde in such a place
Ye wotte right well what ye heyght me
And in mine hand your troth plyght ye
To love me best, god wotte ye said so?
Al be it I am unworthy thereto
Madame I speak it for the honor of you
More than for to save mine hertes life now
I have done right as ye commanded me
And if ye vouchsafe, ye may go se
Does as you list, haueth your heste in mind
For quick or deed, right there ye shall me find
In you lythe al to do me live or deye
But well I wot the rocks ben aweye
He took his leave, and she astonyed stood
In all her face there nas a drop of blood
She wend never han come in such a trappe
Alas (quod she) that ever this should hap
For wend I never by possibylite
That such a mister or marvel might be
It is against the process of nature
And home she gothe a sorouful creature
For very fear uneaths may she go
She wepeth and wayleth a day or two
And swonneth, that it was routhe to se
But why it was to no wight told she
For out of town was gone Arueragus
But to her self she spoke, and said thus
In her complaynt, as ye shall after here
with face pale, and with sorouful chere.
Alas (quod she) on the fortune I plain
That unware have wrapped me i^ thy chain
Fro which to escape, wot I no socoure
Save only death, or else dishonor
One of these two behooves me to chese
But nathelesse, yet had I lever to lose
My life, than of my body to have a shame
Or know my self false, or lose my name
And with my death, I may be quyt iwys
Has there not many a wife er this
And many a maid, islayn her self alas
Rather than with her body done trespass
And certes lo, these stories beren witness
when thurty tyrants, full of cursydnesse
Had stayne Phidon, in Athenes at the feast
They commanded his daughters to areste
And bringen hem byforne hem in dispyte
Al naked, to fulfill her foul delight
And in her fathers blood, he did hem dau^ce
Upon the paueme^t, god give him mischaunce
For which these woeful maidens full of dread
Rather the^ they would lesen her maydenhede
They privily ben sterte in to a well
And drenched hem self, as books tell.
They of Messene let enquire and seek
Of Lacidomony fyfty maidens eke
On which they would have don her lechery
But there was none of all that company
That she nas slain, and with a glad enten^
Chese rather for to dyen, than for to assent
To ben oppressed of her maydenhede
why should I than to dye ben in dread?
Lo eke the tyrant Aristoclides
That loved a maid, yt hight Symphalydes
when that her father slain was on a night
Unto Dyanes temple gothe she anon right
And hente the image, with her arms two
Fro which image would she never go
No wight might fro it her hondes race
Till she was slain, right in the self place.
Now sythnes yt maidens had such dispyte
To ben defouled with man's foul delight
well ought a wife rather her self slay
Than be defouled, as thinks me.
What shall I say of Hasdruballes wife?
That at Cartage byrafte her self her life
For wha^ she saw ye romans wan the town
She took her children al, and lepte adown
Into the fire, and chese rather to dye
Than any roman did her villanye.
Has not Lucrece islayne her self, alas
At Rome, there she oppressed was
Of Tarquyne, for her thought it was shame
To live, when that she had lost her name.
The eight maidens of Melesye also
Han slain hem selue for very dread and woe
Rather than folk of Gaul should he^ oppress
Mo than a thousand stories, as I guess
Couthe I now tell, as touching this matere
when Abradas was slain, his wife so dear
Her self slow, and let her blood to glyde
In Abradas wounds, broad and wide
And said, my body at the least way
There shall no wight defoule if I may.
What should I mo ensamples hereof sayn?
Sythens that so many han hem self slain
Well rather than they would defouled be
I wol conclude that it is best for me
Well rather slay my self in some manner
As did demo^tious daughter dear
Because that she nolde not defouled be.
O Sedasus, it is full great pity
To reden how thy daughters dyden, alas?
That slowen hem self for such a manner caas
As great a pity was it or well more
The Theban maiden, that for Nychanore
For one of Macedone had her oppressed
with her death her maydenhede she redressed
What shall I said of Nycerates wife
That for such case birafte her self her life?
How true was eke to Alcibyades
His love, that for to dyen rather thees
Than for to suffren his body unburied be
Lo which a wife was Alceste (quod she)
what says Homere of good Penelope?
Al Greece knows of her chastyte.
Parde of Laodomia is written thus
That wha^ at Troy was slain Protheselaus
No longer nolde she live after his day.
The same of noble Portia tell I may
withouten Brutus couthe she not live
To whom she had al her heart igyue.
The parfyte wyfehode of Artemisy
Honored is, throughout al Barbary
Oh Thenta queen, thy wifely chastyte
To al wives may a myrrour be.
The same thing I say of Bil^a
Of Rodogone, and eke Valeria.
Thus playned Dorigene a day or twey
Purposyng ever that she would dey
But nathelesse upon the third night
Home came Arueragus, the worthy knight
And asked her why she wept so sore
And she began wepen ever longer the more
Alas (quod she) that ever was I borne
Thus have I said (quod she) thus have I sworn
And told him al, as ye have herd before
It needs not to reherce it no more.
This husbo^de with glad chere in so^drie wise
Answerde and said, as I shall you deuyse
Is there aught else Dorigene but this.
Nay nay (quod she) god help me so as wys
This is to much, and it were gods will.
Ye wife (quod he) let sleep that is still
It may be well yet parauenture to day
Ye shall your truth hold by my fay
For god so wysly have mercy on me
I had well lever stycked for to be
For very love, which that I to you have
But if ye should your truth save
Troth is the highest thing that me^ may keep
But with that word he brast anon to weep
And said, I you forbid on pain of death
That never whiles you lasts life or brethe
To no wight tell of this misauenture
As I may best I wol my woe endure
Ne make no countenance of heaviness
That folk of you may deem harm ne guess
And forth he cleped a squier and a maid
Gothe forth anon with Dorigene he said
And brings her in such a place anon
They took her leave, and on her way they gone
But they ne wyste why she thither went
She nolde no wight tell her intent.
This squier, which that hight Aurelius
On Dorigen, which that was so amerous
Of adventure happed her to mete
Amydde the town, right in the hye street
As she would have gone the way forth right
Toward the garden, there as she had hight
And he was to the garden ward also
For well he spyed when she would go
Out of her house, to any manner place
But thus they met of adventure or of grace
And he salueth her with glad intent
And asked of her whyther that she went.
And she answerde half as she were mad
Unto the garden as my husbonde badde
My truth for to hold, alas alas.
Aurelius began wondren of this caas
And in his heart had great compassyon
Of her chere, and of her lamentation
And of Aruyragus the worthy knight
That bade her hold all that she had hight
So loath he was yt she should break her troth
And in his heart he caught of it great routh
Consydryng the best on every side
That fro his lust were him better abide
Than do so hye a churlishe wretchydnesse
Against fraunchise, and against al gentylnesse
For which in few words said he thus
Madame, says to your lord Aruiragus
That sythen I se this great gentylnesse
Of him, and eke I se well your distress
That ye to me thus should hold your truth
Certes me thinks it were great routhe
I have well lever ever to suffer woe
Than depart the love bytwyxt you two
I you relese madame into your hand
Quyte every surement and every bond
That ye have made to me, as here byforne
Sythens thylke time that ye were borne
my troth I plight, I shall you never repreue
Of no beheste, and here I take my leave
As of the trewest and the best wife
That ever yet I knew in all my life
But every wight beware of her byheste
On Dorigene remembers at the least
Thus can a squire done a gently deed
As well as can a knight, withouten dread.
She thonked him upon her knees al bare
And home unto her husbonde is she fare
And told him al, as ye han herd me said
And be ye syker, he was so well apayde
That it were impossible me to write
What should I longer of this case endyte?
Arueragus, and Dorigen his wife
In sovereign bliss leden forth her life
Never after was there anger hem between
He cherished her, as though she were a queen
And she was to him true for evermore
Of these two folks ye get of me no more.
Aurelius, that his cost has al forlorn
Curses the time that ever he was borne
Alas (quod he) alas that ever I beheyght
Of pured gold a thousand pound of wright
Unto this philosopher, how shall I do?
I se no more, but that I am for do
Mine heritage more I needs sell
And ben a beggar, here may I no le^ger dwell
And shame al my kynrede in this place
But I of him may get better grace
But nathelesse I wol of him assay
At certain days, year by year to pay
And thonke him of his great curtesye
My truth wol I keep, I wol not lie.
With heart ^ore, he gothe unto his cofer
And brought gold unto this philosopher
The value of fine hundred pound as I guess
And him besecheth of his gentylnesse
To grant him days of the remenaunt
And said: master I dare well make auaunt
I failed never of my truth as yet
For sykerly my hette shall be quyt
Toward you, how that ever I fare
To gone a beggyng in my kyrtel bare
But would ye vouchesafe upon suerte
Two year or three for to respyte me
Than were I well, for else mot I sell
Mine heritage, there is no more to tell.
This philosopher soberly answerde
And said thus, when he this word herd
Have I not hold covenant unto the?
Yes certes, well and truly (quod he)
Haste thou not had thy lady as the lyketh?
No no (quod he) and sorily he syketh
what was the cause, tell me if that thou can.
Aurelius anon his tale began
And told him al as ye han herd before
It needs not to reherce it any more.
He said Arueragus of gentylnesse
Had lever dye in sorrow and in distress
Than his wife were of her truth falls
The sorrow of Dorigene he told him als
How loathe she was to ben a wicked wife
And that she had lever have lost her life
And yt her troth she swore throug innoce^ce
She never erste herd speak of appearance
That made me have of her so great pity
And right as freely as he sent her to me
As freely sent I her to him again
This is al and some, there nys no more to same.
The philosopher answerde, leave brother
Eueriche of you did gentilly to other
Thou art a squier, and he is a knight
But god forbid, for his blisful might
But if a clerk could done a gentyl deed
As well as any of you, it is do dread.
Sir I relese the thy thousand pound
As now thou were crope out of the ground
Ne never er now had thou known me
For sir, I wol not taken a penny of the
For all my craft, ne naught for my travail
Thou haste ^payed right well for my vitayle
It is enough, and farwell and have good day
And took his horse, and rode forth on his way.
Lordynges this question would I ask now
which was the most fre, as thinks you?
Now tells me, er that I ferther wend
I can no more, my tale is at an end.
Here ends the Frankeleyns tale, and begins the second nonnes prologue.
THe mynistre and the norice unto vices
Which that men clepen in english idleness
That is porter of the yate of delyces
To eschew, and by her contrary her oppress
That is to said, by leful business
well ought we to don your intent
Lest that the fend through idleness us he^t
For he that with his thousand cords slye
Contynually us wayteth to be clappe
when he may man in idleness espy
He can so lightly catch him in his trappe
Till that a man be hente, right by the lap
He nis not ware the fend has him in hand
well ought us werche, and idleness witstonde
And though men dredden never for to dye
Yet se men well by reason doutles
That idleness is rote of slogardye
Of which there comes never no good encres
And sythnes that sloth holds he^ in a lees
Only to sleep, and for to eat and drink
And to deuouren all that other swynke
And for to put us from such ydelnesse
That cause is of so great confusyon
I have here done my faithful business
After the legende in translacion
Right of thy glorious life and passion
Thou with thy garlo^de, wrought with rose and lely
The mean I, maid and marter saint Cecely
And thou that art flower of virgins all
Of whom that Bernarde list so well to write
To the at my beginning first I call
Thou comfort of us wretches, do me endyte
Thy mayde^s death, yt wan through her merit
The eternal life, and of the fend victory
As men may after read in her story
Thou mayde^ and mother, daughter of thy son
Thou well of mercy, synful souls cure
In whom that god of bou^te chese for to wo^ne
Thou humble and hye over every ceature
Thou noblest, so far over nature
That no disdain the maker had of kind
His son in blood and flesh to clothe and wind
Which in the cloystre of thy blisful sydis
Took man's shappe, the eterne love and pees
That of the true compass, lord and gyde is
whom heaven, earth, and see, withouten les
Aye heryen, and thou virgyne wemles
Bare of thy body, and dweldest maiden pure
The creator of every creature
Assembled is in the magnifycence
with mercy, goodness, and with such pyt
That thou art the son of excellence
Not only that helpest hem that prayenth
But often time of thy benignyte
Full freely, or that men thine help beseech
Thou go beforne, and art her lives leche.
Now help thou blisful, and meke fair maid
Me flemed wretch, in this deserte of gal
Think on the woman of Canane, that said
That whelps eaten some of ye cro^mes small
That from her lords table ben isal
And though yt I unworthy daughter of Eve
Be synful, yet accepts my believe
And for ye faith is deed withouten werkis
So for to werche, give me wit and space
That I be quyt from ye place yt most derke is
O thou that art so fair and full of grace
Be mine advocate in that hye place
There as without end is song Osanna
Thou Christ's mother, and daughter of Anna
And of thy light, my soul in prison light
That troubled is by the contagyon
Of my body, and also by the wight
Of erthly lust, and also false affection
O haven, O refute, O salvation
Of hem that been in sorrow and distress
Now help, for to my work I wol me dress
Yet I pray you that reden that I write
Foryeueth me, that I do no dyligence
This ylke story subtelly to endyte
For both have I the words and the sentence
Of him that at the saints reverence
The story wrote, and folowen her legende
And pray you that ye wol my work amend
First wol I you the name of saint Cecily
Expowne, as men may in her story se
It is to say in english, heuens lylly
For pure chastnesse of virgynite
Or for she witness had of honest
And grene of conscience, and of good fame
The sote sauoure lylye was her name
Or Cecily is to say, the way to blind
For she ensample was by good techyng
Or else Cecily, as I written find
Is joined by a manner conioynyng
Of heaven and Lya, in her fyguring
The heaven is set for thought of holiness
And lya, for her lastyng business
Cecily may eke be said in this manner
wantyng of blyndnesse, for her great light
Of sapience, and for her thewes clear
Or else Lo, this maidens name bright
Of heaven and Leos comes, of which by right
Men might the heaven of people her call
Ensample of good and wise works al
For Leos people, in English is to say
And right as men may in the heaven se
The sun, and moon, and sterres every way
Right so men gostly, in this maiden fre
Sawen of faith, the great magnanymite
And eke the clerenesse hole of sapience
And sondrie works, bright of excellence
And right so as these philosophers write
That heaven is swyfte, round, and eke bre^nyng
Right so was fair Cecily the white
Full swyfte and besy in every good workynge
And round and hole in good persevering
And brennyng ever in charity full bright
Now have I declared you what she hight.
Here ends the second nonnes Prologue, and begins her tale.
THis maiden bright Cecile, as her life says
was comen of Romans, and of noble kind
And so forth fostred up in the faith
Of Christ and bare his gospel in her mind
She never cessed, as I written find
Of her prayere, and god to love and dread
Besechyng him to keep her maydenhede
And when this maid should unto a man
I wedded be, that full young of age
which that yeleped was Valeryan
And day was come of her marriage
She full devout and humble in her courage
Under her robe of gold, ye sat full fair
Had next her flesh yclad her in an heir
And whiles that the organs made melodye
To god alone thus in heart song she
O lord, my soul and eke my body gye
Vnwemmed, lest I counfounded be
And for hi^ love that dyed upon a tree
Every second or third day she fast
Aye byddyng in her orisons full fast.
The night came, and to bed must she gone
with her husbonde, as often is the manner
And privily she said unto him anon
O sweet and well byloued spouse dear
There is a counsel, and ye wol it here
Which that right feign I would to you said
So that ye me ensure, it not to bewrayne.
Valeryan began fast unto her swear
That for no case, ne thing that might be
He should never to none bewrayen here
And than at erste, thus to him said she
I have an angel, which that loves me
That with great love, where so I wake or sleep
Is ready aye, my body for to keep
And if that he may felen out of dread
That ye me touch or love in vylonye
He right anon will slay you with the deed
And in your youth thus shall ye dye
And if that ye in clean love me gye
He wol you love as me, for your clennesse
And show you of his joy and brightness.
This Valeryan, corrected as god would
Answerde again, if I shall trust the
Let me that aungel se, and him behold
And if that it a very aungel be
Than wol I done as thou haste prayde me
And if thou love another man forsothe
Right with this sword tha^ wol I sle you both
Cecyle answerde anon in this wise
If that ye lust, that angel shul ye se
So that ye trow on Christ and you baptyse
Gothe forth to V^a apia (quod she)
That from this town ne sta^t but miles three
And to the poor folk that there dwell
Say hem right thus, as I shall you tell
Tell hem that I Cecyle, you to hem send
To shown you the good Urban the old
For secret needs, and for good intent
And when that ye saint Urban han behold
Tell him the words, that I to you told
And wha^ that he has purged you fro sin
Than shall ye se that aungel er ye twynne.
Valeryan is to that place ygon
And right as him was taught by his lerning
He found this holy Urban anon
Among these saints buryals loutyng
And he anon, without taryeng
Did his message, and when he had it told
Urban for joy, began his hondes up hold
The teres from his eyes let he fall
Almighty god, O Jesus christ (quod he)
Sower of chaste counsel, hierde of us all The fruit of thilke sede of chastyte
That thou haste sow in Cecyle, take to the
Lo like a besy be, withouten gyle
The serves aye thine own thral Cecyle
For thylke spouse, that she took but new
Full like a fierce lion, she sends here
As meke as any lamb was to ewe
And with that word, anon there began apere
An old man, cladde in white clothes clear
That had a book with letters of gold in ho^de
And began byforne Valeryan for to stand.
Valeryan as deed fell down for dread
when he this old man saw standing so
which forwith anon he herd him read
O lord, O faith, O god withouten mo
Of christendom, and father of al also
Abouen al, and over al every where
These words al with gold written were
wha^ this was radde, tha^ said this old man
Leuest thou this thing or none, say ye or nay
I leave all this thing (quod Valeryan)
Under the heaven no wight ne think may
Sother thing than this, I dare well say
Tho vanyshed the old man, he nyst where
And pope Urban him christened right there
Valeryan gothe home, and fyndeth Cecilye
within his chamber, with an aungel stand
This aungel had of rose and of lyllye
Crowns two, the which he bare in hand
And first to Cecyle, as I understand
He yaue that one, and after began he take
That other to Valeryan her make
with body clean, and with vnwemmed thought
Keeps aye well these crowns (quod he)
From paradyse to you I have hem brought
Ne never more shullen rotten be
Ne lose her sweet savor, trusts me
Ne never wight shall seen hem with eye
But he be chaste, and hate vilonye
And thou Valeryan, for thou so sone
Assenteddest to good counsel also
Say what you list, and thou shall have thy bone
I have a brother (quod Valeryan tho)
That in this world I love no man so
I pray you that my brother may have grace
To know the truth, as I do in this place.
The angel answered, god lyketh your request
And both with the palm of martyrdom
Shall ye come unto the blisful feast
And with ye word Tyburce his brother come
And when that he the sauoure vndernome
which that the roses and the lylyes cast
within his heart he began to wonder fast
And said: I wonder this time of the year
whence that this sote sauoure comes so
Of roses and lylyes, that I smell here
For though I had hem in mine hondes two
The savor might in me no deper go
The sweet smell, that in my heart I find
Has changed me al in another kind.
Valeryan said, two crowns have we
Snow white and rose reed, that shyneth clear
which that thine eyes han no might to se
And as thou smellest hem through my prayere
So shall thou seen hem my leave brother dear
If it so be that thou will without slouthe
Believe a right, and know the very truth.
Tyburce answered, say thou this to me
In sothnesse, or in dreme harken I this?
In dremes (quod Valerian) han we be
Unto this time, brother mine iwys
But now at erst, our dwelling in truth is
How wost thou (quod Tyburce) and in what wise
Quod Valeryan, that I shall the deuyse.
The angel of god has me ye troth itaught
which thou shall seen, and thou will reney
The ydols, and be clean, and else naught
And of the miracles of these crowns twey
Saint Ambrose in his preface lust to sey
Solempnly this noble doctor dear
Commends it, and says in this manner.
The palm of martyrdom for to receive
Saint Cecile, fulfilled of gods yefte
The world and eke her chamber began she weyu^
witness Tyburce, and Cecyles shrifte
To which god of his bounte would shyfte
Crowns two, of flowers well smellyng
And made the angel he^ tho Crowns bring
The maid has brought hem to bliss above
The world has wist what it is worth certal
Devotion and chastyte well for to love
Tho showed him Cecyle al open and plain
That al ydolles ben but things in vain
For they ben dombe, and thereto they ben defe
And charged him his ydoles for to lefe
Who that troweth not this, a be he is
(Quod this Tyburce) if that I shall not lie
She kyssed his breast when she herd this
And was full glad he couthe truth espy
This day take I the for mine allye
Said this blisful maiden fair and dear
For after that she said as ye may here.
Lo right so as the love of Christ (quod she)
Made me thy brothers wife, right in yt wise
Anon for mine alye here take I the
Sythe^s that thou wolte thyn ydoles dispyse
Go with thy brother now, and the baptyse
And make the clean, so yt thou may behold
The angels face, of which thy brother told.
Tyburce answered, and said: brother dear
First tell me whyther I shall, and to what man
To whom he said, come forth with good chere
I wol the led unto the pope Urban
To Urban brother mine Valeryan
(quod this Tyburce) wylt thou me thither led?
Me thinks that it were a wonder deed
Ne menest thou Not Urban (quod he tho)
That is so often dampened to be deed
And wonneth in halkes to and fro
And dare not ones put forth his heed
Men should him brenne in a fire so reed
If he were found, and men might him spy
And we also, that bear him company
And whiles we seken thylke divinity
That is yhidde in heaven privily
Algate ybrent in this world should we be
To whom Cecile answerde boldly
Men might dread well and skylfully
This life to lose, mine own dear brother
If this were living only and non other
But there is better living in other place
That never shall be lost, ne dread the naught
which gods son us told through his grace
That fathers son has al thing wrought
And al ye wrought is with a skilful thought
The ghost that from the father began proceed
Has souled him without any dread
By word and by miracle, lo gods soune
when he was in this world, declared here
That there is other life there men may wo^ne
To whom answerde Tyburce: O suster dear
Ne saydest thou right now in this manner
There nas but one god lord in sothfastnesse
And now of three how may you bear witness
That shall I tell (quod she) or that I go
Right as a man has sapyences three
Memory, engyne, and intellecte also
So in such being of divinity
Three persons may there right well be
Tho began she there full besily him preche
Of Christ's son, and of his pains teache
And many points of his passion
How gods son in this world was witholde
To do mankind plain remyssyon
That was bound in sins and cares cold
Al these things she unto Tyburce told
And after this Tyburce in good intent
with Valeryan to pope Urban went
That thonked god, and with glad heart and light
He christened him, and made him in that place
Perfyte in his lernyng gods knight
And after this Tiburce gate such grace
That every day he saw in time and space
The aungel of god, and every manner boon
That he god asked, it was sped full soon
It were full hard by order for to said
How many wonders Jesus for him wrought
But at the last, to tell short and plain
The sergeaunt of the town hem sought
And hem before Almache ye preuost brought
which hem aposed, and knew al her intent
And to the image of Jupiter hem sent
And said, who so wol do no sacrifyce
Swappe of his heed, this is my sentence here
Anon these martyrs, that I you deuyse
One Maximus that was an officere
Of the prefectes, and his councelere
Hem hent, and wha^ he forth the saints ladde
Him self he wept for pity that he had
when Maximus had herd this saints lore
He gate hem of the turmentours leave
And had hem to his house withouten more
And with her prechyng, er that it were eve
They gonne from the turmentour reave
And from Maximus, and from his folk echon
The false faith, to trowen in god alone
Cecyle came, when it was woxen night
with priests, that hem christened al in fere
And afterward, when day was woxen light
Cecile hem said with a sober chere
Now Christ's own knights leave and dear
Casts al away the works of derknesse
And armeth you in armoure of brightness
Ye han for sothe ydone a great battle
Your course is don, your faith has you conserved
Gothe to ye crown of life that may not fail
The rightful judge, which ye han served
Shall give it you as ye it deserved
And when this thing was said, as I deuyse
Men ladde hem forth to done the sacrifyse
But wha^ they were unto the place ibrought
To tell shortly the conclusyoun
They nold ensence ne sacrifyce right naught
But on her knees, they saten hem adoun
with humble heart and sad deuocioun
And losten both her heedes in the place
Her souls went to the king of grace.
This Maximus, yt saw this thing betyde
with pytouse teres told it anon right
That he her souls saw to heaven glyde
with angels full of clerenesse and of light
And with his word converted many a wight
For which Almachius did him so to beat
with whyppes of leede, till he his life ga^ let
Cecyle him took, and buried him anon
By Tyburce and Valeryan sothly
within her buryeng place under a stone
And after this Almachius hastily
Bad his mynisters fetchen openly
Cecily, so that she might in his presence
Do sacrifyce, and Iupyter encence
But they converted at her wise lore
wepten full sore, and yaue full credence
Unto her word, and cryden more and more
Christ gods son, without difference
Is very god, this is all our sentence
That has a servant so good him to serve
Thus with o voice we trow though we sterue
Almachius, that herd all this doing
Bad fetch Cecily, that he might her se
And alderfyrst this was his askyng
what manner woman art thou (quod he)
I am a gentylwoman borne (quod she)
I ask of the (quod he) thought it the grieve
Of thy relygion and of thy believe?
Ye have bygon your question folishly
(quod she) that would two answers conclude
In one demand, ye asken leudly
Almachius answerde to that symilitude
Of whence comes thyn answer so rude
Of whence (quod she) wha^ that she was frayned
Of conscience, and of good faith unfeigned.
Almachius said, ne take thou none head
Of my power: and she him answerde this
Your might (quod she) full little is to dread
For every mortal man's power nys
But ilyke a bladder full of wind iwys
For with a nedels point, when it is yblowe
May all the bos^e of it be laid full low
Full wrongfully beganste thou (quod he)
And yet in wrong is thy perseueraunce
woste thou not how our mighty princes fre
Have thus commanded and made ordinance?
That every christen wight shall have penance
But if that he his cristendome withsey
And gone al quyte, if he wol it reney.
Your princes erren, as your nobles does
Quod tho Cecile, in a wode sentence
Ye make us gilty, and it is not sothe
For ye that known well our innocence
For as much as we done a reverence
To Christ, and for we bear a christen name
Ye put on us a crime and eke a blame
But we that known thilke name so
For virtuous, we may is not withsey.
Almachius answered, chese one of these two
Do sacrifyce, or christendom reney
That thou may scapen by that wey
At which word the holy blisful maid
Began for to laughed, and to the judge she said.
O judge confused in thy nycete
Wolte thou that I renye innocence
To make me a wicked wight (quod she)
Lo he dissymuleth here in audience
He stareth and wodeth in his aduertence
To whom Almachius said: O sely wretch
Thou wost not how far me mit may stretch
Has not our mighty princes yeuen
To me, both power and eke auctorite
To make folk to dyen or to lyuen?
why spekest thou so proudely than to me?
I ne speak it not but steadfastly (quod she)
Not proudly, for I say as for my side
I hate deedly thilke vice of pride
And if thou dread not a sothe for to here
Than wol I shown al openly by right
That thou have made a full great lesyng here
Thou sayste thy princes han give the might
Both to slay and eke to quick a wight
Thou ne may but only life byreue
Thou haste non other power ne leave
But thou may say, thy princes ha^ ye make^
Mynistre of death, for if thou speak of mo
Thou lie, for thy power is full naked
Doway thy boldness, said Almachius the
And do sacrifyce to our gods er thou go
I recke not what wrong thou me profice
For I can suffer, as can a philosopher
But thilke wrongs may I not endure
That thou spekest of our gods here (quod he)
Cecile answerde, O nyce creature
Thou saydest no word sythens thou spakest to me
That I ne knew therewith thy nycite
And that thou were in every manner wise
A leude offycer, and a vain justice
The lacks nothing to thine utter eyes
That thou nart blind, for thing yt we seen all That is a stone, that men may well espyen
That ylke stone, a god thou wolte it call
I read the let thyn hand upon it fall
And taste it well, and stone thou shalt it find
Sens that thou see not with thyn eyes blind
It is a shame that the people shall
So scorn the, and laugh at thy folly
For comenly men wotte it well over all That mighty god is in his heuens hye
And these images, well may thou aspye
To the ne to hem self may they not profit
For in her effect, they be not worth a myte
Thus and such other words said she
And he woxe wroth, and bad she should be led
Home to her house, and in her house (quod he)
Brenne her in a bathe, with flames read
And as he bade, right so was done the deed
For in a bathe they began her fast sheten
And night and day great fire under they beten
All the long night, and eke the day also
For all the fire, and eke the bathes hete
She sat al cold, and felt of it no woe
It made her not a drop for to sweet
But in that bathe her life she mote let
For Almachie, with a full wicked intent
To sleen her in the bathe, his sonde sent
Three strokes in the neck he smote her tho
The turmentour, but for no manner chance
He might not smite al her neck a two
And for there was that time an ordinance
That no man should do no person such penance
The fourth stroke to smite, soft or sore
This turmentour durst smite no more
But half deed, with her neck ycorue^ there
He let her lie, and on his way he went
The christen folk that about her were
with shetes home full fair her hente
Three days lived she in this turmente
And never cesed she the faith to teache
That she had fostred hem, she began to preche
And hem she yaue her mouables and her thing
And to the pope Urban bytoke hem tho
And said, I asked this of the heaven king
To have respyte three days and no mo
To reco^maunde to you, er that I go
These souls, and that I might so werche
Here of mine house perpetuellyche a cherche
Saint Urban, with his dekens privily
The body fette, and buried it by night
Among his other saints honestly
Her house the church of saint Cecile hight
Saint Urban hallowed it, as he well might
In which unto this day in noble wise
Men don to Christ and to his saints service.
Here ends the second nonnes tale, and here begins the Prologue of the
chanons yeman.
WHa^ ended was the life of saint Cecyle
Er we fully had rydden five mile
At Boughton under the blee, us began a take
A man, that clothed was in clothes blake
And under that he had a white surplyse
His hakeney, that was al pomely gryse
So swette, that it wonder was to se
It seemed that he had pricked miles three
The horse eke that his yoman rode upon
So swette, that uneath might he gone
About the paytrel stood the foam full hye
He was of foam as flecked as a pie
A male twyfolde on his croper lay
It seemed that he carried little array
Al light for summer rode this worthy man
And in my heart wondren I began
what that he was, till I understood
How that his cloak was sewed to his hode
For which, when I had long auysed me
I demyd him some chanon for to be
His hatte hynge at his back by alace
For he had rydden more than trot or pace
He rode aye prickyng as he were wode
A clote lefe he had laid under his hode
For swette, and for to keep his heed fro hete
But it was inye for to se him sweet
His forheed dropped, as a styllatorie
were full of plantayne or of peritorie
And when he was come, he began cry
God save (quod he) this ioly company
Fast have I pricked (quod he) for your sake
Because that I would you overtake
To ryden in this merry company
His yoman was eke full of curtesye
And said syrs, now in the morrow tide
Out of your hostery I saw you ride
And warned here my lord and sovereign
which that to ryden with you is full feign
For his disporte, he loves dalyaunce.
Friend for thy warni^g god give ye good chance
Than said our host, certain it would seem
Thy lord were wise, and so I may well deem
He is full soconde also dare I lay
Can he ought tell a merry tale or tway
with which he glade may this company.
Who sir my lord? ye without lie
He can of myrthe and eke of iolyte
Not but enough also sir trusts me
And ye him knew also well as do I
Ye would wonder how well and thriftely
He couthe work, and that in sondrie wise
He has taken on him many a great emprise
which were full hard, for any that is here
To bring about, but they of him it lere
As homely as he rydeth among you
If ye him knew, it would ben for your prowe
Ye nolde not forgon his aquayntaunce
For mochel good I dare lay in balaunce
All that I have in my possessyon
He is a man of hye discressyon
I warn you well he is a passing wise man.
Well (quod our host) I pray the tell me than
Is he a clerk or non tell what he is.
A clerk, nay he is greter tha^ a clerk iwys
Said the yoman, and in words few
Host of his craft somewhat wol I show
I say my lord can such a subtelte
But al his craft ye may not wete of me
And somewhat help I yet to his worchyng
That all the ground that we be on rydyng
Till we come to Caunterbury town
He could al clean turn up and down
And paue it al of silver and of gold.
And when this yoman had thus ytolde
Unto our host: he said benedicite
This thing is wonder meruaylous to me
Sens that thy lord is of so hye prudence
(Because of which, men should him reverence)
That of his worship recketh he so lyte
His ouerest sloppe is not worth a my^e
As in effect to him, so more I go
It is al bandy and to tore also
why is thy lord so slotlyche I the pray
And is of power better clothes to bey?
If that his deed acorde with thy speech
Tell me that, and that I the beseech.
Why (quod this yeman) whereto ask ye me?
God help me so, for he shall never ythe
But I wol not auowe that I say
And therefore keep it secret I you pray
He is to wise in fay, as I believe
That is ouerdone nyl not preue
And right as clerks said, it is a vice
wherefore I hold him in that, leude and ny^^
For when a man has over great a wit
Full often it happeth him to misusen it
So does my lord, and that me greueth sore
God amend it, I can say you no more.
Thereof no force good yeman (quod our host)
Sens of the connyng of thy lord thou wost
Tell how he does, I pray the hertely
Sens that he is so crafty and so sly
where dwellen ye, if it to tell be?
In the subbarbes of a town (quod he)
Lurkyng in corners and in lanes blind
where these robbers, and thieves by kind
Holden her privy fearful resydence
As they that dare not shown her presence
So fare we, if that I shall say the soth.
Yet (quod our host) let me talk tothe
why art thou so discolored in thy face?
Peter (quod he) god give it hard grace
I am so used in the hot fire to blow
That it has changed my color as I trow
I am not wont in no myrrour to pry
But swynke sore, and learn to multiplye
we blondren ever, and pooren in the fire
And for all that, we faylen of our desire
For ever we lacken our conclusyon
To much folk we do illusyon
And borowe gold, be it a pound or two
Or ten or twelve, or many sommes mo
And make hem wene at the least way
That of a pound we could make tway
Yet is it false, and aye han we good hope
It for to done, and after it we grope
But that science is so far us byforne
we mow not, al though we had it sworn
It overtake, it slytte away so fast
It wol us make beggars at the last.
whiles this yeman was thus i^ his talkyng
This chanon drew him nere, and herd al thing
which this yeman spoke, for suspection
Of men's speech ever had this chanon
For Cato says, he that gyltye is
Demeth al thing be spoke of him iwys
Because of that, ge began so nyghe to draw
To his yeman, to harken al his saw
And thus he said unto his yeman tho
Hold now thy peace, and speak no words mo
For if thou do, thou shall it sore abye
Thou slau^drest me here in this company
And eke dyscouerest yt thou should hyde.
Ye (quod our host) tell on what so ever betyde.
Of al his threatyng, recke the not a myte
In faith (quod he) no more do I but lyte
And when this chanon saw it would not be
But his yeman would tell his priuite
He fled away for very sorrow and shame
A (quod the yeman) here shall rise a game
All that I can, anon wol I you tell
Sens he is gone, the foul fend him quel
For never here after wol I with him mete
For penny ne for pound, I you behete
He that me brought first unto that game
Er that he dye, sorrow have he and shame
For it is ernest to me by my faith
That feel I well, what so any man says
And yet for all my smerte and al my grefe
For all my sorrow, labor and myschefe
I couth never leave it in no wise
Now would god my wit might suffyce
To tellen all that longs to that art
But nathelesse, yet wol I tell you a part
Sens that my lord is gone, I wol not spare
Such thing as I know I wol declare.
Here ends the prologue of the chanons yeman, and here follows his tale.
WIth this chanon I dwelt seven year
And of his science am I never the nere
All that I had, I have lost thereby
And god wot, so has many mo then I
There I was wont to be right fresh and gay
Of clothing, and eke of other good array
Now may I wear an hose upon my heed
And where my color was both fresh and reed
Now it is wanne, and of a leeden hew
who so it uses, sore shall him rewe
And of my swynke, yet blered is mine eye
Lo which advantage it is to multiplye
That slydynge science has me made so bare
That I have no good, where yt ever I fare
And yet I am endetted so thereby
Of gold, that I have borrowed trewly
That while I live, I shall it quyte never
Let every man beware by me ever
what manner man that casts him thereto
If he continue, I hold his thryfte ydo
So help me god thereby shall he never wyn
But empte his purse, and make his wits thyn
And when he through his madness and folly
Has lost his own good, through ieopardy
Then he excyteth other men thereto
To lose her good, as him self has do
For unto shrewes, joy it is and ese
To have her fellows in pain and dysese
For thus was I ones learned of a clerk
Of yt no charge, I wol speak of our work
when we be there, as we shall exercise
Our eluysh craft, we semen wonder wise
Our terms ben so clergial and so quaynte
I blow the fire till mine heart faynte.
what should I tell each proporcion
Of things, which we werchen upon?
As on five or six ounces, may well be
Of silver, or of some other quantite
And besye me to tellen you the names
Of orpyment, brent bones, iron squames
That into poudre grounden ben full small
And in an erthen pot, how put is all
And salt yput in, and also papere
Before these poudres that I speak of here
And well ycouered with a lamp of glass
And of much other thing that there was
And of the pottes and glass englutynge
That of the air might pass out no thing
And of the esy fire and smerte also
which that was made, and of the care and woe
That we had in our matters sublymynge
And in amalgamyng, and calsenynge
Of quycsyluer, yclypped Mercurye crude
For all our sleyght, we conne not conclude
Our orpyment, and sublymed Mercurye
Our ground lytarge eke on the porphirye
Of each of these, ounces a certain
Not helps us, our labor is in vain
Ne eke our spirits assencioun
Ne yet our matters, that lain al sire adoun
Mow in our werkynge nothing avail
For lost is al our labor and our travail
And all the cost, a twenty dyuel way
Is lost also, which we upon it lay.
There is also full many an other thing
That is to our craft apertaynynge
Though I by order hem ne reherce can
Because that I am a leude man
Yet wol I tellen hem, as they come to mind
Though I ne can set hem in her kind
As bole Armonyake, verdegrece, boras
And sundry vessels made of earth and glass
Our vrinals, and our dyscensories
Vyols, crosselettes, and sublymatoryes
Concurbytes, and alembykes eke
And other such, dear enough a leke
It needs not to reherce hem al
waters rubyfyeng, and boles gal
Arsneke, sal armoniake, and brymstone
And herbs could I tell eke many one
As Egrimonye, valerian, and lunarye
And other such, if that me list to tarry
Our lamps brennyng both night and day
To brynge^ about our craft, if that we may
Our fournyce eke of calcinacion
And of waters albifycation
Vnsleked lyme, chalk, and gleyre of an eye
Poudres diverse, ashes, donge, pysse, and cley
Sered pokettes, salt peter, and vytriole
And diverse fyres, made of wood and cole
Sal tartre, alcaly, and sal preparate
And combust matters, and coagulate
Cley made with horse du^ge, man's here, and oil
Of tartre al^n, glass, berme, worte, and argo^^
Resalgor, and other matters enbybynge
And eke of our matters encorporynge
And of our silver cytrination
Our sementynge, and eke fermentacion
Our Ingottes testes, and many mo
I wol you tell as was me taught also
The four spirits, and the bodies seven
By order, as often I herd my lord nemene.
The first spirit quycke silver cleped is
The second orpyment, the third ywys
Sal armonyake, the fourth brymstone
The bodies seven eke, lo here hem anon
Sol gold is, and Luna silver we threpe
Mars iron, Mercurye quycksyluer we clepe
Saturnus leede, and Jupiter is tynne
And Venus coper, by my father kynne
This cursed craft, who so wol exercise
He shall no good have that may him suffyse
For all the good he spends theraboute
He lose shall, thereof have I no doubt
who so that lysten to utter his folly
Let him come forth and learn to multiplye
And every man that has aught in his cofer
Let him apere, and were a philosopher
Askaunce that craft is so light for to lere
Nay nay god wot, al be he monk or friar
Priest or chanon, or any other wight
Though he sit at his book both day and night
In learning of this eluyshe nyce lore
Al is in vain, and parde much more
Is to lere a leude man this subtelte
Fie speak not thereof, it wol not be
Al could he lettrure, or could he none
As in effect, he shall find it al one
For both two, by my salvation
Concluden in multiplicacion
I lyche well, when they have al ydo
This is to said, they faylen both two.
Yet forgate I much rehersayle
Of waters corosyfe, and of lymayle
And of bodies mollifycacion
And also of her induracion
Oils, ablucions, metal fusyble
To tellen you al, would pass any bible
That o where is, wherefore as for the best
Of al these names now wol I rest
For as I trow, I have you told ynowe
To reyse a fend, al look he never so row.
A nay let be the philosophers stone
Alixer cleped, we seken fast echeone
For had we him, the^ were we syker ynowe
But unto god of heaven I make auowe
For all our craft, when that we han al ydo
And al our sleyght, he wol not come us to
He has made us spend much good
For sorrow of which, almost we waxe^ wood
But that good hope crepeth in our heart
Supposing ever, though we sore smerte
To ben releued by him afterward
Supposing and hope is sharp and hard
I warn you well it is to syken ever
That future temps has made men dysceuer
In trust thereof, all that ever they had
Yet of that art, they could not wax sad
For unto him it is a bitter sweet
So seemed it, for ne had they but a shete
Which yt they might wrappe^ the^ in anyght
And a bratte to walken in the day light
They wolden hem sell, and spe^de it on this craft
They conne not stynte till nothing be laft
And ever more, where that ever they gone
Men may hem ken by smell of brymstone
For all the world they stynken as a got
Her savor is so rammysh and so hot
That though a man a mile from hem be
The savor wol enfecte him trusts me
Lo, thus by smellyng, and by thread bare array
If that men list, this folk know they may
And if a man wol ask hem privily
why they be clothed so vnthryftely
Right anon they wol rowne in his ere
And said, if that they aspyed were
Men would hem slay, because of her science
Lo thus these folk bytrayen innocence
Pass over this, I go my tale unto.
Er that the pot be on the fire ydo
Of metalles, with a certain quantyte
My lord hem tempreth, and no man but he
Now he is gone, I dare say boldly
For as men said, he can do craftily
Algate I wotte well he has such a name
And yet full often he renneth in the blame
And wot ye how, full often it happeth so
The pot to breketh, and farewell al is go
These metalles ben of so great violence
Our walls may not make hem resystence
But if they were wrought of lime and stone
They percen so, and through the wall they gone
And some of hem synken in to the ground
Thus have we lost by times many a pound
And some are scatered all the floor about
Some lepen into the rofe wythouten doubt
Tho yt the fend not in our sight him show
I trow that he with us be, that ylke shrewe
In hell where that he is lord and sire
Ne is there no more woe, ne anger ne ire
when that our pot is broke, as I have said
Every man chyte, and holte him yuel apayde
Some said it was long of the fire making
Some said nay, it was on the blowyng
Then was I ferde, for that was mine office
Straw (quod the third) ye ben leude and nyce
It was not tempred as it ought to be
Nay (quod the fourth) stynte and harken me
Because our fire was not made of beche
That is the cause, and none other so theche
I can not tell whereon it is alonge
But well I wot great strife is us among.
what (quod my lord) there nys no more to done
Of these perils I wol beware efte sone
I am right syker, that the pot was crased
Be as be may, be ye not amassed
As usage is, let swepe the floor as swythe
Pluck up your heart, and be glad and blythe.
The mullocke on an heap yswepte was
And on the floor cast a canuas
And al this mulloke in a syue ythrowe
And ysyfted and aplucked many a throw.
Parde (quod one) somewhat of our metal
Yet is there here, though we have not all
And tho this thing mishapped has as now
An other time it may ben well ynow
we more put our good in adventure
A merchant parde, may not aye endure
Trusts me well in his prosperity
Sometime his good is drowned in the sea
And sometime it comes safe unto the land
Peace (quod my lord) ye next time I wol fond
To bring our craft al in an other plyte
And but I do syrs, let me have the wit
There was defaute in somewhat well I wot
An other said, the fire was over hot
But be it hot or cold, I dare say this
That we concluden ever more amys
we faylen of that which we would have
And in our madness ever more we rave
And when we be together euerychon
Every man seems as wise as Solomon
But al thing, which that shyneth as ye gold
Is not gold, as I have herd told
Ne every appel that is fair at eye
Nys not good, what so men clappe or cry.
Right so it fares among us
He that seems the wysest by Jesus
Is most fool, when it comes to the prefe
And he that seems truest is a thief
That shall ye know, er that I from you we^de
By that I of my tale have made an end.
There was a chanon of religioun
Among us, would enfecte al a town
Though it as great were as Niniue
Rome, Alysaundre, Troy, and other three
His sleyght and his infinite falsnesse
There couth no man written as I guess
Though that he might live a thousand year
In all this world of falsnesse nys his pere
For in his terms he wol him so wind
And speak his words in so slye a kind
when he comen shall with any wight
That he wol make him dote anon right
But it a fend be as him self is
Full many a man has he begyled er this
And mo wol, if that he may live a while
And yet men ryden and gone full many a mile
Him for to seek, and have aquayntaunce
Not knowing of his false governance
And if ye lust to give me audience
I wol it tellen here in your presence.
But worshypful chanons religiouse
Ne demeth not that I sclaunder your house
Al though my tale of a chanon be
Of every order some shrewe is parde
And god forbid that al a company
Should rue a syngler man's folly
To slander you is not mine entente
But to correct that mysse is mente
This tale was not only told for you
But eke for other mo, ye wot well how
That among Christ's apostles twelve
There was no traitor but Judas him selue
Then why should the remnau^t have blame
That gyltlesse were, by you I say the same
Save only this, if ye wol harken me
If any Judas in your covent be
Remeueth him betyme, I you read
If shame or loss may causen any dread
And be nothing dyspleased I you pray
But in this case herkeneth what I say.
In Londen was a priest annuellere
That therein had dwelt many a year
which was so pleasant and so seruysable
Unto the wife, where he was at table
That she would suffer him nothing to pay
For board ne clothyng, went he never so gay
And spending silver had he right ynowe
Thereof no force, I wol proceed as now
And tell forth my tale of the chanon
That brought this priest to confusyon.
This false chanon came upon a day
Unto this priests chamber, where he lay
Besechynge him to leave him a certain
Of gold, and he would quyte him again
Leueth me a mark (quod he) but days three
And at my day I wol quyte it the
And if it so be, chat thou find me false
Another day hang me by the half
This pressed took him a mark and that swyth
And this chanon him thanked often sith
And took his leave, and went forth his wey
And at third day brought his money
And to this priest he took this gold acyen
whereof this priest was glad and fayn
Certes (quod he) nothing anoyeth me
To leave a man a noble, two or three
Or what thing were in my possession
when he so true is of condition
That in no wise he break wol his day
To such a man I can never say nay.
what quod this chanon, should I be untrue
Nay, that were thing fallen of new
Troth is a thing that I wol ever keep
Unto the day, in which I shall crepe
Into my grave, or else god forbede
Believes this as syker as your creed
God thank I, and in good time be it said
That there nas never man yet yuel apayde
For gold ne silver that he to me lent
Ne never falshede in mine heart I meant.
And sir (quod he) now of my priuete
Sens ye so goodlyche have been to me
And kythe to me so great gentylnesse
Somewhat to quyte with your kyndenesse
I wol you show, if ye wol it lere
(I shall it show to you anon right here)
How I can werche in philosophye
Takes good head, ye shall it se with your eye
That I wol done a maistrye or I go.
Ye sir (quod the priest) and wol ye so
Marye thereof I pray you hertely.
At your commandment ser truly
(quod the chanon) and else god forbede
Lo how this thief couthe his service bid
Full sothe is that such proffered seruyse
Stynketh, as witnesses the old wise
And that full sone I wol it verifye
In this chanon, rote of al treachery
That evermore delight has and gladness
Such fendely thoughts in his heart empress
How christ's people he may to mischefe bring
God keep us from his false dissymulyng.
what wist this priest with whom yt he delte
Ne of his harm coming nothing he felt
O sely priest, O sely innocente
with couetyse anon thou shalt be blente
O graceless, full blind is thy conceyte
Nothing art thou ware of his disceyte
Which that this fox has shapen to the
His wylye wrenches thou may not fle
Wherefore to go to the conclusyon
That refers to thy confusyon
Unhappy man, anon I wol me hye
To tell thine vnwytte ne thy folly
And eke the falsnesse of that other wretch
As ferforthe as my connyng wol stretche
This chanon was my lord ye would wene
Sir host in faith, and by the heaven queen
It was another chanon, and not he?
That can an hundred fold more subtelte
He has betrayed folk many a time
Of his falsnesse it doleth me to ryme
Ever when I speak of his falseheed
For shame of him, my chekes waxen reed
Algates they begynnen for to glowe
For redness have I non, right well I know
In my visage, for sumes dyuerce
Of metals, which ye have herd me reherce
Consumed and wasted has my redness
Now take heed of this chanons cursydnesse.
Sir (quod he) to the priest, let your man gone
For quick silver, that we it had anon
And let him bring ounces two or three
And when he comes, as fast shul ye se
A wonder thing, which ye saw never er this
Sir (quod the priest) it shall be done iwys
He badde his servant fetch him this thing
And he al ready was at his byddyng
And went him forth, and came anon again
with this quicksyluer, shortly for to said
And took these ounces three to the chanoun
And he hem laid well and fair adoun
And bade the servant coals for to bring
That he anon might go to his werkyng
The coals right anon were yfet
And this chanon took out a crosselet
Of his bosom, and showed it to the priest
This instrument (quod he) which that thou see
Take in thy hand, and put thy self therein
Of this quicksyluer an ounce and begin
In the name of Christ to wexe a philosopher
There be full few, which I would it profer
To show hem this much of my science
For here shul ye se by experience
That this quicksyluer I wol mortifye
Right in your sight anon withouten lie
And make it as good silver and as fine
As there is any in your purse or mine
Or else where, and make it malliable
And else hold me false and unstable
Among folk ever to appear.
I have a poudre, that cost me dear
Shall make al good, for it is cause of al
My connyng, which I you show shall
Voydeth your man, and let him be therout
And shette the door, whiles we ben about
Our priuetie, that no man us espy
whiles that we werken in our philosophye
Al as he bade, fulfilled was in deed
This ylke servant anon out yede
And his master shette the door anon
And to her labor spedily they gone
This priest at this cursed chanons byddyng
Upon the fire anon set this thing
And blewe the fire, and besyed him full fast
And this chanon into this croslet cast
A powder, I not whereof it was
Ymade, either of chalk, earth, or glass
Or somewhat else, was not worth a fly
To blind with this priest, and badde him hye
These coals for to couchen al above
The crosselet, for in token that I the love
(Quod this chanon) thine hondes two
Shall work al thing that here shall be do.
Grant mercy, quod the priest, and was full glad
And couched coals, as the chanon bad
And while he busy was, this fe^dely wretch
This false chanon, the foul fend him fetch
Out of his bosom took a bechen cole
In which full subtelly was made an hole
And therein was put of silver limayle
An ounce, and stopped was without fail
The hole with wax, to keep the limayle in
And understands that this false gyn
was not made there, but it was made before
And other things that I shall you tell more
Hereafter, which that he with him brought
Er he came there, to begyle him he thought
And so he did, er they went a twynne
Till he had turned him, could he not blynne
It dulleth me, when that I of him speak
On his falshede, feign would I me wreke
If I wist how, but he is here and there
He is so variaunt, he hydeth no where
But takes head syrs now for gods love
He took his cole, of which I spoke above
And in his hand he bare it privily
And whiles the priest couched besely
The coals, as I told you er this
This chanon said, friend ye dove amys
This is not couched as it ought to be
But sone I shall amend it (quod he)
Now let me meddle therwyth but a while
For of you have I pity by saint Gyle
Ye ben right hot, I se well how ye sweet
Have here a cloth and wype away the wete
And while the priest him wyped hace
This chanon took the cole, I shrewe his face
And laid it abouen upon the mydwarde
Of the croslet, and blewe well afterward
Till that the coals gonne fast brenne
Now give us drink, quod this chano^ then
As swyth al shall be well I undertake
Sytte we down, and let us merry make
And when this chanons bechen cole
was brent al, the limayle out of the hole
Into the crosselette anon fell adoun
And so it must needs by resoun
Sens it so even above couched was
But thereof wist the priest nothing, alas
He demed all the coals lyche good
For of the sleyght, nothing he understood.
And when this alkamystre saw his time
Ryseth up sir priest (quod he) and stands by me
And for I wot well yngot have I none
Goth walks forth, and bring a chalk stone
For I wol make it of the same shappe
That an yngot is, if I may have hap
And bring eke with you a bolle or a pan
Full of water, and ye shall se thanne
How that our business shall hap and preue
And yet for ye shall have no mysbeleue
Ne wrong conceyte of me in your absence
I wol not ben out of your presence
But go with you, and come with you again
The chamber door, shortly to said
They opened and shette, and went forth her wey
And forth with hem they carried the key
And comen again wythouten any delay
what should I tarry all the long day
He took the chalk, and shope it in the wise
Of an yngot, as I shall you deuyse
I say he took out of his own sleue
A teyne of silver, yuel mote he cheue
which that was but an ounce of weight
And takes head now of his cursed sleyght
He shope his yngot, in lenght and in bread
Of the teyne, wythouten any dread
So slyly that the priest it not aspyde
And in his sleue again he began it hyde
And from the fire took up his matere
And in to the yngot it put with merry chere
And into the water vessel he it cast
when that him list, and bad the priest as fast
Look what there is, put in thyn hand and grope
Thou shall find there silver as I hope
what dyuel of hell should it else be
Shauynge of silver, silver is parde.
He put in his hand, and took up a reyne
Of silver fine, and glade in every vain
was this priest, when he saw it was so
Gods blyssynge and his mothers also
And al hallowes, have ye sir chanon
Said this priest, and I her malyson
But and ye vouchsafe to teache me
This noble craft and this subtelte
I wol be yours, in all that ever I may
quod the Chanon, yet wol I make assay
The second time, that ye mow take heed
And ben expert of this, and in your need
Another day assay in mine absence
This dysciplyne, and this crafty science
Let take another ounce (quod he) tho
Of quycke silver, wythouten words mo
And done therwyth, as I have done er this
with that other, which that now silver is.
This priest him besyeth in all that he can
To done as this Chanon, this cursed man
Commanded him, and fast blewe the fire
For to come to the effect of his desire
And this chanon, right in the mean while
Al ready was, this priest efte to begyle
And for a countynaunce in his hand bare
An holowe stick, take keep and beware
In the end of which an ounce and no more
Of silver lymaile put was al before
was in his cole, and stopped with wexe well
For to kepen in his lymaile every dele
And whiles this peest was in his business
This chanon with his stick began him dress
To him anon, and his powder cast in
As he did erst, the devil out of his skyn
Him torn, I pray to god for his falshede
For he was ever false in thought and deed
And with his stick, above the crosselette
That was ordained with that false iette
He styrreth the coals, till al relent began
The wax again the fire, as every man
But he a fool be, wot well it mote need
And all that in the hole was, out yede
And into the crosselet hastily it fell
The priest supposed nothing but well
But besyed him fast, and was wonder feign
Supposyng naught but troth, soth to sayn
He was so glad, that I can not express
In no manner his myrthe and his gladness
And to the chanon he proffered efte sone
Body and good: ye (quod the chanon) anon
Tho I be poor, crafty thou shall me find
I warn the yet is there more behind
Is there any coper here within said he?
Ye sir (quod the priest) I trow there by.
Else go bye some, and that aswythe
Now good sir go forth thy way and hythe.
He went his way, and with ye coper he came
And this Chanon in his hand it name
And of that coper wayed out but an ounce
Al to simple is my tongue to pronounce
As to minystre of my wit the doubleness
Of this chanon, rote of al cursydnesse
He seemed fre^dly, to hem yt knew him naught
But he was fendly, both in work and thought
It weryeth me to tell of his falsenesse
And nathelesse, yet wol I it express
To the intent that men may beware thereby
And for none other cause truly.
He put this ounce of coper into the crosselet
And on the fire as swythe he has it set
And cast in powder, and made ye priest to blow
And in his workyng for to stoop low
As he did erste, and al nas but a iape
Right as him list, ye priest he made his ape
And afterward in the yngot he it cast
And in the pan put it at the last
Of water, and in he put his own hand
And in his sleue, as ye beforehonde
Herd me tell, he had a silver teyne
He slily took it out, this cursed heyne
Vnwetynge this priest of his false craft
And in the pannes botome he has it lafte
And in the water rombleth to and fro
And wonder privily took up also
The coper teyne, not knowing this priest
And hyd it, and hent him by the breast
And to him spoke, and thus said in his game
Stoupeth adowne, by god ye be to blame
Helps me now, as I did you wylere
Put in your hand, and looks what is there
This priest took up this silver teyne anon
And then said the chanon, let us gone
with these three teines, which we han wrout
To some goldsmyth, and wete if it be ought
For by my faith, I nolde for my hoode
But if it were silver fine and good
And that as swyth proved shall be.
Unto ye goldsmyth, with these teynes three
They went, and put them in assaye
So fire and hammer, might no man say nay
But they were as them ought for to be.
This sotted pressed, who was gladder the^ he
was never bird gladder against the day
Ne nyghtyngale, against the ceson of May
was never none, that list better to sing
Ne lady lustyer in carollynge
And for to speak of love and womanhede
Ne knight in arms, to don a hardy deed
To standen in grace of his lady dear
Then had this priest, this craft to lere
And to the chanon, thus he spoke, and said
For the love of God, that for us al deyd
And as I may deserve it unto you
what shall this receipt cost, tells me now?
By our lady (quod this chanon) it is dear
I warn you well, save I and a friar
In England, there can no man it make.
No force (quod he) now sir for gods sake
what shall I pay, tell me I you pray.
I wys (quod he) it is full dear I say
Sir at one word if that ye list it have
Ye shall pay forty pound, so god me save
And nere the frendshyp that ye did er this
To me, ye should pay more ywys.
This priest ye su^me of forty pound anon
Of nobles fette, and told hem euerychone
To this chanon, for this ylke receyte
Al his worchynge was fraud and dysceyte
Sir pressed he said, I keep for to have no loos
Of my craft, for I would it were kept cloos
And as ye love me, keeps it secre
For and men know al my subtelte
By god men would have so great envy
To me, because of my philosophye
I should be deed, there were none other way
God it forbid (quod the priest) what ye say
Yet had I lever spend all the good
which that I have, and else wax I wood
Then that ye should fallen in such myschefe
For your good will have ye right good prefe
(quod the chanon) and farewell grant mercy
He went his way, and never the priest him sey
After that day: and when that this pressed should
Maken assay, at such time as he would
Of this receyte, farewell it nolde not be
Lo thus be iaped and begyled was he
Thus makes he his introduction
To bring folk to her destruction.
Consydereth syrs, how in each estate
Betwyxt men and gold is debate
So ferforth, that uneaths there is none
This moultiplyenge blyndeth so many one
That in good faith, I trow that it be
The greatest cause of such scarsite
These philosophers speaken so mystely
In this craft, that men can not come thereby
For any wit that men have now a days
They may well chattre and ia^gle as do ye iayes
And in her terms, set her lust and pain
But to her purpose shul they never attain
A man may lightly learn, if he have ought
To multiplye, and bring his good to naught
Lo, such a lucre is in this lusty game
A man's mirth it wol turn al to grame
And empten also great and heavy purses
And maken folk to purchase curses
Of hem that han also her good ylente
O fie for shame, they that han be burnt
Alas, can not they fly the fyres hete
Ye that it vsen, I read that ye it let
Lest yt ye lesen al, for better the^ never is late
Never to thryue, were to long a date
Though yt ye prolle aye, ye shall it never find
Ye ben as bold as is bayarde the blind
That blo^dereth forth, and peril casts he none
He is as bold to run against a stone
As for to go beside in the way
So faren ye, that multiplyen I say
If that your eyes can not seen aryght
Looks that your mind lack not his sight
For though ye look never so broad and stare
Ye shall not win a myte in that chaffare
But wast all that ye may repe and run
wythdrawe the fire, lest it to fast brenne
Medleth with that art no more I mean
For if ye done, your thryfte is gone full clean
And right as swyth I wol you tellen here
what yt the philosophers sayn in this matere
Lo thus says Arnolde of the new town
As his rosarye makes mencioun
He says right thus, wythouten any lie
There may no man Mercurye mortifye
But if it be with his brothers knowlegyng
Lo how yt he, which first said this thing
Of philosophers father was, Hermes
He says how the dragon doutles
Ne dies not, but if he be slain
with his brother: And this is for to said
By the dragon Mercurye, and none other
He understood yt brimstone was his brother
That out of Sol and Luna were ydrawe
And therefore said he, take heed to my saw
Let no man busye him this art for to seche
But he that the entencion and speech
Of philosophers understand can
And if he do, he is a lend man
For this science, and this connyng (quod he)
Is of the secre of the secres parde.
Also there was a dysciple of Plato
That on a time said his master to
As his book Semor wol bear witness
And this was his demand in sothfastnesse
Tell me the name of the preuy stone
And Plato answered unto him anon
Take the stone that Tytanos men name.
which is ye (quod he) Magnatia is the same
Said Plato: yea sir and is it thus?
This is ignotum per ignotius
what is Magnatia, good sir I you pray.
It is a water that is made I say
Of elements four (quod Plato)
Tell me the roche good sir (quod he tho)
Of that water, if it be your will.
Nay nay (quod Plato) certain that I nyll
The philosophers were ysworne echone
That they should dyscouer it unto none
Ne in no book it write in no manner
For unto Christ it is so lefe and dear
That he wol not that it dyscouered be
But where it lyketh to his deite
Man to enspyre and eke for to defend
when that him lyketh, lo this is his end
Then conclude I thus, sens ye god of heaven
Ne will not that the philosophers nemen
How that a man shall come unto this stone
I read as for the best, let it gone
For who so makes god his aduersarye
As for to werch any thing in contrary
Unto his will, certes never shall he thrive
Though that he multiplye term of his live
And there a point, for ended is my tale
God send every true man bote of his bale.
Here ends the tale of the chanons yeman, a no here follows the doctor of
phisykes prologue.
When this yeman his tale ended had
Of this false chanon, which was so bad
Our host began say, truly and certain
This priest was begyled, sothe for to said
He wenynge for to be a philosopher
Till he right no gold left in his cofer
And sothly this priest had alther iape
This cursed chanon put in his hode an ape
But al this pass I over as now
Sir doctor of phisyke, yet I pray you
Tell us a tale of some honest matere
It shall be done, if that ye wol it here
Said this doctor, and his tale began anon
Now good me^ (quod he) herkeneth euerychone.
Here ends the doctor of phisykes prologue, and here begins his tale.
THere was, as tells us Tytus Liuius
A knight, that clypped was Virginius
Fulfilled of honor and of worthynesse
And strong of friends, and of richesse
A daughter he had by his wife
And never had he mo in all his life
Fair was this maid in excellent beauty
Abouen every wight that man may se
For nature has, with sovereign diligence
Formed her in so great excellence
As though she would say, lo I nature
Thus can I form and paynt a creature
when that me list, who can me counterfete
Pigmalio^ not, though he always forge and beat
Or grave or paynte, for I dare well said
Appelles, or zeusis, should werche in vain
To grave or paynte, or forge or beat
If they presumed me to counterfete
For he that is the former principal
Has made me his vycar general
To form and paynte erthely creaturis
Right as me list, for all thing in my cure is
Under the moon, that may wane and wax
And for my work, nothing wol I axe
My lord and I ben fully of a cord
I made her to the worship of my lord
So do I al mine other creatures
Of what color they be, or of what fygures
Thus seems me that nature would say.
This maid was of age twelve year and tway
In which that nature has such delight
For right as she can paynte a lyllye white
And rody as rose, right with such paynture
She painted has this noble creature
Er she was borne, upon her lymmes fre
Were als bright as such colors should be
And Phoebus died had her tresses great
Like to the stremes of his burned hete
And if that excellent were her beauty
A thousand fold more virtuous was she
In her ne lacks no conditioun
That is to preyse, as by discretioun
As well in body as in ghost, chaste was she
For which she floured in virginite
with all humylyte and abstynence
With all attemperaunce and patience
with mesure eke, and beryng of array
Discrete she was in answeryng always
Tho she were wise as Pallas, dare I sayn
(Her faconde eke, full womanly and plain)
No counterfayted terms had she
To seem wise: but after her degree
She spoke, and al her words more and less
Sownyng in virtue and in gentyllesse
Shamfast she was, i^ mayde^s shamfastnesse
Constant in heart, and ever in business
To drive her out of al slogardry
Bacchus had of her mouth no maistry
For wine and youth done Venus encrece
As men in fire wol casten oil or greece
And of her own virtue vnconstrayned
She has full often her sick yfayned
For that she would slye the company
Where lykely was to treten of folly
As is at feestes, at revels, and at daunces
That been occasyons of dalyaunces
Such things maken children for to be
To sone ripe and bold, as men may se
which is full perilous, and has been yore
For all to sone may she learn lore
Of boldness, when she is a wife.
And ye maistresses in your old life
That lords daughters han in governance
Ne takes of my word no diplesaunce
Think that ye ben set in gouernynges
Of lords daughters, only for two things
Either for ye han kept your honest
Either ye han fall in freelte
And known well enough the old dance
And conne forsake fully mischaunce
For evermore, therefore for Christ's sake
Keeps well tho that ye undertake.
A thief of venyson that has forlafte
His lykerousnesse, and al his thieves craft
Can keep a forest best of any man
Now keeps hem well, for and ye wol ye can
Looks well, to no vice that ye assent
Lest ye be dampened for your yuel intent
For who so does, a traitor is certain
And takes keep of that I shall you sayn
Of al treyson sovereign pestilence
Is, when a wight betrayeth innocence
Ye fathers, and eke ye mothers also
Though ye han children, be it one or mo
Yours is the charge of al her sufferaunce
whiles they ben in your governance
Beth ware, that by ensample of your lyueng
Either by your negligence in chastisynge
That they ne perish: for I dare well say
If that they don, ye shall full sore obey
Under a shepeherde soft and neglygent
The wolf has many a sheep and lamb to rent
Suffyseth one ensample now as here
For I mote turn again to my matere.
This maid, of which I tell my tale express
She kept her selue, she neded no maistresse
For in her lyueng maidens might read
As in a book, every good work and deed
That longs to a maid virtuous
She was so prudent and so bountuous
For which out spronge on every side
Both of her beauty and of her bounte wide
That through ye lord they preysed her echon
That loved virtue, save envy alone
That sorye is of other men's well
And glad is of her sorrow, and vnhele
The doctor makes this discriptioun
This maid went on a day into the town
Toward the temple, with her mother dear
As is of young maidens the manner.
Now was there a Justice in the town
That governor was of that regioun
And so befyl, this Justice his eyes cast
Upon this maid, auisyng her full fast
As she came foreby, there as the Judge stood
Anon his heart changes and his mode
So was he caught with beauty of this maid
And to himself full privily he said
This maid shall be mine for any man
Anon the fend into his heart can
And taught him suddenly, by what sleyght
The maid to his purpose win he might
For certes, by no force, ne by no mede
Him thought he was not able for to speed
For she was strong of friends, and eke she
Confyrmed was in such sovereign beauty
That well he wist he might her never wyn
As for to make her with her body sin
For which with great delyberatioun
He sent after a clyent into the town
The which he knew full subtyl and full bold
This judge unto this clie^t his tale has told
In secret wise, and made him to ensure
He should (...) it unto no creature
And if he ^yd, he should lose his head
when assented was this cursed read
Glad was the judge, and made good chere
And yaue him gifts precious and dear
when shapen was al this conspiracy
Fro point to point, how that his lechery
Parfourmed should be full subtelly
As ye shullen after here openly
Home goes this clyent ye hight Claudius
This false judge, that hight Appius
So was his name, for it is no fable
But know for an hystorial thing notable
The sentence of it sothe is out of doubt
This false judge goes now fast about
To hasten his delight, all that he may
And so byfell, that sone after on a day
This false judge, as tells us the story
As he was wont, sat in his consystorie
And yaue his domes upon sundry caas
This false client came forth a full great paas
And said lord, if it be your will
As does me right upon this pytous byll
In which I plain upon Virginius
And if he wol say it is not thus
I wol prove it, and find good witness
That soth is that my byl wol express
The judge answerde, of this in his absence
I may not give diffynite sentence
Let do him call, and I wol gladly here
Thou shall have right, and no wrong here
Virginius came to wete the iuges will
And right anon was radde this cursed byl
The sentence of it, was as ye shall here.
To you my lord Appius so dear
Shows your poor servant claudius
How that a knight called Virginius
Against the law, and against al equite
Holds express against the will of me
My servant, which yt is my thrale by right
which from mine house was stole^ on a night
whiles he was full young, I wol it preue
By witness lord, so that ye you not grieve
She is not his daughter, what so he say
wherefore my lord justice I you pray
Yield me my thrale, if it be your will
Lo this was all the sentence of that byll.
Virginius began upon the clyent behold
But hastily, er he his tale told
He would have defended it, as should a knight
And by witness of many a true wight
That al was false, that said his aduersarye
This cursed judge would no longer tarry
Ne here a word more of Virginius
But yaue his judgment, and said thus.
I deem anon this client his servant have
Thou shall no le^ger her in thine house save
Go bring her forth, and put her in our ward
This clie^t shall have his thral, thus I award
And when this worthy knight Virginius
Through the assent of the judge Appius
Must by force his dear daughter yeuen
Unto the judge, in lechery to lyuen
He goes him home, and set him in his hall
And let anon his dear daughter call
And with face deed as ashen cold
Upon her humble face he began behold
with fathers pity, stickyng through his heart
Al would he not from his purpose convert.
Daughter (quod he) Virginia by thy name
There ben two ways, either death or shame
That thou must suffer, alas yt I was borne
For never thou deseruedest wherforne
To dyen, with a sword or with a knyfe
Oh dear daughter, comfort of my life
which I have fostred up with such plesau^ce
That thou ne were out of my remembrance
O daughter, which that art my last woe
And in my life my last joy also
O iemme of chastity, in patience
Take thou thy death, this is my sentence
For love, and not for hate thou must be deed
My pytous hand mote smite of thine heed
Alas that ever Appius the sey
Thus has he falsely judged the to dey
And told her all the case, as ye before
Han herd, it needs not to tell it more
O mercy dear father (quod this maid)
And with that word, both her arms laid
About his neck, as she was wont to do
The teeres braste out of her eyes two
And said, O good father shall I dye
Is there no grace? is there no remedy?
No certes dear daughter mine (quod he)
Then give me leave father mine (quod she)
My death to complain a little space
For parde, Iepte yaue his daughter grace
For to complain, er he her slough, alas
And god it wot, nothing was her trespass
But that she ran her father first to se
To welcome him with great solempnyte
And with that word she fell a swoune anon
And after, whon her swounynge was gone
She ryseth up, and to her father said
Blyssed be god that I shall dye a maid
Give me my death, er that I have a shame
Does with your child your will a gods name
And with ye word, she prays him full often
That with his swerd he should smitte her soft
And with that word, a swoune down she fell
Her father, with sorrowful heart and fell
Her heed of smote, and by the top it hente
And to the judge he it yaue in present
As he sat in dome in consystorye.
when the judge it saw as says the storye
He bade take him, and hang him also fast
But right anon all the people in thrast
To save the knight, for routh and for pytie
For known was the judges iniquity
The people anon had suspect in this thing
By manner of this clyentes chalengynge
That it was by the assent of Appius
They wyste well that he was lecherous
For which unto Appius they gone
And casten him in prison right anon
where as he slow him self, and Claudius
That servant was unto this Appius
was demed for to be hanged upon a tree
But Virginius, of his great pity
So prayed for him, that he was exiled
And else certes he had been begyled
The remnaunt were hanged, more and less
That consented were to this cursydnesse
Here may men se how syn has his merit
Beware, for no man wot how god will smite
In no degree, ne in no manner wise
The worm of conscience wol arise
Of wicked life, though it so privy be
That no man wot of it but god and he
whether he be leude man or lered
He not how sone he may be affered
Therefore I read you this counsel take
Forsake sin, or sin you forsake
Here ends the doctor of Phisykes tale, and follows the words of the host.
Our host began swear as he were wood
Harowe (quod he) by nails and by blood
This was a false thief, and a cursed justice
As shameful death, as heart may deuyse
Come to the justice and her adu^cas
Algate this sely maiden is slain, alas
Alas to dear bought she her beauty
wherefore I say, that al men may se
That yeftes of fortune, or of nature
Ben cause of death of many a creature
Her beauty was her death, I dare well said
Alas so pytously as she was slain
But here of wol I not proceed as now
Men have full often more harm then prowe
But truly mine own master dear
This is a pytous tale for to here
But nathelesse, pass over is no force
I pray to god to save thy gentel cors
And thy vrinalles, and thy iordanes
Thine ypocras, and eke thy galyanes
And every box full of letuarye
God bless hem and our lady saint Marye
So mote I the, thou art a propre man
And ylyke a prelate, by saint Runian
Save that I can not speak well in term
But well I wot, you do mine heart to yerne
That I have almost ycaught a cardyacle
By corpus domini, but I have tryacle
Or else a draught of moist corny ale
Or but I here anon an other merry tale
My heart is lost, for pity of this maid
Thou belamy, thou Johan pardoner he said
Tell us some merry tale, or iape, right anon.
It shall be done (quod he) by saint Runyon
But first (quod he) here at this ale stake
I wol both drink, and eat of a cake
But right anon, these gentyls began to cry
Nay, let him tell us of no rebaudrye
Tell us some moral thing, that we mow lere
Some wit, and than wol we gladly here
I grant (quod he) twys, but I mote think
On some honest thing, whiles yt I drink.
Here end the words of the host, and here follows the prologue of the
Pardoner.
LOrdynges (quod he) in church when I preche
I pain me to have an hauteyn speech
And ring it out, as round as does a bell
For I can al be root, that I tell
My teme is always, and ever was
(Radix omnium malorum est cupiditas)
First I pronounce fro whens I come
And than my bylles I show al and some
Our ^^ege lord seal on my patent
That show I first, my body to warent
That no man be so bold, priest ne clerk
M^ to distourbe, of Christ's holy work
And after that, tell I forth my tales
Bulls of Popes, and of Cardynales
Of Patriarchs, and of Bishops I show
And in latin I speak words a few
To sauer with my predication
And for to steer men to devotion
Than show I forth my long crystal stones
Ycrammed full of cloutes and of bones
Relykes they ben, as wene they echone
Than have I in laton a sholderbone
which that was of an holy jews sheep
Good men say I, take of my words keep
If that this bone be washen in any well
If cow or calfe, sheep, or ox swel
That any worm has eeten, or hem stonge
Take water of this well, and wash his tongue
And it is hole anon: and farthermore
Of pockes, and of scabbes, and every sore
Shall sheep be hole, that of this well
Drinks a draught, take keep of that I tell
If the good man that the beestes owes
wol every day, er the cock croweth
Fasting drink of this well a draught
As thilke holy jew our elders taught
His beestes and his store shall multiplye
And syrs, also it heals ielousye
For though a man be fall in ielous rage
Let make with this water his potage
And never shall he more his wife mistryst
Though he in sothe the defaute by her wist
Al had she take priests two or three.
Here is a myttayne eke, that ye may se
He that his hand wol put in this mittayne
He shall have multiplyeng of his grain
when he has sown, be it whete or otes
So that he offer good pens or grotes
And men and women, o thing I warn you
If any wight ben in this church now
That has done sin horrible, that he
Dare not for shame of it shriuen be
Or any woman, be she young or old
That has made her husbonde coke would
Such folk shul have no power ne no grace
To offer to my relykes in this place
And who so fyndeth him out of such blame
Comes up and offer in gods name
And I assoyle him by the auctorite
Such as by bulle was granted to me.
By this gaude have I won every year
An hundred mark, sythen I was pardonere
I stand like a clerk in my pulpet
And the leude people been down yset
I preche so as ye have lered here before
And tell an hundred iapes more
Than pain I me to stretche forth my neck
And este and west, upon the people I beck
As does a dove, syttyng upon a berne
My hondes and my tongue gone full yerne
That it is joy to se my business
Of avarice, and of such cursydnesse
Al my prechyng is for to maken hem fre
To yeuen her pens, and namely unto me
For mine intent is not but for to win
And nothing for correction of sin
I recke never, when that they ben beryed
Though her souls gone a blacburyed
For certes many a predycation
Comes often time of yuel entencion.
Some for pleasaunce of folk, and for flatery
To ben auaunced by hipocrysy
And some for vein glory, and some for hate
For when I dare not other ways debate
Than wol I sting hem with my tongue smerte
In prechyng, so that he shall not asterte
To ben diffamed falsely, if that he
Has trespased to my brethren or to me
For though I tell not his propre name
Men shall well know that it is the same
By signs, or by other circunstaunces
Thus quyte I folk, yt does us displesau^ces
Thus put I out my venym under hew
Of holiness, to semen holy and true
But shortly mine intent I wol deuyse
I preche of nothing but of couetyse
Therefore my teme is yet, and ever was
Radix omnium malorum est cupiditas.
Thus can I preach against the same vice
Which that I use, and that is avarice
But though my self be gilty in that sin
Yet can I maken other folk to twynne
From avarice, and sore hem to repent
But that is not my principal intent
I preche nothing but for couetyse
Of this matere, it ought enough suffyse.
Than tell I hem ensamples many one
Of old stories, long time agone
For leude people louen tales old
which things they can well report and hold
What trow ye? whiles that I may preche
And win gold and silver for to teache
That I wol live in pouert wilfully?
Nay nay, I thought it never trewly
For I wol preche and beg in so^drie lands
I wol not do no labor with mine hondes
Ne make baskettes, and live thereby
Because I wol not beg idelly
I wol none of the apostels counterfete
I wol have money, malt, chese, and whete
Al were it yeuen of the poorest page
Or of the poorest wydowe in a village
Though her children should sterue for famy^
Nay, I wol drink the lycoure of the wine
And have a ioly wenche in every town
But herkeneth lordynges my conclusyoun
Your lykyng is that I should tell a tale
Now I have dro^ken a draught of corny ale
By god I hope I shall tell you a thing
That shall by reason ben at your liking
For though my self be a full vycious man
A moral tale yet I you tell can
which I am wont to preche, for to win
Now holds your peace, my tale I woll begin.
Here ends the Pardoners prologue, and here follows his tale.
IN Flaunders whilo^ there was a company
Of young folk, that hau^ted folly
As hasarde, ryotte, Stews, and tauernes
Where as with harpes Lutes, and Geternes
They dauncen and playen at dyce night and day
And eeten also, over that her might may
Through which they don the dyuel sacrifyce
within the dyuels temple, in cursed wise
By superfluite abominable
Her oaths ben so great and so damnable
That it is grisly for to here hem swear
Our blissed lords body they al to tere
Hem thought jews rent him not enough
And each of hem at others sin lough.
And right anon comen in tomblesteres
Fetys and small and young froytereres
Syngers wilh harpes, bands, and waferers
which that been verily the dyuels officers
To kyndlen and blow the fire of lechery
That is anexed unto glotony
The holy writ take I to my witness
That lechery is in wine and dronkenesse.
Lo how that dronken Loathe unkindly
Lay by his daughters two on wetyngly
So drunk he was, he nist what he wrought
And therefore sore repent him ought
Herodes, who so wol the stories seche
There may ye learn, and by ensample teache
when he of wine was replete at his feste
Right at his own table, yaue his heste
To sleen Johan the Baptiste full giltlesse
Seneke says eke good words doutlesse
He says he can no difference find
Betwixt a man that is out of his mind
And a man that is dronklewe
But woodnesse that is fallen in a shrewe
Perseuereth longer than does dronknesse
O gloteny, full of cursydnesse
O cause first of our confusyon
O original of our dampnacion
Till Christ had bout us with his blood again
Lo how dear, shortly for to sayn
Bought was first this cursed vilanye
Corrupt was all this world through glotony
Adam our forn father, and his wife also
Fro Paradyce, to labor and to woe
Were driven for that vice, it is no dread
For whiles that Adam fasted, as I read
He was in paradyce, and when that he
Ete of the fruit, defended on the tree
Anon he was out cast to woe and pain
O gloteny, on the well ought us to plain.
Oh, wyste a man how many maladyes
Follows of excess and of glotenyes
He would ben the more mesurable
Of his dyete, syttyng at his table
Alas the short throat, the tender mouth
Makes that este, and west, north, and southe,
In earth, in air, in water, man to swynke
To getten a gloton dayntye mete and drink
Of this matter, o Poule well canste thou trete
Mete unto womb, and womb eke unto mete
Shall god distroy both as Poule says
Alas, a soul thing it is by my faith
To say this word, and fouler is the deed
when men so drinks of the white and read
That of his trothe he makes his prive
Through thilke cursed superfluite.
The apostle says, weeping full pitously
There walken many, of which told have I
I say it now weeping with pitous voice
There ben enemies Of Christ's croyse
Of which ye end is death, womb is her god
O belly, O womb, O stynkyng cod
Fulfilled of donge and of corrupcioun
At either end of the soul is the soun
How great cost and labor is to find
These cokes? how they sta^pe, strain, and grind
And turn substance in to accident
To fulfill al thy lykerous talent
Out of the hard bones knocken they
The mary, for they cast it not awey
That may go through the gullet safe and sote
Of spycerie, of leaves, bark, and rote
Shall ben his sauce ymade by delight
To maken him have a newer apetyte
But certes he that haunteth such delytes
Is deed, whiles that he lives in the vices
A lecherouse thing is wine and dro^knesse
It is full of stryuyng and of wretchydnesse
Oh dronken man, disfygured in thy face
Sower is thy breath, foul art thou to enbrace
And through thy dro^ke^ nose sowneth ye soun
As tho thou saydest aye, Sampson Sa^pson
And yet god wot Sa^pson dro^k never wine
Thou fallest, as it were a stycked swyne
Thy tongue is lost, and al thine honest cure
For drynkennesse is very sepulture
Of man's wit, and his discretion
In whom that drink has domynation
He can no counsel keep, it is no dread
Now keep you fro the white and fro ye read
Namely fro the white wine of Lepe
That is to sell in Fish street and in Chepe
This wine of Spain crepeth subtelly
In other wynes growyng fast by
Of which rises such fumosyte
That when a man has dro^ck draughtes three
And weneth that he be at home in Chepe
He is in Spain, right at the town of Lepe
Naught at Rochel, ne at Bordeaux town
And than wol he say, Sampsoun Sa^psoun
But herkeneth lordiges o word, I you pray
That all the sovereign acts, dare I say
Of victories in the old Testament
That through very god, that is omnipotent
Were don in abstinence and in prayere
Looks the Bible, and there ye mow it lere.
Looks Attyla, the great conqueror
Deyd in his sleep, with shame and dishonor
Bledyng aye at his nose in dronknesse
A captain should live in soberness.
And over all this, auyse you right well
what was commanded unto Lamuel?
Not Samuel: but Lamuel say I
Redeth the Bible, and fyndeth it expressly
Of wine yeuyng to hem that have justice
No more of this, for it may enough suffyce.
And now that I have spoke of glotenye
Now wol I defend you hasardrie
Hasarde is very mother of lesynges
And of disceyte, and cursed for swerynges
Blaspheme of christ, ma^slauter, and wast also
Of battle often time, and of other mo
It is reprefe, and contrary to honor
For to be holden a common hasardour
And ever the hyer that he is of estate
The more he is holden desolate
If that a prince use hasardrie
In all governance and policy
He is as by comen opinyon
Hold the less in reputacion.
Styllebon, that was hold a wise ambassador
was sent in to Corinthe with full great honor
Fro Calydone, to maken hem alyaunce
And when he came, happed this chance
That all the greatest that were of that land
Playeng at hasarde he hem fond
For which, as soon as it might be
He stale him home again to his country
And said, there wol I not lose my name
I nyl not take on me so great defame
For to alye you to none hasardours
Sends other wyser enbassadours
For by my truth, me were lever dye
Than I should you to hasardours alye
For ye that been so gloriouse in honors
Shall not alye you with hasardours
As by my will, ne by my tretie
This wise philosopher, thus said he.
Look eke how to king Demetrius
The king of Parthes, as the book says us
Sent him a pair of dyce of gold in scorn
For he had used hasardrie there byforne
For which he held his glory and his renoun
At no value or reputacioun
Lords might find other manner play
Honest enough to drive the day away.
Now wol I speak of oaths false and great
A word or two, as other books entreat
Great sweryng is thing abhomynable
And false sweryng is yet more reprouable
The hye god forbade sweryng at all
witness of Matthew, but in special
Of sweryng, says the holy Ieromye
Thou shalt swear soth thyn oaths, and not lie
And swear in dome and eke in rightwysnesse
But idle sweryng is a cursydnesse.
Behold and se that in the first table
Of hye gods hestes honorable
How that the second heste of him is this
Take not my name in ydelnesse amys
Lo, he rather forbyddeth such sweryng
Than homicide, or any other cursed thing
I say as thus, by order it stondeth
This knows they yt his hestes understands
How that the second heste of god is that
And further more, I wol the tell al plat
That vengeance shall not part fro his hou^
That of his oaths is to outragyous
By gods preciouse heart, and his bones
And by the blood of Christ, shed for us ones
Seven is my chance, and thyn five and three
By gods arms, if thou falsely play me
This daggar shall through thyn heart go
This fruit comes of thylke bones two
For swering, ire, falsnesse, and homicyde
Now for yt love of Christ, that for us did
Leaves your oaths, both great and small
For I shall tell you a meruaylous tale.
These ryottours three, of which I tell
Long erste or prime ronge any bell
were set hem in a tavern to drink
And as they sat, they herd a bell clynke
Byforne a cors, yt was carried to his grave
That one of hem began call to his knave
Go bette (quod he) and ask redely
what cors is this, that passes forth by
And look that thou report his name well.
Sir (quod he) it needs never a dele
It was me told er ye came here two hours
He was parde an old fellow of yours
Al suddenly was he slain to night
For drunk as he sat on his benche upright
There came a privy thief, men clepen death
That in this country all the people slethe
And with his spear he smote his heart a two
And went his way, withouten words mo
He has a thousand slain, this pestilence
And master, er ye come in his presence
Me thinks that it were necessary
For to beware of such an aduersarye
Bethe ready for to meten him ever more
Thus taught me my dame, I say no more.
By saint Mary, said this tauernere
the child says sothe, for he has this year
Hence over a mile, slain in a great village
Both man and woman, child and page
I now his habytacioun be there
To ben auysed, great wisdom it were
Er that he did a man dishonor.
Yea gods arms (quod this ryottour)
Is it such peril with him for to mete?
I shall him seche by style and eke by street
I make a vow, by gods digne bones
Herkeneth fellows, we three ben al ones
Let each of us hold up his hand to other
And each of us become others brother
And we wol slay this false traitor death
He shall be slain, that so many slethe
By gods dignite, er that it be night
To gider ha^ these three her trouthes plight
To live and dye each of him with other
As though he were his own brother
And up they sterten al dronken in this rage
And forth they gone, toward that village
Of which the tauerner has spoke before
And many a grisly oath han they swore
And Christ's blessed body they to rent
Death shall be deed, and we may him hent.
when they han gone not fully a mile
Right as they would have trodden over a style
An old poor man with hem met
This old man full mekely hem grette
And said, now lordynges god you se.
The proudest of these ryottours three
Answerde again, what chorle with hard grace
why art thou al forwrapped save thy face?
why lyuest thou so long in so great age?
This old man began loken in his visage
And said thus: for I can not find
A man, though I walked into Jude
Neither in cite, ne in no village
That wol change his youth for mine age
And therefore mote I have mine age still
As long time as it is gods will.
Ne death alas, nyl not have my life
Thus walk I like a restless caityfe
And on ye ground, which is my mothers gate
I knock with my staff erlyche and late
And say, leave mother let me in
Lo how I vanyshe, flesh, blood, and skyn
Alas, when shall my bones ben at rest
Mother with you would I change my cheste
That in my chamber long time has be
Ye for an heren cloute to wrappe in me
But yet to me she wol not done that grace
For which full welked is my face
But syrs, to you it is no curtesye
To speken unto an old man villanye
But he trespace in word either in deed
In holy writ, ye may your self well read
Against an old man, hoore upon his heed
Ye should arise, therefore I you read
Ne does unto an old man no harm as now
No more than ye would a man did you
In age, if that I may so long abide
And god be with you, whether ye go or ride
I mote go thither as I have to go
Nay old chorle, by god thou shall not so
Said these other hasardours anon
Thou partest not so lightly by saint John
Thou spakest right now of thilk trayter death
That in this country al our friends slethe
Have here my truth thou art his espy
Tell where he is, or else thou shall dye
By god and by the holy sacrament
For sothely thou art of his assent
To slay us young folk, thou false thief.
Now syrs, if it be to you sy lefe
To find death, turn up this crooked way
For in that grove I left him by my fay
Under a tree, and there he wol abide
Ne for your boste he nyl him nothing hyde
Se ye yo^der oak, right there ye shall hi^ find
God save you, that bought again mankind
And you amend, thus said thus old man
Than eueryche of these ryottours ran
Till they came to the tree, and there they found
Floreynes of gold fine, ycoyned round
well nigh a seven bushels, as hem thought
No longer than after death they sought
But each of hem so glad was of that sight
For that the Floreyns so fair ben and bright
That down they sytte, by the precious hord
The worst of hem spoke the first word.
Brethern (quod he) take keep what I say
My wit is great, though I board and play
This tresure has fortune to us yeuen
In myrthe and iolyte our life to lyuen
And lightly as it comes, so wol we spend
Hey, gods precious heart: who wend
To day, that we should have so fair a grace?
But might thus gold be carried fro this place
Home to my house, or else to yours
(For well I wot that all this gold is ours)
Than were we in hye felycite
But trewly by day it may not be
Men would say, that we were thieves strong
And for our own tresoure than us honge
This tresour must ycaried be by night
As wisely and as ^^ily as it might
Wherefore I read, let look among us al
To draw, and let se where the cut wol fall
He that has yt shortest cut, with heart blyth
Shall run to town, and that full swythe
To bring us breed and drink full privily
And two of us shall keep full subtelly
This tresour well, and if he wol not tarry
when it is night, we wol this tresour carye
By one assent, where as us list best
That one of hem brought grass in his fest
And bad he^ draw, and look on who^ it would fall
And it fell on the youngest of hem al
And forth toward the town he went anon
And al so sone as he was gone
That one of hem spoke unto that other
Thou wost well, thou art my sworn brother
Thy profit wol I tell the right anon
Thou woste well that our fellow is gone
And here is gold, and that full great plente
That shall departed be among us three
But n^thelesse, if that I can shape it so
That it departed were among us two
Had I not done a friendly turn to the
That other answered, I not how yt might be
I wol well that the gold were ours two
what should we do, that it might be so?
Shall it be counsel (said the first shrewe)
And I shall tell the in words few
what we wol done, and bring it well about.
I grant (quod that other) out of doubt
That by my troth, I wol yt not bewrayne
Now (quod he) thou wost well we ben twayn
And twain of us shall stronger be than one
Look when he is set, and than anon
Arise, as though thou would with him play
And I shall ryuen him through ye sides tway
whiles yt thou strugglest with him as in game
And with thy dagger, look thou do the same
And than shall all the gold departed be
My dear friend, betwixt the and me
Than may we both our lusts fulfill
And play at dyce, right at our own will
And thus accorded ben these shrewes tway
To slay the third, as ye herd me say
This youngest, which yt went to the town
Full often in his heart he rolled up and down
The beauty of these floreyns fair and bright
O lord (quod he) if so were that I might
Have all this tresour to my self alone
There nys no man, that lives under trone
Of god, that should live so merry as I
And at the last the feude our enemy
Put in his thought, that he should poison bey
with which he might sleen his fellows twey
For why, the fend fond him in such living
That he had leave to sorrow him to bring
For this was utterly his entente
To sleen hem both, and never to repent.
And forth he goth, no longer would he tarry
In to the town, unto a potecary
And prayde him that he wol him sell
Some poison, that he might his rattes quel
And eke there was a polkat in his hawe
That as he said, his capons had yslawe
And said, he would wreken him if yt he might
Of vermyn, that distroyed hem by night.
The potecary answerde, thou shall have
A thing, as wisely god my soul save
In all this world there nys no creature
That eats or drinks of this confecture
Not but the mou^tenau^ce of a corn of whete
That he ne shall his life anon forlete
Yea sterue he shall, and that in less while
Tha^ thou would gone a pace, not but a mile
This poison is so hard and so violent
This cursed man has in his hand hent
This poison in a bore, and sithe he ran
In to the next street unto a man
And borrowed him large botels three
And in the two, the poison poured he
The third he kept clean for his drink
For all the night he shope him for to swynke
In caryeng of the gold out of that place
And when this riottour, with sorry grace
Had fylde with him his great bottels three
To his fellows again repaired he.
what needs it thereof to sermon more?
For right as they had cast his death before
Right so they han him slain, and that anon
And when this was done, than spoke ye one
Now let us sit and drink, and make us merry
And afterward we wolne his body bury
And after that it happed hem per caas
The one took the botel, therein yt poison was
And drunk, and yaue his fellow drink also
Through which anon they stern both two.
But certes I suppose that Auicenne
wrote never in no cannon, ne in no fenne
More wonder sorrows of enpoysonnyng
Than had these wretches two in her ending
Thus ended ben these homicides two
And eke the false enpoysonner also.
O cursed sin, full of al cursydnesse
O traitors homicide, O wickydnesse
O glotenye, luxure, and hasardye
Thou blasphemour of Christ with vilanye
And oaths great, of usage and of pride
Alas mankind, how may it betyde
That to thy creatoure, which yt the wrought
And with his precious blood the bought
Thou art so false and so unkind, alas?
Now good me^, godforyeue you your trespass
And ware you fro the sin of auaryce
Mine holy pardon, may you al waryshe
So that ye offer nobles or starlynges
Other else silver spones, broches, or rings
Boweth your heed under this bulle
Comes up ye wives, and offreth of your wol
Your names here I enter in my roll anon
In to the bliss of heaven shul ye al gone
I you assoyle by mine high powere
Ye that offren, as clean and eke clear
As ye were borne. Lo syrs, thus I preche
And Jesus Christ, that is our souls leche
So grant you his pardon to receive
For that is best, I wol you not disceyue
But sirs, one word for yate I in my tale
I have relykes, and pardon in my male
As fair as any man in England
which were yeuen me by the popes hand
If any of you wol of devotion
Offren, and have mine absolucion
Comes forth anon, and kneleth here adoun
That ye may have part of my pardoun
Or else takes pardon as ye wend
Al new and fresh, at every towns end
So that ye offren always new and new
Nobles or pens, which ben good and true
It is great honor to eueryche that is here
That ye may have a sufficient pardonere
To assoyle you, in country there ye ride
For auentures, which that may betyde
For perauenture there may fall one or two
Down of her horse, and break her neck a two
Look which suertie it is to you all That I am in your fellowship yfal
That may assoyle you both more and less
when that the soul shall fro the body pass
I read that our host shall begin
For he is most enuelopte of sin
Comes forth sir host, and offer first anon
And thou shalt kiss the relykes euerychon
Yea for a grote, vnbokyl anon thy purse.
Nay nay (quod he) than have I christ's curse
Let be (quod he) it shall not be so theiche
Thou would make me kiss thyn old breche
And swear it were a relyke of a saint
Though it were with thy foundeme^t depeynt
But by the cross, which saint Helayne fond
I would I had thy coylons in mine hand
Instead of relykes, or of sanctuarye
Let cut hem of, I wol help ye hem to carry
They shul be shrined in an hogs torde
This pardoner answerde not a word
So wroth he was, he would no word say.
Now (quod our host) I wol no longer play
with the, ne with non other angry man.
But right anon the worthy knight began
when that he saw that all the people loughe
No More of this, for it is right enough
Sir pardoner, be merry and glad of chere
And ye sir host, that been to me so dear
I pray you that ye kiss the pardoner
And pardoner, I pray the draw the ner
And as we did, let us laughe and play
Anon they kyssed, and ryden forth her way.
Here ends the pardoners tale, and here begins the Shipmans Prologue
Now friends said our host so dear
How lyketh you by John the Pardonere?
He has vnbokeled well the male
He has us told right a thrifty tale
As touching of his mysgouernaunce
I pray to god give him good chance
As ye han herd, of these ryottours three
Now gentyl mariner, hertely I pray the
Tell us a good tale, and that right anon
It shall be done, by god and by saint John
Said this maryner, as well as ever I can
And right anon his tale he thus began
Here ends the Shypmans Prologue, and here follows his tale.
A Merchant, whilom dwelled at saint Denise
That rich was, for which me^ held hi^ wise
A wife he had, of excellent beauty
And co^pynable, and reuelous was she
Which is a thing that causes more dispense
Than worth is all the chere and reverence
That men hem done, at feestes and at daunces
Such salutations and countynaunces
Passes, as does the shadow on a wall
But woe is him that pay mote for all
The sely husbonde algate he mote pay
He mote us both cloth and eke array
Al for his own worship, richely
In which array we dauncen iolyly
And if that he may not parauenture
Or else lust no such spence endure
But thinks, that it is wast and ylost
Than mote another pay for our cost
And lend us gold, and that is perilous
This noble Merchant held a noble house
For which he had al day great repair
For his largess, and for his wife was fair
That wonder is but herkeneth to my tale
Among al his gestes great and small.
There was a monk, a fair man and a bold
I trow thurty winter he was old
That ever in one, was drawing to that place
This young monk, yt so fair was of face
Aquaynted was with this good man
Sythens that he first knowledge began
That in his house, as famylier was he
As it is possible any friend to be
And for as much, as this good man
And eke this monk, of which I began
Were both two borne in one village
The monk him claymed, as for cosynage
And he again said not ones nay
But was as glad thereof, as foul of day
For to his heart it was a great pleasaunce
Thus ben they knytte with eterne aliaunce
And each of hem began other for to ensure
Of brotherheed, whiles her life may dure.
Fre was Dan Johan, and namely of dispe^ce
As in that house, and full of diligence
To do pleasaunce, and eke great costage
He foryate not to give the least page
In all that house, but after her degree
He yaue the lord, and sythen his meyne
when yt he came, some manner honest thing
For which they were as glad of his coming
As foul is feign, when the son up ryseth
No more hereof as now, for it suffyseth.
But so byfel, this merchant on a day
Sheep him to make ready his array
Toward the town of Bruges for to fare
^^bye there a portion of ware
For which he has sent to paris anon
A messanger, and prayde has dan John
That he should come to saint Denis to plain
with him, and with his wife, a day or twayn
Or he to Bruges went, in all wise.
This noble monk, of which I you deuyse
Has of his abbot, as him list license
Because he was a man of hye prudence
And eke an offycer, out for to ride
To seen her graunges, and her bernes wide
And unto saint Denis he comes anon.
who was so welcome, as my lord dan John
Our dear cosyn, full of curtesye
with him he brought a iubbe of maluesy^
And eke another full of fine vernage
And volatily, as was aye his usage
And thus I let hem both eat, drink, and play
This merchant and this monk, a day or tway
The third day this merchant up ryseth
And on his need sadly him auyseth
And up in to his countyng house gothe he
To reken with him self, as well may be
Of thilke year, how it with him stood
And how he spended had his good
And if that he encresed were or none
His books and his bags many one
He laythe before him, on his counter board
Full rich was his tresour and his horde
For which full fast his counter door he shet
And eke he nolde no man should him let
Of his accomptes, for the mean time
And thus he sat till it was passed prime.
Dan Johan was risen in the morrow also
And in the garden walked two and fro
And has his things said full curtesly.
This good wife come walkyng privily
In to the garden, there he walked soft
And him salueth, as she has done full often
A maiden child came in her company
which as her lust, she may govern and gye
For yet under the yerde was the maid.
O dear cosyn dan Johan, she said
what eyleth you so rathe to a rise?
Nece (quod he) it ought enough suffyse
Five hours for to slepen on a night
But it were for an old palied wight
As ben these old wedded men, that lie and dare
As in a form sytteth a weary hare
Al forstraught, with hounds great and small
But dear nece, why look ye so pale?
I trow certes, that our good man
Has you labored, sithe this night began
That you were need to resten hastily
And with that word, he lough full merrily
And with his own thought he woxe al reed
This fair wife, began to shake her heed
And said thus, yea god wot al (quod she)
Nay cosyn mine, it stondeth not so with me
For by that god that yaue me soul and life
In all the realm of France, is there no wife
That less lust has to that sorry play
For I may syngen alas, and welaway
That I was borne, but to no wight (quod she)
Dare I not tell, how it stonte with me
Wherefore I think out of this world to wed
Or else of my self sone to make an end
So full I am of dread and eke of care.
This monk began upon this wife to stare
And said alas, nay nece god forbede
That ye for any sorrow, or for any dread
For do your self, but tells me your grefe
Perauenture I may in your mischefe
Counsel or help, and therefore tells me
Al your anoye, for it shall secret be
For on my portouse I make an oath
That never in my life, for lefe ne loathe
Ne shall I not of no counsel you bewray.
The same again to you (quod she) I say
By god and by this portouse, I you swear
Thoug men would me al in to pieces tere
Ne shall I never, for to go to hell
Bewray o word, of thing that ye me tell
Not for no cosynage, ne for alyaunce
But verily for love and affyaunce
Thus ben they sworn, and here upon kyste
And ylke of hem told other what hem list
Cosyn (quod she) if I had a space
As I have none, and namely in this place
Than would I tell a legende of my life
That I suffered have* sithe I was a wife
with mine husbonde, though he be your cosyn
Nay (quod this monk) by god and saint Martyn
He nis no more cosyn unto me
Than is this lefe, that hongeth on the tree
I clepe him so, by saint Denis of France
To have the more cause of aquayntaunce
Of you, whom I have loved specially
Abouen al other women sykerly
This swear I you on my professyoun
Tells your grefe, lest he come adoun
And hastes you, and goth your way anon.
My dear love (quod she) O my dan John.
Full lefe me were this counsel to hyde
But out it mote, it may no longer abide
My husbonde is to me the worste man
That ever was, sithe the world began
But sythen I am a wife, it sytte not to me
To tellen no wight of our priuyte
Neither in bed, ne in none other place
God shylde I should tell it for his grace
A wife ne should not say of her husbonde
But al honor, as I can understand
Save unto you, thus much tell I shall
As help me god, he is naught worth at al
In no degree, the value of a fly
But yet me greueth most his nygardye
And well ye wot, that woman naturally
Desyren things six, as well as I
They wolden that her husbondes should be
Hardy, and wise, rich, and thereto fre
And buxom to his wife, and fresh a bed
But by that ylke lord that for us bledde
For his honor, my self to arraye
A sunday next, I mote needs pay
An hundred frankes, or else am I lorne
Yet were me lever that I were unborn
Than me were done a slander or a vilanye
And if mine husbonde eke might it aspye
I nere but lost, and therefore I you prey
Lene me this sum, or else mote I dey
Dan John I say, lene me this hundred fra^kes
Parde I wol not fail you my thanks
If that ye list to do that I you pray
For at a certain day I wol you pay
And to done you what plesaunce and service
That I may don, right as ye list deuyse
And but I do, god take on me vengeance
As foul as ever had genilion of France.
This ge^til monk answered in this manner
Now truly mine own lady dear
I have (quod he) on you so great routhe
That I you swear, and plight my truth
That wha^ your husbo^d is to Flanders ^fare
I wol deliver you out of all this care
I wol bring you an hundred frankes
And with that he caught her by the flanks
And her enbraced herd, and kyssed her often
Go the now your way (quod he) al still and soft
And let us dyne as soon as ever ye may
For by my calendar it is prime of the day
Gothe now, and beth as true as I shall be.
Now else god forbid sir said she
And forth she gothe, as ioly as a pie
And bade the cokes that they should hem hye
So that men might dyne, and that anon
Up to her husbonde is this wife gone
And knocked at his counter do^e boldly.
Qui est la (quod he) Peter it am I
(Quod she) how long wol ye fast?
How long time wol ye reckon and cast
Your sommes, your books, and your things?
The dyuel have part of al such reckeninges
Ye have enough (quod she) of gods sonde
Come down to day, and let your bags stand
Ne be ye not a shamed, that dan John
Shall fasting all this long day gone?
what let us go here mass and go dyne.
Wife (quod this man) little can thou divine
The curyous business that we have
For of chapmen, so god me save
And by that lord that called is saint Iue
Scarsly among twenty, twelve shall thrive
Contynually, lastyng unto their age
We may well make chere and good vysage
And drive forth the world, as it may be
And keep our estate in priuyte
Till we be deed, or else that we play
A pylgrimage, or gone out of the way
And therefore have I great necessyte
Upon this queynte world to auyse me
For evermore we mote stand in dread
Of hap and fortune, in our chapmanhede.
To Flanders wol I gone to morrow at day
And come ayene as soon as ever I may
For which my dear wife, I the beseke
As be to every wight buxom and meke
And for to keep our good be curyouse
And honestly govern well our house
Thou haste enough, in every manner wise
That to a thrifty huswyfe may suffyse
The lacks none array, ne no vitayle
Of silver in thy purse thou may not fail
And with ye word, his counter door he shette
And down he gothe, no longer would he let
And hastily a mass was there isayde
And spedely the tables were ilayde
And to dinner fast they hem spedde
And richly the chapman this monk fed.
And after dinner, dan Johan soberly
This chapman took a part al privily
And said him thus, cosyn it stondeth so
T^^^ well I se to Bruges ye wol go
God and saint Austen speed you and gyde
I pray you cosyn, wisely that ye ride
Governs you also well of your dyete
Al temperatly, and namely in this hete
Betwixt us two needs no strange fare
Farwell cosyn, god shylde you fro care
If any thing there be by day or by night
And it lie in my power or in my might
That ye me wol command in any wise
It shall be done, right as ye wol deuyse
O thing or that ye go, if that it may be
I would pray you for to leave me
In hundred frankes, for a weke or twey
For certain beestes, that I mote needs bey
To store with a place that is ours
God help me so, I would it were yours
I shall not fail surely at my day
Not for a thousand frankes, a mile way
But let this thing be secret, I you pray
For yet this night these beestes mote I bey
And fare now well, mine own cosyn dear
Grant mercy of your cost and your chere.
This noble merchant, gentilly anon
Answerde and said, O cosyn dan John
Now sikerly, this is a small request
My gold is yours, when that you lest
And not only my gold, but my chaffare
Take what ye list, god shilde that ye spare
But one thing is, ye know it well enough
Of chapmen, that her money is her plough
we may creaunce, while we have a name
But goldlesse for to be it is a shame
Pay it again, when it lythe at your ese
After my might, feign would I you plese
These hundred frankes, set he forth anon
And privily he took hem to dan John
No wight of this world, wist of this lone
Saving this merchant, and dan Johan alone
They drink and speak, and rome a while and pley
Till that dan Johan rydeth to his abbey.
The morrow came, and forth ryd this marcha^t
To Flanders ward, his pre^tes brought him aua^t
Till he came to Bruges, well and merrily
Now gothe this merchant, well and besily
About his needs, and byeth, and creaunseth
He neither plays at the dyce ne daunseth
But as a merchant, shortly to tell
He led his life, and there I let him dwell
The sunday next, yt this marcha^t was gone
To saint Denis is comen dan John
with crown and berde al fresh and new ishaue
In all this house, there nas so little a knave
Ne no wight else, but he was full feign
For yt my lord dan John was comen again
And shortly to the point for to gone
This fair wife acordeth with dan John
That for these hundred frankes he should al night
Have her in his arms, bolte upright
And this acorde parformed was in deed
In myrthe al night a besy life they led
Till it was day, yt dan John yede his way
And bade the meyne farwell and have good day
For none of hem, ne no wight in the town
Had of Dan Johan any suspection
And forth he rydeth, home to his abbey
Or where him list, no more of him I sey.
This merchant, when ended was ye fair
To saint Denis he began for to repair
And with his wife he makes feast and chere
And tells her that the chaffare is so dear
That needs must he make a cheuesaunce
For he was bounden in a reconisaunce
To pay twenty thousand shildes anon
For which this merchant is to Paris gone
To borowe of certain friends that he had
A certain frankes, and some with him he lad
And when he was comen in to the town
For chierte and great affection
Unto dan John he first gothe him to pley
Naught for to borowe of him no money
But for to wete and se of his welfare
And for to tellen him of his chaffare
As friends done, wha^ they ben met in fere
Dan Johan him makes feast and merry chere
And he him told again full specially
How he had bought, full well and graciously
Thonked be god, al hole his marchaundyse
Save that he must, in all manner wise
Maken a cheuesaunce, as for his best
And than should he be in joy and rest
Da^ John answered, certes I am right fayn
That ye in heal be comen home again
And if I were rich, as have I bliss
Of twenty thousand shildes should ye not miss
For ye so kyndely, this other day
Lent me gold, and as I can and may
I thonke you, by god and by saint Iame
But nathelesse, I took it unto our dame
Your wife at home, the same gold again
Upon your benche, she wot it well certain
By certain tokens, that I can her tell
Now by your leave, I may no longer dwell
Our abbot wol out of this town anon
And in his company I mote gone
Great well our dame, mine own nece sweet
And farwele dear cosyn, till we mete.
This merchant that was full ware and wise
Creaunced has, and eke paid in Paris
To certain lombardes, ready in her houdes
This sum of gold, and gate of hem ye bonds
And home he gothe, as merry as a popyngay
For well he knew he stood in such array
That needs must he win by that viage
A thousand frankes, above al his costage.
His wife full ready met him at the yate
As she was wont, of old usage algate
And all that night in myrthe they be set
For he was rich, and clearly out of debt
wha^ it was day, this marcha^t began enbrace
His wife al new, and kyssed her in her face
And up he gothe, and made it wonder tough
No more (quod she) by god ye have enough
And wantonly again with him she playde
Till at the last this merchant thus said.
By god (quod he) I am a little wroth
With you my wife, al though it be me loathe
And wot ye why: by god as I guess
For ye have made a manner of strangeness
Betwixt me and my cosyn dan John
Ye should have warned me, or I had gone
That he had you an hundred frankes paid
By ready token, and held him yuel apayde
For that I to him spoke of cheuesaunce
Me seemed so, as by his countenance
But nathelesse, by god our heaven king
I thought not to ask of him nothing
I pray the wife, ne do no more so
Tell me always er that I fro the go
If any dettour, has in mine absence
Ypayde the, lest through thy negligence
I might him ask a thing that he has paid
This wife was not a ferde ne affrayde
But boldly she said, and that anon
Mary I defye that false monk dan John
I keep not of his tokens never a dele
He took me certain gold, I wot it well
what yuel thedom on his monks snoute
For god it wotte, I wend without doubt
That he had give it me, because of you
To don therewith mine honor and my prow
For cosynage, and eke for bellye chere
That he has had full often times here
But sithe I se it stonte in such disioynte
I wol answer you shortly to the point.
Ye have mo slacker dettours than am I
For I wol pay you well and redily
Fro day to day, and if so be I fail
I am your wife, score it on my tail
Or else I shall pay it as soon as ever I may
For by my troth, I have on mine array
And not in waste, bestowed it every dele
And for I have bestowed it so well
To your honor, for gods sake I say
As be not wroth, but let us laughe and play
Ye shall my ioly body have to wedde
By god I nyl not pay you but a bed
Foryeue it me, mine own spouse dear
Turns hitherwarde, and make better chere.
This merchant saw there was no remedy
And for to chyde, it was but a folly
Sythen that the thing may not amended be
Now wife he said, and I foryeue it the
But in thy life, be no more so large
Keep bet my good, this give I the in charge
Thus ends now my tale, and god us send
Talynge enough, unto our lives end.
Here ends the Shypmans tale, and here follows the words of our host.
Well said by corpus domini (quod our host)
Now long mote thou sail by the cost
Thou gentyl master, gentel marinere
God give ye monk a thousand last quad year
I ha fellows, beware of such a iape
The monk put in the marcha^tes hode an ape
And in his wives eke, by saint Austyn
Draws no monks more in to your Inn
But now pass over, and let us seek about
who shall tell now first of all this route
An other tale, and with that word he said
Is courteously, as it had been a maid.
My lady prioresse, by your leave
So that I wyste that I should you not grieve
I wol deem, that ye tellen should
I tale next, if so be that ye would
Now wol yt vouchsafe my lady dear
Gladly (quod she) and said in this manner.
Here end the words of our host, and here begins the Prioresse prologue.
DOmine dominus noster: quam admirabile est nomen tuum in vniuersa terra,
Lord our Lord, thy name how maruaylous
Is in this wide world ysprad (quod she)
For not only thy land precious
Parfourmed is, by men of dygnite
But by the mouth of children thy bounte
Parfourmed is, for on the breast soukynge
Sometime shown they thine heryenge
wherefore in laud, as I can best and may
Of the and of the white lylly flower
which that the bare, and is a maid always
To tellen a storye, I wol do my labor
Naught that I may encrese her honor
For she her self is honor and rote
Of bountye, next her son of souls bote
Mother maiden, O maiden and mother fre
O bushe vnbrent, brennyng in Moses sight
That rauyshedest down fro the deyte
Through thyn hu^blesse, ye ghost yt in the light
Of whose virtue, when he in thine heart pight
Conceived was the fathers sapience
Help me to tell it in thy presence
Lady thy bounte, and thy magnifycence
Thy virtue and thy great humilite
There may no tongue express, in no science
For sometime lady, er men pray to the
Thou go before, of thy benignyte
And gettest us ye light, through thy prayere
To gyden us unto thy son so dear
My connyng is to weak, O blysful queen
For to declare thy high worthynesse
That I ne may the weight sustene
But as a child of twelve month old or less
That can uneaths any word express
Right so fare I, and therefore I you pray
Gydeth my song, that I shall of you say.
Here ends the Prioresses prologue, and here follows her tale.
THere was in Asye, in a great city
Among Christen folks a iewrye
Sustained by a lord of that country
For foul usure, and lucre of villainy
Hateful to Christ, and to his company
And through ye street me^ might ride and we^de
For it was free, and open at every end
A little schole of christen folk there stood
Down at ye farther end, in which there were
Children an hepe, comen of christen blood
That learned in that schole, year by year
Such manner doctrine, as men vsen here
This is to say, to sing and to read
As small children done in her chyldhede
Among these children was a wedowes son
A little clergion, that.vij. year was of age
That day by day to schole was his won
And also eke, where he sey the image
Of Christ's mother, had he in usage
As him was taught, to knele adowne and say
An Aue maria, as he goes by the way
Thus has this wedow, her litel child icaut
Our blyssed lady, Christ's mother dear
To worship aye, and he foryate it naught
For the sely child, would al day soon lere
But aye, when I remember me on this matere
Saint Nicholas stands ever in my presence
For he so young to Christ did reverence
This little child his little book lernyng
As he sat in the schole at his prymere
He (Alma redemptoris matter) herd sing
As children lered her antiphonere
And as he durst, he drew aye nere and nece
And herkened to the words and the note
Till he the first verse couth al by rote
Naught wist he what this latin was to say
For he so young and tender was of age
But on a day his fellow began he pray
To expoune him the song, in his langage
Or tellen him why this song was in usage
This prayde he him to constre and declare
Full often time, upon his knees bare
His fellow, which that elder was the^ he
Answered him thus, this song I have herd say
was made of our blessed lady free
Her to salewe, and eke her for to prey
To ben our help and socoure when we dey
I can no more erpowne in this matter
I learn song, I can but small grammar
And is this song ymade in reverence
Of Christ's mother, said this innocent?
Now certes I wol done my diligence
To tonne it al er Christmasse be went
Though that I for my primer shall be shent
And should be beten thryse in an hour
I wol it conne, our lady to honor
His fellow taught him homewarde privily
Fro day to day, till he couth it by rote
And then he song it well and boldly
Fro word to word, according to the note
Twyse a day it passes through his throat
To scholewarde, and homeward when he went
On Christ's mother set was al his intent
As I have said through out the iewrie
This little child as he came to and fro
Full merely then would he sing and cry
O Alma redemptoris matter, ever mo
The swetnesse has his heart persed so
Of Christ's mother, that to her to pray
He can not stynte of singing by the way
Our first foe, the serpent Sathanas
That in Jews heart his waspes nest
Vpswale and said, O ^brake people alas
Is this a thing to you that is honest
That such a boy shall walk as him lest
In your dyspyte, and syngen of such sentence
which is against your laws reverence
From thence forth, ye jews han conspyred
This innocent out of this world to chase
An homicide thereto han they hired
That in an aley, had a privy place
And as the child began forby to pace
This cursed jew him hent, and held fast
And cut his throat, and in a pytte him cast
I say that in a wardrope they him threw
where that the jews purged her intrayle
O cursed folk, of heraudes al new
what may your yuel intent you avail
Murder wol out, certes it wol not fail
And namely there ye honor of god shalsprede
The blood out cries on your cursed deed
O Matter, sowned unto virginite
Now may thou sing following ever in on
The white lamb celestial (quod he)
Of which the great euangelyst saint John
In Pathmos wrote, which says yt they gone
Before this lamb, and sing asonge all new
That never flesshly women they ne knew.
This poor wydowe, awayteh al yt night
After her little child, and he came naught
For which as soon as it was day light
with face pale, for dread and besy thought
She has at schole, and else where him sought
Till finally, she began so far aspye
That he was last seyne in the iurye
with mothers pity, in her breast enclosed
She goth as she were half out of her mind
To every place, where she has supposed
By lyklyhede her child for to find
And ever on Christ's mother, meke and kind
She cried, and at the last thus she wrought
Among the cursed jews she him sought
She freyneth and she prays pytously
To every jew that dwells in thylke place
To tellen her, if her child went there by
They said nay, but Jesus of his grace
Yaue in her thought, within a little space
That in that place, after her son she cryde
There he was cast, in a pyt beside
O great god, that perfourmest thy laud
By mouth of innocence, lo here thy might
This iemme of chastity, this Emeraude
And eke of martyrdom the rubye bright
There he with throat yeorne lay vpryght
He (Alma redemptoris) began to sing
So loud that all the place began to ring
The christen folk, yt through ye street went
In comen, for to wonder on this thing
And hastily they for the prouoste sent
He came anon, without taryenge
And heryeth Christ, that is of heaven king
And eke his mother, honor of mankind
And after that, the jews let he bind
This child with pytous lamentacion
was vptaken, syngyng his song always
And with honor, and great processyon
They caryen him to the next abbey
His mother swounyng by the bear lay
Uneath might the people that were there
This new Rachel bring fro his bear
with turme^t and with shamful death ilke one
This provost does these jews for to sterue
That of this murder wyste, and that anon
He nolde no such cursednesse observe
Yuel shall he have, that yuel wol deserve
Therefore with wild horse he did hem draw
And afterward he honge hem by the law
Upon his bear aye lies this innocent
Beforne the chief altar, whiles ye mass last
And after that, the abbot with his covent
Hem spedde, for to burye him als fast
And when they holy water on him cast
yet spoke ye child, when spreit was holy water
And song, O Alma redemptoris matter.
This abbot, which that was an holy man
As monks ben, or else ought to be
This young child to cover he began
And said: O dear child, I haylfe the
By virtue of the holy Trinite
Tell me what is thy cause for to sing
Sythens thy throat is cut to my semynge.
My throat is cut, unto my neck bone
Said this child, as by way of kind
I should have deyde, ye long time agone
But Jesus Christ, as ye in books find
wol that his glory last and be in mind
And for the worship of his mother dear
Yet may I sing (O Alma) loud and clear
This well of mercy, Christ's mother sweet
I loved always, as after my conning
And when that I my life should forlete
To me she came, and bad me for to sing
This antem verily in my dyenge
As ye han herd, and when that I had song
Me thought she laid a grain upon my tongue
wherefore I sing, and sing mote certain
In honor of the blysfull maiden fre
Till fro my tongue, of taken is the grain
And after that, thus she said to me
My little child, now wol I fetch the
when that the grain is fro thy tongue ytake
Be not agaste, I wol the not forsake.
This holy monk, this abbot him mean I
His tongue out caught, and took away ye grain
And he yaue up the ghost full softly
And when this abbot had this wonder seyne
His salt teeres trykled down as rain
And grofe he fell al platte to the ground
And still he lay, as he had been ybounde
The covent lay eke upon the pament
Weeping and heryeng Christ's mother dear
And after that they risen, and forth ben went
And took away this martyr fro the bear
And in a tomb of marble stones clear
Enclosen they his little body sweet
There he is now, god lene us for to mete.
O young Hew of Lyncoln slain also
With cursed jews, as it is notable
For it is but a little while ago
Pray eke for us, we synful folk unstable
That of his mercy, god be merciable
On us, his great mercy multiply
For the reverence of his mother Mary.
Here ends the Prioresse tale, and here follow the words of the Host to
Chaucer.
When said was this miracle, every man
As sobre was, as wonder was to se
Till that our host to iapen began
And than at erste, he looked upon me
And said thus: what man art thou (quod he)
Thou lokest, as thou would find an hare
For ever upon the ground I se the stare
Aproche nere, and look up merrily
Now ware you syrs, and let this man have place
He in the wast is shapen as well as I
This were a popet in arms to enbrace
For any woman, small and fair of face
He seems eluyshe by his countenance
For unto no wight does he dalyaunce
Say now so^what, sithe^s other folk ha^ said
Tell us a tale of myrthe, and that anon
Host (quod he) ne be not yuel apayde
For other tale certes can I none
But of a ryme, I learned yore agone
Yea that is good (quod he) we shullen it here
Some daynte thing, me thinks by thy chere
Here ends the words of the host, and here follows the ryme of sir Thopas.
LYsteneth lordinges in good intent
And I wol tell verament
Of mirth and of solas
Al of a knight was fair and gent
In battle and in turnament
His name was sir Thopas
Iborne he was in far country
In Flaundres, al beyond the sea
At Poperynge in the place.
His father was a man full fre
And a lord he was of that country
As it was gods grace.
Sir Thopas was a doughty swayne
white was his face as pain main
His lyppes reed as rose
His rudde is like scarlet in grain
And I you tell in good certain
He had a semely nose.
His here, his berde was like safroun
That to his gyrdel raught adoun
His shone of cordewane
Of Bruges were his hosen broun
His robe was of chekelatoun
That cost many a jane.
He couth hunte at the wild dear
And ride an haukynge forby the ryuere
with gray goshauke on hand
Thereto he was a good archere
Of wrastlynge was there none his pere
There any Ram should stand.
Full many a maid bright in hour
They mourn for him paramoure
when hem were bet to sleep.
But he was chaste and no lechoure
And sweet as is the bramble flower
That bears the reed hype
And so byfel upon a day
Forsooth, as I you tell may
Sir Thopas would out ride.
He worth upon his stead graye
And in his hand a lance gaye
A long sword by his side
He prycketh through a fair foreste
Therein was many a wild be
Yea both bucke and hare.
And as he prycketh north and este
I tell you, him had almeste
Betydde a sorye care.
There spryngen herbs great and small
The lycores and the setuale
And many a clowe gelofer
And nutmygges to put in ale
whether it be new or stale
Or for to lie in cofer.
The birds syngen, it is no nay
The sperhauke and the popyngaye
That joy it was to here.
The throstell eke made his lay
The wodcocke upon the spray
She song full loud and clear.
Sir Thopas fyl in love longing
And when he herd the throstel sing
He prycked as he were wode
His fair stead in his pryckynge
So swette, that men might him wrynge
His sides were all blood.
Sir Thopas eke so weary was
For prickynge on the soft gras
So fyers was his courage
That down he laid him in that place
To maken his stead some solace
And gave him good forage.
Oh, saint Mary, benedicite
what ayleth this love at me
To blind me so sore?
Me dremed al this night parde
An elfe queen shall my lemman be
And sleep under my gore.
An Elfe queen wol I love ywys
For in this world no woman is
worthy to be my make in town
All other women I forsake
And to an Elfe queen I me betake
By dale and eke by down.
Into his sadell he clombe anon
And pricketh over style and stone
An Elfe queen for to espy
Till he so long has rydden and gone
That he fond in a pryue wone
The country of Fayrie. So wild
For in that country nas there none
Neither wife ne child
Till him there came a great Giaunt
His name was called sir Oliphaunt
A peryllous man of deed
He said child, by Termagaunt
But if thou prycke out of my haunt
Anon I slay thy steed with mace
Or ever I go out of this place
Here is the queen of Fayry
with harp and pype, and symphony
Dwelling in this place.
The child said, als so mote I the
To morrow wol I meten the
When I have mine armure.
And yet I hope par ma faye
That thou shalt with this lance gay
Abyen it full sore: Through thy mawe
Shall I perce, if I may
Or it be fully prime of the day
For here thou shall be slawe.
Sir Thopas drowe abacke full fast
This gyaunt at him stones cast
Out of a fell staste slynge
But fair escaped sir Thopace
And al was through gods grace
And through his fair beryng
Yet lysteneth lordynges to my tale
Meryer than the nyghtyngale
For now I wol ye rowne
How sir Thopas, with sides small
Prickyng over down and dale
Is comen again to town.
His merry man commanded he
To maken him both game and gle
For needs must he fight
with a gyaunt, with heedes three
For paramoures and tolyte
Of one that shone full bright.
Do come he said my mynstrales
And iestours, for to tellen us tales
Anon in mine armyng
Of romaunces that been royals
Of popes and of cardynals
And eke of love longyng.
They fette him first the sweet wine
And meede eke in a mazelyne
And royal spycerye
Of gynger breed that was full fine
Of lycores and eke comyne
with sugre that is try.
He did next his white lere
Of clothe of lake fine and clear
A breche and eke a sherte.
And next his sherte an ha^^ton
And over that an haberion
For percyng of his heart.
And over that a fine hauberke
was al ywrought of jews work
Full strong it was of plate
And over that his core armoure
As white as is the lylly flower
In which he would debate.
His shylde was al of gold so reed
And therein was a bores heed
A carbocle by his side.
And there he swore on ale and breed
How that the gyaunt should be deed
Betyde what betyde.
His tambeux were of cure buly
His swords shethe of yuorie
His helm of laton bright
His sadel was of ruel bone
His bridel as the sun shoue
Or as the moon light
His spear was of fine sypres
That byddeth war, and nothing pees
The heed full sharp ygrounde
His stead was al dappel gray
He gothe an aumble by the way
Full softely and round in land.
Lo lords mine, here is a fyt
If ye wol any more of it
To tellen it wol I fond.
Now hold your mouth for cha^rite
Both knight and lady fre
And herkeneth to my spel
Of battle and of cheualrye
And of ladies love diery
Anon I wol you tell.
Men sp^ken of Romaunces of pris
Of Hornechilde, and of I potys
Of Beuys, and of sir Gye
Of sir Lybeaur, and Blayndamoure
But sir Thopas, he bears the flower
Of royal cheualrye.
His good stead he be strode
And forth upon his way glode
As spark out of the bronde.
Upon his creste he bare a toure
And therein stycked a lilly flower
God shylde his cors fro shonde
And for he was a knight auentrouse
He nolde slepen in none house
But lygge in his hood.
His bright helm was his wangre
And by him fed his destper
Of herbs fine and good
Him self drunk water of the well
As did the knight sir Persyuel
So worthy under wede.
Here ends the ryme of sir Thopas, and begins the words of our Host.
No more of this for gods dignite
(quod our host) for thou make me
So weary of thy very lewdness
That also wysly god my soul bless
Mine ears aken of thy drafty speech
Now such a ryme, the dyuell I beteche
This may well be cleped ryme dogrel (quod he)
why so (quod I) why wolt thou let me
More of my tale, then any other man
Sens that it is the best ryme I can?
By God (quod he) plainly at o word
Thy drafty rymynge is not worth a torde
Thou do naught else but spendest time
Sir at one word, thou shall no le^ger ryme
Let se whether thou can tell ought in geste
Or tell in prose somewhat at the least
In which there may be some mirth or doctrine
Gladly (quod I) by gods sweet pyne
I woll you tell a little thing in prose
That ought like you, as I suppose
Or else ye be certes to dangerous
It is a moral tale virtuous
Albe it told sometime in sundry wise
Of sondrye folk, as I shall you deuyse
As thus, ye wot that every euangelyste
That tells us the pain of Jesus Christ
Ne says not al thing as his fellow does
But nathelesse her sentente is al soth
And al accorden in her sentence
Al be there in her telling dyfference
For some of hem said more, and some less
when they his pytouse passion express
I mean of Mark, Mathen, Luke, and John
But doutlesse her sentence is al one
Therefore lordynges, I you beseech
If that ye think I vary in my speech
As thus, though I tell somwl, at more
Of proverbs, then ye han herd before
Comprehended in this little treatise here
To enforcen with the effect of my matere
And though I not the same words say
As ye han herd, yet to all you I pray
Blames me not, for in my sentence
Sul ye not find mochel dyfference
Fro the sentence of this treatise lyte
After the which, this merry tale I write
And therefore herkeneth, what I shall say
And let me tell my tale I you pray.
Here end the words of our host and here begins Chaucers tale of Melibeus.
A Young man called Melibeus, mighty and rich, begat upon his wife that
called was Prudence, a daughter which that called was Sophye.

Upon a day byfell that he for his dysport is went into the feldes him to
play: His wife and eke his daughter has he left with in his house, of which
the doors were fast yshette. Four of his old foes han it aspyde, and sette^
ladders to the walls of his house, and by the wyndowes ben entered, and beat
his wife, and wounded his daughter with five mortal wounds, in five sondrye
places: That is to say, in her fete, in her hands, in her eeres, in her nose,
and in her mouth, and leften her for deed, and went her way.

When Melibeus returned was into his house, and se all this myschefe, he like
a mad man rentyng his clothes, began to weep and cry.

Prudence his wife, as ferforth as she durst besought him of his weeping for
to stynte: But not for thy he began to weep and cry ever longer the more.

This noble wife Prudence remembered her upon the sentence of Ouyde, in his book
that cleped is the remedy of love, where as he says, he is a fool that
dystourbeth the mother to weep in the death of her child till she have wept her
fill, as for a certain time and then shall a man done diligence with amiable
words to recomforte and pray her of her weeping for to stynte. For which
reason this noble wife Prudence, suffered her husbonde to weep and cry, as for
a certain space: and when she saw her time, she said him in this wise. Alas
my lord (quoth she) why make ye your self for to be like a fool? forsooth it
apperteyneth not unto a wise man to maken such a sorrow. Your daughter with
the grace of God, shall waryshe and escape. And all were it so that she right
now were deed, ye ne ought not as for her death your self distroye. Seneke
says, the wise man shall not take to great discomforte for the death of his
children, but certes he should suffer it in patience, as well as he abides ye
death of his own proper person.

This Mellebeus answerde anon and said: what man (quod he) should of his weeping
stynt, that has so great a cause for to weep? Jesus him self our lord, wept
for ye death of Lazarus his friend. Prudence answered, certes well I wot a
temperate weeping is nothing defended to him that sorouful is, among folk in
sorrow, but it is rather granted him to weep. The apostel Poule unto ye Romans
writes, men should rejoice with he^ that makes joy, and weep with such folk
as wepen. But though a temperate weeping be granted, certes outragyous weeping
is defended. Mesure of weeping should be co^sydred after the lore that techeth
us Sencke. When that thy friend is deed (quod he) let not thine eyes to moist
ben of teeres, ne to much dry: although teeres comen to thyn eyes, let hem not
fall. And when thou have forgon thy friend, do diligence to get a another
friend: and this is more wisdom tha^ for to weep for thy friend which thou have
lorne, for therein is no bote. And therefore if ye govern you by sapience, put
away sorrow out of your heart. Remembers you that Jesus Sirake says, a man
that is ioyus and glad in heart, it him conserueth storishyng in his age: but
sothely a sorrowful here makes his bones dry. He says eke thus, that sorrow
in heart sleeth full many a man. Solomon says, that right as moughthes in the
shepes sleyse anoyeth the clothes, and the small worms yt tree, right so
anoyeth sorrow the heart of man, wherefore us ought as well in the death of our
children, as in the loss of our temporal goods, have patience.

Remember you upon pacient Iobe, wha^ he had lost his children and his
temporal substance, and in his body endured and received full many a grievous
trybulacion, yet said he thus: Our lord it sent to me, our lord has
byrafte it me, right so as our lord would, right so it be done, iblessed be the
name of our lord.

To these foresaid things Melibeus unto his wife Prudence answered: Al thy
words (quod he) ben true, and thereto profitable, but truly mine heart is
troubled with this sorrow so grievously, that I not what to do. Let call (quod
Prudence) your true friends al and thy lynage, which that been wise, and
tells to hem your case, and herkeneth what they say in counsaylyng, and
govern you after her sentence. Solomon says, work all thy things by
counsel, and thou shalt never rue. Than by counsel of his wife Prudence,
this Melibeus let caul a great congrygacion of people, as surgyens,
physicions, old folk and young, and some of his old enemies reconciled (as by
her semblant) to his love and to his grace: And therwithal there came some of
his neighbors, that did him reverence more for dread tha^ for love, as it
happeth often. There comen also full many subtyl flaterers, and wise advocates
learned in the law. And wha^ these folk togyders assembled were, this Melibeus
in sorrowful wise showed hem his case, and by the manner of his speech, it seemed
that in heart he bare a cruel ire, ready to don vengeance upon his foos, and
suddenly he desired yt we^e should begin, but nathelesse yet asked he counsel
upon this matter. A surgyen by license and assent of such as were wise up rose,
and unto Melibeus said as ye shall here.

Sir (quod he) as to us surgiens apertayneth that we do to every wight the best
that we can, where as we ben withholde^, and to our pacient that we don no
damage: wherefore it happeth many time and often, that when two men have eueriche
wounded other, one surgyen heals hem both, wherefore unto our art it is not
pertine^t to norishe werre, ne parties to supporte. But certes as to the
warysshyng of your daughter, al be it so that perilously she be wounded, we
shall do so tentyfe business fro day to night that with ye grace of god she
shall ben hole and sound, as sont as is possible. Almost right in the same wise
the physiciens answered, save that they said a few words more: That right as
maladies ben by her contraries cured, right so shall man warisshe werre by
peace. His neighbors full of envy, his feigned friends that seemed reconciled,
and his flatterers, maden semblau^ce of weeping, and enpayred and agrutched
much of this matter, in praysinge greatly Melibe of might, of power, of
richesse and of friends, dispysing the power of his adversaries: and said
utterly, that he anon should wreken him on his foos, and begin war.

Up rose then an aduocat that was wise believe and by counsel of other that
were wise, and said: The need for the which we been assembled in this place, is
a full heuye thing, and a great matter because of ye wrong and of the
wickedness that has be done, and eke by reason of great damages that in time
coming ben possible to fallen for ye same, and eke by reason of the great
richesse and power of the parties both, for the which reasons it were a full
great peril to erren in this matter. Wherefore Melibeus this is our sentence,
we counsel you abouen all thing, that right anon thou do thy delygence in
keeping of thy proper person, in such a wise that thou ne want none espy ne
watch, thy body for to save: And after that we counsel that in thine house
thou ^et suffycie^t garryson, so as they may as well thy body as thy house
defend: but certes to mouen war, or to done suddenly vengeance we may not
deem in so little time yt it were profitable, wherefore we ask leyser and space
to have delyberacion in this case to deem, for the commen proverb says thus:
He that sone demeth sone shall repent. And eke men said, thylke judge is wise
that sone understands a matter, and iugeth by leyser: For all be it taryenge
be noyfull, algate it is not to be reproved in yeuynge of judgment, ne in
vengeance taking, when it is sufficyent and reasonable. And that showed our
Lord Jesus Christ by ensample, for when the woman was taken in auoutry and was
brought in his presens to known what should be done of her person, al be it
that he wist well him self what he would answer, yet ne would he not answer
suddenly, but he would have delyberacion, and in the ground he wrote twyse,
and by this cause we asken delyberation: and we shall then by the grace of God
counsel you yt thing that shall be profitable

Up sterte then the young folk at ones, and ye most part of that company
have scorned this old wise man, and began to make noise and said. Right so as
whiles that iron is hot men should smite, right so men should wreken her
wrongs while that they been fresh and new, and with loud voice they tried
war war. Up rose tho one of ye old wise, and with his hand made
countenance that they should holde^ hem still and yeuen him audience. Lordynges
(quod he) there is full many a man that cries war war, ye wot full lyte
what war amounts. War at his beginning has so great an entryng and so
large, that every wight may enter when him likes, and lightly find war: but
certes what end thereof shall fall, it is not lightly to know. When ye war is
ones bygon, there is full many a child unborn of his mother, yt shall sterue
yo^ge because of thilke war, other else live in sorrow, or dye in
wretchedness: And therefore or yt any war be bygon, men must have great
counsel and good delyberation. And when this old man wend to enforcen his
tale by reason, well nigh all at ones bygon for to rise for to breken his tale,
and bydde^ him full often his words for to abrege: For certes he yt precheth to
hem that list not to here his words, his sermon hem anoyeth. For Jesus Syrake
says, yt weping in musyke is a noyous thing. This is as much to say, as much
avails it to speak byforne folk to which his speech anoyeth, as it is for
to syngen byforne hem that weep. And when this wise man saw yt him wa^ted
audience, al shamfaste he set him adowne again. For Salomo^ says. There as thou
may not have audience, enforce the not to speak. I se well (quod this wise
man) that the common proverb is soth, yt good counsel wants, when it is
most need.

Yet had this Melibeus in his counsel many folk, that privily in his eere
counsayled him certain things, and counsayled him the contrary in general
audience. when Melibeus had herd that the greatest part of his counsel were
accorded that he should make war, anon he consented to her cou^saylynge, and
fully affyrmed her sentence. Then dame Prudence, when that she saw her
husbonde shope him for to awreke him on his enemies, and to begin war: she in
full humble wise, when she saw her time said to him these words. My lord (quod
she) I you be seche as hertely as I dare or can, ne have you not to fast, and
for all guerdons give me audience. For Peter Alpho^s says. Who so does to the
good or harm, have the not to quyte it for in this wise thy friend woll abide,
and thine enemy shall the longer live in dread. The proverb says, he hastes
well yt wisely can abide: And in wicked have is no profit.

This Melibe answered to his wife prudence: I purpose not (quoth he) to work
by thy counsel, for many causes and reasons, for certes every wight would
hold me then a fool. This is to say, if I for thy counsaylynge would change
things that been ordained and affyrmed by so many wise. Secondly, I say that
all women been wicked, and none good of hem all. For of a thousand men says
Solomon, I found one good man: but certes of all women found I never none.
And also certes, if I governed me by thy counsel, it should seem that I had
give the over me the maystrye: and God forbid yt it so were. For Jesus Syracke
says, that if the wife have maystrye, she is contrarious to her husband. And
Solomon says. Never in thy life to thy wife, ne to thy child, ne to thy
friend, ne give no power over thy self, for better it were that thy children
ask of thy things that hem needs then thy self to be in the hands of thy
children. And also if I woll werche by thy counsel, certes my counsel must
be sometime secret til it were time that it must be known: and this ne may
not be, if I should be counsayled by the. When dame Prudence full debonairly
and with great patience, had herd all that her husbonde lyked for to say, then
asked she of him license for to speak, and said in this wise. My lord (quoth
she) as to your first reason, it may lightly ben answered. For I say that
it is no folly to change counsel, when the thing is changed, or else when
ye thing seems otherwise the^ it seemed before. And more over I say, though
that ye have sworn and behyght to perform your empryse, and by just cause
ye do it not: men should not say therefore ye were a liar and forsworn For the
book says, that the wise man makes no lesynge, when he turns his courage
for the better. And albeit that your empryse be establyshed and ordained by
great multitude of folk, yet dare you not accomplish thylke ordinance but
you lyketh: for the troth of things and the profit ben rather founden in
few folk that been wise and full of reason, then by great multitude of folk,
there every man cries and clattereth what him lyketh: sothly such multitude
is not honest. And as to the second reason, where as ye say, that all women
ben wicked: save your grace. Certes ye despise all women in this wise, and he
that all despyseth, as says the book, all dyspleaseth. And Senecke says,
that who so woll have sapience, shall no man dysprayse, but he shall gladlye
teach the science that he can, without presumption or pride: and such things
as he naught ne can, he shall not ben ashamed to learn hem, and to inquire of
less folk then him self. And that there has been many a good woman, may
lightly be proved: For certes sir our Lord Jesus Christ nolde never have
descended to be borne of a woman, if al women had be wicked. And after that,
for ye great bounte that is in women, our lord Jesus Christ, when he was risen
fro death to life, apered rather to a woman then to his apostles. And though
that Solomon said, he found never women good, it follows not therefore that
all women be wicked: for though that he ne found no good woman, certes many
an other man has found many a woman full good and true. Or else parauenture
the entente of Solomon was this, that in sovereign bountye he found no woman,
this is to say: that there is no wight that has parfyte bountye save God
alone, as he him self records in his euangelye. For there nys no creature so
good that him ne wants somewhat of the perfection of God that is his maker.
Your third reason is this, ye say that if that yt govern you by my
counsel it should seem that ye had give me the maystrye and the lordshyppe of
your person. Sir save your grace it is not so, for if so were that no man
should be counsayled but only of hem that han lordshyppe and maystrye of his
person, men nolde not be counsayled so often. For sothly thylke man that asks
counsel of a purpose, yet has he free will whether he woll do after that
counsel or none. And as to your fourth reason, there as ye said that the
ianglerye of women can hyde things that they wot not, as who says, that a
woman can not hide that she wot Sir, these words ben understand of women
that been ianglers and wicked, of which women men said that three things driven
a man out of his house, that is to say, smoke droppynge of rain, and wicked
wives. And of such women Solomon says, that a man were better dwell in
deserte, then with a woman that is riottous. And sir by your leave it am not I,
for ye have full often assayde my great silence and my great patience, and eke
how well that I can hyde and heal things that men oughten secretly to hyden.
And sothly as to your fyfth reason, where as ye say that in wicked counsel
women venquyshe men: God wot that thylke reason stante here in no stead: for
understands, now ye asken counsel for to do wickedness: And if ye would
werken wickedness, and your wife restrayneth thylke wicked purpose, and
overcome you by reason and by good counsel, certes your wife ought rather to
be praised then blamed. Thus should ye understand the philosopher that says,
in wicked counsel women venquyshe her husbands. And there as ye blame all
women and her reasons, I shall show you by many ensamples that many women
have be full good, and yet been, and her counsel wholesome and profitable. Eke
some men have said that the counsel of women is either to dear, or to little
worth But all be it so that full many women been badde, and her counsel vile
and naught worth, yet han men found full many a good woman, and full
dyscrete and wise in counsaylynge. Lo Jacob through the counsel of his mother
Rebecke, wanne the benyson of his father, and ye lordshyp of all his brethren.
Judith through her good counsel, delivered the cite of Bethule, in which she
dwelt, out of the hand of Holoferne that had it al beseged, and would have
dystroyed it. Abigayle delivered Naball her husband fro David the king, that
would have slain him and apeased the ire of the king by her wit and by her
good counsel. Hester by her counsel enhaunsed greatly ye people of god in
the raygne of Assuerus the king. And the same bountye in good cou^saylyng of
many a good woman may men read and tell. And furthermore when that our lord
had created Adam our former father, he said in this wise: It is not good a man
to be alone: make we an helper to him self semblable. Here may ye se that if
that women were not good, and her counsel good and profitable, our lord god
of heaven ne would neither han wrought hem, ne called hem the helper of man, but
rather confusyon to man.

And there said a clerk ones in two verses. What is better the^ gold? Jasper.
What is better then Jasper? wisdom. And what is better then wisdom? woman.
And what is better then a good woman? that is a good man. And what is better
then a good man? nothing. And sir, by many other reasons may ye seen, that
many women been good, and eke her counsel good and profitable. And therefore
sir, if that ye woll trust to my counsel, I shall restore you your daughter
hole and sound, and eke that I woll do you so much, that ye shall have
honor in this case.

When Melibe had herd the words of his wife prudence, he said thus. I se well
that words of Solomon be soth. For he says, the words that be spoken
dyscretlye by ordinance been honycombes, for they yuen swetnesse to the soul,
and holsomnesse to the body. And wife because of thy sweet words, and eke for
I have proved and assayed thy great sapience and thy great truth: I woll
govern me by thy counsel in all thing.

Now sir (quoth dame Prudence) and sythens that ye vouchsafe to be governed by
my counsel, I woll enfourme you how that ye shall govern your self in
choosing of your counsaylours. Ye shall first in all your work mekelye
besechynge to the hye God that he would be your counsaylour, and shapeth you to
such intent that he give you counsel and comfort, as taught Thobye his
son. At all times thou shalt bliss God, and pray him to dress thy ways,
and look eke that thy counsayles ben in him ever more. Saint James says, if
any man of you have need of sapience, ask it of God. And afterward, then
shullen ye take counsel in your self, and examyne well your own
thoughts, of such things as you thinks that been best for your profit.
And then shall ye drive from your heart things that be co^trarious to good
counsel: that is to say, ire, covetous, and hastynesse.

First he that asks counsel of him self, certes he must be wythouten ire
and wrath in him self for many causes. The first is this: He that has great
ire and wrath in him self, he weneth always that he may do the thing yt he
may not do. And secondly, he that is yrous and wrothfull, he may not well deem:
And he that may not well deem, may not well counsel. The third is this, he
that is yrous and wroth, as says Seneke, may not speak but blamefull
things, and with thylke vycious words he styreth other folk to anger and to
ire. And eke sir ye must drive couetyse out of your heart. For the Apostle
says, that couetyse is the root of all harms. And trusts right well that a
covetous man ne can not deem ne think but only to fulfill the end of his
couetyse: and certes that ne may never be accomplyshed, for evermore, the more
abou^daunce that he has of rychesses, the more he desires. And sir, ye must
also drive out of your heart hastynes: For certes ye may not deem for the best
a so dayne thought that falls in your heart, but ye must auyse you on it
full often: For as ye have herd here before, the come^ proverb is this. He
that sone demeth, sone repents.

Sir, ye ne be not always in like dysposicion, for certes some thing that
seems sometime to you yt is good for to do, an other time it seems to you the
contrary.

And when ye han taken counsel in your self, and han demed by good
delyberacion such thing as you seems best, then read I you that ye keep it
secret. Bewraye ye not your counsayl to no person, but if so be that ye wene
sekerly that through your bewrayeng, your condition shall be to you the more
profitable. For Jesus Syrack says: neither to thy foe ne to thy friend
dyscouer not thy secret, ne thy folly: for they wol give you audience and
lokynge, and supportacion in your presence, and scorn you in your absence. An
other clerk says, that scarsly shall you find any person that may keep
counsel secretly The book says, while that thou kepest thy counsel in
thine heart, thou kepest it in thy prison: and when thou bewrayest thy counsayl
to any wight, he holds yt in his snare And therefore you is better to hyde
your counsel in your heart, then to pray him to who^ ye have bewrayed your
counsel, yt he woll keep it close still. For Seneca says: If so be yt thou
may not thine own counsel hyde, how darste thou pray any other wight thy
counsel secret to keep. But nathelesse if thou wene sykerly that the
bewrayeng of thy counsel to a person woll make thy condycion stand in ye
better plyght, then shall thou tell him thy counsel in this wise. First thou
shalt make no semblaunt whether the were lever peace or war, or this or
that, ne show him not thy will ne thine intent: for trust well that comenly
these cou^saylers ben flatterers, namely the counsaylers of great lords, for
they enforce hem always rather to speak pleasant words, enclynynge to the
lords lust, then words that been true or profitable, and therefore men say
yt the rych man has selde good counsel, but if he have it of him self. And
after that thou shall consider thy friends and thine enemies. And as touching
thy friends, thou shalt consider which of hem ben most faithful and most
wise, and eldest, and most approved in cou^saylynge: and of hem shall thou
ask thy counsel, as the case requires.

I say, that first ye shall call to your counsel your friends that been true.
For Solomon says: that right as the heart of a man delyteth in sauoure that
is sote, right so the counsel of true friends yeueth swetnesse to the soul.
And he says also, there may no thing be lykened to the true friend: For
certes gold ne silver be not so much worth as the good will of a true
friend. And also he says that a true friend is a strong defense who so that
it fyndeth has a great treasure. Then shall ye also consider if that your true
friends be dyscrete and wise: for the book says, ask always thy counsel of
them that been wise. And by this same reason shall ye call to your counsel
your friends that been of age, such as seem and ben expert in many things,
and ben approved in cou^saylyng For the book says, that in old men is
sapience, and in long time the prudence. And Tullius says, that great
things been not aye accomplyshed by strength ne by delyuernesse of body, but
by counsel, by auctorite of persons, and by science: the which three things
ne ben not feoble by age, but certes they enforce, and increase day by day,
and then shall ye keep this for a general rule. First shall ye call to your
counsel a few of your friends that been especial. For Solomon says, many
friends have thou, but among a thousand chose the one to be thy cou^saylour
for all be it so that thou first ne tell thy counsel but to a few, thou
may afterward tell it to mo folk if it be need. But look always that thy
counsaylers have those conditions that I have said before, that is to say,
that they be true, wise, and of old experience. And work not always in every
need by one counsayler alone: for sometime behooves it to be counsayled by many.
For Solomon says, salvation of things is where as there be many counsaylers.

Now have I told you of which folk ye shall be counsayled: Now wol I tell
you which counsel ye ought to eschew. First ye shall eschew the
counsaylynge of fools. Solomon says, take no counsel of a fool for he wol
counsel but after his own lust and his affection. The book says, that the
property of a fool is this: He troweth lightly harm of every man, and
lightly troweth al bounty in him self. Thou shall eschew the counsaylyng of
al flatterers, which as enforce^ hem rather to praise your person by
slatterye, than for to tell you the sothfastnesse of things. Wherefore, Tullius
says, among all the pestelencie that been in frendshyp, the greatest is
flaterye. And therefore it is more need that thou eschew and dread flaterers,
tha^ any other people. The book says, thou shall rather flee fro the sweet
words of flatering and praysynge, than fro the eygre words of thy friends
that says the sothes. Solomon says, that the words of a flaterer is a snare
to catch innocence. He says also, he that speaks to his friend words of
flatery and of plesaunce, he sets a net beforne his fete to catch him.
And therefore Tullius says. Enclyne not thine ears to flatterers. And Caton
says. Auyse the well, and eschew ye words of swetnesse and of pleasaunce. And
eke thou shall eschew the counsaylynge of thine old enemies that been
reconciled. The book says, that no wight retourneth safely in to the grace of
his old enemy. And Esope says ne trust not to hem, to which thou have
sometime had werre or enemyte, ne tell hem not thy counsel. And Seneke tells
the cause why it may not be, for he says, there as great fire has long time
endured, yt there dwells some vapoure of hete. And therefore says Solomon, in
thyn old foe trust thou never. For sikerly though thy enemy be reconciled and
make the sign of humilite, and lout to the with his heed, trust him never:
for certes he makes thilke feigned humylite more for his profit than for any
humilite, or for any love of thy person, because yt he demeth to have victory
over thy person, by such feigned countynaunce, the which vyctorie he might not
have by strife or werre. And Petrus Alphons says, make no fellowship with thine
old enemies, for if thou do hem bountye, they woollen peruerte it to
wickedness. And eke thou must eschew the counsaylynge of hem that been thy
servants, and beren ye great reverence: for parauenture they sayen it more for
dread. than for love. And therefore says a philosopher in this wise. There is
no wight parfetly true to him yt he dredeth And Tullius says, there is no
might so great of any emperor that long may endure, but he have love of the
people and dread. Ye shall eschew also the counsaylyng of folk that been
dronklewe, for they ne can no counsel hyde. For Solomon says, there nys no
priuyte there as reygneth dronknesse, ye shall have also in suspecte the
counsaylyng of such folk as counsel you one thing privily, and counsel
you the contrary openly. For Cassidorie says, that it is a manner slight to
hinder his enemy when he shows to done a thing openly, and werketh privily
the contrary. Thou shalt have also in suspecte the counsaylyng of wicked
folk, that be always full of fraud. And David says, that blisful is the man
that has not followed the counsaylyng of shrewes.

Thou shalt also eschew the counsaylynge of young folk, for her counsaylynge
is not ripe, as Solomon says.

Now sir, sythens, I have showed you of such folk as ye shall be counsayled
of, and follow it: now woll I teache you how ye shall examyne your counsel.
After the doctrine of Tullius, in examenynge of your counsayloures, ye shall
consydere many things.

First thou shall consider thylke thing that thou purposest, and upon that
thing yt thou wolt have counsel, that very troth be said and co^serued,
this is to say, tell truly thy tale for he that says false, may not well be
counsayled in that case, of which he lies. After this thou shalt consider
the things that acorden to that thou purposest for to do by thy cou^saylours,
if reason accord thereto, and eke if thy might may attain thereto, and if the
more part and the better part of your counsaylours accorden thereto or no.
Than shalt Thou consider what thing shall follow of her cou^saylinge: As hate,
peace, werre, grace profit, or damage, and many other things: and in all
things thou shalt chose the best, and weyue al other things. Tha^ shall
thou consider of what rote is engendered the matter of thy counsel, and what
fruit it may conceive and engender. Thou shall eke consider al thy causes,
from whence they be spronge. And when thou have examyned thy counsel, as I
have said, and which party is the better and more profitable, and haste
approved it by many wise folk and old, than thou shall consider, if thou
may perform it, and make of it a good end. For certes reason wol not that
any man shall begin a thing, but if he might perform it as him ought, ne no
wight should take upon him so heavy a charge but that he might bear it. For the
proverb says, he that to much enbraceth distrayneth little. And Caton says,
assay to do such things as thou haste power to done, lest the charge oppress
the to sore, that the behooves weyue the thing that thou haste begone. And if so
be that thou be in dout, whether thou may perform a thing or none, chose
rather for to suffer than to begin. And Peter Alphons says, if thou haste
might to do a thing, of which thou must repent, it is better hold thy
tongue still than for to speak. Than may thou understand by stronger resons,
that if thou haste power to perform a work, of which thou shall repent the,
than is it better thou suffer than begin. Well said they that defenden every
wight to assaye a thing of which he is in doubt whether he may perform it or
none. And after when ye have examined your counsel (as I have said before)
and know well, that ye may perform your emprise: conferme it tha^ sadly till it
be at an end.

Now it is reason and time that I show you, when and wherefore that ye may
change your counsel, wythouten reprofe. Sothly a man may change his purpose
and his counsel, if the cause cease, or when a new case betydeth. For the
law says, that upon things that newly betyden, behooves new counsel. And
Seneke says, if thy counsel is come to the eeres of thine enemies, change
thy counsel. Thou may also change thy counsel, if so be thou find that
by error or by any other cause, harm or damage may betyde. Also if thy
counsel be dyshonest, other else come of dyshonest cause, change thy
counsel. For the law says, that al behestes that be dishonest, ne ben of
no value: And eke, if so be that it be impossible or may not gladly be
parformed or kept.

And take this for a general rule, that every counsel that is enfourmed so
strongly, that it may not be changed for no condycion that may betyde, I say
that ilke counsel is wicked.

MElibeus, when he had herd the doctrine of his wife dame Prudence answerde
in this wise. Dame (quod he) as yet unto this time ye han well taught me, as in
gouernayle how I shall govern me in the choosing and in the wytholdynge of my
counsel: but now would I feign yt ye would condiscende in especial, how
that ye seems by our counsaylours that we have chose in this present need.

My lord (quod she) I beseech you in all humblesse, that ye wol not wylfully
replye against my reasons, ne distemper your heart though I speak the thing yt
you displese, for god wot as in mine intent, I speak it as for your best and
for your honor and profit eke, and sothly I hope that your benygnyte wol
take it in patience. And trusts me well that your counsel in this case ne
should not (as to speak properly) be called a counsaylyng, but a mocion or a
mouynge of folly, in which counsel ye have erred in many a sondrie wise.

First ye have erred in the assemblynge of your counsaylours: For first ye
should have cleped a few folk to your counsel, and after ye might have
showed it to mo, if it had be need. But ye have cleped to your counsayl a great
multitude of people, full chargeous and full noyous for to here. Also ye have
erred, for there as ye should have only cleped to your counsel your true
friends, old and wise, ye have cleped strange folk, young folk, false
flatterers, and enemies reconcyled, and folk that done you reverence withouten
love. And eke ye have erred, for ye have brought with you to your counsel ire
couetyse, and hastynesse, the which three things ben contrary to every good
counsel, honest and profitable, the which three things ye have not distroyed
neither in your self ^e in your counsaylours, as ye ought. Ye have erred also
for ye have showed to your counsaylours your talent and your affections to make
werre anon, and for to do vengeance, and they have espyde by your words, to
what thing ye ben enclyned: and therefore have they rather counsayled you to
your talente, than to your profit. Ye han erred eke, for it seems that you
suffyseth to have be counsayled by these counsailours only, and with little
auysement, where as in so hye and in so great a need, it had been necessary mo
counsaylours, and more delyberacion to perform your emprise. Ye ha^ erred
also, for ye have not examyned your counsel in the foresaid matters, ne in dew
manner as the case requires. Ye have erred also, for ye made no division
between your true friends and your feigned cou^saylours ne ye have not known ye
will of your true cou^saylours, and friends, old, and wise, but ye have cast
al her words in an hochepot and encyned your heart to the more part and to
the gretter nombre of fools than of wise men. And therefore the counsaylynges
that been at congregacions and multitudes of folk, there as men take more
regard to the number than to the sapie^ce of persons, ye seen well, that in
such counsaylinges, fools han the maistrye. Melibe answerde and said again: I
grant well that I have erred, but there as thou have told me here byforne, yt
he nys not to blame that changes his counsel in certain case and for
certain and just cause, I am al ready to change my counsaylours right as thou
would deuyse. The proverb says, for to done sin is mannysshe, but certes
for to perceuer long in sin, is a work of the dyuell.

To this sentence answers anon dame Prudence and said: Examyneth (quod she)
well your counsel, and let us se which of hem has spoke most resonably, and
taught you best counsel. And for as much as the examinacion is necessary,
let us begin at surgens and physiciens, that first spoke of this matter. I
say that physiciens and surgiens have said you in your counsel discretly, as
hem ought: and in her speech said full wisely, that to the office of hem
apertayneth to done to every wight honor and profit, and no wight to anoye,
and after her craft to don great dyligence unto the cure of hem, which they
have in her governance. And sir, right as they have answerde wisely and
discretly, right so read I that they ben hyely and soueraynly guerdoned for her
noble speech, and eke for they shul more done their ententyfe business in the
curacion of your daughter: for all be it so they ben your friends, therefore
shulle^ ye not suffer, that they serve you for naught, but ye ought thereafter
guerdo^ hem, and pay hem her largess. And as touching the proposicion, which
the physiciens entreteden in in this case, this is to said, that in maladies
is, that contrary is warished by an other contrary: I would feign know how
ye understand thylke text, and what is your sentence? Certes (quod Melibeus)
I understand it in this wise. Right as they han do me a contrary, so should I
done hem an other, for right as they han venged hem upon me, and done me
wrong, right so woll I venge me upon hem, and don hem wrong, and than have I
cured one contrary by an other.

Lo, lo (quod dame Prudence) how lightly is every man enclyned to his own
desire and his own plesaunce. Certes (quod she) the words of the physiciens
ne should not ben understand in that wise, for certes wickedness is not
contrary to wickedness, ne vengeance is not contrary to vengeance, ne
wrong to wrong, but every of hem encreseth and engenders other. But certes
ye words of the phisiciens should be understand in this wise, for good and
wyckydnesse ben two contraries: and peace and werre, vengeance and suffraunce,
discord and acorde, and many other things: But certes wyckidnesse shall be
warished with goodness, discord by acorde, werre by peace, and so forth in
other things. And thereto acordeth saint Poule the Apostel in many places: He
says, ne yield not harm for harm, ne wicked speech for wicked speech, but do
well to hem that don to the harm, and bless them that said the harm. And in
many other places he amonissheth peace and acorde.

But now wol I speak of the counsel, which was lyeue unto you by men of
law, and the wise folk and old folk, that sayde^ al by one accord as ye
herd byforne, that over al things ye shall done your business and dyligence
to keep your person, and to warnstore your house: And they said also, yt in
this case ye ought to werchenfull wisely and with great delyberacion. And sir,
as to the first point, that touches the keeping of your person: ye shall
understand that he that has werre, shall ever deuoutely and mekely prayen,
byforne all things, that Jesus Christ of his mercy wol have him in his
protection, and to be his sovereign helper at his need: For certes in this
world there nys no wight that may be counsayled and ykepte suffyciently
without the keeping of our lord Jesus Christ. To this sentence acordeth the
prophet David that says: If god ne kept the cite, in ydel waketh he that it
keeps. Now sir, than should he commytte the keeping of your person to your
true friends, that been approved and yknowe, and of hem shul ye ask help, your
person to keep. For Caton says: If thou have need of help, ask it of thy
friends, for there nys none so good a physicien as thy true friend. And after
this than shall ye keep you fro al strange folk, and fro liars, and have always
in suspecte her company. For Peter Alphons says. Ne take no company by the
way of no strange man, but if so be that thou haste known him of longer time:
And if so be that he fall in to thy company, parauenture withouten thyn assent
and good will, enquire than as subtelly as thou can of his conversation, and
of his life byforne, and feign thy way, saying thou would go thither as thou
wolte not go, and if he bear a spear, hold the on the right side of him, and
if he bear a sword, hold the on the left side of him. And than shall ye keep
you wisely from all manner of such people as I have said you here before, and
hem and her counsel eschew. And after this than shall ye keep you, in such
manner, that for any presumpsion of your bodily strength, that ye dispyse not
ne acounte not the might of your adversary so lyte, that ye let the keeping of
your person for your presumpcion, for every wise man dredeth his enemy. And
Solomon says: A very fool is he that of al has dread: But certes he yt
through hardynesse of his heart, and through the hardynesse of him self, has
to great presumpcion, him shall yuel betyde. Than shall ye evermore
encountrewayte enbushementes, and all espyaile. For Seneke says: The wise man
that dredeth harms, escheweth harms: He ne falls in to no perils, that
peril escheweth. And al be it so that thou seem, yt thou be in secret place,
yet shall thou always don dyligence in keeping of thy person, this is to say, ne
be not neglygent to keep thine own person, not only for thy greatest enemy,
but also for thy lest enemy. Seneke says, a man that is well aduysed, he
dredeth his lest enemy. Ouyde says, that the little wesel wol slay the great
bulle and the wild heart. And the proverb says, that a little thorn wol
grieve a king full sore, and a little hounde wol hold the wild bore. But
nathelesse I say not thou shall be so cowarde that thou doubt where as is no
dread. The book says, that some men have great lust to disceyue, but yet
they dread to be disceyued And keep the fro the company of skorners: for the
book says, with skorners ne make no company, but fly her words as venym

Now as to the second point, where as your wise counsaylours counsayled you
to warn store your house with great delygence, I would feign know how ye
understood thylke words, and what is your sentence.

Melibeus answered and said, certes I understand it in this wise, that I shall
warne^ store mine house with toures, such as have castles and other manner
edyfices, and armurye and archeries, bitwene which things I may my person and
my house so keep and defend that mine enemies shullen be in dread mine house
to aproch. To this sentence answerde anon Prudence. Warnishyng (quod she) of
hye toures and of hye edyfices, is with great costages and with great travail,
and when that they ben accomplished, yet ben they not worth a straw, but if
they ben defended with true friends, that been old and wise. And understands
well, that ye greatest and the stro^gest garnyson that rich men may have, as
well to kepen her parsone as her goods is, yt they be byloued with her
subjects, and with her neighbors. For thus says Tullius, that there is a
manner garryson, that no man may venquishe ne discomfyte, and that is a lord to
be byloued of his cytezyns, and of his people.

Now sir, as to the third point, where as your old and wise counsaylours
said, that ye ought not suddenly ne hastily proceed in this need* but that ye
oughten puruayen and aparayle you in this case, with great dylygence and
delyberacion. Verily I trow yt they said right trewly and right sothe. For
Tullius says: In every deed or thou begin it, apparayle the with great
dyligence. Than say I, in vengeance taking, in werre, in battle, and in
warnestoryng, or thou begin I read that thou apparayle the thereto, and do it
with great delyberacio^. For Tullius says: The long apparelynge to fore the
battle, makes short victory. And Cassidorus says The garryson is stronger,
when it is long time auysed. But now let us speak of the counsel that was
acorded by your neighbors, such as don you reverence withoute^ love, your
old enemies reconciled, your flatterers, that counsayled you certain things
privily, and openly counsayled you the contrary. The young folk also, that
counsayled you to venge you, and to make werre anon. Certes sir, as I have
said before, ye have greatly erred to clepe such manner of folk to your
counsel, which counsaylours ben enough reproved by the resons a foresaid.
But nathelesse let us now discende to the special. Ye shul first proceed
after the doctrine of Tullius. Certes the truth of this matter or of this
counsel, needs not dyligently to enquire, for it is well wyste, which they
ben that han done you this trespass and vilanye, and how many trespasours, and
in what manner they have done al this wrong to you, and all this vilanye. And
after this, than shul ye examyne the second condition, which Tullius adds
in this matter. For Tullius puts a thing, which that he clepeth consentyng:
this is to say, who ben they and which ben they, and how many, that
co^senten to thy counsel in thy wylfulnesse, to done hasty vengeance. And
let us consider also who ben they, and how many they ben that consented to
your adversaries. As to the first point, it is well known which folk they
be, that consented to your hasty wylfulnesse. For trewly al tho that counsayl
you to maken sudden werre, ne be not your friends. Let se now which ben they
that ye holden so greatly your fre^des, as to your person For all be it so that
ye be mighty and rich certes ye ben but alone: for trewly ye ne have no child
but a daughter, ne ye have no brethern ne cosyns germayns, ne none other nigh
kynrede, wherefore your enemies should stynte to plede with you, ne to distroye
your person.

Ye know also that your richesse mot be dispended in diverse parties. And wha^
that every wight has his part, they woollen take but little regard to venge
your death. But thine enemies ben three, and they have many brethern, children,
cosyns, and other nigh kynred and though so were, that thou had slain of
hem two or three, yet dwells there ynowe to avenge her death, and to slay thy
person. And though so be that your kynrede be more steadfast and syker than the
kyn of your adversaries, yet never the less your kynrede is but after kynrede,
for they ben but little sybbe to you, and the kynne of your enemies ben nigh
sybbe to hem. And certes as in that, her condition is better than is yours.
Than let us consider also of the counsaylynge of hem that counsayled you to
take sudden vengeance, whether it acorde to reason or non: And certes ye know
well nay for as by right and reason, there may no man take vengeance of no
wight, but the judge that has jurisdiction of it, when it is granted him to
take vengeance hastily or attemperatly, as the law requires. And yet more
over of thylke word that Tullius clepeth co^sentynge, thou shalt consent, if
that thy might and thy power may consent and suffyse to thy wilfulness, and
to thy counsaylours: And certes thou may well say nay, for sykerly as for
to speak properly, we may do nothing but such thing as we may done
ryghtfully: and certes righfully ye may take no vengeance, as of your own
propre auctorite. Than may ye se that your power ne consents not ne
accords not with your wylfulnesse. Now let us examyne the third point, that
Tullius clepeth consequence. Thou shalt understand that the vengeance yt
thou purposest for to take is consequent, and thereof follows an other
vengeance, peril, and werre, and other damages withouten nombre, of which we
be not ware, as at this time. And as touching the fourth point, yt Tullius
clepeth engendring, thou shalt consider, that this wrong, which that is done
to the, is engendered of ye hate of thine enemies, and of ye vengeance taking
upon hem, that would engender a another vengeance, and mochel sorrow and
wastyng of richesse, as I said ere. Now sir, as touching the fylte point,
that Tully clepeth causes, which is the last point, thou shalt understand,
that the wrong that thou haste received, has certain causes, which that
clerks callen orien, and efficien, and causa longinqua, and causa propinqua,
that is to say, the far cause, and the nyghe cause. The far cause is
almighty God, that is cause of al things. The nere cause is the three enemies.
The cause accidental was hate. The cause material, ben the five wounds of thy
daughter. The cause formal, is the manner of their werkynge that brought
ladders, and clambe in at thy wyndowes. The cause fynal was for to sle thy
daughter, it let not in as much as in them was. But for to speak of you
far cause, as to what end they should come, or finally what shall betyde of
them in this case, ne can I not deem, but by coniectynge and supposing: for
we shall suppose that they shall come to a wicked end, because that the book
of decrees says. Selde or with great pain, ben causes brought to a good
end, when they ben badly begone.

Now sir, if men would ask me why that god suffered men to do you this
villanye, truly I can not well answer, as for no sothfastnesse. For the Apostel
says, that the scyences and the iugementes of our lord God almighty ben full
deep, there may no man comprehend ne search hem. Nathelesse by certain
presumpcyous and coniectynges, I hold and believe, that God which that is full
of justice and of rightwisnesse, has suffered this betyde, by just cause
reasonable.

Thy name is Melibee, this is to say, a man that drinks honey. Thou haste
drunk so much honey of sweet temporel rychesses, and delyces of honors of
this world, that thou art drunk, and haste forgoten Jesus Christ thy
creator: Thou ne haste not done to him such honor and reverence as the
ought, ne thou ne haste not taken keep to the words of Ouide, that says.
Under ye honey of the goods of thy body, is hyd the venym that sleeth thy soul.

And Solomon says: If it so he that thou have found honey, eete of the same
honey, that that suffyseth: For if so be that thou eete of ye same honey out of
mesure, thou shalt spewe, and also be nedy and poor. And parauenture almighty
God Jesus Christ, has the in dispyte, and has turned away fro the his face,
and his eeres of myserycorde and mercy. And also he has suffered and give
license, that thou thus should be punished and chastised, in ye manner that
thou haste trespased and offended. Thou have done sin against our lord
Christ, for certes the three enemies of mankind, that is to say: the flesh,
the fend, and the world, thou haste suffered hem enter into thine heart
wylfully, by the wyndowes of thy body, and have not defended thy self
suffyciently against their assautes and their temptacions, so that they have
wounded thy soul in five places, this is to shy: The deedly sins, that been
entered in to thy heart by thy five wits. And in the same manner our lord
Christ has would and suffered that thy three enemies be^ entered in to thy house
by ye wyndowes, and have wounded thy daughter in the foresaid manner.

Truly (quod Melibee) I se well that ye enforce you much by words to
overcome me, in such manner that I shall not venge me on mine enemies, showing
me the perilles and the yuels that might fall of this vengeance but who so
would consider in all vengeaunces, the perils and yuels that might s^e of
vengeance taking, a man would never take vengeance, and that were harm: For
by ye vengeance taking, ben the wicked men disceuered from the good men. And
they that have will to do wickedness, restrayn their wicked purpose, when they
se the ponishyng and chastysyng of ye trespasours: And yet say I more, that
right as a synguler person synneth in taking vengeance of a another m^, right
so synneth the judge, if he do no vengeance of hem that have deserved. For
Seneke says thus: That master he says is good that preueth shrewes. And as
Cassyodor says: A man dredeth to do outrages, when he wot and knows, that
it dyspleaseth to the iuges and soueraynes. And an other says: The judge that
dredeth to do right makes men shrewes. And saint Poule the Apostle says in
his Epistle, when he writes unto the Romans, that the iuges bear not the
speere without cause, but they bear it to punyshe the shrewes and mysdoers,
and for to defend the good men. If ye woll then take vengeance of your
enemies, ye shul return and have your recourse to the judge that has the
iurisdyction upon hem, and he shall punyshe hem, as the law asks and
requires

A ha, said Melibee, this ve^geau^ce lyketh me nothing. I bethynke me now,
and take heed how that fortune has nouryshed me fro my childhode, and has
help me to pass many a strong paas: Now I woll assaye her, trowynge with
gods help, that she shall help me my shame for to avenge.

Truly said Prudence, if ye wol work by my counsel, ye shall not assay for
^^ne by no way: ne ye shall not lene or bow unto her, after the word of
Senek For things that been foolyshlye done, and that been done in hope of
fortune, shall never come to good end. And as the same Seneke says: The more
clear and the more shynynge that fortune is, the more brytel and the sooner
broke she is. Trusts not in her, for she is not steadfast ne stable. For when
thou trowest to be most sure and steadfast of her help, she woll fail and
dysceyue the. And where as ye say, that fortune has nouryshed you fro your
chyldhode, I say that in so much ye shall the less trust in her, and in her
wit. For Seneke says: what man that is noryshed by fortune, she makes him
a great fool Now then sith ye desire and ask ve^geau^ce and the vengeance
that is done after the law, and before the judge, ne lyketh you not and the
vengeance that is done in hope of fortune is peryllous and uncertain, then
have ye none other remedy, but for to have your recourse unto the sovereign
judge, that ve^geth all vylanyes and wrongs. And he shall ve^ge you, after that
him self witnesses, where as he says: Leave the vengeance to me, and I
shall do it.

Melibee answered, if I ne venge me of the villainy that men have done to me, I
so^mmo^ or warn hem, that have done to me that vyllanye, and al other, to do
me an other vyllanye. For it is written: If thou take no vengeance of an old
vyllany, thou so^monest thine adversaries to do the a new vyllany: And also
for my suffrau^ce men would do me so much vyllany, that I might neither bear
it ne sustain it, and so should I be put and holden over low. For men said,
in mykel sufferyng shall many things fall unto the, which thou shall not mow
suffer.

Certes (quod Prudence) I grant you, that over much suffraunce is not good,
but yet ne follows it not thereof, that every person, to whom men do
vyllanye, should take of it ve^geaunce: for that appertains and longs all
only to iuges, for they should venge ye vyllanyes and iniuryes: And therefore
those two authorities that ye have said before, been only understand in the
iuges: For when they suffer over much the wro^ges and vyllanyes to be done,
without punishment, they sommon not a man all only for to do new wrongs, but
they command it. Also a wise man says, that the judge that corrects not ye
sinner, commands and byddeth him do sin. And ye iuges and souerayns, might
in their land so much suffer of the shrewes and mysdoers, that they should by
such suffrau^ce, by process of time, wexe of such power and might that they
should put out the iuges and the soueraynes from their places, and at last,
make hem lose her lordshyppes.

But let us now suppose, that ye have leave to venge you: I say ye be not of
might and power as now to venge you, for if ye woll make comparyson unto the
might of your adversaries, ye should find in many things that I have showed
you er this, yt their condicyon is better then yours, and therefore say I, that
it is good as now, that ye suffer and be pacient.

Furthermore, ye know well that after the common saw, it is a woodnesse, a
man to strive with a stronger or a more mighty man then he is him self, and
for to strive with a man of even strength, that is to say, with as strong a
man as he is, it is peril: and for to strive with a weaker man, it is folly,
and therefore should a man slye stryuynge as mykel as he might. For Solomon
says: It is a great worship to a man to keep him fro noise and strife: and
if it so befall and hap that a man of greater might and strength then thou
art, do the greuau^ce: study and besye the rather to still the same greuaunce,
then for to venge the. For Seneke says, that he puts him in great peril,
that stryueth with a greater man than he is hem self. And Caton says, if a
man of higher astate or degree or more mighty than thou, do the anoye or
greuaunce, suffer him: for he that ones has grieved the, may an other time
releue the and help the. Yet set I case ye have license for to venge you. I
say that there ben full many things, that shall restrain you of vengeance
taking, and make you for to enclyne to suffer, and for to have patience in the
wrongs that have been done to you. First and formest if ye wol consider the
fautes that been in your own person, for which fautes god has suffered you to
have this trybulacion, as I have said to you here before. For the poet says,
that we ought patiently take the trybulacions that come to us, when that we
think and consider that we have deserved to have them. And saint Gregory
says, that when a man consydereth well the nombre of his defautes and of his
sins, the pains and the trybulacions that he suffers seem the less unto
him. And in as much as him thinks his sins more heavy and grievous, in so
much seems his pain the lighter and the esyer unto him. Also ye owe to
enclyne and bow your heart to take the patience of our lord Jesus Christ, as
says saint Peter in his epystles. Jesus Christ he says has suffered for us,
and yeuen ensample to every man to follow and sewe him, for he did never
sin, ne never came there a villaynous word out of his mouth. When men
cursed him, he cursed hem not. And when men beat him, he manaced hem not. Also
the great patience, which saints that been in paradyse have had in tribulacyon
that they have suffered, without her deserte or gylte, ought much stir you to
patience. Ferthermore, ye shul enforce you to have patience, co^sydryng that
the trybulacions of this world but little while endure, and sone passed ben and
gone, and ye joy that a man seeks to have by patience in tribulacions is
perdurable, after that the Apostle says in his Epistle. The joy of god he
says, is perdurable, that is to say, everlasting. Also troweth and byleueth
steadfastly that he is not well nourished and well taught, that can not have
patience, or wol not receive pacyence. For Solomon says, that the doctrine
and the wit of a man is known by patience. And in an other place he says,
that he that is pacient, governs him by great prudence.

And the same Solomon says. The angry and wrathful man makes noyses, and the
pacient man attempreth and stylleth hem. He says also, it is more worth to be
pacient than to be right strong. And he that may have the lordeship of his
own heart is more to praise, tha^ he that by his force or strength takes
great cities. And therefore says saint Iame in his epistle that pacyence is a
great virtue of perfectyon.

CErtes (quod Melibee) I grant you dame Prudence, that patience is a great
virtue of perfection, but every man may not have the perfection that ye seek,
ne I am not of the no^bre of right perfyte men. For mine heart may never be in
peace, unto the time it be avenged. And al be it so that it was great peril to
mine enemies to do me a villanye, in taking vengeance upon me, yet took they
no head of the peril, but fulfilled her wicked will and her courage: And
therefore me thinks men ought not repreue me, though I put me in a little
peril, for to avenge me, and though I do a great excess, that is to say: that
I venge one outrage by an other.

Ah (quod dame) Prudence, ye say your will as you lyketh: But in no case of the
world a man should not do outrage ne excess for to venge him. For Cassiodor
says, that as yuel does he that vengeth him by outrage, as he that does the
outrage. And therefore ye shall venge you after the order of right, that is to
say, by the law, and not by excess ne by outrage. And also if you wol venge
you of the outrage of your adversaries in other manner than right commands,
ye sin. And therefore says Seneke: that a man shall never venge shreudnesse
by shreudnesse. And if ye say that right asks to defend violence by
violence, and fightyng by fighting: certes ye say soth, when the defense is
done without interual, or without taryeng or delay, for to defend him, and not
for to venge him. And it behooves that a man put such attemperau^ce in his
defense, that me^ have no cause ne matter to repreue him yt defends him of
outrage and excess, for else were it again reason. Parde ye know well, that ye
make no defense as now, for to defend you, but for to venge you: and so
shows it that ye have no will to do your deed attemperatly, and therefore me
thinks that patience is good. For Solomon says, that he that is not pacient
shall have great harm.

CErtes said Melibee I grant you, that when a man is impacient and wroth of
that that touches him not, and that appertains not unto him, though it harm
him it is no wonder For the law says, that he is culpable, that entremetleth
or meteth with such things as apertayneth not unto him. And Salomo^ says*
that he that entremetleth of the noise or strife of another man, is like to him
that takes a strange hounde by the ceres: For right as he, that takes a
strange hou^de by ye ceres, is other while bytte^ by ye hand, right so in the
same wise it is reason that he have harm that by his impacience medleth him of
the noise of an other man, where as it appertains not unto him. But ye know
well that this deed, that is to say my grefe and my disease, touches me right
nyghe. And therefore though I be wroth and impacient, it is no maruayle: and
saving your grace I can not se yt it might greatly harm me though I took
vengeance, for I am rycher and more mighty then mine enemies be: And well
know ye that by money and by having great possessions, ben all things of
this world governed. And Salomo^ says, al these things obey to money.

When Prudence had herd her husband auaunt him of his richesse and his money,
dyspraysynge ye power of his adversaries, she spoke and said in this wise.
Certes dear sir, I grant you that ye be rich and mighty, and that ye richesse
is good to hem that have well gotten hem, and that well can use hem. For right
as the body of a man may not live without the soul, no more may it live with
out the temporel goods, and by riches may a man get him great friends. And
therefore says Pamphillus: If a nerthes daughter he says be rich, she may
chief of a thousand men, which she woll take to her husband: for of a
thousand, one woll not forsake her ne refuse her. And this Pamphillus says
also: If thou be right happy, that is to say, if thou be rich, thou shalt
find a great nombre of fellows and friends. And if thy fortune change,
farewell frendshyp, and fellowship for thou shalt be alone without any company
but if it be the company of poor folk. And yet says this Pamphillus more
over that they that been bond and thrall of lynage, shall be made worthy and
noble by the rychesses. And right so as by the rychesses there come many
goodnesses, right so by poverty come there many harms and yuels, for great
poverty co^strayneth a man to do many yuels. And therefore calls Cassiodor
pouertye the mother of ruin, that is to say, the mother of ouerthrowynge or
of falling down. And therefore says Peter Alfonce: One of the greatest
aduersyties of this world is when a free man by kind or of birth, is
constrained by poverty to eat the alms of his enemy. And the same says
Innocent, in one of his books: He says, that sorrowful and myshappy is the
condition of a poor beggar, for if he ask not his meat, he dies for honger,
and if he ask, he dies for shame: and algates necessite constrayneth him to
ask. And therefore says Solomon, that better is to dye, then for to have
such pouerte. And as the same Solomon says: Better it is to dye of bitter
death, then for to live in such wise. By these reasons that I have said unto
you, and by many other reasons that I could say, I grant you that rychesses
ben good, to hem yt getten hem well, and to hem that well vsen tho rychesses And
therefore wol I show you how ye shall behave you in gatherynge of rychesses,
and in what manner ye shullen use hem.

First ye shall get hem without great desire, by good leyser, sokynglye and not
ouerhastelye, for a man that in to desiring to get richesse, habandoneth him
first to theft and to all other yuels. And therefore says Solomon: He that
hastes him to besely to wax rich, he shall be none innocent. He says also,
that the richesse that hastily comes to a man, sone and lightly goes and
passes from a man, but that richesse that comes little and little, wexeth
always and multiplyeth. And sir, ye shall get richesse by your wit and by
your travail, unto your profit, and that without wrong or harm doing to
any other person. For the law says, there makes no man him self rich, if
he do harm to an other wight, this is to say: that nature defends and
forbyddeth by right, that no man make him self rich unto the harm of an
other person. And Tullius says, that no sorrow ne no dread of death, ne
nothing that may fall unto a man, is so much against nature, as a man to
encreace his own profit, to the harm of an other man. And though the great
and mighty me^ get rychesses more lightly then thou, yet shalt thou not be
ydell ne slow to do thy profit, for thou shalt in all wise fly ydelnesse.
For Solomon says, ye ydelnesse teaches a man to do many yuels. And the same
Solomon says, that he that trauayleth and besyeth him to tylth his land
shall eat breed: but he that is ydell and casts him to no business ne
occupacion, shall fall in to pouerte and dye for honger. And he that is ydell and
slow, can never find couenable time for to do his profit. For there is a
versyfyer says, that the ydel man excuses him in winter, because of the
great cold, and in summer because of the heete. For these causes says
Caton, waketh and enclyne you net over much for to sleep, for over much rest
nourysheth and causes many vices. And therefore says saint Ierom, do some
good deeds, that the deuell which is our enemy, ne find you not unoccupied,
for the dyuel ne takes not lightly unto his were king such as he fyndeth
occupied in good works.

Then thus, in getting rychesses ye must fly ydelnesse. And afterward ye shul
use the rychesses, which ye have got by your wit and by your travail, in
such manner, that men hold you not to scarce ne to sparyng, ne fool large,
that is to say, over large a spe^der For right as men blame an auaricious man
because of his scarcite and chynchery, in the same wise is he to blame that
spends over largelye. And therefore says Caton: Use (says he) the
rychesses that thou haste gotten in such manner, that men may have no matter ne
cause to call the another wretch ne chynche: For it is great shame to a man to
have a poor heart and a rich purse. He says also, the goods that thou
haste got, use them by measure, that is to say, spend mesurably, for they
that foolyshly waste and dyspende the goods that they have, when they have no
more propre of her own, then they shape hem to take ye goods of an other man.
I say then that ye shall fly auaryce, using your richesse in such manner,
that men say not that your rychesses been buried, but that ye have hem in
your might and in your weldynge. For a wise man repreueth the auaricyous man,
and says thus in this verses two. Whereto and why buryeth a man his goods by
his great auaryce, and knows well that needs he must dye, for death is the
end of every man* as in this present life? And for what cause or encheson
joins he him, or knytteth he him so fast unto his goods, that all his
wits mow not dysceuer him, ne depart him fro his goods, and knows well,
or ought to know, that when he is dead, he shall nothing bear with him out
of this world. And therefore says saint Augustyne, that the auaricyous man is
lykened unto hell, that the more it swaloweth, the more desire it has to
swalowe and devour. And as well as ye would eschew to be called an auaricyous
man or chynche, as well should ye keep and govern you in such a wise, that men
call you not fool large. Therefore says Tullius. The goods of thine house ne
should not be hid ne kept so close, but that they might be opened by pity
and debonayrte, that is to say, to give hem part that have great need. Ne
thy goods should not be so open, to be every man's goods. Afterward in
getting of your rychesses and in using hem, ye shall always have three
things in your heart, that is to say, our Lord God, conscience, and good
name. First ye shall have god in your heart, and for no riches ye should do any
thing, which may in any manner dysplease god your creator and maker. For after
the word of Solomon, it is better to have a little good with ye love of god,
then to have much good and treasoure, and lose the love of his Lord God. And
the prophet says, that better it is to be a good man, and have little good
and treasour, then to be holden a shrewe, and have great richesse. And yet I
say furthermore, that ye should always do your business to get you rychesses,
so that ye get hem with good conscience. And the Apostle says, that there nys
thing in this world, of which we should have so great joy, as when our
conscience bears us good witness. And the wise man says: that the
substance of a man is full good, when sin is not in man's conscience.
Afterward in gettyng of your rychesses and in using of hem, ye must have
great business and great diligence, that your good name be always kept and
conserved. For Solomon says, that better it is, and more it avails a man to
have a good name, then for to have many rychesses: And therefore he says in an
other place. Do great diligence says Solomon, in keeping of thy friends and
of thy good name, for it shall longer abide with the the^ any treasure, be it
never so precious. And certes he should not be called a great gentylman, that
after God and good conscience, all things left, ne does his deligence and
business to keep his good name. And Cassyodor says, that it is a sign of a
gentle heart, when a man loves and desires to have a good name And therefore
says saint Augustyne, that there ben two things that been right necessary
and also needful: and that is good conscience, and good lose, that is to say:
good conscience to thine own person inward, and good lose for thy neighbor
outward. And he that trusts him so much in his good conscience, that he
dyspyseth and sets at naught his good name or loose, and recketh not though
he keep not his good name, nys but a cruel churl. Sir, now have I showed you
how ye should do in getting rychesses, and how ye should use hem: and I se
well for the trust that ye have in your rychesses, ye woll move war and
battle. I counsel you that ye begin no war in trust of your rychesses,
for they ne suffyse not wars to maynteyne. And therefore says a philosopher:
That man that desires and would algates have war shall never have
suffysaunce: for the rycher that he is, the greater dyspe^ces must he make if
he woll have worship and vyctorye. And Solomon says, that the greater
rychesses yt a man has, the more dyspendours he has. And therefore sir, all be
it so that for your riches ye may have much folk, yet behooves it not, ne
it is not good to begin war, where as ye may in other manner have peace,
unto your worship and profit: For the vyctorye of batayls that been in this
world, lies not in great nombre or multitude of people, ne in the virtue of
man, but it lies in the will and in the hand of our Lord God almyghtye. And
therefore Judas Machabeus, which was gods knight, when he should fight against
his aduersarye, that had a greater nombre and a greater multitude of folk,
and stronger then was his people of Machabee, yet he recomforted his little
company, and said right in this wise: Also lightly said he, may our Lord God
give vyctorye to a few folk, as to many folk, for the vyctorye of a battle
comes not by the great nombre of people, but it comes from our Lord God
of heaven. And dear sir, for as much as there is no man certain, if it be
worthy that God give him vyctorye or not, after that Solomon says, therefore
every man should greatly dread wars to begin: and because that in batayles
fall many peryls, and happeth other while, that as sone is the great man
slain as the little man. And as it is written in the second book of kings:
The deeds of batayles ben aduenturous and nothing certain, for as lyghtlye is
one hurt with a speere as an other: And for there is great peril in war,
therefore should a man slye and eschew war in as much as a man may goodly. For
Salomo^ says, he that loves peril, shall fall in peril.

After that dame Prudence had spoken in this manner, Melibe answered and said. I
se well dame Prudence, that by your fair words and your resons that ye have
showed me that the war lyketh you nothing, but I have not yet herd your
counsel how I shall do in this need.

Certes (said she) I counsel you that ye accord with your adversaries, and
that ye have peace with hem. For saint James says in his Epistle: that by
concord and peace small riches wax great: and by debate and dyscorde riches
decay. And ye know well, that one of the greatest and most sovereign thing
that is in this world, is unite and peace And therefore says our lord Jesus
Christ to his apostles, in this wise: well happy ben they, that love and
purchase peace, for they be called the children of god. Ah, said Melibee, now
se I well, that ye love not mine honor ne my worship. Ye know well that mine
adversaries have begone this debate and bryge by their outrage. And ye se well
that they ne require ne pray me of peace, ne they ask not to be reconsiled.
Wol ye then that I go meke me, and obey me to them, and cry hem mercy?
Forsooth yt were not my worship. For right as men say, over great humbleness
engenders dyspraysynge, so fares it by to great^ humilite or meekness.

Then began dame Prudence to make semblant of wrath, and said: Certes sir, save
your grace. I love your honor and profit as I do mine own, and ever have do:
ye ne none other never se the contrary. And yet, if I had said, that ye should
have purchased peace and reconsiliation, I ne had much mystake me, ne said
amysse. For the wise man says: the dyscention begins by an other man, and
the reconsylynge begins by thy self. And the prophet says: fly
shreudnesse, and do goodness, seek peace and follow it, in as much as in the
is. Yet say I not, that ye should rather pursue to your adversaries for
peace, then they should to you: For I know well that ye been so hard herted,
that ye woll do nothing for me. And Solomon says: He that has over hard an
heart, he at last shall myshappe or mysbetyde.

When Melibee had herd dame Prudence make semblaunt of wrath, he said in
this wise. Dame I pray you, that ye be not dyspleased of ye thing that I
say, for ye know well that I am angrye and wroth, and that is no wonder: and
they that be wroth wot not well what they do, ne what they say. Therefore the
prophet says: that troubled eyes have no clear sight. But say and counsel
me as you lyketh, for I am ready to do right as ye wol desire: And if ye
reprefe me of my folly, I am the more holden to love and praise you. For
Salomo^ says, that he that repreueth him that does folly, he shall find
greater grace then he that dysceyueth him by sweet words.

Then said dame Prudence, I make no semblaunt of wrath ne of anger, but for
your great profit. For Solomon says: He is more worth, that repreueth or
chydeth a fool for his folly, showing him semblaunt of wrath, then he that
supporteth him and prayseth him in his mysdoynge, and laugheth a^ his folly.
And this same Solomon says afterward: That by the sorrowful vysage of a man,
that is to say, by the sorye and heavy countenance of a man, the fool
corrects and amendeth him self.

Then said Milibee, I shall not con answer unto so many fair reasons as ye
put to me and show: say shortly your will and your counsel, and I am all
ready to perform and fulfill it. Then dame prudence dyscouered all her will
unto him and said. I counsel you (said she) above al things, that ye make
peace between God and you, and be reconsyled unto him and to his grace for as I
have said you here before, god has suffered you to have this tribulation and
disease for your sins: and if ye do as I say you, God will send your
adversaries unto you, and make hem fall at your fete, ready to do your will
and your commandment. For Solomon says, when the condition of man is
pleasant and liking to god, he chau^geth the hertes of the man's adversaries,
and constrayneth hem to beseech him of peace and of grace. And I pray you let
me speak with your adversaries priuelye, for they shall not know that it be of
your will or your assent. And then when I know their will and their entente, I
may counsel you the more surely.

Dame said Melibee, does your will and your liking, for I put me holy in
your dysposicion and ordinance.

Then dame Prudence, when she saw the good will of her husbonde, delybered and
took advise in her self, thynkyng how she might bring this need unto a good
conclusion and to a good end: And when she saw her time, she sent for these
adversaries to come unto her in a prive place. And showed wisely unto hem ye
great goods that come of peace and the great harms and peryls that been in
war, and said to hem in a goodly manner how that hem ought have great
repentance of the injury and wrong, that they had done to Melibeus her lord,
and unto her and to her daughter.

And when they herd ye goodly words of dame Prudence, they were so supprysed
and rauyshed, and had so great joy of her, that wonder was to tell. Ah, lady
(said they) ye have showed unto us the blessyng of swetnesse after the saying
of David the prophet, For the reconsyling which we be not worthy to have in no
manner. But we ought require it with great co^tricion and humilite, that ye of
your goodness have presented unto us. Now se we well, that the science and
co^nyng of Solomon is full true, for he says: That sweet words multiply and
encreace friends, and makes shrewes to be debonaire and meke.

Certes (said they) we put our deed and al our matter and cause, al holy in your
goodwyl, and been ready to obey at the commandment of our lord Melibeus. And
therefore dear and benygne lady: we pray and beseech you as mekely as we can
and may, that it like unto your great goodness, to fulfill in deed, your
goodly words. For we consider and know, that we have offended and grieved our
lord Melibeus out of measure: so forforth, that we be not of power to make him
amends. And therefore we oblige and bind us and our friends, for to do all at
his will and commandment: but parauenture he has such heaviness, and such
wrath to us ward, because of our offense, that he woll enioyn us such a
pain, as we mow not bear ne sustain. And therefore noble lady, we beseech
your womanly pity, to take such aduysement in this need, that we ne our
fre^des be not disherited ne distroyed, through our folly.

Certes (said Prudence) It is an hard thing and right perilous, that a man
put him al utterly in arbytration and judgment, and in the might and power of
his enemy: For Solomon says: leueth me, and yeueth credence to that I shall
say: Ne yeueth never the power ne governance of thy goods, to thy son, to
thy wife, to thy friend, ne to thy brother: ne give thou never might ne mastry
over thy body while thou live. Now, sith he defends that a man should not
give to his brother ne to his friend, the might of his body. By a stronger
reason he defends and forbedeth a man to give him self to his enemy. And
nathelesse I counsel you that ye mystrust not my lord: for I wot well and
know verily, that he is debonair and meke, large, curteys, and nothing
desirous ne couitous of goods ne riches. For there is nothing in this world
that he desires, save only worship and honor. Ferthermore I know, and am
right sure, that he shall nothing do in this need, without my counsel: and I
shall so work in this case, that by the grace of our lord god, ye shall be
reconsyled unto us.

Than said they with one voice, worshypful lady we put us and our goods all
fully in your will and disposycion, and ben ready to come, what day that it
lyketh unto your noblesse to lymyte us or assyne us for to make our oblygacion
and bond as strong as it lyketh unto your goodness, that we mow fulfill the
will of you and of my lord Melibe.

When dame Prudence had herd the answer of these men, she bad hem go again
privily, and she returned to her lord Melibe, and told him how she found
his adversaries full repentaunt, knowlegynge full lowly her sins and trespass,
and how they were ready to suffer al pain, requiryng and prayi^g him of mercy
and pity.

Than said Melibe, he is well worthy to have pardon and foryeuenesse of his
sin, that excuses not his sin, but knowlegeth and repents him, askyng
indulgynce. For Seneke says, there is the remission and for yeuenesse, where
as the confession is: for confession is neighbor to innocence. And therefore I
assent and confyrme me to have peace, but it is good that we do naught without
the assente and will of our friends.

Than was Prudence right glad and joyful, and said: Certes sir, ye have well
and goodly answered: for right as by the counsel, assent, and help of your
friends, ye have be steered to venge you and make werre: Right so, without her
counsel shall ye not accord you, ne have peace with your adversaries. For
the law says: There is nothing so good, by way of kind, as a thing to be
unbound by him that it was ybounde.

Than dame Prudence, without delay or taryenge, sent anon her messanger for
her kynsfolke and her old friends, which that were true and wise: and told
hem by order, in the presence of Melibe, all the matter, as it is above expressed
and declared. And prayed hem that they would say their advise and counsel
what best were to do in this need. And when Melibeus friends had taken her
advise and delyberacion of the foresaid matter, and had examyned it by great
business and dilygence. They yaue full counsel for to have peace and rest,
and that Melibee should receive with good heart his aduersaris, to foryeuenesse
and mercy.

And when dame Prudence had herd thassent of her lord Melibee, and the
counsel of his friends accord with her will and her entencion, she was
wondersly glad in her heart, and said. There is an old proverb (said she)
That ye goodness that thou may do this day, do it, and abide it not, ne
delay it not till the next day. And therefore I counsel, that ye send your
messengers, such as be discrete and wise, unto your adversaries: tellyng hem
on your behalf, that if they wol treat of peace and accord, that they shape
he^ with out delay or taryeng, to come unto us: which thing performed was in
deed. And when these trespasours, and repentyng folk of her folies, that is to
say, the adversaries of Melibeus, had herd what these messangers said unto
hem, they were right glad and joyful, and answered full mekely and benygnely,
yeldyng grace and thanks to her lord Melibe^, and to al his company: and
shope hem without delay to go with the messangers, and obeyed to the
commandment of her lord Melibeus. And right anon they took her way to the
court of Melibe, and took with hem some of their true fre^des, to make faith
for hem, and for to be her borowes: And wha^ they were comen to the presence of
Melibee, he said to hem these words. It stondeth thus, said Melibee, and soth
it is, that causeless and without skyl and reason, ye have done great injuries
and wrongs to me and my wife Prudence, and to my daughter also, for ye have
entered in to my house by violence and have done such outrage, that all men
know well that ye have deserved death. And therefore woll I know and wete of
you, whether ye woll put the punishynge and the chastylyng and the vengeance
of this outrage, in the will of me and of my wife, or ye wol not.

Than the wysest of hem three answered for hem al, and said. Sir (said he) we
know well that we ben unworthy to come to the court of so great a lord and so
worthy as ye be, for we have so greatly mistaken us, and have offended and
agylted in such wise again your high lordshyp, that truly we hail deserved
the death, but yet for the great goodness and debonairte, that all the world
witnesses of your person, we submytte us to ye excelle^cye and benygnytye of
your gracious lordeshyp, and ben ready to obey to al your commandments,
besechynge you, that of your mer^iable pity ye well consider our great
repentance, and low submyssyon, and grant us foryeuenesse of our outragyous
trespace and offense: For well we know, that your liberal grace and mercy
stretches ferther in to the goodness, than don our outrageous gyltes and
trespaces in to the wickedness. Al be it that cursedly and damnably we have
agilted against your high lordshyp.

THan Melibee took hem up fro the ground full benygnely, and received her
oblygacions and her bonds by her oaths upon her pledges and borowes, and
assigned hem a certain day to return unto his court, for to receive and
accept the sentence and judgment that Melibeus would command to be don on
hem, by the causes aforsayd, which things ordained, every man returned to his
house.

And when dame Prudence saw her time, she feigned and asked her lord Melibe,
what vengeance he thought to take on his adversaries.

To which Melibe answerde, and said* Certes (said he.) I think and purpose
me fully to disherit the^ of all that ever they have, and for to put them in
exile for ever.

Certes said dame Prudence, this were a cruel sentence, and much against
reason. For ye be rich enough, and have no need of other men's riches. And ye
might lightly in this wise get you a covetous name, which is a vicious thing,
and ought be eschewed of every good man. For after the saying of the apostel:
Couetise is rote of al harms. And therefore it were better to you to lose so
much good of your own, than for to take of their good in this manner. For
better it is to lose good with worship, than to win good with vilanye and
shame. And every man ought to do his dilygence and his business, to get him
a good name. And yet shall he not only busy him in keeping his good name, but he
shall al so enforce him always to do some thing, by which he may renew his
good name. For it is written, that the old good lose of a man or good name, is
soon gone and past, when it is not renewed. And as touching, that ye say that
ye wol exile your adversaries: that thinks me much against reason, and out of
measure, consydringe the power that they have give you upon them self. And it
is written: that he is worthy to lose his pryuilege, that mysuseth ye might and
power that is given him. And I set case, ye might enjoin hem yt pain by
right and law, which I trow ye may not do: I say, ye might not put it to
execution, for parauenture than it were like to turn to ye werre, as it was
before. And therefore if ye woll that men do you obeysaunce, ye must demean you
more curteisly, that is to say: ye must give more easy sentences and
judgment. For it is written: he that most curteisly commands, to him men
most obey. And therefore I pray you, that in this necessyte and in this need,
ye cast you to overcome your heart. For as Senet says: he that ouercometh his
heart, ouercometh twice. And Tully says: there is nothing so commendable in a
great lord, as when he is debonaire and meke, and apeseth him lightly. And I
pray you that ye woll now forbere to do vengeance, in such a manner, that
your good name may be kept and conserved, and that men may have cause and
matter to praise you of pity and mercy: and that ye have no cause to repent you
of thing that is done. For Senecke says: he ouercometh in an yuel manner,
that repents him of his victory. Wherefore I pray you, let mercy be in your
heart, to theffecte and intent, that god almyghty^ have mercy upon you in his
last judgment. For saint James says in his Epistel: judgment without mercy
shall be do to him, that has no mercy of another wight.

When Melibee had herd the great skylles and reasons of dame Prudence, and her
wise informations and techynges, his heart began enclyne to the will of his wife:
consydryng her true intent, confirmed him anon and assented fully to work
after her counsel: and thanked god, of whom proceeds all goodness and
virtue, that him had sent a wife of so great discretion. And when the day came
that his adversaries should appear in his prensence, he spoke to hem goodly,
and said in this wise.

Al be it so, that of your pride and high presumption and folly, and of your
negligence and uncunning, ye have misborne you, and trespaced unto me, yet for
as mikel as I se and behold your great humilyte, and that ye be sorry and
repentau^t of your gyltes, it co^strayneth me to do you grace and mercy:
wherefore I receive you to my grace, and forgive you holy all the offenses,
injuries, and wrongs, that ye have don against me and mine, to theffecte and
end, that god of his endless mercy wol at the time of our dyeng forgive us
our gyltes, that we have trespaced to him in this wreched world. For doutlesse
if we be sorry and and repentaunt for the sins and gyltes, which we have
trespaced in ye sight of our lord god: he is so fre and so merciable, that he
woll forgive us our gyltes, and bring us to the bliss that never shall have
end. AMEN.

Here ends the tale of Chaucer and here follows the Monks Prologue.
When ended was the tale of Malibee
And of Prudence, and her benygnyte
Our Host said, as I am faithful man
And by the precious corpse Madrian
I had lever than a barel of ale
That Goodlefe my wife had herd this tale
For she nothing is of such patience
As was this Melibeus wife Prudence
By gods bones, wha^ I beat my knaves
She brings me the great clubbed staves
And cries, slay the dogs euerichone
And break both back and every bone
And if that any neighbor of mine
Wol not in church to my wife enclyne
Or be so hardy, to her to trespace
when she comes hom, she ra^peth in my face
And cries false cowarde wreke thy wife
By corpus domini, I wol have thy knyfe
And thou shall have my distaffe, and go spynne
Fro day till night, she wol thus begin.
Alas she says, that ever she was shape
To wedde a mylksop, a cowarde ape
That wol be ouerleyde with every wight
Thou dare not stand by thy wives right
This is my life, but if that I would fight
And out at door, anon I mote me dight
And else I am lost, but if that I
Be like a wild lion, fool hardy
I wot well she wol do me slay some day
Some neighbor, and than go my way
For I am perlous with knyfe in hand
Al be it that I dare not her withstonde
For she is bygge in arms be my faith
That shall he find, that her mysdoth or says
But let us pass away from this matere.
My lord he said, sir monk: be merry of chere
For ye shall tell us a tale trewly
Lo Rochester stondeth here fast by
Ride sorth mine own lord, break not our game
But by my truth I know not your name
whether I shall call you my lord dan John
Or dan Thomas, dan Robert, or dan Albon
Or of what house be ye, by your farther kyn
I vow to god, thou have a full fair chyn
It is a gentyl pasture there thou ghost
Thou art not like a pynaunt or a ghost
Upon my faith thou art some officere
Some worthy Sexten, or some Celerere
For by my fathers soul, as to my dome
Thou art a master, when thou art at home
No poor cloysterer, ne no poor nouyse
But a gouernoure ware and wise
And therewith of brawne and of bones
A well faryng person for the nones
I pray to god give him confusyon
That first the brought in to religyon
Thou would be a trede foul a right
Had thou as great leave as thou have might
To perform al thy lust in engendrure
Thou had begoten many a creature
Alas, why werest thou so wide a cope
God give me sorrow, and I were pope
Not only thou, but every mighty man
Though he were shore high upon his pan
Should have a wife, for all this world is lorn
Religyon has take up all the corn
Of tredynge, and borel men ben shrimpes
Of feeble trees there comes wretched impes
This makes that our heirs be so slender
And feeble, that they may not well engender
This makes that our wives wol assay
Religious folk, for they may better pay
Of Venus paymentes, than mow we
God wot no lusheburghs pay ye
But be not wroth my lord, though I play
Full often in game a sothe have I herd say.
This worthy monk took al in patience
And said, I wol do my dilygence
As far as sowneth in to honest
To tell you a tale, ye two or three
And if ye list to harken hytherwarde
I wol you said, the life of saint Edward
Or else tragedyes first I wol tell.
Of which I have an hundred in my cel.
Tragedy is to tell a certain story
As old books maken memory
Of hem that stood in great prosperyte
And be fallen out of hye degree
In to mysery, and ended wretchedly
And they ben vercifyed comenly
Of six fete, which men call exametron
In prose eke ben endyted many on
And in meter, many a sondrye wise
Lo, this ought enough to suffyse
Now herkeneth, if you list for to here
But first I beseech you in this matere
Though I by order tell not these things
Be it of Popes, Emperors, or Kings
After her ages, as men written find
But tellen hem, some before and some behind
As it comes now to my remembrance
Have me excused of mine ignorance.
Here ends the Monks Prologue, and here begins his tale.
I Will bewail, in manner of tragedy
The harm of hem that stoden in hye degree
And fyl, so that there nas no remedy
To bring hem out of her aduersyte
For certain, when that fortune list to fly
There may no man of her the course withold
Let no man trust on blind prosperity
Bethware by this ensample young and old
Lucifer. AT Lucifer, though he an angel were
And not a man, at him will I begin
For though fortune may not angel dear
From hye degree, yet fell he for his sin
Down in to hell, where he is yet inn
O Lucifer, brightest of angels al
Now art thou Sathanas, yt may not twyn
Out of mysery, in which thou art fall

Adam. Lo Adam, in the field of Damascene
With gods own finger wrought was he
And not begotten of man's sperm unclean
And welte al paradise saving o tree
Never worldly man had so hye degree
As Adam, till he for mysgouernaunce
Was driven out of his high prosperity
To labor and to hell, and to myschaunce.

Sampson. Lo Samson, which yt was annunciate
By the angel, long or his natiuite
And was to god almighty consecrate
And stood in nobles, while he might se
Was never such another, as was he
To speak of strength, and thereto hardynesse
But to his wives told he his secre
Through which he slough him for wretchedness
Sampson, this noble and mighty champion
without wepen, save his hondes twey
He slough and al to rent the lion
Toward his weddyng, walking by the wey
His false wife could him so psese and pray
Till she his counsel knew, and she untrue
Unto his foes, his counsel began vewray
And him forsook, and took another new
An hundred foxes took Sampson for ire
And al her tails he together bond
And set the foxes tails al on fire
For he in every tail has put a bronde
And they brent all the corns in that land
And her olyues, and her vynes eke
A thousand men eke he slough with his hond
And had no wepen, but an ass cheke
wha^ they were slain, so thristed him yt he
was well nigh lorne, for which he began to prey
That god would of his pain, have some pity
And send him drink, or else mote he dey
And of this ass cheke, that was so drey
Out of a wange tothe, sprange anon a well
Of which he drunk enough, shortly to sey
Thus help him god, as Iudicum can tell
By very force, at Gasa on a night
Maugre the Philystens of that cite
The gates of the town, he has up plyght
And on his back, ycaried hem has he
High on an hyl, where as men might hem se
O noble mighty Sampson, lefe and dear
Had thou not told to women thy secre
In all this wrolde ne had be thy pere
This Sa^pson neither syder dra^ke ne wine
Ne on his heed came rasour none ne shere
By precepte of the messangere divine
For all his strength, in his heeres were
And fully twenty year by year
Of Israel, he had the governance
But after soon shall he weep many a tere
For women shall bring him to myschaunce.
Unto his lemman Dalyda he told
That in his heeres, al his strength lay
And falsely to his foes she him sold
And slepyng in her barme upon a day
She mad to clyppe or shere his heeres away
And made his fomen al his craft espyen
And when that they him fond in such array
They bound him fast, and put out his eyes
But er his heeres were clypped or ishaue
There was no bond that might him bind
But now is he put in prison in a cave
where as they made him at ye querne grynde
O noble Sa^pson, strongest of mankind
O whylom judge in glory and richesse
Now may thou weep with thyn eyes blind
Since you art from well fall in to wretchidnesse
The end of this caytife was, as I shall sey
His fomen made a feast upon a day
And made him, as their fool before he^ pley
And this was in a temple of great array
But at last he made a foul afray
For he two pyllers shoke, and made hem fall
And down fell the temple al, and there it lay
And sloughe him self, and eke his fomen all
This is to say, the princes euerychone
And eke three thousand bodies were there slain
with falling of the great temple of stone
Of Sampson wol I no more said
Beth ware by this ensample old and plain
That no men tell her counsel to her wives
Of such thing as they would have secret fayn
If that it touch her lymmes or her lives.

Hercules. OF Hercules, the sovereign conqueroure
Syngen his works, laud, and hye renoun
For in his time, of strength he bare the flower
He slough and rafte the skyn of the lyoun
And of the Centaurs, laid the boste adoun
He Harpias slew, the cruel birds fell
He the golden appels rafte fro the dragon
He drew out Cerberus, the hounde of hell
He slew the cruel tyrant Bustrus
And made his horse to frete him flesh and bone
He slough the very serpent venomous
Of Achelous two horns, brake he that one
And he slew Cacus, in a cave of stone
He slough the gyaunt Antacus the strong
He slough the grisly bore, and that anon
And bare his heed upon his spear long
was never wight, sithe the world began
That slough so many monsters, as did he
Through the wide world, his name ran
what for his strenght and his bounte
And every realm went he for to se
He was so strong, yt no man might him let
And at both worlds ends, he Trophe
Instead of bounds, of brass a pyllour set.
Alemman had this noble champyon
That hight De^anire, as fresh as May
And as clerks make mention
She has him sent a shyrte fresh and gay
Alas this shirte, alas and well away
Enuenomed was subtelly with all
That er he had weared it half a day
It made his flesh al fro his bones fall.
But nathelesse, some clerks her excusen
By one that hight Nessus, that it maked
Be as be may, I wol her not accusen
But on his body, the shyrte he ware al naked
Till the flesh was with the venym slaked
And when he saw none other remedy
In hot coals, he has him self iraked
For with no venym dayned he to dye
Thus sterfe this worthy mighty Hercules
Lo, who may trust in fortune any throw
For him that follows all this world of prees
Or he be ware, is often laid full low
Full wise is he, that him self can know
Beware, for when that fortune list to gloss
Than wayteth she, her man down to throw
By such a way, as he would lest suppose.

Nabugodonosor. THe mighty trone, the precious tresore
The glorious septre, and royal mayeste
That had the king Nabugodonosore
with tongue uneath may discryu^d be
He twyse wanne Jerusalem, that cite
The vessel of the temple he with him lad
At Babylon was his sovereign se
In which his glory and his delight he had.
The fairest children of the blood royal
Of Jerusalem, he did do gelde anon
And made each of hem to ben his thral
Among al other Danyel was one
That was the wysest of euerychone
For he the dre^^s of the king expowned
where as in Caldee clerks were there non^
That wist to what fine his dreme sowned
This proud king let make a statu of gold
Sixty cubits long, and seven in bread
To which image, both young and old
Commanded he to loute, and have in dread
Or in a furneys, full of flames read
He should be deed, that would not obey
But never would assent to that deed
Danyel, ne his young fellows twey
This king of kings, proud and elate
wend god, that sytteth in majesty
Ne might him not byreue of his estate
But suddenly he lost his dygnite
And like a be, him seemed for to be
And eat hey as an ox, and lay therout
In rain, with wild beestes walked he
Till a certain time was come about
And like an Egles feathers were his heeres
And his nails like birds claws were
God releued him at certain years
And yaue him wit, and the^ with many a tere
He thanked God, and all his life in fere
was he, to do amysse, or more trespace
And er that he laid was on his bear
He knew yt god was full of might and grace

Balthaser. HIs son, which that hight Balthasare
That held the reygne after his fathers day
He by his father could not beware
For proud he was of heart, and of array
And eke an ydolaster was he aye
His high estate, assured him in pride
But fortune cast him down, and there he lay
And suddenly his raygne began deuyde
A feast he made, unto his lords al
Upon a time, he made hem blyth be
And then his officers began he call
Gothe bring forth the vessels (quod he)
which that my father in his prosperity
Out of the temple of Jerusalem byrafte
And to our gods thanken we
Of honor, that our elders with us lafte
His wife, his lords, and his co^cubynes
Aye dronken, whiles her appetytes last
Out of these noble vessels, sondrye wynes
And on a wall, this king his eyes cast
And saw an ho^de armelesse, that wrote fast
For fear of which he quoke, and syghed sore
This hand ye Balthazar made sore agaste
wrote (Mane techel phares) and no more
In all that land, magicien was there none
That could expowne what this letter meant
But Daniel expowned it anon
And said, king, god thy father sent
Glory and honor, reygne, treasour, and rent
And he was proud, and nothing god he drad
And therefore great wrath god upon him sent
And him byrafte the raygne that he had
He was out cast of man's company
with asses was his habitacion
And eat hey as a be, in wete and dry
Till that he knew, by grace and by reason
That god of heaven has domination
Over every reygne, and every creature
And then had God of him compassyon
And him restored his reygne and his figure
Eke thou ye art his son, art proud also
And know all these things privily
And art rebel to god, and his foe
Thou drank eke of his vessels boldly
Thy wife eke, and thy wenches synfully
Drunk of the same vessels sondrye wynis
And heryed false gods cursedly
Therefore to the shapen great pain is
This hand was sent fro god, yt on the wall
wrote (Mane techel phares) trust me
Thy reygne is done, thou worest not al
Divided is thy realm, and it shall be
To Medes and to Perciens (quod he)
And that same night the king was slawe
And Darius occupied his dignite
Though he thereto had nether right ne law
Lordynges, here emsample mow ye take
How that in lordshyp is no sykernesse
For when that fortune wol a man forsake
She bears away his raygne, and his richesse
And eke his friends, both more and less
And what man has fre^des, through fortune
Myshap wol make him enemies I guess
This proverb is full soth, and full comune

zenobia. ZEnobia of Palmerye queen
(As writes percie^s of her noblesse)
So worthywas in arms, and so kene
yt no wight passed her in hardynesse
Ne i^ lineage, ne i^ none other ge^tilnes
Of kings blood of Perce she is dyscended
I say that she had not most fayrnesse
But of her shape she might not be amended
From her chylhode I find that she fled
Office of woman, and to wood she went
And many a wild hertes blood she shed
with arowes broad, that she to hem sent
She was so swyfte, that she anon hem hent
And when that she was elder, she would kill
Lions, lybardes, and beeres al to rent
And in her arms welde hem at her will
She durst wild beestes dens seek
And run in the mounteyns all the night
And sleep under a bushe, and she could eke
wrastell by very force, and by very might
with any yo^ge man, were he never so wight
There might no thing in her arms stand
She kept her maydenhede from every wight
To no man dayned she to be bond
But at last, her friends has her married
To Odenat, a prince of that country
Al were it so, that she hem long tarried
And ye shall understand, how that he
Had such fantasyes as had she
But nathelesse, when they were knyt in fere
They lived in joy and in felicite
For each of hem had other lefe and dear
Save one thing, she nolde never assent
By no way, that he should by her lie
But ones, for it was her plain intent
To have a child, the world to multyplye
And also sone as she might aspye
That she was not with child with that deed
Then would she suffer him do his fantasye
Efte sons, and not but ones out of dread
And if she were with child at that cast
No More should he play that game
Till fully forty days were paste
Then would she ones suffer him the same
All were this Odenat wild or tame
He gate no more of her, for thus she said
It was to wives lechery and shame
In other case, if men with hem playde
Two sons by this Odenat had she
The which she kept in virtue and lettrure
But now unto our tale turn we
I say that so worshypfull a creature
And wise therwyth, and large with mesure
So penyble in war, and curteys eke
Ne more labor might in war endure
was none, though al this world me^ would seek
Her rich array, ne might not be told
As well in vessel as in her clothing
She was al clad in pierry and in gold
And eke she left not for none hunting
To have of sundry tongues folk knowing
when that she leyser had for to entende
To learn books was all her liking
How she in virtue her life might dyspende
And shortly of this storye for to treat
As doughty was her husbonde as she
So that they conquered many reygnes gre^^
In the Orient, with many a fair cite
Apperteynaunt unto the majesty
Of Rome, and with strength held them fast
Ne never might her for men do her slay
All the while that Odenates days last
Her batayles, who so list hem for to read
Again Sapor the king, and other mo
And how all this process fill in deed
why she conquered, and what title she had thereto
And after of her myschefe and of her woe
How that she was besieged, and ytake
Let him to my master Petrarke go
That writes enough of this, I undertake
when Odenat was deed, she myghtely
The realms held, and with her own hand
Against her foes she fought truly
That there was no prince ne king, in all that land
But were glad, if they that grace fond
That she ne should upon his land werrey
with her they made alyaunce by bond
To be in peace, and let hem ride and pley
The Emperor of Rome Claudius
Ne him beforne, the romayne Galyen
Ne durst never be so coragius
Ne none Armen, ne none Egypcien
Ne Surrien, ne none Arabien
within the field, that durst with her fight
Lest yt she would hem with her hondes sle^^
Or with her meyne, put hem to flight
In kings habyte went her sons two
As the heirs of her realms all
And Hermanno and Titamallo
Her names were, as perciens hem call
But aye fortune, has in her honey gall
This mighty queen, may no while endure
Fortune out of her reygne made her to fall
To wretchedness, and to mysauenture
Aurelian, when that the governance
Of Rome came in his hondes twey
He shope upon this queen to do vengeance
And with his legions, he took his wey
Toward zenobia, and shortly for to say
He made her fly, and at last her hent
And fettered her, and eke her children tway
And wan the lord, and home to Rome he went
Among other things that he wan
Her chare, yt of gold was wrought and pierre
This great Romayne, this Aurelian
Has with him ladde, that for men should se
Beforne his tryumphe walked she
with golden chains on her neck hongyng
Crowned she was, as after her degree
And full of pier^e charged her clothing
Alas fortune, she that whylom was
Dreadful to kings, and to emperoures
Now gaureth all the people on her, alas
And she that helmed was in stark stoures
And wan by force towns strong, and toures
Shall on her heed now were autremyte
And she that bare the septre full of flowers
Shall bear a dystaffe, her cost for to quyte

Nero. ALthough that Nero were as vicious
As any fend, that lies full low adoun
Yet he, as tells us suetonius
All this world had i^ subjection
Both este, and west, and Septentrion
Of Rubyes, saphers, and of perles white
were al hes clothes broudred up and down
For he in gemmes greatly began delight
More delycate, more pompous of array
More proud, was never Emperor, the^ he
That ylke cloth that he had wered o day
After that time, he nolde it never se
Nets of gold threde had he great plente
To fyshe in Tyber, when him list to play
His lusts were as law, in his degree
For fortune as his friend would him obey
He Rome brent for his delycacye
The Senators he slew upon a day
To here how her wives would weep and cry
And slough his brother, and by his sister lay
His mother made he in a pytouse array
For her womb let slytte, to behold
where he conceived was, so welaway
That he so little of his mother told
No teeres out of his eyes, for that sight
Ne came, but said, a fair womon was she
Great wonder is, that he could or might
Be domysman, of her deed beauty
The wine to bring him, commanded he
And drank anon, none other woe he made
when might is joined unto cruelte
Alas, to deep will the venyme wade
In youth a master had this Emperor
To teach him lettrure, and curtesye
For of moralite he was the flower
As in his time, but if his books lie
And whiles his master had of him mastrye
He made him so conning and so souple
That long time it was or tyranny
Or any vice, durst in him uncouple
Senec his master was, of which I deuyse
Because Nero had of him such dread
For he for his vices would him chastyse
Dyscretly as by word, and not by deed
Sir he would say, an emperor mote need
Be virtuous, and hate tyranny
For which he made him in a bath to blede
On both his arms, till he must dye
This Nero had eke of a customaunce
In youth, against his master to rise
which afterward, him though great greuau^ce
Because he often would him chastyse
Therefore he made him dye in this wise
To chose in a bath to dye in this manner
Rather then to have another turmentyse
And thus has Nero slain his master dear
Now fell it so, that fortune list no longer
The high pride of Nero to cheryshe
For tho he were strong, yet was she stronger
She thought thus, by god I am to nyce
To set a man, that is fulfilled of vice
In hye degree, and an emperor him call
By God out of his sete I woll him tryce
when he lest weneth, sonest shall he fall
The people rose upon him on a night
For his defaute, and when he it aspyed
Out of his doors anon he has him dyght
Alone, and there he wend have been alyed
He knocked fast, and aye the more he cried
The faster shette they the doors all
Tho wyste he well, he had him self begyled
And went his way, no longer durst he call
The people cried and rombled up and down
That with his eeres he herd how they said
Vhere is this false tyrant, this Neroun
For fear full nere of his wit he brayde
And to his gods, right pitously he prayde
For socoure, but it might not betyde
For dread of this, him thought that he deyde
And ran in to a gardeyn, him to hyde
And in this gardayne, found he chorles twey
Syttyng by a fire great and reed
And to the chorles two he began to prey
To flee him, and to gyrde of his heed
That to his body, when he were deed
were no dispyte done, for his diffame
Him self he slough, he could no better read
Of which fortune lough and had game.

Holofernes. WAs never captain under a king
That reigns mo, put in subiectyo^
Nestro^ger was in feld, of al thing
As i^ his time, ne greater ofrenou^
Ne more pompous in high presumpcioun
Than Holopherne, which fortune aye kyste
And so lycorously ladde him up and down
Till that he deed was er that he wyste
Not only that this world had of him awe
For lesyng of richesse and lyberte
But he made every man renye his law
Nabugodonosor was lord, said he
None other god should honored be
Against his hest, there dare no wight trespace
Save in Bethulia, a strong cite
where Eliachym was priest of that place
But take keep of ye death of Holopherne
Amyd his host, he drunk lay al night
within his tent, large as is a berne
And yet for all his pomp, and al his might
Judith, a woman, as he lay upright
Sleping, his heed of smote, and fro his tente
Full privily she stale, from every wight
And with his heed, unto her town she went

Antiochus. WHat needs it of King Antiochus
To tell his high and royal majesty?
His great pride, his work venemus
For such an other man nas never as he
Redeth what that he was in Machabe
And redeth the proud words that he said
And why he fyl from his prosperyte
And in an hyl, how wretchedly he deyde
Fortune him had enhaunsed so in pride
That verily he wend he might attain
Unto the sterres, upon every side
And in a balaunce, to wey each mountain
And all the floodes of the sea restrain
And gods people had he most in hate
Hem would he slay, in turment and in pain
wenyng that god ne might his pride abate
And for that Nychanore and Tymothe
By jews were venquished mightyly
Unto the jews such an hate had he
That he bad greythe his chare full hastily
And swore and said, full dispytously
Unto Jerusalem he would eftsone
To wreke his ire on it full cruelly
But of his purpose was he let full sone
God for his manace him sore smote
with inuysible wound, aye incurable
That in his guts carfe so and bote
That his pains were importable
And certainly the wreche was reasonable
For many a man's guts did he pain
But from his purpose, cursed and dampnable
For all his smerte, he nolde him not restrain
But bade anon, aparayle his host
And suddenly, or he than was ware
God daunted al his pride, and al his boste
For he so sore fell out of his chare
That al his lymmes and his skyn to tare
So that he ne might go ne ride
But in a chair, men about him bare
Al forbrused both back and side
The wreche of god him smote so cruelly
That in his body wicked worms crept
And therewith al he stanke so horribly
That none of his meyne, that him kept
whether that he woke or else slept
Ne might not of him the stynke endure
And in his myschefe he wayled and eke wept
And knew god, lord of every creature
To all his host, and to him self also
Full loathsome was the stynke of his carayne
No man might him beat to ne fro
And in his stynke, and in his horrible pain
He sterfe full wretchedly on a mountain
Thus has this robbour, and this homicide
That many a man made to weep and plain
Such gue^don, as belongs to pride.

Alexander. THe storye of Alexander is so commune
That every wight, that has dyscretion
Has herd somewhat or al, of his fortune
This wide world, as in conclusyon
He wanne by strength, and for his renoun
They were glad for peace unto him send
The pride of man, and bost he laid adoun
where so he came, unto the worlds end
Comparison might yet never be maked
Betwyrre him, and an other conqueroure
For all this world, for dred of hi has quaked
He was of knyghthode, and of fredome flower
Fortune him made ye heir of high honor
Save wine and women, nothing might aswage
His high intent in arms and labor
So was he full of loving courage.
what price were it to him, though I you told
Of Darius, and of a hundred thousand mo
Of princes, earls, and knights bold
which he conquered, and brought to woe
I say as far as a man may ride or go
The world was his, what should I more devise
For though I wrote and told you ever mo
Of his knyghthode, it might not suffyse
Twelve year he reigned, as I read i^ Machabe
Philippes son of Macedone he was
That first was king of Greece, that country
O worthy gentyl Alexander, alas
That ever should the fall such a caas
Enpoysoned of thy folk thou were
Thy syce, fortune has turned in to an ace
And yet for the ne wept she never a tere
Who shall give men tears to complain
The death of gentylnesse, and of fraunchyse
That all the world welded in his demayne
And yet him thought it might not suffyse
So full was his courage of high empryse
Alas, who shall me help to endyte
False fortune, and poison to despise?
The which of all this woe I wit.

Julius Caesar. BY wisdom, manhood, and high labor
From humble bed to royal majesty
Up rose he, Julius the conqueroure
That all the occident, by land and see
wan by strength of hand, or else by trete
And unto Rome made hem trybutary
And sith of Rome, emperor was he
Till that fortune wexte his adversary
O mighty Caesar, that in Thessaly
Against Pompei, father thine in law
That of the Orient had the chyualry
As far as that the day begins to dawe
Them through knyghthod have take and slawe
Save few folk, ye with Pompeius fled
Through which you put all ye orie^t in awe
Thank fortune, that so well the spedde
But now a little while I wol bewail
This Pompei, this noble gouernoure
Of Rome, which that fled at this battle
I say one of his men, a false traitor
His heed of smote, to win him favor
Of Julius, and to him the heed brought
Alas Pompei, of the orient conqueror
That fortune unto such a fine the wrought
To Rome again repayreth Julius
with his triumph lauriate full hye
But on a time Brutus Cassius
That ever had of his hye estate envy
Full privily had made conspyracye
Against this Julius, in subtel wise
And cast the place, in which he should dye
with bodkyns, as I shall you deuyse
This Julius unto the capitol went
Upon a day, as he was wont to gone
And in the capitol, anon him hent
This false Brutus, and his other fone
And stycked him with bodkyns anon
with many a wound and thus they let him lie
But never geueched he at no stroke but one
Or else at two, but if his storye lie
So manly was this Julius of heart
And so well loved estately honest
That tho his deedly wou^des so sore smerte
His mantel over his ^yppes cast he
For no man should se his priuety
And as he lay in dyenge on a trance
And wyste verily that dye should he
Of honestye yet had he remembrance
Lucan to the this storye I recomende
And to Sueton, and Valery also
That of this storye written word and end
How that these conquerours two
Fortune was first a friend, and sithe a foe
No man trust upon her favor long
But have her in awayte for ever mo
witness on all the conquerours strong.

Cresus. THe rich Cresus, whylom king of Lyde
Of which Cresus, Cirus sore him drad
Yet was he caught amydde all his pride
And to brenne, men to the fire him lad
But such a rain down from you fyrmame^t shad
That queynt the fire, and made him to escape
But to beware yet no grace he had
Till fortune on the galowes made him gape
When he escaped was, he could not sten^
For to begin a new array again
He wend well, for that fortune him sent
Such hap, yt he escaped through ye rain
That of his foes he might not be slain
And eke a sweuen upon a night he met
Of which he was so proud, and eke so feign
That in vengeance he all his heart set
Upon a tree he was as him thought
There Jupiter him wyshe, both back and side
And Phoebus eke a fair towel him brought
To dry him with, and therewith wext his pride
And to his daughter, that stood him beside
which yt he knew in hye sentence habounde
He bade her tell what it sygnyfyed
And she his dreme right thus did expound
The tree (quod she) the galous is to mean
And Jupiter betokens snow and rain
And Phoebus, with his towel so clean
Betokens the son beams, soth to said
Thou shall honged be, father certain
Rain shall the wash, and son shall the dry
Thus she warned him full plat and full pain
His daughter, that called was Phanye
And honged was Cresus the proud king
His royal trone might him not avail
Tragedye is none other manner things
Ne ca^ in singing cry ne bewail
But for that fortune aldaye wol assail
with unware stroke, ye reygnes yt be proud
For when men trusts her, then wol she fail
And cover her bright face with a cloud.

Peter of Spain. OO noble, o worthy Petro, glory of Spain
whom fortune held so high in majesty
well ought men thy pytous death complain
Out of thy land, thy brother made the fle
And after at a siege by subtelte
Thou were betrayed, and ladde unto his tente
where as he with his own hand slew the
Succedynge in thy raygne and in thy rent
The field of snow, with thegle of black therein
Caught with ye lymrod, colored as ye glede
He brewe this cursydnesse, and all this sin
The wicked neste was werker of this deed
Not Charles, Oliver, that took aye head
Of troth and honor, but of Armorike
Genilion Oliver, corrupt for mede
Brought this worthy king in such a bryke.

Petro king of Cypre. O Worthy Petro, king of Cypre also
That Alexandrye wanne by high mastrye
Full many an hethe^ wroughtest you woe
Of which thine own lyeges had envy
And for no thing, but for thy chyualrye
They in thy bed han slain ye by ye morrow
Thus can fortune her whele govern and gye
And out of joy bring men to sorrow

Barnabo vicounte. OF Millan great Barnabo vicounte
God of delight, and scourge of Lumbardye
Why should I not thyn infortune accounte
Sens in astate thou clomben were so hye
Thy brothers son, yt was thy double alye
For he thy neuewe was, and son in law
Within his prison made the to dye
But why ne how not I, yt thou were slawe.

Hugelyne of Pyse. OF the earl Hugelyne of Pyse the langour
There may no tongue tell for pity
But little out of Pyse stonte a toure
In which toure in prison put was he
And with him ben his little children three
The eldest scarsly five year of age
Alas fortune, it was a great cruelte
Such birds for to put in such a cage
Dampened was he to dye in that prison
For Roger, which that bishop was of Pyse
Had on him made a false suggestyon
Through which ye people began upon him rise
And put him in prison, in such a wise
As ye have herd, and meat and drink he had
So small, that uneath it may suffyse
And therwithal it was full poor and bad
And on a day befell, that in that hour
wha^ that his meat wont was to be brought
The geylour shette the doors of the toure
He herd it well, but he spoke right naught
And in his heart anon there fyl a thought
That they for hunger would do him dyen
Alas (quod he) alas that I was wrought
Therewith the teeres fyl fro his eyes
His young son, that three year was of age
Unto him said, father father why do ye weep
When will the geylour bring our potage
Is there no morsel breed that ye do keep
I am so hungry, that I may not sleep
Now would god that I might sleep ever
Than should not hunger in my womb crepe
There nys nothing but breed yt me were lever
Thus day by day, this child began to cry
Till in his fathers arm adowne it lay
And said, farwell father I mote dye
And kyste his father, and deyde the same day
And when the woeful father did it sey
For woe, his arms two he began to byte
And said alas, fortune and welaway
Thy false whele, my woe al may it wit
His children wend, that it for hunger was
That he his arms gnewe, and not for woe
And said: father, do not so (alas)
But rather eat the flesh upon us two
Our flesh you yaue us, take our flesh us fro
And eat enough, right thus they to him said
And after that within a day or two
They laid hem in his lap adoun, and deyde
Thus ended is this mighty earl of Pyse
Him self dispeyred eke, for hungre starfe
From high estate fortune away him carfe
Of this Tragedy, it ought enough suffyse
Who so wol here it in a longer wise
Redeth the great Poet of Itayle
That hight Dante, for he can it al deuyse
Fro point to point, not a word wol he sail.

Here ends the Monks tale.
Here stynteth the knight the monk of his tale, and here follows the Prologue
of the Nonnes priest.
HO (quod the knight) good sir no more of this
That ye have said, is right enough ywys
And mokel more, for little heaviness
Is right enough to much folk, I guess
I say for me, it is a great disease
where as men have be in wealth and ease
To here of her sudden fall, alas
And the contrary is joy and solas
As when a man has been in pore estate
And clymbeth up, and wexeth fortunate
And there abides in prosperity
Such things is gladsome, as thinks me
And of such thing were good for to tell.
Ye (quod our Host) by saint Poules bell
Ye say right soth, this Monk clappeth loud
He spoke, how fortune coue with a cloud
I wot not what, and also of a Tragedy
Right now ye herd, and perdy no remedy
It is for to bewaylen, ne complain
That that is done, and als it is a pain
As ye have said, to here of heaviness
Sir monk no more of this, so god you bless
Your tale anoyeth all this company
Such talkyng is not worth a butterfly
For therein is there no disporte ne game
Therefore sir monk, da^ Piers by your name
I pray you hertely, tell us somewhat else
For sykerly, nere clynkyng of your belles
That on your bridell honge, on every side
By heaven king, that for us al did
I should er this have fall down for sleep
Al though the slough had been never so deep
Than had your tale al be told in vain
For certainly, as that these clerks said
where as a man may have none audyence
Naught helps it to tell his sentence
And well I wot, the substance is in me
If any thing, shall well reported be
Sir, say somewhat of huntyng I you pray
Nay (quod this monk) I have no lust to play
Now let an other tell, as I have told.
Tha^ spoke our host, with rude speech and bold
And said, unto the nonnes priest anon
Come nere you pressed, come hider thou sir John
Tell us such a thing, as may our hertes glade
Be blythe, though thou ride upon a jade
what though thy horse be both foul and lene
If he wol serve the, recke not a been
Look that thy heart be merry ever mo
Yes sir (quod he) yes host, so mote I go
But I be merry, iwys I wol be blamed
And Right anon, his tale he has atamed
And thus he said, unto us euerychon
This sweet priest, this goodly man sir John
Here ends the Prologue of the nonnes priest, and here follows his tale.
A Poor wydowe, some dele ystept in age
was whylom dwelling in a pore cotage
Beside a grove, stondynge in a dale
This wydow, of which I tell you my tale
Sens the day that she was last a wife
In patience, led a full simple life
For little was her catel and her rent
By husbondrie, of such as god her sent
She foude her self, and eke her daughters two
Three large sowes had she, and no mo
Three kyne, and eke a sheep that hight Mal
well sooty was her bou^e, and eke her hal
In which she ete many a slender mele
Of poynau^t sauce, ne knew she never a dele
Ne deynty morcel passed through her throat
Her diet was accordaunt to her cote
Replection ne made her never syke
A temperate dyete was her phisyke
And exercise, and hertes suffysaunce
The gout let her nothing for to dance
Ne apoplexy shent not her heed
No wine ne drank she, white ne reed
Her board was most served with white and black
Milk and brou^ breed in which she fo^de no lack
Seynde bakon, and sometime an eye or twey
For she was as it were a manner dey.
A yerde she had, enclosed al about
with slyckes, and dry dytched without
In which she had a cock hight Chau^teclere
In all the land, of crowyng nas his pere.
His voice was meryer than the merry orgon
On mass days, that in the churches gone
well sykerer was his crowyng in his loge
Than is a clock, or in an abbey an orloge
By nature he knew each assentioun
Of the equinoctial in the town
For when degrees.xv. were assended
Tha^ crewe he, that it might not be amended
His comb was redder than the fine coral
And batelled, as it had be a castle wall
His byl was black, as any get it shone
Like asure were his legs and his tone
His nails whyter than the lylly flower
And like the burned gold was his color.
This gentil cock, had in governance
Seven hens, to done his plesaunce
which were his susters, and his paramours
And wonder like to him, as of colors
Of which the fairest hewed in the throat
was called fair damosel Pertelote
He fethered her an hundred times a day
And she him pleases, all that ever she may
Curteys she was, discrete, and debonayre
And compenable, and bare her self so fair
Sens the time that she was seuenyght old
That trulyche, she has the heart in hold
Of Chaunteclere, lokyng in every lyth
He loves her so, that well was him therewith
But such a joy it was to here hem sing
when the bright sun began to spring
In sweet acorde, my lefe is far in land
For that time, as I have understand
Beestes and birds could speak and sing
And it so fyl, that in the dawnyng
As Chaunteclere, among his wives al
Sat on his perch, that was in the hal
And next him sat his fair Pertelote
This Chau^teclere ga^ to groan in his throat
As a man in his dreme is drenched sore
And wha^ that Pertelot thus herd him rore
She was agaste, and said heart dear
what eyleth you to groan in this manner
Ye be a very sleper, fie for shame.
And he answerde thus, by god madame
I pray you, that ye take it not in grefe
By god I met, I was in such mischefe
Right now, that yet mine heart is sore a fright
Now god (quod he) my sweuen retche a right
And keep my body out of foul prisoun
Me met, that I romed up and down
within our yerde, where I saw a be
was like an hou^de, and would have made areest
Upon my body, and would have had me deed
His color was betwyxt yelowe and reed
And typped was his tail, and both his eeres
with black, unlike the remena^t of his heeres
His snowte small, with glowyng eyes twey
Yet for his look, almost for fear I dey
This causes me my gronyng doutlesse.
Away (quod she) fie for shame hertlesse
Alas (quod she) for by god above
Now have ye lost my heart, and al my love
I can not love a cowarde by my faith
For certes, what so any woman says
we al desire, if that it might be
To have husbondes, hardy, wise, and fre
And secret, and no nygarde, ne no fool
Ne him that is agaste of every tole
Ne none auauntour, by that god above
How durst ye say for shame, unto your love
That any sweuen might make you a ferde?
Have ye no man's heart, and have a berde?
Alas, and con ye be a ferde of sweuenis?
Nothing but vanyte god wotte insweuen is
Sweuens ben engendered of replections
And of fume, and of complections
when humors ben to habunda^t in a wight
Certes this dreme, which ye have met tonight
I tell you truth, ye may trust me
Comes of superfluyte, and reed color parde
which cause folk to dread in her dremes
Of arowes, and of fire with reed lemes
Of reed beestes, that wol hem byte
Of conteke, and of waspes great and lyte
Right as the humor of melancolye
Causes many a man in sleep to cry
For fere of great bulls, and beres blake
Or else that black dyuels wol hem take
Of other humors could I tell also
That work a man in sleep much woe
But I wol pass, as lightly as I can.
Lo Caton, which that was so wise a man
Said he not thus, do no force of dremes
Now sir (quod she) wha^ we fly fro ye bemes
For gods love, as takes some laxatyfe
Up peril of my soul, and of my life
I counsel you the best, I wol not lie
That both of color, and of melancolye
Ye purge you, and for ye shul not tarry
Though in this town, be none apotecary
I shall my self two herbs teache you
That shall be for your heal, and for your prow
And in our yerde, tho herbs shall I find
The which have of her properte by kind
To purge you byneth, and eke above
Foryete not this, for gods own love
Ye be right coleryke of complexion
where the sun is in his ascension
Ne find you not replete of humors hot
For if ye do, I dare well lay a grote
That ye shall have a fever terciane
Or else an ague, that may be your bane
A day or two, ye shall have digestyues
Of worms, or ye take your laxatyues
Of laurel, centorie, and of femetere
Or else of elder beryes, that grow there
Of cataprice, or of gaytres beris
Of herb yue, growing i^ our yerde yt merry is
Pluck hem up as they grow, and eat hem in
Be merry husbonde, for your father kyn
Dredeth no dreme, I can say you no more.
Madame (quod he) gramercy of your lore
But nathelesse, as touching dan Catoun
That of wysdom has so great renoun
Though he bade no dremes for to dread
By god, men may in old books read
Of many a man, more of auctorite
Than ever Caton was, so mote I the
That all the reuers says of his sentence
And have well found by experyence
That dremes ben signyfycations
As well of joy, as of trybulations
That folk endure, in this life present
There needs to make of this none argument
The very prefe shows it in deed
One of the greatest auctours that me^ read
Says thus, that whilom two fellows went
On pylgrimage, in full good intent
And happed so, they come in to a town
where as there was such congregation
Of people, and eke of strayte herbygage
That they ne fond, as much as a cotage
In which they both might yloged be
Wherefore they mote of necessyte
As for that night, depart company
And each of hem gothe to his host^iry
And took his lodgyng, as it would fall
That one of hem, was lodged in a stal
Far in a yerde, with oxen of the plough
That other man was lodged well enough
As was his adventure, or his fortune
That us governs al, as in comune
And so befell, long or it were day
This man met in his bed, there as he lay
How that his fellow began upon him call
And said (alas) for in an oxes stal
This night shall I be murdered, there I lie
Now help me dear brother or I dye
In all haste, come to me (he said)
This man out of his sleep for feere abrayd
But when he was waked of his sleep
He turned him, and took of this no keep
Him thought his dreme was but a vanyte
Thus twyse in his sleep dremed he
And at the third time, yet his felawe
Came as him thout, and said I now am slawe
Behold my blody wounds, deep and wide
A rise up erly, in the morrow tide
And at the west gate of the town (quod he)
A carte full of donge, there shall thou se
In which my body is hid full privily
Do thou that carte areste boldly
My gold caused my death, sothe to said
And told him every point how he was slain
with a full pytous face, pale of hew
And trust well his dreme, he found right true
For on the morrow, as soon as it was day
To his fellows inn, he took the way
And when that he came to the oxes stal
After his fellow, he began to call
The hosteler answerde him anon
And said, sir your fellow is gone
As soon as it was day, he went out of ye town
This man began fall in suspectioun
Remembering of his dremes that he met
And forth he goth, no longer would he let
Unto the westgate of the town, and fond
A donge carte, as it were to donge land
That was arrayed in the same wise
As ye have herd the deed man deuyse
And with hardy heart, he began to cry
Vengeance and justice of this felonye
My fellow murdered is this same night
And in this carte he lythe, gapyng upright
I cry out on the mynisters (quod he)
That should keep and rule this cite
Harowe alas, here lythe my fellow slain
What should I more of this tale said?
The people out starte, and tall ye carte to ground
And in the myddel of the donge they found
The deed man, that murdered was al new.
O blysful god, that art so good and true
Lo, how thou be wrayest murdre always
Murdre wol out, that se we day by day
Murdre is so waltsome and abhomynable
To god, that so just is and reasonable
That he ne wol it suffer healed to be
Though it abide a yete, two, or three
Murdre wol out, this is my conclusyoun.
And right anon, the mynisters of the town
Have hente the carter, and sore him pyned
And eke the hosteler so sore engyned
That they beknewe her wickedness anon
And were hanged by the neck bone
Here may ye se, that dremes ben to dread.
And certes, in the same lefe I read
Right in the next chapter after this
I gabbe not, so have I joy and blys
Two men would have passed over the se
For certain causes, in to a far country
If the wind ne had be contrary
That made hem in a cite to tarry
That stood full merry upon an haven side
But on a day, against an even tide
The wind began change, and blew as hem lest
Ioly and glad, they went to rest
And cast hem full erly for to sail
But harken, to one man fyl a great marvel
To one of hem, in slepyng as he lay
He mer a wonders dreme, again the day
Him thought a man stood by his beds side
And him commanded, that he should abide
And said him thus, if thou to morrow wend
Thou shalt be dreynt, my tale is at an end.
He woke, and told his fellow what he met
And prayed him his voyage for to let
As for that day, he prayed him for to abide
His fellow, that lay by his beds side
Began for to laugh, and scorned him full fast
No dreme (quod he) may so my heart agaste
That I wol let for to do my things
I set not a straw for thy dremynges
For sweuens ben but vanytees and iapes
Men meten alday of oules and of apes
And eke of many a mase therwithal
And dremen of thing that never was, ne shall
But sithe I se that thou wolte here abide
And thus slouthe wylfully thy tide
God wot it rueth me, and have good day
And thus he took his leave, and went his way
But er he had half his course ysayled
I not why, ne what mischaunce it ayled
But casuelly the ships botome to rent
And ship and men, under the water went
In fight of other ships beside
That with hem sailed at the same tide
And therefore fair Pertelot so dear
By such ensamples old, may thou lere
That no man should be to rechelesse
Of dremes, for I say the doutlesse
That many a dreme full sore is for to dread
Lo in the life of saint Kenelm we read
That was Kenelphus son, the noble king
Of Mereturike, how Kenelm met a thing
A little er he were murdered on a day
His murder in his visyon he say
His norice him expowned it every dele
His sweuen, and badde him keep him well
Fro trayson, but he was but seven year old
And therefore little tale he thereof told
Of any dreme, so holy was his heart
By god, I had rather than my shert
That ye had herd his legende, as have I
Dame Pertelot, I say to you trewly
Macrobius, that writes the auisyon
In Affrike, of the worthy Scipion
Affyrmeth dremes, and says that they been
warnyng of things, that we after seen
And farthermore I pray you looks well
In the old Testament, of Danyel
If he held dremes for vanyte
Read eke of Joseph, and there shall ye se
wonders ben sometime, but I say not al
warnyng of things, that after shall fall.
Lo of Egypt the king, that hight Pharao
His Baker, and his butteler also
Whether they felt none effect in dremes?
who so wol seek acts of sondrie remes
May read of dremes a wonder thing
Lo Cresus, which was of Lyde king
Met he not that he, satte upon a tree
which signified he should honged be
Lo Adromeda, that was Hectors wife
That day that Hector should lefe his life
She dremed in the same night beforne
How the life of Hector should be lorne
If that day he went unto bataile
She warned him, but it might not avail
He went for to fight nevertheless
But he was slain anon of Achilles
But that tale is to long to tell
And eke it is nigh day I may not dwell
Shortly I say, as for conclusyon
That I shall have of this auision
Aduersyte: and I say farthermore
That I ne tell of laxatyues no store
For they ben venomous, I wot it well
I hem defye, I love hem never a dele
But let us speak of myrthe, and stynte all this
Madame Pertelot, so have I blys
Of one thing god has me sent large grace
For when I se the beauty of your face
Ye be so scarlet reed about your eyes
It makes al my dread for to dyen
For also syker, as In principio
Mulier est hominis confusio.
Madame, the sentence of this latin is
woman is man's joy and his blys
For when I feel on night your soft side
Al be it that I may not on you ride
For that our perch is made so narowe alas
I am so full of joy and of solas
That I defye both sweuen and dreme
And with ye word he flew down fro ye beme
For it was day, and eke the hens al
And with a chucke, he began hem for to call
For he had found a corn lay in the yerde
Royal he was, and no more a ferde
He feddred Pertelot twenty time
And tradde her eke as often, er it was prime
He looks as he were a grymme lyoun
And on his toes he romed up and down
Him deyned not to set his fete to the ground
And chucked, when he had a corn ifounde
And to him than ran his wives al
As royal as a prince in his hal
Leave I this Chaunteclere, in his pasture
And after wol I tell of his adventure.
when ye monthe, in which ye world began
That hight March, that god first made man
was complete, and passed were also
Sithe March began, twenty days and two
Befyl that Chauntecler, in all his pride
His seven wives walkyng him beside
Cast up his eyes to the bright son
That in the sign of Taurus was ironne
Forty degrees and one, and somewhat more
He knew by kind, and by none other l^^e
That it was prime, and crew with a blisful steue^
The sun he said is clombe up to the heaven
Forty degrees and one, and so^what more iwys
Madame Pertelot, my worlds bliss
Harken how this blisful birds sing
And se the fresh flowers how they spring
Full is mine heart of revel, and solas
But suddenly him fell a sorouful caas
For ever the later end of joy is woe
God wot, worldly joy is soon ago
And if a rethore could fair endite
He in a cronycle might sauely write
As for a sovereign notabilyte
Now every wise man harken to me
This story is also true I undertake
As is the book of Lancelot du Lake
That women hold in full great reverence
Now wol I turn again to my sentence
A col fox (full of sleyght and iniquite)
That in the grove had wouned years three
By high ymagynacion a forne cast
The same night, through the hedge braste
In to the yerde, there Chau^teclere the fair
was wont and eke his wives to repair
And in a bed of wortes still he lay
Till it was passed vndren of the day
waytyng his time, on Chaunteclere to fall
As gladly done these homycides all That in a wait lie to murdre men
O false murdrer, ruckyng in thy den
O new Scariot, and new Genylion
False dissymuler, O greek Synon
That broughtest Troy utterly to sorrow
O Chauntecler, acursed be the morrow
That thou in thy yerde flewe from ye bemes
Thou were full well warned by thy dremes
That ilke day was peryllous to the
But what yt god before wot, must needs be
After the opynion of certain clerks
witness of him, that any clerk is
That in schole is great altercation
In this matter, and great disputation
And has been, of an hundred thousand men
But I ne can not boulte it to the bren
As can the holy doctor saint Austyn
Or Boece, or the bishop Bradwardyn
whether that gods worthy forewetyng
Strayneth me nedely to do a thing
(Nedely clepe I simple necessyte)
Or if the fre choice be granted me
To do that same thing, or do it naught
Though god forwote it, or it was wrought
Or if his wetyng strayneth never a dele
But by necessyte condycionele
I wol not have to done of such matere
My tale is of a cock, as ye shall here
That took his counsel of his wife with sorrow
To walk in the yerde upon the morrow
That he had met the dreme, as I you told
women's counsayles ben full often cold
Women's counsel brought us first to woe
And made Adam fro paradise to go
There as he was full merry, and well at e^^^
But for I not, whom I might displease
If I counsel of women would blame
Pass over, I said it in my game
Redeth authors, where they trete of such matere
And what they say of women, ye inowe here
These ben the cocks words, and not mine
I can of women no harm deuyne.
Fair in the sonde, to bathe her merrily
Lies Perteloe, and al her susters by
Against the sun, and Chaunteclere so free
Song meryer, than the Mermayde in ye see
For Phisiologus says utterly
How that they syngen well and merrily
And so befyl, as he cast his eye
Among the wortes on a butterflye
He was ware of this fox that lay full low
Nothing than list him for to crow
But cried cock cock, and up he stert
As one that was affrayde in his heart
For naturally, beestes desires to fly
Fro her contrary, if he may it se
Tho he never erst had seen it with his eye.
This Chaunteclere, when he began him espy
He would have fled, but the fox anon
Said gentil sir, alas: what wol ye done?
Be ye afraid of me, that am your friend?
Now certes: I were worse than a fend
If I to you would harm, or villainy
I am not come your counsel to espy
But trewly the cause of my coming
was only to here how ye sing
For sothly ye have as merry a steven
As any angel has, that is in heaven
Therewith ye have of musyke more felyng
Than had Boece, or any that can sing
My lord your father, god his soul bless
And eke your mother, of her gentylnesse
Have in my house ben, to my great ease
And certes sir, full feign would I you please.
But for men speken of syngyng, I wol sey
So mote I broken well mine eyes twey
^^ue you, ne herd I never man so sing
As did your father in the morning
Certes it was of heart, all that he song
And for to make his voice more strong
He would so pain him, yt with both his eyes
He must wynke, so loud he must cryen
And slouden on his typtoes there withal
And stretche forth his neck, long and small
And eke he was of such discrecion
That there was no man in no regyon
That him in song or wysedom might pass
I have well read dan Burnel the ass
Among his verses, how yt there was a cock
For that a priests son yaue him a knock
Upon his legs, while he was young and nyce
He made him for to lose his benefyte
But certain there is no comparyson
Betwyxt the wysedom and discrecion
Of your father, and of his subtylte
Now syngeth sir, for saint charity
Let se, can ye your father counterfete.
This Chau^teclere his wings ga^ to beat
As a man that could not his treson aspye
So was he rauyshed with his flaterye
Alas ye lords, many a false flaterour
Is in your court, and many a false lesyngour
That please you well more, by my faith
Than he that sothfastnesse unto you says
Redeth Ecclesiast of flaterye
Beware ye lords of her trecherye.
This Chau^teclere stood hye upon his toos
Stretching his neck, and held his eyes cloos
And began to crow loud for the nones
And dan Russel the fox starte up at ones
And by the gorget hent Chaunteclere
And on his back toward ye wood him bear
For yet was there no man that him sued
O desteny, that may not be eschued
Alas that Chaunteclere flewe fro the bemes
Alas his wife raught not of dremes
And on a friday fyl all this mischaunce
O Venus that art goddess of plesaunce
Sithnes yt thy servant was this Chau^tecler
And in thy service did al his powere
More for delight, tha^ the world to multiplye
why would you suffer him on thy day to dye?
O Gaulfryde, dear master sovereign
That wha^ ye worthy king richard was slain
with shot, complaynedest his death so sore
why ne had I now thy science and thy lore
The friday for to chyde, as did ye
For on a friday, shortly slain was he
Tha^ would I show you how yt I could plain
For Chauntecleres dread, and for his pain.
Certes such cry, ne lamentacion
Nas never of ladies made, when that Ilion
was won, and Pirrus with his bright sword
when he hent king Priam by the berde
And slough him (as said Eneidos)
As made all the hens in the cloos
when they had lost of Chau^teclere the sight
But soueraynly dame Pertelot shright
well louder than did Hasdruballes wife
when that her husbonde had lost his life
And that the Romans had brent Cartage
She was so full of turment and of rage
That wylfully in to the fire she sterte
And brent herself, with a steadfast heart.
O woeful hens, right so cried ye
As when that Nero brent the cite
Of Rome, cried the senators wives
For that her husbondes should lose her lives
withouten gylte Nero has hem slain
Now wol I turn to my tale again.
The sely wydowe, and her daughters two
Herd the hens cry and make woe
And out at the door sterte they anon
And saw the fox toward the wodde gone
And bare upon his back the cock away
And cried out harowe and well away
A ha the fox, and after him they ran
And eke with staves, many a another man
Ran Col our dog, Talbot, and eke garlonde
And Malkyn, with her distaffe in her hand
Ran cow and calfe, and eke the very hogs
For they so sore a ferde were of the dogs
And shoutyng of men, and of women eke
They ran so, her heart thought to break
They yellen as fendes do in hell
The duckes cried, as men would hem quell
The geese for fear flewe over the trees
Out of the hyues came the swarm of bees
So hydous was the noise, a benedicite
Certes Jack Straw, ne his meyne
Ne made never shoutes half so shril
when that they would any flemmyng kyl
As that day was made upon the fox
Of brass they blewe the trompes and of box
Of horn and bone, in which they blew and pouped
And therewith they shriked and shouted
It seemed, as though heaven should fall
Now good men I pray you harken al.
Lo how fortune turns suddenly
The hope and the pride of her enemy
This cock that lay upon the foxes bake
In all his dread, unto the fox he spoke
And said, sir: If I were as ye
Yet should I say, as wise god help me
Turns again, ye proud churles al
A very pestylence upon you fall
Now am I come unto this woods side
Maugre your heed, the cock shall here abide
I wol him eete in faith, and that anon
The fox answered, in faith it shall be done
And as he spoke the word, al suddenly
This cock brake from his mouth deliuerly
And high upon a tree he slew anon
And when the fox saw that he was gone
Alas (quod he) o Chaunteclere alas
I have (quod he) do to you trespass
In as much as I made you aferde
wha^ I you hent, and brought out of your yerde
But sir, I did it not in no wicked intent
Come down, and I shall tell you what I meant
I shall you say sothe, god help me so.
Nay than (quod he) I shrewe us both two
And first I shrew my self, both blood and bones
If thou begyle me ofter than ones
Thou shalt no more with thy flaterye
Do me sing with a wynkyng eye
For he that wynketh, when he should se
Al wylfully, god let him never thee.
Nay (quod ye fox) but god give him mischa^ce
That is so indiscrete of governance
That iangleth, wha^ that he should have pees
Lo, such it is for to be recheles
And neglygent, and trust on f^aterye
But ye that hold this tale a lie
As of a fox, of a cock, and of a hen
Takes the moralyte good men
For saint Poule says, all that written is
To our doctrine it is written iwys
Takes the fruit, and let the chafe be still
Now good god, if that it be thy will
As says my lord, so make us al good men
And bring us to thy high bliss. Amen.
Here ends the tale of the nonnes priest, and here follows the Manciples
prologue.
SIr nonnes priest, our host said anon
Yblessed be thy breche and every stone
This was a merry tale of Chauntecler
But by my truth, if thou were a seculer
Thou would be a tredfoule a right
For if thou have courage, as thou have might
The were need of hens, as I wene
Ye more than seven times seuentene
Se which brawnes has this gentil priest
So great a neck, and such a large breest
He looks as a sperhauke with his eyes
Him needs not his colors for to dyen
with brasyl, ne with grain of Portyngale
But sir, fair fall you for your tale
And after that, he with full merry chere
Said to a another man, as ye shall here.
Wot ye not where stondeth a little town
Which that is called Bob up and down
Under the blee, in Cauntebury way
There began our host to ^ape and to play
And said, sirs: what dunne is in the mire
Is there no man, for prayer ne for hyre
That wol awake our fellow behind
A thief him might full lightly rob and bind
Se how he nappeth, se for cocks bones
How he wol fall from his horse atones
Is that a coke of London, with mischaunce
Do him conforte, he knows his penance
For he shall tell a tale by my fey
Al thought it be not worth a botel of hey
Awake thou coke (quod he) god give the sorrow
what eyleth the to sleep by the morrow
Have thou had steen al night, or art you drunk
Or have you al night with some queen iswonke
So that thou may not hold up thyn heed.
This coke that was full pale, and nothing reed
Said, sir host: so god my soul bless
There is fall on me great heaviness
But I not why, me were lever to sleep
Than the best gallon of wine in chepe
Well (quod the Manciple) if it may do ese
To the sir coke, and to no wight displese
which that here ride in this company
And that our host will of his curtesye
I wol as now excuse the of thy tale
For in good faith thy visage is full pale
Thyn eyes dase, sothely as me thinks
And well I wot, thy breath full sour stinketh
That shows well thou art not well disposed
Of me certain thou shall not be glosed
Se how he galpeth, lo this dronke^ wight
As though he would us swalow anon right
Hold close thy mouth, by thy father kyn
The dyuel of hell set his foot therein
Thy ^ursed ^rethe will enfecte us al
Fie slynking swyne, fie soul mote the befall
Takes head sirs of this lusty man
^owe sweet sir, wol ye just at the van
Thereto me thinks ye be well shape
I trow that ye have dronken wine ape
And that is when men play at straw.
And with his speech the coke wexed al wrawe
And on the manciple he began to nodde fast
For lack of spech^ and down his horse him cast
where as he lay, till that men him up took
This was a fair cheuesaunce of a coke
Alas that he ne had hold him by his ladyl
And er that he again were in the sadyl
There was a great shouyng to and fro
To lift him up, and much care and woe
So unwieldy was this sely palled ghost
And to the Manciple than spoke our host.
Because that drink has domynation
Upon this man, by my salvation
I trow leudely wol he tell his tale
For were it wine, or old moysty ale
That he has drunk, he speaks so in ye nose
And snyueleth fast, and eke has the pose
He also has to do more than enough
To keep him on his caple out of the slough
And if he fall from his caple efte sone
Than shall we al have enough to done
In lyftyng up his dronken corce
Tell on thy tale, of him make I no force
But yet Manciple, in faith thou art to nyce
Thus openly to repreue him of his vice
An other day he wol parauenture
Recleyme the, and bring thy to lure
I mean he speak will of small things
And for to pynche at thy rekenynges
That were not honest, if it came to prefe.
No (quod ye Manciple) yt were a great mischefe
So might he bring me in to the snare
Yet had I lever pay for the mare
which he rydeth on, tha^ he should with me strive
I wol not wrath him, so mote I thrive
That I spoke, I said it but in bourde
And wot ye what, I have here in my gourd
A draught of wine, ye of a ripe grape
And right anon ye shall se a good iape
This coke shall drink thereof, if I may
Up pain of my life he wol not say nay
And certainly, to tellen as it was
Of this vessel the coke drank fast, alas
what needs it, he drank enough beforne
And when he had pouped in his horn
To the Manciple he took the gourde again
And of the drink the coke was full feign
And thonked him, in such wise as he could
Than began our host to laugh wonder loud
And said: I se well it is necessary
where that we gone, good drink with us to carry
For that will turn rancoure and disese
To accord and love, and many a word to pese
O Bacchus, yblessed be thy holy name
That so canste turn ernest in to game
worship and thonke be to thy deite
Of that matter ye get no more of me.
Tell on thy tale thou Manciple, I the pray
well sir (quod he) herkeneth what I say.
Here ends the Manciples prologue, and here follows his tale.
When Phoebus dwelled here in earth adoun
As old books make me^cioun
He was the most lusty bacheler
Of all the world, and eke the best archer
He slough Phetou the serpent as he lay
Slepyng against the sun upon a day
And many a another noble worthy deed
He with his bow wrought, as me^ mow read
Play he could on every mynstralcye
And sing, that it was a melodye
To here of his clear voice the soun
Certes the king of Thebes, Amphion
That with his song, walled the cite
Could never sing half so well as he
Thereto he was the semelyst man
That is or was, sithe the world began
what needs it his feture to discryue?
For in this world nas none so fair a live
He was therewith fulfilled of gentylnesse
Of honor, and of perfyte worthynesse
This Phoebus, yt was flower of bachelerye
As well in fredome, as in chyualrye
For his disporte, in sign eke of victory
Of Pheton, so as tells us the story
was wont to bear in his hand a bow
Now had this Phoebus in his house a crow
within a cage ifostred many a day
And taught it speech, as men teache a iaye
white was this crow, as is a white swan
And countrefete the speech of every man
He could, when he should tell a tale
There was in all this world no nightyngale
Ne could, by an hundred thousand dele
Sing so wonderly merry and well
Now had this Phoebus in his house a wife
which that he loved more than his life
And night and day, did ever his dyligence
Her for to plese, and do her reverence
Save only, if I the sothe shall said
Ielous he was, and would have kept her feign
For him were loathe, iaped for to be
And so is every wight, in such degree
But al for naught, for it avails naught
A good wife, yt is clean of work and thought
Should not be kept in none awayte certain
And trewly the labor is in vain
To keep a shrewe, for it wol not be
This hold I for a very nycete
To spyl labor, for to keep wives
Thus written old clerks in her lives
But now to purpose, as I first began
This worthy Phoebus, does all that he can
To plese her, wenyng through such plesau^ce
And for his manhood, and for his governance
That no man should put him from her grace
But god it wot, there may no man enbrace
As to distrayne a thing, which that nature
Has naturally set in a creature
Take any bird, and put him in a cage
And do al thine intent, and thy courage
To foster it tenderly with meat and drink
Of al daynties that thou canste be think
And keep it also clenly as thou may
Al though the cage of gold be never so gay
Yet had this bird, by twenty thousand fold
Lever in a forest, that is wide and cold
Go cete worms, and such wretchydnesse
For ever this bird will do his business
To escape out of his cage when he may
His lyberte the bird desires aye.
Let take a catte, and foster her with milk
And tender flesh, and make her couche of sylke
And let her se a mouse go by the wall
Anon she weyueth flesh, and couche, and al
And every deyntie, that is in that house
Such appetyte has she to erte the mouse
Lo here has lust his domynacion
And appetyte flemeth discrecion.
A she wolf, has also a vylanous kind
The leudest wolf that she may find
Or l^ste of reputacion, that wol she take
In time when her lust to have a make
Al these ensamples speak I by these men
That been untrue, and no thing by women
For men have ever a lycorouse appetyte
On lower thing, to perform her delight
Than on her wives, be they never so fair
Ne never so true, ne so debonayre
Flesh is so newfangel, with mischaunce
That we ne conne in nothing have pleasau^ce
That sowneth unto virtue, any while.
This Phoebus, which thought no gyle
Disceyued was, for all his io^yte
For under him an other had she
A man of little reputation
Naught worth to Phoebus, in comparyson
The more harm is, it happeth often so
Of which there comes much harm and woe
And so befell, when Phoebus was absent
His wife anon has for her lemman sent
Her lemman, certes that is a knauysh speech
Foryeue it me, and that I you beseech.
The wise Plato says, as ye mow read
The word must needs acorde with the deed
If men should tell properly a thing
The word must cosyn be to the werkyng
I am a boystouse man, right thus say I
There is but little difference truly
Betwyxt a wife, that is of hye degree
If of her body dishonest she be
And a poor wenche, other than this
If it so be they work both amys
But for the gentyl is in estate above
She shall be called his lady and his love
And for that the other is a poor woman
She shall be called his wench, or his lemma^
And god it wot, mine own dear brother
Men lay as low that one as that other
Right so betwixt a tytlelesse tyrant
And an outlawe, or a thief erraunt
The same I say, there is no dyfference
To Alysaunder was told this sentence
That for the tyrant is of greater might
By force of meyne, to slay down right
And brenne house and home, and make al plain
Lo therefore is he called a captain
And for the outlawe has but small meyne
And may not do so great an harm, as he
Ne bring a country to so great mischefe
Men callen him an outlawe or a thief.
But for I am a man not textuele
I wol not tell of textes never a dele
I wol go to my tale, as I began.
Wha^ Phoebus wife had sent for her lemma^
Anon they wrought al their lust volage
This white crow, that hynge aye in yt cage
Beheld their work, and said never a word
And wha^ hom was come Phoebus ye lord
This crow song, cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo
what bird (quod Phoebus) what syngest thou?
Ne were thou not wont so merrily to sing
That to my heart it was a reioysyng
To here thy voice, alas, what song is this?
By god (quod he) I sing not amys
Phoebus (quod he) for all thy worthynesse
For all thy beauty, and thy gentylnesse
For all thy song, and thy mynstralsye
For all thy waytyng, blered is thyn eye
with one of little reputatyon
Not worth to the in comparison
The mountena^ce of a gnat, so mote I thrive
For on thy bed, thy wife I saw him swyne
what wol ye more? ye crow anon him told
By sad tokens, and by words bold
How that his wife had done her lechery
Him to great shame, and to great vyllany
And told him eft, he saw it with his eyes
This Phoebus began awayward for to prie^
Him thought his woeful heart braste a two
His bow he bent, and set therein a flo
And in his ire he has his wife slain
This is the effect, there is no more to said
For sorrow whereof, he brake his mynstralsye
Both harp and lute, getern, and sautrye
And eke he brake his arowes, and his bow
And after that, thus spoke he to the crow.
Traitor (quod he) with tongue of scorpion
Thou haste me brought to my confusyon
Alas that I was wrought, why nere I deed
O dear wife, o gemme, o lusty heed
That were to me so sad, and eke so true
Now lie thou deed, with face pale of hew
Full gyltlesse, that durst I swear iwys
O rakel hand, to do so foul amys
O troubled wit, o ire retchelesse
That unadvised smytest gyltlesse
O wantrust, full of false suspection
Where was thy wit and thy discretion
Oh, every man beware of rekylnesse
Ne trow no thing, without strong witness
Smite not to sone, or thou wete why
And be auysed well and sykerly
Or ye do any execution
Upon your ire, for suspection
Alas, a thousand folk has rekel ire
Fully fordone, and brought hem in the mire
Alas, for to sorrow I wol my self sle
And to the crow, o false these said he
I wol quite anon thy false tale
Thou song whylom, like a nyghtyngale
Now shall thou false thief, thy song forgon
And eke thy white feathers euerychon
Ne never in all thy life shalt thou speak
Thus shul men on a traitor be awreke
Thou and thyn of spring ever shall be blake
Ne never sweet noise shall ye make
But ever cryen against tempest and rain
In token, that through the my wife is slain
And to the crow he sterte, and that anon
And pulled of his white feathers euerychon
And made him black, and reft him al his song
And eke his speech, and out at door him slonge
Unto the dyuel, which I him betake
And for this cause ben al crows blake.
Lordi^ges, by this ensample I wol you pray
Beware, and take keep what I say
Ne tells never no man in your life
How that an other man has dight his wife
He wol you hate mortally certain
Dan Solomon, as wise clerks said
Techeth a man to keep his tongue well
But as I said, I am not tertuel
But nathelesse, thus taught me my dame
My son, think on ye crow a gods name
My son keep well thy tongue, and keep thy friend
A wicked tongue is worse than a fend
My son, from a fend men may hem bless
My son, god of his endelesse goodness
walled a tongue with tethe, and lyppes eke
For man should him auyse what he speak
My son, full often for to mykel speech
Has many a man be spylte, as clerks teache
But for little speech, spoken auysedly
Is no man shente, to speak generally
My son, thy tongue should thou restrain
At al times, but when thou do thy pain
To speak of god, in honor and prayere
The first virtue son, if thou wolt lere
Is to restrain, and keep well thy tongue
Thus learn children, when they be young
My son, of mykel spekyng unadvised
(There less spekyng had enough suffysed)
Comes mykel harm, thus was me taught
In much speech, sin wants naught
woste thou wherefore a rakel tongue serves
Right as asworde forcutteth and forke^ueth
An arm on two, my dear son right so
A tongue cutteth frendshyp al a to
A tangler is to god abhomynable
Read Solomon, so wise and honorable
Read David in his psalms, read Senecke
My son speak not, ne with thy heed deck^
Dissimule as thou were deefe, if yt thou here
The ianglour speaks of perious matere.
The fle^ming says, learn if that thou lest
That little ianglyng causes much rest
My son, if thou no wicked word have said
The dare not dread for to be bewrayde
But he that has missayd, I dare well said
He may by no way clepe his word again
Thing that is said, is said, and forth it gothe
Though him repent, or him be never so loath
He is thral to him, to whom he has said
A tale, for which he is now yuel apayde
My son beware, and be none auctour new
Of tidings, whether they be false or true
Where so thou come, among hye or low
Keep well thy tongue, and think on the crow.
Here ends the Manciples tale, and here begins the Persons Prologue.
BY that the Manciple had his tale ended
The son fro the south side is dyscended
So low, that it was not to my sight
Degrees of five and twe^tye on hyghte
Ten a clock it was, so as I guess
For elleuen foot, a little more or less
My shadow was at that time, as there
Of such fete as my length parted were
In six fete equally of proportion
^^^rwyth the Moons exaltation
I mean Libra, always began ascend
As we were entering at the thropes end
For which our host, as he was wont to gye
Aye in this case, this ioly company
Said in this wise, lordynges euerychone
Now lacks us no tale more then one
Fulfilled is my sentence and my decre
who woll now tell a tale let se
Almost fulfilled is mine ordinance
I pray to god so give him right good chance
That tells this tale to us lustely
Sir priest (quod he) art thou a vicary
Or art thou a person, say soth by thy fay
Be what thou be, break thou not our play
For every man save thou, has told his tale
Vnbokell, and show us what is in thy male
For truly me thinks by thy chere
Thou should knyt up well a great matere
Tell us a fable anon, for kockes bones
This person him answerde all at ones
Thou gettest fable none told of me
For Paul, that writes to Timothe
Repreueth hem that wayuen sothfastnesse
And teachen fables, and such wretchedness
why should I sow draffe out of my fyst
when I may sow wheat, if that my list
For which I say, if that ye list to here
Moralite, and of virtuous matere
And then, if ye woll give me audience
I would full feign at Christ's reverence
Done you pleasaunce lefull, as I can
But trusts well, I am a sotherne man
I can not ieste, rum, ram, ruf, by letter
And god wot, ryme hold I but little better
And therefore if ye list, I woll not gloss
I woll you tell a little tale in prose
To knyt up al this feast, and make an end
And Jesus for his grace, wit me send
To show you the way, in this voyage
Of thylke perfyte gloriouse pylgrimage
That hight Jerusalem celestial
And if ye vouchsaue, anon I shall
Begin upon my tale, for which I pray
Tell your advise, I can no better say
But nathelesse this meditacion
I put it aye, under the correction
Of clerks, for I am not textuell
I take but the sentence, trusts well
Therefore I make protestation
That I woll stand to correction.
Upon this word we have assented sone
For as it seemed, it was for to done
To end in some virtuous sentence
And for to give him space and audience
And bad our host he should to him say
That all we, to tell his tale him pray
Our host had the words for us all
Sir priest (quod he) now fair mote you befall
Says what ye list, and we shall gladly here
And with that word he said in this manner
Tells (quod he) your meditation
But hastes you, the sun woll adoun
Beth fructuous, and that in little space
And to do well, god send you his grace.
Here ends the Persons prologue, and here after follows his tale.
Ieremi.vi. State super vias, et vt dete, et interrogate de semitis antiquis,
que sit via bona, ambulate in ea et inuenietis refrigerium animabus vestris.
Our sweet Lord God of heaven, would that no man should peryshe, but that we
turn al to the know lege of him, and to the blysfull life that is perdurable,
amonysheth us by the prophet Ieremye, that says in this wise. Stands upon
the ways and sees, and asks of old paths: that is to say, of old
sentences, which is the good way, and walks in that way, and ye shall find
refreshynge for your souls. etc. Many be the ways espirituels that led folk
to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the reygne of glory: Of which ways there
is a full noble way, and full couenable, which may not fail to man ne to
woman, that through sin has mysgone fro the right way of Jerusalem
celestial: and this way is called penitence, of which man should gladly
herke^ and enquire with al his heart, to wete what is penite^ce, and which is
called penitence, and how many manners been of actions or werkynges of
penitence, and how many speces there been of penitence, and which things
appertain and behoue to penitence, and which things dystourbe penitence.

Saint Ambrose says, that penitence is the playnynge of man for the gylte yt
he has done, and no more to do any thing for which him ought to plain. And
some doctoure says, Penitence is the waymentynge of man that soroweth for his
sin, and paineth him self, for he has mysdone Penite^ce with certain
circumstaunces, is very repentance of a man that holt him self in sorrow, and
other pain for his gyltes: and for he shall be very penytent, he shall first
bewail sins that he has done, and stedfastlye purpose in his heart to have
shryfte of mouth, and to do satisfaccion, and never to do thing, for which
him ought more bewail or complain, and continue in good works: or else his
repentance may not avail. For as saint Isoder says. He is a iaper and a
liar, and no very repentaunt, that eftsone does thing, for which him ought
repent. Weeping and not for to stynte to do sin, may not avail: But
natthelesse me^ shall hope that at every time that man falls, be it never so
often, that he may arise through penance, if he have grace: but certain it is
great doubt, for as says saint Gregorye. Uneaths aryseth he out of sin
that is charged with ye charge of yuel usage. And therefore repentaunt folk,
that stynt for to sin, and leave sin or sin leave them, holy church
holds them syker of their salvation. And he that synneth, and verily
repe^teth him in his last end: holy church yet hops his salvation, by the
great mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, for his repentance: but take the syker
way.

And now sith I have declared you, what thing is Penitence, now ye shall
understand, that there ben three actions of penitence. The first is, that a man
be baptized after that he has sinned. Saint Austyn says, but he be penitent
for his old sinful life, he may not begin the new clean life: For certes
if he be baptized without penitence of his old gylte, he retayneth ye mark of
baptyme, but not the grace ne the remissyon of his sins, till he have very
repentance. An other defaute is this, that men do deedly sin after that they
have received baptysme. The third defaute is this, that men fall in venial
sins after her baptysme, fro day to day. Thereof says saint Augustyne, that
penitence of good and humble folk, is the penitence of every day.

The speces of penitence ben three: That one of hem is solemn: an other is
common, and the third is privy. That penance that is solemn is in two
manners: As to be put out of holy church in lent, for slaughter of children,
and such manner thing. An other is when a man has sinned openly, of which
sin the fame is openly spoken in the country: and then holy church by
judgment, dystrayneth him for to do open penance.

Common penance is, that priests enjoin men in certain case: (...)
as for to go peraue^ture naked in pilgrimage, or barefote. Privy penance is
that, that men do al day for privy sins, of which we shryue us privily, and
receive privy penance.

Now shall thou understand, what is behouefull and necessary to very perfyte
penytence: and this stonte on three things. Contricion of heart, confession of
mouth, and satisfaction. For which says saint John Chrysostom. Penitence
dystrayneth a man to accept benignely every pain, that him is enjoined, with
contricion of heart, and shryfte of mouth, with satisfaction: and in werdynge
of all manner humilite. And this is fruitful penitence against three things, in
which we wrath our Lord Jesus Christ: this is to say: By delight in
thinking, by retchlesnesse in speakinge, and by wicked syn full werkynge. And
against these wicked gyltes is penitence, that may be lykened unto a tree.

The root of this tree is contricion, that hydeth him in the heart of him that
is very repentau^t, right as the root of a tree hydeth him in the earth. Of
this root of contricion spryngeth a stalk, that bears branches and leaves
of confession, and fruit of satisfaction. For which Christ says in his gospel.
Does digne fruit of penitence, for by this fruit men may know the tree, and
not by the rote that is hyde in the heart of man, ne by ye branches, ne the
leaves of confession. And therefore our Lord Jesus Christ says thus: By the
fruit of hem shall ye know hem. Of this root also spryngeth a sede of grace,
yt which sede is mother of all sykernesse, and this sede is egre and hot. The
grace of this sede spryngeth of God, through remembrance of the day of dome,
and on the pains of hell. Of this matter says Solomon, that in ye dread of
God, man forletteth his sin. The heat of this sede is the love of God, and
the desiring of the joy perdurable: This hete draws the heart of man to
God, and does him hate his sin: For sothly there is nothing that sauoureth
so well to a child, as ye milk of his nouryce, ne nothing is to him more
abominable then that malke, when it is meddled with other meat. Right so the
sinful man that loves his sin, him seems that it is to him most sweet of
any thing, but fro that time he loves sadlye our Lord Jesus Christ, and
desires the life perdurable, there is to him nothing more abominable For
sothly the law of god is the love of god For which David the prophet says:
I have loved thy law, and hated wickedness. He that loves God, keeps his
law and his word.

This tree saw the prophet Daniell in spirit, on the visyon of
Nabuchodonosor, when he counsayled him to do penitence. Penance is the tree of
life, to hem that it receive, and he that holds him in very penitence is
blessed, after the sentence of Solomon. In this penitence or contricion, man
shall understand four things, that is to say what is contrityon, and which
ben the causes that move a man to contricion, and how he should be contryte,
and what contricion avails to the soul. Then is it thus that contricion is
the very sorrow, that a man receives in his heart for his sins, with sad
purpose to shryue him, and to do penance, and never more to do sin: And this
sorrow shall be in this manner, as says saint Bernarde: It shall be heuye and
grievous, and full sharp and poynaunt in heart.

First, for a man has agylted his lord and his creatoure, and more sharp
and poynaunt, for he has agylted his father celestial: And yet more sharp
and poynaunt, for he has wrathed and agylted him that bought him, that with
his preciouse blood has delivered us fro the bonds of sin, and fro the
cruelte of the dyuell, and fro the pains of hell.

The causes that ought move a man to co^tricion been six. First a man shall
remember him of his sins, but look that that remembrance ne be to him no
delight, by no way, but great shame and sorrow for his sins. For Job says,
sinful men done works worthy of confession. And therefore says Ezechiel: I
wol remember me all the years of my life, in the bytternesse of my heart And God
says in the Apocalypse: Remember ye from whence that ye be fall, for before
that time that ye sinned, ye were children of God, and lymmes of the raygne of
God: But for your sin ye be waren thrall and foul and members of the fend:
hate of angels, slander of holy church, and food of the false serpent,
perpetual matere of the fire of hell: And yet more foul and abominable, for ye
trespace so often times, as does an hou^de that returns again to eat his own
spewynge: and yet be ye fouler, for your long co^tinuynge in sin, and your
sinful usage, for which ye be rooted in your sin, as a be in his donge.
Such manner of thoughts make a man to have shame of his sin, and no delight.
As God says, by the prophet Ezechiel: ye shall remember you of your ways and
they shall dysplease you sothly. Sins ben the ways that led folk to hell.

THe second cause that ought make a man to have dysdayne of sin is this,
that as says saint Peter: who so does syn, is thrall of sin, and sin
puts a man in great thraldom. And therefore says the prophet Ezechiel: I
went sorrowful, in dysdayne of my self. Certes well ought a man have dysdayne
of sin, and wythdrawe him fro that thraldom and vylanye. And lo what says
Seneke in this matter, he says thus: Though I wyste, that neither God ne man
should never know it, yet would I have dysdayne for to sin. And the same
Seneke also says: I am borne to greater thing, the^ to be thral to my body,
or for to make of my body a thral Ne a fouler thrall may no man ne woman make
of his body, then for to give his body to do sin, al were it ye foulest
churl, or the foulest woman that lives, and lest of value, yet is he then
more foul and more in servitude. Ever fro the higher degree that man falls
the more is he thrall, and more to God and to the world vile and abhomynable.
O good God, well ought man have great dysdayne of sin, sithe that through
sin, there he was free he is made bond. And therefore says saint Austyne:
If thou have dysdayne of thy servant, if he ofte^de or sin, have thou then
dysdayne that thou thy self should do sin. Take reward of thine own
value, that thou ne be to foul to thy self. Alas well ought they then have
dysdayne to be servants and thralles to sin, and sore to be ashamed of them
self, that God of his endless goodness has set in high astate, or give
hem wit, strength of body, heal, beauty, or prosperity and boughte hem fro
the death with his heart blood, that they so vnkyndlye against his gentylnesse
quyte him so vylaynously to slaughter of her own souls. O good God ye women
that been of great beautye remembers you on the proverb of Solomon. He
says he lykeneth a fair woman that is a fool of her body to a ring of
gold yt were worn on the groyne of a sow For right as a sow wroteth in
every ord^ne so wroteth she her beauty in stynkyng ord^^e of sin.

THe third cause that ought meue a man to contricion, is dread of the day of
dome, and of the horrible pains of hell. For as saint Jerome says: At every
time that me reme^breth of the day of dome, I quake: For when I eat and
drink, or what so that I do, ever seems me that the trompe sowneth in mine
ear: Ryseth ye up that been deed, and comes to the judgment. O good God,
much ought a man to dread such a judgment, there as we shall be al, as saint
Poule says, before ye sete of our Lord Jesus Christ, where as he shall make a
general congregation, where as no man may be absent, for certes there avails
none essoyne ne excusation, and not only that our defautes shall be iuged, but
also that all our w^rkes shall openly be known. And as says saint Bernarde,
there ne shall no pleading avail, ne no sleyght: we shall give rekenyng of every
ydell word. There shall we have a judge that may not be dysceyued ne corrupt,
and why? For certes, all our thoughts been dyscouered, as to him, ne for
prayer ne for mede, he shall not be corrupt. And therefore says Salomo^: The
wrath of God ne wol not spare no wight, for prayer ne for yeffe. And therefore
at the day of dome, there is no hope to escape. Wherefore as says saint
Anselme: full great anguyshe shall the sinful folk have at that time: There
shall ye fyerce and wroth judge sytte above, and under him the horrible pytte of
hell open, to destroy him that must be know his sins, which sins openly
ben showed before God and before every creature: And on the left side, mo
dyuels then any heart may think, for to hale and draw the sinful souls to
the pain of hell, and within the hertes of folk shall be the bytynge conscience,
and without forth shall be the world al brennynge: whyther shall then the
wretched sinful man fly to hyde him? Certes he may not hyde him, he must
come forth and show him. For certes as says saint Jerome, the earth shall
cast him out of it and the sea also, and the air that shall be full of thonder
clappes and lyghtenynges. Now sothly, who so woll remembers him of these
things: I guess, that this sin shall not turn him in delight, but to great
sorrow, for dredde of the pain of hell. And therefore says Job to God: suffer
lord, that I may a while bewail and weep, er I go without returning to the
derke land, covered with the darkness of death, to the land of mysese and
of derknesse, where as is the shadow of death, where as there is none order,
or ordinance, but ferefull dread that ever shall last. Lo, here may ye se,
that Job prayed respyte a while, to bewepe and wayle his trespace: for sothly
one day of respyte is better then all the treasoure of this world. And for as
much as a man may acquyte him self before God by penitence in this world,
and not by treasoure, therefore should he pray to God to give him respyte a
while, to bewepe and wayle his trespace: For certes all the sorrow that a man
might make fro the beginning of the world, nys but a little thing, at
regard of the sorrow of hell. The cause why that Job calls hell the land of
darkness, understands that he calls it land or earth, for it is stable
and never shall fail, and derke: for he that is in hell has defaute of light
material, for certes the dark light that shall come out of the fire that ever
shall brenne, shall turn him all to pain that is in hell, for it shows him
to the horrible deuels that him turmenteth, covered with the darkness of
death, that is to say, that he that is in hell, shall have defaute of the sight
of God: for certes the sight of God is ye life perdurable. The derkenesse of
death, been the sins that the wretched man has done which that dystourbe
him to se the face of God, right as the derke cloud betwyxt us and the sun.
Land of mysese, because that there ben three manner of defautes, against three
things that folk of this world have in this present life, that is to say:
honors, delyces, and richesse. Against honor have they in hell, shame and
confusyon: For well ye wot, that men call honor the reverence that man does
to man, but in hell is none honor ne reverence. For certes, no more reverence
shall be do there to a king, then to a knave. For which God says by the
prophet Ieremye: Those folk that me dyspise shall be in dyspyte. Honor is also
called great lordshyp: there shall no wight serve other, but of harm and
turment. Honor is also called great dygnite and highness, but in hell shall
they be al fortroden of dyuels. As god says the horrible deuels shall go and
come upon the heedes of dampened folk: and this is for as much as ye higher
that they were in this present life, the more shall they be abated and defoyled
in hell. Against the richesse of this world shall they have mysese of pouerte,
that shall be in four things: In defaute of treasoure. Of which David says:
The rich folk that enbrase and knytte all her heart to treasoure of this
world, shall sleep in the slepynge of death, and nothing ne shul they find
in her hondes of all her treasoure. And more over the mysese of hell shall be in
defaute of meat and drink. For God says thus by Moses: They shall be wasted
with honger, and the birds of hell shall devour hem, with bitter death, and
the gall of the dragon shall be her drink, and the venym of the dragon her
morsels. Also her mysease shall be in defaute of clothing, for they shall be naked
in body, as of clothing, save the fire in which they brenne, and other
fylthes: and naked shall they be of soul, of all manner of virtues, which that
is the clothing of the soul. Where been then the gaye robes, the soft
shetes, and the small shertes? Lo, what says God of hem by the prophet
Isaye, that under hem shall be strewed moughtes, and her couertures shall be of
worms of hell? Also her mysease shall be in defaut of friends for he is not
poor that has good friends, but there is no friend, for neither God ne no
creature shall be friend to them, and each of hem shall hate other with deedly
hate: The sons and the daughters shall rebel against father and mother, and
kynrede against kynred, chyde and dispyse each other, both day and night as god
says by the prophet Micheas: And the loving children yt whylom loved so
fleshlye each other, would each of hem eat other if they might. For how
should they love together in the pains of hell, when they hated each other i^
ye prosperity of this life: for trust well, her fleshly love was deadly hate. As
says the prophet David: who so you loves wickedness, he hates his soul,
and who so hates his own soul, certes he may love none other wight in no
manner: And therefore in hell is no solace ne no frendshyp, but ever yt more
kynredes that been in hell, the more cursings the more chydynges, and ye more
deedly hate there is among them. Also they shall have defaute of all manner
delyces, for certes helyces ben after the appetites of the five wits: as
sight, hearing, smelling, sauourynge, and touching. But in hell her sight
shall be full of derknesse and of smoke, and therefore full of tears, and her
hearing full of waylynge and gryntynge of tethe: As says Jesus Christ. Her
nostrylles shall be full of stynkynge. And as says Isaye the prophet: Her
sauourynge shall be full of bitter gall, and as touching of al her bodies,
ycouered with fire that never shall quench, and with worms that never shall
dye. As God says by the mouth of Isaye: and for as much as they shall not
wene that they may dye for pain, and by death fly fro pain, that may they
understand in the words of Job, that says: There is the shadow of death.
Certes a shadow has the lykenes of the thing of which it is shadowed, but
shadow is not ye same thing of which it is shadowed: right so fares the
pain of hell, it is like death, for the horrible anguyshe. And why? For it
payneth hem ever as though they should dye anon, but certes they shall not dye.
For as says saint Gregory to wretched caytyses shall be death without death,
and end without end and defaute without failing, for her death shall always
live, and her end shall ever more begin and her defaute shall not fail.

And therefore says saint John the Euangelyst, they shall follow death and they
shall not find him, and they shall desire to dye, and death shall slye fro
hem. And also Job says, that in hell is no order of rule. And al be it so,
that God has create al thing in right order, and nothing without order, but
all things ben ordered and nombred, yet nathelesse they that been dampened ben
nothing in order, ne hold none order, for the earth ne shall bear hem no fruit.
For as the prophet David says: God shall destroy the fruit of the earth, as
for hem, ne water, ne shall give hem no moisture, ne the air no refreshynge, ne
fire no light. For as says saint Basil^e: The brennynge of the fire of this
world shall God give in hell to hem that been dampened, but the light and the
clerenesse shall he give in heaven to his children: right as good men give
flesh to her children, and bones to her hounds. And for they shall have none
hope to escape, says saint Job at last, that there shall error and grisly
dread dwell without end. Horror is always dred that is to come, and this
dread shall always dwell in the hertes of hem that be damned. And therefore have
they lost all her hope, for vii. causes. First for god yt is her judge shall be
without mercy to hem, and they may not please him ne none of his saynctes, ne
they may not give nothing for her raunsom, ne they shall have no voice to
speak to him, ne they may not stye fro pain, ne they have no goodness in hem,
that they may show to deliver hem fro pain. And therefore says Solomon: The
wicked man dies, and wha^ he is deed, he shall have no hope to escape fro
pain* who so than would well understand the pains, and bethynke him well that
he has deserved those pains for his sins, ^^^es he should have more tale^t
to sygh and w^ye, than for to sing and play. For as says Solomon: whosoever that
had the science to know the pains that been ordained for sin, he would make
sorrow. That science, as says sayncte Austyn, makes a man to weyment in his
heart.

THe fourth point that ought to make a man have contrition, is the sorrowful
remembrance of the good that he has left to do here in earth, and also the
good that he has lost. Sothlye the good works that he has left, either they
be the good works that he wroughte er he fill in deedly sin, or else the good
works that he wrought while he lay in sin. Sothlye the good works that he
did before that he fell in sin ben all mortifyed astonyed and dull by often
synnynge. The works that he did while he lay in syne he deed, as to the life
perdurable in heaven: than the good works that been mortifyed by often synning,
which he did being in charity, may not quyck again without very penite^ce.
And of it says God by the mouth of Ezechiel: If the right full man return
again fro his ryghtousnesse and do wickedness, shall he live? nay, for all the
good works that he has done shall never be in remembrance, for he shall dye
in his sin. And upon that chapter says S. Gregorye thus, that we shall
understand this principally: If that we don deedly syn, it is for naught than,
to rehearse or draw in to memory the good works that we have wrought before:
for certes in the werkynge of deedlye syn, there is no trust in no good work
that we have done before: that is to say, as for to have thereby the life
perdurable in heaven. But nathelesse the good works quycken and come again,
and help and avail to have the life perdurable in heaven, when we have
contrition: But sothlye the good works that men do while they be in deedly
sin, for as much as they were don in deedly syn, they may never quycke: for
ce^tes, thing that never had life, may never quycke: And nathelesse, al be it
that they avail not to have the life perdurable, yet avail they to abredge of
the pain of hell, or else to get te^porall rychesses, or else that god wol the
rather enlumyn or light the heart of the synful man to have repentance, and eke
they auayl for to use a man to do good works, that the fend have the less
power of his soul. And thus the carteys Lord Jesus Christ ne wol that no good
work be lost for in somewhat it shall avail. But for as much as the good works
that men done while they ben in good life, ben all amortified by syn following:
and also sith that all the good works that men don while they ben in dedly syn
ben utterly deed, as for to have ye lyse perdurable: well may that man that no
good work ne does, sing that fresshe new song (Iay tout perdu mon temps,
et mon labure). For certes sin byreueth a man both the goodness of nature,
and also the goodness of grace. For sothlye the grace of the holy ghooste
fares like fire that may not be idle, for fire fails anon as it forletteth
his werkyng: and right so grace fails anon as it forletteth his werkynge.
Than leseth the sinful man the goodness of glory, that only is behyght to
good men that labor and work. well may he be sorry than that owes all his
life to God as long as he has lived, and also as long as he shall live, that
no goodness ne has to pay with his det to God, to whom he owes all his
life: for trust well he shall give acco^ptes, as says saynct Bernarde, of the
goods that have been give him in this present life, and how he has hem
dispe^ded, insomoch yt there shall not perysh an here of his heed, ne a moment
of an hour, ne shall not perisshe of his time, that he ne shall give of it a
reckoning.

THe fyfth thing that ought to move a man to contrition, is remembrance of
the passion that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered for our sins. For as says
saint Bernard while that I live I shall have remembrance of the trauayles that
our Lord Jesus christ suffered in preaching, his werynesse in trauaylynge: his
temptations when he fasted his long wakynges when he prayed, his tears when
that he wept for pytie of good people, the woe, the shame, and the fylth that
men said to him: of the foul spyttynge that men spyt in his face, of the
buffettes yt men yaue him: of the foul mowes, and of the reproues that men
said to him, of the nails with which he was nailed to the cross, and of all
the remnaunt of his passion that he suffered for my sins, and nothing for his
gylt. And ye shall understand, that in man's sin is every manner order or
ordinance turned up so down. For it is soth, that god, reason, sensuality,
and the body of man, been ordained that each of these four things should
have lordshyppe over that other: as thus, God should have lordshyppe over
reason, and reason over sensualytye, and sensuality over the body of man. But
sothly when man synneth, all this order or ordinance is turned up so down.
And therefore than, for as much as reason of man ne woll not be subject ne
obeysau^t to god, that is his Lord by right, therefore leseth it the lordshyppe
that it should have over sensualytie, and also over the body of man. And why?
for sensuality rebelleth then against reason: and by that way ledeth reason the
lordshyp over sensuality and over the body: For right as reason is rebel to
god, right so is both sensuality rebel to reason, and to the body also? And
certes this disordinaunce and this rebellion our Lord Jesus Christ bought upon
his precious body full dear: and hearken in what wise. For as much than as
reason is rebel to god, therefore is man worthy to have sorrow and to be deed.
This suffered our Lord Jesus Christ for man, after that he had be betrayed of
his disciple, and distrayned and bound, so that his blood brast out at every
nail of his hondes, as says s. Austin. And ferthermore, for as much as
reason of man wol not daunt sensualite, when it may, therefore is man worthy to
have shame: and this suffered our Lord Jesus christ for man, when they spyt in
his visage. And ferthermore for as much tha^ as the caytif body of man is rebel
both to reso^ and to sensuality, therefore it is worthy death: and this suffered
our Lord Jesus Christ upon the cross, where as there was no part of his body
free without great pain and bitter passion: and all this suffered our Lord
Jesus Christ that never forfayted And therefore resonably may be said of Jesus in
this manner: To much am I pained for things that I never deserved, and to much
defouled for shame that man is worthy to have: And therefore may the synful man
well say, as saint Bernarde. Accursed be the bytternesse of my sin, for which
there must be suffered so much bitterness. For certes after the diverse
discordaunce of our wickedness was the passion of Jesus Christ ordained in
diverse things: as thus. Certes sinful man's soul is betrayed of the devil by
couetyse of temporal prosperity, and scorned by disceyte when that he cheseth
fleshly desires, and yet it is turmented by impatience of adversity, and
bespet by seruage and subjection of syn, and at the last it is slain fynallye.
For this disordinau^ce of synful man was Jesus christ betrayed, and after yt was
he bound, that came for to unbind us of sin and of pain. Than was he
bescorned, yt only should have be honored in all things. Tha^ was his vysage
that ought to be desired to be seen of al mankind, in which visage angels
desire to look vylaynsly bespet. Than was be scourged yt nothing had
trespassed, and finally tha^ was he crucified and slain. Than was
acco^plisshed the words of Esaias: He was wounded for our misdeeds, and defoyled
for our felonies. Now since that Jesus christ took on him the pains of our
wickednesses, much ought synful man weep and bewail, that for his sins Gods
son of heaven, should all this pain endure.

THe sixth thing that should meue a man to co^trition, is ye hope of three
things, that is to say foryeuenesse of syn, and ye yeft of grace for to do
well, and ye glory of heaven with which God shall reward man for his good deeds:
and for as much as Jesus christ yeueth us these yeftes of his largeness and of
his souerayn bou^ty, therefore is he called (Jesus Nazarenus rex Indeoru^) Jesus
is to say, savior or salvation, on whom men shall hope to have foryeuenesse
of sins, which that is proprely salvation of sins. And therefore said the
angel to Joseph: thou shalt call his name Jesus, that shall save his people of
her sins. And her of says s. Peter: There is none other name under heaven yt
is give to any man, by which a man may be saved, but only Jesus. Nazarenus is
as much for to say, as floryshing in which a man shall hope, that he that
yeueth him remyssyon of sins, shall give him al so grace well for to do. I
was at the door of thine heart, says Jesus, and called for to enter he that
opens to me shall have foryeuenes of sin. I will enter to him by my grace,
and suppe with him by the good works, that he shall do, which works ben the
food of the soul, and he shall suppe with me by ye great joy that I shall give
him. Thus shall man hope for his works of penance, that God shall give him
his reygne, as he behyghte him in the gospel. Now shall a man understand in
which manner shall be his contrytion: I say that it shall be universal and
total, this is to say: a man shall be very repentaunt for all his sins that
he has done in delight of his thought, for it is right peryllous. For there ben
two manner of consentinges, that one of hem is called consentyng of affection,
when a man is moved to do syn, and than delyteth him long for to think on
that sin, and his reason apperceyueth it well that it is sin against the law
of god and yet his reason refrayneth not his foul delight or talent, though he
se well apertlye, that it is ayenste the reverence of God, although his reason
ne consent not to do that sin in deed, yet say some doctoures that such
delight that dwells long is full perilous, albeit never so little. And also a
man should sorrow, namely for all that ever he has desired against the law of
God, with perfyt consentyng of his reason, for thereof is no doubt that it is
deedly sin in consentyng: for certes there is no deedly sin, but that it is
first in man's thought, and after that in his delight, and so forth into
consenting and into deed: wherefore I say that many me^ ne repent hem never of
such thoughts and delytes, ne never shryue him of it, but only of the deed
of great sins outward: wherefore I say that such wicked delytes been
subtle begylers of them that shall be dampened. Moreover, man ought to sorrow for
his wicked words as well as for his wicked deeds: for certes the repentance
of a synguler syn, and not repentaunt of all his other sins, or else repent
him of all his other sins, and not of a syngular syn, may not avail: For
certes god almightye is all good, and therefore either he foryeueth all, or else
right naught. And therefore says saynct Austyn: I wot certainly that god is
enemy to every sinner: and how tha^ he that observes one sin, shall he have
for yeuenesse of those other sins? Nay. And moreover co^trition should be
wonder sorrowful and anguishous, and therefore yeueth him God plainly his mercy:
And therefore wha^ my soul was anguyshed and sorrowful wtin me, than had I
remembrance of God, that my prayer might come to him. Ferthermore, contrition
must be contynuall, and that man have steadfast purpose to shryue him, and to
amend him of his life. For sothly while contrition lasts, man may ever hope
to have foryeuenesse. And of this comes hate of sin, that destroys both
sin in him self, and also in other folk at his power. For which says
David: They that love god hate wickedness: For to love god is for to love that
he loves, and hate yt he hates. The last thing that men shall understand is
this. wherefore avails contrition. I say the contrition sometime delyuereth
man fro sin: Of which David says I say, said David: I purposed fermely to
shryue me, and thou Lord releaseddest my sin. And right so as contrition
avails not without sad purpose of shrift if man have oportunitye, right so
little worth is shryfte or satisfaction without contrition. And moreover
contrition destroys the prison of hell, and makes weak and feeble all the
strengthes of the deuylles, and restores the yeftes of the holy ghost and of
al good virtues and it cleanses the soul of syn, and delyuereth it fro the
pain of hell, and fro the company of the dyuel, and fro the seruage of sin,
and restores it to all goods spirituels, to the company and communion of
holy church. Ferthermore it makes him that whylom was son of ire, to be the
son of grace. And all these things ben proved by holy writ. And therefore
he that would set his intent to these things he were full wise, for truly he
ne should have than in all his life courage to sin, but give his heart and body
to serve Christ, and thereof do him homage For truly our Lord has spared us so
meke lie in our follyes, that if he ne had pytye of man's soul, a sorye song
might we all sing.

Explicit prima pars penitentie et incipit pars secunda.
THe second part of penitence is confession, that is sign of contrition. Now
shul ye understood what is confession, and if it ought to be done or no, and
which things be couenable to very confession. First shall thou understand ye
confession is very showing of sins to the pressed: this is to say very, for he
must confess him of all the conditions that belong to his sin, as ferforth
as he can: al must be said, and nothing excused ne hid, and not auaunt the of
thy good works. Also it is necessary to understand whence that sins spring,
and how they enter, and which they ben. Of the springyng of sins says
saint Poule in this wise: that right as by one man, syn entered first into this
world, and through syn death right so the death enters into all men that sin,
and this man was Adam, by whom sin entered into this world, when he brake the
commandment of God. And therefore he that first was so mighty that he ne should
have dyed, becam so that he must needs dye whether he would or no, and all his
progeny in this world that in the said man sinned. Look that in the state of
innocence when Adam and Eve were naked in paradyse, and shamed not thereof, how
the serpent wylyest of all other beasts that god made, said to the woman: why
commanded god you yt ye should not eat of every tree in paradyse? The woman
answered: Of the fruit said she of the trees of paradyse we feed us, but of
the fruit of the mydle tree of paradyse god forbod us to eat and touch, lest we
should dye. The serpent said to the woman. Nay nay, ye shall not dye of death,
forsooth god wotte that what day that ye eat thereof, your eye^ shall open, and
ye shall be as gods, knowing good and harm. The woman tha^ saw that the tree
was good to fedyng, and fair to the eyes, and delectable to sight, she took of
the fruit of the tree and ate, and yaue to her husbonde, and he ate, and anon
the eyes of hem both opened: And wha^ that they knew that they were naked, they
sowed of fyggeleues in manner of breches to hyde her me^bres There may ye se
that deedly syn has first suggestion of the fend as shows here by the
adder, and afterward the delight of the flesh, as shows by Eve, and after
that consentyng of reason, as shows here by Ada^. For trust well though so it
were that ye fend tempted Eve, that is to say the flesh, and the flesh had
delight in the beautye of the fruit defended, yet certes till that reason, that
is to say Adam, consented to the eating of the fruit, yet stood he in the state
of innocence. Of the said Adam took we the said original syn of him fleshly
descended be we all, and engendered of vile and corrupt matter: And when the
soul is put in our bodies, right anon is contract original syn, and that that
was erst but only pain of concupiscencie is afterward both pain and syn, and
therefore we been all borne sons of wrath, and of dampnatio^ perdurable, if it
nere baptym that we receive, which benymmeth us the coulpe but forsooth the
pyne dwells with us as to temptation, which pyne hight concupyscence. This
concupiscence when it is wrongfully disposed or ordained in man, it makes him
coueyte by couetysye of flesh fleshly sin by sight of his eyes, as to
erthlye things, and also couetyse of highness by pride of heart.

Now as to speak of the first couetise that is concupiscence, after the law
of our members that were lawfully made, and by rightful judgment of God: I
say for as much as man is not obeysaunte to God, that is his Lord, therefore
is the flesh to him disobeysaunt through concupiscence, which is called
noryshing of sin, and occasyon of sin. Therefore all the while that a man
has within him the pyne of concupyscence it is impossyble but he be tempted
sometime and moved in his flesh to syn. And this thing may not fail as long
as he lives. It may well wax feeble by virtue of baptim, and by the grace of
god through penitence, but fully ne shall it never quench that he ne shall
sometime be moved in him self, but if he were al refrayned by sycknesse or by
malice of sorcery or cold drynkes. For lo, what says s. Poule: the flesh
coueteth against the spyryte and the spyrite against the flesh: they been so
contrary and so stryuen, that a man may not always do as he would. The same
saint poul after his great penance, in water, and in land: in water by night
and by day, in great peril and in great pyne. In land, famyne and thurst,
cold, and clothlesse, and ones sloned almost to death. Yet (said he) alas, I
caytyfe man, who shall deliver me fro the prison of my caytyfe body? And saint
Ierom when he long ^yme had dwelled in desert, where as he had no company but
of wild beasts, where as he had no meat but herbs and water to drink, ne
bed but the naked earth, wherefore his flesh was black as an Ethiopien for
hete and nigh distroyed for cold. Yet said ^e that the brennyng of lechery
boiled in all his body: wherefore I wot well that they be disceyued that say,
they be not tempted in ^^ bodies. witness saint James yt says that every
wight is tempted in his own conscience, that is to say: that each of us has
matter and occasion to be tempted of the norishing of syn that is in his body.
And therefore says saint John the evangelist: if we say that we ben without
sin, we disceyue our self, and truth is not in us. Now shall ye understand
how syn wexeth and encreaeth in man. The first thing is the same noryshing of
syn of which I spoke before, the fleshlye concupiscence, and after that comes
suggestyon of the devil, this is to say the deuyls belous, with which he
blows in man the fire of concupiscence, and after that a man bethinketh him
wheder he will do or no, ye thing to which he is tempted. And then if a man
withsto^d and weyue the first entisyng of his flesh, and of the fend, tha^ it
is no syn, and if so be he do not tha^ feleth he anon a flame of de^^te, and
tha^ it is good to beware and keep him well, or else he will fall anon, to
co^sentynge of syn, and than will he do it if he may have time and place. And
of this matter says Moses by the devil, in this manner: ye fe^d says, I will
chase and pursue man by wicked suggestyon, and I will take him by mouyng and
steryng of syn, and I woll depart my pryse of my pray by delyberation, and my
lust shall be acco^plyshed in delight: I will draw my sword in consenting. For
certes, right as a sword departs a thing in two pieces, right so co^sentyng
departs god fro man, and than will I sle him with my hond in deed of syn: thus
says the fend. For certes than is a man all deed in soul, and thus is syn
acco^plyshed with temptation by delight and consentyng: and than is the syn
actual. Forsooth syn is in two manners, either it is venyall or deedly syn.
Sothlye when man loves any creature more then Jesus Christ our creator, than
it is deedly sin, and venyall synn it is, if man love Jesus christ less tha^
him ought. Forsooth the deed of this venyal syn is full perylous, for it
mynissheth the love that man should have to god more and more. And therefore if a
man charge him self with many such venyall sins: certes but if so be that
he sometime discharge him of hem by shryft They may full lightly mynysh in him all the love that he has to Jesus Christ, and in this wise skyppeth venyall sin
into deedly sin For certes, the more that a man charge his soul with venyall
sins, the more he is enclyned to fall into deedlye sin. And therefore let
us not be neglygent to charge us of venyal sins. For the proverb says that
many small make a great. Harken this ensample. A great vawe of the sea comes
sometime with so great a vyolence, that it drowneth the ship. And the same
harm do sometime the small drops of water that enters through a little
creueys, into the tymbre and to the botume of the ship, if men be so geglygent,
that they dyscharge hem not bytymes. And therefore although there be a
dyfference betwyxt these two causes of drownynge, allgates the ship is
drowned. Right so fares it sometime of deedlye sin, and of anoyous venyall
sins, when they multyplye in man so greatly, that those worldly things
that he loves, through which he synneth venyally, is as great in his heart as
the love of God, or more: and therefore the love of every thing that is not
beset in God, ne done pryncipallye for Gods sake, although that a man love
it self then God: yet is it venyal sin and deedly sin when the love of any
thing weyeth in the heart of man as much as the love of God or more. Deedly
sin as says saynct Austyn is when a man turns his heart fro God: which that
is very sovereign bounty that may not change: and gives his heart to a thing
that may change and flit and certes that is every thing save God of heaven.
For sothe is that if a man give his love which that he owes to God, with
all his heart unto a creature: certes as much of love as he yeueth to that same
creature so much he bereueth fro God: and therefore does he sin. For he that
is dettour to God ne yeldeth not to god al his det that is to say: all the love
of his heart. Now since man understands generally which is venyall syn, then
it is couenable to tell specyallye of sin which that many a man peradventure
demeth hem no sins: and shryueth him not of the same things: and yet
nevertheless they be sins sothly as these clerks write that is to say. At
every time that man eats or drinks more then suffiseth to ye sustenau^ce of
his body in certain he does sin: and also when he speaks more then it
needs it is sin. Also when he herkeneth not benignly the co^playnt of the
pore. Also when he is in heal of body: and wol not fast when other folks
fast without cause reasonable: also when he slepeth more then needs: or when
he comes perchance to late to church: or other works of charity. Also when
he uses his wife without sovereign desire of enge^drure to the honor of god:
or for the intent to yield to his wife debt of his body. Also when he wol not
vysit the sick or the prisoner: if he may. Also if he love wife or child or
other wordly thing more then reason requires. Also if he flatter or blandyse
more then him ought for any necessitye. Also if he minish or withdraw ye
alms of the pore. Also if he apparel his meat more deliciously then need is
or eat to hastelye by lycorousnes. Also if he talk vanities at church or at
gods seruise, or that he be a talker of idle words, of folly or vylanye, for he
shall yield accomptes of it at the day of dome. Also when he behyghteth or
assures to do things that he may not perform. Also when yt he by lyghtnesse
or folly myssayeth or scorneth his neighbor. Also when he has any wicked
susspection of any thing that he ne wot of sothfastnesse. These things and mo
without no^bre be sins as says s. Austyn Now shall men understand that
albeit so yt none erthly man may eschew al venyal sins, yet may he refrain
him by the brennyng love yt he has to our lord Jesus christ and by prayers and
confession and other good works, so that it shall be but little grefe. For as
saeth s. Austin: If a man love god insuch manner, that all that ever he does is
the love of god, or for ye love of god verily, for he bre^neth in the love of
god: look how much that one drop of water which does fall into a great
furneys full of fire anoyeth or greueth the brennyng of the fire: in like manner
anoyeth or greueth a venyall syn unto that man which is steadfast and perfyte in
the love of our savior Jesus Christ. Ferthermore me^ may also refrain and put
away venyall syn, by commenyng and receiving worthily the body of our savior
Jesus Christ. Also by taking of holy water, by almesdede, by general confession
of Confi^^or at mass and at complyn, and by blessings of bishops and prestes,
and other good works. (...)


De septem peccatis mortalibus, et de eorum dependentus circumstantis et
speciebus.
HOw is it expedient to tell which been the seven deedly sins, that is to
say, the chefetayns of sins. All they run in o lees, but in diverse manners.

Now been they called seven Cenes, for as much as they be chief, and spring of
al other sins. Of the root of these seven sins, then is pride the general
rote of al harms For of this rote spryngeth certain branches: as ire, envy,
accidie or sloth, avarice, or couetyse, to co^me^ understanding glotony and
lechery: And each of these chief sins have her branches and twigges, as it
shall be declared in her chapiters following. And though so be yt noman can
utterly tell the no^bre of twigges, and of the harms that com of pride: Yet wol
I show a part of hem, as ye shall understand. There is Inobedience auauntyng,
ypocrisy, dispite, errogance, impedence, swellyng of heart, insolence, elation,
impacience, strife, contumacy, presumption irreuerence, pertinacy, vein glory,
and many other twigs that I can not declare. Inobedience is he that
disobeyeth for dispyte the commandments of God, to his souerains, and to his
gostly father. Auaunter is he that bosteth of the harm or of the bou^te that
he has done. Ipocrite is he that bedeth to show him such as he is, and
shows him to seem such as he is not. Dispitous is he that has disdain of
his neighbor, that is to say, of his even christen, or has dispite to do
that him ought to do. Errogance is he that thinks yt he has those bou^^es in
him that he has not, or weneth that he should have hem by his deserts, or else
that he demeth he is that he is not. Impedent is he, yt for his pride has no
shame of his pride ne sin. Swellyng of heart is when man reioyseth him of
harm that he has done. Insolence is he that dispiceth in his judgment all
other folk, as in regard of his value, of his conyng, of his spekyng and of
his berynge. Elation is when he ne may neither suffer to have master ne fellow
Impacient is he that will not be taught ne rebuked of his vice, and by strife
denies troth wyttyngly, and defends his folly. C^^^umaxe is he that through
his indignation i^ against every auctorite or power of hem that been his
souerayns. Presumption is wha^ a man undertakes an emprise that him ought not
to do or else that he may not do, and this is called surquidie. Irreuerence is,
when manne does not honor there as him ought to do, and look to be
reverenced. Pertinacye is when men defend her folly, and trust to much on her
own wit. Vaynglory is for to have pomp and delight in his temporel hynesse,
and glory him in worldly estates. Jangling is when men speak to much before
folk and clappeth as a myl, and take no keep what they say. And yet is there a
privy spice of pride, that wayteth first to be salewed or he woll salve, all be
he less worthy tha^ that other is. And also he wayteth or desires to sytte,
or else to go above him in the way, or kiss paxe, to be encensed, or go to
offrynge before his neighbor, and such semblable things against his duty
paraue^ture, but that he has his heart and his entente, in such a proud
desire to be magnyfyed and honored before the people. Now been here two
manners of prides. One of hem is within the heart of a man, and that other is
without. Of which foresaid things sothlye and mo than I have said apertayn to
pride, that is in the heart of man, and other spices of pride ben without, but
nathles, that one of these spices of pride is sign of that other, right as
the gay leuesel at the tavern, is sign of the wine that is in the celer. And
this is in many things: as in speech and countenance and outrageous array of
clothyng: For certes, if there had been no syn in clothing, Christ would not so
sone have noted and spoken of the clothyng of the rich men in the gospel. And
as saint Greg. says that precious clothing is culpable, for the derth of it
and for his softness, and for his strangeness and disguisyng: and for the
superfluite, or for the inordinate scantnesse of it. Alas? may not a man se in
our days the sinful costlye arraye of clothyng, and namely in to much
superfluite, or else in to disordinate scantnesse. As to the first sin in
superfluite of clothing such that makes it so dear to the harm of the
people, not only the cost of imbroydring the disguysed endendyng, or barringe,
oundyng, palyng, wyndynge, or bendynge, and semblable wast of cloth in vanite.
But there is also the costlye furrynge in her gowns, so much pousyng of chesel
to make hooles, so much daggyng of sheres forche, with the superfluite in
length of the foresaid gowns, traylyng in the donge and in the mire, on horse
and also on foot, as well of man as of woman. That all that traylynge is
verilye as in effect wasted, consumed thredebare and rotten with donge, rather
than it is give to the poor, to great damage of the forsayde pore folk, and
yt in so^drie wise, this is to say that the more the cloth is wasted, the more
must it cost the poor people for the scarsnesse. And moreover, if so be that
they would give such pounsed and dagged clothyng to the poor people, it is not
convenient to were for her estate, ne sufficient to her necessite, to keep hem
fro the distemperaunce of the firmament. Upon that other side, to speak of ye
horrible disordinate sca^tnesse, of clothinge as ben these cutted sloppes or
hanselines, yt through her shortness cover not the shamful me^bres of man, to
wicked intent. Alas, some of hem show the bosse of her shap, and the horible
swole members that seems like to malady of hernia, in the wrappyng of her
hose^ and also the buttockes of hem fare as it were the hinder part of a
sheape in the full of the moon. And moreover the wretched swollen me^bres that
they show through disguising in departing of her hosen, in white and reed
seems that half her shameful preuy members were flayne. And if so be that
they depart her hosen in other colors, as is white and blew, or white and
black, or black and red and so forth: Tha^ seems it as by variau^ce of
color that you half part of her preuy me^bres, ben corrupt by the fire of
saint Anthony, or by canker, or other such mischaunce. Of the hinder part of
her buttockes it is full horrible for to se, for certes in that part of her
body there as they purge her stynkynge ordure, that foul party show they to
ye people proudly in dispite of honesty, which honesty that Jesus Christ and
his friends observed to show in her life. Now as the outrageous array of
women, God wotte that though yt visages of some of hem seem full chaste, and
debonayre, yet notify in her array or afyre, licorousnes and pride: I say not
that honesty in clothing of man or woman is vncouenable, but certes the
superfluity of disordinate quantite of clothing is reprouable. Also the syn
of ornement or of apparayle is in things that apertayne to riding, as in
company, delicate horses that been holden for delight, that been so fair,
fat, and costlye, and also in many a nyce knave, that is sustained because of
hem, in curious harneis, as in sadels, cropers, peytrels, and bridels covered
with precious clothing, and rich bars of plates of gold and of silver. For
which god says by zacharye the prophet, I woll confound the ryders of such
horses. These folk take little regard of the riding of gods son of heaven,
and of his harneys when he rode upon the ass, and non other harneys but the
pore clothes of his disciples, ne we read not that ever he rode on other be.
I speak this for the sin of superfluity, and not for reasonable honestye,
when reason it requires. And moreover, certes pride is greatly notyfyed in
holding of great meyny, when they be^ of little profit, or of right no
profit, and namely when that meyne is felonous and dammageous to the people by
hardynes of high lordshyp, or by way of offices. For certes such lords sell
tha^ her lordshyppe to the dyuel of hell, wha^ they sustain the wickedness of
her meyne. Or else, when these folk of low degree: as those that keep
hostelries, sustain these of the hostelers, and that is in many manner of
disceytes: those manner of folk ben the flies that follow the honey, or else the
hounds that follow the ^arayn. Such forsaid folk strangel spirituelly her
lordshyps: For such, thus says David the prophet, wicked death might come on
those lordships, and God give that they might descend in to b^l* all down: For
in her houses been iniquities and shreudnesse, and not god of heaven. And
certes, till they done amendeme^t* right as god yaue his blessing to Pharao by
the service of Jacob, and to Laban, by the service of Joseph: Right so god wol
give his curse to such lordshyps, as sustayn the wyckednes of her servants,
but they come to amendment. Pride of the table appears also full often: for
certes, rich men ben called to festes and pore folk ben^ put away and
rebuked. And also in excess of diverse meats and drynkes, and namely such
manner bake meats and dishemetes brenning of wild fire: peynted and castelled
with paper and semblable waste, so that it is ^^usyon to think. And also in to
great ^^cyousnesse of vessel and curiosytye of m^^stralcye, the which a man
is sterred mo^ to delyces of lecherye, if so be he set his heart the less
upon our Lord Jesus Christ certaynlye it is a sin. And certaynlye the
delyces might be so great in this case, that a man might lyghtlye fall by hem
into a deadly sin. The especes that sourde of pride, sothly when they sourde
of malice ymagined, auysed, and forecaste, or else of usage ven deedly syn, it
is no dout. And wha^ they sourde by freelte unadvised suddenly, and suddenly
wythdrawe ayene, all be they greuouse sins, I guess that they be not deedly.
Now might me^ ask, whereof that pride sourdeth and springs. I say that
sometime it spryngeth of the goods of nature, sometime of the goods of fortune,
and sometime of the goods of grace. Certes the goods of nature stondeth only
in goods of body, or goods of ye soul. Certes goods of the body been heel
of body, strength, deliuernes beauty, gentry, fra^chise. Goods of nature of
the soul, ben good with sharp understanding, subtel engine, virtue naturel,
good memory. Goods of fortune, be riches, hye degrees of lordships, praysyngs
of the people Goods of grace: been science, power to suffer spounell traueyle,
benign, virtuous co^templation, understanding of temptation and semblable
things: of which foresaid goods: certes it is a full great folly, a man to
have pride in any of hem all. Now, as for to speak of goods of nature, God
wot, that sometime we have hem in nature, asmoche to our damage as to our
profyt. As to speak of heel of body, truly it passes full lightly, and also it
is full often occasion of sickness of the soul: for God wot ye flesh is a
great enemy to the shule: and therefore the more that the bodies hole, the more
be we in peril to fall. Also for to have pride in his strength of body, it is an
hie folly: for certes the flesh coueteth against the spirit: and the more
strong the flesh is the sorier may the soul be. And over all this strength
of body and worldly hardiness, causes full often many man to perell and
mischaunce, and also to have pride of his gentry, is right great folly: for
oftyme the ge^try of ye body takes awey the gentry of the soul: and also we
ben al of o father and mother: and all we ben of o nature rotten and corrupt,
both rich and pore. Forsooth o manner ge^try is for to praise that aparelleth
man's courage: wit virtue and moralite, makes him Christ's child. For trust
well, that over what man that syn has maystry, he is a very churl to sin.
Now ben there general signs of ge^tlenes as esche wyng of vice and ribaudry,
and seruage of sy^n word, in work, and countenance and vsyng of virtue,
curtesy, and clennes, and to be liberal: that is to say, large by measure: for
yt yt passes measure, is folly and sin: Another is to remember him of
bou^tie, that he of other folk has received: Another is to be benign to his
good subictes, wherefore says Senecke: there is nothing more couenable to a man
of high estate, than debonairte and pite. And therefore these flies that men
call bees, when they make her king, they chese one that has no prick,
wherwyth he may stynge.

Another is, man to have a noble heart and a diligent, to attain to the high
virtuous things. Now certes, a man to have pride in the goods of grace, is
also an outrageous folly: for those gifts of grace yt should have turned him
to goodness, and to medycen, tourneth him to venym and confusion, as faith
saint Greg. Certes also, who so has pride in the goodness of fortune, he is
a full great fool: For sometime is a man a great lord by the morn, that is a
catyfe, and a wretch or it be night: and sometime the riches of a man is cause
of his death. Sometime the delyces of a man, is cause of a grievous melady
through which he dies. Certes, the comendation of the people is sometime full
false and brotell for to trust This day they praise, to morrow they blame. God
wot, desire to have commendation of the people, has caused death to many a
busye man. Now sith that so it is, that ye have understand what is pride, and
which be the speces of it, and whence it sourdeth and spryngeth: now ye shall
understand which is the remedy against it. Humilytie or meekness is the remedy
against pride, yt is a virtue, through which a man has very knowledge of him
self, and holds of him self no price ne deyntie, as in regard of his
deserts, considering ever his freelte. Now been there three manner of
humilytes: As humylyte in heart, another humylytye is in mouth, and the third
is in works. The humilytie in heart, is in four manners: That one is, when a man holds him self as naught worth before God of heaven. The second is,
when he dispiceth none other man. The third is, when he ne recketh not though
men hold him naught worth. And the fourth is, wha^ he is not sorry of his
humiliation. Also the humility of mouth is in four things. In a temperate
speech, in humility of spech, and wha^ he confesses with his own mouth, that
he is such as him thinks, that he is in his heart: Another is, wha^ he
prayseth the bounte of another man and nothing thereof minyssheth. Humilitye
also in work, is in four manners. The first is, when he puts other men
before him, ye second is to chese the lowest place over al, the third is,
gladly to assent to good counsel, the fourth in, to stand gladly to the
awarde of his souerains, or of him that is in hier degree. Certain this is great
work of humilite.

De Inuidia.
AFter Pride woll I speak of the foul sin of Envy, which that is after the
word of the philosofer, sorrow of other men's prosperity. And after the word
of saint Augustine: it is sorrow of other men's well, and the joy of other
me^nes harm. This foul sin is platly against the holy ghost: al be it so,
that every sin is against the holy ghost: yet nathles, for asmoch as bounte
apertayneth properly to the holy ghost: and envy comes properly of malice,
therefore it is properlye against the bounty of the holy ghost. Now has malice
two speces, yt is to say: hardines of heart in wickedness, or else the flesh of
a man is so blind, that he co^sidreth not that he is in syn, or recketh not yt
he is in syn, which is the hardines of ye devil. That other spece of envy is,
when that a man denies troth, wha^ he knows that it is troth, and also
wha^ he repents ye grace that God has give to his neighbor: and all this is
by envy. Certes, tha^ is envy ye worst sin that is, for sothly al other
sins be so^time only against o special virtue: but certes, envy is against
al virtues and al goodness For it is sorry against al bou^ties of her neighbor,
and in this manner, it is diverse from al other sins. Alas: for there ne is any
sin that it ne has some delight in it selefe, save only envy, that ever has
in it self anguishe and sorrow. The speces of envy ben these, there is first
sorrow of other men's goodness and of her prosperity, and prosperity is
kyndlye matter of joy: Than is envy a sin against kind. The second spece of
envy, is joy of other men's harm, and that is properly like to the devil,
that ever reioyseth him of man's harm. Of these two speces comes bacbytynge,
and this sin of bacbytynge or detractynge has certain speces, as thus:
Some man prayseth his neighbor by a wicked intent, for he makes always a
wicked knot at the last end: always he makes a but at the last end that is
digne of more blame, tha^ is worth all the praysyng. The second spece is, that
if a man be good, or does or says a thing to good entente, the backbyter
woll turn al yt goodness up so down, to his shreude entente. The third is
to amynishe the bountye of his neighbor. The fourth spece of backbytyng is
this, that if men speak goodness of a man, than woll the backbiter say:
Perfay such a man is yet better than he, in dispraysynge of him ye men praise.
The fyfth spece is this, for to consent gladly and herke^ gladly to ye harm
that men speak of other folk: This sin is full great, and aye encreseth after
the wicked intent of the backbiter. After backbytynge comes grutching or
murmuration, and sometime it spryngeth of unpacience against God, and sometime
against man. Against God it is when a man grutcheth against pain of hell, or
against poverty or loss of catel, or against rain or tempeste, or else
grutcheth that shrewes have prosperity, or else for that good me^ have
aduersite: and all these things should men suffer patiently, for they come by
the ryghtfull judgment and ordinance of God. Sometime comes grutching of
avarice, as Judas grutched against Maudelen, when she anointed the heed of our
lord Jesus Christ, with (...) precious ointment. This manner murmu^rynge is
such, as when man grutcheth of goodness that him self does, or that other
folk done of her own catel. Sometime comes murmr of pride, as when Simon
the pharisee grutched against Maudeleyn, when she aproched to Jesus Christ and
wept at his fete for her sins. And sometime it sourdeth of envy, wha^ me^
discover a man's harm yt was privy, or bears him on hand a thing that is
false. Murmr also is often among servants ye grutche wha^ her soueraynes bid
hem do lefull things, and for as much as they dare not openly wythsay ye
commandment of her soueraynes, yet woll they say harm and grutche and
murmr privily for very dispite: which words they call the dyuels pater
noster, though so be that the dyuel had never pater noster, but yt lend folk
yeueth it such a name. Sometime it comes of ire or pryuy hate, yt nourysheth
rancoure in the heart, as afterward I shall declare. Than comes also
bytternesse of heart, through which bytternesse every good deed of his
neighbor seems to him bitter and unsavory. Than comes discord that
unbinds al manner of frendshyp. Than comes scornyng of his neighbor, all do
he never so well. Than comes accusynge, as when man seeks occasion to anoy
his neighbor which is like the craft of the dyuel, yt wayteth both day and
night to accuse us all. Than comes malignitie, through which a man anoyeth
his neighbor privily if he may: and if he may not algate his wicked will shall
not let as for to brenne his house privily, or enpoyson or sle his beasts, and
semblable things. Now woll I speak of the remedy against this foul sin of
envy. First is the love of God principally, and loving of his neighbor as him
self: for sothly that one ne may not be without that other. And trust well
that in the name of thy neighbor thou shalt understand the name of thy
brother, for certes all we have one father fleshly and one mother, yt is to
say, Adam and Eve, and also one father spirituell yt is God of heaven. Thy
neighbor art thou bound for to love, and will him all goodness and therefore
says god: love thy neighbor as thy self, yt is to say, to salvation both of
life and soul. And moreover thou shalt love him or word and in benign
admonyshynge and chastysyng, and comfort him in his noyaunces, and pray for
him with all thy heart. And in deed thou shalt love him in such wise that thou
shall do to him in charity, as thou would that it were done to thine own
person: and therefore thou ne shall do him no damage in wicked word, ne harm
in his body ne in his catel, ne in his soul by entysyng of wicked ensample.
Thou shalt not desire his wife ne none of his things. Understand also that
in the name of neighbor is comprehended his enemy: Certes man shall love his
enemy by the commandment of God and sothly thy friend thou shall love in god.
I say thine enemy shall thou love for gods sake* by his commandment, for
if it were reason that man should hate his enemy, forsooth god would not receive
us to his love yt ben his enemies. Against three manner of wro^ges that his enemy
does to him, he shall do three things, as thus: against hate and ra^cour of
heart, he shall love him in his heart: Against chiding and wicked words, he shall
pray for his enemy: Against wicked deeds, he shall do him bounty. For Christ
says: Love your enemies, and pray for hem yt speak you harm and for hem that
chase and pursue you: and do bounte to hem yt hate you. Lo, thus commands us
our Lord Jesus Christ to do to our enemies: For soth nature drives us to love
our friends, and parfay our enemies have more need of love than our friends,
and they yt more need have, certes to hem shall men do goodness. And certes in
that deed have we remembrance of the love of Jesus Christ yt dyed for his
enemies: And in as much as that love is more grievous to perform, so much is
the more great the merit, and therefore the loving of our enemy has confounded
ye dyuels venym: For right as the dyuel is confounded by humility, right so
is he wounded to the death by the love of our enemy, certes tha^ is love the
medicyn that casts out the venym of envy fro man's heart. The speces of
this place shall be more largely declared in her chapiters following.

De Ira.
AFter envy wol I discriue the sin of Ire, for sothly who so has envy upon
his neighbor, anon he woll comenlye find him a matter of wrath in word or in
deed, against him to who^ he has envy: And as well comes ire of pride as of
envy, for sothly he that is proud or enuyous is lightly wroth. This sin of
ire, after the discriuynge of saint Austyn is wicked will to be aue^ged by
word or by deed. Ire after the philosopher, is the fervent blood of man
yquycked in his heart, through which he would harm to him that he hates: for
certes the heart of man by eschaufynge and mouyng of his blood, wexeth so
troubled that it is out of al manner of judgment of reason. But ye shall
understand ye ire is in two manners, that one of hem is good, and that other is
wicked. The good ire is by ielousye of goodness, through which a man is wroth
with wickedness, and against wickedness. And therefore says a wise man, that ire
is bet tha^ play. This ire is with debonairte, and it is wroth without
bitterness, not wroth against the man, but wrath with the misdede of the man: As
says the prophet David: Irascimini, et nolite peccare. Now understand that
wicked ire is in two manners, that is to say, sodayn ire or hasty ire without
auysement and consentyng of reason: The meaning and the sense of this is, that
the reason of a man ne consent not to that sudden ire, and than it is venyal.
Another ire is full wicked, that comes of felony of heart, auysed and cast
before, with wicked will to do vengeance, and thereto his reason co^senteth: and
sothly this is deedly sin. This ire is so displeasaunt to God, that it
troubles his house, and chaseth the holy ghost out of man's soul, and wastes
and distroyeth that likeness of God, that is to say the virtue of that is in
man's soul and puts in him the likeness of the dyuel, and takes the man
fro God that is his rightful lord. This is a full great pleasau^ce to the
dyuell, for it is the dyuels fournayes that is eschaufed with the fire of hell:
For certes right so as fire is more mighty to distroy erthly things tha^ any
other eleme^t right so ire is mighty to distroy al spirituel things. Look how
that fire of small coals that been almost deed under asshen, woll reuyue or
quycke again when they been touched with brymstone, right so ire wol evermore
quyck again when it is touched by the pride that is covered in man's heart. For
certes fire ne may not come out of nothing, but if it were first in the same
thing naturally: as fire is draw out of flyntes with stele. And right so as
pride is many times matter of ire, right so is rancour nourice and keeper of
ire. There is a manner tree, as says saint Isodore, yt when a man makes fire
of the said tree, and cover the coals of it with asshen, sothly the fire of it
wol last a year or more: And right so fares it of ra^coure wha^ it is ones
conceived in the hertes of some men, certes it wol last peraue^ture from one
Ester day until another Ester day or more But certes that same man is full far
from the mercy of god all that while. In this forsayde dyuels fourneis there
forge three shrewes: Pride that aye blows and increases the fire by chiding
and wicked words: Than stands envy and holds hot iron in ye fire upon the
heart of man with a pair of long tongues of long ra^cour. And tha^ stands the
syn of co^tumely or strife and chest, and battereth and forgeth by vilaynous
repreuinges. Certes this cursed syn anoyeth both to the man him self and also
his neighbor. For sothly almoost all the harm or damage that any man does to
his neighbor comes of wrath for certes outrageous wrath does all that ever
the foul fend wills or commands him, for he ne spares neither our lord
Jesus Christ, neither his sweet mother. And in his outragiouse anger and ire,
alas alas, full many and diverse at that time, feleth in his heart full wickedly
both of Christ and also of al his halowes: Is not this a cursed vice? yes
certes. Alas it takes fro man his wit and his reason, and all his debonayre
life spirituell that should keep his soul. Certes it wythdraweth also gods
dew lordshyp, and that is man's soul, and the love of his neighbors. It
stryueth also all day against troth, it reueth him the quyete of his heart, and
subuerteth his soul. Of tree comes these stinkinge engendrures. First hate,
yt is old wrath discord, through which a man forsakes his old friend yt he
has loved full long And than comes war and every manner of wrong that a man
does to his neighbor in body or in catell. Of this cursed syn of (...) comes
also ma^slaughter. And understand well that homicide, that is manslaughter is in
diverse wise.

Some manner of homicide is spirituell and some is bodily. Spirituell
manslaughter is in.vi. things. First by hate as says Saint Johan: He that
hates his brother, is an homicide. Homicede is also by backebytynge, of which
backebytinge says Solomon, that they have two sweatdes, with which they slay
her neighbors For sothlye as wicked is to take from him his good name as his
life. Homicide is also in giving of wicked counsel by fraud as for to give
counsel to areyse wrongful customs, and talages. Of which says Solomon:
A Lion roringe and a be^^e hongry, be like to the cruel lords in wythholdyng
or abredging of the sheep or ye hyre of the wages of servants, or else in
usury, or in wythdrawyng of the alms of poor folk. For which the wise man
says. Fedethe him that almooste dies for honger, for sothly but if ye feed
him ye slay him. And al these been deedlye sins. Bodylye manslaughter is when
thou sleest him with thy tongue: An other manner is, when thou commaundest to
slay a man, or else yeuest counsel to slay a man. Manslaughter in deed is in
four manners. That one is by law, right as a Justice dampneth him that is
coulpable to the death: But let the Justice be ware that he do it ryghtfully,
and that he do it not for delight to spyll blood, but for keeping of
ryghteousnes. An other homicide is done for necessity, as when a man sleeth an
other in his defense, and that he ne may none otherwise escape without
slaughter of his adversary, he does sin, and he shall bear penance as for
deedly sin. Also if a man by case or adventure shote an arowe or cast a
stone, with which he sleeth a man, he is an homicide. Al so if a woman by
negligence ouerlieth her child in her slepynge, it is homicide and deedly sin
Also when a man distourbleth conception of a child, and makes a woman either
bareyne by drinking of venymous herbs, thorough which she may not conceive,
or sletth a child by drynkes, or else puts certain material things in her
secre places to slay the child, or else does unkindly sin by which a man or
a woman shedeth her nature in manner or in a place there as a child may not be
conceived. Or else if so be that a woman has conceived, and hurts her self,
and by that myshap the child is slain yet it is homicide. What say we of
those women that murtheren her children for because of eschewynge of worldly
shame? Certes it is an horrible homicide. Homicide is also if a man approach to
a woman by desire of lecherye, thorough which the child is peryshed, or else
smyteth a woman wetyngly through which she leseth her child: All these been
homicides and horrible dedly sins. Yet come there of ire mo sins, as well
in word as in thought, and deed: As he that arretteth upon God, or blames god
of the thing of which he is him self gylty or dyspyseth God and all his
halowes, as done the cursed hasardours in diverse countries: This cursed sin
done they, when they feel in her heart full wyckedly of God and of his halowes.
Also when they treat irreverently the sacrament of the altar, that sin is
so great that uneath it may be released, but that the mercy of God passes al
his works it is so great and he so benygne. Then comes of ire an atterly
anger, when a man is sharpelye amoneshed in his shryfte to leave his sin:
Then woll he be angry and answer hokerlye and angerlye, or defend or excuse
his sin by unsteadfastness of his flesh, or else he did it for to hold
company with his fellows, or else he says the fend entyced him, or else
he does it for his youth, or else his complexion is so coragious that he may
not forbear, or else it is his destenye he says unto a certain age, or
else he says it comes him of ge^tylnesse of his au^cesters, and semblable
things. All these manner of folk so wrappe hem in her sins, that they ne
woll not deliver him self: For sothlye no wyghte that excuses him self
wylfullye of his sin, may not be delivered of his sin till that he mekelye
beknoweth his sin. After this then comes swearynge, that is express
against the commandment of God, and this befalls often of anger and of
ire. God says: Thou shalt not take the name of thy Lord God in vain or in
ydell. Also our Lord Jesus Christ says by the word of saint Mathewe: Ne
will ye not swear in all manner, neither by heaven, for it is gods trone, ne
by earth, for it is the benche of his feet, ne by Jerusalem, for it is the
city of a great king, ne by thine heed, for thou may not make an here
neither white ne black: but say by your word, yea yea, nay nay: and what
that is more, it is of yuell. Thus says Christ. For Christ's sake swear not
so synfullye in dysmembrynge of Christ: By soul, heart, bones, and body, for
certes it seems that ye think that the cursed Jews ne dysmembred not enough
the preciyous person of Christ, but ye dysmembre him more. And if so be that
the law compel you to swear, then rules you after the law of God in your
swearyng as says Jeremy the fourth chapter. Thou shalt keep three conditions,
thou shall swear in troth, in dome and in ryghtwysenesse, this is to say,
thou shalt swear sothe. For every lesynge is against Christ, for Christ is
very troth. And think well this that every great swearer not compelled
laufully to swear, the plage shall not depart fro his house while he uses such
unlawful swearynge. Thou shalt swear also in dome, when thou art constrained
by thy domes man to witness truth: Also thou shall not swear for envy,
neither for favor, neither for mede or reward, but only for righteousness
and for declarynge of it to the honor and worship of God, and to the
aydinge and help of thine even christen. And therefore every man that takes
gods name in ydel, or falselye swears with his mouth, or else takes on him
the name of Christ to be called a christen man, and lives against Christ's
living and his teaching, all they take gods name in ydell. Look also what
says saint Peter, Actuum. iiij. Capitu. Non est aliud nome^ sub celo. etc.
There is none other name says saint Peter under heaven give to men, in which
they may be saved, that is to say, but the name of Jesus Christ. Take heed eke
how precious is the name of Jesus Christ, as says saint Paul, ad
Philippenses secundo. In nomine Jesus. etc. That in the name of Jesus every knee
of heavenly creatures, earthlye, and of hell should bow, for it is so hye and
so worshypfull, that the cursed fend in hell should tremble to hear it named
Then seems it that men that swear so horriblye by his blessed name, that they
despise it more boldly then the cursed Jews, or else the dyuell that trembles
when he hears his name.

Now certes sith that swearyng, but if it be lawfullye done, is so hyelye
defended: much more is forswearynge falslye, and yet nedelesse.

What say we also of hem that delight hem in swearynge, and hold it a genterye
or a ma^ly deed to swear great oaths? And what of hem yt of very usage ne
cease not to swear great oaths, all be the cause not worth a straw? Certes
this is horrible sin. Swerynge suddenly is also a great sin. But let us go
now to that horrible sin swearynge of adiuration and coniuration, as done
these false enchau^tours or nigroma^cers in basyns full of water, or in a
bright swearde, in a cercle, in a fire, or in the sholderbone of a sheep? I can
not say but that they done cursedly and dampnably against Christ, and all the
faith of holy church.

What say we of hem yt believe on Deuinales, as by flyghte or by noise of birds
or of beestes, or by sort, by Geoma^cye, by dremes, by chyrkynge of doors or
crakynge of houses, by gnawynge of rattes, and such manner wretchedness*
Certes al these things ben defended by god and holy church, for which they
be^ accursed till they come to amendeme^t yt on such fylth set her belyue.
Charms for wou^des or maladye of men or of beestes, if they take any effect,
it may be perauenture that God suffers it, for folk should give the more
faith and reverence to his name.

Now woll I speak of leasynges which generally is false sygnifyaunce of word
in intent to dysceyue his even christen. Some lesynge is, of which there comes
none auau^tage to no wight, and some leasyng turns to the profit or ease of
o man, and to the damage of an other man. An other leasing is for to save his
life or his catell, which comes of delight for to lie, in which delight they
woll forge a long tale, and paynt it with al circumstaunces, where all the tale
of ye ground is false. Some leasing comes for he woll sustain his words:
Some leasyng comes of retchelesnesse without auyseme^t, and semblable things.
Let us now touch the vice of flaterye, which ne comes not gladlye but for
dread, or for couetyse. Flatterye is generally wronful praysynge. Flaterers
been the dyuels nouryces, that noryshe, his children with milk of losyngerye:
Forsooth Solomon says that Flatery is worse then detraction, for sometime
detractio^ makes an hauteyne man be the more humble, for he dredeth
detraction, but certes flaterye makes a man tenhaunce his heart and
countenance Flaterers be ye deuels enchau^tours, for they make a man to wene
him self be like, that he is not like. Those be like to Judas that betraye a
man to sell him to his enemy. Flaterers ben the dyuels chapleyns yt ever singe
Placebo. I reken flatery in the vices of ire for often time if a man be wroth
with another, then woll he flater some wyghte to sustain him in his quarrel.
Speak we now of such cursynge as comes of yrous heart Malyson generally
may be said every manner power of harm: Such cursing bereueth man fro the
raygne of God, as says saint Poule. And often time such cursyng wrongfully
returns again to him that curses, as byrd that turns again to his own
neste. And over all thing men ought eshewe to curse her children and give to
the deuel her engendrure as far forth as in hem is: certes it is great peril
and great sin. Let us then speak of chiding and reproach, which ben full
great wounds in ma^s heart, for they vnsowe the semes of frendshyp in man's
heart: for certes uneath may a man be plainly be accorded with him, that him
openly has reuyled and repreued, and dyslaundred: This is a full ghastly sin
as Christ says in the gospel. And take heed now that he that repreueth his
neighbor either he repreueth him by some harm of pain that he has upon
his body as mesell, crooked, harlot, or by some sin that he does. Now if he
repreue him by harm of pain, then turns the re^^efe to Jesus Christ: For
pain is send by the ryghtwyse sonde of God, and by his suffraunce, be it
meselry, meyme, or maladye: And if he repreue him uncharitably of sin as thou
holour, thou dronkelewe harlot, and so forth. Then pertayneth that to the
reioysynge of the deuell, which ever has joy yt men done sin. And certes
chiding may not come but of vylaynous heart, for after the haboundaunce of the
heart speaks ye mouth full often. And ye shall understand, that look by any
way when any man shall chastyse or correct another, that he beware from
chydyng or repryuynge: for truly but he beware, he may full lyghtlye quycken
the fire of anger and of wroth, which he should quench: And perauenture sleeth
him which he might chastyse with benignite. For as says Salomo^ The amiable
tongue is the tree of life, that is to say, of life spirituell. And sothlye a
dissolute tongue sleeth the spirits of him that repreueth, and also of him
which is repreued Lo, what says saint Augustyne: There is nothing so like
the dyuels child, as he which often chydeth.

A servant of God behooves not to chyde And though that chiding be a
vyllainous thing betwyxte all manner folk, yet it is certis most vncouenable
between a man and his wife, for there is never rest. And therefore says
Solomon: An house that is uncovered and droppynge and a chiding wife, ben a
like.

A man which is in a droppynge house in many places, though he eschew the
droppynge in one place, it droppeth on him in an other place: So fares it by a
chiding wife, if she chyde him in one place she woll chyde him in another: And
therefore better and greatly more plesaunt is a morsel or little gobet of bread
with joy, then an house filled full of delyces with chiding and guerrynge,
says Solomon. Saint Poule says: O ye women, beth ye subject to your
husbands, as you behooves and ought in God: And ye me^ loves your wives, ad
Colossenses.iij.

Afterward speak we of scornyng which is a wicked sin, and namely when he
scorneth a man for his good works: For certes such scorners fare like the
foul tode, that may not endure to smell ye sweet sauoure of the vine when it
flourysheth. These scorners been partynge fellows with the dyuell, for they
have joy when the dyuell wynneth, and sorrow if he leseth. They ben
adversaries of Jesus Christ, for they hate that he loves, that is to say,
salvation of soul.

Speak we now of wicked counsel, ye which is a traytoure, for he dysceyueth
him that trusts in him: Vt Achitofel ad Salomonem. But nathelesse, yet is his
wicked counsel first against him self, for as says the wise man: every
false living has this properte in him self, that he that wol anoye another
man, he anoyeth first him self. And men shall understand, that man shall not
take his counsel of false folk, ne of angrye folk, or grievous folk, ne of
folk that love specially to much worldly folk, namely in counsaylynge of
souls.

Now comes the sin of hem that sow and make dyscorde among folk, which
is a sin that Christ hates utterly, and no wonder is: for he deyde for to
make concord. And more shame do they to Christ then did they that him
crucified: For God loves better that friendship be among folk then he did
his own body, which that he gave for unite Therefore ben they lykened to the
dyuell that ever be about to make dyscorde. Now comes the sin of double
tongue, such as speak fair before folk, and wyckedly behind, or else they make
semblau^t as though they spak of good entencion, or else in game and play, and
yet they speak of wicked intent.

Now comes hewrayenge of counsel, through which a man is dyffamed: Certes
uneath may he restore the damage. Now comes menace, that is an open folly,
for he that often menaceth, he threateth more then he may perform full often
time. Now comes ydell words, that is without profit of him that speaks
the words, and also of him that herkeneth the words: Or else ydel words ben
those that been nedelesse or with out intent of natural profit. And all be it
that ydell words be sometime venyall sin yet should men doubt hem, for we
shall give reckoning of hem before God. Now comes jangling that may not be
without sin. And as says Solomon: it is a sign of a perte folly. And
therefore a philosopher said when men asked him how that he should please the
people, he answerde: Do many good works and speak few vanities. After this
comes the sin of iaperies, that been ye deuels apes, for they make folk to
laughe at her iaperye, as folk do at the gaudes of an ape: which iapes
defends saint Paul. Look how that virtuous words and holy comfort hem
that travail in the service of Christ: Right so comfort the villaynous
words and knackes of iapers hem, that travail in the service of the deuell.
These been the sins of the tongue, that come of ire and of other sins.

The remedy against Ire
THe remedy against Ire, is a virtue that men call Mansuetude, that is
Debonairie, and also another virtue that men clepe Patience or sufferaunce.
Debonayrte wythdraweth and refrayneth the stee rings and mouynges of man's
courage in heart, in such manner that they ne skyppe not out by anger ne ire.
Sufferaunce suffers swetely all the anoyaunces and wrongs ye men done to man
outward. Saint Jerome says this of debonairte, yt it does no harm to no
wight, ne says: ne for no harm that men do ne say, he ne chafeth against
reason. This virtue sometime comes of nature: for as says the philosopher, A
man is a quycke thing by nature, debonayre and tretable to goodness: but when
debonairte is informed of grace, then it is the more worth.

Patience is another remedy against ire, and is a virtue that suffers swetely
every man's goodness, and is not wroth for no harm that is done to him. The
philosopher says that patience is the virtue that suffers debonairly all the
outrages of aduersite, and every wicked word. This virtue makes a man like
to God, and makes him gods own child: as says Christ. This virtue
dyscomfyteth thine enemy. And therefore says the wise man: If thou would
vanquyshe thine enemy learn to suffer. And thou shalt understand that a man
suffers four manner of greuaunces in outward things, against the which four
he must have four manner of paciences.

The first greuaunce is of wicked words which suffered Jesus Christ without
grutchynge full patiently, when the Jews despised him full often. Suffer thou
therefore patiently, for the wise man says: If thou strive with a fool,
though ye fool be wroth or though he laugh, always thou shalt have no rest.
That other greuaunce outward is to have damage of thy catell: There against
suffered Christ full patiently, when he was d^spoyled of all that he had in this
life, and that was but his clothes. The third greuaunce is a man to have harm
in his body: That suffered Christ full patiently in all his passion The fourth
greuaunce is in outrageous labor in works* wherefore I say, that folk that
make her servants to travail to greuouslye or out of time, as in holy days,
sothly they do great sin. Here against suffered Christ full patiently, and
taught us patience when he bare upon his blessed shoulders the cross, upon
which he should suffer dyspytous death. Here may men learn to be pacie^t, for
certes not only Christen be paciente for love of Jesus Christ, and for reward of
blessed life that is perdurable, but certes the old paynems that never were
christened, commended and used the virtue of patience. A philosopher upon a
time that would have beat his dysciple for his great trespace, for which he
was moved, and brought a rod to beat the child and when this child saw the
rod, he said to his master: what think ye to do? I woll beat the said the
master for thy correction. Forsooth said the child, ye ought first correct
your self that have lost al your patience for the offense of a child. Forsooth
said the master all weeping, thou say soth: Have thou the rod my dear
child, and correct me for mine impacience. Of patience comes obedience,
through which a man is obediente to Christ and to al hem to which he ought be
obedient in Christ. And understand well that obedience is perfyte when that a
man does glad lie and hastily with good heart entierlye, all that he should do.
Obedience generally is to perform the doctrine of God and of his so
ueraygnes, to which him ought to be obeysaunt in all righteousness.

De Accidia.
AFter the sins of Envy and ire, now woll I speak of the sin of Accidie:
for envy blinds the heart of a man, and ire troubles a man and accidie
makes him heavy, thoughtfull and pensyfe. Envy and ire maken bytternesse in
heart* which bytternesse is mother of accidie and takes fro him the love of al
goodness, the^ is accidie the anguyshe of trouble of heart. And saint
Augustyne says: It is anoye of goodness and anoye of harm. Certes this is a
dampnable sin, for it does wrong to Jesus Christ, in as much as it beno^meth
the service that men ought do to Christ, as says Solomon: but accidie does
no such diligence. He does all thing with anoye and with wrawnesse,
slacknesse, and excusation: with ydelnesse and unlust.

For which the book says: Acursed be he that does the service of god
negligently. The^ is accidie enemy to every estate of man. For certes the
state of man is in three manners.

Either it is in the estate of Innocence, as was the estate of Adam before that
he fill in to sin, in which estate he was hold to work, as in praysynge and
lauding God. And there estate is ye estate of sinful me^: in which estate men
been holden to labor in prayenge to God for amendment of her sins, and
that he woll grant hem to rise out of her sins.

Another estate is the state of grace, in which state he is holden to works
of penitence: and certes to all these things is accidie contrary, for he
loves no business at all. Now certes, this foul sin accidie is also a
full great enemy to the lyfelode of the body, for it ne has no purueyaunce
against te^porel necessite, for it forswoleth, forslogeth, and destroys al
goods temporel by rechelesnesse. The iiij. thing is, that accidie is like hem
ye been in the pain of hell, because of her sloth and heaviness: for they that
be dampened been so bound, that they may neither well do ne think. Of accidie
comes first that a man is anoyed and encombred to do any goodness, and makes
ye God has abhominacion of such accidie, as says saint John. Now comes
sloth that wol not suffer no hardness ne penance: for sothly sloth is so
teder and so delycate, as says Solomon, that he woll suffer no hardness ne
penance, and therefore he marreth all that he does. Against this rotten sin of
accidie and sloth, should men exercise hem self and use hem to do good
works: and ma^ly and virtuously catch courage to do, thyn king that our Lord
Jesus Christ quyteth every good deed, be it never so lyte. Usage of labor is a
great thing. For it makes as says saint Bernard, ye labourer to have strong
arms and hard senewes: and sloth makes heuye, feeble, and tender. Then
comes dread to begin to work any good works. For certes he that enclyneth
to sin, him thinks it is so great an empryse for to undertake the works of
goodness, and casts in his heart, that the circumstaunces of goodness been
so greuouse and weyghtye for to suffer, that he dare not undertake to do works
of goodness, as says saint Gregorye.

Now comes wanhope, that is dyspayre of the mercy of God, that comes
sometime of to much outrageous sorrow, and sometime of to much dread, ymaginynge
that he has do so much sin, that it wol not avail him tho he would repent
him and forsake sin: thorough which dyspayre or dread, he abandoneth al his
heart to every manner sin, as says saint Augustyne. Which dampnable sin,
if it continue unto his end, it is called synnynge in the holy ghost.

This horrible sin is so peryllous, that he that is dyspayred there nys no
felony ne no sin that he douteth for to do, as showed well by Judas. Certes
above al sins then is this sin most dyspleasaunt to Christ and most
adversary. Sothly he that dyspayreth him is like to the cowarde champion
recreaunt, that flies without need. Alas alas, nedeles is he recreau^t, and
nedelesse dyspayreth. Certes the mercy of God is ever ready to the penitent
person, and is above al his works. Alas can not a man bethynke him on the
gospel of saint Luke. xv. where as Christ says, that as well shall there be
joy in heaven upon a sinful man that does penitence, as upon four score and
nynetene ryghtful me^ that need no penitence. Look ferther in the same gospel
the joy and ye feast of the good man that had lost his son, when his son
with repentance was returned to his father. Can they not remember hem also,
that (as says saint Luke) capi. xxx. How that the thief that was hanged
beside Jesus Christ said: Lord remember me, when thou come in to thy reygne.
Forsooth said Christ, I say to the: To day shalt thou be with me in paradyse.
Certes, there is none so horrible sin of man, that ne may in his life be
dystroyed by penitence, thorough virtue of passion and of the death of Christ.
Alas what need men then to be dyspayred, sith that his mercy is so ready and
large? Ask and have. Then comes sompnolence, that is sluggye slombrynge,
which makes a man heavy and dull in body and in soul, and this sin comes
of sloth: And certes the time that by way of reason man should not sleep, is
by ye morrow, but if there were cause reasonable. For sothely the morrow tide
is most couenable a man to say his prayers, and for to thank God, and to
honor God, and to give alms to the poor, that comes first in the name of
Jesus Christ. Lo, what says Salomo^? who so woll by the morrow awake to seek
me, he shall find me. Then comes negligence or retchelesnesse, that recketh
of nothing. And though that ignorance be mother of al harms, certes
negligence is the noryce. Negligence ne does no force when he shall do a
thing, whether he do it well or evil. The remedy of these two sins is, as
says the wise man: That he that dredeth God spares not to do that he ought
to do, and he that loves god he woll do dylyge^ce to please god by his works,
and aba^done him self with al his might well for to do. The^ comes ydelnesse,
that is the yate of all harms. An ydell man is like to a place that has no
walls, ye dyuell may enter on every side, or shote at him that is dyscouert,
by temptation on every side. This ydelnesse is the thorruke of all wicked and
vylayne thoughts, and of al ordure. Certes the heaven is give to hem that will
labor, and not to ydell folk. Also David says, that they ne be not in the
labor of men, ne they shall not be whypped with men. Certes then seems it
they shall be turmented with the dyuels in hell, but if they do penance.

Then comes the sin that me^ call Tarditas, as when a man is so latered, or
tarienge or he woll turn to god: and certes that is a great folly. He is like
him that falls in the dyche, and woll not arise. And this vice comes of
false hope, that he thinks he shall live long, but that hope fails full
often.

Then comes lachesse, that is he that when he begins any good work, anon
he wol leave and stynte it, as done they that have any person to govern, and
ne take of him no more head, anon as they find any contrary or any anoye.
These ben the new sheperdes that let their sheep wyttyngly go renew to ye
wolf that is in the breres, or do not force of her own governance. Of this
comes pouerte and destruction both of spiritual and temporell things. Then
comes a manner coldness that freseth the heart of man. Then comes vndeuotion,
through which a man is so blont, and as says saint Bernarde, has such
langour in his soul, that he may neither read ne sing in holy church, ne here
ne think of no devotion, ne travail with his hands in no good work, that it
nys to him unsavory and al apalled. Then wareth he slow and slombry and sone
wol be wroth and sone is enclyned to hate and envy. Then comes the sin of
worldly sorrow, such as is called Tristitia, that sleeth a man, as says saint
Poule. For certes such sorrow works the death of the soul and body also, for
thereof comes that a man is anoyed of his own life. wherefore such sorrow
shorteth full often the life of man, er that his time is come by way of kind.

Remedium contra peccatum Accidie.
Against this horrible sin of Accidie, and the branches of the same, there is
a virtue that is called Fortitudo or strength, that is an affection, through
which a man dispyseth anoycus things: This virtue is so mighty and so
rygorous, that it dare withstonde mightily, and wisely keep him self fro
perils that been wicked, and wrastel against thassautes of the dyuel, for it
enhaunceth and enforces the soul, right as accidie abateth and makes it
feeble: for this fortitude may endure by long suffraunce the trauayles that been
couenable. This virtue has many speces, the first is called Magnanimite,
that is to say, great courage. For certes there behooves great courage against
accidie, lest that it ne swalowe ye soul by the sin of sorrow, or distroye
it by wanhope. Certes this virtue makes folk under take hard and grievous
things by her own will wisely and resonably. And for as much as the devil
fyghteth against a man more by subtylte and sleyght than by strength, therefore
shall a man wythstonde him by wit, reason, and discretion. Tha^ are there the
virtues of faith and hope in God and in his saints, to eschew and
accomplisshe the good works, in the which he purposes fermely to continue.
Than comes surety or sykernesse, and that is when a man ne douteth no
traueyle in time coming, of the good works that he has begone. Than comes
Magnifycence, that is to say, when a man does and parformeth great works of
goodness that he has begone, and that is the end why that men should do good
works. For in the accomplishyng of good works, lies the great guerdon. Tha^
is there Constance, that is stablenesse of courage, and this should be in heart
by steadfast faith, and in mouth, in be^ynge, in chere, and in deed. Also
there ben mo special remedies against accidie, in diverse works: as in
co^syderatyo^ of ye pains of hell, the joys of heaven, and in trust of the
grace of the holy ghoost, that will give him might to perform his good intent.

De Auaricia.
AFter Accidie woll I speak of Avarice, and of couetyse. Of which syn saint
Poule says the rote of al harms is couetyse, ad Timoth. vi. For sothly when
the heart of man is confounded in it self and troubled, and that the soul has
lost the confort of god, than seeks he an ydell solace of worldly things.
Avarice, after the discryption of saint Augustyn, is a lycorousnesse in heart to
have erthly things. Some other folk say, that auaryce is for to purchase
many erthely things, and nothing to give to hem that have need.

And understand that avarice sto^deth not only in land ne catel, but sometime
in science and glory, and in every manner of outrageous things is Auaryce.
And couetyse is this. Couetyse is for to coueit such things that thou have
not. And avarice is to with hold and keep such things as thou haste without
right. Sothly this avarice is a sin that is full da^pnable, for all holy writ
curses it, and speaks against ye vice, for it does wrong to Jesus christ: for
it takes fro him the love that men to him owe, and tourneth it backward
against al reason, and makes that the auarycious man has more hoope in his
catell, than in Jesus Christ, and does more obseruaunce in keeping of his
treasour, than he does in the service of Jesus Christ. And therefore says
saint Poule, ad Ephesios quinto: That an auarycious man is the thraldom of
idolatrye. What dyfference is there betwyxt an ydolaster and an auaricyous man?
But that an ydolaster perauenture ne has not but a mawmet or two, and the
auaricious man has many. For certes every floreyn in his co^re, is his maumet.
And certes the sin of maumetry is the first that God defended, as in the.x.
commau^dements it bears witness, in Exodi Capitu. xx. Thou shalt have no
false gods before me, ne thou shalt make to the no grave thing. Thus is an
auaricious man, that loves his treasour before God, an idolaster. And through
this cursed sin of Auyryce and Couetyse, comes these hard lordeshyppes,
through which they ben streyned by tyllages, customs, and cariages, more than
her duetye or reason is, or else take they of her bondmen amercyamentes,
which might more resonablye be called extortions than mercyamentes. Of which
amerciamentes or raunsomynge of bondmen, some lords stewardes say that it is
rightful, for as much as a churl has no temporel thing, that it ne is his
lords, as they say. But certes these lordshyppes do wrong, that bereue their
bondmen things that they never yaue hem. Augustinus de Ciuitate dei. Libro.
ix. Sothe is, that the condition of thraldom, and the first cause of thraldom
was for sin.

Thus may ye se, that thoffence deserved thraldom, but not nature. Wherefore
these lords ne should not much glorifye hem in her lordeshyps, sithe that
they by natural co^dycion ben not lords over thralles, but for that thraldom
came first by the deserte of sin. And more over there as the law says, that
temporel goods of bond folk ben the goods of her lord: ye, that is for to
understand, the goods of the Emperor, to defend hem in her right, but not
to rob hem ne reave hem. Therefore says Seneca: thy prudence should live
benygnly with ye thralles. Those that thou call thy thralles, ben gods
people: and for humble people ben Christ's friends, they ben contubernyall with
the lords. Think also that of such sede as chorles spring, of such sede
spryng lords: as well may the chorle be saved as the lord. The same death that
takes the chorle, such death takes the lord. Wherefore I read do right so
with the chorle as thou would that thy lord did with the if thou were in his
plyght. Every synful man is a chorle to syn: I read the lord certes, that thou
work in such wise with thy chorles, that they rather love the tha^ dread the.
I wot well that there is degree above degree, as reason is, and skyll is that
men do her deuoyre there as it is due: But certes extorcions and dispyte of
your underlings is dampnable. And ferthermore understand well, that these
conquerours or tyrauntes make full often thralles of hem that been borne of as
royal blood as ben they that hem conquer. This name of thraldom was never
erst know, till that Noe said that his son Canam should be thral to his
brethern for his sin. What say we than of he^ that pyl and do extorcions to
holy church: Certes the sword that men give first to a knight, when he is
new dubbed, sygnyfyeth that he should defend holy church, and not rob and
pyl it, and who so does he is traitor to Christ. And as says saint Austyn,
they ben the dyuels woulues that strangle the sheep of Jesus christ, and done
worse than woulues for sothely when the woulfe has full his womb, he
stynteth to strangle sheep: But sothlye the pyllours and dystroyers of holy
church goods ne do not so, for they ne stynte never to pyll. Now as I have
said, sithe so is that sin was first cause of thraldom than is it thus,
that at the time that all this world was in sin, tha^ was all this world in
thraldom and in subjection, but certes sith the time of grace came, god
ordained yt some folk should be more hye in estate and in degree, and some
folk more low, and that each should be served in his astate. And therefore in
some countries there they be thralles, wha^ they have turned hem to ye faith,
they make her thralles free out of thraldom, and therefore certes the lord
owes to his man that the man owes to the lord. The pope calls him self
servant of the servants of God, but for as the estate of holy church ne
might not have been, ne the comen profit might not have be kept, ne peace ne
rest in earth, but if god had ordained that some man had hier degree and some
men lower. Therefore was soueraynte ordained to keep, maintain, and defend her
underlings and her subjects in reason, as ferforth as it lies in her power,
and not to distroye ne confound hem. Wherefore I say, that those lords that been like wolves that devour the possessions or the catel of poor folks
wrongfully, with out mercy or mesure, they shall receive be the same mesure yt
they have mesured to poor folk, the mesure of Jesus Christ but it be amended.
Now comes disceyte betwixt merchant and merchant. And thou shall
understand that marchaundyse is in two manners, that one is bodily, and that
other is goostly: that one is honest and leful and that other is dishonest and
unlawful.

The bodily marchaundyse that is lefull and honest is this: that there as god
has ordained that a reygne or a countreye is suffysau^t to him self, than it
is honest and lefull that of haboundaunce of his country, men help an other
country that is nedy: And therefore there must be merchau^tes to bring fro one
country to that other her marchaundyse.

That other marchaundyse that me^ haunten with fraud, and trecherye, and
disceyte, with leasynges and false oaths, is right cursed and dampnable.
Espirituel marchaundyse is properly Symonye, that is ententife desire to bye
any thing espyrituel, that is a thing which apertayneth to the sayntuarye of
God, and to cure of the soul. This desire if so be that a man do his dilygence
to perform it, al be it that his desire ne take non effect, yet it is to him
a deedlye sin, and if he be ordered, he is irreguler. Certes symonye is called
of Simon Magus, that would have bought for temporell catell the yefte that God
had give by the holy ghost to saint Peter and to the Apostels: And therefore
understand that he that sells and he that byethe things espyrituels, ben
called Symonyakes, be it by catell, be it by procuring or by fleshly prayer of
his friends, fleshly friends or espyrituell friends, flesshly in two manners, as
by kynred or other friends: Sothlye if they pray for him that is not worthy
and able, it is symonye if he take the benefice, and if he be worthy and able
there is none. That other manner is when man or woman prays for folk to
auaunce hem only for wicked fleshly affection, which they have unto the
persons, and that is foul symonye. But certes in service, for which men yeuen
things espyrituel unto her servants it must be understand that the service
must be honest, or else not, and also that it be without bargeynyng, and that
the person be able. For as says saint Damasen: All the sins of the world at
regard of this sin, are as a thing of naught, for it is the greatest sin
that may be after the sin of Lucifer and of Antichrist: For by this sin God
forleseth the church and the soul which he bought with his precious blood,
by hem that give churches to hem that be^ not worthy, for they put in thieves
hondes that steal the souls of Jesus Christ, and distroy his patrimony. By
such unworthy priests and curates have lend men less reverence of the
sacraments of holy church, and such yeuers of churches put the children of
Christ out, and put in the church the dyuels own sons: they sell the souls
that lambs should keep to the wolf which strangleth hem, and therefore shall
they never have part of the pasture of lambs, that is the bliss of heaven.
Now comes hasardrie with his apertenauntes, as tables and rafles, of which
comes disceyte, false oaths, chydynges, and al rauynesse, blasphemynges, and
renyenges of God, and hate of his neighbors, waste of goods, myspendynge of
time, and sometime manslaughter. Certes hasardours ne mow not be without great
sin. Of avarice comes also lesynges theft, false witness, and false oaths:
and ye shall understand that these be great sins, and express against the
commandments of God, as I have said. False witness is in word, and also in
deed: In word as for to byreue thy neighbors good name by thy false
witness, or byreue him his catel or his heritage, by thy false wytnessyng,
wha^ thou for ire or for mede, or for envy, bear false witness, or
accusest him, or excusest thy self falsely. Ware ye questmongers and notaries:
Certes for false wytnessynge was Susan in full great sorrow and pain, and many
another mo. The syn of theft is also express against gods hest, and in two
manners, corporell and spirituel, the temporel theft is: As for to take thy
neighbors catel against his will, be it by force or by sleight, be it by met
or by mesure by stealing also of false endytementes upon him and in borowyng
of thy neighbors catell, in intent never to pay it again, and semblable
things. Espyrituel theft is sacrylege, that is to say, hurtyng of holy
things sacred to Christ in two manners, by reason of the holy place, as
churches or church yerdes For which every villaynous sin that men don in
such places may be called sacrylege, or every vyolence in the semblable
places. Also that they withdraw falsely the rightes that long to holy
church and pleasynge. And generally sacrilege is to reave holy thing fro holy
place, or unholy thing out of holy place, or holy thing out of unholy place.

Releuatio contra peccatum Auaricie.
How shall ye understand, that releuynge of avarice is misericorde and pity
largely taken. And men might ask why that misericorde and pity are releuyng of
avarice: Certes the auaricious man shows no pity ne misericorde to the
nedeful man. For he delyteth him in the keeping of his treasure, and not in the
rescuynge ne releuynge of his even christen. And therefore speak I first of
mysericorde. Than is mysericorde (as says the Philosopher) A virtue, by
which the courage of man is stered, by ye mysease of him that is myseased. Upon
which mysericorde follows pity, in performyng and fulfilling of charitable
works of mercy, helps and comfort him that is myseased. And certes these
things move and stere a man to mysericorde of Jesus christ that he yaue him
self for our offense, and suffered death for mysericorde, and forgave us our
original sins, and thereby released us fro the pains of hell, and mynished the
pains by penitens, and yeueth grace well to do, and at last the bliss of
heaven. The speces of mysericorde ben for to lene, and also for to give: for to
foryeue and releace, and for to have pity in heart and compassyo^, of the
mischefe of his even christen, and also to chastyse there as need is. Another
manner of remedy against Auaryce, is reasonable largess: but sothlye here
behooves the consyderacyon of the grace of Jesus Christ, and of the temporell
goods, and also of the goods perdurable that Jesus Christ yafe to us, and to
have remembrance of the death which he shall receive, he knows not when
where, ne how: and also that he shall forgo all that he has, save only that
which he has expended in good works.

But for as much as some folk been unmeasurable, men ought for to avoid and
eschew folyshe largess, the which some people call waste.

Certes he that is fool large, yeueth not his catel, but he leseth his catel?

Sothlye what thing that he yeueth for veynglorye, as to mynstrels and to
folk to bear his renome in the world, he has sin thereof and none alms:
Certes he leseth foul his good that he ne seeks with the yefte of his good
nothing but sin. He is like to an horse that seeks rather to drink drouy or
troubled water than for to drink water of the clear well. To hem apperteyne^
the said cursings, that Christ shall give at the day of dome, to hem that shall
be dampened.

Sequitur de Gula.
AFter Auaryce comes Gloteny, which is express against the commandment of
god. Gloteny is vnntesurable appetyte to eete or to drink, or else to do enough
to the unmeasurable appetyte and disordeyned couetyse to eat or to drink. This
sin corrupts all this world, as is well showed in the sin of Adam and of
Eve. Look also what says saint Poule of glotenye. Many (says he) gone, of
which I have often said to you, and now I say it weeping, that been the
enemies of the cross of Christ, of which the end is death, and of which her
womb is her god and her glory, in confusyon of hem that so devour erthly
things. He that is used to this sin of gloteny, he ne may no sin
withstonde, he must be in seruage of al vices, for it is the dyuels hourde,
there he hydeth and rests him. This sin has many speces: The first is
dronkenesse that is the horrible sepulture of man's reason: and therefore when man
is drunk he has lost his reason: And this is deedly sin. But sothly when
that a man is not wont to strong drink, and parauenture ne knows not ye
strength of the drink, or has feblesse in his heed, or has trauayled,
through which he drinks the more, al be he suddenly caught with drink, it is
no deedly sin, but venyal. The second spece of glotenye is, that the spyrite
of a man wexeth al troubled, for dronkenesse byreneth him the discretion of his
wit.

The third manner spece of glotonye is when a man deuoureth his meat, and has
not ryghtful manner of eetyng. The fourth is when through the great abundaunce
of his meet, the humors in his body ben distempred. The fyfth is
foryetfulnesse by to much drynkyng, for which sometime a man forgets er the
morning what he did on the euenyng before.

In other manner ben distyncte the speces of glotenye after saint Gregory. The
first is For to eat before time to eat. The second is wha^ a man gives him
to delycate meat or drink. The third is when men take to much over measure.
The fourth is curiosyte, with great intent to make and appareyle his meat.
The fyfthe is for to eat to gredely.

These ben the five fyngers of the dyuels hand, by which he draws solke to
sin.

The remedy against Glotony.
Against glotony the remedy is abstyne^ce, as says Galyene: but that I hold
not meritorious, if he do it for the heal of his body. Saint Augustyne woll
that abstynence be done for virtue, and with patience. Abstinence (says he) is
little worth but if a man have good will thereto, and but if he be enforced by
patience and charity, and that men do it for gods sake, and in hope to have
the bliss of heaven.

The fellows of abstynence be attemperaunce, that holds the mean in all
things. Also shame that escheweth all dishonestye. Suffysaunce that seeks no
rich meats ne drynkes, ne does not force of outragi^^g appareylyng of meat.
Mesure also, that restreyneth by reason, the unmeasurable appetyte of eating.
Soberness also, that restrayneth the outrage of drink. Sparynge also, that
restrayneth ye delycate ease to sytte long at meat, wherefore some folk
stonden of her own will when they eete, because they wol eat at less leysar.

De Luxuria.
AFter Glotonye comes Lecherye, for these two sins been so nigh cosyns, that
oftyme they wol not depart. God wot this sin is full displesaunt to god, for
he said him self: do no lecherye. And therefore he puts great pains against
this sin.

For in the old law, if a woman thrall were take in this sin, she should be
beat with staves to death. And if she were a gentylwoman she should be slain
with stones. And if she were a bishops daughter, she should be brent by gods
commandment.

Moreover by the sin of lecherye, God drowned all the world and after that he
brent five cytees with thunder and lightnyng, and sanke hem in to hell.

Now let us speak than of the said stynking sin of lechery, that men call
auowtrye of wedded folk, that is to say, if that one of hem be wedded or else
both.

Saint Johan says, that auoutrers shall be in hell in a stacke brennynge of
fire and of brimstone for the stenche of her ordure: Certes the brekynge of
this sacrament is an horrible thing: It was made of God him self in paradyse,
and confermed by Jesus Christ, as witnesses saint Mathewe in the gospel: A man
shall leave father and mother and take him to his wife, and they shall be two in
one flesh.

This sacrament betokens the knyttyng together of Christ and holy church.
And not only that god forbade auoutrye in deed, but also he commanded that
thou should not coueyte thy neighbors wife. In this heste says saint
Augustyne is forboden all manner couetyse to do lecherye. Lo, what says saint
Mathewe in the gospel, that who so sees a woman to couetyse of his lust he
has done lecherye with her in his heart. Here may ye se that not only the deed
of this sin is forboden, but also the desire to that sin. This cursed sin
anoyeth greuouslye hem that it haunte: and first to her soul, for he oblygethe
it to sin and to pain of death, which is perdurable. Unto the body anoyeth
it grievously also, for it dries him and wastes, and shenteth him, and of his
blood he makes sacryfyce to the fend of hell: It wastes his catell and his
substance. And certes if it be a foul thing a man to waste his catell on
women: yet it is a fouler thing when that for such ordure women dispende upon
men her catell and her substance. This sin as says the Prophet, takes
from man and woman her good fame and her honor, and it is full delectable and
pleasant to the dyuell. For thereby wynneth he the more part of this wretched
world. And right as a merchant delyteth him most in that chaffare which he
has most advantage and profit of, right so delyteth ye fend in this ordure.

This is that other hand of the dyuel, with five fyngers, to catch the people
to his vilanye. The first is the folyshe lokynge of the folyshe woman and of
the folysshe man, that sleeth right as the Basilycock or cokatryce sleeth folk
by venym of his sight: for the couetyse of the eyes follows the couetyse of ye
heart. The second fyngre is the vilaynous touching in wicked manner. And
therefore says Solomon: that who so touches and handles a woman, he fares as
that man that handles the scorpyon, which styngeth and suddenly sleeth
through his enuenemyng, or as who so that touches warm pytche blemysheth his
fyngers. The third is foul words, which fares like fire, which right anon
brenneth the heart. The fourth finger is the kissing: And truly he were a
great fool that would kiss the mouth of a brennyng oven or of a forneys. And
more fools ben they that kiss in vilanye, for that mouth is the mouth of
hell, and namely these old dotardes holours, which woll kiss and flicker, and
besye hem self though they may naught do. Certes they ben like to hounds:
For an hounde when he comes nigh to the rosere, or by other benches, though so
be that he may not pysse, yet woll he heue up his leg and make a
countenance to pysse. And for that many man weneth that he may not sin for
no lycorousnesse that he does with his wife. Truly that oppynyon is false:
God wot a man may slay him self with his own knyfe, and make him self
drunk of his own tonne. Certes be it wife, be it child or any worldly
thing, that he loves before God, it is his maumet, and be is an ydolaster. A
man should love his wife by discrecyon, patiently and attemperatlye, and than
is she as though it were his suster. The fyfthe fyngre of the dyuels hand is
the stynkynge deed of lecherye. Truly the five fyngers of glotonye the dyuell
puts in to the womb of a man: And with his five fyngers of lecherye he
grypeth him by ye reins for to throw him in to the furneys of hell, there as
they shall have the fire and the worms that ever shall last, and weeping and
waylynge, and sharp hungre and thirst, grymnesse of dyuels, which shall al to
trede hem withouten end. Of lecherye as I said sourdeth and springs diverse
speces: As fornycacyon, that is between man and woman which be not married and
is deedly syn, and against nature: All that is enemy and destruction to nature
is against nature. Perfay the reason of a man tells him well also that it is
deedly sin, for as much as god forbade lecherye. And saint Poule yeueth hem
the reygne that nis dew to no wight but to hem that done deedly sin. An
other sin of lecherye is to byreue a maids maydenhede, for he that so does,
certes he casts a maiden out of the highest degree that is in this present
life, and byreueth her that precious fruit that the book calls the hundred
fruits I ne can say it none other wise in English, but in Latin it hight
(Centesimus fruct^^^.) Certes he that so does is cause of many damages and
vilanyes, mo than any man can reken: right as he is cause of many damages
sometime that beestes do in the field, that break the hedge or the closure,
through which he distroyeth that may not be restored: For certes no more may
maiden head be restored than an arm that is smytte fro the body ^u^y return
again and were: She may have mercy, this wot I well, if that she have well to do
penitence, but never shall it be that she nas corrupt. And all be it so yt I
have spaike somewhat of auoutry, also it is good to show the perils that long
to auoutrye, for to eschew that foul sin. Auoutrye in latin is for to say,
approchynge of an other man's bed, through which those that sometime were
one flesh, abandon her bodies to other persons. Of this sin as says the
wise man follow many harms: First breaking of faith, and certes in faith
is the keye of christendom: and when that faith is broke and lost, sothly
christendom stout veyneard without fruit. This sin is also theft, for theft
generally is to reave a wight his thing against his will. Certes this is the
foulest theft that may be, when that a woman steals her body fro her
husbonde and yeueth it to her holour to defoyle her, and steals her soul fro
Christ, and yeueth it to the dyuell: This is a fouler theft than for to break
a church and steal away the chalyce, for these auouterers break the temple of
god spyrituellye, and steal the vessel of grace, that is the body and the
soul: For which Christ shall distroye hem, as says saint Paul. Sothlye of
this theft doubted greatly Joseph, when that his Lords wife prayed him of
vylanye, when he said: Lo my Lady how my Lord has take to me under my
ward, all that he has in this world, ne nothing of his things is out of
my power, but only ye that be his wife: and how should I than do this
wickedness and syn so horrible against God, and against my lord God it forbede.
Alas, all to little is such truth now found. The third harm is the
fylthe, through which they break the commandment of God, and defoyle the
outer of matrymonye, that is Christ. For certes in so much as the sacrament
of marriage is so noble and so digne, so much is it greater sin for to break
it: For God made marriage in Paradyse in the estate of innocencye, to multiply
mankind in the service of God, and therefore is the breaking thereof the more
grievous, of which breking come false heirs often time, that wrongfullye
occupye folks heritages, and therefore wol Christ put hem out of the reygne of
heaven, that is heritage to good folk. Of this breakyng comes also often time
that folk unware wedde or sin with her own kyn^ed: and namely these
harlottes that haunte bordels of these foul women, that may be ^ekened to a
comune gonge, where as men pourge her ordure. what say we also of putours, that
live by the horrible sin of putrye, and constreyne women to give to hem a
certain rent of her bodyly putery, ye sometime of his own wife or his
child, as done these baudes: Certes these been cursed sins. Understand also
that auoutrie is set gladlye in the ten commandments between theft and
man slaughter, for it is the greatest thrft yt may be, for it is theft of
body and of soul, and it is like to homicide for it kerueth a two and breketh
a two hem that first were made of one flesh. And therefore by the old law of
God they should be slain, but nathlesse by ye law of Jesus Christ that is law
of pytye, when he said to the woman that was fond in auoutrye, and should
have be slain with stones after the will of the Jews, as was her law: Go
said Jesus Christ, and have no more will to do sin. Sothly the vengeance of
auoutrye is awarded to the pains of hell, but if so be that it be distourbed
by penitence. Yet been there mo speces of this cursed sin, as when that one
of hem is relygyouse or else both, or of folk that been entered in to order,
as subdeaken, deaken, or Preeste, or hospitaliers. And ever the hyer that he is
in order, the greater is the sin. The things that greatly agredge her sin
is the breaking of her auow of chastity wha^ they received the order. And more
over sothe is that holy order is chief of all the treasorye of God and his
especial sign and maike of chastity, to show that they ben joined to
chastity, which is the most precious life that is: and these ordered folk
been specially titled to God and of the special meyne of God, for which when
they done deedly sin they been traytoures of God and of his people, for they
live of the people. Priests ben angels as by dignetie of her misterye, but
forsooth saint Paul says yt Sathanas transfourmeth him in an angel of light.
Sothly the priest that haunteth deedly sin, he may be lykened to the angel
of derkenesse, transfourmed in the angel of light, he seems angel of light,
but forsooth he is angel of derkenesse. Such priests be the sons of Helye,
as shows in the book of kings, that they were the sons of Beliall, that is
the dyuell. Beliall is to say without judge and so fare they, hem thinks
they be free and have no judge, no more than has a free bulle that takes
which cow that him lyketh in the town. So fare they by women, for right as
one free bulle is enough for all a town, right so is a wicked preeste
corruption enough for all a paryshe, or for all a country: These priests, as
says the book ne can not ministre the mystery of presthode to the people, ne
they know not God, they ne held hem not apayed, as says the book of sodeyne
flesh that was to hem offered, but they took by force the flesh that was
raw. Certes, so that these shrewes ne held hem not apayed of roasted and sodde
flesh, with which the people fed hem in great reverence, but they wol have
raw flesh of folks wives and her daughters, and certes these women yt
co^sente to her harlotry done great wrong to Christ and to holy church, al
halowes, and al souls, for they byreue al these hem that should worship
Christ, and holy church, and pray for christen souls, and therefore have
such priests and her lem man's also that consent to her lecherye, the cursing
of all the court christen, til they come to amendment. The third spece of
auoutrye is sometime betwixt a man and his wife, and that is when they take no
regard in her assemblynge, but only to her fleshly delight, as says saint
Jerome, and ne reken of nothing but that they ben assembled because they ben
married, al is good enough, as they think: but in such folk has the dyuell
power, as said the angel Raphaell to Tobye, for in her assemblyng they put
Jesus Christ out of her heart, and give her self to all ordure. The fourth
spece is the assemble of hem that been of affinity, or else of hem, with which
her fathers or her kynred have dealed in the sin of lecherye: This sin
makes hem like to hounds, that take no keep to kynred And certes parentele is
in two manners, either ghostly or fleshly: gostly as for to deal with his
godsyb, for right so as he that engenders a child is his fleshly father: right
so is his God father his father espirituell: for which a woman may in no
less sin assemble with her godsyb, than with her own fleshly brother. The
fifth spece is that abominable sin, of which abominable syn no man uneath
ought speak ne write nathlesse it is openly rehearsed in holy writ. This cursed
sin done men and women in diverse entente and in diverse manner: But though that
holy writ speak of horrible syn, certes holy writ may not be defoyled, no
more tha^ the su^ne that shyneth on the donghyll. Another sin apertayneth to
lecherye that comes sleping, and this syn comes often to hem that be maidens,
and also to hem that be corrupt, and this syn me^ call Polucion, that comes of
three manners: Sometime of languyshyng of body, for the humors been to rank and
aboundaunt in the body of man, so^time of infirmite, for feblenesse of the
virtue retentife, as phisike makes mention: Sometime for surfeit of meat and
drink, and sometime of vylanous thoughts that been enclosed in man's mind wha^
he goes to sleep which may not be without sin, for which men must keep hem
wyselye, or else may men sin full grievously.

Remedium contra peccatum luxury.
Now comes the remedy against lecherye, and yt is generally chastity and
continence that restrain all disordinate menynges yt come of fleshely
talentes. And ever the greater merit shall he have that most restreyneth the
wicked chaufynges of the ordoure of this sin, and this is in two manners: That
is to say chastity in marriage and chastity in widowhed Now shall you understand
ye matrimony ^s leful asse^blyng of man and woman that ^^^^^uen by virtue of
this sacrament, the bond through which they may not be departed in all her
life, that is to say, while that they live both. This, as says the book, is
a full great sacrament, God made it as I have said in paradyse, and would him
self be borne in marriage: and for to halowe marriage he was at a wedding,
where as he turned water in to wine, which was the first miracle that he
wrought in earth before his disciples. True effect of marriage cleanses
fornication and replenysheth holy church of good lynage, for that is the end
of marriage, and changes deedly sin in to venyal sin, bitwene hem that been
wedded, and makes the hertes as one of hem that been wedded, as well as the
bodies.

Very marriage was established by god er that syn began, when natural law was
in his right point in Paradise. And it was ordained that o man should have but
a woman, and o woman but o man, as says saint Augustyne, by many reasons.

First for marriage is figured betwixt Christ and holy church.

Another is for a man is head of a woman always by ordinance it should be so.
For if a woman had mo men tha^ one, than should she have mo heedes tha^ one, and
that were a right horrible sin before God, and also a woman might not please
so many folk at ones: and also there should never be rest ne quiet among
hem, for each of hem would ask her own right. And furthermore, no man should
know his own engendrure, ne who should have his heritage, and the woman should
be the less beloved.

Now comes how that a man should bear him with his wife, and namely in two
things: that is to say, in sufferaunce and reverence, as showed Christ when
he first made woman. For he ne made her of ye head of Adam, for she should
not claym to great lordshyp, for there as the woman has the maystrye, she
makes to much variaunce, there need no mo ensamples of this, the experience
al day, ought enough suffice.

Also certes, God ne made not woman of the foot of Adam, for she should not
behold to low, for she can not patiently suffer: but God made woman of the
rybbe of Adam, for woman should be fellow unto man.

Man should bear him to his wife in faith* in troth, and in love (as says
saint Paul that a man should love his wife, as Christ loves holy church,
that loved it so well that he dyed for it: so should a man for his wife, if it
were need.

Now how that a woman should be subject to her husband: that tells saint
Peter, first in obedience. And also as says the decree: A woman that is a
wife, as long as she is a wife she has none auctoritye to swear ne bear
witness without leave of her husband yt is her Lord, always he should be so by
reason. She should also serve him in all honestye and be atte^pperate of her
array.

I woll well that they should set her intent to please her husbands but not be
queintise of her array. S. Ierom says: wives yt be apparelled in sylke and
precious purple, ne mow not clothe hem in Jesus Christ. Saint Greg. says
also: that no wyghte seeks precious array, but only for vaynglory to be
honored the more of the people. It is great folly a woman to have great array,
outward, and in her self be foul inward A wife should also be mesurable in
lokynge in bearyng, and in laughing, and discrete in all her words and her
deeds, and above all worldelye things she should love her husband with al her
heart, and to him be true of her body: So should an husband be to his wife:
For sithe that all the body is the husbands, so should her heart be, or else
there is betwixt hem two, as in that no perfyte marriage. Than shall men
understand that for three things a man and his wife fleshly may assemble. The
first is for thentent of engendrure of children to the service of god for
certes that is the cause final of matrimony. Another cause is to yield each of
hem to other ye dettes of her bodies, for neither of hem has power of there
own bodies. The third is to eschew lechery and vyllanye. The fourth is
forsooth deedlye sin. As to the first is meritorye: the second also, for as
says the decre, that she has merit of chastity that yeldeth to her husband
the debt of her body, ye thought it be against her liking and the lust of
her heart. The third manner is venyall sin, and truly scarscely may any of
these be without venyal sin for the corruption and for the delight. The fourth
manner is for to understand if they assemble only for amorous love, and for none
of the forsayde causes, but for to accomplish the brennynge delight, they recke
not how often, sothlye it is deedly sin: and yt with sorrow some folk woll
pain hem more to do then to her appetyte suffiseth.

The second manner of chastitye is for to be a clean wydowe and eschew the
enbrasynges of a man, and desire the enbrasynge of Jesus Christ: These been
those that have been wives, and have forgote her husbands, and also women that
have done lecherye, and been received by penitence. And certes if that a wife
could keep her all chaste by license of her husband, so that she give never
none occasion that he offend, it were to her a great merit. This manner of
woman that observes chastity in clothing and in countenance, abstinent in
eatinge and drinkyng, in spekyng and in deed, she is the vessel or the box of
the blessed Maudelayne ye fulfylleth holy church of good ordour. The third
manner of chastity is virginity, and it behooves that she be holy in heart,
and clean of body, than is she spouse of Jesus Christ, and she is the life of
angels: she is the pray sing of this world, and she is as these martyrs in
regaly: she has in her yt tongue may not tell ne heart think. Virginity bare
our Lord Jesus Christ, and virgyn was him self.

Another remedy against lechery is specially to withdraw such things as give
occasyon to that vylanye: as ease, eating, and drinkyng: For certes when the
pot boylleth stronglye, the best remedy is to with draw the fire. Slepyng
long in great quiet is also a great nouryce to lecherye.

Another remedy against lechery is that a man or a woman eschew the company of
hem by which he douteth to be tempted: For all be it so that the deed is
withstand, yet is there great temptation. Sothly a white wall, all though it
ne brenne not fullye by stickyng of the candell, yet is the wall black of the
flame. Full often time I read that no man trust in his own perfection, but he be
stronger than Sampson, or holyer than Daniel or wyser than Solomon.

Now after that I have declared you as I can, the seuyn deedly sins, and
some of her branches, with her remedies: Sothly if I could, I would tell you
the ten commandments, but so hye doctrine I put to divines. Nathlesse I hope
to God they ben touched in this treatise each of hem.

Sequitur secunda pars penitentie.
Now for as much as the second part of penitence stont in confession of
mouth, as I began in the first chap, I say saint Austen says.

Sin is every word and every deed and all that men coniecte against the law
of Jesus Christ, and this is for to sin in heart, in mouth, and in deed, by
the fine wits, which ben sight, hearing, smellyng, tastyng or savor, and
feeling. Now it is good to understand, that that agredgeth much every sin.
Thou shall consider what thou art that doste the syn, whether thou be male or
female, young or old, gentle or thrall, free or servant, hole or sick,
wedded or single, ordered or vnordred, wise or fool, clerk or seculer, if she
be of thy kynrede bodilye or gostly, or no, if any of thy kynred have sinned
with her or no, and many mo things. Another circumstaunce is this, whether it
be done in fornicacion or in aduoutry or no, in manner of homiced or no,
horrible great sins or small, and how long thou have continued in sin. The
third circumstaunce is the place there thou have done sin, wheder in other
men's houses or in thine own, in field, in church or in churchyard, in
church dedecate or no. For if the church be hallowed and man or woman spyl his
kind, within that place by way of sin or wicked temptation, the church is
enterdited, and the priest that did such a villainy, the term of all his life
he should no more sing mass, and if he did, he should do deedly sin at
every time yt he so song mass. The fourth circu^stau^ce is by which
mediators or by which messe^gers, or for enticement, or for co^sentment to
bear company with fellowship. For many a wretch for to bear company, wol go
to the dyuel of heel: wherefore they that egg or consent to the sin, ben
parteners of the sin, and of the temptation of the sinner. The fyfth
circumstaunce is how many times that he has sinned, if it be in his mind,
and how often he has fallen. For he that often falls in syn, he dispiceth the
mercy of God and encreseth his sin, and is unkind to Christ, and he we^eth
the more feeble to withstand syn, a synneth the more lightly and the later
ryseth, and is more slow to shriue him; and namely to him yt is his confessor.
For which that folk wha^ they fall again to her old folyes, either they leave
their old confessor, or else they depart her shrift in diverse parts. But
sothly such departed shrifte deserves no mercy of God for her sins. The
sixte circumstaunce is, why that a man sins as by temptation: and if him
self procure that temptation, or by the excitinge of other folk, or if he syn
with a woman by force or by her assente, or if the woman maugre her heed have
be a forced or none. This shall she tell, whether it were for couetise or
pouertye, or if it were by her procurement or no, and such other things. The
seventh circumstaunce is, in what manner he has do his sin, or how that she
has suffered that folk have do to her. And the same shall the man tell
plainly with all the circumstaunces, and whether he has sinned with common
bordel woman or none or done his sin in holy times or none, in fasting time
or none, or before his shrifte or after his later shryfte, and has parauenture
broke thereby his penance enjoined by whose help or whose counsel, by
soce^^e or craft, all must be told, and all these things after as they be
great or small, and grudge the conscience of man or woman. And eke the priest
that is thy judge, may the better be auysed of his judgment in yeuyng of
penance and that is after thy contrition. For understand well that after time
that a man has defoyled his baptyme by sin, if he woll come to salvation
there is none other way but by penance, shryfte, and satisfaction, and namely
by the two, if there be a confessoure to whom he may shriue him, and the third
if he have life to perform it. Than shall a man look and consider, that if he
wol make a true and a profitable confession, there must be four conditions.

First it must be in sorowfulnesse of heart as says the king Ezechiel to God,
I wol remember me all the years of my life in bitterness of my heart. This
condition of bytternes has five signs: The first is that confession must be
shamefaste, not for to cover ne hide her sin for he has offended his lord god
and defoyled his soul. And hereof says saint Augustyn: The heart traueyleth
for shame of his sin, and for he has great shamefastnes he is worthy to
have great mercy of god which was the confession of the Publicaue, that would
not heave up his eyes to heaven for he had offended god of heaven, for which
shamfastnesse he had anon ye mercy of god. And thereof says saint Augustyn:
yt such shameful folk be next foryeuenesse and mercy.

Another sign is humilite in confession, of which says saint Peter* Humbles
you under the might of god: ye hand of God is strong in confession, for thereby
god foryeueth the thy sins, for he alone has the power And this humilite
shall be in heart, and in outward signs: For right as he has humility to God
in his heart, right so should he humble his body outward to the priest, yt
sytteth in gods stead. For which in no manner, sith that Christ is sovereign,
and the Preeste mean and mediatoure betwixt Christ, and the sinner is last
by way of reason. Than should not the sinner sytte as hye as his confessor
but knele before him or at his fete, but if syckenesse cause it: For he shall
not take heed who sytteth there, but in whose place he sytteth. A man that has
trespassed to a Lord and comes to ask mercy and make his accord, and
sytteth him down by him, men would hold him outrageous and not worthy so sone
for to have remission of his trespace.

The third sign is, how thy shryfte should be full of tears if thou may,
and if thou may not weep with thy bodily eyes, than weep in thine heart,
which was the confession of saint Peter. For after that he had forsake Jesus
Christ, he went out and wept full bitterly.

The fourth sign is, that thou ne let not for shame to show thy confession:
Such was the confession of Magdaleyn, that ne spared for no shame of hem that
were at the feast, to go to our Lord Jesus Christ, and beknowe to him her
sins. The fyfth sign is, that a man or a woman be obeysaunte to receive the
penance that hem is enjoined. For certes Jesus Christ, for the offenses of man
was obedient to death. The second condition of very confession is, that it be
hastily done. For certes, if a man had a deedly wound, ever the longer that he
taryeth to heal him self, the more would it corrupt and haste him to his
death, and also the wound would be the worse for to heal. And right so fare
the sin, that long time is in a man vnshewed. Certes a man ought hastelye
show his sins for many causes, as for dread of death, that comes often
sodaynlye, and no certain what time it shall be, ne in what place, and also
the drenchyng of o sin draws in another: and also the longer that he
taryeth the farther he is fro Christ. And if he abide to his last day,
scarscely may he shriue him or remember him of his sins, or repent for the
grievous maladye of his death. And for as much as he ne has in his life
herkened Jesus Christ when he has spoken, he shall cry to Jesus Christ at his
last day and scarscely woll he harken him. And understand that this condition
must have four things.

Thy shryfte must be provided before and auysed, for wicked have does no
profit, if a man shriue him of his sins, be it of pride or envy, and so
forth with the speces and circumstaunces of sin. And that he have
comprehended in his mind the nombre and greatness of his sins, and how
long he has lain in syn. And also that he has be contrite for his sins,
and in steadfast purpose (by the grace of God) never again to fall to sin. And
also that he dread and counterwayte him self that he fly the occasion of
sin, to which he is inclined. Also thou shall shryue the of al thy sins to
a man, and not part to o man and part to another, that is to understand, in
intent to depart thy confession for shame or dread, for it is but stranglynge
of thy soul. For certes Jesus Christ is entierly al good, in him nys none
imperfection, and therefore either he foryeueth all perfeitely, or else never a
deal. I say not yt if thou be assigned to thy penytencer for certain sin
that thou art bound to show him all ye remenant of thy sins, of which thou
haste be^ shryuen of thy curate, but if it like to the of thy humilite, this is
no part of thy shrift. Ne I say not there as I speak of division of
confession, that if thou have license to shryue the to a discrete and an
honest preeste where the lyketh, and by license of thy curate, that thou ne
may well shryue the to him of al thy sins. Let no sin be untold as
far as thou have remembrance. And when thou shall be shryuen to thy curate,
tell him all thy sins that thou haste do sith thou wast last shriuen. This
is no wicked intent of division of shrift.

Also the very shrift asks certain co^dicions. First that thou shriue the by
thy fre will, not constrained for shame of folk, sickness, ne such other
things. For it is reason, that he that trespaceth by his free will that by his
free will he confess his trespace and that none other man tell his sin but
him self, ne he shall not nay ne deny his sin, ne wrath him against the priest
for amonysshyng him to leave his sin. The second condition is, that thy
shryfte be laufull, that is to say, that thou shriuest the. And also the priest
that hereth thy confession be verily in faith of holy church, and that a man
ne be not dispeyred of the mercy of Jesus Christ, as Caym or Judas. And also a
man must accuse him self of his own trespace and not another, but he shall
blame and wit him self and his own malice of his sin, and none other: But
nathelesse if that another man be occasion or entycer of his syn, or the estate
of a person be such by which his sin is agredged, or else yt he may not
plainly shryue him but he tell the person with which he has sinned, than may
he tell, so that his intent ne be not to backbyte the person, but only to
declare his confession. Thou ne shalt not also make no leasynges in thy
confession for humility, parauenture to say that thou have commised and done
such sins as of which that thou ne were never gyltye. For saint Augustyn
says, if that thou because of thine humilitye make leasynges of thy self,
though thou were not in sin before, yet art thou than in sin through thy
leasing. Thou must also show thy sin by thine own proper mouth, but thou
be dombe and not by no letter* For thou that have done the sin, shalt have
the shame therefore. Thou shall not eke paynt thy confession by fair subtell
words, to cover the more thy sin: for than begylest thou thy self and not
the priest, thou must tell it plain, be it never so foul ne horrible. Thou
shalt also shryue the to a priest, that is discrete to counsel the, and also
thou shalt not shriue the for vaynglorye, ne for ypocrisye, ne for no cause
but only for the love and fear of Jesus Christ, and heal of thy soul. Thou
shalt not also ren to the priest suddenly to tell him lightly thy sin, as who
says, to tell a tape or a tale, but auysedly and with good devotion: And
generally shryue the often if thou often fall often arise by confession. And though
thou shriue the ofter than ones of the sin which thou have be shriuen of, it
is the more merit. And as says saint Augustyn, thou shall have the more
lightly foryeuenes and grace of God, both of sin and pain. And certes ones a
year at leest, it is laufull to be houseled, for surely ones a year all things
renouellen.

Now have I told you of very confession, that is the second part of
penitence.

Explicit secunda pars penitentie: Et sequitur tertia pars.
THe third part of penitence is satisfaction, and that stant most generallye
in alms deeds and bodily pain. Now ben there three manner of alms.
Co^tritio^ of heart, where a man offreth him self to god.

An other is, to have pytie of default of his neighbor. And the third is in
gyuyng of good counsel, goostly and bodily whereas men have need, and namely
in sustenance of man's fode. And take keep yt a man has need of these things
generallye, he has need of fode of clothing, and of herbrow: He has need of
charitable counsel, visityng in prison in sickness, and sepulture of his
body. And if thou may not visit the nedeful in thy person, visit them with
thy message and yeftes. These been generally the alms and works of charity,
of hem that have temporal riches or discretion in counsaylyng. Of these works
shalt thou here at the day of dome. These almesses shall thou do of thyn own
proper things, and hastesy and privily if thou may: But nathelesse, if thou
may not do it privily, thou shalt not forbear to do alms though me^ se
it, so that it be not do for thank of the world, but only for thank of Jesus
christ. For as witnesses saint Mathu Cap. v. A cite may not be hid that is
set on a mountain, ne men light not a lantern to put it under abusshel but
set it upon a candelsticke to give light to men in ye house.

Right so shul your light, light before men that they may se your good works,
and glorify our father that is in heaven.

Now as to speak of bodily pain, it stont in prayers, wakyng, fasting,
virtuous teaching of orisons. And ye shall understand, that orisons or prayers
is to say a pitious will of heart, that sets it in God, and expresses by
word outward to remeue harms, and to have things spiritual and durable, and
sometime temporal things. Of which orisons, certes in the oryson of the pater
noster: has Jesus Christ enclosed most things. Certes it is priuileged of
three things in his dignity, for which it is more digne than any other
prayer, for that Jesus Christ him self made it, and it is short, for it should
be learned yt more lightly, and to hold it the more easy in heart, and help
him self the ofter with that orison: And for a man should be the less werye
to say it, and not excuse him to learn it, it is so short and easy: and for
it comprehends in it self all good prayers. The exposition of this holy
prayer that is so excellent and digne, I refere to the masters of theology,
save thus much woll I say, that when thou prayest, that God should foryeue
the thine offenses, as thou foryeuest them that have offended the. Be well ware
that thou be not out of charity. This holy orison aminisheth also venial syn
and therefore it appertains specyallye to penitence.

This prayer must be truly said and in parfyte faith, and that men pray to God
ordinatly, discretly, and devoutly, and always a man shall put his will to be
subject to the will of God. This oryson must also be said with great
humbleness and full pure and honestlye, and not to the auoyaunce of any man
or woman: It must also be continued with the works of charity. It avails
also against the vices of the soul: For as says saynct Jerome: By fasting ben
saved the vices of the flesh, and by prayer the vices of the soul.

After this thou shall understand, that bodily prayer stont in waking. For Jesus
christ says: wake ye and pray, that ye ne enter in to wicked temptation. Ye
shul understand also, that fasting stont in three things: In forberyng of
bodily mete and drink, in forbering of wordly iolitie, and in forberynge of
deedly syn: this is to say: that a man shall keep him fro deedly syn with all
his might

And thou shall understand also, that god ordained fasting, and to fasting
pertayneth four things. Largeness to pore folk gladness of heart spiritual:
not to be angrye ne anoyed, ne grutche for he fasteth and also reasonable hour
to eat by measure, that is to say, a man shall not eat in vntyme, ne sit the
longer at the table, for he fasteth.

Than shall thou understand, that bodily pain stont in disciplyne or
teaching by word or writing, or by example. Also in wearynge of here or
stamyn or of harbergions on her naked flesh for Christ's sake, and that such
manner penaunces, ne make not thine heart bitter or angrye, ne anoyed of thy
self, for better is to cast away thine here, than to cast away the swetnesse
of Jesus Christ. And therefore says saynct Poule: Clothe you, as they that been
chosen of God in heart of misericorde, debonartie, suffrau^ce and such manner of
clothyng, of which Jesus Christ is more pleased, than with heeres or habergions.

Than is disciplyne also, in knocking of thy breast, in scourgyng with rods,
in knelyng, in tribulation, in suffrynge patiently wrongs that been do to the,
and also in pacie^t suffrynge of sycknesse, or lesyng of worldly goods or
cattle, or wife, child, or other friends.

Than shall thou understand which things distourbe penance, and that is in
four manners, dread, shame, hope, and wanhope, that is desperation: And for to
speak first of dread for which he weneth that he may suffer no penance.
There against is remedy for to think that bodilye penance is but short and
little, at regard of the pain of hell that is so cruel and so long, that it
lasts without end.

Now against the shame that a man has to shryue him, and namely these
ypocrytes that would be hold so perfyte, that they have no need to shryue hem.
Ayenste that shame should a man think that by way of reason, that he that has
not be ashamed to do foul things: certes him ought not be ashamed for to do
fair things, and that is co^fessyons. A man should also think that god sees
and knows all his thoughts and all his works: To him may nothing be hyd ne
covered. Men should also remember hem of the shame that is to com at the day
of dome to hem that been not penitent and shryuen in this present life. For all
the creatures in earth and in hell shall se apertly, all that they hid in this
present world. Now for to speak of the hope of hem that been so negligent
and slow to shryue them: that stondeth in two manners. That one is, that he
hops for to live long, and for to purchase much richesse for his delight,
and tha^ he wol shriue him: And as he says, him seems than tymely enough to
come to shryft.

An other is of surquidrie that he has in christ's mercy. Against the first
vice he shall think that our life is in no sykerneke, and also that all the
rychesses in this world ben in adventure, and pass as a shadow on the wall:
And as says saynct Gregorye, that it appertains to the great righteousness
of god, that never shall the pain stynte of hem that never would withdraw hem
fro sin her thanks, but ever continued in sin: for that perpetual will to
do sin, shall they have perpetual pain. wanhope is in two manners. The first
wanhope is in the mercy of god. That other is that they think that they ne
might not long persevere in goodness. The first wanhope comes of that he
demeth that he has sinned so greatly and so often and so long lain in sin,
that he shall not be saved. Certes against that cursed wa^hope should he think
that the passion of Jesus Christ is more strong for to unbind, than sin is
strong for to bind. Ayenste the second wanhope he shall think that as often
as he falls he may rise again by penitence: and though he never so long
has lain in sin, the mercy of Christ is always ready to receive him to mercy.
Ayenste the wanhope that he deemeth, he should not long persevere in
goodness, he shall think, that the feblenesse of the devil may nothing do but
if men woll suffer him, and also he shall have strength of the help of Jesus
christ and of all holy church, and the protection of angels if him list.

Than shall men understand what is the fruit of penance, and after the words
of Jesus Christ, it is endless bless of heaven. There joy has never end, no
contrariety of woe ne greuaunce: there al harms ben passed of this present life,
there as is ye sykernes fro the pain of hell, there as is the blysfull company
that rejoice hem euermo, eueriche of others joy: there as the body of man, that
sometime was foul and dark, is more clear than the sun: there as the body
that sometime was sick, freyle, and feeble, and mortal, is immortal, and so
strong and hol^, that there ne may nothing appeyre it: there as is neither
hungre, thurst ne cold, but every soul replenysshed with the sight of the
perfyte knowing of God. This blysfull reygne may men purchase by poverty
espirituel, and the glory by lowness, the plenty of joy by hungre and
thurst, and the rest by travail, and the life by death and mortification of syn:
to which life he us bring that bought us with his pecious blood. AMEN.

Here ends the persons tale.
Here begins the Plowmans Prologue.
THe Ploweman plucked up his plowe.
when mydsommer moan was comen in
And said his b^estes should rate ynowe
And lyge in the grass up to the chynne
They ben feeble both ox and cow
Of hem nys left but bone and skin
He shoke of snare and cultre of drowe
And honge his harneys on a py^^e.
He took his tabarde and his staff eke
And on his heed he set his hat
And said he would saint Thomas seek
On pylgremage he goth forth platte
In scrippe he bare both breed and lekes
He was forswonke and all forswatte
Men might have seen through both his chekes
And every wang toth and where it sat
Our host beheld well all about
And saw this man was sun ybrent
He knew well by his senged shoute
And by his clothes that were to rent
He was a man wont to walk about
He nas not always in cloystre ypent
He could not religiouslyche loute
And therefore was he fully shent.
Our host him axed, what man art thou?
Sir (quod he) I am an hyne
For I am wont to go to the plowe
And erne my meat yer that I dyne
To sweet and swynke I make auowe
My wife and children therewith to find
And serve God and I wist how
But we leude men been full blind.
For clerks say we shullen be feign
For her lyuelod swet and swynke
And they right naught us give again
Neither to eat ne yet to drink
The mow by law, as they said
Us curse and dampne to hell brynke
Thus they putten us to pain
with candles queynt and belles clynke.
They make us thralles at her lust
And said we mow not else be saved
They have the corn and we the dust
who speaks there again they say he raued
what man quod our host, can thou preach
Come nere and tell us some holy thing
Sir quod he, I herd ons teach
A pressed in pulpyt a good preaching
Say on quod our host, I the beseech.
Sir I am ready at your byddyng
I pray you that noman me reproach
while that I am my tale telling.
Thus ends the prologue, and here follows the first part of the tale.
A Stern strife is stered new
In many stedes in a stounde
Of so^dry seeds that been sewe
It seems that some ben unsound
For some be great grown vngrounde
Some ben soul, simple and small
whether of hem is falser sound
The falser foul mote him befall
That one side is that I of tell
Popes, cardynals and prelates
Parsons, monks, and freers fell
Priours, abbottes of great estates
Of heuyn and hell they keep the yates
And Peter's successors they ben all
This is demed by old dates
But falshed foul might it befall
The other side ben poor and pale
And people put out of prease
And seem caytyffes sore and cale
And ever in one without increase
I clepeth iollers and loudlese
who toteth on hem they been vntall
They ben arrayed all for the peace
But falsshed foul mote it befall.
Many a country have I sought
To know the falser of these two
But ever my travail was for naught
All so far as I have go
But as I wandered in a wro
In a wodde beside a wall
Two fowls saw I sytte tho
The falser foul mote him befall.
That one did plede on the Popes side
A gryffon of a grymme stature
A Pellycane withouten pride
To these lollers laid his lure
He mused his matter in measure
To counsel Christ ever began he call
The gryffon showed as sharp as fire
But falshed foul mote it befall.
The Pellycan began to preach
Both of mercy and of meekness
And said that Christ so began us teach
And meke and mercyable began bless
The Euangely bears witness
A lamb he lykeneth Christ over all
In tokenynge that he mekest was
Since pride was out of heaven fall.
And so should every Christened be
Priests, Peter's successors
Beth lowlyche and of low degree.
And vsen none erthly honors
Neither crown, ne curious couetours
Ne pylloure, ne other proud pall
Ne naught to cofren up great treasours
For falshed foul mote it befall
Preests should for no cattle plede.
But chasten hem in charity
Ne to no bateyle should men led
For inhaunsyng of her own degree
Not wylne syttynges in hye see
Ne souerayntie in house ne hall
All worldly worship defye and flee
For who so wylleth highness foul shall fall
Alas who may such saints call
That wylneth welde erthlye honor
As low as Lucifere such shall fall
In baleful blackness ybuylden her boure
That eggeth the people to error
And makes them to hem thrall
To Christ I hold such one traitor
As low as Lucifer such one shall fall.
That wylleth to be kings peers
And higher than the Emperor
Some that were but poor freers
Now woollen wax a warryour
God is not her governor.
That holds noman his permagall
while couetyse is her counsaylour
All such falshed mote need fall.
That hye on horse wylleth ride
In glytterande gold of great array
I painted and portred all in pride
No common knight may go so gaye
Change of clothyng every day
with golden gyrdles great and small
As boystous as is bear at baye
All such falshed mote need fall.
with pride punyshed the poor
And some they sustain with sale
Of holy church makes an hoar
And fylleth her womb with wine and ale
with money fylleth many a male
And chaffren churches when they fall
And tells the people a leude tale
Such false faytours foul them befall.
with change of many manner meats
with song and solace sitting long
And fylleth her womb, and fast fretes
And from the meat to the gonge
And after meat with harp and song
And each man mote hem lords call
And hot spyces ever among
Such false faytours foul hem fall
And myters mo than one or two
I perled as the queen's heed
A staff of gold, and pyrrey lo
As heavy as it were made of lead
with cloth of gold both new and red with glytterande gold as grene as gall
By dome will dampne men to deed
All such faytours foul hem fall.
And Christ's people proudly curse
with broad books, and braying bell
To put pennyes in her purse
They woll sell both heaven and hell
And in her sentence and thou wylt dwell
They wyllen guess in her gaye hall
And though the soth thou of hem tell
In great cursynge shall thou fall.
That is blessed, that they bless
And cursed that they curse woll
And thus the people they oppress
And have their lordshyppes at full
And many be merchants of woll
And to purse penyes woll come thrall
The poor people they all to pull
Such false faytours foul hem fall
Lords mote to hem loute
Obeysaunt to her broad blessyng
They ryden with her royal route
On a courser, as it were a king
with saddle of gold glyttryng
with curyous harneys quayntly crallyt
Styroppes gaye of gold mastlyng
All such falshed foul befall it.
Christ's minysters clepen they been
And rulen all in robberye
But Antichrist they seruen clean
Attyred all in tyranny
witness of John's prophecye
That Antichriste is her admiral
Tyffelers attyred in trecherye
All such faytours foul hem fall.
who says that some of hem may sin
He shall be done to be deed
Some of hem woll gladly win All against that which god forbed
All holiest they clepen her heed
That of her rule is regal
Alas that ever they eten breed
For all such falshed woll foul fall
Her heed loves all honor
And to be worshypped in word and deed
Kings mote to hem knele and coure
To the Apostles, that christ forbede
To Popes hestes such takes more head
Than to keep Christ's commandment
Of gold and silver mote ben her wede
They holds him hole omnipotent
He ordayneth by his ordinance
To parysh priests a powere
To another a greater auaunce
A greater point to his mystere
But for he is highest in earth here
To him reserueth he many a point
But to Christ that has no pere
Reserueth he neither opyn ne joint
So seems he above all
And Christ abouen him nothing
when he sytteth in his stall
Dampneth and saves as him think
Such pride tofore god does stynke
An Angel bad John to him not knele
But only to god do his bowynge
Such wyllers of worship must need evil feel.
They ne clepen Christ, but s^tu^s deus
And clepen her heed Sanctissimus
They that such a sect sewys
I trow they taken hem amysse
In earth here they have her bliss
Her hye master is Belyal
Christ's people from hem wysse
For all such false will foul tall.
They mow both bind and lose
And all is for her holy life
To save or dampne they mow those
Between hem now is great strife
Many a man is killed with a knyfe
To wete which of hem have lordshyp shall
For such Christ suffered wounds five
For all such falshed will foul fall.
Christ said: Qui gladio percutit
with sword shall dye
He bad his priests peace and gryth
And bade hem not dread for to dye
And bad them be both simple and slye
And carke not for no cattall
And trusts on god that sytteth on hye
For all false shull foul fall.
These woollen make men to swear
Against Christ's commandment
And Christ's members all to tere
On roode, as he were new yrent
Such laws they make by common assent
Echeon it choweth as a ball
Thus the poor be fully shent
But ever falshed foul it befall.
They vsen no symonye
But sellen churches and prioryes
Ne they vsen no envy
But cursen all hem contraryes
And hyreth men by days and years
with strength to hold hem in her stall
And culleth all her adversaries
Therefore falshed foul thou fall
with purse they purchase personage
with purse they paynen hem to plede
And men of war they woll wage
To bring her enemies to the deed
And lords lives they woll led
And much take, and give but small
But he it so get, from it shall shede
And make such false right foul fall
They halowe nothing but for hyre
Church, font, ne vestement
And make orders in every shyre
But priests pay for the parchement
Of ryatours they taken rent
Therewith they smere the ships skall
For many churches ben often suspent
All such falshed yet foul it fall.
Some lives not in lecherye
But haunten wenches, widows and wives
And punysheth the poor for putrye
Them self it uses all their lives
And but a man to them shryues
To heaven come never he shall
He shall be cursed as be caytyues
To hell they said that he shall fall
There was more mercy in Maximyen
And in Nero, that never was good
Than is now in some of them
when he has on his furred hoode
They follow Christ that shed his blood
To heaven, as buckette in to the wall
Such wreches ben worse than wode
And all such faytours foul hem fall
They give her alms to the rich
To maynteynours, and to men of law
For to lords they woll be lyche
An harlottes son not worth an hawe
Sothfastnesse such han slawe
They kembe her crokettes with crystal
And dread of god they have down draw
All such faytours foul hem fall
They maken parsons for the penny
And canons of her cardynals
Uneaths amongst hem all any
That he ne has glosed the gospel falls
For Christ made never no cathedrals
Ne with him was no cardynall
with a Red hatte as vsyn mynstrals
But falshed foul mote it befall
Their tythyng, and her offryng both
They clemeth it by possessyon
Thereof nyll they none forgo
But robben men as ransom
The tythyng of Turpe lucrum
with these masters is meynall
Tythyng of bribry, and larson
will make falshed full foul to fall
They taken to ferme her sompnours
To harm the people what they may
To pardoners, and false faytours
Sell her seals I dare well say
And all to holden great array
To multiply hem more metal
They dread full little domes day
when all such shall foul fall
Such harlottes shull men dysclaunder
For they shullen make her gree
And ben as proud as Alexaunder
And said to the poor, woe be ye
By year each preeste shall pay his fee
To increase his lemmans call
Such heerdes shull well yuell the
And all such false shull foul fall
And if a man be falsely famed
And would make purgacioun
Than woll the officers be agramed
And assign him fro town to town
So need he must pay ransom
Though he be clean, as is crystal
And than have an absolutioun
But all such false shull foul fall
Though he be gyltie of the deed
And that he may money pay
All the while his purse woll blede
He may use it fro day to day
These bishops officers gone full gay
And this game they vsen over all
The poor to pyll is all their pray
All such false shull foul fall
Alas, god ordained never such law
Ne no such craft of couetyse
He forbade it by his saw
Such governors mowen of god agryse
For all his rules is ryghtwyse
These new points ben pure papal
And gods law they dispyce
And all such faytours shul foul fall
They said that Peter had the key
Of heuyn and hell, to have and hold
I trow Peter took no money
For no sins that he sold
Such successors ben to bold
In wynnyng all their wit they wrall
Her conscience is waxen cold
And all such faytours foul hem fall
Peter was never so great a fool
To leave his key with such a lorell
Or to take such cursed such a tole
He was aduysed nothing well
I trow they have the key of hell
Their master is of that place marshall
For there they dressen hem to dwell
And with false Lucifere there to fall
They ben as proud as Lucifarre
As angry, and as enuyous
From good faith they ben full far
In couetyse they ben curyous
To catch catell as couytous
As hou^de, that for hungre woll yall
Ungoodly, and ungracious
And nedely such falshed shall foul fall
The pope and he were Peter's heir
Me think he erreth in this case
when choice of bishops is in dispeyre
To chosen hem in diverse place
A lord shall write to him for grace
For his clerk anon pray he shall
So shall he speed his purchase
And all such false foul hem fall
Though he can no more good
A lords prayer shall be spedde
Though he be wild of will or wood
Not understanding what men han read
A leude boster, and that god forbede
As good a bishop is my horse ball
Such a Pope is foul be stedde
And at last woll foul fall
He makes bishops for erthly thank
And nothing for Christ's sake
Such that been full fat and rank
To soul heal none head they take
Al is well done what ever they make
For they shall answer at one fors all
For worlds thank, such worch and wake
And all such false shall foul fall
Such that can not her Creed
with prayer shull be made prelates
Another can the gospel read
Such shull now welde hye estates
The hye goods frendshyp hem makes
They toteth on her sum total
Such bear the keys of hell yates
And all such false shall foul fall
They forsake for Christ's love
Traueyle, hungre, thurst, and cold
For they ben ordered ever all above
Out of youth till they ben old
By the door they go, not in to the fold
To help their sheep they naught trauall
Hired men all such I hold
And all such false foul hem fall
For Christ her king they woll forsake
And know him naught for his pouerte
For Christ's love they woll wake
And drink pyement ale aparte
Of god they seem nothing a ferde
As lusty lives, as did Lamuall
And driven her sheep in to deserte
All such faytours shull foul fall
Christ has.xij. Apostels here
Now say they, there may be but one
That may not err in no manner
who leueth not this ben lost echone
Peter erred, so did not John
why is he cleped the principal?
Christ cleped him Peter, but him self ye stone
All false faytours foul hem fall
why cursen they the croysery
Christ's christen creatures
For between hem is now envy
To be enhaunsed in honors
And christen lyuers with her labors
Fyr they leuyn on no man mortal
But do to death with dishonours
And all such false foul hem fall
what knows a tyllour at the plowe
The popes name, and what he hate
His creed suffyseth to him ynowe
And knows a cardynall by his hatte
Rough is the poor unrightly latte
That knows Christ his god royal
Such matters be not worth a gnatte
But such false faytours foul hem fall
A king shall knele and kiss his show
Christ suffered a sinful to kiss his fete
Me thinks he holds him hye ynowe
So Lucifer did, that hye set
Such one me thinks him self foryete
Either to the troth he was not call
Christ that suffered wounds wete
Shall make such falshed foul fall
They lays out her large nets
For to take silver and gold
Fyllen coffers, and sackes fettes
There as they souls catch should
Her servants be to them vnholde
But they can doublyn their rentall
To bygge hem castles, and bygge hem hold
And all such false foul hem fall.
Here ends the first part of this tale, and herafter follows the second
part
TO accord with this word fall
No more English can I find
Show another now I shall
For I have much to say behind
How priests han the people pynde
As curteys Christ has me kende
And put this matter in my mind
To make this manner men amend
Shortly to shende hem, and show now
How wrongfully they worche and walk
O hye god, nothing they tell, ne how
But in gods word, tells many a balke
In hernes hold hem and in halke
And prechyn of tithes and offrende
And untruly of the gospel talk
For his mercy god it amend
What is Antichrist to say
But even Christ's adversary
Such has now ben many a day
To Christ's byddyng full contrary
That from the truth clean varry
Out of the way they ben wend
And Christ's people untruly carry
God for his pytie it amend
That lyuen contrary to Christ's life
In hye pride against meekness
Against sufferaunce they vsen strife
And anger against sobrenesse
Against wisdom wylfulnesse
To Christ's tales little tend
Against measure outragyousnesse
But when god woll it may amend
Lordly life against lowlynesse
And demyn all without mercy
And couetyse against largess
Against truth treachery
And against alms envy
Against Christ they comprehend
For chastyte they maynteyne lechery
God for his grace this amend
Against penance they use delyghtes
Against suffraunce strong defense
Against god they vsen yuel rightes
Against pytie punishementes
Open yuell against contynence
Her wicked wynnyng worse dispende
Sobrenesse they set in to dispense
But god for his goodness it amend
Why cleymen they holy his powere
And wranglen against all his hestes
His living folowen they nothing here
But lyuen worse than wytlesse beestes
Of fyshe and flesh they louen feestes
As lords they ben broad ykende
Of gods poor they haten gestes
God for his mercy this amend
With Diverse such shall have her dome
That said that they be Christ's friends
And do nothing as they should done
All such ben falser than ben fendes
On the people they ley such bendes
As god is in earth they han offend
Surour for such Christ now send us
And for his mercy this amend
A token of Antichrist they be
His careckes ben now wide yknowe
Received to preche shall no man be
without token of him I trow
Each christen priest, to prechyn owe
From god above they ben send.
Gods word, to all folk for to show
Sinful man for to amend
Christ sent the poor for to preche
The royal rich he did not so
Now dare no poor the people teache
For Antichrist is over all her foe
Among the people he mote go
He has bydden, all such suspende
Some has he hente, and thinks yet mo
But all this god may well amend
All tho that han the world forsake
And lyuen loly, as god badde
In to her prison shullen be take
Betyn and bounden, and forth ladde
Hereof I read no man be dradde
Christ said, his should be shende
Each man ought hereof be glad
For god full well it woll amend
They take on hem royal powere
And say they have swerdes two
One curse to hell, one flee men here
For at his taking Christ had no mo
Yet Peter had one of tho
But Christ, to Peter smite began defend
And in to the sheth badde put it tho
And all such myscheues god amend
Christ badde Peter keep his sheep
And with his sword forbade him smite
Sword is no tole with sheep to keep
But to sheperdes that sheep woll byte
Me thinks such sheperdes ben to wit
Again her sheep with sword that contend
They drive her sheep with great dispyte
But all this god may well amend
So successors to Peter be they naught
Whom Christ made chief pastoure
Aswerde no sheperde vsen ought
But he would slay, as a bochoure
For who so were Peter's successor
Should bear his sheep till his back bend
And shadow hem from every shoure
And all this god may well amend
Successors to Peter ben these
In that that Peter Christ forsook
That had lever the love of god lose
Than a sheperde had to lose his hoke
He culleth the sheep as does the coke
Of hem taken the woll vntrende
And falsely gloss the gospel book
God for his mercy them amend
After Christ had take Peter the kay
Christ said, he must dye for man
That Peter to Christ began withsay
Christ badde him go behind Satan
Such cou^saylours many of these men han
For worlds well, god to offend
Peter's successors they ben for than
But all such god may well amend
For Satan is to say no more
But he that contrary to Christ is
In this they learn Peter's lore
They sewen him when he did mysse
They follow Peter forsothe in this
In all that Christ would Peter reprehende
But not in that that longs to heuyn bliss
God for his mercy hem amend
Some of the Apostels they sewen in case
Of ought that I can understand
Him that betrayed Christ, Judas
That bare the purse in every land
And all that he might set on hand
He hid and stale, and myspende
His rule these traitors han in hand
Almighty God hem amend
And at last his lord began tray
Cursedly through his false couetyse
So would these, trayen him for money
And they wysten in what wise
They be seker of the self ensyse
From all sothnesse they ben friend
And couetyse chaungen with queyneyse
Almighty God all such amend
Were Christ on earth here efte sone
These would dampne him to dye
All his hestes they han fordone
And said his sawes ben heresy
And against his commandments they cry
And dampne all his to be brende
For it lyketh not hem such losengery
God almighty hem amend
These han moremyght in England heart
Than has the king and all his law
They han purchased hem such powere
To taken hem whom list not knawe
And say that heresy is her saw
And so to prysone woll hem send
It was not so by elder dawe
God for his mercy it amend
The kings law wol no man deem
Angerlyche withouten answer
But if any man these mysqueme
He shall be bayghted as a bear
And yet well worse they woll him tere
And in prysone woll hem pende
In gyues, and in other gere
When God woll, it may mende
The king taxes not his men
But by assente of the commynalte
But these each year woll raunsom hem
Maysterfully, more than does he
Her seals by year better be
Than is the kings in extend
Her officers han gretter fee
But this mischefe god amend
For who so woll prove a testament
That is natt all worth ten pound
He shall pay for the parchement
The third part of the money all round
Thus the people is raunsounde
They say such part to hem should apende
There as they grypen it gothe to ground
God for his mercy it amend
A simple fornycatioun
Twenty shyllynges he shall pay
And than have an absolution
And all the year vsen it forth he may
Thus they letten hem go a stray
They recke not though the soul be brende
These kepyn yuell Peter's key
And all such sheperdes God amend
Wonder is, that the parlyament
And all the lords of this land
Here to taken so little intent
To help the people out of her hand
For they ben harder in their bond
Worse beat, and bitter brende
Than to the king is understand
God him help this to amend
What bysshoppes, what relygions
Han in this land as much lay fee
Lorshyppes, and possessions
More than the lords, it seems me
That makes hem lose charity
They mow not to God attend
In earth they have so high degree
God for his mercy it amend
The Emperor yaf the pope sometime
So high lordshyp him about
That at last the sely kyme
The proud Pope put him out
So of this realm is in doubt
But lords be ware and them defend
For now these folk be wonder stout
The king and lords now this amend.
Thus ends the second part of this tale, and her after follows the third.
Moses law forbode it tho
That priests should no lordshyppes welde
Christ's Gospel byddeth also
That they should no lordshyppe held
Ne Christ's Apostels were never so bold
No such lordeshyppes to them enbrace
But smeren her sheep and keep her fold
God amend hem for his grace
For they ne ben but countrefete
Men may know hem by her fruit
Her gretnesse makes hem god foryete
And take his meekness in dispyte
And they were poor and had but lyte
They nolde not demen after the face
But noryshe her sheep, and hem not byte
God amend hem for his grace
Gyfon. What can thou preche against chanons
That men clepen seculere?

Pely. They ben curates of many towns
On earth they have great powere
They han great prebendes and dear
Some two or three, and some mo
A personage to ben a playeng fere
And yet they serve the king also

And let to ferme all that fare
To whom that woll most give therefore
Some woll spend, and some woll spa^
And some woll lay it up in store
A cure of soul they care not fore
So they mow money take
whether her souls be won or lore
Her profytes they woll not forsake
They have a gederyng procuratour
That can the poor people enplede
And robben hem as a rauynour
And to his lord the money led
And catch of quick and eke of deed
And riche^ him and his lord eke
And to rob the poor can give good read
Of old and young, of hole and syke
Therewith they purchase hem lay fee
In land, there hem lyketh best
And build also broad as a cite
Both in the Est, and eke in the west
To purchase thus they ben full pressed
But on the poor they woll naught spend
Ne no good give to gods gest
Ne send him some that all has send
By her service such woll live
And trusse that other in to treasour
Though all her paryshe dye vnshriue
They woll not give a rose flower
Her life should be as a myrrour
Both to lered and to leude also
And teache the people her lele labor
Such myster men ben all mysgo.
Some of hem ben hard nygges
And some of hem ben proud and gay
Some spend her good upon gygges
And fynden hem of great array
Alas, what think these men to say
That thus dispenden goddis good
At the dredefull domes day
Such wretches shulbe worse than wood
Some her churces never ne sye
Ne never o penny thither ne send
Though the poor parishens for hungre dye
O penny on hem will they not spend
Have they receyuynge of the rent
They recke never of the remenant
Alas the devil has clean hem blent
Such one is Sathanas soiournant
And vsen horedome and harlotry
Couetyse, pomp^, and pride
Slouthe, wrath, and eke envy
And sewen sin by every side
Alas, where think such tabyde
How woll they accomptes yield
From hye God they mow hem not hyde
Such wyllers wit is not worth a nelde
They ben so roted in richesse
That Christ's pouert is foryet
Served with so many mess
Hem thinks that Manna is no mete
All is good that they mow get
They wene to live evermore
But when god at dome is set
Such treasour is a feeble store
Uneath mote they matyns say
For countyng and for court holding
And yet he iangleth as a iaye
And vnderstont him self nothing
He woll serve both earl and king
For his fyndyng and his fee
And hyde his tythynge and his offrynge
This is a feeble charity
Other they ben proud, or coueytous
Or they ben hard, or hungry
Or they ben lyberall or lecherous
Or else medlers with marchandry
Or maynteyners of men with maistry
Or stewardes, countours, or pledours
And serve God in hypocrisy
Such priests ben Christ's false traitors
They ben false, they ben vengeable
And begylen men in Christ's name
They ben unsteadfast and unstable
To tray her lord, hem thinks no shame
To serve God they ben full lame
Gods thieves, and falsely stele
And falsely gods word defame
In wynnyng is her worlds well
Antichryst these seruen all
I pray the who may say nay?
With Antichryst such shull fall
They folowen him in deed and fay
They seruyn him in rich array
To serve Christ such falsely feign
Why, at the dredeful domes day
Shull they not follow him to pain?
That known hem self that they done ill
Against Christ's commandment
And amend hem never ne will
But serve Satan by one assent
Who says sothe he shall be shent
Or speaks against her false living
who so well lives shall be brent
For such ben gretter than the king
Pope, Bishops, and Cardynals
Chanons, Persons, and Vycaire
In gods service I trow ben false
That sacraments sellen here
And ben as proud as Lucifere
Each man look whether that I lie
Who so speaks against her powere
It shall be holden heresy
Look how many orders take
Only of Christ, for his service
That the worlds goods forsake
who so takes orders, or other wise
I trow that they shall sore agryse
For all the gloss that they conne
All sewen not this assyse
In yuell time they thus begone
Look how many among hem all
Holden not this hye way
with Antichrist they shullen fall
For they wolden God betraye
God amend hem that best may
For many men they maken shende
They weten well the sothe I say
But the dyuell has foul hem blende
Some on her churches dwell
Apparaylled poorly, proud of port
The seven sacraments they done sell
In cattle catchynge is her comfort
Of each matter they woollen mell
And done hem wrong is her dysporte
To afray the people they ben fell
And hold hem lower then does the lord
For the tythynge of a ducke
Or of an apple, or an aye
They make men swear upon a book
Thus they foulen Christ's say
Such bearen yuell heaven kay
They mowen assoyle, they mow shryue
with men's wives strongly play
with true tyllers sturte and strive
At the wrestlynge, and at the wake
And chief chauntours at the nale
Markette beaters, and medlynge make
Hoppen and houten with heue and hale
At fair fresh, and at wine stale
Dyne and drink, and make debate
The seven sacraments set at sail
How keep such the kayes of heaven gate?
Men's wives they woollen hold
And though that they ben right sorry
To speak they shull not be so bold
For sompnynge to the consystory
And make hem say mouth I lie
Though they it saw with her eye
His lemman holden openly
No man so hardy to axe why
He woll have tythynge and offrynge
Maugre who so ever it gruche
And twyse on the day he woll sing
Gods prestes nere none such
He mote on huntyng with dog and byche
And blown his horn, and cryen hey
And sorcery vsen as a wytche
Such kepen yuell Peter's key
Yet they mote have some stock or stone
Gayly painted, and proudly dyght
To maken men lyuen upon
And say that it is full of might
About such, men set up great light
Other such stocks shull stand thereby
As dark as it were mydnyght
For it may make no mastry
That it leude people se mow
Thou Mary, thou worchest wonder things
About that, that men offren to now
Hongen broches, ouches, and rings
The priest purchases the offrynges
But he nyll offer to none image
woe is the soul that he for synges
That precheth for such a pylgrimage
To men and women that been poor
That been Christ's own likeness
Men shullen offer at her door
That suffren honger and dystresse
And to such images offer less
That mow not feel thurst ne cold
The poor in sprete began Christ bless
Therefore offreth to feeble and old
Buckelers broad, and sweardes long
Baudryke, with baselardes kene
Such toles about her neck they honge
with Antichrist such priests been
Upon her deeds it is well seen
whom they seruen, whom they honoren
Antichrists they been clean
And gods goods fasly deuouren
Of scarlet and grene gay gowns
That mote be shape for the new
To clyppen and kyssen counten in towns
The damoseles that to the dance sewe
Cutted clothes to sewe her hew
with long pykes on her shone
Our gods gospel is not true
Either they seruen the dyuell or none
Now ben prestes pokes so wide
That men must enlarge the vestement
The holy gospel they done hyde
For they contraryen in raiment
Such priests of Lucifer ben sent
Like conquetours they ben arayde
The proud pendauntes at her ars ypent
Falsely the truth they han betrayde
Shryfte silver such woollen ask is
And woll men crepe to the crouche
None of the sacraments save asks
without mede shall no man touch
On her bishop their warant vouche
That is law of the decre
with mede and money thus they mouche
And thus they said is charity
In the mids of her mass
They nyll have no man but for hyre
And full shortly let forth pass
Such shull men find in each shyre
That personages for profit desire
To live in liking and in lusts
I dare not said, Sans ose ieo dyre
That such ben Antichrists priests
Or they yes the bishops why
Or they mote ben in his service
And holden forth her harlotry
Such prelates ben of feeble empryse
Of Gods grame such men agryse
For such matters that taken mede
How they excuse hem, and in what wise
Me thinks they ought greatly dread
They said that it to no man longs
To reprove them though they err
But falsely gods goodesse they fongeth
And therwyth maynteyne woe and werre
Her deeds should be as bright as sterre
Her living, leude man's light
They say the pope may not err
Need must that pass man's might
Though a pressed lie with his leman al night
And tellen his fellow, and he him
He goth to mass anon right
And says he syngeth out of sin
His bird abides him at his ynne
And dyghteth his dinner the mean while
He syngeth his mass for he would win
And so he weneth God begyle
Hem thinks long till they be met
And that they vsen forth all the year
Among the folk when he is set
He holds no man half his pere
Of the bishop he has powere
To soil men, or else they ben lore
His absolution may make them skere
And woe is the soul that he syngeth fore
The Gryffon began for to threte
And said, of monks can thou ought
The Pellycan said, they ben full great
And in this world much woe has wrought
Saint benet, that her order brought
Ne made hem never on such manner
I trow it came never in his thought
That they should use so great power
That a man should a monk lord call
Ne serve on knees, as a king
He is as proud as prince in pall
In meat, and drink, and all thing
Some wearen myter and ring
with double worsted well ydyght
with royal meat and rich drink
And rydeth on a courser as a knight
With hawk and with hounds eke
with broches or ouches on his hode
Some say no mass in all a weke
Of deynties is her most food
with lordshyppes and with bondmen
This is a royal religion
Saint Benet made never none of hem
To have lordshyppe of man ne town
Now they ben queynte and curious
with fine clothe cladde and served clean
Proud angry, and enuyous
Malice is much that they mean
In catchynge crafty and covetous
Lordly lyuen in great liking
This living is not religious
According to Benette in his living
They ben clerks, her courts they over se
Her poor tenaunce fully they slyte
The hyre that a man amerced be
The gladlyer they woll it write
This is far from Christ's pouerte
For all with couetyse they endyte
On the poor they have no pity
Ne never hem cheryshe but ever hem byte
And commonly such ben comen
Of poor people, and of hem begete
That this perfection han ynomen
Her fathers ryden not but on her fete
And trauaylen sore for that they ete
In pouert lives young and old
Her fathers suffers drought and wete
Many hongry meles, thurst, and cold
And all this the monks han forsake
For Christ's love and saint Benette
To pride and ease have hem take
This religion is yuell besette
Had they ben out of religioun
They must have honged at the plowe
Threshynge and dykynge fro town to town
with sorry mete, and not half ynowe
Therefore they han this all forsake
And taken to riches, pride, and ease
Full few for God woll monks hem make
Little is such order for to praise
Saint Benet ordained it not so
But badde hem be cherelyche
In churlyche manner live and go
Boystous in earth, and not lor^lych
They dysclaunder saint Benette
Therefore they have his holy curse
Saint Benet with hem never met
But if they thought to rob his purse
I can no more hereof tell
But they ben like tho before
And clean serve the dyuell of hell
And ben his treasoure and his store
And all such other counterfaytours
Chanons, Canons, and such dysgysed
Ben gods enemies and traitors
His true religion han foul despised
Of Freres I have told before
In a making of a Creed
And yet I could tell worse and more
But men would weryen it to read
As gods goodness no man tell might
write ne speak, ne think in thought
So her falshed, and her unright
May no man tell that ever god wrought
The Gryffon said, thou can no good
Thou came never of no gentle kind
Other I trow thou waxest wood
Or else thou have lost thy mind
Should holy church have no heed?
who should be her gouernayle
who should her rule, who should her reed
who should her forthren, who should avail
Each man shall live by his travail
who best does, shall have most mede
with strength if men the church assail
with strength men must defend her need
And the pope were purely poor
Nedy, and nothing ne had
He should be driven from door to door
The wicked of him nolde not be dradde
Of such an heed men would be sad
And synfully lyuen as hem lust
with strength, amends such be made
with wepen wolves from sheep be wust
If the pope and prelates would
So beg, and bydde, bow and borowe
Holy church should stand full cold
Her servants sytte and soupe sorrow
And they were noughty foul and horowe
To worship god men would wlate
Both on even and on morrow
Such harlotry men would hate
Therefore men of holy church
Should ben honest in all thing
worshypfully gods works werche
So seems it to serve Christ her king
In honest and in clean clothing
with vessels of gold and clothes rich
To God honestly to make offrynge
To his lordshypppe none is lyche
The Pelican cast an houge cry
And said alas, why say thou so
Christ is our heed that sytteth on hye
Heddes ne ought we have no mo
we ben his members both also
And father he taught us to call him als
Masters to be called defended he tho
All other masters ben wicked and falls
That takes maystry in his name
Goostly, and for earthly good
Kings and lords should lordshyp hane
And rule the people with mylde mode
Christ for us that shed his blood
Badde his priests no maystershyp have
Ne carke not for cloth ne fode
From every myschefe he will hem save
Her rich clothing shall be ryghtwysnesse
Her treasoure, true life shall be
Charity shall be her richesse
Her lordshyppe shall be unite
Hope in God, her honest
Her vessel clean conscience
Poor in spirit, and humilite
Shall Be holy churches defense
What said the Gryffon may the grieve
That other folks faren well
what haste thou to done with her live
Thy falsheed each man may feel
For thou can no catell get
But lyuest in land as a lorell
with glosynge gettest thou thy mete
So fares the deuell that wonneth in hell
He would that each man there should dwell
For he lives in clean envy
So with the tales that thou do tell
Thou would other people dystry
with your gloss, and your heresy
For ye can live no better life
But clean in hypocrisy
And bryngest the in woe and strife
And therwyth have not to done
For ye ne have here no cure
Ye serve the dyuell, neither God ne man
And he shall pay you your hyre
For ye woll fare well at feestes
And warm clothed for the cold
Therefore ye gloss gods hestes
And begyle the people young and old
And all the seven sacraments
Ye speak against, as ye were slye
Against tythynges, offringes, with your ente^tes
And on our lords body falsely lie
And all this ye done to live in case
As who says, there ben none such
And said the pope is not worth a pease
To make the people again him gruche
And this comes in by fendes
To bring the christen in dystaunce
For they would that no man were friends
Leave thy chattrynge with myschaunce
If thou live well, what wylt thou more
Let other men live as hem list
Spend in good, or keep in store
Other men's conscience never thou nyst
Ye han no cure to answer fore
what meddell ye, that han not to done
Let men live as they han done yore
For thou shalt answer for no man
The Pelican said, Sir, nay
I dispysed not the pope
Ne no sacrament, soth to say
But speak in charity and good hope
But I despise her hye pride
Her richesse, that should be poor in spirit
Her wickedness is know so wide
They serve god in false habyte
And turnen meekness in to pride
And lowlynesse in to hye degree
And gods words turn and hyde
And that am I moved by charity
To let men to live so
with all my conning and al my might
And to warn men of her woe
And to tell hem troth and right
The sacraments be soul hele
If they ben used in good use
Against that speak I never a dele
For then were I nothing wise
But they that vsen hem in mysse manner
Or set hem up to any sale
I trow they shall abye hem dear
This is my reason, this is my tale
who so takes hem vnryghtfullyche
Against the ten commandments
Or by gloss wreched lyche
Sells any of the sacraments
I trow they do the deuell homage
In that they weten they do wrong
And thereto I dare well wage
They seruen Satan for all her song
To tythen and offren is wholesome life
So it be done in dew manner
A man to houselyn and to shryue
wedding, and all the other in fere
So it be another sold ne bought
Ne take ne give for couetyse
And it be so taken it is naught
who sells hem so, may sore agryse
On our Lords body I do not lie
I say soth through true read
His flesh and blood through his mystrye
Is there, in the form of bread
How it is there, it needs not strive
whether it be subgette or accydent
But as Christ was, when he was on live
So is he there verament
If pope or cardynall live good live
As Christ commanded in his gospel
Against that woll I not strive
But me thinks they live not well
For if the pope lived as god bid
Pride and highness he should despise
Richesse, couetyse, and crown on head
Meekness and pouerte he should use
The Gryffon said he should abye
Thou shall be brent in balefull fire
And all thy sect I shall dystrye
Ye shall be hanged by the swyre
Ye shullen be hanged and to draw
who gives you leave for to preach
Or speak against gods law
And the people thus falsely teach
Thou shall be cursed with book and bell
And dysseuered from holy church
And clean ydampned into hell
Otherwise but ye woll worche
The Pellycan said that I ne dread
Your cursynge is of little value
Of god I hope to have my mede
For it is falshede that ye show
For ye ben out of charity
And wylneth vengeance, as did Nero
To suffren I woll ready be
I dread not that thou can do
Christ badde ones suffer for his love
And so he taught all his servants
And but thou amend for his sake above
I dread not all thy mayntenaunce
For if I dread the worlds hate
Me thinks I were little to praise
I dread nothing your hye estate
Ne I dread not your disease
Would ye turn and leave your pride
Your hye port, and your richesse
Your cursynge should not go so wide
God bring you into ryghtwysnesse
For I dread not your tyranny
For nothing that ye can done
To suffer I am all ready
Syker I recke never how soon
The Gryffon grynned as he were wode
And looked lovely as an owl
And swore by cocks heart blood
He would him tere every doule
Holy church thou dysclaundrest foul
For thy reasons I woll the all to race
And make thy flesh to rote and moule
Losell, thou shalt have hard grace
The Gryffon flewe forth on his way
The Pellycane did sytte and weep
And to him self he began say
God would that any of Christ's sheep
Had herd, and yeake keep
Each a word that here said was
And would it writ and well it keep
God would it were all for his grace
Plowman. I answerde, and said I would
If for my travail any man would pay

Pelyca^. He said yes, these yt god han sold
For they han store of money

Plowma^. I said, tell me and thou may
why tellest thou men's trespace?

Pelycan. He said, to amend hem in good fay
If God woll give me any grace

For Christ him self is lykened to me
That for his people dyed on rode
As fare I, right so fares he
He fedeth his birds with his blood
But these done yuell against good
And ben his fone under friends face
I told hem how her living stood
God amend hem for his grace
Plowma^. what ayleth ye Gryffon, tell why
That he holds on that other side
For they two ben lykely
And with kinds robben wide

Pellica^. The foul betokens pride
As Lucifer, that high flewe was
And sith he did him in evil hyde
For he agylted gods grace

As bird flies up in the air
And lives by birds that been meke
So these be flow up into dyspayre
And shenden sely souls eke
The souls that been in sins seek
He culleth hem, knele therefore alas
For brybry gods forbode break
God amend it for his grace
The hinder part is a lyoun
A robber and a rauynere
That robs the people in earth a down
And in earth holds none his pere
So fares this foul both far and nere
And with te^porel strength they people chase
As a lion proud in earth here
God amend hem for his grace
Pelican. He slew forth with his wings twain
All droupynge, dased, and dull
But soon the Gryffon came again
Of his fowls the earth was full
The Pelican he had cast to pull
So great a nombre never seen there was
what manner of fowls tellen I woll
If God woll give me of his grace

With the Gryffon comen fowls feel
Rauyns, rokes, crows, and pie
Grayfoules, agadred well
Igurde above they would hye
Gledes and bosardes weren hem by
white molles and puttockes token her place
And lapwynges, that well co^neth lie
This fellowship han for gerde her grace
Long the Pelican was out
But at last he comes again
And brought with him the Phoenix stout
The Gryffon would have flow full faint
His fowls that flewen as thycke as rain
The Phoenix tho began hem chase
To fly from him it was in vain
For he did vengeance and no grace
He slew hem down without mercy
There astarte neither free ne thrall
On him they cast a rufull cry
when the Gryffon down was fall
He beat hem not, but slew hem all
whyther he hem drove no man may trace
Under the earth me thought they yall
Alas they had a feeble grace
The Pelican then axed right
For my writing if I have blame
who woll for me fight of flight?
who shall shield me from shame
He that had a maid to dame
And the lamb that slain was
Shall shield me from gostly blame
For erthely harm is gods grace
Therefore I pray every man
Of my writing have me excused
This writing writes the Pelican
That thus these people has despised
For I am fresh fully aduysed
I nyll not maynteyne his manace
For the deuell is often dysguysed
To bring a man to yuell grace
Wyteth the Pelican and not me
For hereof I nyl not auowe
In hye ne in low, ne in no degree
But as a fable take it ye mow
To holy church I will me bow
Each man to amend him Christ send space
And for my writing me allow
He that is almighty for his grace
FINIS.
Thus ends the book of Caunterbury tales. And here after follows the Romaunt
of the Rose.
The Romau^t of the Rose.

Many man sayen, that in sweuenynges
There nys but fables and lesynges
But men may some sweuen seen
which hardlye that false ne been
But aftewarde ben apparaunt
This may I draw to warraunt
An author that hight Macrobes
That halte not dreams false ne lees
But vndoth us the auysyoun
That whylom met king Cipioun
And whosoever says, or weneth it be
A^ape, or else nycetie
To wene that dremes after fall
Let whosoever list a fool me call
For this trow I, and say for me
That dremes signifiaunce be
Of good and harm to many wightes
That dremen in her sleep a nyghtes
Full many things covertly
That fallen after all openly
within my twenty year of age
when that love takes his courage
Of young folk, I went soon
To bed as I was wont to done
And fast I slept, and in slepyng
Me met such a swenyng
That like me wonders well
But in that sweue is never a dele
That it nys afterward befall
Rygh as this dream wol tell us all
Now this dreme wol I ryme aryght
To make your hertes gaye and light
For love it prays, and also
Commands we that it be so
And if there any ask me
whether that it be, he or she
How this book, which is here
Shall hate that I read here
It is the Romaunce of the Rose
In which all the art of love I gloss.
The matter fair is of to make
God grant me in gre that she it take
For whom that it begone is
And that is she, that has ywys
So mokel pryse, and thereto she
So worthy is beloved to be
That she well ought of pryse and right
Be cleped Rose of every wight
That it was May me thought tho
It is five year or more ago
That it was May, thus dremed me
In time of love and iolitie
That all thing gynneth waxen gay
For there is neither buske nor hay
In May, that it nyl shrouded been
And it with new leaves wrene
These woddes eke recoueren grene
That dry in winter ben to seen
And the earth wexeth proud withal
For swote dewes that on it fall
And the pore estate forgette
In which that winter had it set
And than becomes the ground so proud
That it woll have a new shroude
And makes so queynt his robe and fair
That it had hewes an hundred pair
Of grass and flowers, ynde and Pers
And many hewes full diverse
That is the robe I mean ywys
Through which the ground to praysen is
The birds that han lefft her song
while they han suffered cold full strong
In wethers grylle, and derke to sight
Ben in may, for the sun bright
So glad, that they show in syngyng
That in her heart is such lykyng
That they mote syngen and ben light
Than does the nyghtyngale her might
To maken noise, and syngen blythe
Than is blysfull many a sithe
The chelaundre, and the popyngay
Than young folk entenden aye
For to ben gay and amarous
The time is than so sauorious
Hard is his heart that loves naught
In May when all this mirth is wrought
when he may on these branches here
The small byrbes syngen clear
Her blysfull sweet sweet song pitions
And in this seson delytious
when love affirms all thing
Me thougt one night in my slepyng
Right in my bed full redely
That it was by the morrow erly
And up I rose and began me clothe
Anon I wysh mine hondes both
A silver nedle forth I drowe
Out of an aguyler queynt ynowe
And began this nedle threde anon
For out of town me list to gone
The sown of bryddes for to hear
That on these buskes syngen clear
That in the sweet season that lefe is
with a threde bastyng my sleues
Alone I went in my playing
The small fowls song herkenyng
That payned hem full many a pair
To sing on bows blossomed fair
Iolyfe and gaye, full of gladness
Toward a river began I me dress
That I herd run fast by
For fayrer playing none saw I
Than playen me by that ryuere
For from an hill that stood there nere
Come down the streme full styffe and bold
Clear was the water, and as cold
As any well is soth to said
And somdele less it was than Said
But it was strayter, well away
And never saugh I er that day
The water that so well lyked me
And wonder glad was I to se
That lusty place, and that ryuere
And with that water that ran so clear
My face I wysh, tho saw I well
The botome ypaued every dele
with gravel, full of stones shene
The meadows soft, sote and grene
Beet right on the water side
Full clear was than the morrow tide
And full attempre out of dread
Tho began I walken through the mede
Downwarde aye, in my playing
The ryuers side coostyng.
And when I had a while ygone
I saw a Garden right anon
Full long and broad, and every dele
Enclosed was, and walled well
with hye walls enbatayled
Portrayed without and well entayled
with many rich portreytures
And both the images and peyntures
Began I behold besely
And I woll tell you redely
Of thilke images the semblaunce
As far as I have remembrance.
A mydde saw I hate stand
That for her wrath and ire, and onde
Seemed to be a mynoresse
And angry with a chyderesse
And full of gyle, and fell courage
By semblaunt was that ylke image
And she was nothing well arrayed
But like a wode woman afraid
Yfrounced foul was her vysage
And grynnyng for disputous rage
Her nose snorted up for tene
Full hydous was she for to seen
Full foul and rusty was she this
Her heed ywryththen was ywys
Full grymly with a great towayle.
An image of an other entayle
A list half was her fast by
Her name above her heed saw I
And she was called Felony
An other image that vyllany
Ycleped was saw I and fond
Upon the wall on her right hand
Vyllany was like somdele
That other image, and trusts well
She seemed a wicked creature
By countenance in portreture
She seemed be full dispytous
And eke full proud, and outrageous
well could he paynt I undertake
That such an image could make
Full foul and chorlysh seemed she
And eke vyllanous for to be
And little could of norture
To worship any creature.
And next was painted Couetyse
That eggeth folk in many a gyse
To take and give right naught again
And great treasures up to layne
And that is she that for usure
Leueth to many a creature
The less for the more wynnyng
So covetous is her brennyng
And that is she for pens feel
That teaches for to rob and steel
These thieves and these small harlotes
And that is routh, for by her throtes
Full many one hongeth at the last
She makes folk compass and cast
To taken other folks thing
Through robbery and myscouetyng
And that is she that makes trechours
And she makes false pledours
That with her terms and her domes
Done maidens, children, and eke gromes
Her heritage to forgo
Full crooked were her hondes two
For couetyse is ever wode
To grypen other folks good
Couetyse, for her wynnyng
Full lefe has other men's thing
An other image set saugh I
Next Couetise fast by
And she was cleped Auaryce
Full foul in payntyng was that vice
Full sad and caytyfe was she eke
And also grene as any leke
So evil hewed was her color
Her seemed to have lived in langour
She was like thing for hungre deed
That lad her life only by breed
Kneden with eysell strong and egre
And thereto she was lean and megre
And she was clad full poorly
All in a torn courtpy
As she were al with dogs torn
And both behind and eke beforne
Clouted was she beggarly
A mantell honge her fast by
Upon a benche weke and small
A burnyt cote honge there withal
Furred with no menyuere
But with a furre rough of here
Of lamb skynnes heavy and blake
It was full old I undertake
For Avarice to cloth her well
Ne hastes her never adele
For certainly it were her loathe
To wearren often that ylke clothe
And if it were forweared, she
would have full great nycetie
Of clothyng, er she bought her new
All were it bad of woll and hew
This Avarice held in her hand
A purse that honge by a band
And that she hid and bond so strong
Men must abide wonder long
Out of the purse or there come ought
For that ne comes in her thought
It was not certain her intent
That fro that purse a penny went
And by that image nygh enough
was painted Envy that never lough
Nor never well in her heart ferde
But if she either saw or herd
Some great myschannce, or great disese
Nothing may so much her plese
As myschefe and mysaduenture
Or when she sees discomfyture
Upon any worthy man fall
Than lyketh her well withal
She is full glad in her courage
If she se any great lynage
Be brought to naught in shameful wise
And if a man in honor rise
Or by his wit, or by his prowess
Of that has she great heaviness
For trusts well she goth nigh wood
when any chance happeth good
Envy is of such cruelty
That faith ne troth holds she
To friend ne fellow, badde or good
Ne she has kynne none of her blood
That she nys full her enemy
She nolde, I dare said hardely
Her own father fared well
And sore abides she every dele
Her malice, and her male talent
For she is in so great turment
And hate such, when folk does good
That nygh she melts for pure wood
Her heart kerueth and so breaks
That god the people well awreketh
Envy ywys shall never let
Some blame upon the folk to set
I trow that if Envy ywys
Knew the best man that is
On this side or beyond the sea
Yet somewhat lacken him would she
And if he were so hende and wise
That she ne might al abate his pryse
Yet would she blame his worthynesse
Or by her words make it less
I saw Envy in that payntyng
Had a wonderful lokyng
For she ne looked but awry
Or ouetwharte, all baggyngly
And she had a foul usage
She might look in no vysage
Of man ne woman, forth right plain
But shu^te her one eye for disdain
So for envy brenned she
when she might any man se
That fair or worthy were, or wise
Or else stood in folks pryse
Sorrow was painted next Envy
Upon that wall of masourye
But well was seen in her color
That she had lived in langour
Her seemed to have the iaundice
Not half so pale was Auaryce
Ne nothing like of leanesse
For sorrow, thought, and great distress
That she had suffered day and night
Made her yelowe, and nothing bright
Full fade, pale, and megre also
was never wight yet half so woe
As that her seemed for to be
Nor so fulfilled with ire, as she
I trow that no wight might her plese
Nor do that thing that might her ese
Nor she ne would her sorrow slake
Nor comfort none unto her take
So deep was her woe begone
And eke her heart in anger run
A sorrowful thing well seemed she
Nor she had nothing slow be
For to cratchen all her face
And for to rent in many place
Her clothes, and for to tere her swyre
As she that was fulfilled of ire
And all to torn lay eke her here
About her shulders here and there
As she that had it all to rent
For anger and for male talent
And eke I tell you certainly
How that she wept full tenderly
In world nys wight so hard of heart
That had seen her sorrows smerte
That nolde have had of her pytye
So woe begone a thing was she
She al to dashed her self for woe
And smote together her hondes two
To sorrow was she full intentyfe
That woeful rechelesse caytyfe
Her rought little of playing
Or of clyppynge or kissing
For whosoever sorrowful is in heart
Him lust not to play ne sterte
Ne for to dauncen, ne to sing
Ne may his heart in tempre bring
To make joy on even or morrow
For joy is contrary unto sorrow.
Elde was painted after this
That shorter was a foot iwys
Than she was wont in her yonghede
Uneath her self she might feed
So feeble and eke so old was she
That faded was all her beautye
Full salowe waxen her color
Her heed for hoar was white as flower.
Iwys great qualme ne were it none
Ne sin, although her life were gone
All woxen was her body vnwelde
And dry and dwyned al for elde
A foul forwelked thing was she
That whylom round and soft had be
Her ears shoken fast withal
As from her heed they would fall
Her face frounced and forpyned
And both her hondes lorne forwyned
So old she was, that she ne went
A foot, but it were by potent
The time that passes night and day
And restless trauayleth aye
And steleth from us so privily
That to us seems sekerly
That it in one point dwells ever
And certes it ne rests never
But goth so fast, and passes aye
That there nys man that think may
what time that now present is
Asks at these clerks this
For men think it redely
Three times been passed by
The time that may not soiourne
But goth, and may never return
As water that down renneth aye
But never drop return may
There may nothing as time endure
Metal, nor erthly creature
For all thing it frette and shall
The time eke that changes all
And all does wax, and fostred be
And all thing destroys he
The time that eldeth our ancestors
And eldeth kings and emperors
And that us all shall ouerco^men
Er that death us shall have no^men
The time that has all in welde
To elden folk had made her elde
So inly, that to my wetyng
She might help her self nothing
But turned again unto chyldheed
She had nothing her self to lead
Ne wit ne pythe in her hold
More than a child of two year old
But nathelesse I trow that she
was fair sometime, and fresh to se
when she was in her right full age
But she was past all that passage
And was a doted thing beco^men
A furred cappe on had she nummen
well had she clad her self and warm
For cold might else done her harm
These old folk have always cold
Her kind is such when they ben old.
Another thing was done there writ
That seemed like an Ipocryt
And it was cleped Pope holy
That ylke is she, that privily
Ne spares never a wicked deed.
when men of her take none head
And makes her outward precious
with pale vysage and pytous
And seems a simple creature
But there nys no misauenture
That she ne thinks in her courage
Full like to her was thylke image
That maked was like her semblaunce
She was full simple of countenance
And she was clothed and eke shod
As she were for the love of God
Yolden to religion
Such seemed her devotion
A psauter held she fast in hand
And besyly she began to fond
To make many a faint prayere
To god, and to his saints dear
Ne she was gaye, fresh, ne iolyfe
But seemed to be full ententyfe
To good works, and to fair
And thereto she had on an hair
Ne certes she was fat nothing
But seemed weary for fasting
Of color pale and deed was she
From her the gates aye werned be
Of paradyse, that blysful place
For such folk maken lean her grace
As Christ says in his Euangyle
To get hem prise in town a while
And for a little glory veigne
They lesen god and eke his reign
And alderlaste of euerychone
was painted Pouert al alone
That not a penny had in hold
Although she her clothes sold
And though she should an honged be
For naked as a worm was she
And if the wether stormy were
For cold she might have dyed there.
She ne had on but a strayte old sack.
And many a cloute on it there stacke
This was her cote, and her mantele
No more was there never adele
To cloth her with, I undertake
Great leyser had she to quake
And she was put, that I of talk
Far fro these other, up in an halke
There lurked, and there coured she
For poor thing where so it be
Is shamefaste, and despised aye
Acursed may well be that day
That poor man conceived is
For god wot al to selde iwys
Is any poor man well yfedde
Or well arrayed or ycledde
Or well beloved, in such wise
In honor, that he may arise.
Al these things well auysed
As I have you er this devised
with gold and assure over all
Depaynted were on the wall
Square was the wall, and high somdele
Enclosed, and ybarred well
Instead of hegge, was that gardyn
Come never shepherde therein
In to that gardyn, well wrought
who so that me could have brought
By ladders, or else by degree
It would well have lyked me
For such solace, such joy, and pley
I trow that never man ne sey
As was in that place delicious
The gardyn was not dangerous
To herberowe birds many one
So rich a year was never none
Of birds song, and branches grene
Therein were birds mo I wene
Then been in all the realm of France
Full blisful was the accordaunce
Of sweet pytous song they made
For all this world it ought glade.
And I my self so merry ferde.
when I her blysful songs herd
That for an hundred pound would I
If that the passeage openly
Had be unto me free
That I nolde entren for to se
Thassemble, god keep it (...) care
Of birds, which therein ware
That songen through her merry throtes
Daunces of love, and merry notes.
when I thus herd fowls sing
I fell fast in a waymentyng
By which art, or by what engyn
I might come in to that gardyn
But way I couthe find none
In to that gardayn for to gone
Ne naught wist I if that there were
Either hole or place where
By which I might have enter
Ne there was none to teach me
For I was al a lone I wys
For woe and anguyshe of this
Till at last bethought I me
That by no way ne might it be
That there nas ladder ne way to pace
Or hole, in to so fair a place
Tho began I go a full great paas
Enuyron, even in compass
The closyng of the square wall
Till that I found a wicket small
So shette, that I ne might in gone
And other enter was there none
Upon the door I began to smite
That was fetys, and so lyte
For other way could I not seek
Full long I shofe, and knocked eke
And stood full long al herkenynge
If that I herd any wight coming
Till that the door of thylke enter
A maiden curteys opened me
Her here was as yelowe of hew
As any basen scoured new
Her flesh tender as is a chycke
with bent brows, smoth and slycke
And by measure large were
The openyng of her eyes clear
Her nose of good proporcion
Her eyes gray, as is a faucon
with sweet breath, and well sauoured
Her face white, and well colored
with little mouth and round to se
A cloue chynne eke had she
Her neck was of good fassyon
In length and greatness by reason
without bleyne, scabbe, or royne
Fro Jerusalem unto Burgoyne
There nys a fair neck ywys
To feel how smoth and soft it is
Her throat also white of hew
As snow on branch snowed new
Of body full well wrought was she
Men neden not in no country
A fayrer body for to seek
And of fine Orfrays had she eke
A chapelet, so semely on
Ne wered never maid upon
And fair above that chapelet
A rose garlande had she set
She had a gay mirror
And with a rych gold tresour
Her heed was tressed queyntly
Her sleues sewed fetously
And for to keep her hands fair
Of gloves white she had a pair
And she had on a cote of grene
Of cloth of Gaunt, withouten wene
well seemed by her apparayle
She was not wont to great travail
For when she kempt was fetouslye
And well arrayed and rychly
Than had she done al her iournee
For merry and well begone was she
She ladde a lusty life in May
She had no thought, by night ne day
Of nothing, but if it were only
To grayth her well and vncouthly.
when that this door had opened me
This May, semely for to se
I thanked her as I best might
And asked her how that she hight
And what she was, I asked eke
And she to me was naught vnmeke
Ne of her answer dangerous
But fair answerde, and said thus
Lo s^e, my name is ydelnesse
So clepe men me, more and less
Full mighty and full rich am I
And that of one thing namely
For I entende to nothing
But to my joy, and my playeng
And for to kembe and trysse me
Aquaynted am I and prive
with mirth, lord of this gardyne
That fro the land of Alexandryne
Made the trees hither to be fette
That in this garden been ysette
And when the trees were waxen on hight
This wall, that stant here in thy sight
Did mirth enclosen al about
And these images al without
He did hem both entayle and peynte
That neither been iolyfe ne queynte
But they been full of sorrow and woe
As thou haste seen a while ago
ANd often time him to solace
Sir mirth comes in to this place
And eke with him comes his meyne
That lyuen in lust and ioylyte
And now is mirth therein, to here
The birds how they syngen clear
The mauys and the nyghtyngale
And other ioly birds small
And thus he walks to solace
Him and his folk, for sweter place
To playen in, he may not find
Although he sought one in till Inde
The alther fairest folk to se
That in this world may found be
Has mirth with him in his route
That folowen him always about.
when ydelnesse had told all this
And I had herkened well ywys
Than said I to dame ydelnesse
Now also wysly god me bless
Sith mirth, that is so fair and fre
Is in this yerde, with his meyne
Fro thylke assemble, if I may
Shall no man werne me to day
That I this night ne mote it se
For well wene I there with him be
A fair and ioly company
Fulfilled of al curtesye
And forth without words mo
In at the wycket went I tho
That Idelnesse had opened me
In to that garden fair to se
And when I was in ywys
mine heart was full glad of this
For well wend I full sykerly
Have been in paradyse erthly
So fair it was, that trusts well
It seemed a place espirituell
For certes as at my deuyse
There is no place in paradyse
So good in for to dwell or be
As in that garden thought me
For there was many a bird syngyng
Throughout the yerde al thryngyng
In many places were nyghtyngales
Alps, fynches, and wodwales
That in her sweet song delyten
In thylke places as they habyten
There might men se many flocks
Of turtles and lauerockes
Chalaundres feel saw I there
That weary nygh forsongen were
And thrustels, teryns, and mauyse
That songen for to wine hem pryse
And eke to surmount in her song
That other birds hem among
By note made fair seruise
These birds, that I you devise
They song her song, as fair and well
As angels done espirituell
And trusts me, when I hem herd
Full lusty and well I ferde
For never yet such melodye
was herd, of man that might dye
Such sweet song was hem among
That me thought it no birds song
But it was wonder like to be
Song of Meremaydens of the sea
That for her syngyng is so clear
Though we Meremaydens clepe hem here
In English, as is our vsaunce
Men clepe hem Sereyns in France
ENtentyfe weren for to sing
These birds, that not vnkonnynge
were of her craft, and aprentyse
But of song subtyl and wise
And certes, when I herd her song
And saw the grene place among
In heart I wext so wonder gay
That I was never erst, er that day
So iolyfe, nor so well bygo
Ne merry in heart, as I was tho
And than wist I, and saw full well
That ydelnesse me served well
That me put in such iolyte
Her friend well ought I for to be
Sith she the door of that gardyn
Had opened, and me let in.
From hence forth, how that I wrought
I shall you tell, as me thought
First whereof mirth served there
And eke what folk there with him were
without fable I will discriue
And of that garden eke as bliue
I wol you tellen after this
The fair fassyon al ywys
That well wrought was for the nones
I may not tell you al atones
But as I may and can, I shall
By ordure tellen you all.
Full fair service, and eke full sweet
These birds maden as they sete
Lays of love, full well sownyng
they songen in her iargonyng
Some hye, and some low song
Upon the branches grene ispronge
The swetnesse of her melodye
Made al my heart in reuelrye
And when that I had herd I trow
These birds syngyng on a row
Than might I not with hold me
That I ne went in for to se
Her mirth, for my desyryng
was him to seen over all thing
His countenance and his manner
That sight was to me full dear.
THo went I forth on my right hand
Down by a little pathe I found
Of myntes full, and fenell grene.
And fast by without wene
Her mirth I found, and right anon
Unto her Mirth began I gone
There as he was him to solace
And with him in that lusty place
So fair folk and so fresh had he
That when I saw, I woundred me
Fro whence such folk might come
So fair they wexen all and some
For they were like, as to my sight
To angels, that been fethered bright
These folk, of which I tell you so
Upon a karole wenten tho
A lady karoled hem, that hight
Gladness, blysful and light
well could she sing and lustely
None half so well and semely
And couth make in song such refraynyng
It sat her wonder well to sing
Her voice full clear was and full sweet
She was not rude ne unmeet
But couth enough of such doing
As longs unto karollyng
For she was wont in every place
To syngen first, folk to solace
For syngyng most she gave her to
No craft had she so lefe to do.
THo myghteste thou karolles seen
And folk dance and merry been
And many a fair turnyng
Upon the grene grass springyng
There myghtest thou se these stutours
Mynstrales and eke ioglours
That well to sing did her pain
Some song longes of Lorayne
For in Loreyne her notes be
Full sweter than in this country
There was many a tymbestere
And saylours, that I dare well swear
Couth her craft full parfetly
The tymbres up full subtelly
They cast, and hente full often
Upon a finger fair and soft
That they failed never mo.
Full fetys damsels two
Right young, and full of semelyhede
In kyrtels, and none other wede
And fair tressed every tresse
Had mirth done for his nobleness
Amydde the carole for to dance
But thereof lies no remembrance
How that they daunced queyntly
That one would come al privily
Again that other, and when they were
Together almoost, they threw yfere
Her mouths so, that through her play
It seemed as they kyst always
To dauncen well couthe they the gyse
what should I more to you deuyse
Ne bode I never thence go
whiles that I saw hem dance so
Upon the karole wonder fast
I began behold, till at last
A lady began me for to espy
And she was cleped curtesye
The worshypfull, the debonayre
I pray to god ever fall her fair
Full curteysly she called me
what do ye there Beau sire (quod she)
Come, and if it like you
To dauncen, daunceth with us now
And I without taryeng
went in to the carollyng
I was abashed never a dele
But it to me lyked right well
That curtesye me cleped so
And bade me on the dance go
For if I had durst certain
I would have karoled right feign
As man that was to dance right blyth
Than began I look often sith
The shap, the bodies, and the cheres
The countenance and the maneres
Of all the folk that daunced there
And I shall tell what they were.
Full fair was mirth, full long and high
A fayrer man I never sigh
As round as appel was his face
Full roddy and white in every place
Fetys he was and well besey
with metely mouth, and eyes gray
His nose by mesure wrought full right
Cryspe was his here, and eke full bright
His shulders of large bread
And smallyshe in the gyrdelstede
He seemed like a purtreyture
So noble he was of his stature
So fair, so ioly, and so fetyse
with lymmes wrought at point deuyse
Deliver, smerte, and of great might
Ne saw thou never man so light
Of herd uneath had he nothing
For it was in the first spryng
Full young he was, and merry of thought
And in samette, with birds wrought
And with gold beten full fetously
His body was clad full rychly
wrought was his robe in strange gyse
And all to slyttered for queyntyse
In many a place, low and hye
And shode he was with great maystrye
with shone decoped, and with lace
By drury, and by solace
His leefe a rosen chapelet
Had made, and on his heed it set
And were ye who was his sefe
Dame gladness there was him so lefe
That syngeth so well with glad courage
That from she was twelve year of age
She of her love grant him made
Sir mirth her by the finger hade
Daunsynge, and she him also
Great love was a twixt hem two
Both were they fair and bright of hew
She seemed like a rose new
Of colors, and her flesh so tender
That with a brere small and tender
Men might it cleue, I dare well se^
Her forheed frouncels al pley
Bent were her brows two
Her eyes gray, and glad also
That laugheden aye in her semblaunt
First or the mouth by covenant
I wot not what of her nose I shall discryue
So fair has no woman a live
Her here was yelowe, and clear shynyng
I wot no lady so lykyng
Or frayes fresh, was her garlande
I which have seen a thousand
Saw never ywys no garlande yet
So well wrought of sylke as it
And in an ouergylte samyte
Cladde she was, by great delight
Of which her leefe a robe werde
The meryer she in her heart ferde
And next her went, on her other side
The god of love, that can deuyde
Love, and as him lyketh it be
But he can cherles daunten, he?
And maken folks pride fallen
And he can well these lords thrallen
And ladies put at low degree
when he may hem to proud se.
This god of love of his fassyoun
was like no knave, ne quystroun
His beauty greatly was to prise
But of his robe to deuyse
I dread encombred for to be
For not ycladde in sylke was he
But all in flowers and stourettes
I painted all with amorettes
And with losenges and scochons
with birds, lyberdes, and lions
And other beasts wrought full well
His garment was euerydele
Ypurtrayed and ywrought with flours
By diverse medelynge of colors
Flowers there were of many gyse
Yset by compace in a syse
There lacked no flower to my dome
Ne not so much as flower of brom
Ne vyolet, ne eke peruynke
Ne flower none, that men can on think
And many a rose lefe full long
was entermedled there among
And also on his heed was set
Of roses reed a chapelet
But nyghtyngales a full great route
That flyen over his heed about
The leaves felden as they flyen
And he was al with birds wrien
with popingay, with nyghtyngale
with chaulaundre, and with wodewale
with fynche, with lark, and with archa^gel
He seemed as he were an angel
That down were comen fro heaven clear
Love had with him a bachelere
That he made always with him be
Sweet lokynge, clepyng was he
This bacheler stood beholding
The dance, and in his hand holdyng
Turk bows two, full well devised had he
That one of hem was of a tree
That bears a fruit of sauoure wicke
Full crooked was that foul stycke
And knotty here and there also
And black as bery, or any slo
That other vow was of a plant
without wemme, I dare warrante
Full even and by proporcion
Trectes and long, of full good fassyon
And it was painted well and twhitten
And over al diapred and written
with ladies and with bacheleres
Full lyghtsome and glad of cheres
These bows two held sweet lokyng
That seemed like no gadlyng
And ten broad arowes held he there
Of which five in his ryghthande were
But they were shaven well and dyght
Nocked, and fethered aryght
And al they were with gold begone
And strong poynted euerychon
And sharp for to keruen well
But iron was there none ne stele
For all was gold, men might se
Out take the feathers and the tree.
THe swyfteste of these arowes five
Out of a bow for to drive
And best fethered for to fly
And fairest eke, was cleped beauty
That other arowe, that hurts less
was cleped (as I trow) Symplesse
the third cleped was Fraunchyse
That fethered was in noble wise
with valor and with curtesye
The fourth was cleped company
That heavy for to shoten is
But who so shoteth right ywys
May therewith done great harm and woe
The fyfth of these, and last also
Fair Semblaunt men that arowe call
The leest grievous of hem al
yet can it make a full great wound
But he may hope his sores sound
That hurt is with that arowe ywys
His woe the better bestowed is
For he may sooner have gladness
His langour ought to be the less
Five arowes were of other gyse
That been full foul to deuyse
For shaft and end, soth for to tell
were also black as fend in hell
The first of hem is called pride
That other arowe next him beside
It was cleped vyllanye
That arowe was, as with felonye
Enuenymed, and with spitous blame
The third of hem was cleped shame
The fourth wanhope cleped is
The fyfth the new thought ywys
These arowes that I speak of here
were all five on one manner
And all were they resemblable
To hem was well syttyng and able
The foul crooked bow hydous
That knotty was, and all roynous
That bow seemed well to shete
These arowes five, that been unmeet
And contrary to that other five
But though I tell not as blyue
Of her power, ne of her might
Hereafter shall I tellen right
The soth, and eke signyfyaunce
As far as I have remembrance
All shall be said I undertake
Er of this book an end I make
Now come I to my tale again
But alderfyrst, I woll you said
The fassyon and the countenaunces
Of all the folk that on the dance is
The god of love iolyte and light
Ladde on his hand a lady bright
Of high prise, and of great degree
This lady was called beauty
And an arowe, of which I told
Full well thewed was she hold
Ne she was dark ne brown, but bright
And clear as the moon light
Again whom all the sterres semen
But small candels, as we demen
Her flesh was tender as dew of flower
Her chere was simple as bird in boure
As white as lylye or rose in rise
Her face gentle and treatise
Fetys she was, and small to se
No wyntred brows had she
Ne popped her, for it neded naught
To wyndre her, or to paynt her ought
Her tresses yelowe, and long straughten
Unto her heles down they raughten
Her nose, her mouth, and eye and cheke
well wrought, and all the remenaunt eke
A full great savor and a swote
Me thought in mine heart rote
As help me God, when I remember
Of the fassyon of every membre
In world is none so fair a wight
For young she was, and hewed bright
Sore pleasant, and fetyse with all
Gent, and in her myddell small
Beside Beauty yede Richesse
And hight lady of great noblesse
And great of price in every place
But who so durst to her trespace
Or till her folk, in work or deed
He were full hardy out of dread
For both she help and hyndre may
And that is not of yesterday
That rich folk have full great might
To help, and eke to grieve a wight
The best and greatest of valor
Dydden Richesse full great honor
And besy weren her to serve
For that they would her love deserve
They cleped her Lady great and small
This wide world her dredeth all
This world is all in her daungere
Her court has many a losengere
And many a traitor enuyous
That been full besy and curious
For to dysprayse, and to blame
That best deseruen love and name
To forne the folk hem to begylen
These losyngeours hem praise and smylen
And thus the world with word anoynten
But afterward they pryll and poynten
The folk, right to the bare bone
Behind her back when they ben gone
And foul abaten folks pryse
Full many a worthy man and wise
Han hyndred, and ydon to dye
These losyngeours with her flaterye
And makes folk full strange be
There as hem ought ben pryue
well yuell mote they thryue and thee
And yuell aryued mote they be
These losengeours full of envy
No good man loves her company.
Richesse a robe of purple on had
Ne trow not that I lie or mad
For in this world is none it lyche
Ne by a thousand dele so rich
Ne none so fair, for it full well
with Orfreyes leyde was euerydele
And purtrayde in the rybanynges
Of dukes stories, and of kings
And with a bend of gold tassyled
And knoppes fine of gold amyled
About her neck of gentle entayle
was shette the rich Cheuesayle
In which there was full great plente
Of stones clear, and fair to se.
Richesse a gyrdell had upon
The bokell of it was of ston
Of virtue great, and mokell of might
For who so bare the stone so bright
Of venyme durst him nothing dout
while he the stone had him about
That stone was greatly for to love
And till a rich man's behoue
worth all the gold in Rome, and Fryse
The Mourdant wrought in noble gyse
was of a stone full precious
That was so fine and virtuous
That whole a man it couth make
Of palsye, and of toth ache
And yet the stone had such a grace
That he was seker in every place
All thylke day not blind to been
That fasting might that stone seen
The bars were of gold full fine
Upon a tyssue of Satyne
Full heavy, great, and nothing light
In eueryche was a besaunt wight
Upon the tresses of richesse
was set a cercle for noblesse
Of brende gold, that full light shone
So fair trow I was never none
But he were konnynge for the nones
That could deuyse all the stones
That in that cercle shown clear
It is a wonder thing to here
For no man could praise or guess
Of hem the value or richesse
Rubyes there were, Saphyrs, Ragounces
And Emeraudes, more then two ounces
But all before full subtelly
A fine Charboncle set saw I
The stone so clear was and so bright
That all so soon as it was night
Men might seen to go for need
A mile or two, in length and bread
Such light sprange out of the stone
That Richesse wonder bright shone
Both her heed, and all her face
And eke about her all her place
Dame richesse on her hand began led
A young man full of semelyhede
That she best loved of any thing
His lust was much in housholdynge
In clothing was he full fetyse
And loved well to have horse of pryse
He wend to have reproved be
Of theft or murdre, if that he
Had in his stable an hackenay
And therefore he desired aye
To ben acqueynted with Richesse
For all his purpose, as I guess
was for to make great dyspence
wythouten warning or defense
And Richesse might it well sustene
And her dyspences well mayntene
And him always such plentye send
Of gold and silver for to spend
without lacking or daungere
As it were pourde in a garnere.
And after on the dance went
Largess, that set all her intent
For to ben honorable and free
Of Alexanders kynne was she
Her most joy was ywys
when that she yafe, and said: have this
Not auaryce the foul caytyfe
was half to grype so ententyfe
As Largess is, to give and spend
And God always ynowe her send
So that the more she yaue away
The more ywys she had always
Great loos has Largess, and great pryse
For both wise folk and unwise
were wholly to her bandon brought
So well with yeftes has she wrought
And if she had an enemy
I trow that she couth craftily
Make him full sone her friend to be
So large of yeftes, and wise was she
Therefore she stood in love and grace
Of rich and poor in every place
A full great fool is he ywys
That both rich and poor, and nygarde is
A lord may have no manner vice
That greueth more then auaryce
For nygarde never with strength of hand
May win him great lordshyp or land
For friends all to few has he
To done his will performed be
And who so woll have friends here
He may not hold his treasour dear
For by ensample tell I this
Right as an adamant ywys
Can drawn to him subtelly
The iron, that is laid thereby
So draws folks hertes ywys
Silver and gold that yeuen is
Largess had on a robe fresh
Of rich purpure Sarlynyshe
well fourmed was her face and clear
And opened had she her colere
For she right there had in present
Unto a lady made present
Of a gold broche, full well wrought
And certes it myssate her naught
For through her smock wrought with sylke
The flesh was seen as white as milk
Largess, that worthy was and wise
Held by the hand a knight of pryse
was sybbe to Arthour of Breteygne
And that was he that bare the enseygne
Of worship, and the Gousfaucoun
And yet he is of such renoun
That men of him say fair things
Before barons, earls, and kings
This knight was comen all newly
Fro tourneynge fast by
There had he done great chyualrye
Through his virtue and his maystrye
And for the love of his lemman
He cast down many a doughty man
And next him daunced dame Frau^chyse
Arrayed in full noble gyse
She nas not brown ne dunne of hew
But whyt as snow yfallen new
Her nose was wrought at point deuyse
For it was gentle and tretyse
with eyes glad, and brows hent
Her here down to her heles went
And she was simple as down on tree
Full debonayre of heart was she
She durst neither say ne do
But that, that her longs to
And if a man were in dystresse
And for her love in heaviness
Her heart would have full great pity
She was so amyable and free
For were a man for her bestadde
She would ben right sore adradde
That she did over great outrage
But she him help his harm taswage
Her thought it all a vylanye
And she had on a suckeny
That not of hemp heerdes was
So fair was none in all Arras
Lord it was ryddeled fetylly
There nas not a point truly
That it nas in his right assyse
Full well yclothed was Fraunchyse
For there nys no cloth sytteth bette
On damsel, then does rokette
A woman well more fetyse is
In rokette, then in cote ywys
The white rokette ryddeled fair
Betokens that full debonayre
And sweet was she that it bear
By her daunced a Bachelere
I can not tellen you what he hight
But fair he was and of good hight
All had he ben, I say no more
The lords son of wyndesore.
And next that daunced Curtesye
That praised was of low and hye
For neither proud ne fool was she
She for to dance called me
I pray God give her good grace
For when I come first into the place
She nas not nyce, ne outrageous
But wise and ware, and virtuous
Of fair speech, and fair answer
was never wight myssayde of here
She bare no rauncour to no wight
Clear brown she was, and thereto bright
Of face and body auenaunt
I wotte no lady so pleasant
She were worthy for to been
An emperesse or crowned queen.
And by her went a knight dauncynge
That worthy was and well speaking
And full well could he done honor
The knight was fair and styffe in stour
And in armure a semely man
And well-beloved of his lemman.
Fair Idelnesse then saugh I
That always was me fast by
Of her have I without fail
Told you the shappe and appareyle
For (as I said) Lo, that was she
That did to me so great bounte
She the gate of that garden
Vndyd, and let me passen in
And after daunced as I guess
And she fulfilled of lustynesse
That nas not yet.xij. year of age
with heart wild, and thought volage
Nyce she was, but she ne mente
None harm ne sleyght in her entente
But only lust and iolyte
For young folk, well weten ye
Have little thought, but on her play
Her lemman was beside always
In such a gyse that he her kyste
At all times that him list
That all the dance might it se
They make no force of preuyte
For who so spoke of hem yuell or well
They were ashamed never a dele
But men might seen hem kiss there
As it two young douues were
For young was thylke bachelere
Of beauty wot I none his pere
And he was right of such an age
As Youth his lefe, and such courage
The lusty folk that daunced there
And also other that with hem were
That weren all of her meyne
Full hende folk, wise, and free
And folk of fair port truly
There were all comenly
when I had seen the countenaunces
Of hem that ladden thus these daunces
Then had I will to gone and se
The garden that so lyked me
And loken on these fair Laurelles
On Pyne trees, Cedres, and Olmeres
The daunces then ended were
For many of hem that daunced there
where with her loves went away
Under the trees to have her play.
A Lord they lived lustely
A Great fool were he sekerly
That nolde his thanks such life led
For this dare I said out of dread
That who so might so well fare
For better life durst him not care
For there nys so good paradyse
As to have a love at his deuyse
Out of that place went I tho
And in that gardyn began I go
Playenge alonge full merely
The god of Love full hastily
Unto him Sweet lokynge clepte
No longer would he that she kept
His bow of gold, that shone so bright
He had hem bent anon right
And he full sone set an end
And at a brayde he began it bend
And took him of his arowes five
Full sharp and ready for to drive
Now God that sytteth in majesty
Fro deedly wounds he keep me
If so be that he had me shete
For if I with his arowe mete
It had me grieved sore ywys
But I that nothing wist of this
went up and down, full many a way
And he me followed fast always
But no where would I resle me
Till I had in all the garden be.
THe garden was by measurynge
Right even and square in compasynge
It as long was as it was large
Of fruit had every tree his charge
But it were any hydous tree
Of which there were two or three
There were, and that wot I full well
Of Pome garnettes a full great deal
That is a fruit full well to like
Namely to folk when they be syke
And trees there were, great foyson
That baren nuttes in her season
Such as men nutmygges call
That swote of savor ben wythall
And Almandres great plente
Fygges, and many a date tree
There weren, if men had need
Through the gardyn, in length and bread
There was eke werynge many a spyce
As clowe, gylofre, and lycorice
Gyngere, and greyne de Paris
Canell, and setewale of prys
And many a spyce delytable
To eaten when men rise fro table
And many homely trees there were
That peches, coins, and apples bear
Medlers, plommes, peers, chesteynis
Cheryse, of which many one feign is
Notes, aleys, and bolas
That for to seen it was solas
with many high laurer, and pyne
was renged clean all that gardyne
with Cypres, and with Olyueris
Of which that nygh no plenty here is
There were Elmes great and strong
Maples, ash, oak, aspe, plants long
Fine ewe, popler, and lyndes fair
And other trees full many a pair
what should I tell you more of it?
There were so many trees yet
That I should all encombred be
Er I had rekened every tree
These trees were set that I deuyse
One from another in assyse
Five fadome or six, I trow so
But they were hye and great also
And for to keep out well the son
The croppes were so thycke yronne
And every branch in other knytte
And full of grene leaves sytte
That son might there none dyscende
Lest the tender grasses shende
There might men Does and Roes yse
And of squyrels full great plente
From bow to bow always lepynge
Connes there were also playenge
That common out of her clapers
Of sundry colors and manners
And maden many a tourneynge
Upon the fresh grass spryngynge
In places saw I wells there
In which there no frogs were
And fair in shadow was every well
But I ne can the nombre tell
Of stremys small that by deuyse
Myrthe had done come through condyse
Of which the water in rennynge
Began make a noise full liking
About the brynkes of these wells
And by the stremes over all else
Sprange up the grass, as thycke yset
And soft as any velvet
On which men might his lemman ley
As on a fetherbed to pley
For the earth was full soft and sweet
Through moisture of the well wete
Spronge up the sote grene gras
As fair, as thycke, as myster was
But much amended it the place
That therth was of such a grace
That it of flowers has plente
That both in somer and winter be
There sprange the vyolet al new
And fresh peruynke rich of hew
And flowers yelowe, white, and read
Such plente grew there never in mede
Full gaye was all the ground and queynt
And poudred, as men had it peynt
with many a fresh and sondrye flower
That casten up full good sauoure
I woll not long hold you in fable
Of all this garden delectable
I mote my tongue stynten need
For I ne may wythouten dread
Naught tellen you the beauty all
Ne half the bounte there with all
I went on right hand and on left
About the place, it was not left
Till I had all the garden been
In the efters that men might seen
And thus while I went in my play
The God of love me followed aye
Right as an hunter can abide
The beast, till he sees his tide
To shoten at goodmesse to the dear
when that him needs go no nere
And so befyll, I rested me
Besides a well under a tree
which tree in France men call a Pyne
But sith the time of king Pepyne
Ne grew there tree in man's sight
So fair, ne so well woxe in hight
In all that yard so high was none
And spryngynge in a marble stone
Had nature set, the soth to tell
Under that pyne tree a well
And on the border all without
was written in the stone about
Letters small, that sayden thus
Here starfe the fair Narcisus.
Narcisus was a bachelere
That love had caught in his daungere
And in his net began him so strain
And did him so to weep and plain
That need him must his life forgo
For a fair lady that hight Echo
Him loved over any creature
And began for him such pain endure
That on a time she him told
That if he her louen nolde
That her behooved needs dye
There lay none other remedy
But nathelesse for his beauty
So fyers and dangerous was he
That he nolde graunten her asking
For weeping ne for fair prayenge
And when she herd him werne her so
She had in heart so great woe
And took it in so great dyspyte
That she without more respyte
was deed anon: but ere she deyde
Full pytously to God she prayde
That proud heart Narcisus
That was in love so dangerous
Might on a day ben hampred so
For love, and been so hot for woe
That never he might to joy attain
Then should he feel in every vain
what sorrow true lovers maken
That been so vyllaynously forsaken
This prayer was but reasonable
Therefore God held it ferme and stable
For Narcisus shortly to tell
By adventure came to ye well
To rest him in the shadowynge
A day, when he come from huntinge
This Narcisus had suffered pains
For rennynge all day in the playnes
And was for thurst in great dystresse
Of heart, and of his werynesse
That had his breath almost be nomen
when he was to that well ycomen
That shadowed was with branches grene
He thought of thylke water shene
To drink, and fresh him well wythall
And down on knees he began to fall
And forth his neck and heed out straught
To drink of that well a draught
And in the water anon was seen
His nose, his mouth, his eyes shene
And he thereof was all abashed
His own shadow had him betrasshed
For well wend he the form se
Of a child of great beauty
well couth love him wreke tho
Of danger and of pride also
That Narcisus sometime him bear
He quyte him well his guerdon there
For he mused so in the well
That shortly the soth to tell
He loved his own shadow so
That at last he starfe for woe
For when he saw that he his will
Might in no manner way fulfill
And that he was so fast caught
That he him couth comfort naught
He lost his wit, right in that place
And deyde within a little space
And thus his waryson he took
For the lady that he forsook
Ladies I pray ensample takes
Ye that against your love mystaketh
For if her death be you to wit
God can full well your wyle quyte.
WHen yt this lettre of which I tell
Had taught me yt it was ye well
Of Narcisus in his beauty
I began anon wythdrawe me
when it fell in me remembrance
That him betyde such myschaunce
But at the last then thought I
That scathlesse, full sekerly
I might unto the well go
whereof should I abashen so
Unto the well then went I me
And down I louted for to se
The clear water in the stone
And eke the gravel, which that shone
Down in the botome* as silver fine
For of the well, this is the fine
In world is none so clear of hew
The water is ever fresh and new
That welmeth up, with wawes bright
The mountenaunce of two finger hight
About it is grass spryngynge
For moist so thycke and well liking
That it ne may in winter dye
No more then may the sea be dry.
Down at the botome set saw I
Two cristall stones craftily
In thylke fresh and fair well
But o thing sothly dare I tell
That ye woll hold a great maruayle
when it is told, wythouten fail
For when the sun clear in sight
Cast in that well his bemes bright
And that the heete dyscended is
Then takes the cristall stone ywys
Again the son an hundred hewes
Blewe, yelowe, and reed that fresh and new is
Yet has the meruaylous cristall
Such strength, that the place over all
Both foul and tree, and leaves grene
And all the yerde in it is seen
And for to done you to understand
To make ensample woll I fond
Right as a myrrour openly
Shows all thing that stands thereby
As well the color, as the figure
wythouten any couerture
Right so the cristall stone shynynge
wythouten any dysceyuynge
The entrees of the yerde accuses
To him that in the water museth
For ever in which half that ye be
Ye may well half the gardyne se
And if the turn, he may right well
Seen the remnaunt every dele
For there is none so little thing
So hid ne closed with shyttynge
That it ne is seen, as though it were
Painted in the cristall there
This is the myrrour perillus
In which the proud Narcisus
Sey all his fair face bright
That made him sith to lie vpryght
For who so looks in that myrrour
There may nothing be his socour
That he ne shall there se somthynge
That shall him led into laughing.
Full many a worthy man has it
yblent, for folk of greatest wit
Ben soon caught here and waited
wythouten respyte ben they beyted
Here comes to folk of new rage
Here changes many a wight courage
Here lies no read ne wit thereto
For Venus son, dan Cupido
Has sown there of love the sede
That help ne lies there none, ne read
So cercleth it the well about
His gynnes has he set without
Right for to catch in his panters
These damsels and bachelors
Love will none other bird catch
Though he set either net or latche
And for the sede that here was sown
This well is cleped, as well is known
The well of Love, of very right
Of which there has full many a wight
Spoken in books dyuersely
But they shull never so verily
Description of the well here
Ne eke the sothe of this matere
As ye shull, when I have undo
The craft that her belongs to.
AL way me lyked for to dwell
To seen the crystal in the well
That showed me full openly
A thousand things fast by
But I may say in sorry hour
Stood I to loken or to power
For sythen I sore syghed
That Myrrour has me now entriked
But had I first known in my wit
The virtue and strengthes of it
I nolde not have mused there
Me had bette ben else where
For in the snare I fell anon
That had bytreshed many one
In thylke Myrrour saw I tho
Among a thousand things mo
A Roser charged full of rosis
That with an hedge about enclosis
Tho had I such lust and envy
That for Paris ne for Pauye
Nolde I have left to gone and se
There greatest heap of roses be
when I was with this rage hente
That caught has many a man and shente
Toward the Roser began I go
And when I was not far therfro
The savor of the roses swote
Me smote right to the heart rote
As I had all enbaumed me
And if I ne had endouted me
To have been hated or assailed
My thanks woll I not have failed
To pull a rose of all that route
To bear in mine hand about
And smellen to it where I went
But ever I dredde me to repent
And lest it grieved or forthought
The lord that thylke gardyn wrought
Of roses there were great wone
So fair ware never in Rone
Of knoppes close, some saw I there
And some well better woxen were
And some there ben of other moyson
That drowe nygh to her season
And spedde hem fast for to sprede
I love well such roses read
For broad roses, and open also
Ben passed in a day or two
But knoppes will fresh be
Two days at leest, or else three
The knoppes greatly lyked me
For fayrer may there no man se
who so might have one of all
It ought him ben full lefe withal
Might I garlonde of hem geten
For no richesse I would it leten
Among the knoppes I chief one
So fair, that of the remenaunt none
Ne preyse I half so well as it
When I auyse in my wit
For it so well was enlumyned
with color reed, as well fined
As nature couthe it make fair
And it has leaves well four pair
That kind has set through his knowing
About the red roses springyng
The stalk was as ryshe right
And thereon stood the knoppe upright
That it ye bowed upon no side
The swote smell spronge so wide
That it dyed all the place about
when I had smelled the savor swote
No will had I fro thence yet go
But somdele nere it went I tho
To take it, but mine hand for dread
Ne durst I to the Rose bid
For thystels sharp of many manners
Netles, thorns, and hoked briers
For much they distourbled me
For sore I dradde to harmed be.
THe god of love, with bow bent
That all day set had his talent
To pursue and to spyen me
was stondyng by a fygge tree
And when he saw how that I
Had chosen so ententifly
The bothum more unto my pay
Than any other that I say
He took an arowe, full sharply whette
And in his bow when it was set
He straight up to his eere drough
The strong bow, that was so tough
And shot at me so wonder smerte
That through mine eye unto mine heart
The takel smote, and deep it went
And therwithal such cold me hente
That under clothes warm and soft
Sythen that day I have chyuered often
When I was hurt thus in stounde
I fell down platte unto the ground
Mine heart failed, and faynted aye
And long time in swoune I lay
But when I came out of swounyng
And had wit, and my felyng
I was al mate, and wend full well
Of blood have lorne a full great deal
But certes the arowe that in me stood
Of me ne drew no drop of blood
For why, I found my wounds al drey
Than took I with mine hondes twey
The arowe, and full fast it ought plyght
And in the pullyng sore I sight
So at the last the shafte of tree
I drough out, with the feathers three
But yet the hoked heed ywis
The which Beauty called is
Began so deep in mine heart pace
That I it might not arace
But in mine heart still it stood
All bledde I not a drop of blood
I was both anguyshous and trouble
For the peril that I saw double
I nyste what to say or do
Ne get a leche my wounds to
For neither through grass ne rote
Ne had I help of hope ne bote
But to the bothum ever mo
Mine heart drew, for all my woe
My thought was in none other thing
For had it ben in my keeping
It would have brought my life again
For certes euenly, I dare well said
The sight only, and the sauoure
Alegged much of my langoure
Than began I for to draw me
Toward the Bothom fair to se
And love had get him in his throw
Another arowe in to his bow
And for to shote began him dress
The arowes name was Symplesse
And when that Love began nygh me nere
He drowe it up withouten were
And shot at me with al his might
So that this arowe anon right
Throughout eygh as it was found
In to mine heart has made a wound
Than I anon did all my craft
For to drawn out the shafte
And therwithall I syghed efte
But in mine heart the heed was left
which aye encresed my desire
Unto the bothom drowe I nere
And euermo that me was woe
The more desire had I to go
Unto the Roser, where that grew
The fresh bothom, so bright of hew
Better me were to have letten be
But it behooved need me
To don right as mine heart badde
For ever the body must be ladde
After the heart, in well and woe
Of force together they must go
But never this archer would fine
To shote at me with all his pyne
And for to make me to him mete
The third arowe he began to shete
When best his time he might espy
The which was named Curtesye
In to mine heart it did auale
A swoune I fell, both deed and pale
Long time I lay, and styrred naught
Till I abrayde out of my thought
And fast than I auysed me
To draw out the shafte of tree
But ever the heed was left behind
For aught I couthe pull or wind
So sore it stycked when I was hytte
That by no craft I might it flytte
But anguyshous and full of thought
I left such woe, my wound aye wrought
That somoned me always to go
Toward the Rose, that plesed me so
But I ne durst in no manner
Because the archer was so nere
For evermore gladly as I read
Brent child of fire has much dread
And certes yet for all my pain
Though that I sight, yet arowes reyne
And ground quarrels, sharp of steel
Ne for no pain that I might feel
Yet might I not my self with hold
The fair Roser to behold
For Love me yaue such hardyment
For to fulfill his commandment
Upon my fete I rose up than
Feeble, as a for wounded man
And forth to gone might I set
And for the archer nolde I let
Toward the Roser fast I drowe
But thorns sharp, mo than ynowe
There were, and also thystels thick
And breres brymme for to prick
That I ne might get grace
The roughe thorns for to pace
To seen the fresh Roses of hew
I must abide, thought it me rewe
The hedge about so thycke was
That closed the Roses in compass
But o thing lyked me right well
I was so nyghe, I might feel
Of the bothom the swote odoure
And also se the fresh color
And that right greatly lyked me
That I so nere might it se
Such joy anon thereof had I
That I forgate my maladye
To seen I had such delight
Of sorrow and anger I was all quyte
And of my wounds that I had thore
For no thing lyken me might more
Than dwellen by the Roser aye
And thence never to pass away
But when a while I had be their
The god of Love, which all to share
Mine heart with his arowes kene
Casts him to give me wounds grene
He shot at me full hastily
An arowe named Company
The which takell is full able
To make these ladies merciable
Than I anon began chaungen hew
For greuaunce of my wound new
That I again fell in swounyng
And syghed sore, in complaynyng
Sore I complained that my sore
On me began greuen more and more
I had non hope of allegeaunce
So nygh I drowe to disperaunce
I rought of death, ne of life
Whether that love would me dryfe
If me a martyr would he make
I might his power not forsake
And while for anger thus I woke
The god of Love an arowe took
Full sharp it was and pugnaunt
And it was called Fair semblaunt
The which in no wise wol consent
That any lover him repent
To serve his love, with heart and all
For any peril that may befall
But though this arowe was kene ground
As any rasour that is found
To cut and kerue at the point
The god of Love it had anoynte
with a precious ointment
Somdele to give alegement
Upon the wounds that he hade
Through the body in my heart made
To help her sores, and to cure
And that they may the bette endure
But yet this arowe, without more
Made in mine heart a large sore
That in full great pain I abode
But aye the oyntement went abroad
Throughout my wounds large and wide
It spredde about in every side
Through whose virtue, and whose might
Mine heart joyful was and light
I had been deed and all to shent
But for the precious ointment
The shafte I drowe out of the arowe
Rokyng for woe right wonder narowe
But the heed, which made me smerte
Left behind in mine heart
with other four, I dare well say
That never woll be take away
But the ointment halpe me well
And yet such sorrow did I feel
That al day I changed hew
Of my wounds fresh and new
As men might se in my vysage
The arowes were so full of rage
So varyaunt of diuersyte
That men ^n eueryche might se
Both great anoye, and eke swetnesse
And joy meynt with bytternesse
Now were they easy, now were they wood
In hem I felt both harm and good
Now sore without aleggement
Now softyng with ointment
It softened here, and pricketh there
Thus ease and anger together were.
THe God of Love delyuerly
Come lepande to me hastily
And said to me in great iape
Yield the, for thou may not escape
May no defense avail the here
Therefore I read make no daungere
If thou wolte yield the hastily
Thou shall rather have mercy
He is a fool in sykernesse
That with danger or stoutnesse
Rebelleth, there that he should plese
In such folly is little ese
Be meke, where thou must needs bow
To strive again is naught thy prowe
Come atones, and have ydo
For I woll that it be so
Than yield the here debonairly
And I answered full humbly
Gladly sir, at your byddyng
I wol me yield in all thing
To your service I woll me take
For god defend that I should make
Again your byddyng resystence
I woll not don so great offense
For if I did, it were no skyll
Ye may do with me what ye will
Save or spyll, and also slo
Fro you in no wise may I go
My life, my death, is in your hand
I may not last out of your bond
Plain at your list I yield me
Hopyng in heart, that sometime ye
Comfort and ese shull me send
Or else shortly, this is the end
withouten health, I mote aye dure
But if ye take me to your cure
Comfort or health, how should I have
Sithe ye me hurt, but ye me save
The health of love mote be found
where as they token first her wound
And if ye list of me to make
Your prisoner, I woll it take
Of heart and will fully at gre
Holy and plain I yield me
without feynyng or feyntyse
To be governed by your empryse
Of you I here so much price
I woll ben hole at your deuyce
For to fulfill your lykyng
And repent for nothing
Hopyng to have yet in some tide
Mercy, of that I abide
And with that covenant yield I me
Anon down knelyng upon my kne
Proferyng for to kiss his fete
But for nothing he would me let.
ANd said, I love the both and preise
Sens that thyn answer does me ese
For thou answered so curtesly
For now I wot well utterly
That thou art gentle by thy speech
For though a man far would seche
He should not fynden in certain
No such answer of no vilayne
For such a word ne might naught
Isse out of a vilayns thought
Thou shall not lesen of thy speech
For thy helpyng woll I each
And eke encresen that I may
But first I woll that thou obaye
Fully for thine advantage
Anon to do me here homage
And sithe kiss thou shalt my mouth
which to no vilayne was never couthe
For to aproche it, ne for to touch
For saufe of cherles I ne vouche
That they shall never neyght it nere
For curteys, and of fair manner
well taught, and full of gentylnysse
He must ben, that shall me kiss
And also of full high fraunchyse
That shall atteyne to that emprese
And first of o thing warn I the
That pain and great aduersyte
He mote endure, and eke travail
That shall me serve, without fail
But there against the to comfort
And with thy service to disporte
Thou may full glad and joyful be
So good a master to have as me
And lord of so high renoun
I bear of love the Gonfenoun
Of Curtesy the banere
For I am of the self manner
Gentle, curteys, meke, and fre
That who ever ententyfe be
Me to honor, doubt, and serve
And also that he him observe
Fro trespace and fro vilanye
And him govern in curtesye
with will and with entencion
For when he first in my prison
Is caught, than must he utterly
Fro thence forth full besyly
Cast him gentle for to be
If he desire help of me
Anon without more delay
withouten danger or affray
I become his man anon
And gave him thanks many a one
And kneled down with hondes joint
And made it in my port full queynt
The joy went to my heart rote
when I had kyssed his mouth so swote
I had such myrthe and such lykyng
It cured me of languyshyng
He asked of me than hostages
I ha^te he said taken feel homages
Of one and other, where I have been
Disteyned often, withouten wene
These felons full of falsyte
Have many sythes begyled me
And through her falshede her lust acheued
Whereof I repent, and am agreued
And I hem get in my daungere
Her falshede shull they bye full dear
But for I love the, I say the plain
I woll of the be more certain
For the so sore I woll now bind
That thou away ne shall not wind
For to denyen the covenant
Or done that is not auenaunt
That thou were false, it were great ruthe
Sithe thou semest so full of truth
Sir, if the list to understand
I marvel the askyng this demand
For why or wherefore should ye
Hostages or borowes ask of me
Or any other sykernesse
Sithe ye wot in sothfastnesse
That ye me have susprised so
And hole mine heart taken me fro
That it woll do for me nothing
But if it be at your byddyng
Mine heart is yours, and mine right naught
As it behooves, in deed and thought
Ready in all to worche your will
whether so turn to good or ill
So sore it lusts you to plese
No man thereof may you disese
Ye have thereon set such iustyse
That it is werreyed in many wise
And if ye doubt it nolde obey
Ye may thereof do make a key
And hold it with you for hostage
Now certes this is none outrage
(Quod love) and fully I accord
For of the body he is full lord
That has the heart in his tresore
Outrage it were to asken more.
THan of his aumener he drough
A little key fetyse enough
which was of gold polished cler
And said to me, with this key here
Thyn heart to me now woll I shette
For all my iowell look and knette
I bind under this little key
That no wight may carry awey
This key is full of great post
with which anon he touched me
Under the side full softely
That he mine heart suddenly
without anoye had speered
That yet right naught it has me deered
When he had done his will all out
And I had put hem out of doubt
Sir I said: I have right great will
Your lust and pleasure to fulfill
Look ye my service take at gree
By thylke faith ye owe to me
I say naught for recreaundyse
For I naught doubt of your service
But the servant traueyleth in vain
That for to seruen does his pain
Unto that lord, which in no wise
Conne him no thank for his service.
Love said, dismay the naught
Sith thou for socour haste me sought
In thank thy service wol I take
And high of degree I woll the make
If wickedness ne hinder the
But (as I hoope) it shall naught be
To worship no wight by adventure
May come, but if he pain endure
Abide and suffer thy distress
That hurts now, it shall be less
I wotte my self what may the save
What medicyne thou would have
And if thy truth to me thou keep
I shall unto thine helpyng eke
To cure thy wounds and make hem clean
where so they be old or grene
Thou shalt be helped at words few
For certainly thou shalt well show
Where that thou seruest with good will
For to accomplyshen and fulfill
My commandments day and night
which I to lovers give of right.
AH sir, for gods love (said I)
Er ye pass hens ententyfely
Your commandments to me ye say
And I shall keep hem if I may
For hem to kepen is all my thought
And if so be I wot hem naught
Than may I vnwyttingly
Wherefore I pray you entierly
with all mine heart, me to lere
That I trespace in no manner
The god of Love than charged me
Anon, as ye shall here and se
word by word, by right empryse
So as the Romaunt shall deuyse
The master leseth his time to lere
when the disciple woll not here
It is but vain on him to swynke
That on his learning woll not think
Who so lust love, let him entende
For now the Romance begins to amend
Now is good to here in faye
If any be that can it say
And point it as the reason is
Set for other gate ywis
It shall not well in all thing
Be brought to good understanding
For a reder that poynteth ill
A good sentence may often spyl
The book is good at the endyng
Made of new and lusty thing
For who so woll the endyng here
The craft of love he shall now lere
If that he woll so long abide
Till I this Romance may vahyde
And undo the sygnyfiaunce
Of this dreme in to Romaunce
The sothfastnesse that now is hid
without couerture shall be kydde
when I undone have this dremyng
wherein no word is of leasyng.
Villainy at the beginning
I woll say love over all thing
Thou leave, if thou wolte be
False, and trespace against me
I curse and blame generally
All hem that louen villainy
For villainy makes villeyne
And by his deeds a chorle is seyne
These villayns arne without pity
Frendshyp, love, and all bounte
I nyll receive unto my service
Hem that been villayns of emprise
But understand in thine intent
That this is not mine entendement
To clepe no wight in no ages
Only gentle for his lynages
But who so is virtuous
And in his port not outragyous
when such one thou see the beforne
Though he be not gentle borne
Thou may well seyne this is in sothe
That he is gentle, because he does
As longs to a gentylman
Of hem none other deem I can
For certainly withouten dread
A chorle is demed by his deed
Of hye or low, as ye may se
Or of what kynrede that he be
Ne say naught for none yuell will
Thing that is to holden still
It is no worship to missey
Thou may ensample take of key
That was sometime for missayeng
Hated both of old and young
As far as Gaw^yn the worthy
was preysed for his curtesye
Kaye was hated, for he was fell
Of word dispytous and cruel
wherefore be wise and aqueyntable
Goodly of word, and reasonable
Both to less and eke to mare
And when thou come there men are
Look that thou have in custom aye
First to salve hem if thou may
And if it fall that of hem sum
Salve the first, be not domme
But quyte hem curtesly anon
without abydyng, er they gone
For nothing eke thy tongue apply
To speak words of rybaudrye
To villayne speech, in no degree
Late never thy lyppe vnbounden be
For I naught hold him in good faith
Curteys that foul words says
And all women serve and preyse
And to thy power her honor reyse
And if that any missayere
Despise women, that thou may here
Blame him, and bide him hold him still
And set thy might, and all thy will
women and ladies for to please
And to do thing that may hem ease
That they ever speak good of the
For so thou may best praised be
Look fro pride thou keep the well
For thou may both perceive and feel
That pride is both folly and sin
And he that pride has him within
Ne may his heart in no wise
Meken ne souplen to service
For pride is found in every part
Contrary unto loves art
And he that loves trewly
Should him conteyne iolyly
without pride in sondrie wise
And him disgysen in queyntyse
For queynte array, without dread
Is nothing proud, who takes head
For fresh array, as men may se
without pride may often be
Maintain thy self after thy rent
Of robe and eke of garment
For many sith fair clothyng
A man amendeth in much thing
And look always that they be shape
what garment that thou shalt make
Of him that can best do
wythall that parteyneth thereto
Points and sleues be well syttande
Right and straight on the hand
Of shone and boots, new and fair
Look at the leest thou have a pair
And that they sytte so fetously
That these rude may utterly
Marvel, sith that they sytte so plain
How they come on or of again
wear strayte gloves with aumere
Of sylke, and always with good chere
Thou give, if thou have richesse
And if thou have naught spend the less
Always be merry, if thou may
But wast not thy good always
Have hatte of flowers, as fresh as May
Chapelet of Roses of whytsondaye
For such array ne costneth but lyte
Thine hands wash, thy teeth make white
And let no fylth upon the be
Thy nails black, if thou may se
Void it away delyuerly
And kembe thine heed right iolyly
Farce not thy visage in no wise
For that of love is not thempryse
For love does haten, as I find
A beauty that comes not of kind
Always in heart I read the
Glad and merry for to be
And be as joyful as thou can
Love has no joy of sorrowful man
That yuel is full of curtesy
That knows in his malady
For ever of love the sycknesse
Is meynte with sweet and bytternesse
The sore of love is maruaylous
For now the lover joyous
Now can he plain, now can he groan
Now can he syngen, now maken moan
To day he playneth for heaviness
To morrow he playneth for iolynesse
The life of love is full contrary
which stoundemeale can often varye
But if thou can myrthes make
That men in gre wol gladly take
Do it goodly, I command the
For men should where so ever they be
Do thing that hem sitting is
For thereof comes good loos and pris
whereof that thou be virtuous
Ne be not strange ne dangerous
For if thou good ryder be
Prycke gladly that men may se
In arms also if thou come
Pursue till thou a name haste won
And if thy voice be fair and clear
Thou shall maken no great daungere
when to sing they goodly pray
It is thy worship for to abey
Also to you it longs aye
To harp and gyterne, dance and play
For if he can well foot and dance
It may him greatly do auaunce
Among eke for thy lady sake
Songs and complayntes that thou make
For that wol meuen in her hete
when they reden of thy smerte
Look that no man for scarce the hold
For that may grieve the manyfolde
Reason wol that a lover be
In his gifts more large and fre
Than chorles that be not of loving
For who thereof can any thing
He shall be lefe aye for to give
In lands lore who so would leave
For he that through a sudden sight
Or for a kyssyng anon right
yaue hole his heart, in will and thought
And to him self keeps right naught
After this swyfte, it is good reason
He give his good in abandon.
Now woll I here reherce
Of that I have said in verce
All the sentence by and by
In words few compendously
That thou may the better on hem think
whether so it be thou wake or wynke
For the words little grieve
A man to keep, when it is breue
who so with love wol gone or ride
He mote be curteyes, and void of pride
Merry, and full of iolyte
And of largess a losed be.
First I join the here in penance
That ever without repentance
Thou set thy thought in thy loving
To last without repentyng
And think upon thy myrthes sweet
That shall follow after when ye mete.
And for thou true to love shall be
I will, and command the
That in one place thou set al hole
Thine heart, without halfen dole
For treachery and sykernesse
For I loved never doubleness
To many his heart that wol depart
Eueryche shall have but little part
But of him dread I me right naught
That in one place sets his thought
Therefore in o place it set
And let it never thens flette
For if thou yeuest it in lenyng
I hold it but a wreched thing
Therefore give it hole and quyte
And thou shall have the more merit
If it be lent, than after soon
The bounte and the thank is done
But in Love, free yeuen thing
Requires a great guerdonyng
give it in yeft al quyte fully
And make thy gift debonairly
For men that yefte hold more dear
That yeuen is with gladsome chere
That gift naught to praysen is
That man yeueth maugre his
when thou haste yenen thine heart (as I
Have said) the here openly
Than auentures shall the fall
which hard and heavy been with all
For often when thou bethynkest the
Of thy loving, where so thou be
From folk thou must depart in hye
That none perceive thy malady
But hyde thine harm thou must alone
And go forth sole, and make thy moan
Thou shall no while be in o state
But whylom cold and whylom hate
Now reed as Rose, now yelowe and fade
Such sorrow I trow thou never hade
Cotidien, ne quarteyne
It is not so full of pain
For often times it shall fall
In love, among thy pains all
That thou thy self al holy
Foryeten shall so utterly
That many times thou shall be
Still as an image of tree
Dome as a stone, without steryng
Of foot or hand, without spekyng
Than sone after al thy pain
To memory shall thou come again
A man abashed wonder sore
And after syghen more and more
For wit thou well wythouten wene
In such estate full often have I been
That have the yuel of love assayde
where through thou art so dismayde
AFter a thought shall take the so
That thy love is to far the fro
Thou shalt say (God) what may this be
That I ne may my lady se?
Mine heart alone is to her go
And I abide al sole in woe
Departed fro mine own thought
And with mine eyes se right naught
Alas mine eyes seen I ne may
My careful heart to convey
Mine hertes gyde, but they be
I praise nothing what ever they se
Should they abide than, nay
But gone and visiten without delay
That mine heart desires so
For certainly, but if they go
A fool my self I may well hold
when I ne se what mine heart would
wherefore I wol gone her to seen
Or eased shall I never been
But I have some tokenyng
Than ghost thou forth without dwelling
But often thou faylest of thy desire
Er thou may come her any nere
And wastest in vain thy passage
Than fallest thou in a new rage
For want of sight, thou gynnest mourn
And homewarde pensyfe thou do return
In great mischefe than shall thou be
For than again shall come to the
Syghes and playntes with new woe
That no itchynge prycketh so
who wot it naught, he may go lere
Of hem that byen love so dear
No thing thine heart appesen may
That often thou wolt gone and assaye
If thou may seen by adventure
Thy lives joy, thine hertes cure
So that by grace, if thou might
Attain of her to have a sight
Than shall thou done none other deed
But with that sight thine eyes feed
That fair fresh when thou may se
Thine heart shall so rauyshed be
That never thou woldeste thy thanks let
Ne remove, for to se that sweet
The more thou see in sothfastnesse
The more thou couytest of that swetnesse
The more thine heart brenneth in fire
The more thine heart is in desire
For who consydreth euerydele
It may be lykened wonder well
The pain of love unto a fere
For evermore thou neyghest nere
Thought, or who so that it be
For very soth I tell it the
The hotter ever shall thou brenne
As experience shall the kenne
where so come in any cost
who is next fire he brenneth most
And yet forsooth for all thine hete
Though thou for love swelte and sweet
Ne for no thing thou felen may
Thou shall not wyllen to pass away
And though thou go, yet must the need
Think al day on her fair head
whom thou beheld with so good will
And hold thy self begyled ill
That thou ne had none hardyment
To show her ought of thine intent
Thine heart full sore thou wolte despise
And eke repreue of cowardyse
That thou so dull in every thing
were dome for dread, without spekyng
Thou shall eke think thou dydest folly
That thou were her so fast bye
And durst not auntre the to say
Some thing, er thou come away
For thou haddeste no more won
To speak of her when thou begone
But yet she would for thy sake
In arms goodly the have take
It should have been more worth to the
Than of treasour great plente
Thus shalt thou mourn and eke compain
And get encheson to gone again
Unto thy walk, or to thy place
where thou beheld her fleshely face
And never for false suspection
Thou woldost find occasion
For thou gone unto her house
So art thou than desyrouse
A sight of her for to have
If thou thine honor myghtest save
Or any erande myghtest make
Thither, for thy loves sake
Full feign thou would, but for dread
Thou go not, leest that men take heed
wherefore I read in thy going
And also in thine again coming
Thou be well ware that men ne wit
Feyne the other cause than it
To go that way, or fast bye
To heal well is no folly
And if so be it hap the
That thou thy love there may se
In seker wise thou her salewe
wherwyth thy color wol transmewe
And eke thy blood shall all to quake
Thy hew eke chaungen for her sake
But word and wit, with chere full pale
Shall want for to tell thy tale
And if thou may so ferforth win
That thou reason durst begin
And would said three things or mo
Thou shall full scarsly said the two
Though thou bethynke the never so well
Thou shall foryete yet somdele
But if thou deal with trecherye
For false lovers mow all folly
Saine what the lust wtoute^ dread
They be so double in her falshede
For they in heart can think o thing
And said another in her speaking
And when thy speech is ended all
Right thus to the it shall befall
If any word than come to mind
That thou to say haste left behind
Than thou shall brenne in great martyr
For thou shall brenne as any fire
This is the strife and eke the affraye
And the batell that lasts aye
This bargayne end may never take
But if that she thy peace will make
And when the night is comen anon
A thousand angres shall come upon
To bed as fast thou wolte the dyght
where thou shall have but small delyght
For when thou wenest for to sleep
So full of pain shalt thou crepe
Sterte in thy bed about full wide
And turn full often on every side
Now downwarde gross, and now upright
And walowe in woe the long night
Thyn arms shalt thou sprede a bread
As man in werre were forwerede
Than shall the come a remembrance
Of her shappe and her semblaunce
whereto none other may be pere
And wete thou well without were
That the shall se sometime that night
That thou haste her, that is so bright
Naked between thine arms there
All sothfastnesse as though it were
Thou shalt than make castles in Spain
And dreme of joy, al but it vain
And the delyten of right naught
while thou so slombrest in that thought
That so sweet and delytable
The which in soth nys but a fable
For it ne shall no while last
Than shalt thou syghe and weep fast
And say dear god, what thing is this
My dreme is turned all amys
which was full sweet and apparent
But now I wake it is all shent
Now yede this merry thought away
Twenty times upon a day
I would this thought would come again
For it alegeth well my pain
It makes me full of ioyefull thought
It sleeth me that it lasts naught
Ah lord, why nyll ye me socoure?
The joy I trow that I langoure
The death I would me should slo
while I lie in her arms two
Mine harm is hard wythouten wene
My great unease full often I mean
But would love do so I might
Have fully joy of her so bright
My pain were quitte me richly
Alas to great a thing ask I
It is but folly, and wrong wenyng
To ask so outrageous a thing
And who so asks folyly
He mote be warned hastily
And I ne wot what I may say
I am so far out of the way
For I would have full great lykyng
And full great joy of less thing
For would she of her gentylnesse
withouten more, me ones kesse
It were to me a great guerdon
Relece of al my passion
But it is hard to come thereto
All is but folly that I do
So high I have mine heart set
where I may no comfort get
I wot not where I say well or naught
But this I wot well in my thought
Thet it were better of her alone
For to stynte my woe and moan
A look on her I cast goodly
That for to have all utterly
Of an other all hole the play
Ah lord where I shall bide the day
That ever she shall my lady be
He is full cured, that may her se
A god, when shall the dawnyng spring?
To lyggen thus is an angry thing
I have no joy thus here to lie
when that my love is not me bye
A man to lain has great disese
which may not sleep, ne rest in ese
I would it dawed, and were now day
And that the night were went away
For were it day, I would up rise
Ah slow sun, show thine enprise
Speed the to sprede thy beemes bright
And chase the derkenesse of the night
To put away the stoundes strong
which in me lasten al to long
The night shalt thou continue so
without rest, in pain and woe
if ever thou knew of love distress
Thou shall mow learn in that sickness
And thus endurynge shalt thou lie
And rise on morrow up erly
Out of thy bed, and harneys the
Er ever dawnyng thou may se
Al privily than shalt thou gone
what whyder it be thy self alone
For reyne or hayle, for snow, for slete
Thither she dwells, that is so sweet
The which may fall a sleep be
And thinks but little upon the
Than shalt thou go, full foul aferde
Look if the gate be vnsperde
And wait without in woe and pain
Full yuel a could in wind and rain
Than shall thou go the door before
If thou may find any shore
Or hole, or refte, what ever it were
Than shalt thou stoop, and lay to eer^
If they within a sleep be
I mean al save thy lady free
whom waking if thou may aspye
Go put thy self in inpardye
To ask grace, and the bymene
That she may wete without wene
That thou night no rest haste had
So sore for her thou were bestad
women well ought pytie to take
Of hem that sorowen for her sake
And look for love of that relyke
That thou think none other like
For when thou have so great annoy
Shall kiss the er thou go awey
And hold that in full great deynte
And for that no man shall the se
Before the house, ne in the way
Look thou begone again er day
Such coming, and such going
Such heaviness, and such walkyng
Makes lovers wythouten any wene
Under her clothes pale and lene
For love leaves color ne cleernesse
who loves true has no fatness
Thou shall well by thy self se
That thou must needs assayed be
For men that shape hem other way
Falsely her ladies for to betray
It is no wonder though they be fat
with false oaths her loves they gatte
For often I se such losengeours
Fatter than Abottes or priours
Yet with o thing I the charge
That is to say, that thou be large
Unto the maid, that her does serve
So best her thank thou shall deserve
give her gifts, and get her grace
For so thou may thank purchase
That she the worthy hold and fre
Thy lady, and all that may the se
Also her servants worship aye
And please as much as thou may
Great good through hem may come to the
Because with her they been prive
They shall her tell how they the fande
Curreys and wise, and well doande
And she shall preyse well the more
Look out of land, thou be not fore
And if such cause thou have, that the
Behooves to gone out of country
Leave hole thine heart in hostage
Till thou again make thy passage
Think long to se the sweet thing
That has thine heart in her keeping
Now have I told the, in what wise
A lover shall do me service
Do it than, if thou wolte have
The mede, that thou after crave.
When love al this had boden me
I said him, sir how may it be
That lovers may in such manner
Endure ye pain ye have said here
I marvel me wonder fast
How any man may live or last
In such pain, and such brennyng
In sorrow and thought, and such syghyng
Aye vnrelesed woe to make
whether so it be they sleep or wake
In such anoy continually
As help me god this marvel I
How man, but he were made of stele
Might live a month, such pains to feel
THe God of love than said me
Friend, by the faith I owe to the
May no man have good, but he it bye
A man lives more tenderlye
The thing, that he has bought most dear
For wete thou well without were
In thank that thing is taken more
For which a man has suffered sore
Certes no woe ne may attain
Unto the sore of loves pain
None yuell thereto ne may amounte
No more than a man count
The drops that of the water be
For dry as well the great see
Thou myghtest, as the harms tell
Of hem that with love dwell
In service, for pain hem sleeth
And that each man would fly the death
And trow they should never escape
Nere that hope couthe hem make
Glad as man in prison sete
And may not getten for to ete
But barlye breed, and water pure
And lies in vermyn and in ordure
with all this yet can he live
Good hope such comfort has him give
which makes wene that he shall be
Delivered and come to liberte
In fortune is full trust
Though he lie in straw or dust
In hope is all his sustaynyng
And so for lovers in her wenyng
which love has shytte in his prisoun
Good hope is her saluatioun
Good hope (how sore that they smerte)
yeueth hem both will and heart
To profer her body to martyr
For hope so sore does hem desire
To suffer each harm that men deuyse
For joy that afterward shall arise
HOpe in desire catch victory
In hope of love is all the glory
For hope is all ye love may give
Nere hope, there should no le^ger live
Blessed be hope, which with desire
Auaunceth lovers in such manyre
Good hope is curteyse for to please
To keep lovers from all disease
Hope keeps his land, and woll abide
For any peril that may betyde
For hope to lovers, as most chief
Does hem endure all mischefe
Hope is her help when myster is
And I shall give the eke ywys
Three other things, that great solace
Does to hem that be in my lace
The first good that may be found
To hem that in my lace be bound
Is sweet thought, for to record
Thing wherwyth thou can accord
Best in thine heart, where she be
Thynkyng in absence is good to the
when any lover does complain
And lives in distress, and in pain
Than sweet thought shall come as blyue
Away his anger for to drive
It makes lovers to have remembrance
Of comfort, and of high pleasaunce
That hope has hight him for to win
For thought anon than shall begin
As far god wotte, as he can find
To make a myrrour of his mind
For to behold he wol not let
Her person he shall before him set
Her laughyng eyes persaunt and clear
Her shappe, her form, her goodly chere
Her mouth, that is so gracious
So sweet, and eke so sauerous
Of all her feyters he shall take heed
Her eyes with all her lymmes feed.
Thus sweet thinking shall aswage
The pains of lovers, and her rage
Thy joy shall double without guess
when thou thynkest on her symelynesse
Or of her laughyng, or of her chere
That to the made thy lady dear
This comfort woll I that thou take
And if the next thou wolte forsake
which is not less sauerous
Thou should not been to dangerous.
THe second shall be sweet speech
That has to many on be leche
To bring hem out of woe and were
And help many a bachelere
And many a lady sent succor
That have loved paramour
Through speaking, when they might here
Of her lovers to hem so dear
To me it voydeth al her smerte
The which is closed in her heart
In heart it makes hem glad and light
Speech when they mow have sight
And therefore now it comes to mind
In old days as I find
That clerks written that her knew
There was a lady fresh of hew
which of her love made a song
On him for to remember among
In which she said when that I here
Speken of him that is so dear
To me it voydeth all smerte
I wys he sytteth so nere my heart
To speak of him at eve or morrow
It cures me of all my sorrow
To me is none so high pleasaunce
As of his person dalyaunce
She wist full well that sweet speaking
Comfort in full much thing
Her love she had full well assayde
Of him she was full well apayde
To speak of him her joy was set
Therefore I read the that thou get
A fellow that can well concele
And keep thy counsel, and well hele
To whom go show holly thine heart
Both well and woe, joy and smerte
To get comfort to him thou go
And priuyly between you two
Ye shall speak of that goodly thing
That has thine heart in her keeping
Of her beauty and her semblaunce
And of her goodly countenance
Of al thy state thou shall him say
And ask him counsel how thou may
Do any thing that may her plese
For it to the shall do great ese
That he may wete thou trust him so
Both of thy well and of thy woe
And if his het to love be set
His company is much the bet
For reason will he show to the
All utterly his priuitie
And what she is he loves so
To the plainly he shall undo
without dread of any shame
Both tell her renome and her name
Than shall he farther far and nere
And namely to thy lady dear
In syker wise, yea every other
Shall helpen as his own brother
In troth without doubleness
And kepen close in sykernesse
For it is noble thing in fay
To have a man thou dare say
Thy privy counsel every dele
For that will comfort the right well
And thou shall hold the well apayed
when such a friend thou have assayed
THe third good of great comfort
That yeueth to lovers most disporte
Comes of sight and beholdynge
That cleped is sweet lokyng
The which may none ese do
when thou art far thy lady fro
wherefore thou prese always to be
In place, where thou may her se
For it is thing most amerous
Most delytable and fauerous
For to aswage a man's sorrow
To seen his lady by the morrow
For it is a full noble thing
when thine eyes have metyng
with that relyke precious
whereof they be so desirous
But all day after soth it is
They have no dread to faren amys
They dreden neither wind ne rain
Ne non other manner pain
For when thine eyes were thus in bliss
Yet of her curtesye ywys
Alone they can not have her joy
But to the heart they conuoye
Part of her bliss to him thou send
Of all his harm to make an end
The eye is a good messangere
which can to the heart in such manner
Tidings send, that has seen
To void him of his pains clean
whereof the heart reioyseth so
That a great party of his woe
Is voyded and put away to flight
Right as the darkness of the night
Is chased with clerenesse of the moon
Right so is al his woe full soon
Deuoyded clean, when that the sight
Beholden may that fresh wight
That the heart desires so
That all his darkness is ago
For than the heart is all at ease
when they seen that they hem please
Now have I declared the all out
Of that thou were in dread and dout
For I have told the faithfully
what the may curen utterly
And all lovers that wol be
Faithful and full of stabylitie
Good hope always keep by thy side
And sweet thought make eke abide
Sweet lokyng and sweet speech
Of all thine harms they shall be leche
Of every thou shall have great pleasaunce
If thou can bide in suffraunce
And serve well without fayntyse
Thou shall be quyte of thine empryse
with more guerdoun if that thou live
But all this time, this I the give
THe god of love when all the day
Had taught me as ye have herd say
And enfourmed me compendously
He vanyshed away all suddenly
And I alone left all sole
So full of complaynt and of dole
For I saw noman there me by
My wounds me grieved wondersly
Me for to curen nothing I knew
Save the bothom bright of hew
whereon was set holly my thought
Of other comfort knew I naught
But it were through the god of love
I knew not ele to my behoue
That might me ease or comfort get
But if he would him entermete
The Roser was withouten dout
Closed with an hedge without
As ye toforne have herd me said
And fast I busyed and would feign
Have passed the hay, if I might
Have getten in by any sleyght
Unto the bothom so fair to se
But ever I drad blamed to be
If men would have suspectioun
That I would of ententioun
Have stole the roses that there were
Therefore to enter I was in fere
But at the last as I bethought
whether I should pass or naught
I saw come with a glad chere
To me a lustye bachelere
Of good stature and of good height
And Bialacoil forsooth he hight
Son he was to curtesy
And he me granted full gladly
The passage of the utter hay
And said, sir: how that ye may
Pass if your will be
The fresh Roser for to se
And ye the sweet savor feel
Your warrans may right well
So thou the keep fro folly
Shall no man do the vylany
If I may help you in ought
I shall not feign, dredeth naught
For I am bound to your seruyse
Fully deuoyde of feyntyse
Than unto Bialacoil said I
I thank you sir full hertely
And your behest take at gre
That ye so goodly proffer me
To you it comes of great fraunchyse
That ye me proof your seruyse
Than after full delyuerly
Through the breers anon went I
whereof encombred was the hay
I was well plesed, the soth to say
To se the bothom, fair and swote
So fresh spronge out of the rote
And Bialacoil me served well
when I so nygh me might feel
Of the bothome the sweet odor
And so lusty hewed of color
But than a churl foul him betyde
Beside the roses began him hyde
To keep the roses of that Rosere
Of whom the name was Daungere
This churl was hyd there in the greues
Covered with grass and with leaves
To spy and take whom that he fond
Unto that Roser put an hand
He was not fool for there was mo
For with him were other two
Of wicked manners, and evil fame
Than one was cleped by his name
wicked tongue, god give him sorrow
For neither at eve ne at morrow
He can of no man good speak
On many a just man does he wreke
There was a woman eke that hight
Shame, that who can reken right
Trespass was her fathers name
Her mother reason, and thus shame
Brought of these ylke two
And yet had trespass never ado
with reason, ne never lay her by
He was so hydous and so ugly
I mean this, that trespass hight
But reason conceyueth of a sight
Shame of that I spoke aforne
And when that shame was this borne
It was ordained that chastity
Should of the Roser lady be
which of the bothoms more and las
with sondrye folk assailed was
That she ne wist what to do
For Venus her assayleth so
That night and day from her she stal
Bothoms and Roses over all
To reason than prays Chastity
whom Venus has flemed over the sea
That she her daughter would her leave
To keep the Roser fresh and grene
Anon reason to chastity
Is fully assented, that it be
And granted her, at her request
That shame, because she is honest
Shall keeper of the Roser be
And thus to keep it, there were three
That none should hardy be ne bold
(were he young, or were he old)
Again her will away to bear
Bothoms ne roses, that there were
I had well sped, had I not been
Awayted with these three and seen
For Bialacoil, that was so fair
So gracious and debonayre
Quytte him to me full curtesly
And me to please bad that I
Should draw me to the bothom nere
Prese in to touch the rosere
which bare the roses, he yafe me leave
This grant ne might, but little grieve
And for he saw it lyked me
Right nygh the bothom pulled he
A leaf al grene, and yaue me that
The which full nygh the bothom sat
I made of that leaf full queynt
And when I felt I was acquaynt
with Bialacoil, and so pryue
I wend all at my will had be
Than wext I hardy for to tell
To Bialacoil how me befell
Of love, that took and wounded me
And said, sir so mote I the
I may no joy have in no wise
Upon no side, but it rise
For sith (if I shall not feyne)
In heart I have had so great pain
So great anoy and such affray
That I ne wot what I shall say
I dread your wrath to deserve
Lever me were, that knyues kerue
My body should in pieces small
Than in any wise it should fall
That ye wrathed should ben with me
Say boldly thy will (quod he)
I nyl be wroth if that I may
For naught that thou shall to me say.
THan said I sir, not you displease
To known of my great unease
In which only love has me brought
For pains great, disese, and thought
Fro day to day he does me dry
Supposes not sir, that I lie
In me five wounds did he make
The sore of which shall never slake
But ye the bothom grant me
which is most passaunt of beauty
My life my death, and my martyr
And treasour, that I most desire
Than Bialacoil affrayed all
Said sir, it may not fall
That ye desire it may not arise
what would ye shende me in this wise
A mokel fool than I were
If I suffered you away to bear
The fresh bothom, so fair of sight
For it were neither skyll ne right
Of the Roser ye broke the rynde
Or take the rose aforne his kind
Ye are not curteys to ask it
Let it still on the Roser sit
And let it grow till it amended be
And parfetly come to beauty
I nolde not that it pulled were
Fro the roser that it bear
To me it is so lefe and dear
with that anon stert out danger
Out of the place where he was hid
His malice in his chere was kydde
Full great he was and black of hew
Sturdy and hydous, whosoever him knew
Like sharp vrchons his here was grow
His eyes red sparklyng as the fire glowe
His nose frounced full kyrked stood
He come cryande as he were wood
And said, Bialacoil tell me why
Thou bryngest hither so boldly
Him that so nygh the rosere
Thou worchest in a wrong manner
He thinks to dishonor the
Thou art well worthy to have maugre
To let him of the Rosere wit
who serves a felon is evil quytte
Thou would have done great bounty
And he with shame would quyte the
Fly hence fellow I read the go
It wants little he wol the slo
For Bialacoil ne knew the naught
when the to serve he set his thought
For thou wolt shame him if thou might
Both again reason and right
I woll no more in the affye
That come so slyghly for tespye
For it proves wonder well
Thy sleyght and trayson every dele
I durst no more make there abode
For the churl he was so wode
So began he thret and manace
And through the hay he did me chase
For fear of him I trymbled and quoke
So churlyshly his heed he shoke
And said, if eft he might me take
I should not from his hondes escape
Than Bialacoil is fled and mate
And I all sole disconsolate
was left alone in pain and thought
For shame to death I was nygh brought
Than thought I on my high folly
How that my body utterly
was give to pain and to martyr
And thereto had I so great ire
That I ne durst the hayes pass
There was no hope, there was no grace
I trow never man wist of pain
But he were laced in loves chain
Ne no man, and soth it is
But if he love, what anger is
Love holds his heest to me right well
when pain (he said) I should feel
No heart may think, ne tongue said
A quarter of my woe and pain
I might not with the anger last
Mine heart in point was for to brast
when I thought on the rose that so
was through danger cast me fro
A long while stood I in that state
Till that me saw so mad and mate
The lady of the high ward
which from her tower looked thytherwarde
Reason men clepe that lady
which from her tower delyuerly
Come down to me without more
But she was neither young ne hoar
Ne high ne low, ne fat ne lene
But best, as it were in a mean
Her eyes two were clear and light
As any candel, that brenneth bright
And on her heed she had a crown
Her seemed well an high person
For round enuyron her crownet
was full of rich stones fret
Her goodly semblaunt by deuyse
I trow was made in paradyse
For nature had never such a grace
To forge a work of such compass
For certain, but if the letter lie
God him self, that is so hye
Made her after his image
And yaue her sithe such advantage
That she has might and segnorie
To keep men from all folly
who so woll trow her lore
Ne may offenden neuermore
And while I stood this dark and pale
Reason began to me her tale
She said: alhayle my sweet friend
Folly and chyldhode will the shende
which the have put in great affraye
Thou have bought dear the time of May
That made thine heart merry to be
In evil time thou wentest to se
The garden whereof idleness
Bare the keye and was mastresse
when thou yedest in the dance
with her and had acquayntaunce
Her acquayntaunce is peryllous
First soft, and after noyous
She has trasshed without wene
The god of love had the not seen
Ne had idleness the conueyde
In the verger, where mirth him pleyde
If follye have supprysed the
Do so that it recovered be
And be welware to take no more
Counsel, that greueth after sore
He is wise, that will him self chastyse
And though a young man in any wise
Trespass among, and do folly
Let him not tarry, but hastily
Let him amend whatso be mys
And eke I counsel the ywis
The god of love holly foryet
That has the in such pain set
And the in heart turmented so
I can not seen how thou must go
Other ways to garysoun
For danger, that is so feloun
Felly purposes the to werrey
which is full cruel the soth to sey.
ANd yet of Danger comes no blame
In reward of my daughter Shame
which has ye roses in her ward
As she that may be no musarde
And wicked tongue is with these two
That suffers no man thither go
For er a thing be do he shall
where that he comes over all
In forty places if it be sought
Say thing that never was don ne wrought
So much trayson is in his male
Of falsnesse for to said a tale
Thou delest with angry folk ywys
wherefore to the better is
From these folk away to fare
For they wol make the live in care
This is the evil that love they call
wherein there is but folly all
For love is folly every dell
who loves, in nowyse may do well
Ne sets his though on no good work
His schole he leseth, if he be clerk
Or other craft eke, if that he be
He shall not thryue therein, for he
In love shall have more passyoun
Than monk, hermyte, or chanoun
This pain is herd out of mesure
The joy may eke no while endure
And in the possessyoun
Is much tribulatioun
The joy it is so short lastyng
And but in hap is the gettyng
For I se there many in travail
That at last foul fail
I was nothing thy counsayler
when thou were made the homager
Of god of love to hastily
There was no wysdom but folly
Thine heart was ioly, but not sage
when thou were brought in such a rage
To yield the so redely
And to love of his great maystry.
I Read the love away to drive
That makes the retche not of thy live
The folly more fro day to day
Shall grow, but thou it put away
Take with thy teeth the bridle fast
To daunt thine heart, and eke the cast
If that thou may to get the defense
For to redress thy first offense
whosoever his heart always wol leave
Shall find among that shall him grieve.
when I her herd thus me chastyse
I answered in full angry wise
I prayed her cesse of her speech
Either to chastyse me or teache
To bid me my thought refreyne
which love has caught in his demeyne
what wene ye love woll consent
(That me assayleth with bow bent)
To draw mine heart out of his hand
which is so quyckly in his bond
That ye counsel may never be
For when he first arested me
He took mine heart so sore him till
That it is nothing at my will
He thought it so him for to obey
That it sparred with a key
I pray you let me be all still
For ye may well, if that ye will
Your words waste in idleness
For utterly wit houten guess
All that ye said is but in vain
Me were lever dye in the pain
Than love to mewarde should arette
Falshed or treson on me set
I will me get pryse or blame
And love true to save my name
who that me chasteseth I him hate
with that word Reason went her gate
when she saw for no sermonyng
She might me fro my folly bring
Than dismayed I left all sole
Forwery, forwandred as a fool
For I ne knew no cherysaunce
Than fell into my remembrance
How love bade me to puruey
A fellow, to whom I might sey
My counsel and my priuytie
For that should much avail me
with that bethought I me, that I
Had a fellow fast by
True and syker, curteys and hende
And he was called by name a friend
A trewer fellow was no where non
In haste to him I went anon
And to him all my woe I told
From him right naught I would witholde
I told him all without were
And made my compleynt on Daungere
Now for to se he was hydous
And to mewarde contrarious
The which through his cruelty
was in point to have meymed me
with Bialacoil when heme sey
within the garden walk and pley
Fro me he made him for to go
And I beleste alone in woe
I durst no longer with him speak
For danger said he would be wreke
when that he saw how I went
The fresh bothom for to hent
If I were hardy to come nere
Between the hay and the rosere.
This friend when he wist of my thought
He discomforted me right naught
But said fellow, be not so mad
Ne so abashed nor bestad
My self I know full well daungere
And how he is fers of chere
At prime temps love to manace
Full often I have been in his case
A felon first though that he be
After thou shall him souple se
Of long passed I knew him well
Ungoodly first though men him feel
He woll meke after in his bearing
Ben, for service and obeysynge
I shall the tell what thou shall do
Mekely I read thou go him to
Of heart pray him specially
Of thy trespace to have mercy
And hot him well here to plese
That thou shall never more him displese
who can best serve of flatery
Shall please danger most utterly
My friend has said to me so well
That he me eased has somdele
And eke alegged of my turment
For through him had I hardement
Again to danger for to go
To preue if I might meke him so.
TO Danger came I all asshamed
The which aforne me had blamed
Desiring for to pease my woo
But over hedge durst I not go
For he forbode me the passage
I found him cruel in his rage
And in his hand a great burdowne
To him I kneled low adowne
Full meke of port, and simple of chere
And said sir, I am comen here
Only to ask of you mercy
That greueth me full greatly
That ever my life I wrathed you
But for to amenden I am come now
with all my might both loud and still
To done right at your own will
For love made me for to do
That I have trespassed hitherto
Fro whom I ne may withdraw we mine heart
Yet shall I never for joy ne smert
(what so befall good or ill)
Offend more again your will
Lever I have endure disease
Than do that should you displease.
I You require, and pray that ye
Of me have mercy and pytye
To stint your ire, that greueth so
That I wol swear for ever mo
To be redressed at your lykyng
If I trespass in any thing
Save that (I pray the) grant me
A thing that may not warned be
That I may love all only
None other thing of you ask I
I shall done all well ywis
If of your grace ye grant me this
And ye may not letten me
For well wot ye, that love is free
And I shall louen such that I will
who ever like it well or ill
And yet ne would I for all France
Do thing to do you displesaunce.
THan Daungere fill in his intent
For to foryeue his male talent
But all his wrath yet at last
He has released, I prayde so fast
Shortly (he said) thy request
Is not to mokell dishonest
Ne I woll not werne it the
For yet nothing engreueth me
For though thou love thus evermore
To me is neither soft ne sore
Love where that the list, what retcheth me
So far fro my Roses be
Trust not on me for none assaye
In any time to pass the hay
Thus has he granted my prayere
Than went I forth withouten were
Unto my friend, and told him all
which was right joyful of my tale
(He said) now gothe well thine affayre
(...) shall to the be debonayre
Though he aforne was dispitous
He shall herafter be gracious
If he were touched on some good vein
He should yet rewen on thy pain
Suffer I read, and no boost make
Till thou at good mes may him take
By sufferaunce, and words soft
A man may overcome often
Him, that aforne he had in dread
In books sothely as I read
Thus has my friend with great comfort
Auaunced me with high disporte
which would me good, as much as I
And than anon full suddenly
I took my leave, and straight I went
Unto the hay, for great talent
I had to seen the fresh bothom
wherein lay my saluatioun
And Daungere to keep, if that I
keep him covenant trewly
So sore I dradde his manasyng
I durst not break his byddyng
For lest that I were of him shent
I brake not his commandment
For to purchase his good will
It was for to come there till
His mercy was to far behind
I kept, for I ne might it find
I complained and sighed sore
And languyshed evermore
For I durst not over go
Unto the Rose I loved so
Throughout my demyng utterly
That he had knowledge certainly
Than Love me ladde in such a wise
That in me there was no fentyse
Falsheed, ne no treachery
And yet he full of villainy
Of disdain, and cruelte
On me ne would have pity
His cruel will for to refrain
Tho I wept always, and me complain
ANd while I was in this tourment
were come of grace, by god sent
Fraunchyse, and with her Pity
Fulfylde the Bothom of bounte
They go to Daungere anon right
To forther me with all her might
And help in word and in deed
For well they saw that it was need
First of her grace dame Fraunchyse
Has taken of this empryse
She said, Daungere great wrong ye do
To worche this man so much woe
Or pynen him so angerly
It is to you great villainy
I can not se, why ne how
That he has trespassed again you
Save that he loves, wherefore ye should
The more in cherete of him hold
The force of love makes him do this
who would him blame he did amys
He lefeth more than ye may do
His pain is hard, ye may se lo
And Love in no wise would consent
That ye have power to repent
For though that quick ye would him slo
Fro love his heart may not go
Now sweet sir, it is your ease
Him for to anger or disease
Alas, what may it you auaunce
To done to him so great greuaunce
what worship is it again him take
Or on your man a werre make
Sith he so lowly every wise,
Is ready, as ye lust deuyse
If Love have caught him in his lace
You for to bey in every caas
And ben your subject at your will
Should ye therefore wyllen him ill
Ye should him spare more all out
Than him that is both proud and stout
Curtesy woll that ye socure
Hem, that been meke under your cure
His heart is hard that woll not meke
when men of meekness him beseke.
This is certain, said Pity
we se often that humylyte
Both ire, and also felony
Venquysheth, and also melancoly
To stand forth in such duresse
This cruelte and wickedness
wherefore I pray you sir Daungere
For to mayntene no longer here
Such cruel werre again your man
As holly yours as ever he can
Nor that ye worchen no more woe
Upon this caytife, that languysheth so
which woll no more to you trespace
But put him holly in your grace
His offense ne was but lyte
The god of Love it was to wit
That he your thrall so greatly is
And if ye harm him ye done amys
For he has had full hard penance
Sithe that ye rest him thaqueyntaunce
Of Bialacoil, his most joy
which all his pains might acoye
He was before anoyed sore
But than ye doubled him well more
For he of bliss has been full bare
Sithe Bialacoil was fro him fare
Love has to him great distress
He has no need of more duresse
Voydeth from him your ire I read
Ye may not wynnen in this deed
Makes Bialacoil repair again
And haueth pity upon his pain
For Franchyse woll, and I Pity
That merciful to him ye be
And sithe that she and I accord
Have upon him mis^^icorde
For I you pray, and eke mou^ste
Naught to refusen our request
For he is hard, and fell of thought
That for us two woll do right naught
Danger ne might no more endure
He meked him unto mesure.
I Wol in no wise, says Daungere
Deny, that ye have asked here
It were to great vncurtesye
I woll ye have the company
Of Bialacoil, as ye deuyse
I woll him let in no wise
To Bialacoil than went in hye
Fraunchyse, and said full curteslye
Ye have to long be deignous
Unto this lover, and dangerous
Fro him to withdraw your presence
which has do to him great offense
That ye not would upon him se
wherefore a soroufull man is he
Shape ye to pay him, and to please
Of my love if ye woll have case
Fulfill his will, sithe that ye know
Danger is daunted and brought low
Through help of me and of Pity
You dare no more aferde be
I shall do right as ye will
Says Bialacoil, for it is skyll
Sithe Danger woll that it so be
Than Fraunchyse has him sent to me.
BYalacoil at the beginning
Salued me in his coming
No strau^genesse was in him seen
No more tha^ he ne had wrathed been
As fair semblaunt than showed he me
And goodly, as aforne did he
And by the hand without done
within the hay right all about
He ladde me with right good chere
All enuyron the vergere
That Danger had me chased fro
Now have I leave over all to go
Now am I raised at my deuyse
Fro hell unto paradyse
Thus Bialacoil of gentylnesse
with all his pain and business
Has showed me only of grace
The eftres of the swote place
I saw the Rose when I was nygh
was greatter woxen, and more high
Fresshe, roddy, and fair of hew
Of color ever yliche new
And when I had it long seen
I saw that through the leaves grene
The Rose spredde to spaunyshinge
To seen it was a goodly thing
But it ne was so sprede on bread
That men within might know the sede
For it covert was and close
Both with the leaves and with the rose
The stalk was even and grene upright
It was thereon a goodly sight
And well the better without wene
For the seed was not seen
Full fair it spradde the god of bless
For such another, as I guess
Aforne ne was ne more vermayle
I was abawed for marueyle
For ever the fayrer that it was
The more I am bounden in loves laas
Long I abode there sothe to say
Till Bialacoil I ganne to pray
when that I saw him in no wise
To me warnen his service
That he me would grant a thing
which to remember is well sitting
This is to said, that of his grace
He would me give leysar and space
To me that was so desirous
To have a kissing prectous
Of the goodly fresh Rose
That so swetely smells in my nose
For if you displeased naught
I would gladly, as I have sought
Have a cosse thereof freely
Of your yeft, for certainly
I wol none have, but by your leave
So loathe me were you for to grieve
HE said, friend so god me speed
Of Chastity I have such dread
Thou should not warned be for me
But I dare not for Chastyte
Again her dare I not mysdo
For always byddeth she me so
To give no lover leave to kiss
For who thereto may wynnen ywisse
He of the surplus of the pray
My life in hoope to get some day
For who so kissing may attain
Of loves pain has (sothe to said)
The best and most auenaunt
And ernest of the remenaunt.
OF his answer I sighed sore
I durst assaye him tho no more
I had such dread to grieve him aye
A man should not to much assaye
To chafe his friend out of measure
Nor put his life in adventure
For no man at the first stroke
Ne may not fell down an oak
Nor of the reysyns have the wine
Till grapes be ripe and well a fine
Be sore empressed, I you ensure
And drawn out of the pressure
But I forpeyned wonder strong
Though that I abode right long
After the kiss, in pain and woe
Sithe I to kiss desired so
Till that rennynge on my distress
There come Venus the goddess
(which aye werryeth Chastity)
Came of her grace to socour me
whose might is know far and wide
For she is mother of Cupyde.
THe God of Love, blind as stone
That helps lovers many one
This lady brought in her right hand
Of brennynge fire a blasyng bronde
whereof the flame and hot fire
Has many a lady in desire
Of Love brought, and sore hette
And in her service her heart is set
This lady was of good entayle
Right wonderful of apparayle
By her atyre so bright and shene
Men might perceive well and seen
She was not of Relygioun
Nor I nyll make mencioun
Nor of robe, nor of tresour
Of broche, neither of her rich attour
Ne of her gyrdell about her side
For that I nyll not long abide
But knows well, that certainly
She was arrayed richely
Deuoyde of pride certain she was
To Bialacoil she went a paas
And to him shortly in a clause
She said, sir: what is the cause
Ye ben of port so dangerous
Unto this lover, and daynous
To grant him nothing but a kiss
To warn it him ye done amysse
Sithe well ye wotte, how that he
Is loves servant, as ye may se
And has beauty, wherthrough is
worthy of love to have the blys
How he is semely behold and se
How he is fair, how he is free
How he is swote, and debonayre
Of age young, lusty, and fair
There is no lady so hawtayne
Duchess, countess, ne chastelayne
That I nolde hold her ungoodly
For to refuce him utterly
His brethe is also good and sweet
And eke his lyppes roddy and mete
Only to plain, and to kiss
Grant him a kiss of gentylnysse
His teth arne also white and clean
Me thinks wrong withouten wene
If ye now warn him, trusts me
To grant that a kiss have he
The less ye help him that ye haste
And the more time shull ye waste
when the flame of the very bronde
That Venus brought in her right hand
Had Bialacoil with his hete smete
Anon he badde me withouten let
Grant to me the rose kiss
Than of my pain I ganne to lysse
And to the rose anon went I
And kyssed it full faithfully
There need no man ask, if I was blythe
when the savor soft and lythe
Stroke to mine heart without more
And me allegged of my sore
So was I full of joy and bliss
It is fair such a flower to kiss
It was so swote and sauerous
I might not be so anguysshous
That I mote glad and ioly be
when that I remember me
Yet ever among sothly to feign
I suffer noye and much pain.
The sea may never be so still
That with a little wind at will
Ouerwhelme and turn also
As it were wood in wawes go
After the calm the trouble son
Mote follow, and change as the moon
Right so fares Love, that selde in one
Holds his ancre, for right anon
when they in ease wene best to live
They ben with tempest all fordryue
who serves Love, cannt tell of woe
The stoundmele joy mote ouergo
Now he hurts, and now he cures
For selde in o point Love endures.
Now is it right me to proceed
How Shame began meddle and take heed
Through whom fell angres I have hade
And how the strong wall was made
And the castle of bread and length
That god of Love wan with his strength
All this in Romaunce will I set
And for no thing ne will I let
So that it liking to her be
That is the flower of beauty
For she may best my labor quyte
That I for her love shall endyte
Wicked tongue that the couyne
Of every lover can deuyne
worste, and adds more somdele
(For wicked tongue says never well)
To mewarde bare he right great hate
Espyenge me erly and late
Till he has seen the great chere
Of Bialacoil and me yfere
He might not his tongue wythstonde
worse to report than he fond
He was so full of cursed rage
It satte him well of his lynage
For him an Irishe woman bare
His tongue was fyled sharp and square
Poignaunt and right keruyng
And wonder bitter in spekyng
For when that he me began espy
He swore (affyrmyng sykerly)
Between Bialacoil and me
was yuel aquayntaunce and pryue
He spoke thereof so folilye
That he awaked Ielousye
which all afraid in his rysyng
when that he herd ianglyng
He ran anon as he were wode
To Bialacoil there that he stood
which had lever in this caas
Have been at Reins or Amyas
For foot hot in his felonye
To him thus said Ielousye
Why haste thou ben so neglygent
To kepen, when I was absent
This verger here left eyn thy ward?
To me thou had no regard
To trust (to thy confusyon)
Him thus, to whom suspection
I have right great, for it is need
It is well showed by the deed
Great fault in the now have I found
By god anon thou shall be bound
And fast locken in a toure
without refuyte or socoure.
FOr Shame to long has be the fro
Over soon she was ago
When thou have lost both dread and fere
It seemed well she was not here
She was besy in no wise
To keep the and chastise
And for to helpen Chastity
To keep the Roser, as thinks me
For than this boy knave so boldly
Ne should not have be hardy
In this verge had such game
which now me tourneth to great shame.
BIalacoil nyst what to say
Full feign he would have fled away
For frare have hid, nere that he
All suddenly took him with me
And when I saw he had so
This Ielousye take us two
I was astoned, and knew no read
But fled away for very dread.
THan Shame came fortheful symply
she wend have trespaced full greatly
Humble of her port, and made it simple
wearyng a veil instead of wymple
As nonnes done in her abbey
Because her heart was in affray
She began to speak within a throw
To Ielousye, right wonder low
First of his grace she befought
And said sir, ne leueth naught
wicked tongue, that false espy
which is so glad to feign and lie
He has you made, through flateryng
On Bialacoil a false leasyng
His falsnesse is not now a new
It is to long that he him knew
This is not the first day
For wicked tongue has custom aye
Young folks to bewrye
And false lesynges on hem lie.
YEt nevertheless I se among
That the loigne it is so long
Of Bialacoil, hertes to lure
In loves service for to endure
Drawyng such folk him to
That he has nothing with to do
But in sothnesse I trow naught
That Bialacoil had ever in thought
To do trespace or vilanye
But for his mother Curtesye
Has taught him ever to be
Good of aqueyntaunce and pryue
For he loves none heaviness
But myrthe and play, and all gladness
He hates all trechours
Soleyne folk and enuyous
For ye weten how that he
woll ever glade and joyful be
Honestly with folk to pley
I have be neglygent in good fey
To chastyse him, therefore now I
Of heart I cry you here mercy
That I have been so recheles
To tamen him wythouten lees
Of my folly I me repent
Now woll I hole set mine entente
To keep both low and still
Bialacoyl to do your will
Shame Shame (said Ielousye)
To be bytrasshed great dread have I
Lecherye has clombe so hye
That almost blered is mine eye
No wonder is, if that dread have I
Over all reygneth lechery
whose might grows night and dey
Both in cloystre and in abbey
Chastyte is werreyed over all
Therefore I woll with syker wall
Close both roses and rosere
I have to long in this manner
Left hem unclosed wylfully
wherefore I am right inwardly
Soroufull, and repent me
But now they shall no longer be
Unclosed and yet I dread sore
I shall repent ferthermore
For the game gothe all amys
Counsel I must new iwys
I have to long trusted the
But now it shall no longer be
For he may best in every cost
Disceyue, that men trusten most
I se well that I am nyghe shent
But if I shette my full intent
Remedy to puruey
wherefore close I shall the wey
Fro hem that woll the rose espy
And come to wait me vilonye
For in good faith and in truth
I woll not let for no slouthe
To live the more in sykernesse
Do make anon a fortress
Than close the roses of good savor
In mids shall I make a tour
To put Bialacoil in prison
For ever I dread me of treson
I trow I shall him keep so
That he shall have no might to go
About to make company
To hem that think of vilanye
Ne to no such as has been here
Aforne, and found in him good chere
which han assailed him to shende
And with her trowandyse to blende
A fool is eyth to begyle
But may I live a little while
He shall forthynke his fair semblaunt.
And with that word came Dread auaunt
which was abashed, and in great fere
when he wyste Ielousye was there
He was for dread in such affray
That not a word durst he say
But quakyng stood full still alone
(Till Ielousye his way was gone)
Save Shame, that him not forsook
Both Dread and she full sore quoke
That at last Dread abrayde
And to his cosyn Shame said
SHame (he said) in sothfastnesse
To me it is great heaviness
That the noise so far is go
And the sclaunder of us two
But sithe that it is befall
we may it not again call
when ones spronge is a fame
For many a year wythouten blame
we have been, and many a day
For many an April, and many a May
we han passed, not shamed
Till Ielousye has us blamed
Of mystrust and suspection
Causeless, without encheson
Go we to Danger hastily
And let us show him openly
That he has not a right wrought
when that he set not his thought
To keep better the purprise
In his doing he is not wise
He has to us do great wrong
That has suffered now so long
Bialacoil to have his will
All his lusts to fulfill
He must amend it utterly
Or else shall he vilaynously
Exiled he out of this land
For he the werre may not wythstonde
Of Ielousye, nor the grefe
Sithe Bialacoil is at mischefe.
TO Danger Shame and Dread anon
The right way ben gone
The chorle they found he^ aforne
Ligging under an hawethorne
Under his heed no pylowe was
But in the stead a trusse of gras
He slombred, and a nappe he took
Till Shame pitously him shoke
And great manace on him began make
Why slepest thou, when thou should wake
(Quod Shame) thou do us vilanye
who trusts the, he does folly
To keep roses or bothoms
when they ben fair in her sesons
Thou art woxe to famyliere
where thou should be strange of chere
Stout of thy port, ready to grieve
Thou do great folly for to leave
Bialacoil here inn to call
The yonder man, to shenden us all
Though that thou sleep, we may here
Of Ielousye great noise here
Art thou now late, rise up an hye
And stop sone and delyuerly
All the gappes of the hay
Do no favor, I the pray
It falls nothing to thy name
To make fair semblant, where thou may blame.
IF Bialacoil be sweet and free
Dogged and fell thou should be
Froward and outrageous ywys
A chorle chau^geth that curtyse is
This have I herd often in saying
That man may for no dauntynge
Make a sperhauke of a bosarde
All men woll hold the for musarde
That debonayre have founden the
It sytteth the naught curteys to be
To do men pleasaunce or seruyse
In the it is recreaundyse
Let thy works far and nere
Be like thy name, which is Daungere
Then all abawed in showing
Anon spoke Dread, right thus saying
And said, Daungyr I dread me
That thou ne wolte besy be
To keep that thou have to keep
when thou shuldesh wake, thou art a sleep
Thou shall be grieved certainly
If the aspye Ielousye
Or if he find the in blame
He has to day assailed shame
And chased away, with great manace
Bialacoil out of this place
And swereth shortly that he shall
Enclose him in a sturdy wall
And all is for thy wickedness
For that he fails strangeness
Thine heart I trow be failed all
Thou shall repent in special
If Ielousye the sothe knew
Thou shall forthynke, and sore rewe.
With yt the churl his clubbe began shake
Frowning his eyes began to make
And hydous chere, as man in rage
For ire he brent in his vysage
when that he herd him blamed so
He said out of my wit I go
To be dyscomfyte I have great wrong
Certes I have now lived to long
Sith I may not this closer keep
All quycke I woll be doluen deep
If any man shall more repair
Into this gardyn for foul or fair
Mine heart for ire gothe a fere
That I let any enter here
I have do folly now I se
But now it shall amended be
who sets foot here any more
Truly he shall repent it sore
For no man more into this place
Of me to enter shall have grace
Lever I had with swerdes twain
Throughout mine heart, in every vain
Perced to be, with many a wound
Then sloth should in me be found
From hence forth by night or day
I shall defend it if I may
wythouten any excepcion
Of each manner condition
And if I it any man grant
Holds me for recreaunt.
THen Danger on his fete began stand
And hente a burden in his hand
wroth in his ire ne left he naught
But through the verger he has sought
If he might find hole or trace
where through that me mote forth by pace
Or any gappe, he did it close
That no man might touch a rose
Of the Roser all about
He shytteth every man without
Thus day by day Danger is wers
More wonderful and more diverse
And feller eke, then ever he was
For him full often I sing alas
For I ne may naught, through his ire
Recover that I most desire
Mine heart alas, woll brast a two
For Bialacoil I wrathed so
For certainly in every membre
I quake, when I remember
Of the bothom, which I would
Full often a day seen and behold
And when I think upon the kiss
And how much joy and bliss
I had through the savor sweet
For want of it I groan and great
Me thinks I feel yet in my nose
The sweet savor of the rose
And now I wot that I mote go
So far the fresh flowers fro
To me full welcome were the death
Absence thereof (alas) me slethe
For whylom with this rose, alas
I touched nose, mouth, and face
But now the death I must abide
But Love consent an other tide
That ones I touch may and kiss
I trow my pain shall never lysse
Thereon is all my couetyse
which brent mine heart in many wise
Now shall repair again syghynge
Long watch on nyghtes, and no slepynge
Thought in wyshynge, turment, and woe
with many a turnynge to and fro
That half my pain I can not tell
For I am fallen into hell
From paradyse and wealth, the more
My turment greueth more, and more
Anoyeth now the bytternesse
That I to forne have felt swetnesse
And wicked tongue, through his falshede
Causes all me woe and dread
On me he leyeth a pytous charge
Because his tongue was to large.
Now it is time shortly that I
Tell you somthynge of Ielousy
That was in great suspection
About him self he no mason
That stone could lay, ne querrour
He hired hem to make a tour
And first the roses for to keep
About hem made he a dyche deep
Right wonder large, and also broad
Upon the which also stood
Of squared stone, a sturdy wall
which on a cragge was founded all
And right great thycknesse eke it bare
About it was founded square
An hundred fadome on every side
It was all lych long and wide
Lest any time it were assailed
Full well about it was batayled*
And round enuyron eke were set
Full many a rich and fair tourette
At every corner of this wall
was set a toure full principal
And eueryche had without fable
A portcolyse defensable
To keep of enemies, and to grieve
That there her force would preue
And eke amydde this purpryse
was made a toure of great maystryse
A fayrer saugh no man with sight
Large and wide, and of great might
They drad none assaut
Of gynne, gonne, nor skaffaut
The temprure of the mortere
was made of lycoure wonder dear
Of quycke lyme persaunt and egre
The which was tempred with vynegre
The stone was hard of adamant
whereof they made the foundemant
The toure was round made in compass
In all this world no rycher was
Ne better ordained there wythall
About the toure was made a wall
So that betwyxt that and the toure
Roses were set of sweet sauoure
with many roses that they bear
And eke within the castle were
Spryngoldes, gonnes, bows, and archers
And eke about at corners
Men seyne over the wall stand
Great engyns, who were nere hand
And in the kernels here and there
Of arblasters great plentye were
None armure might her stroke wythstonde
It were folly to preace to hand
without the dytche were lystes made
with wall batayled large and brade
For men and horse should not attain
To nygh the dyche over the plain
Thus Ielousye has enuyron
Set about his garnyson
with walls round, and dyche deep
Only the Roser for to keep
And Danger erly and late
The keys kept of the utter gate
The which opens toward the eest
And he had with him at leest
Thurty servants each one by name
That other gate kept Shame
which opened, as it was couthe
Toward the part of the southe
Sergeauntes assygned were her to
Full many, her will for to do
Then Dread had in her bayllye
The keeping of the conestablerye
Toward the north I understand
That opened upon the lift hand
The which for nothing may be sure
But if she do besy cure
Erly on morrow, and also late
Strongly to shette and bar the gate
Of every thing that she may se
Dread is aferde, where so she be
For with a puff of little wind
Dread is astonyed in her mind
Therefore for stealing of the Rose
I read her not the yate unclose
A fowls flight woll make her fle
And eke a shadow if she it se.
THen wicked tongue full of envy
with soudyours of Normandye
As he that causes all the bate
was keeper of the fourth gate
And also to the the other three
He went full often for to se
when his lotte was to wake a night
His instruments would he dyght
For to blow and make sown
After then he has enchesoune
And walken often upon the wall
Corners and wyckettes over all
Full narowe serchen and espy
Though he naught fond, yet would he lie
Dyscordaunt ever fro armonye
And destoned from melodye
Controue he would, and foul fail
with hornepypes of Cornewayle
In floyres made he dyscordaunce
And in his musyke with myschaunce
He would seyne with notes new
That he fond no woman true
Ne that he saw never in his life
Unto her husbonde a true wife
Ne none so full of honest
That she nyll lauge and merry be
when that she hereth or may espy
A man speaken of lecherye
Eueryche of hem has some vice
One is dyshonest, another is nyce
If one be full of vyllanye
Another has a lykerous eye
If one be full of wantonness
Another is a chyderesse.
THus wicked tongue, God give him shame
Can put hem euerychone in blame
without deserte and causeless
He lies, though they ben gyltlesse
I have pity to seen the sorrow
That walks both eve and morrow
To innocents does such greuaunce
I pray God give him yuell chance
That he ever so besye is
Of any woman to seyne amys
Eke Ielousye, God confound
That has made a toure so round
And made about a garyson
To set Bealacoil in prison
The which is shette there in the tour
Full long to hold there soiour
There for to live in penance
And for to do him more greuaunce
which has ordained Ielousye
An old vecke for to espy
The manner of his governance
The which dyuell in her enfaunce
Had learned of loves art
And of his pleys took her part
She was except in his seruyse
She knew each wrenche and every gyse
Of Love, and every wyle
It was hard her to begyle
Of Bealacoil she took aye head
That ever he lives in woe and dread
He kept him koye, and eke pryne
Leest in him she had se
Any folly countenance
For she knew all the old dance
And after this when Ielousye
Had Bealacoil in his baillye
And shette him up that was so fre
For sure of him he would be
He trusts sore in his castle
The strong work him lyketh well
He dradde not that no glotons
Sulde steal his roses or bothoms
The roses weren assured all
Defenced with the strong wall
Now Ielousye full well may be
Of dread deuoyde in lyberte
whether that he sleep or wake
For of his roses may none be take.
But I (alas) now mourn shall
Because I was without the wall
Full much doole and moan I made
who had wist what woe I had
I trow he would have had pete
Love to dear had sold me
The good that of his love had I
I went about it all queyntly
But now through doubling of my pain
I se he would it sell again
And me a new bargayne lere
The which all out the more is dear
For the solace that I have lorne
Then I had it never aforne
Certain I am full like in deed
To him that cast in earth his sede
And has joy of the new spring
when it greneth in the gynnynge
And is also fair and fresh of flower
Lusty to seen, swote of odoure
But er he it in sheues shere
May fall a wether that shall it dear
And make it to fade and fall
The stalk, the greyne, and flowers all
That to the tyllers is fordone
The hope that he had to sone
I dread certain that so fare I
For hope and travail sykerly
Ben me byraste all with a storm
The flower nyll seden of my corn
For Love has so auaunced me
when I began my pryuyte
To Bailacoil all for to tell
whom I ne found froward ne fell
But took agree all hole my play
But love is of so hard assaye
That all at ones he reued me
when I went best abouen to have be
It is of love, as of fortune
That changes often, and nyll contune
which whylom woll on folk smyle
And glombe on hem another while
Now friend now foe shall her feel
For a twynclynge tourneth her whele
She can wrythe her heed away
This is the concourse of her play
She can areyst that does mourn
And whirle adowne and ouertourne
who sytteth highest, but as her lust
A fool is he that woll her trust
For it is I that am come down
Through charge and reuolutioun
Sith Bialacoil more fro my twyne
Shette in the prison yonde wythinne
His absence at mine heart I feel
For all my joy and all mine hele
was in him, and in the Rose
That but you woll, which him does close
Open, that I may him se
Love woll not that I cured be
Of the pains that I endure
Nor of my cruel adventure
AH, Bialacoil mine own dear
Though thou be now a prisonere
Keep at leest thine heart to me
And suffer not that it daunted be
Ne let not Ielousye in his rage
Putten thine heart in no seruage
All though he chastyce the without
And make thy body unto him lout
Have heart as hard as diamaunt
Steadfast, and naught plyaunt
In prison though thy body be
At large keep thine heart free
A true heart woll not plye
For no manace that it may dry
If Ielosye does the pain
Quyte him his while thus again
To venge the at leest in thought
If other way thou may naught
And in this wise subtelly
worche, and win the maystry
But yet I am in great affraye
Lest thou do not, as I say
I dread thou can me great maugre
That thou enprysoned art for me
But that not for my trespass
For through me never dyscouered was
Yet thing, that ought by secret
well more annoye is in me
Then is in the of this myschaunce
For I endure more hard penance
Then any can said or think
That for the sorrow almost I synke
when I remember me of my woe
Full nyghe out of my wit I go.
Inward mine heart I feel blede
For comfortless the death I dread
Owe I not well to have dystresse
when false, through her wickedness
And traitors, that arne enuyous
To noyen me, be so coragious
Ah, Bialacoil full well I se
That they hem shape to dysceyue the
To make the buxome to her law
And with her cord the to draw
where so hem lust, right at her will
I dread they have the brought there till
without comfort, thought me slethe
This game woll bring me to my death
For if I your good will lose
I more be deed I may not chese
And if that thou foryete me
Mine heart shall never in liking be
Nor elsewhere find solace
If I be put out of your grace
As it shall never ben I hope
Then should I fall in wanhope
Alas, in wanhope: nay parde
For I woll never dyspeyred be
If hope me fail, then am I
Ungracious and unworthy
In hope I woll conforted be
For Love, when he betaught her me
Said, that hope where so I go
Should aye be relees to my woe
But what and she my bales beat
And be to me curteys and sweet
She is in nothing full certain
Lovers she put in full great pain
And makes hem with woe to dele
Her fair behest dysceyueth feel
For she woll behote sykerly
And faylen after utterly
Ah, that is a full noyous thing
For many a lover in loving
Hangs upon her, and trusts fast
which lose her travail at the last
Of thing to common she wot right naught
Therefore if it be wisely sought
Her counsel folly is to take
For many times, when she woll make
A full good sylogysme, I dread
That afterward there shall in deed
Follow an yuell conclusyoun
This put me in confusioun
For many times I have it seen
That many have begyled been
For trust that they have set in hope
which fell hem afterward a slope
But nathelesse yet gladlye she would
That he that woll him with her hold
Had altymes her purpose clear
without dysceyte or any were
That she desires sykerly
when I her blamed I did folly
But what avails her good will
when she ne may staunche my stounde ill
That helps little that she may do
Outtake behest unto my woe
And heest certain in no wise
without yefte is not to praise.
WHen heest and deed a sondre vary
They done a great contrary
Thus am I possed up and down
with doole, thought, and confusyoun
Of my disease there is no nombre
Daungere and shame me encombre
Dread also, and Ielousye
And wicked Tongue full of envy
Of which the sharp and cruel Ire
Full often me put in great martyr
They have my joy fully let
Sith Bialacoil they have beshette
Fro me in prison wyckedly
whom I love so entierly
That it woll my bane be
But I the sooner may him se
And yet more over worst of all
There is set to keep, foul her befall
A Rympled vecke far roune in rage
Frowning and yelowe in her vysage
which in awayte lies day and night
That none of hem may have a sight.
Now mote my sorrow enforsed be
Full soth it is that Love yafe me
Three wonder yeftes of his grace
which I have lorne now in this place
Sith they ne may without dread
Helpen but little who takes head
For here avails no Sweet thought
And sweet Speech helps right naught
The third was called Sweet Lokynge
That now is lorne without lesynge.
YEftes were fair, but not for thy
They help me but symply
But Bialacoil loosed be
To gone at large, and to be free
For him my life lies all in doubt
But if he come the rather out
Alas I trow it woll not been
For how should I evermore him seen?
He may not out, and that is wrong
Because the Toure is so strong
How should he out, or by whose prowess
Of so strong a forteresse?
By me certain it nyll be do
God wotte I have no wit thereto
But well I wot I was in rage
when I to Love did homage
who was in cause (in sothfastnesse)
But her self dame Idelnesse?
which me conveyed through fair prayere
To enter in to that fair vergere
She was to blame me to leave
The which now does me sore grieve
A fools word is naught to trow
Ne worth an apple for to low
Men should him snybbe bytterly
At pryme temps of his folly
I was a fool, and she me leued
Through who I am right naught releued
She accomplyshed all my will
That now me greueth wonder ill.
REason me said what should fall
A fool my self I may well call
That love aside I had not laid
And trowed that dame Reason said
Reason had both skyll and right
when she me blamed, with all her might
To meddle of love, that has me shent
But certain now I woll repent.
ANd should I repent? nay parde
A false traitor, then should I be
The dyuels engyns would me take
If I my love would forsake
Or Bialacoil falsely betraye
Should I at myschefe hate him? nay
Sith he now for his curtesye
Is in prison of Ielousye
Curtesye certain did he me
So much, that it may not yolden be
when he the hay passen me let
To kiss the Rose, fair and sweet
Should I therefore con him maugre
Nay certainly, it shall not be
For Love shall never give good will
Here of me, through word or will
Offense or complaynt more or less
Neither of Hope nor Idelnesse
For certes it were wrong that I
Hated hem for her curtesye
There is not else, but suffer and think
And waken when I should wynke
Abide in hope, till Love through chance
Send me socour or allegeaunce
Expectant aye till I may mete
To getten mercy of that sweet.
WHylom I think how Love to me
Said he would take at gre
My service, if vnpacience
Caused me to done offense
He said, in thank I shall it take
And high master eke the make
If wickedness ne reave it the
But soue I trow that shall not be
These were his words by and by
It seemed he loved me truly
Now is there not but serve him well
If that I think his thank to feel
My good mine harm, lies hole in me
In love may no defaute be
For true love ne failed never man
Sothly the fault mote needs than
As God forbid, be found in me
And how it comes, I can not se
Now let it gone as it may go
whether Love woll socoure me or slo
He may do hole on me his will
I am so sore bound him till
From his service I may not ^lene
For life and death wythouten wene
Is in his hand, I may not chese
He may me do both win and lest
And sith so sore he does me grieve
Yet if my lust he would acheue
To Bialacoil goodly to be
I give no force what fell on me
For though I dye, as I mote need
I pray Love of his goodlyhede
To Bialacoil do gentylnesse
For whom I live in such dystresse
That I mote dyen for penance
But first, without repentance
I woll me confess in good intent
And make in have my testament
As lovers done that felen smerte
To Bialacoil leave I mine heart
All hole, without departing
Or doubleness of repenting
Comment Raison vient a Lamant.
THus as I made my passage
In complaynt and in cruel rage
And I not where to find a leche
That couthe unto mine helping each
Suddenly again comen down
Out of her tour I saw Reasoun
Discrete and wise, and full pleasant
And of her port full auenaunt
The right way she took to me
which stood in great perplexity
That was posshed in every side
That I nyst where I might abide
Till she demurely sad of chere
Said to me as she came nere
Mine own friend, art thou grieved?
Now is this quarrel yet atcheued
Of loves side? anon tell me
Have thou not yet of love thy fill?
Art thou not weary of thy service?
That the has in such wise
what joy have thou in thy loving?
Is it sweet or bitter thing
Can thou yet chese, let me se
what best thy socour might be.
THou seruest a full noble lord
That makes the thrall for thy reward
which aye returns thy turment
with folly so he has the blent
Thou fell in myschefe thylke day
when thou dyddest, the sothe to say
Obeysaunce, and eke homage
Thou wroughtest nothing as the sage
when thou became his liege man
Thou dyddest a great folly than
Thou wystest not what fell thereto
with what lord thou had to do
if thou had him well know
Thou had naught be brought so low
For if thou wystest what it were
Thou would serve him half a year
Not a weke, nor half a day
Ne yet an hour without delay
Ne never I loved paramours
His lordshyp is so full of shours
Know him ought?
Lamaunt. Yea dame pardye

Reasoun. Nay nay

Lamaunt. Yes I

Reasoun. wherefore let se

Lamaunt. Of that he said I should be
Glad to have such lord (as he)
And master of such seignorie

Reasoun. Know him no more

Lamaunt. Nay certes I
Save that ye yafe me rules there
And went his way, I nyst where
And I abode bound in balaunce
Lo, there a noble conysaunce.

Reasoun. But I woll that thou know him now
Gynnynge and end, sith that thou
Art so anguyshious and mate
Disfigured out of astate
There may no wretch have more of woe
Ne cautyfe none enduren so
It were to every man syttyng
Of his lord have knowledgyng
For if thou knew him out of doubt
Lightly thou should escapen out
Of thy prison that marreth the

Lamaunt. Ye dame sith my lord is he
And I his man made with mine hand
I would right feign understand
To know of what kind he be
If any would inform me.

Reasoun I would (said reason) the lere
Since thou to learn have such de
And show the wtoute^ fable (sire
A thing yt is not demonstrable
Thou shall withouten science
And know withouten experience
The thing that may not known be
Ne wist ne showed in no degree
Thou may the soth of it not wytten
Though in the it were written
Thou shall not know thereof more
while thou art ruled by his lore
But unto him that love woll fly
The knotte may unclosed be
which has to the, as it is found
So long to knytte, and not unbound
Now set well thine ententioun
To here of love descriptioun.
Love it is an hateful pees
A free acquaintance without relees
And through the fret full of falshede
A syckernesse all set in dread
In heart is a dispayryng hope
And full of hope it is wanhope
wise woodnesse, and void Reason
A sweet peril in to drown
An heavy burden light to bear
A wicked vawe away to wear
It is Carybdes perylous
Disagreable and gracious
It is discordaunce that can accord
And accordaunce to discord
It is connyng without science
wisdom without sapience
without discretioun
Hauoyre without possessyoun
It is like hele and hole sycknesse
A trust drowned and dronkenesse
And health full of maladye
And charity full of envy
And anger full of habundaunce
And a gredye suffisaunce
Delight right full of heaviness
And dreried full of gladness
Bitter swetnesse and sweet error
Right yuel sauoured good savor
Sen that pardon has within
And pardon spotted without sin
A pain also it is joyous
And felony right pytious
Also play that selde is stable
And steadfast right meuable
A strength weyked to stand vpryght
And feblenesse full of might
wit unadvised, sage follye
And joy full of tourmentrye
A laughter it is weeping aye
Rest that trauayleth night and day
Also a sweet hell it is
And a sorrowful paradys
A plesaunt gayle and prisoun
And full of frost somer season
Pryme temps full of frostes white
And May deuoyde of all delight
with seer branches blossoms vngrene
And new fruit filled with winter tene
It is a slow may not forbear
Rags rybaned with gold to wear
For all so well woll love be set
Under rags as rich rochette
And eke as well by amorettes
In mournyng black, as bright burnettes
For none is of so mokel pryse
Ne noman founden so wise
Ne none so high is of parage
Ne noman found of wit so sage
No man so hardye ne so wight
Ne no man of so mokell might
None so fulfilled of bounty
That he with love may daynted be
All the world holds this way
Love makes all to gone myswaye
But it be they of evil life
whom Genius cursed man and wife
That wrongly work again nature
None such I love, ne have no cure
Of such as love servants been
And woll not by my counsel flene
For I ne preyse that loving
wherthrough men at the last endyng
Shall call hem wretches full of woe
Love greueth hem and shendeth so
But if thou wolt well love eschew
For to escape out of his mewe
And make all hole thy sorrow to slake
No better counsel may thou take
Than think to fleen well ywys
May naught help else, for wit thou this
if thou fly it, it shall fly the
Follow it, and folowen shall it the

Lamaunt. when I had herd al Reason said
which had spylt her speech in vain
Dame (said I) I dare well say
Of this auaunt me well I may
That from your schole so deuiaunt
I am, that never the more auaunt
Right naught am I through your doctrine
I dull under your disciplyne
I wot no more than wist ever
To me so contrary and so fer
Is every thing that ye me lere
And yet I can it al by partuere
My heart foryeteth thereof right naught
It is so written in my thought
And deep graven it is so tender
That all mine heart I can it render
And read it over communely
But to my self leudest am I

But sith ye love discryuen so
And lack and preise it both two
Defyneth it into this letter
That I may think on it the better
For I herd never defyned here
And wylfully I would it lere
If love be searched well and sought
It is a syknesse of the thought
Annexed and lined bytwyxt tweyne
with male and female with o cheyne
So freely that byndeth, that they ne twynne
whether so thereof they lose or win The rote spryngeth through hot brenning
Into disordinate desyryng
For to kyssen and embrace
And at her lust them to solace
Of other thing love retcheth naught
But sets her heart and all her thought
More for delectatioun
Than any procreatioun
Of other fruit by engendrure
which love to god is not pleasure
For of her body fruit to get
They give no forse, they are so set
Upon delight to play in fere
And some have also this manner
To faynen hem for love seek
Such love I praise not at a leke
For paramours they do but feign
To love truly they disdain
They falsen ladies traytoursly
And swerne hem oaths utterly
with many a lesyng, and many a sable
And all they fynden disceyuable
And when they han her lust getten
The hot ernes they all foryeten
women the harm byen full sore
But men this thynken evermore
That less harm is so mote I the
Disceyue them, than disceyued be
And namely where they ne may
Find none other mean way
For I wot well in sothfastnesse
That who does now his business
with any woman for to dele
For any lust that he may feel
But if it be so for engendrure
He does trespass I you ensure
For he should letten all his will
To getten a lykely thing him till
And to sustain if he might
And keep forth by kinds right
His own likeness and semblable
For because all is corumpable
And fail should successyoun
Ne were their generatioun
Our sects stern for to save
when father or mother arne in grave
Her children should, when they ben bid
Full diligent been in her stead
To use that warke on such a wise
That one may through another rise
Therefore set kind therein delight
For men therein should have delight
And of that deed be not erke
But often sythens haunt that work
For none would draw thereof a draught
Ne were delight which has him caught
This had subtyl dame Nature
For none goth right I the ensure
Ne has intent hole ne perfyte
For her desire is for delight
The which fortened crease, and eke
The play of love for often seek
And thrall hem self they be so nyse
Unto the prince of every vice
For of each sin it is the rote
Unlawful lust though it be sote
And of all evil the racyne
As Tullius can determyne
which in his time was full sage
In a book he made of age
where that more he prayseth elde
Though he be crooked and vnwelde
And more of co^mendatioun
Than youth in his descriptioun
For youth set both man and wife
In all paryll of soul and life
And parell is, but men have grace
The paryll of youth for to pace
without any death or distress
It is so full of wyldnesse
So often it does shame or damage
To him or to his lynage
And ledeth man now up now down
In mokell dissolutioun
And makes him love well company
And led his life disrulely
And halte him paid with none estate
within him self is such debate
He changes purpose and intent
And yalte into some covent
To lyuen after her empryse
And leseth fredom and fraunchyse
That nature in him had set
The which again he may not get
If he there make his mansyon
For to abide professyon
Though for a time his heart absent
It may not fail he shall repent
And eke abide thylke day
To leave his habyte, and gone his way
And leseth his worship and his name
And dare not come again for shame
But all his life he does so mourn
Because he dare not home return
Fredom of kind so lost has he
That never may recured be
But that if god him grant grace
That he may or he hence pace
Conteyne under obedience
Through the virtue of patience
For youth set man in all folly
In vnthryft and in rybaudrye
In lechery and in outrage
So often it changes of courage
Youth gynneth often such bargayne
That may not end without pain
In great paryll is set youth head
Delight so does his brydell led
Delight this hangs, dread the naught
Both man's body and his thought
Only through youths chambere
That to done evil is customere
And of naught else takes head
But only folks for to lead
In to disporte and wyldenesse
So is fro ward from sadness
But elde draws hem therfro
who wot it not, he may well go
And mo of hem, that now arne old
That whylom youth had in hold
which yet remembers of tender age
How it hem brought in many arage
And many a folly therein wrought
But now yt elde has him through sought
They repent hem of her follye
That youth hem put in ieopardye
In paryll and in much woe
And made hem often amysse to do
And sewen evil company
Riot and auoutryce.
But elde can again restrain
From such folly, and refrain
And set men by her ordinance
In good rule and in governance
But evil she spends her seruyse
For noman woll her love neither preyse
She is hated, this wot I well
Her acquayntaunce would no man feel
Ne han of elde company
Men hate to be of her alye
For no man would become old
Ne dye when he is young and bold
And elde maruayleth right greatly
when they remember hem inwardly
Of many a peryllous empryse
which that they wrought in sundry wise
How ever they might without blame
Escape away without shame
In youth without damage
Or reprefe of her lynage
Loss of membre, shedyng of blood
Parell of death, or loss of good
wost thou not where youth abyt
That men so preysen in her wit
with delight she halte soiour
For both they dwellen in o tour
As long as youth is in season
They dwell in one mansyon
Delight of youth woll have service
To do what so he woll deuyse
And youth is ready evermore
For to obey for smerte of sore
Unto delight, and him to give
Her service, while that she may live.
WHere elde habytte, I wol the tell
Shortly, and no while dwell
For thither behooves yt to go
If death in youth the not slo
Of this iourneye thou may not fail
with her labor and travail
Lodged ben with sorrow and woe
That never out of her court go
Pain and distress, syknesse and ire
And melancoly that angry sire
Been of her paleys senators
Gronyng and grutchynge her harbegeours
The day and night her to tourment
with cruel death they her present
And tellen her erlyche and late
That death stands armed at her gate
Than bring they to her remembrance
The folly deeds of her enfaunce
which causen her to mourn in woe
That youth has her begyled so
which suddenly away is hasted
She wepeth the time that she has wasted
Complaynyng of the preterytte
And the present, that not abytte
And of her old vanity
That but aforne her she may se
In the future some socour
To leggen her of her dolor
To grant her time of repentance
For her sins to do penance
And at the last so her govern
To win the joy that is eterne
Fro which go bakwarde youth he made
In vanity to drown and wade
For present time abides naught
It is more swyft than any thought
So little while it does endure
That there nys count ne measure
But how that ever the game go
who list to love, joy and mirth also
Of love, be it he or she
Hye or low who it be
In fruit they should hem delight
Her part they may not else quyte
To save hem self in honesty
And yet full many one I se
Of women, sothly for to said
That desire, and would feign
The play of love, they be so wild
And not coueyte to go with child
And if with child they be perchance
They wol it hold a great mischaunce
But what so ever woe they feel
They woll not plain, but concele
But if it be any fool or nyce
In whom that shame has no justice
For to delight echone they draw
That haunt this work both hye and law
Save such that arne worth right naught
That for money woll be bought
Such love I praise in no wise
when it is given for couetyse
I preyse no woman, though so be wood
That yeueth her self for any good
For little should a man tell
Of her that will her body sell
Be she maid, be she wife
That quycke will sell her by her life
How fair chere that ever she make
He is a wretch I undertake
That loved such one, for sweet or sour
Though she him called her paramoure
And laugheth on him, and makes him feast
For certainly no such be
To be loved is not worthy
Or bear the name of drury
Non should her please, but he were wood
That woll dispoyle him of his good
Yet nathelesse I woll not say
That she for solace and for play
May a jewel or other thing
Take of her lovers free yeuyng
But that she ask it in no wise
For dread of shame, or couetyse
And she of hers may him certain
without slander yeuen again
And join her hertes together so
In love, and take and give also
Trow not that I woll hem twynne
when in her love there is no sin
I woll that they together go
And don all that they han ado
As curteys should and debonayre
And in her love beren hem fair
without vice both he and she
So that always in honesty
Fro folly love to keep hem clear
That brenneth hertes with his fere
And that her love in any wise
Be deuoyde of couetyse
Good love should engendered be
Of true heart, just and secree
And not of such as set her thought
To have her lust, or else naught
So are they caught in loves lace
Truly for bodily solace
Fleshly delight is so present
with the, that set all thine intent
without more what should I gloss
For to get and have the rose
which makes the so mate and wood
That thou desyrest none other good
But thou art not an yuche the nerere
But ever abydest in sorrow and werre
As in thy face it is to seen
It makes the both pale and lene
Thy might, thy virtue goth away
A sorry gest in good faye
Thou harborest in thine Inn
The god of love when thou let in
wherefore I read thou shet him out
Or he shall grieve the out of dout
For to thy profyt it will turn
If he no more with the soiourne
In great myschefe and sorrow sonken
Ben hertes that of love arne dronken
As thou peradventure known shall
when thou have lost the time all
And spent by thought in idleness
In waste, and woeful lustynesse
If thou may live the time to se
Of love for to delivered be
Thy time thou shall bewepe sore
The which never thou may restore
For time lost, as men may se
For nothing may recovered be
And if thou escape, yet at last
Fro love that has the so fast
Knytte and bounden in his lace
Certain I hold it but a grace
For many one as it is seyne
Have lost and spent also in vein
In his service without socour
Body and soul, good and treasour
wit and strength, and eke richesse
Of which they had never redress.
Lamant
THus taught and preached has Reason
But love spylte her sermon
That was so imped in my thought
That her doctrine I set at naught
And yet ne said she never a dele
That I ne understood it well
word by word the matter all
But unto love I was so thral
which calls over all his pray
He chaseth so my thought aye
And holds mine heart under his seal
As trusty and true as any stele
So that no devotion
Ne had I in the sermon
Of dame Reason, ne of her read
It took no soiour in mine heed
For all yede out at one ere
That in that other she did lere
Fully on me she lost her lore
Her speech me grieved wonder sore
THat unto her for ire I said
For anger, as I did abrayde
Dame, and is it your will algate
That I not love, but that I hate
All men as ye me teache
For if I do after your speech
Sith that ye said love is not good
Than must I needs say with mode
If I it leave, in hatred aye
Lyuen, and void love always
From me a sinful wretch
Hated of all that teache
I may not go none other gate
For either must I love or hate
And if I hate men of new
More than love, it woll me rewe
As by your prechyng seems me
For love nothing ne prayseth the
Ye give good counsel sykerly
That precheth me al day, that I
Should not loves lore allow
He were a fool would you not trow
In speech also ye han me taught
Another love that known is naught
which I herd you not repreue
To love each other by your leave
If ye I would diffyne it me
I would gladly here to se
At the lest if I may lere
Of sundry loves the manner.
Raison.
CErtes friend, a fool art thou
when that thou nothing wolt allow
That I for thy profit say
Yet woll I say the more in say
For I am ready at the leest
To acomplysh thy request
But I not where it woll aueyle
In vain peradventure I shall traueyle
Love there is in sundry wise
As I shall the here deuyse.
For some love lefull is and good
I mean not yt which makes the wood
And brings the in many a fytte
And rauysheth fro the all thy wit
It is so marvelous and queynt
with such love be no more acqueynt
Comment Reason diffinist Aunsete.
Love of frenshyppe also there is
which makes no man done amys
Of will knytte betwyxte two
That wol not break for well ne woe
which long is lykely to contune
when will and goods been in commune
Grounded by gods orddinaunce
Hoole without discordaunce
with hem holdyng co^munte
Of al her good in charity
That there be none exceptioun
Through chaungyng of ententioun
That each help other at her need
And wisely hele both word and deed
True of meaning, deuoyde of sloth
For wit is naught without troth
So that the tone dare al his thought
Said to his friend, and spare naught
As to him self without dredyng
To be discovered by wreying
For glad is that conjunction
when there is none suspection
whom they would prove
That true and parfyte weren in love
For no man may be amiable
But if he be so ferme and stable
That fortune change him not ne blind
But that his friend always him find
Both poor and rich in o state
For if his friend through any gate
wol complain of his pouerte
He should not bide so long, till he
Of his helpyng him require
For good deed done through prayere
Is sold and bought to dear ywys
To heart that of great valor is
For heart fulfilled of gentylnesse
Can yuel demeaue his distress
And man that worthy is of name
To asken often has great shame
A good man brenneth in his thought
For shame when he asks ought
He has great thought, and dredeth aye
For his disease when he shall pray
His friend lest that he warned be
Till that he preue his stabilite
But when that he has founden one
That trustye is and true as stone
And assayed him at al
And found him steadfast as a wall
And of his frenshyp be certain
He shall him show, both joy and pain
And all that dare think or say
without shame, as he well may
For how should he a shamed be
Of such one as I told the
For when he wotte his secret thought
The third shall know thereof right naught
For twey in nombre is bette than three
In every counsel and secree
Repreue he dredeth never a dele
who that besette his words well
For every wise man out of dread
Can keep his tongue till he se need
And fools can not hold her tongue
A fools belle is sone ronge
Yet shall a true friend do more
To help his fellow of his sore
And succor him when he has need
In all that he may done in deed
And gladder that he him pleases
Than his fellow that he eases
And if he do not his request
He shall as much him molest
As his fellow, for that he
May not fulfill his volunte
Fully as he has required
If both the hertes love has fyred
Joy and woe they shall depart
And take euenly each his part
Half his anoye he shall have aye
And comfort what that he may
And of this bliss part shall he
If love wol departed be.
ANd whylom of this unite
Spoke Tulllius in a dyte
And should maken his request
Unto his friend, that is honest
And he goodly should it fulfill
But it the more were out of skyl
And otherwise not grant thereto
Except only in causes two
If men his friend to death would drive
Let him be besy to save his live
Also if men woollen him assail
Of his worship to make him fail
And hyndren him of his renoun
Let him with full ententioun
his deuer done in each degree
That his friend ne shamed be
In this two case with his might
Taking no keep to skyl nor right
As far as love may him excuse
This ought no man to refuse
This love that I have told the
Is nothing contrary to me
This wol I that thou follow well
And leave the the other every dele
This love to virtue al entendeth
The the other fools blent and shendeth.
Another love also there is
That is contrary unto this
which desire is so constrained
That is but will feigned
Away fro troth it does so varye
That to good love it is contrary
For it maymeth in many wise
Syke hertes with couetyse
Al in winning and in profit
Such love sets his delight
This love so hangs in balaunce
That if it lose his hope parchaunce
Of luere, that he is set upon
It wol fail, and quench anon
For no man may be amorous
Ne in his living virtuous
But he love more in mood
Men for hem self, than for her good
For love that profit does abide
Is false and bydeth not in no tide
Love comes of dame fortune
That little while will contune
For it shall chaungen wonder soon
And take eclyps right as the moon
when he is from us let
Through earth, that betwyxt is set
The sun and her, as it may fall
Be it in party, or in all
The shadow makes her bemes merke
And her horns to show derke
That part, where she has lost her light
Of Phoebus fully, and the sight
Till when the shadow is ouerpast
She is enlumyned again as fast
Through the bryghtnesse of the su^ne bemes
That yeueth to her again her lemes
That love is right of such nature
Now is fair, and now obscure
now bright, now clipsy of manner
And whylom dymme, and whylom clear
As soon as pouerte gynneth take
with mantel and weeds blake
Hydeth of love the light away
That in to night it turns day
It may not se riches shine
Till the black shadows fine
For when richesse shyneth bright
Love recouereth again his light
And when it fails, he wol flyt
And as she greueth, so greueth it
Of this love here what I say
The rich men are loved aye
And namely tho that sparande been
That wol not wash her hertes clean
Of the fylth nor of the byce
Of gredy brennyng auaryce
The rich man full fond is ywys
That weneth that he loved is
If that his heart it understood
It is not he, it is his good
He may well weten in his thought
His good is loved, and he right naught
For if he be a nygarde eke
Men will not set by him a leke
But haten him, this is the soth
Lo what profit his catel does
Of every man that may him se
It gets him nough but cumyte
But he amend him self of that vice
And know him self he is not wise
Certes he should aye friendly be
To get him love also been fre
Or else he is not wise ne sage
No more than is a got ramage
That he not loves, his deed proves
when he his richesse so well loves
That he wol hyde it aye and spare
His poor friends seen forfare
To kepen aye his purpose
Till for dread his eyes close
And till a wicked death him take
Him had lever a sondre shake
And let al his lymmes a sondre ryue
Than leave his richesse in his live
He thinks to part it with no man
Certain no love is in him than
How should love within him be
when in his heart is no pity
That he trespaseth well I wate
For each man knows his estate
For well him ought to be reproved
That loves naught, ne is not loved
But sith we arne to fortune comen
And has our sermon of her nomen
A wonder will I tell the now
Thou hardest never such one I trow
I not where thou me leven shall
Though sothfastnesse it be al
As it is written: and is soth
That unto men more profit does
The froward fortune and contraire
Than the swote and debonaire
And if the think it is doutable
It is through argument prouable
For the debonayre and soft
Falseth and begyleth often
For lyche a mother, she can cheryshe
And mylken as does a norice
And of her good to him deles
And yeueth him part of her to weles
with great richesse and degnite
And hem she hoteth stabilyte
In a state that is not stable
But chaungyng aye and variable
And fedeth him with glory vain
And worldly bliss noncertayne
when she him sets on her whele
Than wene they to be right well
And in so stable state wythall
That never they wene for to fall
And when they set so high be
They wene to have in certeynte
Of hertly friends to great nombre
That nothing might her state encombre
They trust hem so on every side
wenyng with him they would abide
In every parel and mischaunce
without change or variaunce
Both of catel and of good
And also for to spend her blood
And al her members for to spyll
Only for to fulfill her will
They maken it hole in many wise
And hoten hem her full seruyse
How sore that it do hem smerte
In to her very naked sherte
Heart and also hole they give
For the time that they may live
So that with her flatterye
They maken fools glorifye
Of her words spekyng
And han chere of a reioysyng
And trow hem as the Euangyle
And it is al falsheed and gyle
As they shall afterward se
when they arne fallen in pouerte
And been of good and catel bare
Than shul they seen who friends ware
For of an hundrede certainly
Nor of a thousand full scarsly
Ne shall they find uneaths one
when pouerte is comen upon
For thus fortune that I of tell
with men when her lust to dwell
Makes hem to lose her conysaunce
And norisheth hem in ignorance
But froward fortune and perverse
when high estates she does reuerse
And makes hem to tomble down
Of her whele with sudden turn
And from her richesse doch hem fly
And plongeth hem in pouerte
As a stepmother enuyous
And lays a playstre dolorous
Unto her hertes wounded egre
which is not tempred with vynegre
But with pouerte and indigence
For to show by experience
That she is fortune verylye
In whom no man should affye
Nor in her yeftes have fyaunce
She is so full of varyaunce
Thus can she maken hye and low
when they from richesse arne throw
Fully to known without were
Friend of affecte, and friend of chere
And which in love weren true and stable
And which also weren varyable
After fortune her goddess
In pouerte either in richesse
For all that yeueth here out of dread
Unhappy bereueth it in deed
For in fortune let not one
Of friends, when fortune is gone
I mean tho friends that will fle
Anon as enters pouerte
And yet they woll not leave hem so
But in each place where they go
They call hem wretch, scorn, and blame
And of her mishappe hem diffame
And namely such as in richesse
Pretends most of stablenesse
when that hey saw him set on lofte
And weren of him socoured often
And most yholpe in all her need
But now they take no manner head
But seyne in voice of flatery
That now appears her folly
Over al where so they fare
And sing, go farewell feldefare
Al such friends I beshrewe
For of true there be to few
But sothfast friends, what so betyde
In every fortune woollen abide
They han her hertes in such noblesse
That they nyl love for no richesse
Nor for that fortune may hem send
They woollen hem socour and defend
And change for soft ne for sore
For who is friend loves evermore
Though men drew sword his friend to slo
He may not hew her love a two
But in case that I shall say
For pride and ire lose it he may
And for reprove by nycete
And discoueryng of priuite
with tongue woundyng, as felon
Through venomous detraction
Friend in this case wol gone his way
For nothing grieve him more ne may
And for naught else wol he fle
If that he love in stabylyte
And Certain he is well begone
Among a thousand that fyndeth one
For there may be no richesse
Against frendshyp of worthynesse
For it ne may so high attain
As may the valor, soth to said
Of him that loves true and well
Frendshyp is more than is catel
For friend in court aye better is
Than penny in purse certis
And fortune mishappyng
when upon men she is fablyng
Though misturnyng of her chance
And cast hem out of balaunce
She makes through her aduersite
Men full clearly for to se
Him that is friend in existence
From him that is by appearance
For in fortune makes anon
To know thy friends fro thy fone
By experience right as it is
The which is more to praise ywys
Than is much richesse and tresour
For more deep profit and valor
Pouerte, and such aduersyte
Before than does prosperity
For that one yeueth conysaunce
And the the other ignorance
And this pouerte is in deed
Troth declared fro falshede
For faint friends it wol declare
And true also what wey they fare
For when he was in his richesse
These friends full of doubleness
Offered him in many wise
Heart and body, and service
what would he tha^ have you to have bought
To known openly her thought
That he now has so clearly seen
The less begyled he should have been
And he had than perceived it
But richesse nolde not let him wit
well more auantage does him than
Sith that makes him a wise man
The great mischefe that he perceyueth
Than does richesse that him deceyueth
Richesse rich ne makes naught
Him that on tresour set his thought
For richesse stout in suffysaunce
And nothing in habundaunce
For suffysaunce al only
Makes men to live rychly.
FOr he that has mytches tweyne
Ne value in his demayne
Lives more at ease, and more is rich
Than does he that is chiche
And in his berne has soth to said
An hundrede mauys of where grain
Though he be chapman or merchant
And have of gold many besaunt
For in the getting he has such woe
And in the keeping dread also
And set evermore his business
For to increase, and not to less
For to augment and multyplye
And though on heaps that lie him by
Yet never shall make his richesse
Asseth unto his gredynesse
But the poor that recheth naught
Save of his lyuelode in his thought
which that he gets with his traueyle
He dredeth naught that it shall feyle
Though he have little worlds good
Meat and drink, and easy food
Upon his traueyle and living
And also suffysaunt clothyng
Or if in syckenesse that he fall
And loath meat and drink wythall
Though he have not his me^^^ to bye
He shall bethynke him hast^ly
To put him out of al daungere
That he of meat has no mistere
Or that he may with little eke
Befounden, while that he is seek
Or that men shul him berne in haste
To live till his syckenesse be paste
To some May sondewe beside
He cast naught what shall him betyde
He thinks naught that ever he shall
In to any syckenesse fall.
ANd though it fall, as it may be
That al be time spare shall he
As mokel as shall to him suffyce
why^e he is sick in any wise
He does for that he wol be
Content with his pouerte
without need of any man
So much in little have he can
He is apayed with his fortune
And for he nyl be importune
Unto no wight ne onerous
Nor of her goodesse coueytous
Therefore he spares, it may well been
his pore estate for to sustene.
OR if him lust not for to spare
But suffers forth, as not ne ware
At last it happens as it may
Right unto his last day
And take the world as it would be
For ever in heart thinks he
The sooner that death him slo
To paradyse the sooner go
He shall, there for to live in bliss
where that he shall no good mysse
Thither he hops god shall him send
After his wretched lives end
Pythagoras him self reherses
In a book that the golden verses
Is cleped, for the nobylite
Of the honorable dyte
Than when thou ghost thy body fro
Free in the heir thou shall up go
And leaven al humanyte
And purely live in deite
He is a fool wythouten were
That troweth have his country here
In earth is not our country
That may these clerks seyne and se
In Boece of consolation
where it is maked mention
Of our country plain at the eye
By techyng of phylosophye
where leude men mygh lere wit
who so that would translaten it
If he be such that can well live
After his rent, may him give
And not desires more to have
Than may fro pouerte him save
A wise man said, as we may seen
Is no man wretched, but he it wene
Be he king, knight, or rybaude
And many a rybaude is merry and baude
That swynketh, and bears both day and night
Many a burden of great might
The which does him less offense
For he suffers in patience
They laugh and dance, tryppe and sing
And lay naught up for her living
But in the tavern all dispendeth
The wynnyng that god hem sends
Than goth he fardels for to bear
with as good chere as he did ere
To swynke and travail he not fayneth
For to robben he disdayneth
But right anon, after his swynke
He goes to the tavern for to drink
Al these are rich in abundaunce
That can thus have suffisaunce
well more than can an vsurere
As god well knows, without were
For an usurer, so god me se
Shall never for richesse rich be
But evermore poor and indigent
Scare and gredy in his intent.
For soth it is, whom it displese
There may no merchant live at ese
His heart in such a where is set
That it quycke brenneth to get
Ne never shall, though he has geten
Though he has gold in garners yeten
For to be nedy he dredeth sore
wherefore to getten more and more
He set his heart and his desire
So hot he brenneth in the fire
Of couetyse, that makes him wood
To purchase other men's good
He vnderfongeth a great pain
That undertakes to drink up Said
For the more he drynketh aye
The more he leaves, soth to say
Thus is thurst of false gettyng
That last ever in coueytyng
And the anguyshe and distress
with the fire of gredynesse
She fyghteth with him aye, and stryueth
That his heart asonder ryueth
Such gredynesse him assayleth
That when he most has, most he sayleth
Physiciens, and advocates
Gone right by the same yates
They sell her seyence for wenyng
And haunt her craft for great gettyng
Her wenyng is of such swetnesse
That if a man fall in sycknesse
They are full glad for her encrase
For by her will, without lease
Eueryche man should be seek
And though they dye they set not a l^ke
After when they the gold have take
Full little care for hem they make
They would that forty were sick at ones
Yea two hundred in flesh and bones
And yet two thousand, as I guess
For to encresen her richesse
They wol not worchen in no wise
But for luere and couetyse
For physycke gynneth first by (phy)
The phisycien also sothly
And sythen it gothe fro fie to fie
To trust on hem it is folly
For they nyl in no manner gre
Do right naught for charity
Eke in the same sect are set
Al tho that prechen for to get
worshyps, honor, and richesse
Her hertes arne in great distress
That folk live not holyly
But abouen al specially
Such as prechen veynglory
And toward god have no memory
But forth as ypocrites trace
And to her souls death purchase
And outward showing holiness
Though they be full of cursednesse
Not lyche to the apostles twelve
They disceyue other and hem selue
Begyled is the gyler than
For preaching of a cursed man
Though to other may profit
Him self it aueyleth not amyte
For often good predicatioun
Comes of y^el ententioun
To him not vayleth his preaching
Al help he other with his teaching
For where they good ensample take
There is he with vayn glory shake
But let us leven these preachours
And speak of hem that in her tours
Heap up her gold, and fast shette
And sore theran her heart set
They neither love God ne dread
They keep more than it is need
And in her bags sore it bind
Out of the sun, and of the wind
They put up more than need ware
when they seen pore folk forfare
For hungre dye, and for cold quake
God can well vengeance thereof take
The great mischeues hem assayleth
And thus in gadryng aye trauayleth
with much pain they win richesse
And dread hem holds in distress
To keep that they gather fast
with sorrow they leave it at the last
with sorrow they both dye and live
That unto richesse her hertes give
And in defaute of love it is
As it shows full well ywis
For if these gredy, the soth to said
Loueden and were loved again
And good love reigned over al
Such wickedness ne should fall
But he should give, that most good had
To hem that weren in need bestade
And live without false usure
For charity, full clean and pure
If they hem give to goodness
Defendyng hem fro idleness
In all this world than poor none
we shude find I trow not one
But changed is this world vnstabale
For love is over al vendable
we se that no man loves now
But for wynnyng and for prowe
And love is thralled in seruage
when it is sold for advantage
yet women woll her bodies sell
Such souls goes the dyuell of hell.
WHen Love had told hem his intent
The baronage to counsel went
In many sentences they fill
And dyuersly they said her will
But after dyscorde they accorded
And her acorde to Love recorded
Sir sayden they, we ben atone
By even accord of euerychone
Out take Richesse all only
That sworn has full hauteynly
That she the castle nyll not assail
N^u^n^te a stroke in this battle
with darte ne mace, spear, ne knyfe
For man that speaks, or bears the life
And blames your empryse ywys
And from our host departed is
At leest way, as in this plyte
So has she this man in dyspyte
For she says he ne loved her never
And therefore she woll hate him ever
For he woll gather no treasore
He has her wrath for evermore
He agylte her never in other caas
Lo here all holy his trespass
She says well, that this other day
He asked her leave to gone the way
That is clypped to much yeuynge
And spoke full fair in his prayenge
But when he prayed her, poor was he
Therefore she warned him the enter
Ne yet is he not thryuen so
That he has getten a penny or two
That quytely is his own in hold
Thus has Richesse us all told
And when Richesse us this recorded
wythouten her we ben accorded.
ANd we find in our accordaunce
That false Semblant and Abstinaunce
with all the folk of her battle
Shull at the hinder gate assail
That wicked Tongue has in keeping
with his Normans full of jangling
And with hem Curtesy and Largess
That shull show her hardynesse
To the old wife that kept so hard
Fair welcomynge within her ward
Then shall Delight and well Helynge
Fond, Shame adowne to bring
with all her host early and late
They shull assaylen that ylke gate
Against Dread shall Hardynesse
Assail, and also Sykernesse
with all the folk of her leadynge
That never wist what was fleing
FRaunchyse shall fight and eke Pity
with Dau^gere full of cruelte
Thus is your host ordained well
down shall ye castle every dele
If eueryche do his intent
So that Venus be present
Your mother full of vesselage
That can enough of such usage
wythouten her may no wight speed
This work, neither for word ne deed
Therefore is good ye for her send
For through her may this work amend.
LOrdynges, my mother the goddess
That is my lady, and my maystresse
Nys not al at my wyllyng?
Ne does not al my desyryng?
Yet can she sometime done labor
when that her lust in my socour
As my need is for to atcheue
But now I think her not to grieve
My mother is she, and of child head
I both worship her, and eke dread
For who that dredeth sire ne dame
Shall it abye in body or name
And nathelesse, yet conne we
Send after her if need be
And were she nygh she common would
I trow that nothing might her hold
MY mother is of great prowess
She has taken many a forteresse
That cost has many a pound er this
There I nas not present ywys
And yet men said it was my deed
But I come never in that stead
Ne me ne lyketh so mote I the
That such toures ben take with me
For why? My thinks that in no wise
It may be cleped but marchaundyse.
GO bye a courser black or white
And pay therefore, then art you quyte
The merchant owes ye right noght
Ne thou him when thou it bought
I woll not selling clepe yeuynge
For selling asks no guerdonynge
Here lies no thank, ne no merit
That one goes from that other all quyte
But this selling is not semblable
For when his horse is in the stable
He may it selle again parde
And wynnen on it, such hap may be
All may the manne not lose ywys
For at the leest the skin is his
Or else, if it so betyde
That he woll keep his horse to ride
Yet is he lord aye of his horse
But thylke chaffare is well worse
There Venus entremeteth ought
For who so such chaffare has bought
He shall not worchen so wisely
That he ne shall lose all utterly
Both his money, and his caffare
But the seller of the ware
The pryse and profit have shall
Certain the byer shall lose all
For he ne can so dear it bye
To have lordshyppe, and full maystry
Ne have power to make lettynge
Neither for yefte ne for preaching
That of his chaffare maugre his
Another shall have as much ywys
If he woll give as much as h^
Of what country so that he be
Or for right naught so hap may
If he can flatter her to her pay
Ben then such merchants wise?
No, but fools in every wise
when they bye such thing wylfully
There as they lose her good folyly
But nathelesse, this dare I say
My mother is not wont to pay
For she is neither so fool ne nyce
To entremete her of such vice
But trust well, he shall pay all
That repent of his bargayne shall
when pouerte put him in dystresse
All were the scholar to Richesse
That is for me in great yernynge
when she assenteth to my willing.
But my mother saint Venus
And by her father Saturnus
That her engendered by his life
But not upon his wedded wife
Yet woll I more unto you swear
To make this thing the surere
Now by that faith, and that beauty
That I owe to all my brethren free
Of which there nys wight under heaven
That can her fathers names neuen
So diverse and so many there be
That with my mother have be pryue
Yet would I swear for syckernesse
The Pole of hell to my witness
Now drink I not this year clarre
If that I lie, or forsworn be
For of the gods the usage is
That who so him forsweareth amys
Shall that year drink no clarre
Now have I sworn enough parde
If I forswere me then am I lorne
But I woll never be forsworn
Sith Richesse has me sailed here
She shall abye that trespass full dear
At leestwaye but her arm
with sword, or sparth, or gysarme
For certes sith she loves not me
Fro thylke time that she may se
The castle and the toure to shake
In sorye time she shall awake
If I may grype a rich manne
I shall so pulle him, if I can
That he shall in a few stoundes
Lose all his marks, and his pounds
I shall him make his pens out slynge
But they in his garner spring
Our maidens shall eke pluck him so
That him shall neden feathers mo
And make him sell his land to spend
But he the bette conne him defend.
Poor men han made her lord of me
All though they not so mighty be
That they may feed me in delight
I woll not have hem in dyspyte
No good man hates hem, as I guess
For chynche and feloun is richesse
That so can chase hem and despise
And hem defoule in sondrye wise
They louen full bette, so god me speed
Than does the rich chynchy grede
And been (in good faith) more stable
And trewer, and more seruyable
And therefore it suffyseth me
Her good heart, and her beauty
They han on me set all her thought
And therefore I foryet hem naught
I woll hem bring in great noblesse
If that I were god of Richesse
As I am god of Love sothely
Such routh upon her playnt have I
Therefore I must his socour be
That payneth him to seruen me
For if he deyde for love of this
Then seems in me no love there is
SIr said they, soth is every dele
That ye reherce, and we wot well
Thylke oath to hold is reasonable
For it is good and couenable
That ye on rych me^ han sworn
For sir, this wot we well beforne
If rich men done you homage
That is as fools done outrage
But ye shull not forsworn be
Ne let therefore to drink clarre
Or pyment maked fresh and new
Ladies shull hem such pepyr brewe
If that they fall in to her laas
That they for woe mow said alas
Ladies shullen ever so curteys be
That they shall quyte your oath all free
Ne seeks never other vycayre
For they shall speak with hem so fair
That ye shall hold ye paid full well
Though ye you meddle never a dele
Late ladies worche with her things
They shall hem tell so feel tidings
And move hem eke so many requests
By slatery, that not honest is
And thereto give hem such tankynges
what with kissing, and with thalkynges
That certes if they trowed be
Shall never leave hem land ne fee
That it nyll as the moeble fare
Of which they first delivered are
Now may ye tell us all your will
And we your hestes shall fulfill
But False se^blant dare not for dread
Of you sir, meddle him of this deed
For he says, that ye ben his fo
He not, if ye wol worche him woe
wherefore we pray you all beausyre
That ye forgive him now your ire
And that he may dwell as your man
with Abstinence his dear lemman
This our acorde and our will now
Parfey said Love, I grant it you
I woll well hold him for my man
Now let him come, and he forth ran
False semblant (quod Love) in this wise
I take the here to my service
That thou our friends help always
And hyndreth hem neither night ne day
But do thy might hem to releue
And eke our enemies that thou grieve
Thine be this might, I grant it the
My king of harlotes shalt thou be
we woll that thou have such honor
Certain thou art a false traitor
And eke a thief, sith thou were borne
A thousand times thou art forsworn
But nathelesse in our herynge
To put our folk out of doutynge
I bydde the teache hem, wost thou how?
By some general sign now
In what place thou shall founden be
If that men had myster of the
And how men shall the best espy
For the to know is great maystrye
Tell in what place is thine hauntynge
Sir I have full diverse wonnynge
That I keep not rehearsed be
So that ye would respyten me
For if that I tell you the sothe
I may have harm and shame both
If that my fellows wysten it
My tales shulden me be quyt
For certain they would hate me
If ever I knew her cruelte
For they would over all hold hem still
Of troth, that is again her will
Such tales kepen they not here
I might eftsone bye it full dear
If I said of hem any thing
That ought dyspleaseth to her herynge
For what word that hem prycke or byteth
In that word none of hem delyteth
All were it gospel the euangyle
That would reprove hem of her gyle
For they are cruel and hautayne
And this thing wot I well certain
If I speak ought to pair her loos
Your court shall not so well be cloos
That they ne shall wit it at last
Of good men am I naught aghast
For they woll taken on hem nothing
when that they know all my meaning
But he that woll it on hem take
He woll him self suspecious make
That he his life let covertly
In gyle and in Ipocrisy
That me engendered and yaue fostrynge
They made a full good engendrynge
(Quod Love) for who so sothly tell
They engendered the dyuell of hell.
But nedely, how so ever it be
(Quod love) I will and charge ye
To tell anon thy wo^ning places
Hearing each wight that in this place is
And what life that thou lyuest also
Hyde it no longer now, whereto?
Thou must dyscouer all thy worchynge
How thou seruest, and of what thing
Though yt thou should for thy soth saw
Ben all to beaten and to draw
And yet art thou not wont parde
But nathelesse, though thou beaten be
Thou shall not be the first that so
Has for sothsawe suffered woe.
Sir, sith that it may lyken you
Though that I should be slain right now
I shall done your commandment
For thereto have I great talent
WYthoute^ words mo, right than
False Se^blant his sermon began
And said hem thus in audience
Barons take heed of my sentence
ye wight yt list to have knowing
Of false semblant, full of flateryng
He must in worldly folk him seek
And certes in the cloisters eke
I wone no where, but in hem twey
But not like even, soth to say
Shortly I woll herberowe me
There I hope best to hulstred be
And certainly, sykerest hydynge
Is underneath humblest clothing
Religious folk ben full couerte
Seculer folk ben more apperte
But nathelesse, I will not blame
Religious folk, ne hem dyffame
In what habyte that ever they go
Religyon humble, and true also
woll I not blame, ne despise
But I nyll love it in no wise
I mean of false religious
That stout ben, and malicious
That woollen in an habyte go
And setten not her heart thereto.
REligious folk ben all pytous
Thou shall not seen one dyspytous
They louen no pride, ne no strife
But humbly they woll led her life
with which folk woll I never be
And if I dwell, I feign me
I may well in her habyte go
But me were lever my neck a two
Then let a purpose that I take
what covenant that ever I make
I dwell with hem that proud be
And full of wyles and subtelte
That worship of this world coueyten
And great need connen expleyten
And gone and gadren great pitaunces
And purchase hem the acqueyntaunces
Of men that mighty life may leden
And feign hem poor, and hem self feden
with good morcels delicious
And drynken good wine precious
And preche us pouert and dystresse
And fyshen hem self great richesse
with wyly nets, that they cast
It woll come foul out at the last
They ben fro clean religion went
They make the world an argument
That has a foul conclusyon
I have a robe of religion
Then am I all religious
This argument is all roignous
It is not worth a crooked brere
Habyte ne makes neither monk ne friar
But clean life and devotion
Makes good men of religion
Nathelesse, there can none answer
How high that ever his heed he shere
with rasour whetted never so kene
That gyle in branches cut thurtene
There can no wight dystyncte it so
That he dare say a word thereto.
But what herberowe that ever I take
Or what semblaunt that ever I make
I mean but gyle, and follow that
For right no more then gybbe our cat
(That awayteth myce and rattes to kyllen)
Ne entende I but to begylen
Ne no wight may, by my clothing
wete with what folk is my dwelling
Ne by my words yet parde
So soft and so pleasant they be
Behold the deeds that I do
But thou be blind thou ought so
For varye her words fro her deed
They think on gyle without dread
what manner clothing that they were
Or what estate that ever they bear
Leted or leude, lord or lady
Knight, squire, burgeys, or bailey.
Right thus while False semblant sermoneth
Eft sons Love him aresoneth
And brake his tale in his speaking
As though he had him told leasing
And said: what deuell is that I here?
what folk have thou us nempned here?
May men find religion
In worldly habitacion?
Yea sir, it follows not that they
Should led a wicked life parfey
Ne not therefore her souls lose
That hem to worldly clothes chese
For certes it were great pity
Men may in seculer clothes se
Floryshen holy religioun
Full many a saint in field and town
with many a virgyn glorious
Devour, and full religious
Han dyed, that common cloth aye beren
Yet saints nevertheless they weren
I could reckon you many a ten
Yea, welnygh all these holy women
That men in churches herry and seek
Both maidens, and these wives eke
That baren full many a fair child here
weared always clothes seculere
And in the same dydden they
That saints weren, and ben always
The.xi. thousand maidens dear
That bearen in heaven her cierges clear
Of which men read in church and sing
were take in seculer clothing
when they received martyrdom
And wonnen heaven unto her home
Good heart makes the good thought
The clothing yeueth ne reueth naught
The good thought and the worchynge
That makes the religion flourynge
There lies the good religioun
After the right ententioun
WHo so took a wethers skin
And wrapped a gredy wolf therinne
For he should go with la^bes white
wenest thou not he would hem byte?
Yes: nevertheless, as he were wode
He would hem wirry, and drink the blood
And well the rather hem dysceyue
For sith they could not perceive
His tregette, and his cruelte
They would him follow all tho he fly.
IF there be wolves of such hew
Among these apostles new
Thou holy church thou may bewailed
Sith that thy cite is assailed
Through knights of thine own table
God wot thy lordshyp is doutable
If they enforse it to win
That should defend it fro within
who might defense against hem make
without stroke it mote be take
Of trepeget or mangonell
without dysplayenge of pensell
And if god nyll done it socoure
But let run in this color
Thou must thy heestes letten be
Then is there naught, but yield the
Or give hem trybute doutles
And hold it of hem to have pees
But greater harm betyde the
That they all master of it be
well conne they scorn the wythall
By day stuffen they the wall
And all the night they mynen there
Nay, thou planten must else where
Thine ympes, if thou wolt fruit have
Abide not there thy self to save.
But now peace, here I turn again
I woll no more of this thing said
If I may passen me hereby
I might maken you weary
But I woll heten you always
To help your friends what I may
So they woollen my company
For they be shent all utterly
But if so fall, that I be
Often with hem, and they with me
And eke my lemman mote they serve
Or they shull not my love deserve
Forsooth I am a false traitor
God iuged me for a thief trechour
Forsworn I am, but well nygh none
wot of my gyle, till it be done
TThrough me has many one death received
That my treget never aperceyued
And yet receives, and shall receive
That my falsnesse shall never apperceyue
But who so does, if he wise be
Him is right good beware of me
But so slyghe is the aperceyuynge
That all to late comes knowing
For Protheus that could him change
In every shappe, homely and strange
Could never such gyle ne treasoune
As I, for I come never in town
There as I might known be
Though men me both might here and se
Full well I can my clothes change
Take one, and make another strange
Now am I knight, now chastelayne
Now prelate, and now chapelayne
Now priest, now clerk, and now fostere
Now am I master, now scholere
Now monk, now chanon, now bailey
what ever myster man am I
Now am I prince, now am I page
And can by heart every langage
Sometime am I hoore and old
Now am I young, stout, and bold
Now am I Robert, now Robyn
Now Friar mynor, now Iacobyn
And with me follows my loteby
To done me solace and company
That hight dame Abstinence, and raygned
In many a queynt arraye feigned
Right as it comes to her liking
I fulfill all her desiring
Sometime a woman's cloth take I
Now am I a maid, now lady
Sometime I am religious
Now like an anchor in an house
Sometime am I prioresse
And now a nonne, and now abbess
And go through all regiouns
Seeking all religiouns
But to what order that I am sworn
I take the straw and beat the corn
To ioly folk I enhabyte
I ask no more but her habyte
what woll ye more in every wise
Right as me list I me dysgyse?
well can I bear me under wede
Unlike is my word to my deed
Thus make I into my trappes fall
The people, through my priuyleges all
That been in christendom a live
I may assoyle, and I may shryue
That no prelate may let me
All folk, where ever they found be
I not no prelate may done so
But I only, and no mo
That made thylke establyshynge
Now is not this a propre thing?
But were my sleyghtes aperceyued
As I was wont, and woste thou why?
For I did hem a tregetry
But thereof give I a little tale
I have the silver and the male
So have I preached and eke shryuen
So have I take, so have I yeuen
Through her folly, husband and wife
That I led right a ioly life
Through symplesse of the prelacye
They know not all my tregettrye.
But for as much as a man and wife
Should show her peryshe priest her life
Ones a year, as says the book
Er any wight his housel took
Then have I priuyleges large
That may of much thing dyscharge
For he may say right thus parde
Sir priest, in shryfte I tell it the
That he to whom that I am shryuen
Has me assoyled, and me yeuen
Penance sothly for my syn
which that I fond me gylty in
Ne I ne have never entencion
To make double confession
Ne reherce efte my shryft to the
O shrift is right enough to me
This ought the suffyse well
Ne be not rebel never a dele
For certes, though thou had it sworn
I wot no priest ne prelate borne
That may to shrift efte me constrayne
And if they done I woll me plain
For I wot where to plain well
Thou shall not streyne me a dele
Ne enforce me, ne not me trouble
To make my confession double
Ne I have none affection
To have double absolution
The first is right enough to me
This latter assoylyng quyte I the
I am unbound, what may thou find
More of my sins me to unbind
For he that might has in his hand
Of all my sins me vnbonde
And if thou wolte me thus constrayne
That me mote needs on the plain
There shall no judge imperyall
Ne bishop, ne offyciall
Done judgment on me, for I
Shall gone and plain me openly
Unto my shriftfather new
That hight Friar wolf untrue
And he shall choose him for me
For I trow he can hamper the
But lord he would be wroth wythall
If men him would Friar wolf call
For he would have no patience
But done all cruel vengience
He would his might done at the leest
Nothing spare for gods heest
And god so wise be my socour
But thou give me my savior
At Eester, when it lyketh me
without preasyng more on the
I woll forth, and to him gone
And he shall housell me anon
For I am out of thy grutchyng
I keep not deal with the nothing
Thus may he shryue him, that forsakes
His paryshe priest, and to me takes
And if the priest woll him refuse
I am full ready him to accuse
And him punish and hamper so
That he his church shall for go.
But who so has in his felyng
The consequence of such shryuyng
Shall seen, that priest may never have might
To know the conscience a right
Of him, that is under his cure
And this is against holy scripture
That byddeth every heerd honest
Have very knowing of his be
But poor folk that gone by street
That have no gold, ne sommes great
Hem would I let to her prelates
Or let her priests know her states
For to me right naught give they
And why it is, for they ne may
They ben so bare, I take no keep
But I woll have the fat sheep
Let paryshe priests have the lene
I give not of her harm a been
And if that prelates grutche it
That oughten woth be in her wit
To lose her fat beestes so
I shall give hem a stroke or two
That they shall lesen with force
Ye, both her mytre and her croce
Thus iape I hem, and have do long
My privileges ben so strong.
FAlse Semblaunt would have stynted here
But Love ne made him no such chere
That he was werye of his saw
But for to make him glad and fawe
He said, T^ll on more specially
How tha^ thou seruest untruly
Tell ^orthe, and shame the never a dele
For as ^hyne h^oyt shows well
Thou seruest an holy Heremyte
Sothe is, but I am but an Ypocryte
Thou ghost and prechest pouerte?
Ye sir, but richesse has post
Thou prechest abstynence also
Sir, I woll fyllen so mote I go
My paunche, of good meat and wine
As should a master of divine
For thowe that I me poor feign
Yet all poor folk I disdain.
I Love better the acquaintance
Ten times of the king of France
Than of a poor man of mylde mode
Though that his soul be also good
For when I se beggars quakyng
Naked on myxins all stynkyng
For hongre cry, and eke for care
I entremet not of her fare
They ben so poor, and full of pyne
They might not ones give me a dyne
For they have nothing but her life
what should he give that lycketh his knyfe?
It is but folly to entremete
To seek in hounds nest fat mete
Let bear hem to the spyttle anon
But for me, comfort get they none
But a rich sick vsurere
would I visyte and draw nere
Him woll I comfort and rehete
For I hoope of his gold to get
And if that wicked death him have
I woll go with him to his grave
And if there any reprove me
why that I let the poor be
wost thou how I not ascape
I say and swear him full rape
That rich men han more tetches
Of sin, than han poor wretches
And hanne of counsel more myster
And therefore I would draw hem ner
But as great hurt, it may so be
Has a soul in right great pouerte
As soul in great richesse forsothe
Al be it that they hurten both
For richesse and mendicitees
Been cleped two extremities
The mean is cleped Suffysaunce
There lies of virtue the abundance
For Solomon full well I wot
In his Parables us wrote
As it is know of many a wight
In his thrittene chapter right
God thou me keep for thy post
Fro richesse and mendycite
For if a rich manne him dress
To think to much on richesse
His heart on that so far is set
That he his creator does foryette
And him that beggeth woll aye grieve
How should I by his word him leave
Uneath that he nys a mycher
Forsworn, or else gods liar
Thus says Solomon sawes
Ne we find written in no laws
And namely in our christen lay
who so says yea, I dare say nay
That Christ, ne his apostels dear
while that they walked in earth here
were never seen herbred beggyng
For they nolden beggen for nothing
And right thus were men wont to teache
And in this wise would it preche
The masters of dyuinyte
Sometime in Paris the cite.
ANd if men would there gain appose
The naked text and let the gloss
It might soon assoyled be
For men may well yt soth se
That pardie they might ask a thing
Plainly forth without beggynge
For they weren gods heerdes dear
And cure of souls hadden here
They nolde nothing beg her food
For after Christ was done on rod
with their proper hondes they wrought
And with traueyle, and else naught
They wonnen all her sustenaunce
And lyueden forth in her penance
And the remenaunt yaf away
To other poor folks always
They neither bylden tower ne halle
But they in houses small with all
A mighty man that can and may
Should with his hand and body always
Win him his food in laboryng
If he ne have rent or such a thing
All though he be relygious
And god to seruen curyous
Thus mote he done, or do trespass
But if it be in certain caas
That I can reherce, if myster be
Right well, when the time Ise.
Seek the book of saint Austyne
Be it i^ paper or perchmyne
There as he writ of these worchynges
Thou shall seen that none excusynges
A parfyte man ne should seek
By words, ne by deeds eke
All though he be religyous
And god to seruen curyous
That he ne shall, so mote I go
With propre hondes, and body also
Get his fode in laboryng
If he ne have proprete of thing
Yet should he fell all his substance
And with his swynke have sustenaunce
If he be parfyte in bounte
Thus han the books told me
For he that woll gone ydelly
And uses it aye besyly
To haunten other men's table
He is a trechour full of fable
Ne he ne may by good reason
Excuse him by his orison
For men behooves in some gyse
Ben sometime in gods seruyse
To gone and purchasen her need
Men mote eaten, that is no dread
And sleep, and eke do other thing
So long may they leave prayeng
So may they eke her prayer blynne
while that they work her meat to win
Saint Austyn woll thereto accord
In thylke book that I record
Justinian eke, that made laws
Has thus forboden by old sawes.
NO man, up pain to be deed
Mighty of body, to beg his breed
If he may swynke it for to get
Men should him rather mayme or beat
Or done of him aperte justice
Than suffren him in such malice
They done not well so mote I go
That taken such alms so
But if they have sum privilege
That of the pain hem woll alege
But how that is, can I not se
But if the prince disceyued be
Ne I ne wene not sykerly
That they may have it ryghtfully
But I woll not determyne
Of princes power, ne defyne
Ne by my word comprehend iwys
If it so far may stretche in this
I woll not intremete a dele
But I trow that the book says well
who that takes almesses, that be
Dew to folk that men may se
Lame, feeble, weary, and bare
Poor, or in such manner care
That conne win hem never mo
For they have no power thereto
He eats his own dampnyng
But if he lie, that made all thing
And if ye such a truaunt find
Chastyse him well, if ye be kind
But they would hate you parcaas
If ye fyllen in her laas
They would eftsoon do you scatche
If that they might, late or rathe
For they be not full pacient
That han the world thus foul blent
And weteth well, that god bad
The good man sell all that he had
And follow him, and to poor it give
He would not therefore that he live
To seruen him in mendience
For it was never his sentence
But he had werken, when that need is
And follow him in good deeds
Saint Poule, that loved all holy church
He bade the apostels for to wurche
And wynnen her live lode in that wise
And hem defended truandyse
And said, werketh with your honden
Thus should the thing be vnderstonden
He nolde iwys have bid hem beggyng
Ne sellen gospel, ne prechyng
Lest they berafte, with her askyng
Folk of her catell or of her thing
For in this world is many a man
That yeueth his good, for he ne can
werne it for shame, or else he
would of the asker delivered be
And for he him encombreth so
He yeueth him good to let him go
But it can him no thing profit
They lose the yefte and the merit
The good folk that Poule to preched
Profred him often, when he hem teched
Some of her good in charity
But therefore right nothing took he
But of his hondewerke would he get
Clothes to wryne him, and his mete.
TEll me than how a man may lyuen
That al his good to poor has yeuen
And woll but only bydde his bedes
And never with hondes labor his needs
May he do so? Ye sir: And how?
Sir, I woll gladly tell you
Saint Austen says, a man may be
In houses that han properte
As templers, and hospytelers
And as these chanons regulers
Or white monks, or these blake
I woll no mo ensamples make
And take thereof his susteynyng
For therein lythe no beggyng
But otherwise not ywis
Yet Austyn gabbeth not of this
And yet full many a monk labors
That god in holy church honors
For when her swynkyng is agon
They read and sing in church anon.
ANd for there has been great discord
As many a wight may bear record
Upon the estate of mendicience
I woll shortly in your presence
Tell how a man may beg at need
That has not wherewith him to feed
Maugre his fellows iangelynges
For sothfastnesse woll none hydynges
And yet parcase I may abey
That I to you sothly thus sey.
LO here the case especial
If a man be so bestyall
That he of no craft has science
And naught desires ignorence
Tha^ may he go a begging yerne
Till he some manner craft can learn
Through which without truandyng
He may in truth have his living
Or if he may done no labor
For elde, or sickness, or langour
Or for his tender age also
Than may he yet a beggyng go
Or if he have perauenture
Through usage of his noriture
Lived over delyciously
Than oughten good folk comenly
Han of his mischefe some pity
And suffren him also, that he
May gone about and beg his breed
That he be not for honger deed
Or if he have of craft connyng
And strength also, and desyryng
To worchen, as he had what
But he find neither this ne that
Than may he beg till that he
Have getten his necessyte
Or if his wynnyng be so lyte
That his labor woll not acquyte
Suffyciantly all his living
Yet may he go his breed beggyng
Fro door to door, he may go trace
Till he the remenaunt may purchase
Or if a man would undertake
Any emprise for to make
In the rescous of our lay
And it defenden, as he may
Be it with arms, or lettrure
Or other couenable cure
If it be so he poor be
Than may he beg, till that he
May find in truth for to swynke
And get him clothe, meat, and drink
Swynke he with his hondes corporell
And not with hondes espyrituell.
IN all this case, and in semblables
If that there ben mo resonables
He may beg, as I tell you here
And else not, in no manner
As willyam saint Amor would preche
And often would dispute and teache
Of this matter all openly
At Paris full solemply
And also god my soul bless
As he had in this steadfastness
The accord of the vniuersyte
And of the people, as seems me.
NO good man ought it to refuse
Ne ought him thereof to excuse
Be wroth or blythe, who so be
For I woll speak, and tell it the
All should I dye, and be put down
As was saint Poule in derke prisoun
Or be exiled in this caas
with wrong, as master william was
That my mother Hypocrise
Banysshed for her great envy.
MY mother flemed him Saint Amor
This noble did such labor
To sustain ever the loyalte
That he to much agylte me
He made a book, and let it write
wheryn his life he did all write
And would yche renyed beggyng
And lived by my traueylyng
If I ne had rent ne other good
what weneth he that I were wood?
For labor might me never plese
I have more will to ben at ese
And have well lever, sothe to say
Before the people pattre and pray
And wrye me in my foxerye
Under a cope of papelardie.
Q(Vod Love) what dyuell is this that I here
What words tellest you me here
What sir Falsnesse that apert is
Than dredest thou not god? No certis*
For selde in great thing shall he speed
In this world, that god woll dread
For folk that hem to virtue yeuen
And truly on her own lyuen
And hem in goodness aye coutene
On hem is little thrifte ysene
Such folk drinken great misese
That life may me never plese
But se what gold han usurers
And silver eke in garners
Tayla^^ers, and these monyours
Bayliff^s, bedels, provost, countours
These lyuen well nygh by rauyne
The small people him mote enclyne
And they as wolves wol hem eten
Upon the poor folk they geten
Full much of that they spend or keep
Nys none of hem that he nyll strepe
And w^yne hem self well at full
without scaldyng, they hem pull
The strong the feeble ouergothe
But I that wear my simple clothe
Rob both robbyng and robbours
And gyle gylyng, and gylours
By my treget, I gather and threst
The great tresour in to my cheste
That lies with me so fast bound
Mine high paleys do I found
And my delytes I fulfill
with wine at feestes, at my will
And tables full of entremees
I woll no life, but ease and pees
And win gold to spend also
For when the great bag is go
It comes right with my iapes
Make I not well tomble mine apes
To wynnen is always mine intent
My purchase is better than my rent
For though I should beten be
Over all I entremet me
Without me may no wight dure
I walk souls for to cure
Of all the world cure have I
In bread and length boldly
I woll both preche, and eke counsaylen
with hondes will I not trauaylen
For of the Pope I have the bull
I ne hold not my wits dull
I woll not stynten in my live
These Emperors for to shriue
Of kings, dukes, and lords great
But poor folk all quyte I let
I love no such shryuyng parde
But it for other cause be
I recke not of poor men
Her astate is not worth an hen
Where fyndest thou a swynker of labor
Have me unto his confessor?
But Empresses, and duchesses
These queen's, and eke countesses
These abesses, and eke bygyns
These great ladies palasyns
These iolye knights, and bayliues
These nonnes, and these burgeys wives
That rich ben, and eke plesyng
And these maidens welfaryng
where so they clad or naked be
Vncounsayled gothe there none fro me
And for her souls sauete
At lord and lady, and her meyne
I ask, when they hem to me shriue
The proprete of all her live
And make hem trow, both most and leest
Her parysshe priest nys but a be
Ayens me and my company
That shrewes ben, as great (as I)
For which I woll not hyde in hold
No pryuite that me is told
That I by word or sign ywis
Ne woll make hem know what it is
And they woollen also tellen me
They hele fro me no pryuite
And for to make you hem perceyuen
That vsen folk thus to disceyuen
I woll you said withouten dread
what men may in the Gospel read
Of saint Mathue the gospelere
That says, as I shall you say here.
Upon the chair of Moses
Thus it is glosed doutlees
(That is the old Testament
For thereby is the chair meant)
Sytte Scribes and Pharysen
That is to said, the cursed men
which that we hypocrites call
Does that they preche I read you all
But does not as they done a dele
That been not weary to say well
But to do well, no will have they
And they would bind on folk always
That been to begyled able
Burdons that been importable
On folks shulders things they couchen
That they nyll with her fyngers touchen
And why woll they not touch it why?
For hem ne list not sykerly
For sad burdons that men taken
Make folks shulders aken
And if they do ought that good be
That is for folk it should se
Her burdons larger maken they
And make her hemmes wide always
And louen seats at the table
The first, and most honorable
And for to hanne the first chayris
In synagogges, to hem full dear is
And wyllen that folk hem loute and great
when that they passen through the street
And woollen be cleped master also
But they ne should not wyllen so
The gospel is there against I guess
That shows well her wickedness.
ANother custom use we
Of hem that wol against us be
we hate hi^ deedly euerichone
and we wol werrey him, as one
Him ye one hates, hate we al
And co^iecte, how to done him fall
And if we seen him win honor
Richesse or preyse, through his valor
Prouende, rent, or dignyte
Full fast ywis compassen we
By what ladder he is clomben so
And for to maken him down to go
with trayson we woll him defame
And done him lose his good name
Thus from his ladder we him take
And thus his friends foes we make
But word ne wete shall he noon
Till all his friends been his foon
For if we did it openly
we might have blame redily
For had he wyste of our malice
He had him kept, but he were nyce.
ANother is this, that if so fall
That there be one among us all That does a good turn, out of dread
We said it is our alder deed
Ye sikerly, though he it famed
Or that him list, or that him dayned
A man through him auaunced be
Thereof all parceners be we
And tellen folk, where so we go
That manne through us is sprongen so
And for to have of men preysyng
we purchase through our flattering
Of rich men of great post
Letters, to witness our bounte
So that manne weneth that may us se
That all virtue in us be
And always poor we us feign
But how so that we beg or plain
we been the folk without leasyng
That all thing have without having
Thus be we dradde of the people ywis
And gladly my purpose is this.
I deal with no wight, but he
Have gold and treasour great plente
Her acquaintance well love I
This is much my desire shortly
I entremete me of brocages
I make peace, and marriages
I am gladly executour
And many times a procuratour
I am sometime messagere
That falseth not to my mystere
And many times I make enqueste
For me that office is not honest
To deal with other men's thing
That is to me a great liking
And if that ye have ought to do
In place that I repeyre to
I shall it speden through my wit
As soon as ye have told me it
So that ye serve me to pay
My service shall be yours always
But who so wol chastyce me
Anon my love lost has he
For I love no man in no gyse
That wol me repreue, or chastyce
But I would al folk undertake
And of no wight no teaching take
For I that other folk chasty
wol not be taught fro my folly
I Love none Hermytage more
Al deserts, and holtes hoore
And great woods euerychone
I Let them to the Baptiste John
I queth him quyte and him relesse
Of Egypt all the wilderness
To far were al my mansions
Fro al cities and good towns
My paleys and mine house make I
There men may run in openly
And say that I the world forsake
But al amydde I bylde and make
My house, and swymme and play therinne
Bette than a fyshe does with his fynne.
OF Antechristes men am I
Of which that Christ says openly
They have habyte of holiness
And lyuen in such wickedness
To the copye, if him talent took
Of the Evangelists book
There might he se by great trayson
Full many false comparison
As much as though his great might
Be it of heat or of light
The sun surmounteth the moon
That troubler is, and changes soon
And the nutte kyrnel the shelle
I skorne not that I you tell
Right so wythouten any gyle
Surmounteth this noble Euangyle
The word of any Evangelist
And to her tytel they token Christ
And many such comparysoun
Of which I make no mencioun
Might men in that book find
who so could of hem have mind.
The vniuersyte that tho was a sleep
Began for to brayde, and taken keep
And at the noise, the heed up cast
Ne never sythen slepte it fast
But up it sterte, and arms took
Against this false horrible book
All ready battle for to make
And to the judge the book they take
But they that broughten the book there
Hent it anon away for fere
They nolde show it no more a dele
But than it kept, and kepen well
Till such a time that they may se
That they so strong woxen be
That no wight may hem well wythstonde
For by that book they durst not stand
Away they gonne it for to bear
For they ne durst not answer
By expositioun no gloss
To that that clerks wol appose
Against the cursednesse ywys
That in that book written is
Now wotte I not, ne I can not se
what manner end that there shall be
Of al this that they hyde
But yet algate they shall abide
Till that they may it bette defend
This trow I best woll be her end.
Thus Antechrist abyden we
For we been al of his meyne
And what man that wol not be so
Right soon he shall his life for go
Outward Lamben semen we
Full of goodness and of pity
And inward we wythouten fable
Been gredy wolves rauysable
we enuyroun both land and see
with all the world werryen we
we wol ordain of al thing
Of folks good, and her living.
If there be castle or city
wherein that any bougerons be
Al though that they of Myllayne were
For thereof been they blamed there
Or if a wight out of measure
would lean her gold, and take usure
For that he is so coueytous
Or if he be to lecherous
Or these that haunten Simonye
Or provost full of treachery
Or Prelate living iolyly
Or priest that halte his queyn him by
Or old hoores hostylers
Or other baudes or bordellers
Or else blamed of any vice
Of which men shulden done justice
By all the saints that we prey
But they defend them with lamprey
with luce, with elys, with samons
with tender gees, and with capons
with tartes, or with cheffes fat
with deyntye flaunes, broad and flat
with caleweys, or with pullayle
with conynges, or fine vytayle
That we under our clothes wide
Maken through our golet glyde
Or but he wol do come in haste
Roe venyson bake in paste
whether so that he loure or groyne
He shall have of a cord a loygne
with which men shall him bind and led
To brenne him for his synful deed
That men should here him cry and rore
A mile way about and more
Or else he shall in prison dye
But if he wol his frendshyp bye
Or smerten that, that he has do
More than his gylte amounts to
But and he couth, through his sleyght
Do make up a toure of heyght
Naught rought I, wheder of stone or tree
Or earth, or turns though it be
Though it were of no vounde stone
wrought with squyre and scantilone
So that the toure were stuffed well
with al richesse temporel
And than that he would up dress
Engyns, both more and less
To cast at us by every side
To bear his good name wide
Such sleyghtes I shall you neuen
Barels of wine, by six or seven
Or gold in sackes great plente
He should sone delivered be
And if he have no such pytences
Let him study in equipolences
And let lies, and fallaces
If that he would deserve our graces
Or we shall bear him such witness
O^ ^nne, and of his wretchedness
(...) done his lose so wide run
That al quick we should him brenne
Or else give him such penance
That is well worse than the pytaunce
For thou shall never for nothing
Con known a right by her clothyng
The traitors full of trecherye
But thou her works can aspye
And ne had the good keeping be
whylom of the university
That keeps the key of christendom
we had been turmented al and some
Such been the stynkyng prophetis
Nys none of hem, that good prophet is
For they through wicked entention
The year of the incarnation
A thousand, and two hundred year
Five and fyfty, ferther ne nere
Broughten a book, with sorry grace
To give ensample in comune place
That said thus, though it were fable
This is the gospel pardurable
That fro the holy ghost is sent
well were it worth to been brent
Entytled was in such manner
This book of which I tell here
There nas no wight in all Paris
Beforne our lady at parnys
That they ne might the book by
The sentence pleased hem well trewly.
But I wol stynte of this matere
For it is wonder long to here
But had that ylke book endured
Of better estate I were ensured
And friends have I yet parde
That han me set in great degree
OF al this world is Emperor
Gyle my father, the trechour
And Empress my mother is
Maugre the holy ghost ywys
Our mighty lynage, and our route
Reygneth in every reygne about
And well is worthy we maystres be
For all this world govern we
And can the folk so well disceyue
That none our gyle can perceive
And though they done, they dare not say
The soth dare no wight bewray
But he in Christ's wrath him ledeth
That more than Christ my brethern dredeth
He nys no full good champion
That dredeth such similacion
Nor that for pain wol refusen
Us to correct and accusen
He wol not entremete by right
Ne have god in his eye sight
And therefore shall god him punyce
But me ne recketh of no vice
Sythen men us louen comunably
And holden us for so worthy
That we may folk repreue echone
And we nyl have reprefe of none
whom shulden folk worshypen so
But us that stynten never mo
To patren, while that folk may us se
Though it not so behind hem be.
ANd where is more wood folly
Than to enhaunce chiualry
And love noble men and gaye
That ioly clothes weren always
If they be such folk as they semen
So clean, as men her clothes demen
And that her words follow her deed
It is great pity out of dread
For they wol be none hypocritis
Of hem me thinks great spyte is
I can not love hem on no side
But beggars with these hoodes wide
with sleygh and pale faces lean
And graye clothes not full clean
But fretted full of tatarwagges
And high shoes knopped with dagges
That frouncen like a quayle pype
Or boots ryuelyng as a gype
To such folk, as I you deuyse
Should princes and these lords wise
Take al her lands and her things
Both war and peace in gouernynges
To such folk should a prince him give
That would his life in honor leave
And if they be not as they seem
That seruen thus the world to queme
There would I dwell to disceyue
The folk, for they shall not parceyue
But I ne speak in no such wise
That men should humble habytte dispyse
So that no pride there under be
No man should hate, as thinks me
The poor man in such clothyng
But god ne preyseth him nothing
That says he has the world forsake
And has to worldly glory him take
And wol of such delyces use
who may that beggar well excuse?
That papelarde, that him yeldeth so
And wol to worldly ease go
And says that he the world has left
And gredyly it grypeth efte
He is the hounde, shame is to said
That to his castyng goth again
But unto you dare I not lie
But might I felen or espy
That ye perceived it nothing
Ye should have a stark leasyng
Right in your hand thus to begin
I nolde it let for no sin
The god loughe at the wonder tho
And every wight ganne laughe also
And said: Lo here a man aryght
For to be trusty to every wight.
FAlse semblant (quod Love) say to me
Sithe I thus have auaunced the
That in my court is thy dwelling
And of rybaudes shall be my king
wolte thou well holden my forwards?
Ye sir, from hence forwards
we wol people upon him areyse
And through our gyle, done him ceyse
And him on sharp spears ryue
Or other ways bring him fro live
But if that he wol follow ywys
That in our book written is
THus much wol our book signyfye
That while Peter has mastrye
May never John show well his might
Now have I you declared right
The meaning of the bark and rynde
That makes the ententions blind
But now at erst I wol be gyn
To expowne you the pythe within
And the seculers comprehend
That Christ's law wol defend
And should it kepen and mayntenen
Against hem that al susteynen
And falsely to the people teachen
That Johan betoketh hem to prechen
That there nys law couenable
But thylke gospel pardurable
That fro the holy ghost was sent
To turn folk that been myswent
The strength of Johan they understand
The grace in which they say they stand
That does the synful folk convert
And hem to Jesus Christ reuerte
Full many an other horriblete
May men in that book se
That been commanded doutelesse
Against the law of Rome express
And al with Antechrist they holden
As men may in the book beholden
And than commaunden they to sleen
Al tho that with Peter been
But they shall never have that might
And god to forne, for strife to fight
That they ne shall enough find
That Peter's law shall have in mind
And ever behold, and so mayntene
That at the last it shall be seen
That they shall al come thereto
For aught that they can speak or do
And thylke law shall not stand
That they by Ihon have understand
But maugre hem, it shall down
And hem brought to confusioun
Had never your father here beforne
Servant so true, sith he was borne
That is against al nature
Sir, put you that in adventure
For though ye borowes take of me
The sykerer shall ye never be
For hostages, ne sykernesse
Or charters for to bear witness
I take your self to record here
That men ne may in no manner
Teren the wolf out of his hyde
Till he be slain, back and side
Though men him beat and al defyle
what wene ye that I wol begyle?
For I am clothed mekely
There under is al my treachery
Mine heart changes never the mo
For none habyt, in which I go
Though I have chere of simpleness
I am not weary of shreudnesse
My lemman, strayned abstenaunce
Has mister of my purueyaunce
She had full long ago be deed
Nere my counsel and my read
Let her alone, and you and me
And love answerde, I trust the
without borowe, for I woll none
And false semblaunt the thief anon
Right in that ylke same place
That had of treson al his face
Right black within, and white without
Thankyng him, began on his knees lout
Than was there naught, but every man
Now to assaute, that saylen can
(Quod Love) and that full hardely
Than armed they hem comenly
Of such armoure, as to hem fell
when they were armed, fyers and fell
They went hem forth al in aroute
And set the castle al about
They will not away for no dread
Till it so be that they been deed
Or till they have the castle take
And four batels they began make
And partid hem in four anon
And took her way, and forth they gone
The four gates for to assail
Of which the kepers woll not fail
For they been neither sick ne deed
But hardy folk, and strong in deed
Now wol I said the countenance
Of false semblaunt, and abstinaunce
That been to wicked tongue went
But first they held her parlyment
whether it to done were
To maken hem known there
Or else walken forth dysgysed
But at the last they devised
That they would gone in tapynage
As it were in a pilgrimage
Like good and holy folk unfeigned
And dame abstinence streyned
Took on a robe of camelyne
And began her gratche as a bygyne
A large couercheife of threde
She wrapped al about her head
But she forgate not her psaltere
A pair of beedes eke she bear
Upon a lace al of white threde
On which that she her beads bid
But she ne bought hem never a dele
For they were given her, I wot well
God wot of a full holy friar
That said he was her father dear
To whom she had ofter went
Than any friar of his covent
And he vysited her also
And many a sermon said her to
He nolde let for man on live
That he ne would her often shryue
And with so great devotion
They made her confession
That they had often for the nones
Two heedes in one hode at ones
Of fair shappe, I devised her the
But pale of face sometime was she
That false traytouresse untrue
was like that salowe horse of hew
That in the Apocalips is showed
That signyfyeth to folk beshrewed
That been al full of trecherye
And pale, through hypocrisye
For on that horse no color is
But only deed and pale ywys
Of such a color enlangoured
was abstinence ywys colored
Of her estate she her repented
As her vysage represented
She had a burdowne al of theft
That gyle had give her of his yefte
And a skryppe of faynte distress
That full was of elengenesse
And forth she walked sobrely
And false semblaunt saint, ie vous die
And as it were for such mistere
Done on the cope of a friar
with chere simple, and full pytous
His lokyng was not disdeynous
Ne proud, but meke and full pesyble
About his neck he bare a Bible
And squierly, forth began he gone
And for to rest his lymmes upon
He had of treason a potent
As he were feeble, his way he went
But in his sleue he began to thryng
A rasoure sharp, and well bytyng
That was forged in a forge
which that men clepen Coupe Gorge
So long forth her way they nomen
Till they to wicked tongue comen
That at his gate was syttyng
And saw folk in the way passing
The pilgrims saw he fast by
That beren hem full mekely
And humbly they with him met
Dame abstinence first him grette
And sith him false semblant salued
And he hem, but he not remeued
For he ne dred hem not a dele
For when he saw her faces well
Always in heart, him thought so
He should know hem both two
For well he knew dame abstynaunce
But he ne knew not Constreynaunce
He ne knew not that she was constreyned
Ne of her thieves life feigned
But wend she come of will al fre
But she come in another degree
And if of good will she began
That will was failed her thanne.
ANd false semblant had he said alse
But he knew not that he was false
Yet false was he, but his falsenesse
Ne could he not espy, nor guess
For semblant was so slye wrought
That falsenesse he ne espied naught
But had thou known him beforne
Thou would on a book have sworn
when thou him saugh in thylke array
That he that whylome was so gaye
And of the dance Ioly Robyn
was tho become a Iacobyn
But sothly what so men him call
Friar preachours been good men all
Her order wyckedly they beren
Such minstrels, if they weren
So been Augustyns, and Cordylers
And Carmes, and eke sacked freers
And al freres shodde and bare
Though some of hem been great and square
Full holy men, as I hem deem
Eueryche of hem would good man seem
But shall thou never of appearance
Seen conclude good consequence
In none argument ywys
If existence all failed is
For men may find always sopheme
The consequence to eueneme
who so that has had the subtelte
The double sentence for to se.
when the pilgrims comen were
To wicked tongue that dwelled there
Her harneys nygh hem was algate
By wicked tongue adowne they sat
That badde hem nere him for to come
And of tidings tell him some
And said hem: what case makes you
To come to this place now:
SIr said Strayned Abstinaunce
we for to dry our penance
with hertes pytous devout
Are common, as pylgrimes gone about
well night on foot always we go
Full doughty ben our heels two
And thus both we ben sent
Throughoute this world that is myswent
To give ensample, and preche also
To fyshen sinful men we go
For other fyshynge, ne fyshe we
And sir, for that charity
As we be wont, herborowe we crave
Your life to amend Christ it save
And so it should you not displease
we wolden, if it were your case
A short sermon unto you said
And wicked tongue answered again
The house (quod he) such (as ye se)
Shall not be warned you for me
Say what you list, and I wol here
Grant mercy sweet sir dear.
(Quod alder first) dame abstynence
And thus began she her sentence
Sir the first virtue certain
The greatest and most sovereign
That may be found in any man
For having, or for wit he can
That is his tongue to refrain
Thereto ought every wight him pain
For it is better still be
Than for to speken harm parde
And he that herkeneth it gladly
He is no good man sykerly
And sir, abouen al other sin
In that art thou most gylty inn
Thou spoke a iape, not long ago
And sir, that was right yuel do
Of a young man, that here repaired
And never yet this place apayred
Thou saydest he awayted nothing
But to deceive fair welcomyng
Ye said nothing soth of that
But sir, ye lie, I tell you plat
He ne comes no more, ne goth parde
I trow ye shall him nen^^ se
Fair welcomynge in prison is
That often has played with you er this
The fairest games that he could
without fylth still or loud
Now dare she not her self solace
ye han also the man to chase
That he dare neither come ne go
what meueth you to hate him so?
But properly your wicked thought
That many a false leasyng has thought
That meueth your fool eloquence
That iangleth ever in audience
And on the folk areyseth blame
And does hem d^shonour and shame
For thing that may have no preuyng
But lykelynesse, and contryuyng.
For I dare said, that reason demeth
It is not al soth thing that seems
And it is sin to controue
Thing that is to reprove
This wot ye well, and sir: therefore
Ye arne to blame the more
And nathlesse, he recketh lyte
He yeueth not now thereof a myte
For if he thought harm parfaye
He would come and gone al day
He could him self not abstene
Now comes he not, and that is seen
For he ne takes of it no cure
But if it be through adventure
And less than other folk algate
And thou her watchest at the gate
with spear in thine arest always
There muse musarde all the day
Thou wakest night and day for thought
Iwys thy traueyle is for naught
And Ielosy wythouten fail
Shall never quyte the thy travail
And skath is, that fair welcomyng
without any trespassyng
Shall wrongfully in prison be
There wepeth and languysheth he
And though thou never yet ywys
Agyltest man no more but this
Take not a grefe it were worthy
To put the out of this bailey
And afterward in prison lie
And fettre the till that thou dye
For thou shall for this sin dwell
Right in the dyuels arse of hell
But if that thou repent the
Mafaye, thou lie falsely (quod he)
what, welcome with mischaunce now
Have I therefore herbered you
To say me shame, and eke reprove
with sorry hap to your behoue
Am I today your harbegere
Go herber you else where, than here
That han a liar called me
Two tregeturs art thou and he
That in mine house, do me this shame
And for my sothe saw ye me blame
Is this the sermon that ye make
To all the deuyls I me take
Or else god thou me confound
But er men dydden this castle found
It passes not ten days or twelve
But it was told right to my selue
And as they said, right so told I
He kyst the rose priuyly
Thus said I now, and have said yore
I not where he did any more
why should men say me such a thing
If it had been gabbynge
Right so said I, and woll say yet
I trow I lied not of it
And with my bemes I woll blow
To all neighbors arowe
How he has both common and gone
Tho spoke false semblaunt right anon
All is not gospel out of dout
That men said in the town about
Lay no deefe ere to my speaking
I swear you sir, it is gabbyng
I trow ye wot well certainly
That no man loves him tenderly
That says him harm, if he wot it
All be he never so poor of wit
And sothe is also sykerly
This know ye sir, as well as I
That lovers gladly woll vysiten
The places there her loves habyten
This man you loves, and eke honors
This man to serve you labors
And clepeth you his friend so dear
And this man makes you good chere
And every where that you meteth
He you salweth, and he you greteth
He preseth not so often as ye
Ought of his coming encombred be
There presen other folk on you
Full ofter than he does now
And if his heart him strayned so
Under the Rose for to go
Ye should him seen so often need
That ye should take him with the deed
He could his coming not forbear
Though he him thrilled with a spear
It nere not than, as it is now
But trusts well, I swear it you
That it is clean out of his thought
Sir, certes he ne thinks it naught
No More ne does Fair welcomyng
That sore abyeth all this thing
And if they were of one assent
Full soon were the Rose hent
The maugre yours would be
And sir of o thing herkeneth me
Sith ye this man, that loves you
Han said such harm, and shame now
wytteth well, if he gessed it
Ye may well demen in your wit
He noulde nothing love you so
Ne callen you his friend also
But night and day he wol wake
The castle to destroy and take
If it were soth as ye deuyse
Or some man in some manner wise
Might it warn him every dele
Or by him self perceive well
For sith he might not come and gone
As he was whylom wont to done
He might it soon wit and se
But now all otherwise wot he
Than have we sir all utterly
Deserved hell, and iolyly
The death of hell doutlesse
That thrallen folk so gyltlesse
FAlse semblaunte so proves this thing
That he can none answering
And sees always, such apparaunce
That nygh he fell in repentance
And said him, sir: it may well be
Semblaunt, a good man semen ye
And Abstinence, full wise ye seem
Of o talent you both I deem
what counsel woll ye to me yeuen?
Right here anon thou shall be shryuen
And say thy sin, without more
Of this shall thou repent sore
For I am pressed, and have post
To shryue folk of most dignity
That been as wide as world may dure
Of all this world I have the cure
And that had never yet persoun
Ne vicarie of no manner town
And god wot I have of the
A thousand times more pytye
Than has thy pressed parochial
Though thy friend be special
I have advantage in o wise
That your prelates ben not so wise
Ne half so lettred (as am I)
I am lycenced boldly
In divinity for to read
And to confessen out of dread
If ye woll you now confess
And leave your sins more and less
without abode, knele down anon
And you shall have absolucion.
FINIS.
Here ends the Romaunt of the Rose: And here follows the book of Troylous
and Creseyde.
Troylus and Creseyde.
THe double sorrow of Troilus to tellen
That was king Priamus son of Troy
In loving, how his adventures fellen
From woo to well, and after out of joy
My purpose is, er that I part froye
Thou Thesiphon thou help me for tendite
These woeful verses, that wepen as I write
To the I clepe, thou goddess of tourment
Thou cruel furye, sorowyng ever in pain
Help me that am the sorrowful instrument
That helps lovers, as I can complayue
For well sit it, the soth for to said
I woeful wight to have a drerie fere
And to a sorouful tale a sorye ^here
For I that god of loves servants serve
Ne dare to love, for mine vnlykelynesse
Prayen for speed, al should I therefore sterue
So far am I fro his help in derkenesse
But nathelesse, if this may done gladness
To any lover, and his cause aueyle
Have he my thank, and mine be the trauyle
But ye lovers that bathen in gladness
If any drope of pytie in you be
Remembers you of passed heaviness
That ye have felt, and on the adversity
Of other folk, and thinks how that ye
Han felt that love durst you displease
Or ye han won him with to great an ease
And prays for hem that been in the case
Of Troylus, as ye may after hear
That he hem bring in heaven to solace
And eke for me prays to god so dear
That I have might to show in some manner
Such pain and woe, as loves folk endure
In Troylus vnsely adventure.
And byddeth eke for hem yt ben dispeyred
In love, that never will recovered be
And eke for hem that falsely ben apeyred
Through wicked tongues, be it he or she
Thus byddeth god for his benignity
so grant hem sone out of this world to pace
That been dispayred out of loves grace.
And byddeth eke for hem that been at ease
that God hem grant aye good perseuerau^ce
And send hem grace her loves for to please
That it to love be worship and pleasaunce
For so hope I my self best to auaunce
To pray for hem yt loves servants be
And write her woe, and live in charity
And for to have of hem compassyoun
As though I were her own brother dear
Now herkeneth with a good ententioun
For now will I go straight to my matere
In which ye may the double sorrows here
Of Troylus, in loving of Creseyde
And how that she forsook him er yt she dyed.
IT is well wist, how that the Greeks strong
In arms with a thousand ships went
To Troy wards, and the city long
Besiegeden nygh ten years er they stent
And in diverse wise, and one intent
The rauyshyng to wreke of queen Heleyne
By Paris don, they wroughte^ al her pain.
Now fell it so, that in ye town there was
Dwelling a Lord of great authority
A great divine that cleped was Calcas
That in that science so expert was, that he
Knew well that Troy should destroyed be
By answer of his god that hight thus
Dan Phoebus, or Apollo Delphicus
So wha^ this Calcas knew by calculing
And eke by the answer of this god Apollo
That greeks should such a people bring
Through which that Troy must be fordo
He cast anon out of the town to go
For well he wist by sort, that Troy should
Destroyed be, yea would who so nolde.
wherefore to departen softely
Took purpose full this for knowing wise
And to the Greeks host full priuyly
He stale anon, and they in curteys wise
Did him both worship and service
In trust that he has connyng hem to read
In every peril, which that was to dread.
Great rumor rose wha^ it was first espied
In all the town, and openly was spoken
That Calcas traitor fled was and alyed
To hem of Greece, and cast was to be wroken
On him, that falsely has his faith broken
And said: he and all his kynne atones
were worthy to be brent both fell and bones.
Now had Calcas left in this mischau^ce
Vnwyst of this false and wicked deed
A daughter, which was in great penance
And of her life she was full sore in dread
And wist never what best was to read
And as a wyddowe was she, and al alone
And nyst to who^ she might make her moan.
Creseyde was this ladies name aryght
As to my dome, in all Troyes city
Most fairest lady, fer passing every wight
So angelyke shone her natyle beauty
That no mortal thing seemed she
And therewith was she so parfyte a creature
As she had be made in scornyng of nature
This lady that all day herd at ear
Her fathers shame falshed, and traysoun
(Full nigh out of her wit for sorrow and fear
In widows habit large of samite brown)
Before Hector on knees she fyl adowne
Her mercy bad her self excusing
with pitious voice, and tenderly weeping
Now was this Hector pytious of nature
And saw, that she was sorrowful begone
And that she was so fair a creature
Of his goodness he gladded her anon
And said: let your fathers trayson gone
Forthwith mischau^ce, and ye your self in joy
Dwells with us, while you list in Troy
And all yt honor yt men may do you have
As ferforth as though your father dwell there
Y^ shull have, and your body shull men save
As for as I may ought inquire and here
And she him thanked with full humble chere
And ofter would and it had been his will
Took her leave, went home, and held her still.
And in her house she abode with such meynye
As till her honor need was to hold
And while she was dwelling in that city
She kept her estate, and of young and old
Full well-beloved, and well men of her told
But whether that she children had or none
I read it not, therefore I let it gone
The things fellen as they done of werre
Betwyxen hem of Troy and greeks often
For some day boughte^ they of Troy it derre
And eft the greeks founden nothing soft
The folk of Troy: and thus Fortune alofte
And under eft began hem to whelmen both
After her course, aye while that they were wroth
But how this town came to destruction
Ne falls not to purpose me to tell
For it were a long digressyon
Fro my matter, and you to long to dwell
But the Troyan iestes, as they fell
In Omer, or in Dares, or in Dyte
who so yt can, may reden hem as they write
But though ye greeks hem of Troy shetten
And her city besieged all about
Her old vsages nolde they not letten
As to honouren her gods full devout
But aldermost in honor out of dout
They had a relyke hight Palladion
That was her trust abouen euerychon
And so befyll when common was the time
Of April, when clothed is the mede
with new grene, of lusty veer the pryme
And sweet smellyng flowers white and red
In sundry wise showed as I read
The folk of Troy, their obseruaunces old
Palladions feast went for to hold
Unto the temple in all their best wise
Generallye there went many a wight
To harken of Palladions service
And namely many a iustye knight
And many a lady fresh, and maiden bright
Full well arrayed both most and leest
Both for the season and the hye feast.
Among these other folk was Creseyda
In wydowes habyt black: but nathelesse
Right as our first letter is now an A
In beauty first so stood she makelesse
Her goodly lokyng gladded all the prees
Nas never seen thing to be praised derre
Nor under cloud black so bright a sterre.
As was Creseyd, they sayden euerychone
That her beheld in her black wede
And yet she stood full low and still alone
Behind other folk in little bread
And nyt the door under shames dread
Simple of attire, and debonayre of chere
with full assured lokyng an^ manner
This Troylus, as he was wont to guide
His young knights lad hem up and down
In thylke large temple on every side
Beholding aye the ladies of the town
Now here now there, for no deuocioun
Had he to none, to reuen him his rest
But ganne to praise and lack whom him lest.
And in his walk full fast he began to wayten
If knight or squyre of his company
Began for to syke, or let his eyes bayten
Of any woman, that he could espy
He would smyle, and hold it a folly
And say hem thus: O Lord she slepeth soft
For love of the when thou turnest full often.
I have herd tell pardieux of your living
Ye lovers, and eke your leude obseruaunces
And which a labor folk have in winnyng
Of love, and in keeping such doutaunces
And wha^ your pray is lost, woe and penau^ces
O very fools, blind and nyce be ye
There is not one can ware by another be
And with ye word he began cast up the browe
Ascaunces lo, is this not well yspoken
At which the god of love began loken row
Right for despyte, and shope him to be wroken
He kyd anon his bow was not broken
For suddenly he hit him at the full
And yet as proud a peckoke began he pull
O blind world, o blind ententioun
How often falls all theffect contrayre
Of surquedie and foul presumtioun
For caught is proud, and caught is debonair
This Troylus is clomben on the stayre
And little weneth, that he mote discenden
But al day fails that fools wenden
As proud bayarde begins for to skyp
Out of the way, so prycketh him his corn
Till he a lash have of the long whyppe
Tha^ thinks he, though I prau^ce al beforn
First in the tracie, full fat and new yshorne
Yet am I but an horse, and horses law
I must endure, and with my feeres draw.
So fared it by this fires and proud knight
Though he a worthy kings son were
And wend nothing had had such might
Against his will, that should his heart stere
Yet with a look his heart woxe on fire
That he that now was most in pride above
woxe suddenly most subject unto love.
For thy ensample takes of this man
Ye wise, proud, and worthy folks all
To scornen love, which that so sone can
The ^^edom of your hertes to him thrall
For ever it was, and ever it be shall
That love is he that all thing may bind
For no man may fordo the law of kind
That this be soth, has preued, and does yet
For this (^^owe I) ye know all and some
Men reden not that folk han greater wit
Tha^ they, yt han ben most with love ynome
And strengest folk b^n therewith overcome
The worthyest and greatest of degree
This was and is, and yet men shall it se.
And trulych that sytte well to be so
For alder wysest han therewith ben plesed
And they that han ben aldermost in woe
with love han ben comforted most and esed
And often it has the cruel heart apesed
And worthy folk made worthyer of name
And causes most to dreaden vice and shame
Now sith it may not goodly be withstonde
And is a thing so virtuous in kind
Refuses naught to love, for to ben bond
Sith as him seluen list he may you bind
The yerde is bet that bowen woll and wind
Than that ye breast, and therefore I you reed
Now follows him, that so well can you led
But for to tellen forth in special
As of this kings son of which I told
And leven other thing collateral
Of him think I my tale forth to hold
Both of his joy, and of his cares cold
And his work as touching this matere
For I it began, I wol thereto refere
within the temple he went him forth playi^g
This Troylus, of every wight about
On this lady, and now on that lokyng
where so she were of town, or of without
And upon case befell, that through a rout
His eye perced, and so deep it went
Till on Creseyde it smote, and there it stent
And suddenly for wonder wext astoned
And began her bet behold in thryfty wise
o very god thout he, where have thou wo^ned
That art so fair, and goodly to deuyse
Therewith his heart began to sprede and rise
And soft syghed, lest men might him here
And caught again his first playing chere.
She nas not with the most of her stature
But all her lymmes so well answering
weren to womanhode, that creature
was never less mannysh in semyng
And eke the pure wise of her meaning
Showed well, that men might in her guess
Honor, estate, and womanly noblesse.
Tho Troylus, right wonder well withal
Began for to like her meaning and her chere
which somdele deignous was, for she let fall
Her look alyte aside, in such manner
Ascaunces, what may I not stonden here
And after that her lokyng began she light
That never thout him seen so good a sight
And of her look to him there began to quycke^
So great desire and such affection
That in his hertes botom began to stycken
Of her his fyxe and deep impressyon
And though he erst had pored up and down
Than was he glad his horns in to shrynke
Uneaths wist he how to look or wynke
Lo, he that let him seluen so connyng
And scorned hem that loves pains dryen
was full unware ye love had his dwelling
within the subtle stremes of her eyes
That suddenly hy^ thought he felt dyen
Right with her look, the spyrite in his heart
Blessed be love that thus can folk convert
She this in black lykyng to Troylus
Over al thing he stood for to behold
But his desire, ne whefore he stood thus
He neither chere made, ne word told
But from a far, his manner for to hold
On other thing sometime his look he cast
And eftte on her, while that the service last
And after this, not fully^h all a whaped
Out of the temple all es^lyche he went
Repentyng him that he had ever iaped
Of loves folk, lest fully the descent
Of scorn fyl on him self but what he meant
Lest it were wist on any manner side
His woe he began dyssimulen and hyde
when he was fro this temple thus departed
He straight anon unto his pallayes turns
Right with her look, through shotte^ and darted
Al fayneth he in lust that he soiourneth
And al his chere and speech also he bourneth
And aye of loves servants every while
Him self to wrie al hem he began to smyle.
And said lord, so they live all in lust
Ye lovers for the conyngest of you
That serves most ententiflyche and best
Him tyte as often harm thereof as prowe
Your hyre is quyte again, yea god wot how
not well for well, but scorn for good service
In faith your order is ruled in good wise
In no certain been your obseruaunces
But it a sely few points be
Ne nothing a reth so great atendau^ces
As does your lay, and that know all ye
But that is not the worst, as mote I the
But told I you the worst point, I leave
All said I soth, ye wolden at me grieve
But take this, that ye lovers often eshewe
Or else done of good entention
Full often thy lady wol it mysse constrewe
And deem it harm in her opynion
And yet if she for other encheson
Be wroth, tha^ shall thou have a groin anon
Lord, well is him that may ben of you one
But for all this, wha^ that he sees his time
He held his pees, non other bote him gained
For love began his feathers so to lyme
That well uneath unto his folk he feigned
That other besy needs him distrayned
So woe was him, that what to done he nyst
But bad his folk to gone where as hem list
And when that he in chamber was alone
He down on his beds fete him set
And first he began to syke, and efte to groan
And thought aye on her so withouten let
That as he satte and woke, his spyrite met
That he her saugh, and temple and all ye wise
Right of her look, and began it new auyse
Thus ga^ he make a myrrour of his mind
In which he saugh al holy her figure
And that he well could in his heart find
It was to him a right good adventure
To love such one, and if he did his cure
To seruen her, yet might he fall in grace
Or else, for one of her servants pace
Imaginyng, that traueyle nor grame
Ne might, for so goodly one be lorne
As she, ne him for his desire no shame
Al were it wyft, but in prise and up borne
Of al lovers, well more than beforne
This argumented he, in his gynnyng
Full unadvised of his woe coming
Thus took he purpose lovers craft to sewe
And thought he would worken privily
First to hyde his desire in mewe
From every wight yborne, al ouerly
But he might aught recovered ben thereby
Reme^bryng him, that love to wide yblowe
Yelte bitter fruit, though sweet sede be sow
And over all this, full mokel more he thought
what for to speak, and what to holden inn
And what to arten, her to love he sought
And on a song anon right to begin
And began loud on his sorrow for to win
For with good hope, he began fully assente
Creseyde for to love, and naught repent
And of his song not only his sentence
As writ mine auctour called Lollius
But plainly save our tongues difference
I dare well say, in all that Troylus
Said in his song, lo every word right thus
As I shall said, and who so list it here
Lo next this verse, he may it find here.
The song of Troylus.
IF no love is, o god what feel I so
And if love is, what thing and which is he
If Love be good, from whence comes my woe
If it be wycke, a wonder thinks me
When every turment and aduersyte
That comes of him, may to me sauory think
For aye thurst I the more that yche it drink
And if that at mine own lust I brenne
From whence comes my wayling and my pleynte
If harm agree me, whereto plain I then
I not, ne why, vnwery that I feynte
O quick death, o sweet harm so queynte
How may of the in me, be such quantyte
But if that I consent that it so be
And if that I consent, I wrongfully
Complain ywis, thus possed to and fro
Al sterelesse within a boat am I
A mydde the sea, atwyxen wyndes two
That in contrary stonden ever mo
Alas, what is this wonder maladye?
For heat of cold, for cold of heat I dye
And to the god of love thus said he
with pytous voice, O lord now yours is
My spyrite, which that ought yours be
You thank I lord, ye ha^ me brought to this
But whether goddess or woman ywis
She be, I not which, that ye do me serve
But as her man I wol aye live and sterue
Ye stonden in her eyes mightyly
As in a place to your virtue digne
wherefore lord, if my service or I
May lyken you, so beth to me benign
For mine estate royal here I resign
In to her hand, and with full humble chere
Become her man, as to my lady dear
In him ne deigned sparen blood royal
The fire of love, wherfro god me bless
Ne him forbear in no degree for all
His virtue, or his excellent prowess
But held him as his thrall low in distress
And brende him so in sondrie wise aye new
That sixty times a day he lost his hew
So mochel day fro day his own thought
For lust to her, began quicken and increase
That eueryche other charge he set at naught
For thy full often, his hot fire to cease
To seen her goodly look he began to prease
For thereby to ben eased well he wend
And aye the nere he was, the more he brende
For aye the nere the fire the hotter is
This (trow I) knows all this company
But were he far or nere, I dare say this
By night or day, for wysedom or folly
His heart, which that is his breasts eye
was aye on her, that fayrer was to seen
Than ever was Heleyne, or Polixene
Eke of the day there passed not an hour
That to him self a thousand time he seyde
God goodly, to whom I serve and labor
As I best can, now would god Creseyde
Ye wolden on me rewe, er that I deyde
My dear heart alas, mine heel and hew
And life is lost, but ye woll on me rewe
Al other dredes weren from him fled
Both of thassiege, and his sauacion
Ne in desire non other fownes bredde
But arguments to his conclusyon
That she on him would han compassyon
And he to ben her man, while he may dure
Lo here his life, and from his death his cure
The sharp shoures fell, of arms preue
That Hector or his other brethren dydden
Ne made him only therefore ones meue
And yet wash, where so me^ went or rydden
Found one ye best, and lengest time abyden
There peril was, and did eke such travail
In arms, that to think it was marvel
But for none hate he to the greeks had
Ne also for the rescous of the town
Ne made him thus in arms for to mad
But only lo, for this conclusyoun
To lyken her the bette for his renoun
Fro day to day in arms so he spedde
That the Greeks as the death him dredde
And fro this forth to rest him love his sleep
And made his meat his foe, and eke his sorrow
Began multiplye, that who so took keep
It showed in his hew both eve and morrow
Therefore a title he began him for to borowe
Of other sickness, lest men of him wend
That the hot fire of love him brende
And said he had a fever, and fared amys
But were it certain I can not say
If that his lady understood not this
Or feigned her she nyste, one of the twey
But well read I, that by no manner wey
Ne seemed it, that she on him rought
Or of his pain, what so ever he thought
But than felt this Troylus such woe
that he was well nigh wode, for aye his dread
was this, that she some wight loved so
That never of him she would han taken head
For which him thought he felt his heart blede
Ne of his woe ne durst he naught begin
To tellen her, for all this world to win
But when he had a space from his care
Thus to him self full often he began to plain
He said, o fool now art thou in the snare
That whylom iapedest at loves pain
Now art you he^t, now gnaw thyn own chayn
Thou were aye woned each lover reprehe^de
Of thing fro which thou can yt not defend
What wol now every lover said of the
If this be wist* but ever in thine absence
Laughen in scorn, and said lo there gothe he
That is the man of great sapience
That held us lovers lest in reverence
Now thanked be god, he may gone on ye dau^ce
Of hem that love list febly auaunce
But o thou woeful Troylus, god would
Sith thou must louen, through thy destyne
That thou beset were on such one, yt should
Know all thy woe, all lacked her pity
But also cold in love toward the
Thy lady is, as froste in winter moon
And thou fordo, as snow in fire is soon
God would I were aryued in the port
Of death, to which my sorrow wol me led
Ah lord, to me it were a great comfort
Than were I quyt of languyssyng in dread
For be my hyd sorrow yblowe in bread
I shall beiaped ben a thousand time
More than ye fool, of whose folly men ryme
But now help god, and ye sweet, for who^
I plain, ycaught ye never wight so fast
O mercy dear heart, and help me from
The death, for I, while yt my life may last
More than my self wol love you to my last
And with some fre^dly look gladeth me sweet
Though never more thing ye me byhete
These words, and full many an other mo
He spoke, and called ever in his compleynte
Her name, for to tellen her his woe
Till nyghe that he in salt teeres dreynte
Al was for naught, she herd not his pleynte
And when that he bethought on that folly
A thousand fold his woe began multiplye
Bewaylyng in his chamber thus alone
A friend of his, that called was Pandare
Came ones in unware, and herd him groan
And saw his friend in such distress and care
Alas (quod he) who causes all this fare?
O mercy god, what unhap may this mean?
Han now thus sone greeks made you lene?
Or haste thou some remorce of conscience?
And art now fall in some deuocioun
And waylest for thy sin and thine offense
And have for ferde caught a contricioun
God save hem, that besieged han our town
That so can lay our iolyte on press
And bring our lusty folk to holiness
These words said he for the nones all
That with such thing he mit him angry make^
And with his anger don his sorrow fall
As for a time, and his courage awaken
But well wyste he, as far as tongues spaken
There nas a man of gretter hardynesse
Than he, ne more desired worthynesse
what cas (quod Troylus) or what adventure
Has gyded the to seen me languyssyng
That am refuse of every creature?
But for the love of god, at my prayeng
Go hence away, for certes my deyeng
woll the disese, and I mote needs dey
Therefore go way, there nys no more to sey
But if thou wene I be thus sick for dread
It is not so, and therefore scorn naught
There is an other thing I take of head
well more tha^ aught ye greeks ha^ yet wrout
which cause is of my death for sorrow and thout
But though that I now tell it the ne lest
Be thou not wroth, I hyde it for the best
This Pa^dare, ye nygh molte for woe and routh
Full often said alas, what may this be
Now friend (quod he) if ever love or truth
Has been er this betwyxen the and me
Ne do thou never such a cruelte
To hyden fro thy friend so great a care
woste thou not well that I am Pandare?
I woll parten with the all thy pain
If it so be I do the no comfort
As it is friends right, sothe for to said
To enterparten woe, as glad disporte
I have and shall, for true or false report
In wrong and right yloued the al my live
Hyde not thy woe fro me, but tell it blyue
Than began this soroufull Troylus to syke
And said him thus, God leave it be my best
To tellen the, for sithe it may the like
Yet wol I tell it, though my heart breast
And well wot I, thou may do me no rest
But lest thou deem I trust not to the
Now herke friend, for thus it stant with me
Love, against the which who so defends
Him seluen most, him alder leest avails
with dispeyre so soroufully me offends
That straight unto ye death mine heart sayleth
Thereto desire, so brennyngly me assayleth
That to ben slain it were a greater joy
To me, than king of Greece be and of Troy
Suffyseth this, my full friend Pandare
That I have said, for now wost thou my woe
And for the love of god my cold care
So hyde it well, I told it never to mo
For harms myghten folowen mo than two
If it were wist, but be thou in gladness
And let me sterue unknow of my distress
How have thou thus unkindly and long
Hyd this fro me, thou fool? (quod Pandarus)
Parauenture thou may after such one long
That mine auyse anon may helpen us
This were a wonder thing (quod Troylus)
Thou could never in love thy selfen wysse
How dyuel may thou bringen me to bliss?
Yea Troylus, now herke (quod Pandare)
Though I be nyce, it happeth often so
That one that axes does full yuell fare
By good counsel can keep his friend therfro
I have my self seyne a blind man go
There as he fell, that could loken wide
A fool may eke a wise man often gyde
A whetstone is no keruyng instrument
But yet it makes sharp keruyng tolis
And there you wost that I have aught miswent
Eschew thou that, for such thing to schole is
This often wise men ben ware by foolis
If thou so do, thy wit is well bywared
By his contrary is every thing declared
For how might ever swetnesse have be know
To him, that never tasted bytternesse?
Ne no man wot what gladness is I trow
That never was in sorrow, or some distress
Eke white by black, by sha^e eke worthiness
Each set by other, more for other seems
As men may seen, and so the wise it demeth
Sithe thus of two contraries is o lore
I that have in love so often assayed
Greuaunces, ought connen well the more
Counsaylen the, of that thou art dismayed
And eke the ne ought not ben yuell apayed
Though I desire with the for to bear
Thine heavy charge, it shall the less dear
I wot well that it fared thus by me
As to thy brother Paris, an hierdesse
which that cleped was Oenone
wrote in a complaynte of her heaviness
Ye saw the letter that she wrote, I gess^
Nay never yet iwys (quod Troylus)
Now (quod Pandare) herkeneth it was thus
Phoebus, that first fond art of medicyne
(Quod she) and could in every wightes care
Remedy and read, by hertes he knew fine
Yet to him self his connyng was full bare
For love had him so bounden in a snare
Al for the daughter of the king Admete
That all his craft ne could his sorrow beat
Right so fare I, unhappy for me
I love one best, and that me smerteth sore
And yet parauenture can I reden the
And not my self, repreue me no more
I have no cause I wot well for to sore
As does an hawk, that lysteth for to play
But to thine help, yet somewhat can I say
And of o thing, right syker may thou be
That certain, for to dyen in the pain
That I shall never mo discover the
Ne by my trouhe, I keep not restreyne
The fro thy love, all though it were Heleyne
That is thy brothers wife, if yche it wyste
Be what she be, and love her as the list
Therefore, as frendfullyche in me assure
And tell me platte, what is thyn encheson
And fynall cause of woe, that ye endure
For douteth nothing, mine entencion
Nas not to you of reprehensyon
To speak as now, for no wight may byreue
A man to love, till that him list to leave
And weteth well, that both two ben vycis
Mystrusten all, or else all leave
But well I wot, the mean of it no vice is
As for to trusten some wight is a preue
Of troth, and for thy would I feign remeue
Thy wrong co^ceyte, and do yt some wight trust
Thy woe to tell, and tell me if the lust
The wise eke says, woe him that is alone
For and he fall, he has none help to rise
And sithe thou haste a fellow, tell thy moan
For this nys naught certain the next wise
To wynnen love, as techen us the wise
To walowe and weep, as Niobe the queen
whose teeres yet in marble ben ysene
Let be thy weeping, and thy drerynesse
And let us lyssen woe, with other speech
So may thy woeful time seem less
Delight naught in woe, thy woe to seche
As don these fools, that her sorrows each
with sorrow, when they han misauenture
And lusten naught to sechen other cure
Men said to wretch is consolacion
To have another felawe in his pain
That ought well ben our opinyon.
For both thou and I of love plain
(...) full of sorrow am I sothe to said
That certainly, no more hard grace
May sit on me, for why there is no space
If god woll, thou art naught aghast of me
L^ste I would of thy lady the begyle
Thou wost thy self, who^ that I love parde
As I best can, gone sythen long while
And sythen thou wost, I do it for no wyle
And sithe I am he, that thou trustest most
Crime somewhat, sens al my woe thou woste
Yet Troylus, for all this no word said
But long he lay still, as he deed were
And after this, with sykyng he abrayde
And to Pandarus voice he lent his eere
And up his again cast he, and than in seere
was Pandarus, lest that in frenseye
He should fall, or else sone deye
And said a wake, full wonderlyche and sharp
what slombrest thou as in a lytargye?
Or art thou like an ass to the harp
That hereth soun, wha^ men yt stringes ply?
But in his mind, of that no melodye
May synke him to gladen, for that he
So dull is, in his bestyalite
And with this, Pa^dare of his words stent
But Troylus to him no thing answerde
For why, to tell was naught his intent
Never to no man, for whom that he so ferde
For it is said, men maken often a yerde
with which the maker is him self ybeten
In sondrie manner, as these wise treten
And namelyche in his counsel tellyng
That touches love, that ought ben ^e^re
For of him self it woll enough out spryng
But if that it the bet governed be
Eke sometime it is craft to seem slay
For thing, which in effect men hunte^ fast
All this began Troylus in his heart cast
But nathelesse, wha^ he had herd him cry*
A wake he began, and syke wonder sore
And said friend, though that I still lie
I nam not deefe, now peace and cry no more
For I have herd thy words, and thy lore
But suffer me my fortune to bewaylen
For thy proverbs may naught me auaylen
Nor other cure can thou none for me
Eke I nyl not ben cured, I woll dey
what know I of the queen Niobe?
Let be thine old ensamples, I the prey
No friend (quod Pandarus) therefore I sey
Such is delight of fools to bewepe
Her woe, but seken boot they ne keep
Now know I that reason in the fails
But tell me, if I wyste what she were
For whom that the all misauenture ayleth
Durst thou that I told it in her eere
Thy woe, since thou dare not thy self for feere
And her besought, on the to han some routhe
why nay (quod he) by God and by my truth
What, not as besily (quod Pandarus)
As though mine own life lay in this need
why no parde sir (quod this Troylus)
And why? for that thou should never speed
woste thou that well? ye that is out of dread
(quod Troylus) for all that ever ye conne
She wol to no such wretch as I be won
(quod Pandarus) alas what may this be
That thou dispayred art, thus causeless
what, lives not thy lady, benedicite
How wost thou so, that thou art graceless
Such yuel is not always botelesse
why put not impossible thus thy cure
Sithe thing to come is often in adventure
I grant well that thou endurest woe
As sharp as does he Tesiphus in hell
whose stomach fowls tyren ever mo
That hyghten vultures, as books tell
But I may not endure that thou dwell
In so unskillful an opinyon
That of thy woe nys no curacion
But ones nyll thou, for thy cowarde heart
And for thine ire, and folyshe wylfulnesse
For wantrust tellen of thy sorrows smerte
Ne to thine own help, do business
As much as speak a word, ye more or less
But lie as he that of life nothing retche
what woman could love such a wretch
what may she demen other of thy death
If thou thus dye, and she not why it is
But that for fear, is yolden up thy brethe
For greeks han besieged us ywis
Lord which a thank shall you have tha^ of this
Thus woll she said, and all the town atones
The wretch is deed, ye devil have his bones
Thou may alone here weep, cry, and knele
But love a woman that she wot it naught
And she wol quite it that thou shalt not feel
Unknow vnkyst, and lost that is unsought
what many a man has love full dear about
Twenty winter that his lady ne wyste
That never yet his ladys mouth he kyste
what, should he therefore fallen in despair?
Or be recreaunt for his own tene
Or slain him self, all be his lady fair
Nay nay: but ever in one be fresh and grene
To serve and love, his dear hertes queen
And think it is a guerdone her to serve
A thousand part more, than he can deserve
And of that word took head Troylus
And thought anon, what folly he was in
And how that sothe him said Pandarus
That for to sleen him self, might he not wyn
But both done vnmanhode and a syn
And of his death his lady naught to wit
For of his woe, god wot she knew full lyte
And with ye thought, he began full sore syke
And said, Alas: what is me best to do
To whom Pandare said, if the like
The best is, that thou tell me thy woe
And have my troth, but if thou find it so
I be thy bote, or it be full long
To pieces do me draw, and sythen honge
Ye, so say thou (quod Troylus) alas?
But god wot it is naught the rather so
Full hard it were to helpen in this caas
For well find I, that fortune is my foe
Ne all the men that ride conne or go
May of her cruel whele the harm withsto^d
For as her list, she plays with fre and bond
(quod Pandarus) tha^ blamest thou fortune
For thou art wroth, ye now at erst I se
wost thou not well that fortune is common
To every manner wight, in some degree
And yet thou have this comfort, lo parde
That as her joys moten ouergone
So mote her sorrows passen euerichone
For if her whele stynt, any thing to tourn
Than cesseth she fortune anon to be
Now since her whele by no way may soiourn
what woste thou if her mutabylite
Right as thy seluen lust woll don by the
Or that she be naught far fro thyn helping
Parauenture thou haste cause for to sing
And therefore woste thou what, I you beseech
Let be thy woe, and turnyng to the ground
For who so list have healyng of his leche
To him byhoueth first vnwrie his wound
To Cerberus in hell aye be I bound
were it for my suster all thy sorrow
By my will she should be thyn to morrow
Look up I say, and tell me what she is
Anon, that I may gone about thy need
Know y^h her aught, for my love tell me this
Than would I hope rather for to speed
Tho began the vein of Troylus to blede
For he was hit, and woxe all reed for shame
A ha (quod Pandare) here begins game
And with yt word, he ga^ him for to shake
And said these, thou shalt her name tell
But tho began sely Troylus for to quake
As though men should han had him in to hell
And said alas, of all my woe the well
Than is my sweet foe called Crescyde
And well nigh with the word for fear he deyde
And wha^ ye Pa^dare herd her name neuen
Lord he was glad, and said, friend so dear
Now fare a right, for Jones name in heaven
Love has beset the well, be of good chere
For of good name, and wysedom, and manner
She has enough, and eke of gentyllesse
If she be fair, thou woste thy self I guess
Ne never sey a more bounteous
Of her estate, ne a gladder: ne of speech
A frendlyer, ne more gracious
For to do well, ne less had need to seche
what for to done, and all this bet to each
In honor, to as far as she may stretche
A kings heart seems by hers a wretch
And for thy look of good comfort thou be
For certainly the first point is this
Of noble courage, and well ordain the
A man to have peace with him self ywys
So ought thou, for naught but good it is
To louen well, and in a worthy place
The ought not clepe it hap, but grace
And also think, and therwyth glad the
That sith thy lady virtuous is all
So follows it, that there is some pity
Among all these other in general
And for they se that thou in special
Require naught, that is again her name
For virtue stretches not him self to shame
But well is me that ever I was borne
That thou beset art in so good a place
For by my troth i^ love I durst have sworn
Thou should never have tide so fair a grace
And wost you why* for you were wont to chase
At love in scorn, and for dyspyte hem call
Saint Idiote, lord of these foles all
Now often have thou made thy nyce iapes
And said, that loves servants euerychone
Of nycete, ben very gods apes
And some would monch her meat alone
Lyggynge a bed, and make hem for to groan
And some thou saydest had a blau^che feuere
And praydest god, they should never keuere
And some of hem, took on hem for ye cold
More then enough, so saydest thou full often
And some han feigned often time and told
How that they waken, when they sleep soft
And thus they would have set hem self aloft
And nathelesse were under at the last
Thus saydest thou, and ^apedest full fast
Yet saydest thou, that for the more part
These lovers would speak in general
And thoughten it was a syker art
For faylynge for to assayen over al
Now may I iape of the, if that I shall
But natheles, though that I should dey
Thou art none of tho, I dare well sey
Now beat thy breast, and say to god of Love
Thy grace lord, for now I me repent
If I myspake, for now my self I love
Thus say with all thine heart, in good intent
(Quod Troylus) ah lord, I me consent
And pray to the, my iapes thou foryeue
And I shall never more while I live
Thou say well, quod Pa^dare, and now I hope
That thou the gods wrath have al apesed
And sith thou haste wepten many a drope
And said such thing, wherwt thy god is plesed
Now would never god, but you were eased
And thyncke well she, of whom ryst al thy woe
Here after may thy comfort ben also
For thylke ground, yt bears ye wedes wycke
Bears eke these wholesome herbs, as full often
Next the foul nettle, rough and thycke
The rose wexeth, soote, smoth, and soft
And Next the valey is the hill a lofte
And next the derke night the glad morrow
And also joy is next the fine of sorrow
Now look that attempre be thy brydelle
And for the best aye suffer to the tide
Or else all our labor is on ydell
He hastes well, that wisely can abide
Be dyligent and true, and aye well hyd
Be lusty, free, persevere in thy seruyse
And all is well, if thou work in this wise
But he that departed is in every place
Is no where hole, as written clerks wise
what wonder is, if such one have no grace
Eke wost thou how it fares of some seruyse
As plant a tree or herb, in sondrie wise
And on the morrow pull it up as blyue
No wonder is, though it may never thrive
And sith ye god of love has the bestowed
In place digne unto thy worthynesse
Stand fast, for to good port have you rowed
And of thy self, for any heuenesse
Hope always well, for but if drerynesse
Or ouerhast our both labor shende
I hope of this to maken a good end
And wost you why, I am the less afered
Of this matter, with my nece trete
For this have I herd say of wise lered
was never man of woman yet beyete
That was unapt to suffer loves hete
Celestial, or else love of kind
For the some grace I hope in her to find
And for to speak of her in special
Her beauty to bethynken, and her youth
It sit her naught, to ben celestial
As yet, though that her list both and kouth
And truly it sit her well right nouth
A worthy knight to louen and cheryce
And but she do, I hold it for a vice
wherefore I am, and woll ben aye ready
To pain me to do you this service
For both you to please, this hope I
Here after, for ye ben both wise
And conne it counsel keep in such a wise
That no man shall the wyser of it be
And so we may ben gladed all three
And by my troth I have right now of the
A good conceyt, in my wit as I guess
And what it is, I woll now that thou se
I think that sith Love of his goodness
Has the converted out of wickedness
That thou shall ben the best post I leave
Of all his lay, and most his foes grieve
Ensample why, se now these great clerks
That erren aldermost again a law
And ben converted from her wicked works
Through grace of god, yt lest hem to wtdraw
Then arne they folk yt han most god in awe
And strengest faythed ben I understand
And conne an error alderbest wythstonde
when Troylus had herd Pandare assented
To ben his help, in loving of Creseyde
wext of his woe, as who says vnturme^ted
But hotter wext his love, and then he said
with sobre chere, as though his heart playde
Now blysful Venus help, er that I sterue
Of ye Pandare, I mow some thank deserve
But dear friend, how shall my woe be less
Till this be done, and good eke tell me this
How wylt thou said of me and of my dystrese
Lest the be wroth, this dread I most ywys
Or woll not heren all, how it is
All this dread I, and eke for the manner
Of the her eme, she nyll no such thing here
(Quod Pandarus) you have a full great care
Lest the chorle may fall out of the moon
why lord? I hate of the the nyce fare
why, entremete of that thou have to done
For gods love, I bydde the a boon
So let me alone, and it shall be thy best
why friend (quod he) then done right as ye lest
But herke Pandare o word, for I nolde
That thou in me wendest so great folly
That to my lady I desyren should
That touches harm, or any vylany
For dredlesse me were lever dye
Then she of me ought else understood
But that, that might sownen into good
Tho lough this Pa^darus, and anon answerde
And I thy borow, fie no wight does but so
I raught not though she stood and herd
How yt thou say, but fare well I woll go
A dieu, be glad, god speed us both two
Give me this labor, and this business
And of my speed, be thine all the swetnesse
Tho Troylus began down on knees to fall
And Pandare in his arms hente fast
And said, now fie on the greeks all
Yet parde, god shall helpen at last
And dredlesse, if that my life may last
And god to forne, lo some of hem shall smerte
And yet me athinketh yt this auau^t masterte
Now Pandare, I can no more say
Thou wise, thou wost, thou may, you art all
My life, my death, hole in thine ho^de I lay
Help me now (quod he) yes by my troth I shall
God yield the friend, and this in special
(Quod Troylus) that thou me reco^maunde
To her that may me to the death command
This Pandarus tho, desirous to serve
His full friend, he said in this manner
Farewell, and think I wol yt thank deserve
Have here my troth, and that thou shall here
And went his way, thynking on this matere
And how he best might besechen her of grace
And find a time thereto, and a place
For every wight that has a house to found
He renneth not the work for to begin
with rakel hand, but he woll bide a stoo^de
And send his hertes line out fro within
Alderfyrst his purpose for to win
All this Pandare in his heart thought
And cast his work full wisely er he wrought
But Troylus lay tho no longer down
But anon upon his stead baye
And in the field he played the lyoun
woe was ye greek, yt with him met that day
And in the town, his manner tho forth aye
So goodly was, and gat him so in grace
That each him loved, that looked in his face
For he bycame the frendlyest wight
The gentylest, and eke the most fre
The thryftyest, and one the best knight
That in his time was, or might be
Deed were his iapes and his cruelte
His high port, and his manner strange
And each of hem, began for a virtue change
Now let us stynte of Troylus a stounde
That fares like a man, that hurt is sore
And is somedele of akynge of his wound
Ylessed well, but healed no dele more
And as an easy pacient the lore
Abyte, of him that goes about his cure
And thus he dryueth forth his adventure
Explicit liber primus.
OVt of these black wawes for to sail
O wind, the weder gynneth clear
For in this see, the boat has such travail
Of my conning, that uneath I it stere
This see clepe I the tempestous matere
Of dyspayre, that Troylus was in
But now of hope the kalendes begin
O lady mine that called art Cleo
Thou be my speed fro this forth, and my muse
To ryme well this book till I have do
Me needs here none other art to use
For why, to every lover I me excuse
That of no sentement I this endyte
But out of latin, in my tongue it write
wherefore I nyl have neither thank ne blame
Of all this work, but pray you mekely
Dysblameth me, if any word be lame
For as mine auctour said, so say I
Eke though I spoke of love vnfelyngly
No wonder is, for it no thing of new is
A blind man can not iugen well in hewis
I know yt in form of speech is change
within a thousand year, and words tho
That hadde^ pryse, now wonder nyce and strange
Thinks hem, and yet they spoke hem so
And spedde as well in love, as men now do
Eke for to wynnen love, in sondrye ages
In sondrye lands, sondrye ben vsages
And for thy, if it hap in any wise
That here be any lover in this place
That herkeneth, as the story woll deuyse
How Troylus came to his ladies grace
And thinks, so nolde I not love purchase
Or wondreth on his speech or his doing
I not, but it is to me no wondering
For every wight, which that to Rome went
Halte not o path, ne always o manner
Eke in some land were all the gamen shent
If that men farde in love, as men done here
As thus, in open doing or in chere
In vysityng, in form, or said our sawes
For thy me^ said, each country has his laws
Eke scarsely ben there in this place three
That have in love said like, and done in all
For to this purpose this may lyken the
And the right naught, yet all is done or shall
Eke some me^ grave in tree, some in stone wall
As it betyde, but sith I have begone
Mine author shall I follow, as I konne.
Explicit prohemium.
IN May that mother is of months glade
That fresh flowers, blewe, white, and read
Ben quycke again, that winter deed made
And full of baume is fletynge every mede
when Phoebus does her bright beams sprede
Right in the white Bole, it so betydde
As I shall sing, on Mayes day the thrydde
That Pandarus for all his wise speech
Felt eke his part of loves shottes kene
That could he never so well of loving preche
It made his hew a day full often grene
So shope it, that him fill that day a tene
In love, for which in woe to bed he went
And made er it were day full many a went
The swalowe Proigne, with a sorrowful lay
when morrow come, began make her waime^ting
why she forshapen was, and every lay
Pandare a bed, half in a slomberyng
Till she so nygh him made her wayme^tyng
How Thereus began forth her suster take
That with the noise of her he began a wake
And to call, and dress him up to rise
Reme^brynge him, his arande was to done
From Troylus, and eke his great empryse
And cast, and knew in good plyte was ye moan
To done voyage, and took his way full sone
Unto his neces paleys, there beside
Now Ianus god of enter, thou him gyde
when he was come unto his neces place
where is my lady, to her folk (quod he)
And they him told, and in forth he began pace
And found two other ladies sit and she
within a paued parlour, and they three
Herden a maiden hem reden the geste
Of the siege of Thebes, while hem lest
(Quod Pandarus) madame god you se
with your book, and all the company
Eygh uncle mine, welcome ywys (quod she)
And up she rose, and by the hand in hye
She took him fast, and said, this night thrye
To good mote it turn, of you I met
And with that word, she down on be^ch him set
Yea nece, ye shul faren well the bet
If God woll all this year (quod Pandarus)
But I am sorry that I have you let
To harken of your book ye praysen thus
For gods love what says it, tell it us
Is it of love, or some good ye me lere
Uncle (quod she) your maystresse is not here
with you they gonnen laugh, and tho she seyde
This romaunce is of Thebes, that we read
And we have herd how ye king Layus deyde
Through Edippus his son, and all the deed
And here we stynten, all these letters reed
How the bishop, as the book can tell
Amphiorax, fyl through the ground to hell
(Quod Pa^darus) al this know I my selue
And all thassiege of Thebes, and the care
For hereof ben there maked books twelve
But let be this, and tell me how ye fare
Do way your barbe, and show your face bare
Do way your book, rise up and let us dance
And let us done to May some obseruaunce
Eygh, god forbid (quod she) be ye mad
Is that a wydowes life, so god you save
By god ye maken me right sore adrad
Ye ben so wild, it seems as ye rave
It sat me well bet aye in a cave
To bide, and read in holy saints lives
Let maidens gone to dau^ce, and young wives
As ever thryue I (quod this Pandarus)
Yet could I tell a thing, to done you play
Now uncle dear (quod she) tell it us
For gods love, is then thassiege aweye
I am of greeks ferde, so that I deye
Nay nay (quod he) as ever mote I thryue
It is a thing well bet then such live
Yea holy god (quod she) what thing is that
what bet then such five? eygh nay ywys
For all this world, ne can I reden what
It should ben, some iape I trow it is
And but your seluen tell us what it is
My wit is for to arede it all to leene
As help me god, I not what that ye meene
And I your borowe, ne never shall (quod he)
This thing be told to you, as mote I thryue
And why uncle mine, why so (quod she)
By god (quod he) that woll I tell as blyue
For prouder woman is there none on live
And ye it wyste, in all the town of Troy
I iape not, so ever have I joy
Tho began she wondren more then before
A thousand fold, and down her eyes cast
For never sith the time that she was bore
To known thing, desired she so fast
And with a syke, she said him at the last
Now uncle mine, I nyll you not dysplese
Nor asken more, that may do you dysese
So after this, with many words glade
And friendly tales, and with merry chere
Of this and that they speak, and gonnen wade
In many an uncouth glad and deep matere
As friends done, when they bethe yfere
Till she began asken him how Hector ferde
That was the towns wall, and greeks yerde
Full well I thank it god, said Pandarus
Save in his arm he has a little wound
And eke his fresh brother Troylus
The wise worthy Hector the second
In whom that every virtue list habounde
As all troth, and all gentylnesse
wisdom, honor, fredom, and worthynesse
In good faith eme (quod she) that lyketh me
They faren well, god save hem both two
For truelych, I hold it great deynte
A kings son in arms well to do
And be of good conditions thereto
For great power, and moral virtue here
Is selde ysene in one person yfere
In good faith that is soth (quod Pandarus)
But by my troth, ye king has sons twey
That is to mean, Hector and Troylus
That certainly though that I should dey
They ben as void of vices, dare I sey
As any men that lyuen under son
Her might is wide yknow, and what they co^ne
Of Hector needs it no more for to tell
In all this world, there nys a better knight
Then he that is of worthynes the well
And he well more virtue has then might
This knows many a wise and worthy knit
The same pryse of Troylus I sey
God help me so, I know not such twey
By god (quod she) of Hector that is soth
Of Troylus the same thing trow I
For dredelesse, men tells that he does
In arms day by day, so worthily
And bears him here at home so gentilly
To every wight, that all pryse has he
Of hem that me were leuest praised be
Ye say right soth ywys (quod Pandarus)
For yesterday, who so had with him ben
Might have wondered upon Troylus
For never yet so thycke a swarm of been
Ne flewe, as greeks fro him began fleen
And through the feld in every wyghtes eere
There was no cry, but Troylus is there
Now here, now there, he hunted hem so fast
There nas but greeks blood, and Troylus
Now hem he hurt, and him al down he cast
Aye where he went it was arrayed thus
He was her death, and shield and life for us
That as yt day, there durst him none wtsto^de
while yt he held his blody sword in hand
Vherto he is the frendlyest man
Of great estate, that ever I saw my live
And where him list, best fellowship ran
To such as him thinks able for to thryue
And with ye word, tho Pandarus as blyue
He took his leave, and said I woll gone hen
Nay, blame have I uncle (quod she then)
what ayleth you to be thus weary soon
And namelyche of women, woll ye so?
Nay sytteth down, by god I have to done
with you, to speak of wisdom er ye go
And every wight that was about hem tho
That herd that, began far away to stand
while they two had all that hem list in ho^de
when yt her tale al brought was to an end
Of her estate, and of her governance
(Quod Pandarus) now time is yt I wend
But yet I say, aryseth let us dance
And cast your wydowes habyt to mischau^ce
what list you thus your self to dysfygure
Sith you is tydde so glad an adventure
But well bethought, for love of god (quod she)
Shall I not weten what ye mean of this
No, this thing asks leyser tho (quod he)
And eke me would much grieve ywys
If I it told, and ye it took amys
Yet were it bet my tongue to hold still
Then say a soth, yt were against your will
For nece, by the goddess Mynerue
And Jupiter, that makes the tho^der ring
And the blysfull Venus, that I serve
Ye ben the woman in this world living
wythouten paramours, to my wetynge
That I best love, and lothest am to grieve
And that ye weten well your self I leave
Iwys mine uncle (quod she) grant mercy
Your frendshyp have I founden ever yet
I am to no man holden truly
So much as you, and have so little quyt
And with the grace of god, emforth my wit
As in my gylte, I shall you never offend
And if I have er this I woll amend
But for the love of god, I you beseech
As ye be he, that I love most and tryste
Let be to me your fremed manner speech
And say to me your nece, what ye list
And with yt word, her uncle anon her kyst
And said, gladly my leave nece dear
Take it for good, that I shall say you here
with that she began her eyes down to cast
And Pandarus to cough began a lyte
And said: Nece always lo, to the last
How so it be, that some men hem delight
with subtel art her tales for tendyte
Yet for all that in her entencioun
Her tale is all for some conclusioun
And sith the end is every tales strength
And this matter is so behouely
what should I paynt, or drawn on length
To you that been my friend so faithfully
And with that word he began right inwardly
Beholden her, and loken in her face
And said, on such a myrrour good grace
Then thought he thus, if I my tale endyte
Aught hard, or make a process any while
She shall no savor have therein but lyte
And trow I would her in my will begyle
For tender wits wenen all be wyle
where as they can not playnlych understood
For thy her wit to seruen woll I fond
And looked on her in a besy wise
And she was ware that he beheld her so
Ah lord (quod she) so fast ye me auyse
Saw ye me never er now, what say ye no?
Yes yes (quod he) and bet woll er I go
But by my troth I thought now, if ye
Be fortunate, for now men shall it se
For every wight, some goodly adventure
Sometime is shape, if he it can receyuen
But if he nyll take of it no cure
when that it comes, but wilfully it weyuen
Lo, neither case nor fortune him deceyuen
But right his own sloth and wretchydnesse
And such a wight is for to blame I guess
Good adventure, O belle nece have ye
Full lightly founden, and ye conne it take
And for the love of god, and eke of me
Catch it anon, lest adventure flake
what should I longer process of it make
Give me your ho^de for in this world is none
If that you list a wight so well begone
And sith I speak of good ententioun
As I to you have told well here beforne
And love as well your honor and renoun
As any creature in all the world yborne
By all the oaths that I have you sworn
And ye be wroth therefore, or wene I lie
Ne shall I never seen you efte with eye
Beth not aghast, ne quaketh not, whereto
Ne changes not for fear so your hew
For hardely the worst of this is do
And though my tale as now be to you new
Yet trust always, ye shall me find true
And were it thing yt me thought vnsyttyng
To you would I no such tales bring
Now my good eme, for gods love I pray
(Quod she) come of and tell me what it is
For both I am aghast what ye woll say
And eke me longs it to wete ywys
For whether it be well, or be amys
Say on, let me not in this fear dwell
So woll I done, now herkeneth I shall tell
Now nece mine, the kings dear son
The good wise worthy, fresh and free
which always for to done well is his won
The noble Troylus so loves the
That but ye help it woll his barte be
Lo here is all, what should I more sey
Does what you list, to make him live or dey
But if ye let him dye, I woll steruen
Have here my troth, nece I nyl not lain
Al should I with this knyfe my throat kerue^
with that the teeres burst out of his eyes
And said, if that ye done us both dyen
Thus gyltlesse, then have ye fyshed fair
what mende ye, though yt we both apayre
Alas, he which that is my lord so dear
That true man, that noble gentle knight
That naught desires, but your frendlye chere
I se him dyen, there he goth upright
And hastes him with all his full might
For to ben slain, if his fortune assent
Alas that god you such a beautye sent
If it be so, that ye so cruel be
That of his death you lysteth naught to rech
That is so true and worthy as we se
No More than of a iaper or a wretch
If ye be such, your beauty may not stretch
To make a mendes of so cruel a deed
Auysement is good before the need.
woe worth the fair Geme vertulesse
woe worth that herb also that does no bote
woe worth the beauty that is routhlesse
woe worth ye wight yt trede each under foot
And ye that been of beautye crop and rotte
If therwithall in you ne be no routh
Than is harm ye lyuen by my troth
And also think well, that this is no gaude
For me were lever, thou I and he
were hanged, than I should be his baude
As high as men might on us all yse
I am thine Eme, the shame were to me
As well as the, if that I should assent
Through mine abet, that he thine honor shent
Now understood, for I you naught require
To bind you to him through no behest
Save only that ye make him better chere
Than ye han done er this, and more feast
So that his life saved at the leest
This all and some, and plainly our intent
God help me so, I never other meant
Lo, this request is naught but skyll iwys
Ne dout of reason parde is there none
I set the worst, that ye dreden this
Men would wo^dre to seen him come and gone
Therayenst answer I this anon
That every wight, but he be fool of kind
wol deem it love of friendship in his mind
what, who woll demen though he se a man
To temple gone, that he the images eeteth
Think eke, how well and wisely yt he can
Govern him self, yt he nothing foryeteth
That where he comes he pris and tho^k hi^ gets
And eke thereto he shall com here so seld
what force were it, though all the town be held.
Such love of friends reigns all this town
And wrye you in that mantell euermo
And god so wys be my sauacion
As I have said, your best is to do so
But good nece always to stynt his woe
So let your danger, sugared ben alyte
That of his death ye be not all to wit
Creseyde which yt herd him in this wise
Thought, I shall fele^ what he meneth iwis
Now Eme (quod she) what would ye deuyse?
what is your read, I should done of this?
That is well said (quod he) certain best is
That ye him love again for his loving
As love for love is skylfull guerdonynge
Think eke how elde wastes every hour
In each of you a part of beautye
And therefore er that age the devour
Go love, for old there woll no wight of ye
Let this proverb, a lore unto you be
To late yware, quod bautie, when it past
And elde counts danger at the last
The kings fool is wont to cry loud
wha^ yt him thinks a woman bears her hye
So long mote ye love, and all proud
Till crows feet grow under your eye
And send you than a myrrour in to prye
In which yt ye may se your face a morrow
Nece, I bid wysh you no more sorrow
with this he stynt, and cast down the heed
And she began to breast a weep anon
And said alas for woe, why nere I deed
For of this world, the faith is all agone
Alas, what shulden strange to me done
when he that for my best friend I wend
Rate me to laue, and should it me defend.
Alas, I would have trusted doutlesse
That if that I, through my disaduenture
Had loved either him or Achilles
Hector, or any manner creature
Ye nolde have had no mercy ne measure
On me, but always had me in repreue
This false world alas who may it leave?
what? is this all the joy and all the feast?
Is this your read? is this my blysful caas?
Is this the very mede of your behest?
Is all this painted process said (alas)
Right for this fine, O lady mine Pallas
Thou in this dredefull case for me purueye
For so astonyed am I, that I dye.
with that she began full sorowfully to syke
Ne may it be no bet (quod Pandarus)
By god I shall no more come here this weke
And god toforne, that am mystrusted thus
I se well now, ye setten light of us
Or of our death, alas I woeful wretch
Might he yet live, of me were naught to retche.
O cruel god, O dispytous Mart
O suries three of hell, on you I cry
So let me never out of this house depart
If that I meant harm or vyllanye
But sith I se my lord mote needs dye
And I with him here I me shryue and sey
That wyckedly ye done us both dey
But sith it lyketh you that I be deed
By Neptunus that god is of the sea
Fro this forth shall I never eten breed
Till I mine own heart blood may se
For certain I woll dye as soon as he
And up he stert, and on his way he raught
Till she again him by the lap caught.
Creseyde, which ye welnygh starfe for fear
So as she was the fearfullest wight
That might be and herd eke with her care
And saw the sorrowful ernest of the knight
And in his prayer saw eke none unright
And for the harm eke that might fall more
She began to rewe, and dred her wonder sore
And thought this, vnhappes fallen thycke
All day for love, and in such manner caas
As men ben cruel in hem self and wicke
And if this man slay here him self alaas
In my presence, it nyl be no solace
what men would of it deem, I can not say
It needs me full slyghly for to play
And with a sorrowful sygh she said thrye
Ah lord, what me is tyd a sorry chance
For mine astate lies in a ieopardye
And eke mine emes life lies in balaunce
But nathelesse, with gods governance
I shall so done, mine honor shall I keep
And eke his life, and stynt for to weep
Of harms two, the less is for to chese
Yet had I lever maken him good chere
In honor, than mine emes life to lose
Ye said ye nothing else me requere?
No wys (quod he) mine own nece dear
Now well (quod she) and I will do my pain
I shall mine heart again my lust constrayne
But yt I nyll not holden him in hand
Ne love a man, that can I naught ne may
Against my will, but else wol I fond
Mine honor save, plese^ him from day today
Thereto nolde I not ones have said nay
But that I dred, as in my fantasye
But cesse cause, aye cesseth maladye.
But here I make a protestation
That in his process if ye deper go
That certainly, for no sauacion
Of you, though that ye steruen both two
Though all the world on a day be my so
Ne shall I never on him have other routh
I grant well (quod Pandare) by my troth.
But may I trust well to you (quod he)
That of this thing yt ye han hight me here
Ye woll it hold truly unto me
yea doutlesse (quod she) mine uncle dear
Ne that I shall have cause in this matere
(Quod he) to plain, or ofter you to preche
why no parde, what needs more speech.
Tho fill they in other tales glade
Till at the last, O good eme (quod she tho)
For love of god which that us both made
Tell me how first ye wysten of his woe
wot none of it but ye, he said no
Can he well speak of love (quod she) I prey
Tell me, for I the bet me shall puruey
Tho Pandarus a lyte began to smyle
And said: By my troth I shall now tell
This other day not gone full long while
within the paleyes garden by a well
Began he and I, well half a day to dwell
Right for to speken of an ordinance
How we the Greeks mitghten disauaunce.
Soon after that we gone for to lepe
And casten with our darts two and fro
Till at the last he said, he would sleep
And on the grass adowne, he laid him tho
And I after began to romen to and fro
Till that I herd, as I walked alone
How he began full woefully to groan
Tho began I stalk him softly behind
And sekerly the soth for to said
As I can clepe again now to my mind
Right thus to love he began him for to plain
He said lord, have routh upon my pain
All have I ben rebel in mine intent
Now (Men culpa) Lord I me repent
O god, that at thy disposition
Ledest the fine, by just purueyaunce
Of every wight, my low confession
Accept in gree, and send me such penance
As lyketh the, but from disesperaunce
That may my ghost depart always fro the
Thou be my shylde for thy benignity.
For certes lord so sore has she me wounded
That stood in black: with lokyng of her eye^
That to my hertes botom it is yfounded
Through which I wot yt I mot needs dyen
This is ye worst, I dar me naught bewreye^
And well the hoter ben the gledes red
That men hem wren with ashen pale and deed.
with that he smot his heed adowne anon
And began to muttre, I not what truly
And I with that began still away to gone
And let thereof, as nothing wist had I
And came again anon and stood him by
And said awake, ye slepen all to long
It seems naught yt love does you wrong.
That slepen so, that noma^ may you awake
whosey ever or this, so dull a man
Ye friend (quod he) do ye your heedes ache
For love, and let me lyuen as I can
But lord that he for woe was pale and wan
Yet made he tho as fresh a countenance
As though he should have led the new dau^ce
This passed forth, till now this other day
It fell that I come runnyng all alone
Into his chamber, and found how yt he lay
Upon his bed: but man so sore groan
Ne herd I never and what was his moan
Ne wist I naught, for as I was coming
Al suddenly, he left his complaynyng
Of which I took somewhat suspectioun
And nere I come, and found him weep sore
And god so wise be my sauatioun
As never of thing had I no routh more
For neither with engyn, ne with no lore
Uneaths might I fro the death him keep
That yet feel I mine heart for him weep
And god wot never sith that I was borne
was I so busy noman for to preche
Ne never was to wight so deep sworn
Er he told who might ben his leche
But now to you rehersen all his spech
Or al his woeful words for to sown
Ne bid me nout, but ye woll se me swon
But for to save his life, and else naught
And to non harm of you, thus am I driven
And for ye love of god that us has wrout
Such chere him does, that he and I may liue^
Now have I plat to you mine heart shryue^
And sith ye wot that mine intent is clean
Take heed thereof, for none evil I mean
And rit good thrift, I pray to god have ye
That han such one ycaught withouten net
And be ye wise, as ye be fair to se
well in the ring, than is the Ruby set
There were never two so well ymet
when ye ben his all hole, as he is your
There mighty god yet grant us se that hour
Nay thereof spoke I not: Aha (quod she)
As help me god, ye shenden every dele
A mercy dear nece, anon (quod he)
whatso I spoke I meant naught but well
By Mars the god, that helmed is of stele
Now beth not wroth my blod, my nece dear
Now well (quod she) foryeuen be it here.
with this he took his leave, and home he went
yea lord how he was glad, and well bygon
Creseyde arose, and longer she ne stent
But straight into her closet went anon
And set her down, as still as any stone
And every word began up and down to wind
That he had said, as it came her to mind.
And woxe somdele astoned in her thought
Right for the new case, but when yt she
was full auysed, tho found she right nout
Of peril, why that she ought aferde be
For man may love of possibility
A woman so his heart may to breast
And she not love again, but if her lest
But as she sat alone, and thought thus
Thascrye arose at scarmoche al without
And men cried in the street, se Troylus
Has right now put to flight you greeks rout
with that gonne al her meyne for to shoute
A, go we se, cast up the yates wide
For through this street he mot to palys ride
For other way is fro the yates none
Of dardanus there open is the cheyne
with that come he, and al his folk anon
An easy pace rydyng, in routes tweyne
Right as his happy day was sothe to seyne
For which men says may not disturbed be
That shall betyde of necessyte
This Troylus sat on his baye stead
Al armed save his heed, full ry^^ely
And wounded was his horse, and began to blede
On which he rode a pace full softely
But such a knyghtly sight trewly
As was on him, was not withouten fail
To look on Mars, that god is of battle
So like a man of arms, and a knight
He was to seen, fulfilled of high prowess
For both he had a body, and might
To don that thing, as well as hardynesse
And eke to seen him in his gear dress
So fresh, so young, so weldy seemed he
It was an heaven upon him for to se
His helm to hewn was in twenty places
That by a tyssue honge, his back behind
His shield to dasshed with swerdes and with maces
In which men might many an arowe find
That thyrled had horn, nerfe and rynde
And aye the people cried here comes our joy
And next his brother, holder up of Troy
For which he wext a little reed for shame
when he so herd the people upon him cryen
That to be hold, it was a noble game
How sobrelych he cast adowne his eyes
Cresceyde anon began all his chere espyen
And let it so soft in her heart synke
That to her self she said, who yaue me drink?
For all her own thought, she wore all red
Remembryng her right thus, lo this is be
which yt mine uncle swereth he mot be deed
But I on him have mercy and pytie
And with yt thought for pure ashamed she
Began in her heed to pull, and that as fast
while he and all the people forth by past
And began to cast, and rollen up and down
within her thought his excellent prowess
And his estate, and also his renown
His wit, his shap, and eke his gentyllesse
But most her favor was for his distress
was al for her, and thought it were a routh
To sleen such one, if that he meant truth.
Now might some enuyous iangle thus
This was a sodayn love, how might it be
That she so lightly loved Troylus
Right for the first sight: yea parde
Now whosoever said so, mote he never the
For every thing a gynnyng has it need
Er al be wrought, withouten any dread
For I say not, that she so suddenly
Yafe him her love, but that she began enclyne
To lyken him tho, and I have told you why
And after that, his manhod and his pyne
Made that love within her began to mine
For which by process, and by good service
He wan her love, and in no sudden wise.
And also blysfull Venus well arrayed
Sat in her seventh house of heaven tho
Disposed well, and with aspectes paid
To help sely Troylus of his woe
And soth to said, she nas not al a fo
To Troylus in his nativity
God wot, that well the sooner sped he
Now let us stynt of Troylus a throw
That rydeth forth, and let us turn fast
Unto Creseyde, yt henge her heed full low
There as she sat alone, and began to cast
whereon she would apoynt her at the last
If it so were, her Eme ne would cesse
For Troylus, upon her for to press
And lord so she began in her thought argue
In this matter of which I have you told
And what to don best were, and what to eschew
That plyted she full often in many sold
Now was her heart warm, now was it cold
And what she thought, so^what shall I write
As mine author lysteth for tendyte
She thought first, that Troylus person
She knew by sight, and eke his gentelnesse
And thus she said, al were it naught to don
To grant him love, yet for his worthynes
It were honor with play and with gladness
In honesty, with such a lord to dele
For mine estate, and also for his heal
Eke well wot I, my kings son is he
And sith he has to se me such delight
If I would vtterlyche his sight fly
Peradventure he might have me in despite
Through which I mit sto^d in worse plyte
Now were I wise, me bate to purchase
without need, there I may stand in grace.
In every thing, I wot there lies mesure
For though a man forbid dronkenesse
He naught forbyddeth that every creature
Be d^^nlesse for always as I guess
Eke sith I wot for me is his distress
I ne ought not for that thing him despise
Sith it is so, he means in good wise
And eke I know, of long time agone
His thewes good, and that he nys not nyce
No vauntour said men, certain he is non
To wise is he, to done so great a vice
Ne als I nyl him never so cherice
That he shall make auaunt by just cause
He shall me never bind in such a clause
Now set I case, the hardest is iwys
Men might demen that he loves me
what dishonor were it unto me this?
May iche him let of that, why nay parde?
I know also, and always here and se
Men louen women all this town about
Be they the werse* why nay without dout?
I think eke how, he worthy is to have
Of all this noble town the thryftyest
That woman is, if she her honor save
For out and out he is the worthyest
Save only Hector, which that is the best
And yet his life lies al now in my cure
But such is love, and eke mine adventure.
Ne me to love a wondre is it naught
For well wot I my self so god me speed
All woll I that none wist of this thought
I am one the fairest out of dread
And goodlyest, whosoever that takes head
And so men said in all the town of Troy
what wonder is: though he of me have joy.
I am mine own woman well at ease
I thank it god, as after mine estate
Right young, and stond untied in lusty lose
withouten ielousye and such debate
Shall no husbond said to me check mate
For either they ben full of ielousye
Or masterfull, or louen nouelry
what shall I don? to what fine live I thus
Shall I not love, in case if that me lest?
what pardieux I am not religious
And though that I mine heart set at rest
Upon this knight that is the worthyest
And keep always mine honor and my name
By all right it may do me no shame
But right as when the son shyneth bright
In March, yt changes often time his face
And that a cloud is put with wind to flight
which ouersprat the son, as for a space
A cloudy thought ga^ through her soul pace
That ouersprad her bright thoughts all
So that for fear almoost she began to fall
That thout was this: Alas sith I am fre
Sulde I now love, and put in ieopardye
My sykernesse, and thrallen lybertye
Alas, how durst I thynken that follye?
May I not well in other folk aspye
Her dredful joy, her constreynt and her pain
There loves non, that she ne has way to plain.
For love is yet the most stormy life
Right of him self, that ever was begone
For ever some mystrust, or nyce strife
There is in love some cloud over the sun
Thereto we wretched women nothing co^
when us is woe, but weep and sit and think
Our wrech is this, our own woe to drink
Also wicked tongues been so pressed
To speak us harm, eke men be so untrue
That right anon as cessed is her lest
So cesseth love, and forth to love anewe
But harm ydo is done, whosoever it rewe
For thou these me^ for love hem first to re^de
Full sharp beginning breketh often at end
How often time may men read and seen
The treson that to women has be do?
To what fine is such love I can not seen
Or where becomes it, when it is go
There is no wight that wot I trow so
where it becomes, lo, no wit on it sporneth
That erst was nothing, into naught tourneth
How besy (if I love) eke must I be
To plesen hem, that iangle of love, and demen
And coyen hem, that they say no harm of me
For though there be no cause, yet hem semen
Al be for harm yt folk her friends quemen
And who may stoppen every wicked tongue
Or sown of bells while yt they ben ronge?
And after that her thought began for to clear
And said, he which yt nothing undertakes
Nothing acheueth, be him loath or dear
And with an other though her heart quaketh
Tha^ slepeth hope, and after dread awaketh
Now hot now cold but thus betwixe^ twey
She rysle her up, and went her to pley
Adowne the stayre anonryght tho she went
Into her gardyn with her neces three
And up and down they made^ many a went
Flexippe and she, Tarbe, and Antigone
To playen, that it joy was to se
And other of her women a great route
Her followed in the garden all about.
This yerd was large, and rayled all the aleyes
and shaddowed well, with blosomy bows grene
And benched new, and so^ded all the ways
In which she walks arm in arm between
Till at the last Antigone the shene
Began on a Troyan song to syngen clear
That it an heaven was her voice to hear
She said: O love, to whom I have, and shall
Ben humble subject, true in mine intent
As I best can, to you lord give yche all
For evermore my hertes lust to rent
For never yet thy grace no wight sent
So blysfull cause as me, my life to lead
In all joy and surety out of dread.
The blysful god has me so well beset
In love iwys, that all that bears life
Ymagynen ne could how to be bet
For lord withouten ielousye or strife
I love one, which that most is ententyfe
To seruen well, vntweryly or unfeigned
That ever was and lest with harm distayned
As he that is the well of worthynesse
Of troth ground, myrrour of godlyheed
Of wit Apollo, stone of sykernesse
Of virtue root, of lust fynder and heed
Through which is all sorrow fro me deed
Ywys I love him best, so does he me
Now good thrift have he, whersoeuer he be
whom should I tha^ken but you god of love
Of all this bliss, in which to bath I gynne
And thanked be ye lord, for that I love
This is the right life that I am in
To flemen al manner vice and sin
This does me so to virtue for to entende
That day by day I in my will amend
And who that says ye for to love is vice
Or thraldom, though he felt in it distress
He either is enuyous, or right nyce
Or is vnmyghty for his shreudnesse
To louen, for such manner folk I guess
Diffamen love, as nothing of him know
They speken, but they bent never his bow
what is the son worse of kind right?
Though yt a man for feblenesse of his eyes
May not endure on it to se for bright
Or love the worse, that wretches on it cryen
No well is worth, yt may no sorrow dryen
And for thy, who that has a heed of verre
Fro cast of stones ware him in the werre
But with all mine heart and al my might
As I have said, wol love unto my last
My dear heart, and all mine own knight
In which mine heart grown is so fast
And his in me, that it shall ever last
All dredde I first love him to begin
Now wot I well there is no peril in.
And of her song right with the word she stent
And therwithal, now nece (quod Creseyde)
who made this song, now with so good intent
Antygone answerde anon, and said
Madame ywys the goodlyest maid
Of great estate in all the town of Troy
And led her life in most honor and joy
For soth so seems it by her song
Quod tho Creseyde, and began therwtih to sike
And said: Lord is there such bliss among
These lovers, as they can fair endite
Yea wysse quod fresh Antygone the white
For all the folk that have or been on live
Ne conne well the bliss of love discryue
But wene ye that every wretch wot
The parfyte bliss of love, why nay ywys
They wenen al be love, if one be hot
Do way do way, they wot nothing of this
Men mote asken of saints, if it is
Ought fair in heaven, and why? for they can tell
And ask fendes, if it be foul in hell
Creseide unto the purpose naught answerde
But said, ywys it wol be night as fast
But every word, which that she of her herd
She began to printen in her heart fast
And aye began love her less for to agaste
Than it did erst, and synken in her heart
That she wax somewhat able to convert
The days honor, and the heuens eye
The night foe, al this clepe I the sun
Began westren fast, and downwarde for to wrie
As he that had his days course yrunne
And white things woxen dymme and done
For lack of light, and sterres for to apere
That she and al her folk in went yfere
So when it lyked her to gone to rest
And voyded weren they that voyden ought
She said, that to slepen well her lest
Her women sone till her bed her brought
wha^ al was hust, tha^ lay she still and thought
Of al this thing the manner and the wise
Reherce it needs not, for ye been wise
A nyghtyngale upon a Cedre grene
Under the chamber wall, there as she lay
Full loud song again the moon shene
Parauenture in his birds wise a lay
Of love, that made her heart fresh and gaye
That herkened she so long in good entente
Till at the last the deed sleep her hente
And as she slept, anon right tho her met
How that an Egle fethered white as bone
Under her breast his long claws set
And out her heart he rent, and that anon
And did his heart in to her breast to gone
of which she naught agrose, ne nothing smert
And forth he flies, with heart left for heart
Now let her sleep, and we our tales hold
Of troylus, that is to paleys rydden
Fro the scarmyshe of which I told
And in his chamber sat, and has abydden
Till two or three of his messangers yeden
For Pandarus, and soughten him full fast
Till they him found, and brought him at ye last
This Pandarus came leapyng in at ones
And said thus, who has been well ybete
To day with swerdes, and slonge stones
But Troylus, that has caught him an hete
And began to iape, and said, Lord ye sweet
But rise and let us soupe, and go to rest
And he answerde him, do we as the least
with all the have goodly as they might
They spedde hem fro the souper, and to bed
And every wight out of the door him dyght
And whyder him list, upon his way him sped
But Troylus thought that his heart bledde
For woe, till that he herd some tydynge
And said friend, shall I now weep or sing
(Quod Pandarus) be still and let me sleep
And do on thine hoode, thy needs spedde be
And chese if thou wolt sing, dance, or lepe
At short words thou shalt trow me
Sir, my nece wol done well by the
And love the best, by god and by my truth
But lack of pursuit make it in thy slouthe
For thus forforth I have thy work begone
Fro day to day, till this day by the morrow
Her love of frendshyp have I to the won
and therefore has she laid her faith to borow
Algate a foot is hameled of thy sorrow
what should I longer sermon of it hold
As ye have herd before, al he him told
But right as flowers through the cold of night
I closed, stoupen in her stalks low
Redressen hem again the sun bright
And spreden in her kind course by row
Right so began tho his eyes up to throw
This Troylus, and said: O Venus dear
Thy might thy grace, yheryed be it here
And to Pa^darus he held up both his ho^des
And said, lord al thine be that I have
For I am hole, and brosten ben my bonds
A thousand Troyes, who so that me yaue
Each after other, god so wys me save
Ne might me so gladen, lo mine heart
It spredeth so for joy it wol to sterte
But lord how shall I don? how shall I lyuen
when shall I next my dear heart se?
How shall this long time away be driven?
Till that thou be again at her fro me
Thou may answer, abide abide: but he
That hangs by the neck: soth to said
In great disease abides for the pain
Al easily now, for the love of Mart
(quod Pa^darus) for every thing has time
So long abide, till that the night depart
For all so syker as thou lie here by me
And god to forne, I wol be there at prime
And for thy work somewhat, as I shall say
Or on some other wight this charge lay
For parde god wot, I have ever yet
Ben ready the to serve, and this night
Have I not feigned, but emforth my wit
Done al thy lust, and shall with all my might
Do now as I shall said, and fare aryght
And if thou nylt, wit al thy self thy care
On me is naught alonge thine yuel fare
wot well that thou wyser art than I
A thousand fold: but if I were as thou
God help me so, as I would utterly
Right of mine own hand write her now
A lettre, in which I would her tellen how
I farde amysse, and her beseech of routh
Now help thy self, and leave it for no sloth
And I my self shall therwyth to her gone
And wha^ thou woste yt I am with her there
worth thou up on a courser right anon
Ye hardely, right in thy best gere
And ride forth by yt place, as naught ne were
And thou shall find us (if I may) syttyng
At some wyndowe, in to the street lokyng
And if the list, than may thou us salve
And upon me make thou thy countenance
But by thy life beware, and fast eschew
to taryen ought, god shyld us fro mischau^ce
Ride forth thy way and hold thy governance
And we shall speak of the somewhat I trow
when thou art gone, to do thyn ceres glowe
Touching thy lettre thou art wise enough
I wot thou nylte it deignelyche endyte
As makes it with these arguments tough
Ne scryueynyshe or craftily thou it write
Bebiotte it with thy teeres eke alyte
And thou write a goodly word al ^ofte
Though it be good, reherce it not to often
For though the best harpour upon live
would on the best sowned ioly harp
That ever was, with al his fyngers five
Touch aye o string, or aye o warble harp
were his nails poynted never so sharp
It should make every wight to dull
To here his gle, and of his strokes full
Ne iombre eke no discordans thing y^e^e
As thus, to vsen terms of physyke
In loves terms hold of thy matere
The form always, and do that it be like
For if a peyntour would paynte a pyke
with asses fete, and heeded as an ape
It cordeth not, so were it but a iape
This counsel, lyked well unto Troylus
But as a dredeful lover, he said this
Alas my dear brother Pandarus
I am ashamed for to write ywys
Lest of mine innocence I said amys
Or that she nolde it for dispyte receive
tha^ were I deed, there might nothing weyue
To that Pandare answerde, if the lest
Do that I say, and let me therwyth gone
For by that lord that formed eest and west
I hope of it to bring answer anon
Right of her hand, and if that thou nylt non
Let be, and sorry mote he ben his live
Against thy lust, that helps the to thryue
(Quod Troylus) depardieur yche assent
Sith that the list, I wol arise and write
And blysful god pray yche with good intent
The vyage and the lettre I shall endyte
So speed it, and thou Mynerua the white
Give thou me wit, my lettre to deuyse
and set him down, and wrote right in this wise
First he began her his right lady cast
His hertes life, his lust, his sorrows leche
His bliss, and eke these other terms all
That in such case ye lovers al seche
And in full humble wise, as in his speech
He began him reco^maunde unto her grace
To tell al how, it asks mokel space
And after this full lowly he her prayde
To be naught wroth, though he of his folly
So hardy was to her to write, and said
That love it made, or else must he dye
And pitously began mercy for to cry
And after that he said, and lied full loud
Him self was little worth, and less he could
And that she would have his co^ning excused
That little was and eke he drede^h: ^o
And his unworthiness aye he acu^^d
And after that than began he tell his woe
But that was endelesse wythouten ho
And said, he would in troth alwey him hold
And read it over, and began the lettre fold
And with his salt teeres began he bath
The Ruby in his Signet, and it set
Upon the were deliuerlyche and rath
Therewith a thousand times, er he let
He kyste tho the lettre that he shette
And said, lettre a blysful destyne
The shapen is, my lady shall the se
This Pandare took the lettre, and that betime
A morrow, and to his neces paleys sterte
And fast he swore, that it was passed prime
And began to iape, and sa^d: ywys mine heart
So fresh it is, although it sore smerte
I may not sleep never a Mayes morrow
I have a ioly woe, a lusty sorrow
Creseyde, when that she her uncle herd
with dredeful heart, and desirous to here
The cause of his coming, thus answerde
Now by your faith my^^e uncle (quod she) dear
what manner wyndes gydeth you now here
Tell us your ioly woe, and your penance
How ferforth be ye put in loves dance
By god (quod he) I hope always behind
And to laugh, it thought her heart breast
(Quod Pa^darus) look always that ye find
Game in mine hood, but herkeneth if you lest
There is right now come in to ye town a gest
A greek espy, and tells new things
For which I come to tell you new tidings
In to the gardyn go we, and ye shall here
Al preuely of this a long sermoun
with that they wente^ arm in arm yfere
In to the gardyn fro the chamber down
And when he was so far, that the soun
Of that he spoke, no man heren might
He said her thus, and out the lettre plyght
Lo, he that is al holy yours free
Him reco^mendeth lowly to your grace
And sent you this lettre here by me
Auyseth you on it, when ye han space
And of some goodly answer you purchase
Or help me god so, plainly for to said
He may not long lyuen for his pain
Full dredefully tho began she stand still
And took it not, but al her humble chere
Began for to change, and said scripte nor byl
For love of god, that touches such matere
Ne bring me none, and also uncle dear
To mine estate have more regard I pray
Than to his lust, what should I more say
And looks now if this be reasonable
And lets not for favor ne for sloth
To said a soth, now it is couenable
To mine estate, by god and by my troth
To take it, or to have of him routh
In harmyng of my self, or in repreue
Bear it again, for him that ye on leave
This Pandarus began on her for to stare
And said, now is this the greatest wonder
That ever I saw, let be this nyce fare
To death mote I smytten be with thonder
If for the city, which stands yonder
would I a lettre unto you bring or take
To harm of you: what list you thus it make
But thus ye faren well nyghe al and some
That he that most desires you to serve
Of him ye retche lest where he become
And whether that he leave, or else sterue
But for all that, that ever I may deserve
Refuse it not (quod he) and hente her fast
And in her bosom ye letter dwone he tharste
And said her, now cast it away anon
That folk may tene, and gaurne on us twey
(Quod she) I can abide till they be gone
And began to smyle, and said him, eme I pray
Such answer as you list your self puruey
For trewly I wol no lettre write
No than wol I (quod he) so ye endyte
Therewith she lough, and said go we dyne
And he began at him self iape fast
And said nece, I have so great a pyne
For love, that eueryche other day I fast
And began his best iapes forth to cast
And made her so to laugh at his folly
That she for laughter wend for to dye
And when that she was comen in to the hall
Now eme (quod she) we wol go dyne anon
And began some of her women to her call
And straight in to her chamber began she gone
But of her besynesses this was one
Among other things, out of dread
Full privily this lettre for to read
Auysed word by word in every line
And found no lack, she thought he could his good
And up it put and went her in to dyne
And Pandarus, that in a stodye stood
Er he was ware, she took him by the hoode
And said, ye were caught er that ye wyste
I vouchesafe (quod he) do what you list
Tho wysshen they, and set hem down and ete
And after noone full slyghly Pandarus
Ga^ draw him to ye wyndowe nigh the street
And said nece, who has arrayed thus
The yonder house, that stante aforyeue us
which house (quod she) and began for to behold
And knew it well, and who it was him told
And fellen forth in speech of things small
And saten in the wyndowe both twey
when Pandarus saw time unto his tale
And saw well that her folk were al away
Now nece mine tell on (quod he) I pray
How like you the letttre that ye wot
Can he thereon, for by my troth I not
Therwyth al rosy hewed tho woxe she
And began to him, and said, so I trow
Aquyte him well for gods love (quod he)
My self to medes wol the lettre sow
And held his hands up, and sat on know
Now good nece, be it never so lyte
Give me the labor, it to sow and plyte
Yea, for I can so written (quod she) tho
And eke I not what I should to him say
Nay nece (quod Pandare) say not so
Yet at the lest, thonketh him I pray
Of his good will: O, does him not to dey
Now for the love of me my nece dear
Refuses not at this time my prayere
Depardieux (quod she) god leave all be well
God help me so, this is the first lettre
That ever I wrote, ye al or any dele
And in to a closet for to advise her bettre
She w^nt alone, and began her heart vn^e^tte
Out of ^^daynes prison, but a lyte
And se^^e down, and began a lettre write
Of which to tell in short is mine intent
Theffecte, as far as I can understand
She thanked him, of all that he well meant
Toward her, but holden him in hand
She would not make her seluen bond
In love, but as his sister him to plese
She would aye same, to done his heart an ese
She shette it, and to Pandare in to gone
There as he sat, and looked in to street
And down she set her by him on a stone
Of iaspre, upon a quyshen of gold ybete
And said, as wisely help me god the great
I never did a thing with more pain
Than write this, to which ye me co^strayne
And took it him: He thanked her, and said
God wot of thing full often loath begone
Comes end good and nece mine Creseyde
That ye to him of hard now been ywonne
Ought he be glad, by god and yonder son
For why, men says impressions light
Full lightly ben aye ready to the flight
But ye han played the tyrant al to long
And hard was it your heart for to grave
Now stynt that ye no longer on it honge
Al wolden ye the form of danger save
But hastes you to done him joy have
For trusts well, to long ydone hardness
Causes dispyte full often for distress
And right as they declared this matere
Lo Troylus, right at the streets end
Came rydyng with his tenthe so^me yfere
Al softely, and thyderwarde began bend
There as they sat, as was his way to wend
To paleys ward, And Pandare him aspide
And said, nece I se who comes here ride
O, fly not in, he sethe us I suppose
Lest he may thynken that ye him eschew
Nay nay (quod she) and woxe as red as rose
with that he began her humbly salve
with dredful chere, and often his hewes mue
And up his look debonairly he cast
And becked on Pandare, and forth by paste
God wot if he sat on his horse aryght
Or goodly was besene that ylke day
God wot where he were like a ma^ly knight
what should I dretche, or tell of his array
Creseyde, which that all these things say
To tell in short, her lyked al yfere
His person, his array, his look, his chere
His goodly manner, and his gentyllesse
So well, that never sith that she was borne
Ne had she such routh of his distress
And how so, she has hard ben here beforne
to god hope I, she has now caught a thorn
She shall not pull it out this next wyke
God send mo such thorns on to pyke
Pandare, which that stood her fast by
Felt iron hot, and he began to smite
And said, nece I pray you hertely
Tell me that I shall asken you alyte
A woman that were of his death to white
withoute^ his gift, but for her lack of routh
were it well done (quod she) nay by my troth
God help me so (quod he) ye say me soth
Ye felen well your self that I naught lie
Lo, yonder he rydeth (quod she) ye so he does
well quod Pandare, as I have told you thrie
Let be your nyee shame, and your folly
And speak with him, in eysyng of his heart
Let nycete not do you both smerte
But thereon was to heaven and to done
Consydryng althyng, it may not be
And why? for shame, and it were eke to sone
To graunten him so great a liberte
For plainly her intent, as (said she)
was for to love him vnwyst, if she might
And guerdon him with nothing but with sight
But Pandare thought, it shall not be so
If that I may, this nyce opinyon
Shall not ben holden fully years two
what should I make of this a long sermon?
He must assent on that conclusion
As for the time, and when that it was eve
And al was well, he rose and took his leave
And on his way fast homwarde he sped
And right for joy he felt his heart dance
And Troylus he found alone abed
That lay, as done these lovers in a trance
Betwixen hope and derke disesperaunce
But Pandare, right at his in coming
He song as who says, lo, somewhat I bring
And said, who is in his bed so sone
yburyed thus? it am I friend (quod he)
who Troylus? nay, help me so the moon
(quod Pandarus) thou shall up rise and se
A charm that was sent right now to the
The which can healen the of thine axesse
If thou do forthwith al thy business
Ye through the might of god (quod Troylus)
And Pandarrus began him the lettre take
And said, parde god has helped us
Have here a light, and look on al these blake
But often began the heart glade and quake
Of Troylus, while he it began to read
So as the words yaue him hope or dread
But finally he took al for the best
That she him wrote for somewhat he beheld
on which he thought he might his heart rest
Al covered she the words under shield
Thus to the more worthy part he held
That what for hope, and Pa^darus beheste
His great woe foryede he at the least
But as we may al day our seluen se
Through wood or cool the more fire
Right so increase of hoope, of what it be
Therwyth he full often increases eke desire
Or as an oak comes of a little spyre
so through this lettre, which yt she him sent
Encreasen began desire of which he brent
wherefore I say always, that day and night
This Troylus began to desyren, more
Than he did erste through hoope, and did his might
To preaso^ on, as by Pa^darus lore
And written to her of his sorrows sore
Fro day to day, he let it naught refreyde
That by Pa^dare he somewhat wrote or seid
And did also his other obseruaunces
That till a lover longs in this caas
And after that his dyce turned on chances
So was he either glad, or said alas
And held after his gestes aye his paas
And after such answers, as he had
So were his days sorry either glad
But to Pa^dare was always his recours
And pytously began aye on him to plain
And him besought of read, and some socours
And Pa^darus, that saw his wode pain
were well nygh deed for routh, soth to said
And besyly with all his heart cast
Some of his woe to sleen, and that as fast
And said, Lord and friend, and brother dear
God wot that thy disease does me woe
But wylt thou stynten all this woeful chere
And by my troth, er it be days two
And god to forne, yet shall I shape it so
That thou shall come in to a certain place
There as you may thy self prayen for grace
And certainly I not if thou it woste
But they that been expert in love, it say
It is one of the things forthereth most
A man to have a leyser for to pray
And syker place, his woe for to bewray
for in good heart it mote some routh impresse
To here and se the gyltlesse in distress
Paraue^ture think thou, though it be so
That kind would her done for to begin
To have a manner routh upon my woe
Says danger nay, you shall me never win
So rules her hertes ghost within
That though she bend, yet she stont on rote
what in effect is this unto my bote
Think here again, when that the sturdy oak
On which men hacketh often for the nones
Received has the happy falling stroke
The great sweyght does it come all at ones
As done these rocks, or these mylne stones
for swyfter course comes thing yt is of wight
when it discendeth, than done things light.
But read that boweth down for every blast
Full lightly cesse wind, it wol arise
But so nyl not an oak, when it is cast
It needs me naught long the forbyse
Men shall reioysen of a great empryse
Atcheued well, and stant withouten dout
Al have men ben the longer there about
But Troylus, now tell me if the lest
A thing, which that I shall asken the
which is thy brother, that thou love best*
As in thy very hertes preuyte
I wys my brother Diephebus, tho (quod he)
Now (quod Pa^dare) er hours twyse twelve
He shall the case, vnwyst of it him selue
Now let me alone, and worken as I may
(Quod he) and to Deiphebus went he tho
which had his lord, and great friend been aye
Save Troylus no man he loved so
To tell in short, without words mo
(Quod Pandarus) I pray you that ye be
Friend to a cause, which that touches me
Yes parde (quod Deiphebus) well thou wost
All that ever I may, and god to fore
Al nere it but for the man I love most
My brother Troylus, but say wherefore
It is, for sith the day that I was bore
I nas, ne never mo to been I think
Against a thing that might the forthynke
Pa^dare began him thank, and to him said
Lo sir, I have a lady in this town
That is my nece, and called is Creseyd
which some men would done oppressioun
And wrongfully have her possessioun
wherefore I of your lordshyp you beseech
To been our friend, withouten more speech
Deiphebus him answerde: O, is not this
That thou speak of to me thus strau^gely
Creseyde my friend? He said him yes
Then needs (quod Deiphebus) hardely
No More of this to speak, for trusts well yt I
woll be her champion with spore and yerde
I ne rought not though al her foes it herd
But tell me how, for thou wost this matere
I might best auaylen, now let se
(Quod Pandarus) if ye my lord so dear
wolden ^s now do this honor to me
To prayen her to morrow, lo that she
Came unto you, her playntes to deuyse
Her adversaries would of it agryse
And if I more durst pray as now
And chargen you to have so great travail
To have some of your brethren here with you
That myghten to her cause bet avail
Then wot I well she might never fail
For to ben helped, what at your instaunce
what with her other friends governance
Deiphebus which yt comen was of kind
To all honor and bounte to consent
Answerde, it shall be done: And I can find
Yet greater help to this in mine intent
what would you said, if for Heleyne I sent
To speak of this, I trow it be the best
For she may leden Paris as her lest
Of Hector, which yt is my lord my brother
It needs not to pray him friend to be
For I have herd him, o time and eke other
Speken of Creseyde such honor, that he
May ^ayne no bet, such hap to him has she
It needs not his helps more crave
He shall be such, right as we wol him have
Speak thou thy self also to Troylus
On my behalf, and pray him with us dyne
Sir, all this shall be done (quod Pandarus)
And took his leave, and never began to fine
But to his neces house as straight as line
He came, and found her fro the meat arise
And set hi^ down, and spoke right in this wise
He said, O very God, so have I run
Lo nece mine, se ye not how I sweet
I not where ye the more thank me conne
Be ye not ware how false Poliphete
Is now about eftsoon for to plete
And bring on you aduocacies new?
I, no (quod she) and changed al her hew
what is he more about me to dretche
And done me wrong, what shall I don, alas
Yet of him self nothing would I retche
Nere it for Antenor and Eneas
That been his friends in such manner caas
But for the love of god, mine uncle dear
No force of that, let him have all yfere
wythouten that, I have enough for us
Nay (quod Pandare) it shall nothing be so
For I have been right now at Deiphebus
At Hector, and mine other lords mo
And shortly maked each of hem his foe
That by my thryfte, he shall it never win
For ought he can, when so that he begin
And as they casten what was best to done
Deiphebus, of his own curtesye
Came her to pray, in his propre person
To hold him on the morrow company
At dinner, which she nolde not deny
But goodly began to his prayer obey
He thanked her, and went upon his wey
when this was done, this Pa^dare anon
To tell in short, and forth he began to wend
To Troylus, as still as any stone
And al this thing he told him word and end
And how that he Deiphebus began to blende
And said him, now is time if yt ye conne
To bear the well to morrow, and al is won
Now speak, now pray, now pitously co^plain
Let not for nyce shame, dread, or slouthe
Sometime a man mote tell his own pain
Believe it, and she woll have on the routhe
Thou shall ben saved by thy faith in troth
But well wot I, thou now art in a dread
And what it is, I lay that I can arede
Thou think now, how should I don all this
For by my cheres musten folk aspye
That for her love is, that I fare amys
Yet had I lever vnwyst for sorrow dye
Now think not so, for thou do great folly
For I right now have founden a manner
Of sleyght, for to coueren all thy chere
Thou shall gone ouernight, and that bylyue
Unto Deiphebus house, as the to play
Thy maladye away the bet to drive
For which thou semest sick soth for to say
Sone after that, in thy bed the lay
And say thou may no longer up endure
And lie right there, and bide thine aue^ture
Say that thy fever is wo^te the for to take
The same time, and last till a morrow
And let se now how well thou ranst it make
For parde sick is he that is in sorrow
Go now farewell, and Venus here to borowe
I hope and thou this purpose hold ferme
Thy grace she shall fully there conferme
(Quod Troylus) ywys thou nedelesse
Counsaylest me, that sycklyche I me feign
For I am sick in ernest doutlesse
So that well nygh I sterue for the pain
(quod Pandarus) thou shalt the better plain
And haste the less need to counterfete
For him demeth me^ hot, yt sees hem sweet
Lo, hold the at thy tryste close, and I
Shall well the dear unto thy bow drive
Therwyth he took his leave al softely
And Troylus to paleys went blyue
So glad ne was he never in all his live
And to Pandarus read began all assente
And to Deiphebus house at night he went
what needs it you to tellen all the chere
That Deiphebus unto his brother made
Or his axis, or his sycklyche manner
How men gone him with clothes for to lade
when he was laid, and how me^ would him glade
But al for naught, he held forth aye the wise
That ye han herd Pandare er this deuyse
But certain is, er Troylus him leyde
Deiphebus had prayde him ouernyght
To ben a friend, and helping to Creseyde
God wot that he granted anon right
To ben her full friend with all his might
But such a need was it to pray him then
As for to bydde a wood man to run
The morrow came, and neyghen began ye time
Of meal^yde, that the fair queen Heleyne
Shope her to be an hour after pryme
with Deiphebus, to whom she nolde feign
But as his suster, homely soth to said
She came to dinner, in her plain entente
But god and Pa^dare wist al what this mente
Came eke Creseyde all innocent of this
Antygone her nece, and Tarbe also
But slye we now prolixite best is
For love of god, and let us fast go
Right to theffecte wythouten tales mo
why all this folk assembled in this place
And let us of her saluynges pace
Great honor did hem Deiphebus certain
And fed hem well, with all that might like
But euermo alas, was his refrain
My good brother Troylus the syke
Lyth yet, and therwythall he began to syke
And after that he payned him to glade
Hem as he might, and chere good he made
Complained eke Heleyne of his sycknesse
So faithfully that it pity was to here
And every wight began wexen for axes
A leche anon, and said in this manner
Men curen folk, this charm I woll ye lere
But there sat one, all list her not to teache
That thought, yet best could I ben his leche
After co^playnt him gonne^ they to praise
As folk don yet when some wight has bego^
To praise a man, and with praise him raise
A thousand fold yet higher the^ the son
He is, he can, that few lords kon
And Pandarus of that they would afferme
He naught forgot her praysynge to conferme
Herd al this thing Creseyd well enough
And every word began for to notifye
For which with sobre chere her heart lough
For who is that ne would her glorifye
To mowen such a knight done live or dye
But all pass I, lest ye to long dwell
But for to fine is all that ever I tell
The time came fro dinner for to rise
And as hem ought, arysen euerychone
And gone a while of this and that deuyse
But Pandarus brake all this speech anon
And said to Deiphebus, woll ye gone
If your will be, as I you prayde
To speak of the needs of Creseyde
Heleyne, which that by ye hand her held
Took first the tale and said, go we blyue
And goodly on Creseyde she beheld
And said, Jove's let him never thryue
That does you harm, and ryue him sone of live
And ye me sorrow, but he shall it rue
If that I may, and all folk be true
Tell thou thy neces case (quod Deiphebus)
To Pandarus, for thou can best it tell
My lords and my ladies, it stante thus
what should I longer (quod he) do you dwell
He ronge hem out a process like a bell
Upon her foe, that hight Poliphete
So heinous, that men might on it spete
Answered of this each worse of hem the^ other
And Poliphete they gonnen thus to waryen
An honged be such one, were he my brother
And so he shall, for it ne may naught varien
what should I longer in this tale taryen
P^aynlyche all at ones they her hyghten
To ben her friend, in all yt ever they myghten
Spoke then Heleyne, and said Pandarus
wot aught my lord my brother of this matter
I mean Hector, or wot it Troylus
He said yea, but woll ye me now here
Me thinks thus, sith that Troilus is here
It were good, if that ye would assent
She told him her self all this er she went
For he woll have the more her grefe at heart
Because lo, that she a lady is
And by your will, I woll but in right sterte
And do you wete, and that anon ywys
If that he sleep, or woll ought here of this
And in he lepte, and said him in his eere
God have thy soul, brought have I thy bear
To smylen of this began tho Troylus
And Pandarus wythouten reckoning
Out went anon to Heleyne and Deiphebus
And said hem, so there be no taryenge
Ne more prease, he woll well that ye bring
Creseyde my lady, that is here
And as he may enduren, he wol her here
But well ye wot the chamber is but lyte
And few folk may lightly make it warm
Now looks ye, for I woll have no wit
To bring in prease, yt might don him harm
Or him dyseasen, for my better arm
Yet were it bet she bydde till eftsoonis
Now look ye that known what to done is
I say for me best is, as I can know
That no wight in ne wend, but ye twey
But it were I, for I can in a throw
Reherce her case, unlike that she can sey
And after this she may ones him prey
To ben good lord in short, and take her leave
This may not mokell of his ease him reave
And eke for she is strange, he woll forbere
His ease, which that him dare not for you
Eke other thing that touches not to her
He woll it tell, I wot it well right now
That secret is, and for the towns prowe
And they that knew nothing of his intent
without more, to Troylus in they went
Heleyne in all her goodly soft wise
Began him salve, and womanly to play
And said ywys, ye mote algate arise
Now fair brother be all hole I pray
And began her arm right over his sholder lay
And him with all her wit to recomforte
As she best could, she began him to dysporte
So after this (quod she) we you beseke
My dear brother Deiphebus and I
For love of God, and so does Pandare eke
To ben good lord and friend right hertely
Unto Creseyde, which that certainly
Receives wrong, as wot well here Pa^dare
That can her case well bet then I declare
This Pa^darus began new his tongue affyle
And all her case reherce, and that anon
when it was said, sone after a while
(Quod Troylus) as soon as I may gone
I wol right feign, with all my might be^ one
Have god my troth, her cause to sustene
Now good thryft have ye (quod Heleyne) the queen
(Quod Pandarus) and it your will be
That she may take her leave, er that she go
O, else god forbid it (tho quod he)
If that she vouchsafe for to do so
And with that word (quod Troylus) ye two
Deiphebus, and my sister lefe and dear
To you have I to speak of a matere
To ben aduysed by your read the better
And found (as hap was) at his beds heed
The copye of a treatise, and a lettre
That Hector had him sent, to asken reed
If such a man was worthy to ben deed
wot I naught who, but in a grysly wise
He prayde hem anon on it auyse
Deiphebus began this lettre for to unfold
In ernest great, so did Heleyne the queen
And romynge outward, fast it gone behold
Downewarde a steyre, into an herber grene
This ylke thing redden hem between
And largely the mountenau^ce of an hour
They gonne on it to reden and to pore
Now let hem read, and turn we anon
To Pandarus, that began full soft prye
That all was well, and out he began to gone
Into the great chamber, and that in hye
And said, god save all this company
Come nece mine, my lady queen Heleyne
Abides you, and eke my lords tweyne
Rise, take with you your nece An^igone
Or whom you list, or no force hardely
The less prease yt bet, come forth with me
And look that ye thanken humbly
Hem all three, and when ye may goodly
Your time yse, takes of hem your leave
Lest we to long his restes him byreue
All innocent of Pandarus entente
(Quod tho Creseyde) go we uncle dear
And arm in arm, inward with him she went
Auysynge well her words and her chere
And Pandarus, in ernestfull manner
Said, all folk for gods love I pray
Stynteth right here, and softely you play
Auyseth you what folk been here within
And in what plyte one is, god him amend
And inward thus full softely begin
Nece I conjure, and hyghly you defend
On his half, which that soul us al send
And in the virtue of corownes twain
Slay not this man, yt has for you this pain
Fie on the deuell, think which one he is
And in what plyte he lies, come of anon
Think all such tarried tide but lost it nys
That woll ye both said, when ye ben one
Secondly, there yet deuyneth none
Upon you two, come of now if ye conne
while folk is blent, lo, all the time is wo^ne
In tyterynge and pursuit, and delays
The folk deuyne, at waggynge of a tree
And though ye would han after merry days
Then dare ye not, and why? for she and she
Spoke such a word, thus looked he and he
Lest time be lost, I dare not with you dele
Come of therefore, and brings him to hele
But now to you, ye lovers that been here
was Troylus not in a cankedorte
That lay, and might ye whyspryng of hem here
And thought o lord, right now re^neth my sort
Fully to dye, or have anon comfort
And was the first time he should her pray
Of love, O mighty god what shall he say
Explicit liber secundus.
O Blysfull light, of which the bemes clear
Adorneth all the third heaven fair
O sons lose, o Jove's daughter dear
Pleasaunce of love, o goodly debonayre
In gentle hertes aye ready to repair
O very cause of heal and of gladness
Yheryed be thy might and thy goodness
In heaven and hell, in earth, and salt see
Is felt thy might, if that I well dyscerne
As man, be, fyshe, herb, and grene tree
The feel in times with vapor eterne
God loves, and to love woll naught werne
And in this world no lives creature
wythouten love is worth, or may endure
Ye Jove's first, to thylke affectes glade
Through which that things lyuen al, and be
Co^menden, and amorous hem made
On mortal thing, and as you list aye ye
Give hem in love, ease, or aduersyte
And in a thousand forms down him sent
For love in earth, and whom you list he hente
Ye fyrce Marce apeasen of his ire
And as you list, ye maken hertes dygne
Algates hem that ye woll set afyre
They dreden shame, and vices they resygne
Ye done hem curteys be, fresh, and benign
And hye or low, after a wight entendeth
The joys yt he has, your might it sends
Ye holden reygne and house in unite
Ye soth fast cause of frendshyp ben also
Ye knewen all thylke covered qualyte
Of things, which that folk wondren so
when they can not construe how it may go
She loves him, or why he loves here
As why this fyshe and not that comes to were
Ye folk a law have set in universe
And this know I by hem that lovers be
That who so stryueth with you has ye werse
Now lady bright, for thy benignite
At reverence of hem that seruen the
whose clerk I am, so techeth me deuyse
Some joy of that is felt in thy service
Yea, in my naked heart sentement
I hylde, and do me show of thy swetnesse
Cal^ope, thy voice be now present
For ^^we is need, see thou not my dystresse
How I mote tell anon right the gladness
Of Troylus, to Venus heriynge
To which who need has, god him bring.
Incipit liber tertius.
LAy all this mean while Troylus
Recordynge his lesson in this manner
Mafey thought he, thus wol I say and thus
Thus woll I plain unto my lady dear
That word is good, and this shall be my chere
This nyll I not foryeten in no wise
God lene him werken as he can deuyse
And lord so that his heart began to quappe
Herynge her come, and short for to syke
And Pandarus that led her by the lap
Came nere, and began in at the curteyn pyke
And said, god do bote on all syke
Se who is here, you comen to vysyte
Lo, here is she that is your death to wit
Therwyth it seemed as he wept almost
A, a, (quod Troylus) so routhfully
where me be woe, o mighty god thou woste
who is all there, I se not truly
Sir (quod Creseyde) it is Pandare and I
Ye sweet heart alas, I may not rise
To knele, and do you honor in some wise
And dressed him upward, and she right tho
Began both her hondes soft upon him ley
O for the love of god, do ye not so
To me (quod she) ey what is this to sey
Sir, comen am I to you for causes twey
First you to thank, and of your lordshyp eke
Continuance I would you beseke
This Troylus that herd his lady pray
Of lordship, him woxe neither quick ne deed
Ne might o word for shame to it say
All though men shulden smyten of his heed
But lord so he woxe sodeynlyche reed
And sir, his lesson that he wend conne
To prayen her, is through his wit yronne
Creseyde all this aspyed well enough
For she was wise, and loved him never yt less
All nere he in all aperte, or made it tough
Or was to bold, to sing a fool a mass
But when his shame began somewhat to pass
his resons, as I may my rymes hold
I woll you tell, as techen books old
In changed voice, right for his very dread
which voice eke quoke, and thereto his manner
Goodly abasht, and now his hewes read
Now pale, unto Creseyde his lady dear
with look down cast, and humble iyolde^ chere
Lo, the alderfyrst word that him after
was twyse, mercy, mercy sweet heart
And stynt a while, and when he might out bring
The next word was, god wot for I have
As faithfully as I have had konnynge
Ben yours all, god so my soul save
And shall, till that I woeful wight be grave
And though I dare ne can unto you plain
Iwys I suffer not the less pain
Thus much as now, ah, woma^lyche wife
I may out bring, and if this you dysplese
That shall I wreke upon mine own life
Right sone I trow, and do your heart an ese
If with my death, your heart may apese
But sens that ye han herd me somewhat sey
Now retche I never how sone that I dey
Therwyth his manly sorrow to behold
It might have made an heart of stone to rue
And Pandare wept as he to water would
And poked ever his nece new and new
And said, woe begone ben hertes true
For love of god, make of this thing an end
Or slay us both at ones, er that ye wend
I, what (quod she) by God and by my troth
I not not what ye wylne that I sey
Ey, what (quod he) that ye have on him routh
For gods love, and does him not to dey
Now then thus (quod she) I would him prey
To tell me the fine of his entente
Yet wist I never well what that he mente
what that I mean, O sweet heart dear
(Quod Troylus) o goodly fresh free
That with the stremes of your eyes clear
Ye wolden sometime friendly on me se
And then agreen that I may ben he
wythouten branch of vice, on any wise
In troth always, to do you my seruyse
As to my lady right, and chief resort
with all my wit and all my diligence
And to have right as you list comfort
Under your yerde egall to mine offense
As death, if that I break your defense
And that ye deygne me so much honor
Me to co^maunden aught in any hour
And I to ben your very humble true
Secret, and in my pains pacient
And ever to desyren freshly new
To seruen, and to ben aye ylike dilygent
And with good heart, al holy your talent
Receyuen well, how sore that me smerte
Lo, this mean I, mine own sweet heart
(Quod Pandarus) lo here an hard request
And reasonable, a lady for to warn
Now nece mine, by Natall Jove's feeste
were I a god, ye should sterue as yerne
That heren well this man wol nothing yern
But your honor, and seen him almost sterue
And ben so loathe to suffer him you to serve
with that she began her eyes on him cast
Full easily, and full debonairly
Auysyng her, and hyed not to fast
with never a word, but said him softely
Mine honor safe, I would well truly
And in such form, as I can now deuyse
Receyuen him fully to my service
Besechyng him for gods love, that he
would in honor of truth and gentellesse
As I well mean, eke meanen well to me
And mine honor, with wit and business
Aye keep, and if I may done him gladness
From hence forth, iwys I nyl not feign
Now bethe al hole, no longer ye ne plain
But nathelesse, this warn I you (quod she)
A kings son although ye be ywis
Ye shall no more have soueraynte
Of me in love, than right in that case is
Ne nyl forbear if that ye done amys
To wrath you, and while that ye me serve
Cherysshen you, right after that ye deserve
And shortly dear heart, and al my knight
Beth glad, and draws you to lustynesse
And I shall trewly, with all my full might
your bitter turnen al to sweetness
If I be she, that may do you gladness
For every woe ye shall recover a bliss
And him in arms took, and began him kiss
Fyl Pandarus on knees, and up his eyes
To heaven threw, and held his hondes hye
Immortal god (quod he) that may not dyen
Cupide I mean, of this may glorifye
And venus, thou may maken melodye
withouten hand, me seems that in town
For this miracle yche here each bell sown
But ho, no more now of this matere
For why? this folk wol comen up anon
That have the lettre read, lo I hem here
But I conjure the Creseyde, and one
And two, thou Troylus wha^ you may gone
That at mine house ye ben at my warnyng
For I full well shall shapen your coming
And eases there your hertes right enough
And let se which of you shall bear the bell
To speak of love aright, and therewith he lough
For there have I a leyser for to tell
(Quod Troylus) how long shall I dwell
Er this ben done: quod he, when thou may rise
This thing shall be right as you list deuyse
with that Heleyne, and also deiphebus
Tho comen upward, right at ye stayres end
And lord so tho began gronen Troylus
His brother and his sister for to blende
(quod Pandarus) it time is that we wend
Take nece mine your leave at al three
And let hem speak, and comes forth with me
She took her leave at hem full thryftely
As she well could: and they her reverence
Unto the full dydden hardely
And wonder well speaken in her absence
Of her, in praysyng of her excellence
Her governance, her wit, and her manner
Comendeden, that it joy was to here
Now let her wend unto her own place
And turn we to Troylus again
That began full lightly of the lettre pace
That deiphebus had in the gardyn seyne
And of Heleyne and hem he would feyne
Deleuered ben, and said that hem lest
To sleep, and after tales have a rest
Heleyne him kyste, and took her leave blyue
Deiphebus eke, and home went every wight
And Pandarus, as fast as he may drive
To Troylus tho came, as line right
And on a paillet, all that glad night
By Troylus he lay, with merry chere
To tale, and well was hem they were yfere
when every wight was voyded, but they two
And all the doors weren fast yshette
To tell in short, without words mo
This Pandarus, without any let
Up rose, and on his beds side him set
And began to speaken in a sobre wise
To Troylus, as I shall you deuyse
Mine alderleuest lord, and brother dear
God wot and thou, that it sat me so sore
when I the saw so languysshyng to here
For love of which thy woe woxe always more
That I with all my might, and al my lore
Have ever sythen done my business
To bring the to joy out of distress
And have it brout to such plyte as you woste
So yt through me thou stondest now in way
To faren well, I say it for no boste
And woste thou why, but shame it is to say
For the have I begone a gamen play
which that I never done shall efte for other
Al tho he were a thousand fold my brother
That is to say, for the am I becomen
Betwyxen game and ernest, such a mean
As maken women unto men to comen
Al say I not, thou woste well what I mean
For the have I my nece, of vices clean
So fully made thy gentyllesse tryst
That all shall ben, right as thy self list
But god, yt al wotteth take I to witness
That never I this for couetyse wrought
But only for to abredge that distress
For which well nigh thou dydest, as me thout
But good brother, do now as the ought
For gods love, and keep her out of blame
Sens thou art wise, and save always her name
For well thou wost, the name as yet of her
Among ye people, as (who said) hallowed is
For that man is vnbore I dare well swear
That ever wyste that she did amys
But woe is me, that I that cause al this
May thynken that she is my nece dear
And I her eme, and traitor eke yfere
And were it wyste yt I through mine engyn
Had in mine nece yput this fantasye
To done thy lust, and holly to be thyn
why? all the world would upon it cry
And say, that I the worste trecherye
Did in this case, that ever was begone
And she fordone, and thou right naught ywo^ne
Wherefore er I wol ferther gone or paas
Yet efte I the beseech, and fully say
That priuyte go with us in this caas
That is to said, that thou us never wray
And be not wroth, though I the often pray
To holden secre such an high matere
For skylfull is (thou woste well) my prayere
And think, what woe there has betyd er this
For making of auauntes, as men read
And what myschaunce in this world yet is
Fro day to day, right for that wicked deed
For which these wise clerks that been deed
Have ever this prouerbed to us young
That the first virtue is to keep the tongue
And nere it that I wylne as now abredge
Diffusyon of speech, I could almost
A thousand old stories the aledge
Of women lost, through false and fools boste
Proverbs canste thy self ynowe, and woste
Against that vice for to ben a blabbe
Al said men sothe, as often as they gabbe
O tongue alas, so often here beforne
Haste thou made many a lady bright of hew
Said, welaway the day that I was borne
And many a maidens sorrow for to new
And for the more part al is untrue
That me^ of yelpe, and it were brought to preue
Of kind, none auauntour is to leave
Auauntour and a liar, al is one
As thus: I pose a woman grant me
Her love, and says that other woll she none
And I am sworn to holden it secre
And after I tell it two or three
Iwys I am auauntour at the leest
And liar eke, for I break my beheest
Now look tha^, if they be not to blame
Such manner folk, what shall I clepe hem what
That hem auaunte of women, and by name
That yet behyght hem never this ne that
Ne know hem more than mine old hat
No wonder is, so god me send heel
Though women dreden with us men to deele
I say not this for no mistrust of you
Ne for no wise men, but for fools nyce
And for the harm that in ye world is now
As well for folly often, as for malice
For well wot I, in wise folk that vice
No woman dredeth, if she be well auysed
For wise ben by fools harm chastysed
But now to purpose, leave brother dear
Have all this thing yt I have said in mind
And keep the close, and be now of good chere
For all thy days thou shall me true find
I shall thy process set in such a kind
And god toforne, that it shall the suffyse
For it shall be, right as thou wolte deuyse
For well I wot, thou meanest well parde
Therefore I dare this fully undertake
Thou woste eke, what thy lady granted the
And day is set the chartres to make
Have now good night, I may no le^ger wake
And bid for me, sith thou art now in bliss
That god the send death, or soon lysse
Who might tellen half the joy or feast
which that the soul of Troylus tho felt
Heryng theffect of Pandarus beheest
His old woe, that made his heart swelte
Began tho for joy wasten, and to melte
And all the richesse of his syghes sore
At ones fled, he felt of hem no more
But right so as these holtes, and these hayis
That han in winter deed ben and dry
Reuesten hem in grene, when that may is
when every lusty lysteth to play
Right in that self wise, sothe to say
woxe suddenly his heart full of joy
That gladder was there never man in Troy
And began his look on Pandarus up cast
Full soberly, and friendly on to se
And said, friend, in April the last
As well thou woste, if it remember the
How nyghe yt death for woe thou found me
And how thou dyddest all thy business
To know of me the cause of my distress
Thou woste how long I it forbear to say
To the, that art the man that I best tryst
And peril none was it to the to bewray
That wist I well: but tell me if the list
Sithe I so loath was, that thy self it wyste
How durst I mo tellen of this matere?
That quake now, and no wight may us here
But nathelesse, by that god I the swear
That as him list may all this world govern
And if I lie, Achylles with his spear
Mine heart cleave, al were my life eterne
As I am mortal, if I late or yerne
would it bewray, or durst, or should conne
For all the good that god made under son
That rather dye I would, and determyne
As thinks me now, stocked in prison
In wretchydnesse, in fylthe, and in vermyne
Captyfe to cruel king Agamenon
And this in all the temples of this town
Upon the gods all, I woll the swear
To morrow day, if that the lyketh here
And that thou haste so much ydon for me
That I ne may it never more deserve
This know I well, all might I now for the
A thousand times on a morrow sterue
I can no more, but that I woll the serve
Right as thy slave, whyther so thou wend
For ever more, unto my lives end
But here with all mine heart I the beseech
That never in me thou deem such folly
As I shall said, me thought by thy speech
That this which thou me do for company
I should wene it were a baudrye
I am not wood, all if I leude be
It is not so, that wot I well parde
But he that gothe for gold, or for richesse
On such messages, call him what ye list
And this that thou do, call it gentylnesse
Compassyon, and felawshyp, and tryste
Depart it so, for wide where is wyste
How that there is dyuersyte required
Betwixen things like, as I have lered
And yt thou know I think not ne wene
That this service a shame be or iape
I have my fair suster Polixene
Cassandre, Heleyne, or any of the frape
Be she never so fair, or well yshape
Tell me, which thou will of euerychone
To have for thine, and let me than alone
Buth sith yt thou have done me this service
My life to save, and for non hope of mede
So for the love of god, this great emprise
Parfourme it out, now is the most need
For high and low, withouten any dread
I wol always thine hestes al keep
Have now good night, and let us both sleep
Thus held hem each of other well apayde
That all the world ne might it bet amend
And on the morowed wha^ they were arayde
Each to his own needs began entende
But Troylus, though as the fire he brende
For sharp desire of hope, and of pleasaunce
He not forgate his good governance
But in him self, with ma^hode began restreyne
Each rakel deed, and each unbridled chere
That all that lyuen sothe to said
Ne should have wist, by word or by manner
what that he mente, as touching this matere
From every wight, as far as is the cloud
He was so wise, and well dissymulen could
And al ye while which that I now deuyse
This was his life, with all his full might
By day he was in Martes high service
That is to said, in arms as a knight
And for the more part the long night
He lay and thought how that he might serve
His lady best, her thank for to deserve
Nyll I not swear, all though he lay soft
That in his thought he nas somewhat disesed
Ne that he turned on his pillowes often
And would of that him missed have been eased
But in such case, men be not always pleased
For naught I wot, no more than was he
That can I deem of possibylyte
But certain is, to purpose for to go
That in this while, as written is in geste
He saw his lady sometime, and also
She with him spoke, wha^ yt she durst and lest
And by her both auyse, as was the best
Apoynteden full warely in this need
So as they durst, how they would proceed
But it was spoken in so short a wise
In such awayte always, and in such fere
Lest any wight deuynen or deuyse
would of hem two, or to it lay an eere
That all this world so lefe to hem ne were
As that Cupyde would hem grace send
To maken of her speech right an end
But thylke little that they spoke or wrought
His wise ghost took aye, of all such head
It seemed her he wyste what she thought
withouten word, so that it was no need
To bydde him aught to do^, or aught forbede
For which she thought yt love, al come it late
Of al joy, had opened her the yate
And shortly of this process for to pace
So well his work and words he besette
That he so full stood in his ladys grace
TWenty thousand times er she let
She tonked god she ever with him met
So could he him govern in such service
That all the world ne might it bet deuyse
For she found him so discrete in all
So secret, and of such obeysaunce
That well she felt he was to her a wall
Of steel, and shield of every displesaunce
That to ben in his good governance
So wise he was, she was no more afered
I mean as far as ought ben required
And Pandarus to quick always the fire
was ever ylyke pressed and dyligent
To ease his friend was set al his desire
He shone aye on, he to and fro was sent
He letters bare when Troylus was absent
That never man, as in his friends need
Ne bare him bet than he, withouten dread
But now paraue^ture some man wayte^ would
That every word or sonde, look or chere
Of Troylus, that I rehercen should
In all this while, unto his lady dear
I trow it were a long thing for to here
Or of what wight yt stante in such disioynte
His words al, or every look to point
For sothe I have not herd it done er this
In storye none, ne no man here I wene
And though I would, I could not ywys
For there was some epystel hem between
That would (as says mine auctour) well co^tene
Nigh half this book, of which hi^ list not write
How should I than a live of it endyte
But to the great effect, than say I thus
That stondyng in concord and in quyete
This ylke two, Creseyde and Troylus
As I have told, and in this time sweet
Save only often might they not mete
Ne leyser have, her speches to fulfell
That it befyl, right as I shall you tell
That Pandarus, that ever did his might
Right for the fine that I shall speak of here
As for to bryngen to his house some night
His fair nece, and Troylus yfere
where as at leyser al this high matere
Touching her love, were at ye full up bound
Had out of doubt a time to it found
For he with great delyberation
Had every thing that thereto might avail
Forne cast, and put in execution
And neither left for cost ne for travail
Come if hem list, hem should nothing fail
And for to ben in aught aspyed there
That wyste he well an inpossyble were
Dredelesse it clear was in the wind
Of every pie, and every let game
Now all is well, for all the world is blind
In this matter, both fremed and tame
This timber is al ready up to frame
Us lacks naught, but that weten would
A certain hour, in which she comen should
And Troylus, that all this purueyaunce
Knew at the full, and waited on it aye
And here upon eke made great ordinance
And found his cause, and therewith his array
If that he were myssed night or day
There while he was about this service
That he was gone to done his sacrifyce
And must at such a temple alone wake
Answered of Apollo for to be
And first to seen the holy laurer quake
Er that Apollo spoke out of the tree
To tell him next when greeks should fly
And for thy let him no man god forbede
But pray Apollo help in this need
Now is there little more for to done
But Pandare up, and shortly for to said
Right sone upon the chaungyng of ye moon
wha^ lightlesse is ye world a night or twain
And that the welken shope him for to rain
He straight a morrow unto his nece went
Ye have well herd the fine of his entente
Wha^ he was come^, he began anon to play
As he was wont, and of him self to iape
And finally he swore, and began her say
By this and that, she should him not escape
No longer done him after her to cape
But certainly, she must by her leave
Come soupen in his house with him at eve
At which she lough, and began her first excuse
And said: it rayneth: lo, how should I gone
Let be (quod he) ne stand not thus to muse
This mote be done, ye shall come there anon
So at the last, hereof they fell at one
Or else fast he swore her in her eere
He nolde never comen there she were
Sone after this, she to him began rowne
And asked him if Troylus were there
He swore her nay, for he was out of town
And said, nece: I pose that he were there
You durst never have the more feere
For rather than men might him there aspye
Me were lever a thousand fold to dye
Naught list mine auctour fully to declare
what that she thought, when he said so
That Troylus was out of town yfare
And if he said thereof sothe or no
But that wythouten awayte with him to go
She granted him, sith he her that besought
And as his nece obeyed as her ought
But nathelesse, yet began she him beseech
(All though with him to gone it was no feere)
For to beware of gofyshe peoples speech
That dreme things, which that never were
And well auyse him whom he brought there
And said him eme, sens I must on you tryst
Look al be well, and do now as you list
He swore her this, by stocks and by stones
And by the gods that in heaven dwell
Or else were him leauer soul and bones
with Pluto king, as deep ben in hell
As Tantalus, what should I more tell
when al was well, he rose and took his leave
And she to souper came when it was eve
with a certain of her own men
And with her fair nece Antigone
And other of her women nine or ten
But who was glad now, who as trow ye?
But Troylus, that stood and might it se
Throughout a little wyndowe in a stewe
There hebeshet, since midnight was in mewe
Vnwyst of every wight, but of Pandare
But to the point, now when yt she was come
with all joy, and all friends fare
Her eme anon in arms has her nome
And than to the supper all and some
when time was, full soft they hem set
God wot there was no deynte far to fette
And after supper gannen they to rise
At ease well, with heart fresh and glade
And well was him that could best deuyse
To lyken her, or that her laughen made
He song, she playde, he told a tale of wade
But at the last, as every thing has end
She took her leave, and needs would wend
But o fortune, executrice of wyerdes
O influentes of these heuens hye
Sothe is, that under god ye ben our hierdes
Though to us beestes, ben the causes wrie
This mean I now, for she ga^ homward hye
But execute was al beside her leave
At the gods will, for which she must bleue
The bente moon with her horns pale
Saturnus and Jove, in Ca^c^o joined were
That such a rain from heaven began auale
That every manner woman that was there
Had of that smoky rain a very feere
At which Pandare tho lough, and said then
Now were it time a lady to gone hen
But good nece, if I might ever please
You any thing, than pray I you (quod he)
To don mine heart as now so great an ease
As for to dwell here all this night with me
For why? this is your own house parde
For by my trouhe, I say it not in game
To wend as now, it were to me a shame
Creseyde, which that could as much good
As half a world, took head of his prayere
And sens it rayned, and al was in a flode
She thout, as good chepe may I dwell here
And grant it gladly with a friends chere
And have a thonke, as grutche and than abide
For home to gone it may not well betyde
I woll (quod she) mine uncle liefe and dear
Sens that you list, it skyll is to be so
I am right glad with you to dwellen here
I said but again I would go
I wys grant mercy nece (quod he) tho
were it a game or no, sothe to tell
Now am I glad, sens that you list to dwell
Thus al is well, but tho began aright
The new joy, and all the feast again
But pandarus, if goodly had he might
He would have hyed her to bed feign
And said, lord this is an huge rain
This were a wether for to slepen in
And that I read us soon to begin
And nece, wot ye where I wol you lay?
For that we shul not lyggen far a sonder
And for ye neither shullen, dare I say
Here noise of rain, ne of thonder
By god right in my closet yonder
And I wol in that utter house alone
Ben wardayne of your women euerychone
And in this myddel chamber that ye se
Shall your women slepen, well and soft
And there I said, shall your seluen be
And if ye lyggen well to night, come often
And cares not what wether is a lost
The wine anon, and when so you lest
Go we to sleep, I trow it be the best
There nys no more, but herafter sone
They void, drunk, and trauers draw anon
Began every wight that had naught to done
More in the place, out of the chamber gone
And evermore so sternelyche it rone
And blewe therwyth so wonderlyche loud
That well nyghe no man heren other could
Tho Pa^darus her eme, right as him ought
with women, such as were her most about
Full glad unto her beds side her brought
And took his leave, and began full low loute
And said, here at this closet door without
Right ouertwarte your women lyggen all
That whom you list of hem, ye may sone call
So when that she was in the closet laid
And all her women forth by ordinance
A bed weren, there as I have said
There nas no more to skippe^ nor to praunce
But boden go to bed with mischaunce
If any wight sterynge were any where
And let hem slepen, that a bed were
But Pandarus, yt well couthe each adele
The old dance, and every point therein
when that he saw that all thing was well
He thought he would upon his work begin
And began the stewe door al soft vnpyn
As still as stone, without longer let
By Troylus adown right he him set
And shortly to the point right for to gone
Of al this work he told him word and end
And said, make the ready right anon
For thou shall in to heaven bliss wend
Now blysful Venus, thou me grace send
(quod Troylus) for never yet no deed
Had I er now, ne halfendele the dread
(quod Pandarus) ne dread the never adele
For it shall be right as thou wolte desire
So thrive I, this night shall I make it well
Or casten all the gruel in the fire
Yet blisfull Venus, this night you me enspyre
(quod Troylus) as wys as I the serve
And ever bet and bet shall till I sterue
And if I had, O Venus full of myrthe
Aspectes badde of Mars, or of Saturn
Or thou combuste, or let were in my birth
Thy father pray, al thylke harm disturne
Of grace, and that I glad again may turn
For love of him thou louedest in the shawe
I mean Adon, that with ye bore was s^awe
Jove eke, for the love of fair Europe
The which in form of a bulle away thou set
Now help, O Mars, thou with thy blody cope
For love of Cipria, thou me naught ne let
O Phoebus, think wha^ Daphne her selue s^^t
Under the bark, and Laucer woxe for dread
Yet for her love, o help now at this need
Mercurye, for the love of her eke
For which Pallas was with Aglauros wroth
Now help, and eke Dyane I the beseke
That this vyage be not to the loathe
O fatal sustren, which or any clothe
Me shapen was, my destyne me sponne
So helps to this work that is begone
(quod Pa^darus) thou wretched mouces heart
Art thou aghast so that she wol the byte
why, do on this furred cloak upon thy sherte
And follow me, for I wol have the wit
But bide, and let me gone before alyte
And with that he began undone a trappe
And Troylus he brought in by the lap
The stern wind so loud began to route
That no wight other noise might here
And they that layen at the door without
Full sykerly they slepten al yfere
And Pandarus, with full sobre chere
Gothe to the door anon withouten let
There as they lay, and softely it shette
And as he came ayenwarde privily
His nece awoke, and asks, who goth there?
My dear nece (quod he) i^am I
Ne wondreth not, ne have of it no feere
And nere he came, and said her in her eere
No word for love of god I you beseech
Let no wight arise, and heren of our speech
what, which way be ye comen? benedicite,
(Quod she) and how vnwyst of hem al
Here at this secret trappe door (quod he)
(Quod tho Crescide) let me some wight call
Eygh, god forbyde that it should so fall
(quod Pandarus) that ye such folly wrought
they might deem thing they never er thout
It is not good a slepyng hounde to wake
Ne give a wight a cause for to deuyne
Your women slepyng al I undertake
So yt for hem the house men might mine
And slepen woollen till the sun shine
And when my tale is brought to an end
Vnwyst right as I came, so woll I wend
Now nece mine, ye shul well understand
(quod he) so as ye women demen all That for to hold in love a man in hand
And him her lefe and dear heart call
And maken him an howue above a call
I mean as love an other in this mean while
She does her self a shame, and him agyle
Now whereby that I tell you al this
Ye wot your self, as well as any wight
How that your love al fully granted is
To troylus, the worthyest wight
One of the world, and thereto troth yplyght
That but it were on him alonge, ye nolde
Him never falsen, while ye lyuen should
Now stonte it thus, yt sith I fro you went
This Troylus, right platly for to seyne
Is through a gutter by a privy went
In to my chamber come in all this reyne
Vnwyste of every manner wight certain
Save of my self, as wisely have I joy
And by the faith Iowe Priam of Troy
And he is come in such pain and distress
That but he be al fully wood by this
He suddenly mote fall in to woodnesse
But if god help: and cause why is this
He says him told is of a friend of his
How yt ye should loue^ one, that hight Horast
for sorrow of which this nit shall be his last
Creseyde, which that al this wonder herd
G^ul suddenly about her heart cold
And with a syghe she soroufully answerde
Alas, I wend who so tales told
My dear heart would me not hold
So lightly false, alas conceytes wrong
what harm they done? for now live I to long
Horaste alas, and falsen Troylus
I know him not, god help me so (quod she)
Alas, what wicked spyrite told him thus
Now certes eme, to morrow and I him se
I shall thereof as fully excused me
As ever did woman, if him like
And with that word she began full sore syke
O god (quod she) so wordley selynesse
which clerks callen false felicite
ymedled is with many a bytternesse
Full anguyshous, than is god wot (quod she)
Condition of vein prosperyte
For either joys comen not yfere
Or else no wight has hem always here
O brotyl well of man's joy unstable
with what wight so to be, or how you play
Either he wot, that joy art muable
Or wot it not, it mote been one of tway
Now if he wot it not, how may he say
That he has very joy and selynesse
That is of ignorance aye in derkenesse
Now if he wot that joy is transitorye
As every joy of worldly thing mote fly
Than every time, he that has in memory
The dred of lesyng, makes him, that he
May in no parfyte sykernesse be
And if to lose his joy, he set a myte
Tha^ seems it, that joy is worth full lyte
wherefore I would deffine in this matere
That treuly for aught I can espy
There is no very well in this world here
But O thou wicked serpent ielousye
Thou misbeleued, and enuyous folly
why have thou Troylus made to me vntrist
That never yet agylte, that I wist
(Quod Pa^darus) thus fallen is this caas
why uncle mine (quod she) who told him this
why does my dear heart thus alas?
Ye wot, ye nece mine (quod he) what is
I hope al shall be well, that is amys
For ye may quench al this, if that you lest
And does right so, I hold it for the best
So shall I do to morrow, ywys (quod she)
And god to forne, so that it shall suffyse
To morrow alas, that were fair (quod he)
Nay nay, it may not stonden in this wise
For nece mine, this written clerks wise
That peril is with dretchyng in draw
Nay, soch abodes be not worth an hawe
Nece, al thing has time I dare auowe
For when a chamber a fire is, or an hal
well more need is, it suddenly rescowe
Than to desputen and asken among al
How the candel in the straw is fall
Ah benedicite, for all among that fare
The harm is done, and farewell feldefare
And nece mine, ne take it not a grese
If that ye suffer him al night in this woe
God help me so, ye had him never lefe
That dare I saine, now there is but we two
But well I wot that ye wol not so do
Ye been to wise to done so great folly
To put his life al night in ieopardye
Had I him never lefe* by god I wene
Ye had never thing so lefe (quod she)
Now by my thryfte (quod he) yt shall be seen
For sith ye make this ensample of me
If iche al night would him in sorrow se
For all the treasour in the town of Troy
I bydde god, I never mote have joy
Now look than, if ye that been his love
Should put his life al night in ieopardy
For thing of naught, now by ye god above
Not only this delay comes of folly
But of malice, if that I should not lie
what platly and ye suffer him in distress
ye neither bounte done ne gentyllesse
(Quod tho Creseyde) wol ye done o thing
And ye therwyth shall stynte al his disease
Have here and bear him this blewe ryng
For there is nothing might him better plese
Save I my self, ne more his heart apese
And say my dear heart, that is sorrow
Is causeless, that shall he seen to morrow
A ring (quod he) ye haselwodes shaken
ye nece mine, ye ryng must have a stone
That might deed men alive maken
And such a ryng trow I that ye have none
Discrecion out of your heed is gone
That feel I now (quod he) and that is routh
O time ylost, well may thou cursen sloth
wot ye not well that noble and hye courag^
Ne soroweth not, ne stynteth eke for lyte
But if a fool were in a ielous rage
I nolde setten at his sorrow amyte
But fesse him with a few words white
An other day, wha^ that I might him find
But this thing stant al in another kind
This is so gentyl and so tender of heart
that with his death he wol his sorrows wreke
For trust well, how sore that him smert
He wol to you no ialous words speak
And for thy nece, er that his heart break
So speak your self to him of this matere
For with a word ye may his heart stere
Now have I told what peril he is in
And his coming vnwyst is to every wight
Ne parde harm may there be none, ne syn
I would my self be with you all this night
Ye know eke how it is your own knight
And that by right, ye must upon him f^yste
And I al pressed to fetch him wha^ you list
This accident so pytous was to here
And eke so like a soth, at prime face
And Troylus her knight, to her so dear
His prive coming, and the syker place
That though she did him as than a grace
Consydred al things as they stood
No wonder is, sens he did al for good
Creseyde answerde, as wyselye god at rest
My soul bring, as me is for him woe
And eme ywys feign would I done the best
If that I a grace had for to do so
But whether that ye dwell, or for him go
I am, till god me bettre mind send
At Dulcarnon, right at my wits end
(Quod Pandarus) yea nece wol ye here
Dulcarnon is called flemyng of wretches
it seems hard, for wretches woll naut lere
For very sloth, or other wylful ^etches
this is said by hem, yt be not worth two fetches
But ye ben wise, and yt ye han on hand
Nys neither hard, ne skillful to withstonde
Tha^ eme (quod she) does here of as you list
But er he come, I wol up first arise
And for the love of god, sens al my tryst
Is on you two, and ye bethe both wise
So werketh now, in so discret a wise
That I honor may have and he plesaunce
For I am here, al in your governance
That is well said (quod he) my nece dear
There good thryfte on that wise ge^tyl heart
But lyggeth still, and takes him right here
It needs not no ferther for him stert
And each of you eases other sorrows smert
For love of god, and Venus I the herye
For sone hope I, that we shall ben merye
This Troylus full sone on knees him set
Full sobrely, right by her beds heed
And in his best wise his lady grette
But lord she wore sodaynlyche reed
Ne though men should smyten of her heed
She cold not a word aright out bring
So suddenly for his sudden coming
But Pandarus, that so well could feel
In every thing, to play anon began
And said, nece, se how this lord can knele
Now for your troth, se this gentle man
And with that word, he for a quyshen ran
And said, kneleth now while that you lest
There god your hertes bring sone at rest
Can I naught sayn, for she bad him not rise
If sorrow it put out of her remembrance
Or else that she took it in the wise
Of duty, as for his obseruaunce
But well find I, she did him this plesau^ce
That she him kyst, al though she syked sore
And bade him sytte adowne withoute^ more
(Quod Pandarus) now wol ye well begin
Now does him sytte, good nece dear
Upon your beds side, al therwythin
That each of you the bet may other here
And with that word he drew him to the fyere
And took a light, and fond his countenance
As for to look upon an old romaunce
Creseyde that was Troylus lady right
And clear stood in a ground of sykernesse
Al thought she her servant and her knight
Ne should non untruth in her guess
That nathlesse, consydred his distress
And that love is in cause of such folly
Thus spoke she to him of his ialousy
Lo heart mine, as would the excellence
Of love, against the which that no man may
Ne ought eke goodly maken resistance
And eke because I felt well and say
Your great troth and service every day
And yt your heart al mine was soth to said
This drove me for to rue upon your pain
And your goodness have I fou^de^ always yet
Of which my dear heart, and all my knight
I thank it you, as far as I have wit
Al can I not as much as it were right
And I emforth my co^nyng and my might
Have, and aye shall, how sore that me smert
Ben to you true and hole wythall mine heart
And dredelesse that shall be founden at preue
But heart mine, what al this is to said
Shall well be told, so yt ye naught you grieve
Though I to you right on your self co^plain
For there with mean I finally pain
That halte your heart and mine in heaviness
Fully to slain, and every wrong redress
My good mine, not I, for why ne how
That ielousy alas, that wicked wyuere
Thus causeless is cropen in to you
The harm of which I would feign deliuere
Alas, that he al hole or of him slyuere
Should have his refute in so digne a place
That Jove, him sone out of your heart race
But O thou, O auctour of nature
Is this an honor to thy dignyte
That folk unguilty suffer here iniure
And who that gylty is, al quyte goth he
O were it leful for to plain of the
That undeserved suffrest ialousy
O, that I would upon the plain and cry
Eke al my woe is this, that folk now vsen
To said right thus: ye, ialousy is love
And would a bushel of venym al excusen
For wha^ that a grain of love is on it shoue
But wot high Jove that sytte above
If it be lyker love, hate or grame
And after that it ought bear his name
But certain is, some manner ialousye
Is excusable, more than some ywys
As when cause is, and some such fantasye
with pity so well expressed is
That it uneath does or says amys
But goodly drynketh up al his distress
And that excuse I for the gentyllesse
And some so full of furye is, and dispyte
That it surmounteth his repression
But heart mine, ye be not in that plyte
That thonke I god, for which your passion
I will not call it but illusion
Of habundaunce of love, and besy cure
That does your heart this disese endure
Of which I am sorry, but not wroth
But for my devour and your hertes res^
where so you list, by ordal or by oath
By sort, or in what wise so you lest
For love of god, let preue it for the best
And if that I be gylty, do me dey
Alas what might I more done or sey
with that a few bright teeres new
Out of her eyes fell, and thus she seyde
now god you wost, in thouht ne deed untrue
To Troylus was never yet Creseyde
with yt her heed down in the bed she leyde
And with the shete it wrigh, and syghed sore
and held her peace, not a word spoke she more
But now help god, to quench all this sorrow
So hope I that he shall, for he best may
For I have seen of a full misty morrow
Folowen full often a merry summers day
And after winter follows grene May^
Men seen alday, and reden eke in stories
That after sharp shoures been victories
This Troylus, when he her words herd
Have ye no care, him list not to sleep
For it thought him no strokes of a yerde
To here or se Creseyde his lady weep
But well he felt about his heart crepe
For every tear which that Creseyde a stert
The cra^pe of death, to strain him by ye heart
And in his mind he began the time acurse
That he came there, and that he was borne
For now is wycke turned in to worse
And all that labor he has done beforne
he wend it lost, he thought he nas but lorne
O Pandarus thought he, alas thy wyle
Serves of naught, so welaway the while
And there withal he hynge adown his heed
And fell on knees, and sorowfully he sight
what might he saine? he felt he nas but deed
For wroth was she yt should his sorrows lit
But nathelesse, when that he speken might
Tha^ said he thus, god wot yt of this game
when al is wist, than am I not to blame
Therwyth the sorrow of his heart shette
That from his eyes fyl there not a teere
And every spyrit his vygour in knette
So they astonyed or oppressed were
The felyng of sorrow, or of his feere
Or of aught else, fled were out of town
Adowne he fyl al suddenly in swoune
This was no little sorrow for to se
But al was hushte, and Pandarus up as fast
O nece peace, or we be lost (quod he)
Bethe not agaste, but certain at last
For this or that, he in to bed him cast
And said, O thief, is this a man's heart
And he rent al to his bare sherte
And said nece, but ye help us now
Alas your own Troylus is lorne
Iwys so would I, and I wyste how
Full feign (quod she) alas that I was borne
Ye nece, wol ye pullen out the thorn
That stycketh in his heart (quod Pandare)
Say al foryeue, and stynt is al this fare
Yea that to me (quod she) full lever were
Than all the good the sun about goth
And there wythal she swore him in his eere
Iwys my dear heart I am not wroth
Have here my troth, and many an other oath
Now speak to me, for it am I Creseyde
but all for naught, yet might he not abreyde
Therwt his ponce, and paumes of his hands
They began to frote, and wete his temples twayn
And to deliver him fro bitter bands
She often him kyste, and shortly for to said
Him to rewaken she did al her pain
And at the last he began his breath to draw
And of his swoune sone after that adawe
And began bet mind, and reason to him take
But wonder sore he was abashed ywys
And with a sygh when he began bet awake
He said, O mercy god, what thing is this?
why do ye with your seluen thus amys?
(Quod tho Creseyde) is this a man's game
what Troylus, woll ye do thus for shame?
And therwtal her arm over him she said
And al foryaue, and often time him keste
He thonked her, and to her spoke and said
As fyl to purpose, for his hertes rest
And she to that answerde him as her lest
And with her goodly words him disporte
She began, and often his sorrows to comfort
(Quod Pandarus) for aught I can espyen
This light nor I ne seruen here of naught
Light is not good for sick folks eyes
But for the love of god, sens ye ben brought
with thus good plyte, let now non heavy thout
Ben hangyng in the herts of you twey
And bare the candel to the chymeney
Soon after this, though it no need were
when she such oaths as her list deuyse
Had of him take, her thought tho no feere
Ne cause eke none, to bid him thence rise
Yet less thing than oaths may suffyse
In many a case, for every wight I guess
That loves well, means but gentyllesse
But in effect she would wete anon
Of what man, and eke where, and why
He ialous was, sens there was cause non
And eke the sign that he took it by
She bade him that to tell her besyly
Or else certain she bare him on hand
That this was done of malice her to fond
wythouten more, shortly for to said
He must obey unto this ladies heest
And for the less harm he must feign
He said her, when she was at such a feast
She might on him have looked at the leest
Not I not what al dear enough a ryshe
As he that needs must a cause fyshe
And she answerde, sweet, al were it so
what harm was yt sens I non yuell mean
For by that god that bought us both two
In all thing is mine intent cleene
Such arguments ne be not worth a been
wol ye the chyldyshe ialous counterfete
Now were it worthy that ye were ybete
Tho Troylus began soroufully to syke
lest she be wroth, him thout his heart deyde
And said, alas, upon my sorrows syke
Have mercy sweet heart mine Creseyde
And if that in tho words that I seyde
Be any wrong, I wol no more trespace
Does what you list, I am al in your grace
And she answerde, of gylte mysericorde
That is to said, that I foryeue al this
And evermore on this night you record
And bethe well ware ye do no more amys
Nay dear heart mine (quod he) ywys
And now (quod she) that I have you do smerte
For give it me, mine own sweet heart
This Troylus with bliss of that supprised
Put al in gods hand, as he that mente
Nothing but well, and suddenly auysed
He her in arms fast to him hente
And Pandarus, with a full good entente
Laid him to sleep, and said, if ye be wise
Sweueneth not now lest mo folk arise
what might or may the sely lark say
when the sperhauke has him in his foot?
I can no more, but of these ylke tway
To whom this tale sugre be or sote
Though I tarry a year, sometime I mote
After mine auctour tellen her gladness
As well as I have told her heaviness
Creseyde, which that felt her thus ytake
(As written clerks in her books old)
Right as an aspen leefe she began to quake
when she him felt her in his arms fold
But Troylus al hole of cares cold
Began thanken tho the blysful gods seven
through so^dry pains to bring folk to heaven
This Troylus in arms began her strain
And said sweet, as ever mote I gone
Now be ye caught, here is but we twain
Now yeldeth you, for other boot is none
To that Creseyde answerde thus anon
Ne had I er now, my sweet heart dear
Ben yolde ywys, I were now not here
O, soth is said, that healed for to be
As of a fever, or other great sickness
Men must drynken, as we often se
Full bitter drink, and for to have gladness
Men drynken often pain, and great distress
I mean it here by, as for this adventure
that through a pain has found al his cure
And now swetnesse seems more sweet
That bytternesse assayed was byforne
For out of woe in bliss now they flete
None such they felten sens they were borne
Now is this bet, than both two be lorne
For love of god, take every woman head
To werken thus, if it come to the need
Creseyde al quite from every dread and tene
As she that just cause had him to tryste
Made him such feast, it joy was to seen
when she his troth and cleue intent wist
And as about a tree with many a twyste
Bytrent and writhe the sweet wodbynde
Can each of hem in arms other wind
And as the new abashed nyghtyngale
that stynteth first, wha^ she beginnneth sing
when that she hereth any heerdes tale
Or in the hedges any wight steryng
And after syker does her voice out ryng
Right so Creseyde, when her dread stent
Opened her heart, and told him her intent
And right as he yt sees his death yshapen
And dyen mote, in aught that he may guess
And suddenly rescous does him escapen
And from his death is brought in sykernesse
For all this world, in such present gladness
was Troylus, and has his lady sweet
with worse hap god let us never mete
Her arms small, her straight back and soft
Her sides long, fleshly, smoth, and white
He began to stroke, and good thrifte bade full often
Her snowysse throat, her breasts round and lite
Thus in this heaven he began him to delight
And therwithal a thousand times her kyst
That what to done for joy uneath he wist
Than said he thus, O love, O charity
Thy mother eke, Citheria the sweet
That after thy self, next heryed be she
Venus I mean, the well wylly planete
And next that, I meneus I the great
For never man was to you gods hold
As I which ye have brought fro cares cold
Benign love, thou holy bond of things
who so wol grace, and list the not honouren
Lo, this desire wol fly wythouten wynge^
For noldest thou of bounty hem socouren
That seruen best, and most always labouren
Yet were al lost, yt dare I well said certes
But if thy grace passed our deserts
And for thou me ye lest tho^ke could deserve
Of hem that nombred ben unto thy grace
Have helped there I lykely was for to sterue
And me bestowed in so high a place
That thylke bounds may no bliss pace
I can no more, but laud and reverence
Be to thy bounte and thine excellence
And therwithal Creseyde anon he kyst
Of which certain she felt no disease
And thus said he, now would god I wist
Mine heart sweet, how I you might please
what man (quod he) was ever thus at ease
As I on which the fairest, and the best
That ever I sey, deyneth her to rest
Here may men seen that mercy passes right
The experience of that is felt in me
That am unworthy to so sweet a wight
But heart mine, of your benignite
So think, that though I unworthy be
Yet mote I need amenden in some wise
Right through ye virtue of your hye service
And for the love of god my lady dear
sith he has wrout me for I shall you serve
As thus I mean: woll ye be my seere
To do me live, if that you list, or sterue
So teaches me, how that I may deserve
Your tho^ke, so yt I through mine ignorance
Ne do nothing that you be displeasaunce
For certes fresh womanlyche wife
This dar I say, that troth and diligence
That shall ye fynden in me all my life
Ne I woll not certain breken your defense
And if I do present or in absence
For love of god let slay me with the deed
If that it like unto your womanhede.
I wys (quod she) mine own hertes lust
My ground of ease and all mine heart dear
Grant mercy, for on that is all my trust
But let us fall away fro this matere
For it suffyseth, this that said is here
And at o word, withouten repentance
welcome my knight, my peace, my suffysaunce
Of her delight or joys one of the leest
were impossyble to my wit to say
But judges ye that have been at the feast
Of such gladness, if that hem list play
I can no more, but thus these ylke tway
That nigh betwixen dread and sykernesse
Fe^ten in love the great worthynesse
O blysful night, of hem so long ysought
How blyth unto hem both two thou were?
why ne had I such feast with my soul yboght
Yea, or the leest joy that was there
Away thou foul danger and thou feere
And let hem in this heaven bliss dwell
That is so high, that all ne can I tell.
But soth is, though I can not tellen all
As can mine auctour of his excellence
Yet have I said, and god to forne shall
In every thing all holly his sentence
And if that I at loves reverence
Have any word in eched for the best
Does therwithal right as your seluen lest.
For my words here, and every part
I speak hem all under correction
Of you that felyng have in loves art
And put it all in your discrettion
To entreat or make diminition
Of my langage, and that I you beseech
But now to purpose of my rather speech
These ylke two that beth in arms last
So loath to hem a sonder gone to were
That each from other wenden ben byraft
Or else lo, this was her most feere
That all this thing but nyce dreams were
For which full often each of hem said, o sweet
Clyppe I you thus, or else do I it mete
And lord so he began goodly on her se
That never his look ne bleynt from her face
And said, O dear heart may it be
That it be soth that ye ben in this place
Yea heart mine, god thank I of his grace
(quod tho Creseyde) and therwithal him kyst
That where her spyrite was, for joy she nyst
This Troylus full often her eyes two
Began for to kiss, and said: O eyes clear
It weren ye that wrought me such woe
Ye humble nets of my lady dear
Though there be mercy written in your chere
God wot the text full hard is for to find
How could ye, withouten bond me bind.
Therewith he began her fast in arms take
And well an hundred times began he syke
Not such sorrowful syghes as men make
For woe, or else when that folk be syke
But easy syghes such as ben to like
That showed his affection within
Of such syghes could he not blyu.
Sone after this, they spoke of sundry things
As fill to purpose of this adventure
And playing, enterchaungeden her rings
Of which I can not tellen no scripture
But well I wot, a broche of gold and asure
In which a ruby set was like an heart
Creseyde him yaue, and stacke it on his sherte.
Lord trow ye that a covetous wretch
That blam^th love, and halte of it despyte
That of tho pens yt he can muckre and ketche
was ever yet give to him such delight
As is in love, in o point in some plyte
Nay doutlesse, for also god me save
So parfyte joy may no nygarde have.
They woll say yes, but lord so they lie
Tho busy wretches full of woe and dread
That callen love a woodnesse of follye
But it shall fall hem as I shall you read
They shall forgon the white and eke the read
And live in woe, there god give hem myschau^ce
and every lover this troth auau^ce
As would god tho wretches that dispyse
Service of love, had ears also long
As had Mida, full of couetyse
And thereto dronken had as hot and strong
As Cresus did, for his affectes wrong
To teachen hem, that they ben in the vice
And lovers not although they hold hem nyse
These ylke two of whom yt I you say
when that her hertes well assured were
Tho gonnen they to speak and to play
And eke rehersen how, when, and where
They knew first, and every woe or fere
That passed was, but all such heaviness
I thonke it god, was turned to gladness
And ever more, when that hem fill to speak
Of any thing of such a time agon
with kyssyng all that tale should break
And fallen into a new joy anon
And dydde^ al her might, syns they were one
For to recoueren bliss, and ben at ease
And paysed woe with joy, countrepeyse.
Reason woll not that I speak of sleep
For it accords not to my matere
God wot they took of it full little keep
But lest this night that was to hem so dear
Ne should in vain escape in no manner
It was beset in joy and business
Of all that sowneth into gentylnesse.
But when the cock, common astrologer
Began on his breest to beat, and after crow
And Lucifer, the days messaunger
Began for to rise, and out her beams throw
And estward rose to him that that could it know
Fortuna mayor, tha^ anon Creseyde
with heart sore to Troylus thus seyde.
Mine hertes life, my trust, all my plesau^ce
That I was borne alas, that me is woe
That day of us mote make disceueraunce
For time it is to rise, and hence go
Or else I am lost for ever mo
O night alas, why will thou over us houe
As long as when Alemena lay by Jove.
O black night, as folk in books read
That shapen art by god this world to hyde
At certain times, with thy dark wede
That under that men might in rest abide
well oughte^ beestes to plain, and folk to chyde
That there as day with labor would us breast
That thou thus flyest, and deynest us not rest
Thou do alas, to shortly thine office
Tho rakle night, there god maker of kind
The for thine haste, and thine unkind vice
So fast aye to our himispery bind
That neuermore under you ground thou wind
For now for thou so highest out of Troy
Have I forgone thus hastly my joy
This Troylus that with tho words felt
As thought him tho, for pitous distress
The blody tears from his heart melt
As he that yet never such heaviness
Assayed had, out of so great gladness
Began therwithall Creseyde his lady dear
In arms strain, and hold in lovely manner
O cruel day, accuser of the joy
That night and love have stole and fast ywryen
Accursed be thy coming into troy
For every bore has one of thy bright eyes
Enuyous day, what list the so to spyen
what have thou lost, why sekest thou this place
There god thy light so que^che for his grace.
Alas, what have these lovers the agylt?
Dispytous day, thine be the pain of hell
For many a lover have thou slain, and wylt
Thy poring in wol nowhere let hem dwell
what profrest thou thy light herefor to sell?
Go sell it hem that small seals grave
we woll the not, us needs no day have
And eke the sun Tytan began he chyde
And said, O fool, well may me^ the despise
That have al night the dawning by thy side
And suffrest her so soon up fro the rise
For to disease us lovers in this wise
what hold your bed, there thou and thy morrow
I bid god so give you both sorrow.
Therewith full sore he syghed, and thus he said
My lady right, and of my well or woe
The well and root, o goodly mine Creseyde
And shall I rise alas, and shall I so?
Now feel I that my heart mote a two
And how should I my life an hour save
Syns that with you is all the life I have?
what shall I done? for certes I not how
Ne when alas, I shall the time se
That in this plyte I may ben eft with you
And of my life god wot, how shall that be
Syns that desire right now so byteth me
That I am deed anon, but I return
How should I long alas, fro you soiourne?
But nathelesse, mine own lady bright
were it so that I wist utterly
That your humble servant, and your knight
were in your heart yset so fermely
As ye in mine, the which truly
Me lever were than these worlds twain
Yet should I bet enduren all my pain
To that Creseyde answered right anon
And with a sygh she said: O heart dear
The game ywys so ferforth now is gone
That first shall Phoebus fallen fro the spear
And eueryche the Egle ben the doves fere
And every rock out of his place sterte
Er Troylus go out of Creseydes heart.
Ye ben so deep within my heart grave
That tho I would it turn out of my thout
As wisely very god my soul save
To dyen in the pain, I could naught
And for ye love of god yt us has wrought
Let in your brain none other fantasy
So crepe, that it cause me to dye.
And that ye me would have as fast in mind
As I have you, that would I you beseech
And if I wist sothly that to find
God might not apoynt my joys each
But heart mine withouten more speech
Beth to me true, or else were it routh
For I am thine, by god and by my troth.
Beth glad for thy, and live in sykernesse
Thus said I never er this, ne shall to mo
And if to you it were a great gladness
To turn again sone after that ye go
As feign would I as ye, it were so
As wisely god mine heart bring to rest
And him in arms took, and often kest
Against his will, sith it must needs be
This Troylus up rose, and fast him cledde
And in his arms took his lady free
An hundred times, and on his way him sped
And with such words as his heart bledde
He said: farewell my dear heart sweet
That god us grant sound and sone to mete
To which no word for sorrow she answered
So sore began his partyng her distrayne
And Troylus unto his palleys ferde
As woe begone as she was, soth to said
So hard him wrong of sharp desire ye pain
For to ben efte there he was in pleasaunce
That it may never out of his remembrance.
Returned to his royal palleys sone
He soft unto his bed began for to slynke
To sleep long, as he was wont to done
But al for nout he may well lyg and wynke
But sleep may there non in his heart synke
Thinking how she, for who^ desire him bre^d
A M. fold was worth more than he wend
And in his thout began up and down to wind
Her words al, and every countenance
And fermely impressen in his mind
The lest point, that to him was plesaunce
And verily of thylke remembrance
Desire al new him brende, and lust to bread
Began more than erst and yet took he non head
Creseyde also, right in the same wise
Of Troylus began in her heart shette
His worthynesse, his lust, his deeds wise
His gentleness, and how she with him met
Thonkyng love, he so well her beset
Desyryng often to have her heart dear
In such a place as she durst make him chere
Pandare a morrow which that common was
Unto his nece, and began her fair great
And said: all this night so rayned it alas
That al my dread is, that ye nece sweet
Have little leyser had to sleep and mete
all this night (quod he) has rainso do me wake
That some of us I trow her heedes ache
And nere he came, and said how stant it now
This merry morrow nece how can ye fare
Creseyde answered: never the bet for you
Fox that ye ben, god give your heart care
God help me so, ye caused all this fare
Trow I (quod she) for all your words white
O who so sees you, knows you full lyte
with that she began her face for to wry
with the shete, and woxe for shame al reed
And Pandarus began under for to prye
And said, if that I shall ben deed
Have here a sword, and smyt of my heed
with that his arm, all suddenly he thryst
Under her neck, and at the last her kyst.
I pass al ye which charge naught to say
what, god foryaue his death, and she also
Foryaue: and with her uncle began to play
For other cause was there none, than so
But of this thing right to theffect to go
wha^ time was, home to her house she went
And Pandare has fully his intent.
Now turn we again to Troylus
That restless full long a bed lay
And pryuily sent after Pandarus
To him to come in all the haste he may
He came anon, not ones said nay
And Troylus full sobrely he great
And down upon the beds side him set
This Troylus with all thaffectioun
Of friendly love, that heart may deuyse
To Pandarus on knees fill adowne
And er that he would of the place arise
He began him thanken on his best wise
An hundred time he began the time bless
That he was borne to bring him to distress
He said: O friend of friends, the alderbest
That ever was, the soth for to tell
Thou have in heaven wrought my soul at rest
Fro Phlegeton the fyrye flood of hell
That though I might a thousand times sell
Upon a day my life in thy seruyse
It might not a mote in that suffyse.
The sun which that all the world may se
Saw never yet, my life that dare I leye
So ioly, fair, and goodly as is she
whose I am all, and shall till that I dye
And that I thus am hers dare I seye
That thanked be the high worthynesse
Of love, and eke thy kind business
Thus have thou me no little thing iyeue
For why, to the obleged be for aye
My life and why? for through thyn help I live
Or else deed had I ben ago many a day
And with that word down in his bed he lay
And Pandarus full soberly him herd
Till all was said: and than he him answered.
My dear friend, I have done for the
In any case god wot it is me lefe
And am as glad as man may of it be
God help me so, but take now not agrefe
That I shall sayn, beware of this mischefe
That there as now brought art to thy bliss
That thou thy self, ne cause it not to mysse.
For of fortunes sharp adversity
The worst kind of infortune is this
A man to have been in prosperity
And it remember when it passed is
Thou art wise ynou for thy do not amys
Be not to rakel though thou sit warm
For if thou be, certain it woll the harm
Thou art at ese, and hold the well therein
For also sure as red is every fire
As great a craft is to keep well, as win
Bridle always well thy speech and thy desire
For wordly joy holds not but by a wyre
That preueth well it breast alday so often
For thy need is to werken with it soft
(Quod Troylus) I hope, and god toforne
My dear friend, that I shall so me bear
That in my gilt there shall nothing ben lorn
Ne I nyll not rakle, as for to greuen here
It needs not this matter often tere
For wistest thou mine heart well Pandare
God wot of this thou would lyte care
Tho began he tell him of his glad night
And whereof first his heart drad, and how
And said friend, as I am true knight
And by that faith I owe to god and you
I had it never half so hot as now
And aye the more that desire me byteth
To love her best the more it me delyteth.
I not my self not wisely what it is
But now I feel a new quality
Yea all an other than I did or this
Pandare answered and said thus, that he
That ones may in heaven bliss be
He feleth other ways dare I lay
Than thilke time he first herd of it say
This is a word for all, that Troylus
was never full to speak of this matere
And for to praysen unto Pandarus
The bounty of his right lady dear
And Pandarus to thank, and maken chere
This tale was aye span new to begin
Till that the night departed hem atwyn
Sone after this, for that fortune it would
I comen was the blysfull time sweet
That Troylus was warned, yt he should
There he was erst, Creseyde his lady mete
For which he felt his heart in joy flete
And faithfully began all the gods hery
And let se now, if that he can be merry
And holden was the form and all the gyse
Of her coming, and of his also
As it was erst which needs naught devise
But plainly to theffect right for to go
In joy and surety Pandarus hem two
Abed brought when hem both lest
And thus they ben in quiet and in rest
Naught needs it to you, sith they ben met
To ask at me, if that they blythe were
For it erst was well, tho was it bet
A thousand fold, this needs not enquere
Ago was every sorrow and every fere
And both ywys they had, and so they wend
As much joy as heart may comprehend.
This nys no little thing of for to sey
This passes every wit for to deuyse
For each of hem began other lusts obey
Felicity, which that these clerks wise
Co^menden so, ne may not here suffyse
This joy may not written be with ynke
This passes all that heart may bethynke
But cruel day, so welaway the stounde
Began for to aproch, as they by signs knew
For which hem thought felen dethes wou^d
So woe was hem, yt chaungen began her hew
And day they gonnen to despise all new
Calling traitor, enuyous and worse
And bytterly the days light they curse.
(Quod Troylus) alas, now am I ware
That Pyrous, and tho swyft stedes three
which that drawn forth the sons chare
Han gone some bypath in despyte of me
And makes it so soon day to be
And for the sun him hastes thus to rise
Ne shall I never don him sacrifyce
But needs day depart hem must sone
And when her speech don was and her chere
They twyn anon, as they were wont to don
And setten time of metyng eft yfere
And many a night they wrout in this manner.
And thus fortune a time lad in joy
Creseyde, and eke this kings son of Troy.
In suffysaunce, in bliss, and in syngynges
This Troylus began al his life to lead
He spends, iusteth, and makes feestynges
He yeueth freely often, and changes wede
He held about him always out of dread
A world of folk, as com him well of kind
The freshest and the best he could find.
That such a voice was of him, and a steven
Throughout you world of honor and largess
That it up ronge unto the yate of heaven
And as in love he was in such gladness
That in his heart, he demed as I guess
That there nis lover in this world at ease
So well as he, and thus began love him plese
The goodlyhed or beauty, which yt kind
In any other lady had ysette
Can not ye mou^tenaunce of a gnat unbind
About his heart of all Creseydes net
He was so narowe ymasked and yknette
That is undone on any manner side
That nyll not ben for ought yt may betyde
And by the hand full often he would take
This Pandarus, and into garden led
And such a feast, and such a process make
Him of Creseyde, and of her womanheed
And of her beauty, that withouten dread
It was an heaven his words for to here
And than he would sing in this manner
Love that of earth, and see has governance
Love, that his heestes has in heaven hye
Love, that with an wholesome alyaunce
Halt people joined, as him list hem gye
Love, that knytteth law and company
And couples does in virtue for to dwell
Bind this accord, yt I have told, and tell.
That yt the world with faith which yt is stable
Dyuerseth so his stoundes according
That elements that beth so discordable
Holden abonde perpetually during
That Phoebus mote his rosy day forth bring
And yt the moon has lordship over ye nites
All this does loueaye heried be his mightes
That yt the sea, that gredy is to flowen
Constrayneth to a certain end so
His floudes, that so fersly they ne grown
To drenchen earth and all for euermo
And if that love ought let his bridle go
All that now loves asondre should lepe
And lost were al, yt love halt now to hepe
So would to god, that author is of kind
That with his bond, love of his virtue list
To serchen hertes al, and fast bind
That from his bo^d no wight ye wey out wist
And hertes cold hem, would I yt hem twyst
To make hem love, and that hem list aye rue
On hertes sore, and keep hem that been true.
In all needs for the towns werre
He was, and aye the first in arms dyght
And certainly, but if that books err
Have Hector, most ydradde of any wight
And this increase of hardynesse and might
Com him of love, his ladies thank to win
That altered his spyrite so within.
In time of truce on hauking would he ride
Or else hunt bore, bear, or lyoun
The small beestes let he gone beside
And when yt he come rydyng into ye town
Full often his lady from her window down
As fresh as faucon, comen out of mue
Full ready was him goodly to salve
And most of love and virtue was his speech
And in despyte had al wretchedness
And doutlesse no need was him beseech
To honouren hem, that had worthynesse
And easen hem that weren in distress
And glad was he if any wight well ferde
That lover was, when he it wist or herd.
For soth to said, he lost held every wit
But if he were in loves high service
I mean folk that ought it ben of right
And over all this, so well could he deuyse
Of sentement, and in so uncouth wise
All his array, that every lover thought
That all was well, what so he said or wrought.
And though that he be come of blood royal
Him list of pride, at no wight for to chase
Benign he was to each in general
For which he gat him thank in every place
Thus would love yhered be his grace
That pride and ire, envy and auaryce
He began to fly, and every other vice
Thou lady bright, the daughter of Diane
Thy blind and winged son eke Dan Cupide
Ye sustren nine, eke that by Helic^ne
In hyl Pernaso lysten fyr to abide
That ye thus far han deyned me to gyde
I can no more but syns that ye woll wend
Ye heryed ben for aye withouten end.
Through you have I said fully in my so^ge
Theffect and joy of Troylus service
All be it there was some disease among
As mine auctour lysteth to deuyse
My third book now end I in this wise
And Troylus in lust and in quyete
Is with Creseyde his own heart sweet
Explicit liber tertius.
But all to little, welaway the while
Lasts such joy, ythonked be fortune
That seems trewest when she woll begyle
And can to fools so her song entune
That she hem hent, ye ble^t traitor common
And wha^ a wight is from her whele ythrow
Tha^ laugheth she, and makes him the mow.
From Troylus she began her bright face
Away to wryth, and took of him none head
And cast him clean out of his ladies grace
And on her whele she set up Diomede
For which mine heart rit now gives blede
And now my pen alas with which I write
Quaketh for dread, of that I must endyte
For how Creseyde Troylus forsook
Or at the least, how that she was unkind
Mote hence forth, ben matter of my book
As written folk, through which it is in mind
Alas that they should ever cause find
To speak her harm, and if they on her lie
Iwys hem self should have the vilanye
O ye Herynes nyghtes daughters three
That endless complain ever in pain
Megera, Alle^to, and eke Tesiphonee
Thou cruel Mars eke, father of Quiryne
This ylke Fourth book help me to fine
So that the loos, and love, and life yfere
Of Troylus be fully showed here.
Incipit liber Quartus.
LIgging in host, as I have said er this
The greeks strong, about Troy town
Byfell, that when that Phoebus shynyng is
Upon the breast of Hercules Lion
That Hector, with many a bold baron
Cast on a day with greeks for to fight
As he was wont, to grieve he^ what he might
Not I how long or short it was between
This purpose, and that day they fyghte^ mente
But on a day well armed bright and shene
Hector and many a worthy knight out went
with spear in hond, and bygge bows bente
And in the berde withouten longer let
Her fomen in the field anon hem met
The long day with spears sharp ygrou^de
with arowes, darts, swerdes, and maces fell
They fight, and bringen horse and man to ground
And with her axes out the brains quell
But in the last shoure, sothe to tell
The folk of Troy hem seluen so misledden
That with ye worse at night hom they fledde^
At wyche day was taken Anthenor
Maugre Polymydas, or Monesteo
Xantyppe, Sarpedon, Palestynor
Polyte, or eke the Troyan dan Rupheo
And other less folk, as Phebuseo
So that for harm ye day the folk of Troy
Dredden to lose a great part of her joy
Of Priamus was give, at greeks request
A time of truce, and tho they gonnen trete
Her Prisoners to chaungen most and lest
And for the surplus yeuen sommes great
This thing anon was couthe in every street
Both in thassege, in town, and every where
And with the first it came to Calkas eere
when Calkas knew this tretyse should hold
In consystorie among the greeks sone
He began in thring, forth with lords old
And set him there as he was wont to done
And with a changed face, hem bade above
For love of god, to done that reverence
To stynten noise, and give him audyence
Than said he thus, lo lords mine I was
Troyan, as it is known out of dread
And if that you remember, I am Calkas
That alderfyrst yaue comfort to your need
And told well how that ye should speed
For dredelesse through you shall in a stounde
Ben Troy ybrent, and beaten down to ground
And in what form, or in what manner wise
This town to shende, and al your lust tacheue
Ye have er this well herd me deuyse
This know ye my lords, as I leave
And for the greeks weren me so leave
I came my self in my propre person
To teache in this, how you was best to done
Having unto my treasour, ne my rent
Right no regard, in respect of your ease
Thus al my good I left, and to you went
wenyng in this you lords for to please
But all that loss ne does me no disease
I vouchsafe, as wisely have I joy
For you to lose, all that I have in Troy
Save of a daughter that I left, alas?
Slepyng at home, when out of Troy I stert
O stern, o cruel father that I was
How might I have in that so hard an heart?
Alas that I ne had brought her in my shert
For sorrow of which I wol not live to morrow
But if ye lords rewe upon my sorrow
For because that I saw no time er now
Her to deliver, iche holden have my pees
But now or never, if that it like you
I may her have right soon doutlees
O help and grace, among all this prees
Rewe on this old caytyfe in dystresse
Since I through you have all this heaviness
Ye have now caught, and fettred in prison
Troyans ynow, and if your wylles be
My child with one may have redemption
Now for the love of god, and of bounte
One of so feel alas, so yefe him me
what need were it this prayer for to werne
Since ye shul have, both folk and town as yern
On peril of my life I shall not lie
Apollo has me told full faytfully
I have eke found it by astronomy
By sort, and by augury trewly
And dare well say the time is fast by
That fire and slambe on all ye town shall sprede
And thus shall Troy turn to ashen deed
For certain Phoebus, and Neptunus both
That makeden the walls of the town
Ben with the folk of Troy always so wroth
That they wol bring it to confusyoun
Right in despyte of king Lamedoun
By cause he nolde payen hem her hyre
The town of Troy shall ben set on fire
Tellyng his tale always this old gray
Humble in his speech and lokyng eke
The salt teeres from his eyes twey
Full fast ronnen down by either cheke
So long he began of socoure hem beseke
That for to heal him of his sorrows sore
They gave him Antenor, withouten more
But who was glad enough, but Calcas tho
And of this thing full sone his needs leyde
On hem that shulden for the tretyse go
And hem for Antenor full often preyde
To bringen home king Thoas, and Creseyde
And when Priam his safegarde sent
Thembassadours to Troy straight they went
The cause I told of her coming, the old
Priam the king, full sone in general
Let here upon his parlyment hold
Of which theffecte rehercen you I shall
Thembassadours ben answerde for fynal
The eschaunge of prisoners, and all this need
Hem lyketh well, and forth in they proceed
This Troylus was present in the place
when asked was for Antenor Creseyde
For which full sone chaungen began his face
As he yt with tho words well nyghe deyde
But nathelesse he no word to it seyde
Lest men should his affection espy
with man's heart, he began his sorrows dry
And full of anguyshe and of grisly dread
Abode, what other lords would to it sey
And if they would grant, as god forbede
theschau^ge of her, tha^ thout he things twey
First, how to save her honor, and what wey
He might best theschaunge of her withstonde
Full fast he cast how all this might stand
Love him made al pressed to done her bide
And rather dyen, than she should go
But Reason said him on that other side
withouten assent of her, do not so
Lest for thy work she would be thy foe
And sayn, yt thorugh thy meddling is yblowe
Your bother love, there it was erst unknow
For which he began delyberen for the best
And though the lords would that she went
He would let hem grant what hem lest
And tell his lady first what that they meant
And when that she had said him her intent
Thereafter would he worken also blyue
Tho all the world again it would strive
Hector which that well the greeks herd
For Antenor, how they would have Creseyde
Began it wythstonde, and soberly answerde
Syrs, she nys no prisoner (he seyde)
I not on you who that this charge leyde
But on my part, ye may eftsoon hem tell
we vsen here, no women for to sell
The noise of people up sterte than atones
As brymme as blase of straw yset on fire
For in fortune it would for the nones
They shulden her confusyon desire
Hector (quod they) what ghost may you enspyre
This woman thus to shild, and done us lose
Dan Antenor, a wrong way now ye chese
That is so wise, and eke so bold baroun
And we have need to folk, as men may se
He is one the grettest of this town
O Hector, let thy fantasies be
O king Priam (quod they) thus segge we
That all our voice is to forgone Creseyde
And to deliver Antenore they preyde
O Iuuenall lord, true is thy sentence
That little wenen folk what is to yerne
That they ne fynden in her desire offense
For cloud of error let hem discerue
what best is, and lo, here ensample as yerne
These folk desyren now delyueraunce
Of Antenore that brought hem to mischau^ce
For he was after traitor to the town
Or Troy alas, they quytte him out to rathe
O nyce world, lo thy discrecion
Creseyde, which that never did hem scathe
Shall now no longer in her bliss bathe
But Antenor, he shall come home to town
And she shall out, thus said here and howne
For which delybered was by parlyment
For Antenor to yelden out Creseyde
And it pronounced by the presydent
Though that Hector nay full often prayde
And finally, what wight that it withsayde
It was for naught, it must ben, and should
For substance of the parlyment it would
Departed out of parlyment echone
This Troylus, without words mo
Unto his chamber spedde him fast alone
But if it were a man of his or two
The which he bade out fa^te for to go
Because he would slepen, as he said
And hastily upon his bed him laid
And as in winter leaves ben byrafte
Each after other till trees be bare
So that there nys but bark and brau^che ylafte
Lythe Troylus, byrafte of each welfare
I bounden in the black bark of care
Disposed wood out of his wit to breyde
So sore him sat the chaungyng of Creseyde
He ryst him up, and every door he shette
And wyndowe eke, and tho this soroufull man
Upon his beds side down him set
Full like a deed image, pale and wan
And in his breast the heaped woe began
Out bueste, and he to worken in this wise
In his woodnesse, as I shall you deuyse
Right as ye wild bulle begins spring
Now here now there, ydarted to the heart
And of his death roreth, in complaynyng
Right so began he about the chamber sterte
Smyting his breast, aye with his fystes smert
His heed to the wall, his body to the ground
Full often he swapte him seluen to confound
His eyes two for pity of his heart
Out stremeden as swyfte as wells twey
The high sobbes of his sorrows smerte
His speech him refte, uneaths might he sey
O death alas, why nylte thou do me dey?
Acursed be that day which that nature
Shope me to ben a lives creature
But after when the fury and all the rage
which that his heart twysle, and fast threst
By length of time somewhat began aswage
Upon his bed he laid him down to rest
But tho begone his tears more out to breast
That wonder is the body may suffyse
To half this woe, which that I you deuyse
Than said he thus: Fortune alas ye while
what have I done? what have I the agylte?
How myghtest thou for routhe me begyle?
Is there no grace? and shall I thus be spylt?
Shall thus Creseyde away for yt thou will
Alas: how might thou in thyn heart find
To ben to me thus cruel and unkind?
Have I the not honored all my live?
As thou well worest, above the gods all
why will thou me fro joy thus deprive
O Troylus, what may men now the call
But wretch of wretches, out of honor fall
In to mysery, in which I wol bewail
Creseyde alas, till that the brethe me fail
Alas Fortune, if that my life in joy
Displeased had unto thy foul envy
why ne had thou my father king of Troy
Berafte the life, or done my brethern dye
Or slain my self, yt thus complain and cry
I combre world, that may of nothing serve
But ever dye, and never fully sterue
If that Creseyde alone were me lafte
Naught raught I whyder thou would me stere
And her alas, tha^ have thou me byraft
But evermore, lo this is thy manner
To reave a wight, that most is to him dear
To preue in that thy gierful vyolence
Thus am I lost, there helps no defense
O very lord, O love, o god alas
That know best mine heart, and al my thout
what shall my sorouful life done in this caas
If I forgo that I so dear have bought
Sens ye Creseyde and me have fully brought
In to your grace, and both our hertes sealed
How may ye suffer alas it be repealed
what I may done I shall, while I may dure
On live, in turment and in cruel pain
This infortune, or this disauenture
Alone as I was borne I woll complain
Ne never wol I seen it shine or rain
But end I wol as Edippe in derknesse
My sorouful life, and dyen in distress
O weary ghost, that errest to and fro
why nylt thou styen out of the wofullest
Body that ever might on ground go?
O soul, lurkyng in this woeful neste
Fly forthout mine heart, and it breast
And follow always Creseyde thy lady dear
Thy right place is now no longer here
O woeful eyes two, sens your disporte
was al to seen Creseydes eyes bright
what shall ye done, but for my discomforte
Stonde^ for naught, and wepen out your sight
Sens she is queynt, yt wo^t was you to light
In vein from this forth have I eyes twey
I formed, sens your virtue is awey
O my Creseyde, O lady sovereign
Of this woeful soul that thus cries
who shall now yeuen comfort to thy pain
Alas no wight, but when mine heart dies
My spyrite, which that so unto you hyeth
Receive in gree, for that shall aye you serve
For thy no force is, though the body sterue
O ye lovers, that high upon the whele
Ben set of Fortune, in good adventure
God lene that ye fynden aye love of stele
And long mote your life in joy endure
But when ye comen by my sepulture
Remembers that your fellow rests there
For I loved eke, though I unworthy were
O old unwholesome and mislyued man
Calkas I mean, alas what eyled the
To ben a greek? sens thou art borne Troyan
O Calcas, which that wolte my bane be
In cursed time waste thou borne for me
As would blysful Jove for his joy
That I the had where I would in Troy
A thousand syghes hotter than the glede
Out of his breast, each after other went
Meddled with playnte new, his woe to feed
For which his woeful teeres never slente
And shortly so his sorrows him to rent
And woxe so mate, that joy or penance
He feleth none, but lies in a trance
Pandare, which that in the parlyment
Had herd what every lord and burgeys seyde
And how full granted was by one assent
For Antenor, to yelden out Creyseyde
Began well nigh wode out of his wit to breyde
So that for woe he nyste what he mente
But in a race to Troylus he went
A certain knight, that for the time kept
The chamber door, vndyd it him anon
And Pandare that full tenderly wept
In to the derke chamber as still as stone
Toward the bed began softely to gone
So confuse, that he nyste what to say
For very woe, his wit was nyghe away
And with chere and lokyng al to torn
For sorrow of this, and with his arms folden
He stood this woeful Troylus beforne
And on his pytous face he began beholden
But so often began his heart colden
Seeing his friend in woe, whose heaviness
His heart slough, as thought him for distress
This woeful wight, this Troylus that felt
His friend Pandare ycomen him to se
Began as the snow against the son melte
For which this woeful Pandare, of pity
Began for to weep, as tenderly as he
And spechelesse thus ben these ylke twey
That neither might for sorrow o word sey
But at the last, this woeful Troylus
Nygh deed for smert, began bresten out to rore
And with a forouful noise he said thus
Among his sobbes and his syghes sore
Lo Pandare I am deed, withouten more
Haste thou not herd at parlyment he seyde
For Antenor how lost is my Creseyde
This Pandare full deed and pale of hew
Full pitously answerde, and said yes
As wisely were it false as it is true
That I have herd, and wot al how it is
O mercy god, who would have trowed this
who would have we^de, yt in so little a throw
Fortune our joy would have overthrow
For in this world there is no creature
As to my dome, that ever saw ruin
Stranger tha^ this, through case or aue^ture
But who may al eschew or al deuyne
Such is this world, for thy I thus defyne
Ne trust no wight to find in Fortune
Aye propretie, her yeftes ben common
But tell me this, why thou art now so mad
To sorowe^ thus, why lie thou in this wise
Sens thy desire al holly haste thou had
So that by right, it ought enough suffyse
But I that never felt in my service
A friendly chere or lokyng of an eye
Let me thus weep and waylen till I dye
And over all this, as thou well wost thy selue
This town is full of ladies al about
And to my dome, fayrer than such twelve
As ever she was, shall I fynde^ in some route
Yea one or twey, withouten any doubt
For thy be glad mine own dear brother
If she be lost, we shall recover an other
What god forbid always yt each plesaunce
In o thing were, and in non other wight
If one can sing, another can well dance
If this be goodly, she is glad and light
And this is fair, and that can good aright
Each for his virtue holden is for dear
Both heroner and faucon for ryuere
And eke as writ zansis, that was full wise
The new love out chaseth often the old
And upon new case lythe new auyse
Think eke thy self to sauen art thou hold
Such fire by process, shall of kind cold
For sens it is but casuell plesaunce
Some case shall put it out of remembrance
For also sure as day comes after night
The new love, labor, or other woe
Or else selde seeing of a wight
Done old affections al over go
And for thy part, thou shalt have one of tho
To abredge with thy bitter pains smerte
Absence of her, shall drive her out of heart
These words said he for the nones all
To help his friend, lest he for sorrow deyde
For doutlesse to don his woe to fall
He raught not what unthrift that he seyde
But Troylus that nygh for sorrow deyde
Took little head, of all that ever he mente
One eere it herd, at the other out it went
But at the last he answerde, and said friend
This lechcrafte, or healed thus to be
were well syttyng, if that I were a fend
To trayen a wight, that true is unto me
I pray god let this counsel never ythe
But do me rather sterue anon right here
Er I thus done, as thou me would lere
She that I serve ywis, what so thou seye
To whom mine heart enhabyt is by right
Shall have me holly hers till that I deye
For Pandarus, sens I have troth her hight
I wol not ben untrue for no wight
But as her man I woll aye live and sterue
And never none other creature serve
And there thou say you shall as fair find
As she, let be, make no comparyson
To creature yformed here by kind
O leave Pandare, in conclusyon
I wol not ben of thine opinyon
Touching al this, for which I the beseech
So hold thy piece, thou sleest me with thy spech
Thou byddest me I should love another
All freshly new, and let Creseyde go
It lythe not in my power leave brother
And though I might, yet wol I not do so
But canste thou playen raket to and fro
Netle in docke out, now this now ye Pa^dare
Now foul fall her for thy woe that care
Thou farest eke by me Pandarus
As he, that when a wight is woe bygon
He comes to him a pace, and says right thus
Think not on smerte, and thou shall feel none
Thou may me first transmewe^ in a stone
And reave me my passions all
Or thou so lightly do my woe to fall
The death may well out of my breast depart
The life so long may this sorrow mine
But fro my soul shall Creseydes darte
Out neuermore, but down with Proserpyne
when I am deed, I wol won in pyne
And there I woll eternally complain
My woe, and how that twynned be we twain
Thou have here made an argument forfyne
How that it should less pain be
Creseyde to forgon, for she was mine
And lived in ^ase and in felycite
why gabbest thou, that saydest unto me
That him is worse that is fro well ythrowe
Than he had erst none of that well know
But tell me now, sens yt the thinks so light
To chaungen so in love aye to and fro
why haste thou not done besily thy might
To chaungen her, that does the al thy woe?
why nylte thou let her fro thine heart go?
why nylte thou love another lady sweet
That may thine heart setten in quyete?
If thou haste had in love aye yet mischau^ce
And canste it not out of thine heart drive
I that lived in lust and in plesaunce
with her, as much as creature on live
How should I that foryet, and that so blyue
O where have thou ben hyd so long in mewe
That canste so well and formelyche argewe
Nay godwote, naught worth is al thy read
For which, for what that ever may befall
withouten words mo I wol ben deed
O death, that ender art of sorrows all
Come now, sens I so often after the call
For sely is that death, sothe for to said
That often ycleped, comes and ends pain
well wot I, while my life was in quiet
Er thou me slew, I would have yeuen hyre
But now thy coming is to me so sweet
That in this world, I nothing so desire
O death, sens with this sorrow I am a fire
Thou either do me anon in teeres drenche
Or with thy cold stroke mine heart quench
Sens that thou sleest so feel in sondrie wise
Against her will, vnprayed day and night
Do me at my request this service
Deliver now the world, so doste thou right
Of me that am the wofullest wight
That ever was, for time is that I sterue
Se^s in this world of right naut do I serve
This Troylus in teeres began distyll
As lycoure out of allambyke full fast
And Pandarus began hold his tongue still
And to the ground his eyes down he cast
But nathelesse, thus thought he at last
what parde, rather than my felawe dey
Yet shall I somewhat more unto him sey
And said friend, sens thou have such distress
And sens the list mine arguments blame
why nylt thy seluen help don redress
And with thy manhood letten all this game
Go ravish her, ne can thou not for shame?
And either let her out of town fare
Or hold her still, and leave thy nyce fare
Art thou in Troy, and haste non hardyme^t
To take a wight, which that loves the
And would her seluen ben of thine assent
Now is not this a nyce vanyte
Rise up anon, and let this weeping be
And sithe thou art a man, for in this hour
I woll ben deed, or she shall ben our
To this answerde him Troylus full soft
And said, iwys my leave brother dear
All this have I my self yet thought full often
And more thing than thou deuysest here
But why this thing is laft, you shall well here
And when thou haste me yeuen audyence
Thereafter may thou tell all thy sentence
First syn you wost this town has all this werre
For rauyshyng of women so by might
It should not ben suffered me to err
As it stonte now, ne done so great unright
I should have also blame of every wight
My fathers grant if that I so withstode
Sens she is changed for the towns good
I have eke thought, so it were her assent
To ask her at my father of his grace
Then think I, this were her accusement
Sens well I wot I may her not purchase
For sens my father in so high a place
As parlyment, has her eschaunge ensealed
He nyll for me his lettre be repealed
Yet dread I most her heart to perturbe
with violence, if I do such a game
For if I would it openly dysturbe
It must be dysclaundre to her name
And me were lever dye then her defame
As nolde god, but I should have
Her honor, lever then my life to save
Thus am I lost, for aught that I can se
For certain is that I am her knight
I must her honor lever have then me
In every case, as lover ought of right
Thus am I with desire and reason twyght
Desire for to dystourben her me redeth
And reason nyll not, so mine heart dredeth
Thus weeping, that he could never cease
He said alas, how shall I wretch fare
For well feel I always my love increase
And hope is less and less Pandare
Encreasen eke the causes of my care
So welawaye, why nyll mine heart breast
For as in love there is but little rest
Pandare answered, friend thou may for me
Done as the list, but had I it so hot
And thine estate, she should go with me
Tho all this town cried on this thing by note
I nolde set at all that noise a grote
For when me^ have cried the^ woll they run
Eke wonder last but.ix. days never in tonne
Deuyne not in reason aye so deep
Ne curtesly, but help thy self anon
Bet is that other then thy seluen weep
And namely sens ye two ben all one
Rise up, for by mine heed she shall not gone
And rather be in blame a little yfounde
The^ sterue here as a gnat withoute^ wound
It is no shame unto you ne no vice
Her to with holden, that ye loves most
Parauenture she might hold the for nyce
So letten her go thus unto the greeks host
Think eke fortune, as well thy seluen woste
Helps hardy man unto his empryse
And weyueth wretches, for her cowardyse
And though thy lady would alyte her grieve
Thou shall thy self thy peace herafter make
But as to me certain I can not leave
That she would it as now for yuell take
why should then for fear thine heart quake
Think how Paris has, yt is thy brother
A love, and why shall thou not have another
And Troylus, o thing I dare the swear
That if Creseyde, which that is thy lefe
Now loves the, as well as thou doste here
God help me so, she nyll not take a grefe
Though you do boot anon in this myschefe
And if she wylneth fro the for to pass
Then is she false, so love her well the less
For thy take heart, and think right as a knight
Through love is broken aldaye every law
Kyth now somewhat thy courage and thy might
Have mercy on thy self for any awe
Let not this wretched woe thine heart gnawe
But manly set the world on six and seven
And if thou dye a marter go to heaven
I wol my self ben with the at this deed
Though I and all my kyn upon a stounde
Should in a street, as dogs lyggen deed
Through gyrte with many a bloody wound
In every case I woll a friend be found
And if the lysteth here steruen as a wretch
Adieu, the deuell speed him that retche
This Troylus began with tho words quicken
And said friend, grant mercy, I assent
But certainly thou may not so me prycken
Ne pain none ne may me so turment
That for no case, it is not mine intent
At short words, though I dyen should
To rauyshen her, but if her self it would
why, so mean I (quod Pa^darus) all this day
But tell me then, have thou her well assayde
That sorowest thus? and he answerde him nay
whereof art thou (quod Pa^dare) the^ dysmayde
That nost not that she woll ben euel apayde
To rauyshe^ her, sens thou have not ben there
But if that Jove told it in thine eere
For thy rise up as naught ne were anon
And wash thy face, and to ye king thou we^de
Or he may wondren whyther thou art gone
Thou must with wisdom, him and other blede
Or upon case he may after the send
Or thou beware, and shortly brother dear
Be glad, and let me work in this matere
For I shall shape it so, that sekerly
Thou shall this night so^time in some manner
Come speken with thy lady privily
And by her words eke, as by her chere
Thou shall full sone aperceyue and well here
Of her intent, and in this case the best
And fare now well, for in this point I rest
The swyfte fame, which yt false things
Equal reports like the things true
was throughout Troy isled, with prestwinges
Fro man to man, and made his tale al new
How Calcas daughter with her bright hew
At parlyment without words more
I granted was, in change of Antenore
The which tale anon right as Creseyde
Had herd, she which yt of her father rought
(As in this case) right naut, ne when he deyd
Full busely to Jupiter besought
Give hem myschau^ce, yt this tretys brought
But shortly lest these tales soth were
She durst at no wight asken it for fere
As she that had her heart and al her mind
On Troylus yset so wonder fast
That all this world ne mit her love vnbynd
Ne Troylus out of her heart cast
She would be^ his, while yt her life may last
And she thus brenneth both in love and dread
So that she nyst what was best to read
But as men seen in town, and all about
That women vsen her friends to visyte
So to Creseyde of women came a route
For pitous joy, and wenden her delight
And with her tales dear enough a myte
These women, which that in the cite dwell
They set hem down, and said as I shall tell
(Quod first that one) I am glad trewly
Because of you, that shall your father se
Another said, ywys so am not I
For all to little has she with us be
(Quod tho the third) I hope ywys that she
Shall bryngen us the peace on every side
That when she goes, almighty god her gyde
Tho words and tho womannyshe things
She herd he^ right as though she thence were
For god it wot, her heart on other thing is
Although the body sat among hem there
Her aduertence is always else where
For Troylus full fast her soul sought
wythoute^ word, on him always she thought
These women that thus wende^ her to plese
About naught gonne all her tales spend
Such vanite ne can done her none ese
As she that all this mean while brende
Of other passion then they wend
So that she felt almost her heart dye
Fo woe, and weary of that company
For which might she no longer restrain
Her teryes, they began so up to well
That gave signs of her bitter pain
In which her spirit was, and must dwell
Reme^brynge her from heaven unto which hell
She fallen was, sens she forgo the sight
Of Troylus, and sorowfully she sight
And thylke fools, sitting her about
wend that she wept and syghed sore
Because that she should out of the route
Departen, and never play with hem more
And they that had known her of yore
Se her so weep, and thought it was kyndnesse
And each of hem wept eke for her dystresse
And besely they gonnen her to comforten
One thing god wot, on which she little thout
And with her tales wenden her dysporten
And to be glad they often her besought
But such an ease therewith they her wrought
Right as a man is eased for to feel
For ache of heed, to clawen him on his hele
But after all this nyce vanyte
They took her leave, and home they wente^ all
Creseyde full of sorrowful pity
Into her chamber up went out of the hall
And on her bed she began for deed to fall
In purpose never thence for to rise
And thus she wrought, as I shall you deuyse
Her ownded here, yt sonnyshe was of hew
She rent, and eke her fyngers long and small
She wrong full often, and bad god on her rewe
And with the death to do bote on her bale
Her hew whylom bright, that tho was pale
Bare witness of her woe, and her constraynte
And thus she spoke, sobbyng in her co^playnt
Alas (quod she) out of this regioun
I woeful wretch and infortuned wight
And borne in cursed constellatioun
Mote gone, and thus departen fro my knight
woe worth alas, that ylke days light
On which I saw him first with eyes twain
That causes me, and I him all this pain
Therwyth the teeres from her eyes two
Down fell, as shoure in Apryll swythe
Her white breast she bette, and for the woe
After the death she cried a thousand sith
Sens he that wont her woe was for to lyth
She mote forgone, for which dysauenture
She held her self a forloft creature
She said, how shall he done and I also
How should I live, if yt I from him twynne
O dear heart eke that I love so
who shall ye sorrow slene, that ye ben inn?
O Calkas father, thine be all this sin
O mother mine, that cleaped were Argyue
woe worth yt day, that thou me bare on live
To what fine should I live and sorowen thus?
How should a fyshe wythouten water dure?
what is Creseyde worth from Troylus?
How should a plant or lives creature
Live wythouten his kind noriture?
For which full often, a by word here I sey
That rotelesse mote grene sone dey
I shall don thus, sens neither sword ne darte
Dare I none handle, for the cruelte
That ylke day that I fro you depart
if sorrow of that nyl not my bane be
Then shall no meat ne drink come in me
Till I my soul out of my breast vnshethe
And thus my seluen woll I done to death
And Troylus, my clothes euerychone
Shul black ben, in tokenynge heart sweet
That I am as out of this world agone
That wont was you to set in quyete
And of mine order aye, till death me mete
The obseruaunce ever in your absence
Shall sorrow ben, complaynt, and abstynence
Mine heart, and eke the woeful ghost therein
Byqueth I with your spirit to complain
Eternally, for they shall never twyn
For though in earth twynned be we twain
Yet in the field of Pity, out of pain
That hight Elysos, shall we ben yfere
As Orpheus and Erudice his fere
Thus heart mine, for Antenor alas
I sone shall be changed, as I wene
But how shull ye done in this sorrowful cas
How shall your tender heart this sustene
But heart mine, foryet this sorrow and tene
And me also, for sothly for to sey
So ye welfare, I retche not to dey
How might it ever read ben or ysonge
The playnt that she made in her dystresse
I not, but as for me my little tongue
If I dyscryuen would her heaviness
It should make her sorrow seem less
Then that it was, and chyldyshly deface
Her hye complaynt, and therefore I it pace
Pandare, which that sent from Troylus
was unto Creseyde, as ye have herd deuyse
That for the best it was acorded thus
And he full glad to done him that seruyse
Unto Creseyde in a full secret wise
There as she lay, in turment and in rage
Came her to tell al holy his massage
And fond that she her seluen began to trete
Full petously, for with her salt teeres
Her breast and face ybathed was full wete
Her mighty tresses of her sonnysh heeres
Vnbroyden, hangen all about her eeres
which yaue him very sign of matere
Of death, which that her heart began desire
when she him saw, she began for sorrow anon
Her tery face, atwyxte her arms hyde
For which this Pandare is so woe bygon
That in the house he might uneath abide
As he that felt sorrow on every side
For if Creseyde had erst complained sore
Tho began she plain a thousand times more
And in her aspre playnte, thus she seyde
Pandare, first of joys mo then two
was causynge unto me Creseyde
That now transmued ben in cruel woe
whether shall I say to you welcome or no?
That alderfyrst me brought unto seruyse
Of love alas, that ends in such wise
Ends then love in woe? ye or men lies
And all worldly bliss, as thinks me
The end of bliss aye sorrow it occupyeth
And who troweth not that it so be
Let him upon me woeful wretch se
That my self hate, and aye my birth curse
Feeling always, fro wycke I go to worse
who some sees, he sees sorrow al atonis
Pain, turment, playnte, woe, and dystresse
Out of my woeful body harm there none is
As langour, anguyshe, cruel bytternesse
Annoye, smerte, dread, furye, and eke sycknesse
I trow ywys from heaven teeres rain
For pity of my aspre and cruel pain
And thou my sister, full of dyscomforte
(Quod Pa^darus) what think thou to do?
why ne have thou to thy seluen some resport?
why wylt thou thus alas thy self fordo?
Leave al this work, and take now head to
That I shall said, and harken of good intent
This message, yt by me Troylus you sent
Turned her tho Creseyde, a woe making
So great, that it a death was for to se
Alas (quod she) what words may ye bring
what woll my dear heart said to me
which that I dread never more to se
woll he have playnte or teeres er I wend
I have enough, if he thereafter send
She was right such to seen in her visage
As is that wight that men on bear bind
Her face like of paradys the image
was all ychaunged in another kind
The play ye laughter, me^ were wont to find
On her, and eke her joys euerychone
Ben fled, and thus lies Creseyde alone
About her eyes two, a purpre ring
Bytrent, in sothfast tokenynge of her pain
That to behold it was a deedly thing
For which Pandare might not restrain
The teeres from his eyes for to rain
But nathelesse as he best might he seyde
From Troylus these words to Creseyde
Lo nece, I trow ye han herd al how
The king with other lords for the best
Has made eschaunge of Antenor and you
That cause is of this sorrow and this unrest
But how this case does Troylus moleste
This may none earthly man's tongue say
For very woe, his wit is all away
For which we have so sorowed, he and I
That into little, it had us both slawe
But through my counsel this day fynaly
He somewhat is fro weeping wythdrawe
And seems me that he desires fawe
with you to ben all night for to deuyse
Remedy of this, if there were any wise
This short and plain, theffect of my message
As ferforth as my wit can comprehend
For ye that been of turment in such rage
May to no long prologe as now entende
And hervpon ye may answer him send
And for the love of God my nece dear
So leave this woe or Troylus be here
Great is my woe (quod she) and syghed sore
As she that feleth deedly sharp dystresse
But yet to me his sorrow is mokell more
That love him bet then he him self I guess
Alas, for me has he such heaviness
Can he for me so pytously complain
Iwys this sorrow doubleth al my pain
Grievous to me god wot is for to twynne
(Quod she) but yet it harder is to me
To seen that sorrow, which that he is inn
For well wot I, it wol my bane be
And dye I wol in certain tho (quod she)
But bid hi^ come, er death yt thus me threteth
Drive out yt ghost, which in mine heart beteth
These words said she, on her arms two
Fill gruffe, and began to wepen pytously
(Quod Pandarus) alas why do ye so
Sens ye well wot the time is fast by
That he shall come, arise up hastily
That he you not bewopen thus ne find
But ye wol have him wode out of his mind
For wist he that ye farde in this manner
He would him self flee: and if I wend
To have this fare, he should not come here
For all the good that Priam may dyspende
For to what fine he would anon pretend
That know I well, and for thy yet I sey
So leave this sorrow, or plainly he wol dey
And shapeth you his sorrow for to abredge
And not increase, lefe nece sweet
Beth rather to him cause of plat then edge
And with some wysedom, ye his sorrows beat
what helps it to wepen full a street
Or though ye both in salt teeres dreynte
Bet is a time of cure aye then of pleynte
I mean thus, when I him hither bring
Sens ye be wise, and both of one assent
So shapeth how to distourbe your going
Or come again sone after ye be went
women ben wise, in short auysement
And let seen how your wit shall avail
And what that I may help, it shall not fail
Go (quod Creseyde) and uncle truly
I shall done all my might me to restrain
From weeping in his sight, and besely
Him for to glad, I shall done all my pain
And in my heart seken every vain
If to this sore there may ben founden salve
It shall not lack certain on mine halue
Goth Pandarus, and Troylus he sought
Till in a temple he found him al alone
As he that of his life no longer rought
But to the pytouse gods euerychone
Full tendrely he prayed, and made his moan
To done him sone out of this world to pace
for well he thought there was non other grace
And shortly all the soth for to seye
He was so fallen in dyspayre that day
That utterly he shope him for to deye
For right thus was his argument always
He said he nas but lorne welaway
For all that comes, comes by necessite
Thus to be lorne is my destyne
For certainly this wot I well he said
That forsyght of divine purueyaunce
Had seen always me to forgone Creseyde
Sens god sees every thing out of doutau^ce
And hem dysposeth through his ordinance
In his merytes sothly for to be
As they shull comen by predestyne
But nathelesse alas, whom shall I leave
For there ben great clerks many one
That destynie, through arguments preue
And some said that nedely there is none
But that free choice is yeuen us euerychone
O welawaye, so slygh arne clerks old
That I not whose opinion I may hold
For some men said, ye god sees al byforne
Ne god may not dysceyued ben parde
Tha^ mote it fallen, though me^ had it sworn
That purueiaunce has seen beforne to be
wherefore I say, that from eterne if he
Has wist beforn our thout eke as our deed
we have no fre choice, as these clerks read
For other thought, nor other deed also
Might never ben, but such as purueyaunce
which may not ben dysceyued never mo
Has feled byforne, wythouten ignorance
For if there might ben a variaunce
To wrythen out fro gods purueynge
There nere no prescience of thing coming
But it were rather an opinion
Uncertain, and no steadfast foreseyng
And certes that were an abusyon
That god should have no parfite clear weting
More then we men, yt have doutous wening
But such an error upon god to guess
were false and foul, and wicked cursednesse
Eke this is an opinion of some
That have her top full high and smoth yshore
They sayn right thus, yt thing is not to come
For that the prescience has seen before
That it shall come, but they said yt therefore
That it shall come, therefore the purueyaunce
wot it beforne wythouten ignorance
And in this manner this necessyte
Returns in his part contrary again
For nedefully behooves it not to be
That thylke things fallen in certain
That be^ purueyed, but nedfully as they sayn
Behooves it that things which that fall
That they in certain ben puruayed all
I mean as though I labored me in this
To inquire which thing cause of which thing be
As whether that the prescie^ce of god is
The certain cause of the necessite
Of things that to comen be pardy
Or of necessite of thing coming
Because certain of the purueyeng
But now ne enforce I me not in showing
How ye order of ye causes sta^t, but well wot I
That it behooves that the befallyng
Of things wist before certainly
Be necessary, all seem it not thereby
That prescience put falling necessayre
To thing to come, all fall it foul or fair
For if there sit a man yonde on a see
That by necessite behooves it
That certes thine opinion soth be
That wenest or coniectest that he sit
And further over, now ayenwarde yet
Lo, right so is it on the part contrary
As thus, now harken for I woll not tarry
I say that if the opinion of the
Be soth for that he sit, then say I this
That he mote sytten by necessyte
And thus necessyte in either is
For in him need of sitting is ywys
And in the need of soth, and thus forsooth
There mote necessite ben in you both
But thou may said ye man sit not therefore
That thine opinion of his sitting soth is
But rather for the man sat there before
Therefore is thine opinion soth ywys
And I say, though the cause of soth of this
Comes of his sitting, yet necessite
Is entrechaunged, both in hem and in the
Thus in the same wise out of dontaunce
I may well maken, as it seems me
My reasonynge of gods purueyaunce
And of the things that to comen be
By which reason men may well yse
That thylke things that in earth fall
That by necessite they comen all
For all though that forthing shall come ywys
Therefore is it purueyd certainly
Not that it comes for it purueyed is
Yet nathelesse behooves it nedefully
That thing to come be purueyed truly
Or else things that purueyed be
That they betyden by necessyte
And this suffyseth right enough certain
For to destroy our free choice euerydel
But now is this abusyon to said
That falling of the things temporel
Is cause of the gods prescience eternell
Now truly that is a false sentence
That thing to come should cause his prescie^ce
what might I wene and I had such a thought
But that god purueyeth thing yt is to come
For that it is to come, and else naught
So might I wene that things al and some
That whylom ben byfal and overcome
Ben cause of thylke sovereign purueyaunce
That forewote all, wythouten ignorance
And oueral this, yet say I more thereto
That right as when I wot there is a thing
Iwys that thing mote nedefully be so
Eke right so, when I wot a thing coming
So mote it come, and thus the befallynge
Of things that been wist before the tide
They mow not ben eschewed on no side
The^ said he thus, almighty Jove in trone
That wotest of al this thing ye sothfastnesse
Rewe on my sorrow, and do me dyen sone
Or bring Creseyde and me fro this dystresse
And while he was in all this heaviness
Dysputynge with him self in this matere
Came Pandare in, and said as ye may here
O mighty god (quod Pandarus) in trone
Eygh, who saw ever a wise man faren so?
why Troylus, what thynkest thou to done?
Have thou such lust to ben thine own foe?
what parde, yet is not Creseyde ago
why list the so thy self fordone for dread
That in thine heed, thine eyes semen deed?
Have thou not lived many a year beforne
wythouten her? and farde full well atease
Art thou for her and for none other borne
Has kind ye wrought all only her to please
Let be and think right thus in thy disease
That in ye dyce, right as there fallen chau^ces
Right so in love there come and go plesau^ces.
And yet this is a wonder most of all
why thou thus sorowest since thou wust not yet
Touching her going, how yt it shall fall
Ne if she can her self distourben it
Thou have not yet assayed all her wit
A man may al betyme his neck bid
when it shall of, and sorowen at the need
For thy take heed of all that I shall say
I have with her yspoke and long ybe
So as accorded was betwyxt us twey
And euermo me thinks thus, that she
Has somewhat in her hertes priuitie
wherewith she can, if I shall aryght read
Disturb all this of which thou art in dread
For which my counsayl is when it is night
Thou to her go, and make of this an end
And blysful Juno, through her great might
Shall (as I hope) her grace unto us send
Mine heart sees certain she shall not wend
And for thy put thy heart a while in rest
And hold thy purpose, for it is the best.
This Troylus answerde, and syghed sore
Thou say right well, and I will do right so
And what him list, he said unto him more
And when it was time for to go
Full privily him self withouten mo
Unto her came, as he was wont to done
And how they wrought I shall you tell sone
Soth is, that when they gone first to mete
So began the pain her hertes for to twyst
That neither of hem other might great
But hem in arms took, and after kyst
The less woeful of hem both nyst
where yt he was, ne might o word out bring
As I said erst, for woe and for sobbyng
The woeful tears that they letten fall
As bitter weren out of teres kind
For pain, as is lignealoes, or gall
So bitter teeres wept not as I find
The woeful Myrra through ye bark and rynd
That in this world there nis so hard an heart
That nold have rewed on her pains smert
But when her woeful weary gostes twain
Returned ben there, as hem ought to dwell
And that somewhat to weaken began ye pain
By length of playnt, and ebben began the well
Of her tears, and the heart vnswell
with broken voice al horse, for shright Creseyde
To Troylus these ylke words said
O Jove I dye, and mercy the beseech
Help Troylus, and therewith all her face
Upon his breast she laid, and lost speech
Her woeful spyrit from his propre place
Right with the word away in point to pace
And thus she lyth with hewes pale and grene
That whylom fresh and fairest was to seen.
This Troylus that on her began behold
Cleping her name, and she lay as for deed
wtouten answer, and felt her lymmes cold
Her eyes thrown upward to her heed
This sorouful man can now non other read
But often time her cold mouth he kyst
where him was woe, god and him self it wist.
He rises him up, and long straight he her laid
For sign of life, for ought he can or may
Can he none find in nothing of Creseyde
For which his song full often is welaway
But when he saw that spechelesse she lay
with soroufull voice, and heart of bliss all bare
He said, how she was fro this world yfare
So after that he long had her co^playned
His ho^des wrong, and said that was to seye
And with his teeres salt her breast berayned
He began tho teeres wypen of full dreye
And pytously began for the soul preye
And said, lord that set art in thy trone
Rewe eke on me, for I shall follow her sone
She cold was, and without sentement
For ought he wot, for breath felt ne none
And thus was him a preignant argument
That she was forth out of this world agon
And wha^ he saw there was non other won
He began her lymmes dress in such manner
As men do on hem yt shall ben layen on bear
And after this, with stern and cruel heart
His sword anon out of his sheth he twight
Him self to sleen, how sore that him smerte
So that his soul her soul folowe^ might
There as the dome of Mynos would it dight
Sith love and cruel fortune it ne would
That in this world he longer lyuen should
Than said he thus, fulfyld of high disdayn
O cruel Jove, and thou fortune adverse
This al and some that falsely have ye slain
Creseyde, and sith ye may do me no werse
Fie on your might and works so diverse
Thus cowardly ye shall me never wyn
There shall no death me fro my lady twyn.
for I this world since ye have slain her thus
wol let and follow her spyrite low or hye
Shall never lover said, that Troylus
Dare not for fear with his lady dye
For certain I woll bear her company
But sith ye wol not suffer us lyuen here
Yet suffers that our souls ben yfere
And thou city, in which I live in woe
And thou Priam, and brethren al yfere
And thou my mother, farewell for I go
And Attropose make ready thou my bear
And thou Creseyde, o sweet heart dear
Receive now my spyrite, would he sey
with sword at heart all ready for to deye
But as god would, of swough she abrayde
And began to sygh, and Troylus she cryde
And he answered, lady mine Creseyde
Live ye yet? and let his sword down glyde
Yea heart mine, that thanked be cupyde
(Quod she) and therwithal she sore sight
And he began to glad her as he might
Took her in his arms two, and kyst her often
And her to glad, he did all his intent
For which her ghost yt flyckered aye a loft
Into her woeful heart again it went
But at the last, as that her eye glent
Aside, anon she began his sword aspye
As it lay bare, and began for fear cry.
And asked him, why he had it out draw
And Troylus anon the cause her told
And how hi^ self therwt he would have slawe
For which Creseyd upon him began behold
And began him in her arms fast fold
And said: o mercy god, lo which a deed
Alas how nygh we weren both deed
Than if I and spoken, as grace was
Ye would have slain your self anon (quod she)
Yea doutlesse: and she answerde alas
For by that ylke lord that made me
I nolde a forlonge way on live have be
After your death to have been trowned queen
Of al ye land the sun on shyneth shene
But with this selue swerd, which yt here is
My self I would have slain (quod she) tho
But ho, for we have right enough of this
And let us rise, and straight to bed go
And there let us speken of our woe
For by that marter, which that I se brene
Know I full well, that day is not far hen
when they were in her bed in arms fold
Naught was it like tho nites here beforn
For pytously each other began behold
As they that hadden all her bliss ylorne
Bewaylyng aye ye day that they were borne
Til at ye last this sorrowful wight Creseyd
To Troylus these ylke words seyde
Lo heart mine, well wot ye this (quod she)
That if a wight always his woe complain
And seeks not how helped for to be
It nys but folly, and increase of pain
And syns yt here assembled be we twain
To find bote of woe that we ben in
It were time all soon to begin.
I am a woman, as full well ye wot
And as I am aduysed suddenly
So woll I tell you while it is whote
Me thinks thus, that neither ye nor I
Ought half this woe to maken skylfully
For there is art enough for to redress
That yet is mysse, and sleen this heaviness
Soth is, the woe the which we ben in
For ought I wot, for nothing else is
But for the cause that we should twyn
Consydred al, there nys no more amys
And what is than a remedy unto this
But that we shape us soon for to mete
This all and some, my dear heart sweet
Now that I shall well bryngen it about
To come again sone after that I go
Thereof am I no manner thing in dout
For dredelesse, within a weke or two
I shall ben here, and that it mayebe so
By all right, and in words few
I shall you well an heap of ways show
For which I wol not make long sermon
For time ylost may not recovered be
But I wol go to my conclusyon
And to the best in ought that I can se
And for the love of god foryeue it me
If I speak ought against your hertes rest
For truly I speak it for the best
Making always a protestacion
That now these words which I shall say
Nys but to shown you my mocion
To find unto our help the best way
And takes it none otherwise I pray
For in effect, what so ye me command
That wol I don, for that is no demand
Now herkeneth this ye have well understood
My going granted is by parlyment
So ferforth yt it may not ben withstonde
For all this world as by my judgment
And sith there helps non aduysement
To letten it, let it pass out of mind
And let us shape a better way to find
The soth is, the twynnyng of us twain
wol us disease, and cruelly anoye
But him behooves sometime have a pain
That serves love, if that he wol have joy
And sith I shall no ferther out of Troy
Tha^ I may ride again on half a morrow
It ought less causen us for to sorrow
So as I shall not so ben hyd in mewe
That day by day, mine own heart dear
Syns well I wot that it is now a true
Ye shall full well all mine estate here
And er that truce is don, I shall ben here
Than have ye both Antenor ywon
And me also beth glad now if ye con
And think right thus, Creseyd is now agon
But what, she shall come hastily again
And when alas? by god, so right anon
Er days ten, this dare I safely said
And than at erst shall we be so feign
So as we shall togythers ever dwell
That all this world ne might our bliss tell
I se that often time, there as we ben now
That for the best our counsayl for to hyde
Ye speak not with me, nor I with you
In fourtenyght, ne se ye go ne ride
May ye not ten days than abide
For mine honor in such adventure
Iwys ye mow else lyte endure?
ye know eke how that al my kyn is here
But if that only it my father be
And eke mine other things al yfere
And namely my dear heart ye
whom that I nolde leaven for to se
For all this world as wide as it has space
Or else se I never Jove's face
why trow ye my father in this wise
Coueyteth so to se me, but for dread
Lest in this town that folks me dispyse
Because of him, for his unhappy deed
what wot my father what life that I led
For if he wyste in Troy how well I fare
Us neded for my wendyng not to care
Yea, that every day eke more and more
Men treat of peace, and it supposed is
That men the queen Heleyne shall restore
And greeks us restore that is mys
So though there nere comfort none but this
That men purposen peace on every side
Ye may the better at ease of heart abide
For if that it be peace, mine heart dear
The nature of the peace mote needs drive
That men must enterco^mune yfere
And to and fro eke ride and gone as blyue
Al day as thycke as been slyen from an hyue
And every wight have liberty to bleue
where as him list, the bet withouten leave
And though so be ye peace there may be none
Yet hither though there never peace ne were
I must come, for whyder should I gone
Or how mischaunce should I dwell there
Among tho men of arms ever in fear
For which as wisely god my soul read
I can not seen whereof ye should dread
Have here another way if it so be
That all this thing ne may you not suffyse
My father as ye known well parde
Is old, and eke full of couetyse
And I right now have founden all the gyse
withouten net, wherewith I shall him hente
And herkeneth now if that ye will assent
Lo Troylus, men said that full hard it is
The wolf full, and the weder hole to have
This is to said, that men full often iwys
Mote spenden part, ye remnaunt for to save
For aye with gold men may the heart grave
Of him that set is upon couetyse
And how I mean I shall it you deuyse
The mouable, which yt I have in this town
Unto my father shall I take and say
That right for trust, and for saluatioun
It sent is, from a friend of his or tway
The which friends fervently him pray
To send after more, and that in hye
while yt this town stant thus in ieopardy
And that shall be of gold an huge quantity
Thus shall I said, but lest folk it espyde
This may be sent by no wight but by me
I shall eke shown him, if peace betyde
what friends that I have on every side
Toward the court, to don the wrath pace
Of Priamus, and do him stand in grace
So what for o thing and for other sweet
I shall him enchaunten with my sawes
That right in heaven his soul is, shall he mete
For all Apollo, or his clerks laws
Or calculyng avails not three hawes
Desire of gold shall so his soul blende
That as my list, I shall well make an end
And if he would ought by his sort it preue
If that I lie, in certain I shall fond
Distourben him, and pluck by the sleue
Making his sort, and bearen him on hand
He has not well the gods understand
For gods speak in amphibologies
And for o soth, they tellen twenty lies
Eke dread fond first gods I suppose
Thus shall I said, and that his coward heart
Made him amysse the gods text to gloss
when he for ferde out of Delphos stert
And but I make him sone to convert
And don my read within a day or twey
I woll to you oblege me to deye.
And truly, as written well I find
That all this thing was said of good intent
And that her heart true was and kind
Toward him, and spoke right as she meant
And yt she starfefor woe nigh when she went
And was in purpose ever to be true
Thus written they yt of her works knew
This Troylus with heart and ears sprad
Herd all this thing devised two and fro
And verily it seemed that he had
The selue wit, but yet to let her go
His heart mysyaue him euermo
But finally he began his heart wrest
To trusten her, and took it for the best
For which the great fury of his penance
was queynt with hope, therwt hem between
Began for to joy the amorous dance
And as ye birds when the sun is shene
Delyten in her song, in leaves grene
Right so the words, that they spoke yfere
Delyten hem, and make hem hertes clear.
But nathelsse, the wendyng of Creseyde
For all this world may not out of his mind
For which full often he pytously her preyde
That of her heest he might her true find
And said her, certes if ye be kind
And but ye come at day set in Troy
Ne shall I never have heal, honor ne joy
For all so soth as sun vpryst a morrow
And god so wisely thou me woeful wretch
To rest bring, out of this cruel sorrow
I woll my seluen slay if that ye dretche
But of my death though little be to retche
Yet er that ye me causen so to smert
Dwell rather here mine own sweet heart.
For truly mine own lady dear
The sleyghtes yet yt I have herd you stere
Full shapely ben to fallen all yfere
For thus men says, yt one thinks ye bear
But al another thinks the ledere
Your sire is wise, and said is out of dread
Men may the wise out ren, and not out read
It is full hard to halten vnespyed
Before a creple, for he can the craft
Your father is in sleyght as Argus eyed
For all be it that his mouable is him byraft
His old sleyght is yet so with him lafte
Ye shall not blende him for your woma^hed
Ne said aryght, and that is al my dread
I not if peace shall euermo betyde
But peace or no, for ernest ne for game
I wot sith Calcas on the greeks side
Has ones ben, and lost so foul his name
He dar no more come here again for shame
For which that we, for ought I can espy
To trusten on, nys but a fantasye.
Ye shall eke seen your father shall you gloss
To ben a wife, and as he can well preche
He shall some greek so preyse and well alose
That rauyshen he shall you with his speech
Or do you don by force as he shall teach
And Troylus on whom ye nyll have routh
Shall causeless so steruen in his troth.
And over all this your father shall despise
Us al, and sayn this city is but lorne
And that thassege never shall arise
For why the greeks have it all sworn
Till we be^ slain, and down our walls torn
And thus he shall you with his words fere
That aye dread I, that ye wol bleuen there
Ye shall eke seen so many a lustye knight
Among the greeks full of worthynesse
And each of hem with heart, wit and might
To plesen you don all his business
That ye shull dullen of the rudynesse
Of sely Troyans, but if routh
Remorde you, or virtue of your troth
And this to me so grievous is to think
That fro my breast it woll my soul rende
Ne dredlesse in me there may not synke
O good opinyon, if that ye wend
For why your fathers sleyght woll us she^d
And if ye gone, as I have told you yore
So think I nam but deed, withouten more
For which with humble, true, and pitous heart
A thousand times mercy I you pray
So reweth on mine aspre pains smert
And does somewhat, as that I shall you say
And let us steal away betwyxt us tway
And think yt folly is wha^ a man may chese
For accident his substance for to lose
I mean thus, that syns we now or day
well steal away, and ben together so
what wit were it to putten it in assaye
(In case ye shulden to your father go)
If that ye myghten come again or no
Thus mean I that were a great folly
To put that sykernesse in ieopardy
And vulgarly to speken of substance
Of treasour may we both with us led
Enough to live in honor and pleasaunce
Till unto time that we shall ben deed
And thus we may eschewen all this dread
For every other way ye can record
Mine heart ywys may therewith not accord.
And hardely ne dredeth no poverty
For I have kyn and friends else where
That though we comen in our bare sherte
Us should neither lack gold ne gere
But ben honored while we dwelten there
And go we anon, for as in mine intent
This is the best, if that ye woll assent
Creseyde with a sygh, right in this wise
Answerde: ywys my dear heart true
we may well steal away, as ye deuyse
And fynden such vnthryftye ways new
But afterward full sore it woll us rewe
And help me god so at my most need
As causeless ye suffren all this dread
For thylke day that I for cherysshyng
Or dread of father, or for any other wight
Or for estate, delight, or for weddyng
Be false to you, my Troylus my knight
Saturnus daughter Juno through her migh
As wode as Achama^t do me dwell
Eternally with styx in the pyt of hell
Ad this on every god celestial
I swear it you, and eke on each goddess
On every nymphe, and deity infernal
On Satiry and Fauny more and less
That half gods ben of wilderness
And Attrapos my threde of life to breast
If I be false, now trow me if ye lest.
And thou Synoys that as an arowe clear
Through Troy re^nest aye dounward to ye se
Be witness of this word yt said is here
That ylke day that I untrue be
To Troylus mine own heart free
That thou return bakwarde to thy well
And I with body and soul synke to hell
But that ye speak away thus for to go
And leten al your friends god forbede
For any woman that ye shulden so
And namly syns Troy has now such need
Of help, and eke of o thing takes head
If this were wist, my life lay in balaunce
And your honor, god shylde us from myschaunce.
And if so be that peace herafter betake
As all day heppeth after anger game
why lord ye sorrow and woe ye wolden make
That ye ne durst come again for shame
And er that ye ieoparden so your name
Beth not to hasty in this hot fare
For hasty man ne wants never care
what trow ye the people eke al about
would of it say? it is full light to arede
They wolden say, and swear it out of dout
That love ne drove you not to do this deed
But lust voluptuous, and cowarde dread
Thus were all lost iwys mine heart dear
Your honor, which yt now shyneth clear
And also thinks on mine honesty
That floureth yet, how foul I should it she^d
And with what fylth it spotted should be
If in this form I should with you wend
Ne though I lived unto the worlds end
My name should I never ayenwarde wyn
Thus were I lost, and yt were routh and sin
And for thy, slay with reason all this hete
Men said the suffraunt overcomes parde
Eke who so wol have lefe, he lefe mote let
Thus makes virtue of necessity
By patience, and think that lord is he
Of fortune aye yt naught wol of her retche
And she ne dau^teth no wight but a wretch
And trusts this, that certes heart sweet
Or Phoebus suster Lucina the shene
The Lion pass out of this Ariete
I wol ben here withouten any wene
I mean, as help me Juno heuens queen
The tenth day, but if that death me assail
I woll you seen withouten any fail
And now so thus be soth (quod Troylus)
I shall well suffer unto the tenth day
Syns that I se, that needs it mote be thus
But for the love of god, if it be may
So let us stelen privily away
For ever in one, as for to lyuen in rest
Mine heart says that it woll be the best
O mercy god, what life is this (quod she)
Alas, ye slay me thus for very tene
I se well now that ye mystrusten me
For by your words it is well ysene
Now for the love of Scithia the shene
Mistrust me not thus causeless for routh
Sis to be true, I have you plight my troth
And thinks well, that sometime it was wit
To spend a time, a time for to win
Ne parde lorne I not fro you yet
Though that we ben a day or two a twyn
Drive out tho fantasyes you within
And trusts me, and leaves eke your sorrow
Or here my troth, I will not live till morrow.
For if ye wist how sore it does me smerte
Ye would not cesse of this, for god thou wost
The pure spyrit wepeth in mine heart
To seen you wepen, which yt I love most
And that I mote gone unto the greeks host
Yea nere it that I wist a remedy
To come again, right here I would dye
But certes I am not so nyce a wight
That I ne can ymagynen away
To come again that day that I have hight
For who may holden a thing yt wol away
My father naught, for all his queynt play
And by my thrift my wendyng out of Troy
An other day shall turn us all to joy.
For thy with all mine heart I you beseke
If that you list done ought for my prayer
And for ye love which that I love you eke
That er that I depart fro you here
That of so good a comfort and a chere
I may you seen, that ye may bring at rest
Mine heart, which is at point to breast
And over all this I pray you (quod she) tho
Mine own hertes sothfast suffysaunce
Sith I am thine all hole withouten mo
That while that I am absent, no plesau^ce
Of other, do me fro your remembrance
For I am ever aghast, for why men read
That love is thing aye full of besy dread
For in this world there leueth lady none
If that I were untrue, as god defend
That so betrayed were, or woe begone
As I, that al troth in you entende
And doutlesse, if that iche other wend
I were but deed, and er ye cause find
For gods love, so beth me naught unkind
To this answered Troylus, and seyde
Now god, to who^ there nys no cause ywrie
Me glade, as wys I never unto Creseyde
Since thylke day I saw her first with eye
was false, ne never shall till that I dye
At short words, well ye may me leave
I can no more, it shall be found at preue
Grant mercy it good heart mine ywis (quod she)
And blysful Venus let me never sterue
Er I may stand at pleasaunce in degree
To quyte him well, that so well can deserve
And while yt god my wit will me conserve
I shall so done, so true I have you found
That aye honor to me ward shall rebound
For trusts well, that your estate royal
Ne vein delight, nor only worthynesse
Of you in werre or turuay marcial
Ne pomp, array, nobley, or eke richesse
Ne made me to rewe on your distress
But moral virtue, grounded upon troth
that was ye cause I first had on you routh
Eke gentyl heart, and manhede that ye had
And that ye had (as me thought) in dispyte
Every thing that sowned in to bad
And rudeness, and peoplyshe appetyte
And that your reason bridled your deiyte
This made abouen every creature
yt I was yours, and shall while I may endure
And this may length of years not fordo
Ne remnable fortune deface
But Iupitter, that of his might may do
The sorouful to be glad, so give us grace
Er nyghtes ten, to meten in this place
So that it may your heart and mine suffyse
And fares now well, for time is that ye rise
And after that they long yplayned had
And often ykyst, and strayte in arms fold
The day began rise, and Troylus him clad
And rufully his lady began behold
As he that felt dethes cares cold
And to her grace he began him reco^maunde
where he was woe, this hold I no demand
For man's heed ymaginen ne can
Ne entendement consider, ne tongue tell
The cruel pains of this sorouful man
That passen every torment down in hell
For when he saw that she ne might dwell
which that his soul out of his heart rent
withoute^ more, out of the chamber he went
Explicit li.iiii. Et incipit li.v.
AProchen began the fatal destyne
That Jove's has in disposytioun
And to you angrye Parcas sustren three
Commits to done, execusioun
For which Creseyde must out of the town
And Troylus shall dwell forth in pyne
Till Lachesis his threde no longer twyne
The gold tressed Phoebus high on lost
Thrice had al with his beams clear
The snowes molt, and zephyrus as often
Ybrought again the tender leaves grene
Sens that the son of Eccuba the queen
Began to love her first, for who^ his sorrow
was al, that she depart should a morrow
Full ready was at prime Diomede
Creseyde unto the greeks host to leed
For sorrow of which, she felt her heart blede
As she that nyste what was best to reed
And trewly, as men in books reed
Men wist never woman have the care
Ne was so loathe out of a town to fare
This Troylus wythouten read or lore
As man that has his joys eke forlore
was waytyng on his lady ever more
As she that was sothfast croppe and more
Of al his lust or joys here tofore
But Troylus now fare well al thy joy
For shalt thou never seen her efte in Troy
Sothe is, yt while he bade in this manner
He began his woe full manly for to hyde
That well uneath it seen was in his chere
But at the yate there she should out ride
with certain folk he houed her to abide
So woe begone, al would he not him plain
That on his horse uneath he sat for pain
For ire he quoke, so his heart gnawe
when Diomede on horse began him dyght
And said unto him self this ylke saw
Alas (quod he) thus foul a wretchydnesse
why suffer I it: why nyl I it redress?
were it not bet atones for to dye
Than evermore in langour thus to cry?
why nyl I make at ones rich and poor
To have enough to done er that she go?
why nyl I bring al Troy upon a roore
why nyl I ^^een this Diomede also?
why nyl I rather with a man or two
Steal her away? why wol I this endure?
why nyl I helpen to mine own cure?
But why he nolde done so fell a deed
That shall I said, and why him list it spare
He had in heart always a manner dread
Lest that Creseyde, in rumor of this fare
Should have been slain, lo this was all his care
And else certain, as I said yore
He had it done, withouten words more
Creseyde when she ready was to ride
Full soroufully she syghed, and said alas
But forth she mote, for aught yt may betyde
And forth she rydeth full soroufully a paas
There is none other remedy in this caas
wat wonder is, though that her sore smerte
when she forgoth her own sweet heart
This Troylus in gyse of curtesye
with hawk on hand, and with an huge route
Of knights, rode and did her company
Passing all the valey, far without
And ferther would have rydden out of doubt
Full feign, and woe was him to gone so sone
But turn he must, and it was eke to done
And right with that was Antenor ycome
Out of the greeks host, and every wight
was of him glad, and said he was welcome
And Troylus al nere his heart light
He payned him, with al his full might
Him to wythholde of weeping at least
And Antenor he kyste, and made feste
And therwythal he must his leave take
And cast his eyes upon her pytously
And nere he rode, his cause for to make
To take her by the hand al sobrely
And lord so she began wepen tenderly
And he full soft and slyghly began her sey
Now hold your day, and do me not to dey
with that his courser turned he about
with face pale, and unto Diomede
No word he spoke, ne none of al his route
Of which the son of Tydeus took head
As he that kouth more than the creed
In such a craft, and by the rain her hente
And Troylus to Troy, homwardes went
This Diomede, that ladde her by the bridel
when that he saw the folk of Troy away
Thought, al my labor shall not ben on ydel
If that I may, for somewhat shall I say
For at the worste, it short may our way
I have herd say eke, times twyse twelve
He is a fool that wol foryete him selue
But nathlesse, this thought he well enough
That certainly I am about naught
If that I speak of love, or make it thought
For doutelesse, if she have in her thought
Him that I guess, he may not ben ybrought
So sone away, but I shall find a mean
That she shall not yet wete what I mean
Thus Diomede, as he that could his good
wha^ this was don, began fallen forth in speech
Of this and that, and ask why she stood
In such disease, and began her eke beseech
That if that he encreasen might or each
with any thing her ease, that she should
Command it him, and said he done it would
For trewly he swore her as a knight
yt there nas thing with which he myt her plese
That he nolde don his pain, and al his myt
To don it, for to done her heart an ese
And prayde her she would her sorrow apese
And said, ywys we greeks can have joy
To honouren you, as well as folk of Troy
He said eke thus, I wot you thi^keth strau^g
No wonder is, for it is to you new
Thacqueyntau^ce of these troyans to chau^g
For folk of Greece, that ye never knew
But would never god, but if as true
A greek ye should among us al find
As any troyan is, and eke as kind
And because I swore you right now
To ben your friend, and helply to my might
And for that more acqueintaunce eke of you
Have I had, than another stranger wight
So fro this forth, I pray you day and night
Commands me, how sore that me smerte
To done, all that may like unto your heart
And that ye me would, as your brother treat
And taketth not my frendshpyp in dispyte
and though your sorrows ben for things great
Not I not why, but out of more respyte
Mine heart has for to amend it great delight
And if I may your harms not redress
I am right sorry for your heaviness
For though ye troyans with us greeks wroth
Have many a day ben: always yet parde
O god of love, in soth we seruen both
And for the love of god my lady free
who^ so ye hate, as beth not wroth with me
For trewly there can no wight you serve
that half so loath your wrath would deserve
And nere it that we ben so nere the tent
Of Calcas, which that seen us both may
I would of this you tell al mine intent
But this ensealed till another day
give me your hand, I am and shall be aye
god help me so, while yt my life may endure
Your own, abouen every creature
Thus said I never er now to woman borne
For god mine heart as wisely glade so
I loved never woman here beforne
As paramours, ne never shall no mo
And for the love of god be not my foe
Al can I not to you my lady dear
Complain aryght, for I am yet to lere
And wo^dreth nout mine own lady bright
Though yt I speak of love to you thus bliue
For I have herd or this of many a wight
Has loved thing he never saw his live
Eke I am not of power for to strive
Against the god of love, but him obey
I wol always, and mercy I you prey
There beth so worthy knights in the place
And ye so fair, that eueryche of hem al
wol pain him to stonden in your grace
But might me so fair a grace fall
That ye me for your servant would call
So lowly, ne so trewly you serve
Nyl none of hem, as I shall till I stern
Creseyde unto that purpose lyte answerde
As she that was with sorrow oppressed
That in effect she naught his tales herd
But here and there, now here a word or two
Her thought her sorouful heart brast a two
For when she began her father far espy
well nyghe down of her horse she began to sye
But nathlesse she thonketh Diomede
Of al his travail and his good chere
And that him list his frendshyp to her bid
And she accepts it in good manner
And wol do feign that is him lefe and dear
And trusts him she would, and well she might
As said she, and from her horse she alyght
Her father has her in his arms no^me
and twenty times he kyst his daughter sweet
And said: O dear doughtee mine welcome
She said eke, she was feign with him to mete
And stood forth muet, mylde, and mansuete
But here I leave her with her father dwell
And forth I wol of Troylus you tell
To Troy is come this woeful Troylus
In sorrow abouen al sorrows smerte
with felon look, and face dispytous
Tho suddenly down from his horse he sterte
And through his paleys with swollen heart
To chamber he went, of nothing took he head
Ne non to him dare speak o word for dread
And there his sorrows that he spared had
He yaue an issue large, and death he cryde
And in his throws, frenetyke and mad
He curses Juno, Apollo, and eke Cupide
He curses Bachus, Ceres, and Cipride
His birth, him self, his fate, and eke nature
And save his lady, every creature
To bed he goth and weyleth there and turns
In furye, as does he Ixion in hell
and in this wise he nygh till day soiourneth
But tho began his heart alyte vnswel
Through teeres, which ye gonnen up to well
And pytously he cried upon Creseyde
And to him self thus he spoke and seyde
where is mine own lady lefe and dear?
where is her white breast, where is it where?
where ben her arms, and her eyes clear
That yesterdaye this time with me were?
Now may I weep alone many a teere
And graspe about I may, but in this place
Save a pylowe, find naught to embrace
How shall I don wha^ shall she come again?
I not alas, why let I her go?
As would god I had as tho be slain
O heart mine Ceseyde, O sweet fo
O lady mine, that I love and no mo
To whom for ever more mine heart a dowe
Se how I dye, ye nyll me not rescowe
who sees you now, my right lode sterre?
who sytteth right now in your presence?
who can comforten now your hertes werre
Now I am gone, whom give ye audience?
who speaks for my right now in your absence
Alas no wight, and that is al my care
For well wot I, as yuell as ye fare
How should I thus ten days full endure
when I the first night have al this tene
How shall she eke sorouful creature
For tenderness, how shall she this sustene
Such woe for me, o pytous pale, and grene
Shall ben your fresh womanly face
For langour er ye turn unto this place
And when he fyl in any slombrynges
Anon begyne he should for to groan
And dreamen of the dredfullest things
That might ben, as mete he were alone
In place horrible making aye his moan
Or meten that he was among al
His enemies, and in her hands fall
And therwithal his body should sterte
And with the sterte al suddenly awake
And such a tremour feel about his heart
That of the fear his body should quake
And therwythal he should a noise make
And seem as though he should fall deep
From high alofte, and than he would weep
And rewen on him self so pytously
That wonder was to here his fantasye
Another time he should myghtely
Comfort him self, and said it was folly
So causeless, such dread for to dry
And efte begin his aspre sorrows new
That every man might on his pains rewe
who could tell al, or fully discryue
His woe, his playnt, his langour, and his pyne
Not all the men that han or ben on live
Thou reder may thy self full well deuyne
That such a woe my wit can not defyne
On ydel for to write it should I swynke
when that my wit is weary it to think
On heaven yet the sterres weren seen
Although full pale ywoxen was the moon
And whyten began the orizonte shene
Al eestwarde, as it is wont to done
And Phoebus with his rosy carte soon
Began after that to dress him up to fare
when Troylus has sent after Pandare
This Pandare, that of all the day beforne
Ne might him comen this Troylus to se
Although he on his heed it had sworn
For with the king Priam alday was he
So that it lay not in his lyberte
No where to gone, but on ye morrow he went
To Troylus, when that he for him sent
For in his heart he could well deuyne
That Troylus al night for sorrow woke
And that he would tell him of his pyne
This knew he well enough without book
For which to chamber straight ye way he took
And Troylus tho sobrely he grette
And on the bed full sone he began him set
My Pandarus (quod Troylus) the sorrow
which that I dry, I may not long endure
I trow I shall not lyuen till to morrow
For which I would always on adventure
To the deuysen of my sepulture
The form, and of my mouable thou dispone
Right as the seems best is for to done
But of the fire and flambe funeral
In which my body brennen shall to glede
And of the feast and plays palestrall
At my vygyle, I pray the take good head
That that be well, and offer Mars my stead
My sword, mine helm, and leave brother dear
My sheld to Pallas give, that shyneth clear
the poudre i^ which min heart ibre^de shall turn
That pray I the thou take, and it conserve
In a vessel that men clepeth an vrne
Of gold, and to my lady that I serve
For love of whom thus pytously I sterue
So give it her, and do me this plesaunce
To prayen her to keep it for a remembrance
For well I feel by my maladye
And by my dreams, now and yore ago
Al certainly, that I mote needs dye
The oule eke, which that hight ascaphylo
Has after me shryght al these nyghtes two
and god Mercury, now of me woeful wretch
The soul gyde, and when the list it fetch
Pandare answerde, and said Troylus
My dear friend, as I have told the yore
That it is folly for to sorowen thus
And causeless, for which I can no more
But who so wol not trowen read ne lore
I can not seen in him no remedy
But let him worchen with his fantasye
But Troylus I pray the tell me now
If that thou trow er this that any wight
Has loved paramours as well as thou
Ye god wot, and fro many a worthy knight
Has his lady gone a fourtenyght
And he not yet made haluendele the fare
what need is the to maken al this care?
Sens day by day thou may thy seluen se
That from his love, or else from his wife
A man mote twynnen of necessyte
Ye, though he love her as his own life
Yet nyl he with him self thus maken strife
For well thou wost my leave brother dear
That always friends may not ben yfere
how don this folk yt seen her loves wedded
By friends might? as it betydeth full often
And seen hem in her spouses bed ybedded
God wot they take it wisely fair and soft
For why, good hope halt up her heart alofte
And for they can a time of sorrow endure
As time hem hurts, a time does hem cure
So should thou endure, and letten slide
The time, and fond to ben gald and light
Ten days nys not so long to abide
And sens she to comen the has behyght
She nyl her heste breken for no wight
For dread the not, that she nyl find way
To come again, my life that durst I lay
Thy sweuenesse eke, and al such fantasye
Drive out, and let hem faren to mischaunce
For they proceed of thy melancolye
That does the feel in sleep al this penance
A straw for all sweuenes signifyaunce
God help me so, I count hem not abeene
there wot no man aright what dremes meene
For priests of the temple tellen this
That dreams been the revelations
Of gods, and als well they tell ywys
That they been infernales, illusyons
And leches said, that of complections
Proceden they of fast, or glotonye
who wot in soth thus what they signyfye
Eke other said, that through impressions
As if a wight has fast a thing in mind
That thereof comes such auisions
And other said, as they in books find
That after times of the year by kind
Me^ dreme, and that theffect goth by the moon
But leave no dream, for it is not to done
well worth of dremes aye these old wives
And trewly eke, augurye of these fowls
For fear of which, me^ women lose her lives
as raue^s qualm or schriching of these oules
To trowen on it, both false and foul is
Alas alas, that so noble a creature
As is a man, should dread such ordure
For which with all mine heart I the beseech
Unto thy self, that al this thou foryeue
And rise now up, withouten more speech
And let us cast how forth may best be dryue^
The time, and eke how freshly we may lyuen
wha^ she comes, you which shall be right sone
God help me so, the best is thus to done
Rise, let us speak of lustye life in Troy
That we have lad, and forth the time drive
And eke of time coming us reioye
That bryngen shall our bliss now so blyue
And langour of these twyse days five
we shall therwyth so foryete or oppress
That well uneath it done shall us duresse
This town is full of lords al about
And truce lasten all this mean while
Go we playen us in some lusty route
To Sarpedon, not hence but a mile
And thus thou shall the time well begyle
And drive it forth unto that blysful morrow
That thou her se, that cause is of thy sorrow
Now rise my dear brother Troylus
For certes it non honor is to the
To weep, and in thy bed to rouken thus
For trewly of o thing trust to me
If thou thus lygge, a day, two or three
The folk woll wene, yt thou for cowardyse
The faynest sick, and that thou dare not rise
This Troylus answerde: o brother dear
This known folk that have ysuffred pain
that though he weep, and make sorouful chere
That feleth harm and smert in every vain
No wonder is, and though I ever plain
Or always weep, I am nothing to blame
Sens yt I have lost, ye cause of al my game
But sens of fine force I mote arise
I shall arise, as soon as ever I may
And god, to whom mine heart I sacrifyse
So send us hastily the tenthe day
For was there never foul so feign of May
As I shall ben, when yt she comes in Troy
That cause is of my turment and my joy
But whyder is thy read (quod Troylus)
That we may play us best in all this town
By god my counsel is (quod Pandarus)
To ride and play us with king Sarpedoun
So long of this they speken up and down
Till Troylus began at the last assent
To rise, and forth to Sarpedon they went
This Sarpedon, as he that honorable
was ever his live, and full of hye prowess
wythal that might yserued been on table
That deyntie was, al cost it great richesse
He fed hem day by day, that such noblesse
As sayden both the most and eke the leest
was never er that day wist at any feast
Nor in this world there is none instrument
Delicious, through wynd or touch on cord
As far as any wight has ever ywent
That tongue tell, or heart may record
But at that feast, it nas well herd record
Ne of ladies eke so fair a company
On dau^ce er tho, was never ysene with eye
But what avails this to Troylus
That for his sorrow, nothing of it rought
But ruer in one, as heart pytous
Full besily Creseyde his lady sought
On her was all that ever his heart thought
Now this now that, so fast ymaginyng
That glad ywys can him no festyng
These ladies eke, that at this feast ben
Sens that he saw his lady was a wey
It was his sorrow upon hem for to seen
Or for to here on instruments pley
For she that of his heart has the key
was absent, lo this was his fantasye
That no wight should make melodye
Nor there nas hour in all the day or night
wha^ he was there as no man might him here
That he ne said, O louesom lady bright
How have ye faren sens that ye were there
welcome ywys mine own lady dear
But welaway, all this nas but a mase
Fortune his houe, intended bet to glase
The letters eke, that she of old time
Had him ysent, he would alone read
An hundred sithe, atwixte noone and prime
Refiguryng her shappe, and her womanhede
within his heart, and every word and deed
that passed was, and thus he drove to an end
The fourth day, and said he wol wend
And said leave brother Pandarus
Intendest thou that we shall here bleue
Till Sarpedon woll forth conueyen us
Yet were it fayrer that we took our leave
For gods love, let us now sone at eve
Our leave take, and homwarde let us turn
For trewly I nyl not thus soiourne
Pandare answerde, be we comen hither
To fetchen fire, and rennen home again
God help me so, I can not tellen whyther
we might gone, if I shall sothly said
There any wight is of us more feign
Then Sarpedon, and if we hence hye
Thus suddenly I hold it vylanye
when that we sayden we would bleue
with him a weke, and now thus suddenly
The fourth day, to take of him our leave
He would wondren on it truly
Let us holden forth our purpose fermely
And sens that ye behyghten him to abide
Hold forewarde now, and after let us ride
This Pandarus, with all pyne and woe
Made him to dwell, and at the wekes end
Of Sarpedon they took her leave tho
And on her way they spedden hem to wend
(Quod Troylus) now lord me grace send
That I may find at mine home coming
Creseyde comen, and therwyth began he sing
Ye haselwode thought this Pandare
And to him self full softely he seyde
God wot refroyden may this hot fare
Er Calkas send Troylus Creseyde
But natheles he iaped thus and seyde
And swore ywys, his heart him well behyght
She would come, as soon as ever she might
when they unto the palace were ycomen
Of Troylus, they down of horse alyght
And to ye chamber, her way have they no^men
And unto time that it began to night
They speken of Creseyde the lady bright
And after this, when hem both lest
They spedde hem fro the supper unto rest
On morrow, as soon as day began to clear
This Troylus began of his sleep to abreyde
And to Pandarus, his own brother dear
For love of god, full pytously he seyde
As go we seen the paleys of Creseyde
For sens we yet may have no more feast
So let us seen her paleys at the leest
And therwythall his meyne for to blende
A cause he fond in town for to go
And to Creseydes house they gone wend
But lord this sely Troylus was woe
Him thought his sorrowful heart brast in two
For when he saw her doors sperred all
well nyg for sorrow adowne he began to fall
Therewith when he was ware, and began behold
How shet was every wyndowe of the place
As frost him thought his heart began to cold
For which with changed deedly pale face
wythouten word, he forth by began to pace
And as god welde, he began so fast ride
That no wight of his countenance aspyde
Then said he thus: O paleys desolate
O house of houses, whylom best yhyght
O paleys empty and dysconsolate
O thou lantern, of which queynt is ye light
O paleys, whylom day yt now art night
well ought thou to fall, and I to dye
Sens she is went, that wont was us to gye
O paleys, whylom crown of houses all
Enlumyned with sun of bliss
O ring, of which the rubie is out fall
O cause of woe, that cause haste ben of bliss
Yet sens I may no bet, feign would I kiss
Thy cold doors, durst I for this route
And farwell shryne, of which the saint is out
Therwyth he cast on Pandarus his eye
with changed face, and pytous to behold
And when he might his time aryght aspye
Aye as he rode, to Pandarus he told
His new sorrow, and eke his joys old
So pytously, and with so deed an hew
That euerywight, might on his sorrow rewe
Fro thence forth he rydeth up and down
And every thing came him to remembrance
As he rode forth by the places of the town
In which he whylom had all his plesaunce
Lo, yonder saw I mine own lady dance
And in that temple with her eyes clear
Me kaught first my right lady dear
And yonder have I herd full lustely
My dear heart laugh, and yonder play
Saw I her ownes eke full blysfully
And yonder ones to me began she say
Now good sweet, love me well I pray
And yonde so goodly began she me behold
That to the death mine heart is to her hold
And at the corner in the yonder house
Herd I mine alderleuest lady dear
So womanly, with voice melodyouse
Syngen so well, so goodly and so clear
That in my soul yet my thinks I here
The blysfull sown, and in that yonder place
My lady first me took unto her grace
The^ thought he thus, o blysful lord Cupide
when I the process have in memory
How thou me haste weryed on every side
Men might a book make of it like a storye
what need is the to seek on me vyctorye
Sens I am thine, and holy at thy will
what joy have thou thyn own folk to spyl
well have thou lord ywroke on me thyn ire
Thou mighty god, and dreadful for to grieve
Now mercy lord, thou woste well I desire
Thy grace most, of all lusts leave
And live and dye I woll in thy believe
For which I ne ask in guerdon but a boon
That thou Creseyde again me send soon
Dystrayne her heart as fast to return
As thou do mine to longen her to se
Then wot I well that she nyll not soiourne
Now blysfull lord, so cruel thou ne be
Unto the blood of Troy, I pray the
As Juno was unto the blood Thebane
For which ye folk of Thebes caught her bane
And after this he to the yates went
There as Creseyde out rode, a full good paas
And up and down there made he many a went
And to him self full often he said alas
Fro hence rode my bliss and my solas
As would blysfull god now for his joy
I might her seen again come to Troy
And to the yonder hill I began her gyde
Alas, and there I took of her my leave
And yonde I saw her to her father ride
For sorrow of which mine heart shall to cleue
And hither home I come when it was eve
And here I dwell, out cast from al joy
And shall, till I may seen her efte in Troy
And of him self ymagined he often
To ben defeyted, pale, and woxen less
Then he was wont, and that men sayden soft
what may it be? who can the soth guess
why Troylus has all this heaviness
And all this nas but his melancolye
That he had of him self such fantasye
Another time ymagynen he would
That every wight that went by the wey
Had of him routh, and that they said should
I am right sorry, Troylus woll dey
And thus he drove a day yet forth or tweye
As ye have herd, such life began he led
As he that stood bytwixen hope and dread
For which him lyked in his songs show
Thencheson of his woe, as he best might
And made a song, of words but a few
Somewhat his woeful heart for to light
And when he was from every man's sight
with soft voice, he of his lady dear
That absent was, began sing as ye may here
O sterre, of which I lost have all the light
with heart sore, well ought I to bewail
That ever derke in turment, night by night
Toward my death, with wind I stere and sail
For which the tenth night, if that I fail
The gydyng of thy beams bright an hour
My ship and me Carybdes woll devour
This song when he thus songe^ had soon
He fill again into his syghes old
And every night, as was his wont to done
He stood the bright moon to behold
And all his sorrow he to the moon told
And said, ywys when thou art horned new
I shall be glad, if all the world be true
I saw thine horns old eke by the morrow
when hence rode my right lady dear
That cause is of my turment and my sorrow
For which, O bright Lucina the clear
For love of God ren fast about thy spear
For when thine horns new gynne^ spring
Then shall she come yt may my bliss bring
The day is more, and longer every night
Then they ben wo^te to be, him thought tho
And that the son went his course unright
By longer way then it was wont to go
And said, ywys I dread me ever mo
The Sons son Pheton be on live
And that his fathers carte amysse he drive
Upon the walls fast eke would he walk
And on the greeks host he would se
And to him self right thus he would talk
Lo, yonder is mine own lady free
Or else yonder, there the tents be
And thence comes this air that is so soote
That in my soul I feel it does me boot
And hardly this wind that more and more
Thus stoundemele increases in my face
Is of my ladies deep syghes sore
I preue it thus, for in none other space
Of all this town, save only in this place
Feel I no wind, that sowneth so like pain
It says alas, why twynned be we twain
This long time he dryueth forth right thus
Till fully passed was the nynth night
And aye beside him was this Pandarus
That besyly did all his full might
Him to comfort, and make his heart light
Yeuynge him hope always ye tenth morrow
That she shall comen, and stynten al his sorrow
Upon that other side eke was Creseyde
with women few, among ye greeks strong
For which full often a day alas she seyde
That I was borne, well may mine heart long
After my death, for now live I to long
Alas, and I ne may it not amend
For now is worse then ever yet I wend
My father nyll for nothing do my grace
To gone again, for ought I can him queme
And if so be, that I my term pace
My Troylus shall in his heart deem
That I am false, and so it may well seem
Thus shall I have vnthanke on every side
That I was borne so welawaye the tide
And if that I me put in ieopardye
To steal away by night, and it be fall
That I be caught, I shall be hold a spy
Or else lo, this dread I most of all
If in the hands of some wretch I fall
I nam bust lost, all bemyn heart true
Now mighty god, thou on my sorrow rewe
Full pale ywoxen was her bright face
Her lymmes lean, as she that all the day
Stood when she durst, and looked on the place
There she was borne, and dwelt had aye
And all the night weeping alas she lay
And thus dyspayred out of al cure
She ladde her life, this woeful creature
Full often a day she syghed eke for dystresse
And in her self she went aye purtrayeng
Of Troylus the great worthynesse
And all his goodly words recordyng
Sens first that day her love began to spryng
And thus she set her woeful heart a fire
Through remembrance of yt she began desire
In all this world there nys so cruel heart
That her had herd co^playnen in her sorrow
That nold have wepte^ for her pains smert
So tenderly she wept, both eve and morrow
Her neded no teeres for to borowe
And this was yet the worst of all her pain
There was no wit, to who^ she durst plain
Full rewfully she looked upon Troy
Beheld the toures high, and eke the hallis
Alas (quod she) the pleasaunce and the joy
The which that now al turned into gall is
Have I had often, within yonder wallis
O Troylus, what do thou now she seyde
Lord whether thou yet think upon Creseyde
Alas, that I ne had ytrowed on your lore
And went with you, as ye me read er this
Then had I now not syghed half so sore
who might have said, yt I had done amys
To steal away with such one as he is
But all to late comes the lectuary
when men the corse unto the grave carye
To late is now to speak of that matere
Prudence alas, one of thine eyes three
Me lacked always, er that I came here
For on time passed well remembered me
And present time eke could I well se
But future time, er I was in the snare
Could I not seen, that causes now my care
But nathelesse, betyde what betyde
I shall to morrow at night, by eest or west
Out of this host steal, on some side
And gone with Troylus, where as hem lest
This purpose wol I hold, and this is ye best
No force of wicked tongues ianglerye
For ever on love, have wretches had envy
For who so wol of every word take heed
Or rulen him by every wyghtes wit
Ne shall he never thryuen out of dread
For that that some men blamen ever yet
Lo, other manner folk comenden it
And as for me, for all such variaunce
Felicite clepe I my suffysaunce
For which, without any words mo
To Troy I woll, as for conclusioun
But God it wot, er fully months two
She was full far fro that entencioun
For both Troylus and Troy town
Shall knotlesse throughout her heart slide
For she woll take a purpose for to abide
This Diomede, of whom you tell I can
Goes now within him self aye arguyng
with all the sleyght and all that ever he can
How he may best with shortest taryeng
In to his net Creseydes heart bring
To this entente he couth never fine
To fyshen her, he laid out hoke and line
But nathelesse, well in his heart he thought
That she nas not without a love in Troy
For never sythen he her thens brought
Ne couth he seen her laugh, or maken joy
He nyst how best her heart for tacoye
But for tassey, he said naught it ne greueth
For he that naught assayeth naut atcheueth
Yet said he to him self upon a night
Now am I not a fool, that wot well how
Her woe is, for love of another wight
And hervpon to gone assaye her now
I may well wete, it nyll not ben my prowe
For wise folk in books it express
Men shall not wowe a wight in heaviness
But who so might wynnen such a flower
Fro him, for who^ she mourns night and day
He might said he were a conqueror
And right anon, as he that bold was aye
Thought in his heart, hap how hap may
All should I dye, I woll her heart seche
I shall no more lesen but my speech
This Diomede, as books us declare
was in his needs pressed and coragious
with stern voice, and mighty lymmes square
Hardy, testyfe, strong, and cheualrous
Of deeds like his father Tydeus
And some men said, he was of tongue large
And heir he was, of Calcidony and Arge
Creseyde mean was of her stature
Thereto of shappe, of face, and eke of chere
There might ben no fayrer creature
And often time this was her manner
To gone ytressed with her herres clear
Down by her colere, at her back behind
which with a threde of gold she would bind
And save her brows ioyneden yfere
There nas no lack, in aught I can espyen
But for to speken of her eyes clear
Lo, trewly they written that her seyen
That paradys stood formed in her eyes
And with her rich beauty evermore
strove love in her, ay which of he^ was more
She sobre was eke, simple, and wise withal
The best ynoryshed eke that might be
And goodly of her speech in general
Charitable, estately, lusty, and fre
Ne never more ne lacked her pity
Tender herted, slydynge of courage
But truly I can not tell her age
And Troylus well woxen was in hight
And complete formed by proporcioun
So well, that kind it naught ame^den might
Young, fresh, strong, and hardy as lyoun
True as stele, in each condicioun
One of the best entetched creature
That is or shall, while yt the world may dure
And certainly, in story as I it fond
That Troylus was never unto no wight
As in his time, in no dregre second
In darynge do, that longs to a knight
Al might a gyaunt passen him of might
his heart aye with the first and with ye best
Stood peregall to dare done what him lest
But for to tellen forth of Diomede
It fill, that after on the tenthe day
Sens that Creseyde out of the cite yede
This Diomede, as fresh as brau^che in May
Came to the tente there as Calkas lay
And feigned him with Calcas have to done
But what he mente, I shall you tellen soon
Creseyde at short words for to tell
welcomed him, and down him by her set
And he was eth enough to maken dwell
And after this, wythouten long let
The spyces and the wine me^ forth hem fette
And forth they speak of this and that yfere
As friends done, of which some shall ye here
He began first fallen of the werre in speech
Betwyxen hem and the folk of Troy town
And of thassiege he began eke her beseech
To tellen him what was here opinioun
Fro that demand he so dyscendeth down
To asken her, if that her strange thought
The greeks gyse, and works yt they wrought.
And why her father taryeth so long
To wedden her unto some worthy wight
Creseyde that was in her pains strong
For love of Troylus her own knight
So ferforth as she conning had or might
Answerde him tho, but as of his entente
It seemed not she wyste what he mente
But nathelesse this ylke Diomede
Began on him self assure, and thus he seyde
If I aryght have taken on you head
Me thinks thus, o lady mine Creseyde
That sens I first ho^de on your brydel leyde
when ye out came of Troy by the morrow
Ne might I never seen you but in sorrow
I can not said what may the cause be
But if for love of some Troyan it were
The which right sore would athynken me
That ye for any wight that dwells there
Shulden spyll a quarter of a teere
Or pytously your seluen so begyle
For dredelesse it is not worth the while
The folk of Troy, as who says al and some
In prison ben, as ye your seluen se
Fro thence shall not one on live come
For all the gold atwyxen sun and see
Trusts well, and understands me
There shall not one to mercy gone on live
All were he lord of worlds twyse five
Such wrech on hem for fetchyng of Heleyne
There shall be take, er that we hence wend
That Maunes, which ye gods be^ of pain
Shall ben aghast that greeks wol hem shende
And men shall dread unto the worlds end
From hence forth, to rauyshen any queen
So cruel shall our wreche on hem be seen
And but if Calcas led us with ambages
That is to said, with double words slye
Such as me^ clepen a word with two visages
Ye shall well known that I not ne lie
And all this thing right seen it with your eye
And yt anon, ye nyll not trow how soon
Now takes head, for it is for to done
what wene ye your wise father would
Have yeuen Antenor for you anon
If he ne wist that the city should
Dystroyed ben? why nay so mote I gone
He knew full well there shall not scapen one
That Troyan is, and for the great feere
He durst not that ye dwelte longer there
what woll ye more, o louesom lady dear
Let Troy and troyans fro your heart pace
Drive out yt bitter hope, and make good chere
And clepe again the beauty of your face
That ye with salt teeres so deface
For Troy is brought in such a ieopardye
That it to save is now no remedy
And thinks well, ye shall in greeks find
A more parfyte love, er it be night
Then any troyan is, and more kind
And bet to seruen you woll done his might
And if ye vouchsafe my lady bright
I woll ben he, to seruen you my selue
Yea leauer then be lord of Greces twelve
And with yt word he began to waxen reed
And in his speech, a little while he quoke
And cast aside a little with his heed
And stynte a while, and afterward he woke
And sobrely on her he threw his look
And said I am, al be it to you no joy
As gentle a man, as any wight in Troy
For if my father Tydeus, he seyde
Ilyued had, I had been er this
Of Calcidony and Arge a king Creseyde
And so hope I that I shall be ywys
But he was slain alas, the more harm is
Unhappily at Thebes all to rathe
Polymyte, and many a man to scathe
But heart mine, sithe that I am your man
And ben the first, of whom I seche grace
To serve you as hertely as I can
And ever shall while I to live have space
So that, er I depart out of this place
Ye woll me grant that I may to morrow
At better leyser tell you of my sorrow
what should I tell his words yt he said?
He spoke enough for o day at the mest
It preueth well he spoke so, that Creseyde
Granted on the morrow at his request
For to speak with him at the leest
So that he nolde speak of such matere
And thus she to him said, as ye mow here
As she that had her heart on Troylus
So fast, that there may it none arace
And straungely she spoke, and said thus
O Diomede, I love that ylke place
There I was borne, and Jove's for thy grace
Deliver it soon of all that does it care
God for thy might so leave it well to fare
That greeks would her wrath on Troy wrek
If that they might I know it well ywys
But it shall naught befallen as ye speak
And god to forne, and farther over this
I wot my father wise and ready is
And that he me has bought, as ye me told
So dear I am the more unto him hold
That Greeks ben of high condition
I wot eke well, but certain men shall find
As worthy folk within Troy town
As connyng, as parfyte, and as kind
As ben betwyxtr Orcades and Inde
And that ye could well your lady serve
I trow eke well, her thank for to deserve
But as to speak of love, ywys she seyde
I had a lord, to whom I wedded was
The whose mine heart was all till he deyde
And other love, as help me now Pallas
There in mine heart nys, ne never was
And that ye ben of noble and high kynrede
I have well herd it tellen out of dread
And that does me to have so great a wonder
That ye woll scorn any woman so
Eke god wot, love and I ben fer asonder
I am dysposed bet so mote I go
Unto my death plain and make woe
what I shall after done, I can not say
But trewly as yet me list not play
Mine heart is now in tribulatioun
And ye in arms besy day by day
Herafter when ye wonnen have the town
Perauenture then, so it happen may
That when I se that I never ere say
Then woll I work yt I never ere wrought
This word to you enough suffysen ought
To morrow eke wol I speke^ with you feign
So that ye touchen naught of this matere
And when you list, ye may come here again
And er ye gone, thus much I say you here
As help me Pallas, with her heeres clear
If that I should of any greek have routhe
It should be your seluen by my truth
I say not therefore that I wol you love
Ne say not nay, but in conclusioun
I mean well by god that sit above
And therwythall she cast her eyes down
And ga^ to sigh and said, Troilus and Troy town
Yet bydde I god, in quyete and in rest
I may you seen, or do mine heart breast
But in effect, and shortly for to say
This Diomede all freshly new again
Began preasen on, and fast her mercy pray
And after this the soth for to said
Her glove he took, of which he was full feign
And finally, when it was woxen eve
And all was well, he rose and took his leave
The bright Venus followed and aye taught
The way there broad Phoebus down alight
And Cythera her chare horse over raught
To whyrle out of the lion, if she might
And Signifer his candels shows bright
when that Creseyde unto her bed went
within her fathers fair bright tente
Retournyng in her soul aye up and down
The words of this sudden Diomede
His great estate, and peril of the town
And that she was alone, and had need
Of friends help, and thus began to bread
The cause why the soth for to tell
She took fully purpose for to dwell
The morrow came, and goostly for to speak
This Diomede is come unto Creseyde
And shortly, lest that ye my tale break
So well he for him self spoke and seyde
That all her syghes sore, down he leyde
And finally, the sothe for to said
He left her the great of all her pain
And after this, the storye tells us
That she him yaue the fair baye stead
The which she ones wan of Troylus
And eke a broche (and that was little need)
That Troylus was, she yaue this Diomede
And eke the bet from sorrow him to releue
She made him wear a pencell of her sleue
I find eke in stories else where
when through the body hurt was Diomede
Of Troylus, tho wept she many a teere
wha^ that she saw his wide wounds blede
And that she took to kepen him good head
And for to healen him of his smerte
Men sayn, I not, that she yaue him her heart
But trewly the story tells us
There made never woman more woe
Than she, when that she falsed Troylus
She said alas, for now is clean ago
My name in truth of love for euermo
For I have falsed one the gentyllest
That ever was, and one the worthyest
Alas, of me unto the worlds end
Shall neither ben ywritten nor ysonge
No good word, for these books wol me she^de
Irolled shall I ben on many a tongue
Throughout ye world, my bell shall be ronge
And women most woll hate me of all
Alas, that such a caas me should fall
They wol said, in as much as in me is
I have hem done dishonor welaway
Albe I not the first that did amys
what helps that, to don my blame away
But sens I se there is no better way
And that to late is now for me to rewe
To Diomede I woll algate be true
But Troylus, sens I no better may
And sens that thus departen ye and I
Yet pray I god so give you right good day
As for the gentyllest knight trewly
That ever I saw, to seruen faithfully
And best can aye his ladies honor keep
And with ye word she braste anon to weep
And certes you ne haten shall I never
And friends love, that shall ye have of me
And my good word, all should I lyuen ever
And trewly I would right sorry be
For to seen you in aduersyte
And gyltlesse I wot well I you leave
And all shall pass, and thus take I my leave
But trewly how long it was between
That she forsook him for this Diomede
There is none auctour tells it I wene
Take every man now to his books head
He shall no term fynden, out of dread
For though that he began to wow her soon
Er he her wan, yet was there more to done
Ne me ne list this sely woman chyde
Ferther than the story woll deuyse
Her name alas, is publyshed so wide
That for her gylte it ought enough suffyse
And if I might excuse her in any wise
For she so sorry was for her untruth
Iwys I would excuse her yet for routhe
This Troylus, as I before have told
Thus drives forth, as well as he has might
But often was his heart hot and cold
And namely that ylke nynthe night
which on the morrow she had him behyght
To come again, god wot fall little rest
Had he that night, nothing to sleep him lest
The laurer crowned Phoebus, with his heat
Began in his course aye upward as he went
To warmen of the eest see the waves weate
And Cyrces daughter song, with fresh intent
when Troylus his Pandare after sent
And on the walls of the town they pleyde
To look, if they can seen aught of Creseyde
Till it was noone, they stoden for to se
who that there came, and every manner wight
That came fro far, they sayden it was she
Till that they colden known him aright
Now was his heart dull, now was it light
And thus beiaped stoden for to stare
About naught, this Troylus and Pandare
To Pandarus, this Troylus tho seyde
For aught I wotte, before noone sykerly
In to this town ne comes not here Creseyde
She has enough to done hardely
To wynnen from her father, so trow I
Her old father wol yet make her dyne
Er that she go, god give his heart pyne
Pa^darus answered, it may well ben certain
And for thy let us dyne, I the beseech
And after noon, tha^ may thou come again
And whom they go, without more speech
And comen again, but long may they seche
Er that they find that they after gape
Fortune hem both thinks for to iape
(Quod Troylus) I se well now that she
Is tarried with her old father so
That er she come it woll nygh even be
Come forth, I woll unto the yate go
These porters ben vnkonnyng euermo
And I woll done hem holden up the yate
As naught ne were, all though she come late
The day gothe fast, and after that came eve
And yet came not to Troylus Creseyde
He looks forth by hedge, by tree, by grieve
And far his heed over the wall he leyde
And at the last he turned him, and seyde
By god I wot her meaning now Pandare
Almost ywis al new was my care
Now doutelesse this lady can her good
I wot she comes rydyng privily
I commend her wysedom by mine hode
She woll not maken people nycely
Gaure on her when yt she comes, but softly
By night in to the town she thinks ride
And dear brother think not long to abide
We have naught else for to don ywis
And Pandarus, now will thou trowen me
Have here my truth I se her, yonde she is
Heave up thine eyes man, may thou not se
Pandare answerde, nay so mote I the
Al wrong by god, what say you man where art?
That I se yonde, nys but a far carte
Alas, thou say right sothe (quod Troylus)
But hardely it is not al for naught
That in mine heart I now rejoice thus
It is against some good, I have a thought
Not I not how, but sens yt I was wrought
Ne felt I such a comfort dare I say
She comes to night, my life yt durst I lay
Pa^darus answered, it may be well enough
And held with him, of all that ever he said
But in his heart he thought, and soft lough
And to him self full soberly he said
From haselwodde, there ioly Robyn pleyde
Shall come all that thou abydest here
Yea, farewell all the snow of fern year
The wardeyn of the yates began to call
The folk, which that without yt yates were
And bade hem driven in her beestes all
Or all the night they must bleuen there
And far within the night, with many a tere
This Troylus began homwarde for to ride
For well he sees it helps not to abide
But nathelesse he gladded him in this
He thought he myscounted had his dey
And said, I understand have al amys
For thylke night I last Creseyde sey
She said, I shall ben here, if that I may
Er that the moon, o dear heart sweet
The Lion pass, out of this Aryete
For which she may yet hold al her by^este
And on the morrow, unto the yate he went
And up and down, by west and eke by este
Upon the walls made he many a went
But al for naught, his hope always him blent
For which at night, in sorrow and syghes sore
He went him home, withouten any more
This hope all clean out of his heart fled
He ne has whereon now longer for to honge
But for yt pain him thout his heart bledde
So were his throws sharp, and wonder strong
For when he saw that she abode so long
He nyste what he iudgen of it might
Sens she has broken that she him behyght
The third, fourth, fyfthe, and syxte day
After tho days ten, of which I told
Betwyxen hope and dread his heart lay
Yet somewhat trustyng on her hestes old
But when he saw she nolde her term hold
He can now seen none other remedy
But for to shape him sone for to dye
Therewith the wicked spiryt, god us bless
which that men clepen wood ialousye
Began in him crepe, in all this heaviness
For which because he would sone dye
He ne ete ne drunk for his melancolye
And eke from every company he fled
This was the life that all this time he led
He so defayte was, that no manner man
Uneath him might known there he went
So was he lean, and thereto pale and wan
And feeble, that he walks by potente
And with his ire he thus him self shente
But who so asked him whereof him smerte
He said, his harm was al about his heart
Priam full often, and eke his mother dear
His brethren and his sustren began him frayne
why he so soroufull was in all his chere
And what thing was ye cause of al his pain
But al for naught, he nolde his cause plain
But said, he felt a grievous maladye
About his heart, and feign he would dye
So on a day he lay him down to sleep
And so byfell that in sleep him thought
That in a forest fast he walked to weep
For love of her, yt him these pains wrought
And up and down, as he that forest sought
He met he saw a bore, with tuskes great
That slept against the bright sons heat
And by this bore, fast in her arms fold
Lay kyssyng aye his lady bright Creseyde
For sorrow of which, when he it began behold
And for dispyte, out of his sleep he breyde
And loud he cried on Pandarus, and seyde
O Pandarus, now know I croppe and root
I nam but deed, there nys non other boot
My lady bright Creseyde has me betrayde
In whom I trusted most of any wight
She else where has now her heart apayde
The blyfful gods, through her great might
Have in my dream yshewed it full right
Thus in my dreme, Creseyde have I behold
And all this thing to Pandarus he told
O my Creseyde alas, what subtylte?
what new lust? what beauty? what science?
what wrath of just cause have ye to me?
what gylte of me? what fell experience
Has me rafte alas? thine aduertence
O trust, o faith, o deep assurance
who has me rafte Creseyde, all my plesau^ce
Alas, why let I you from hence go?
For which well nigh out of my wit I breyde
who shall now trow on any oaths mo?
God wot I wend, o lady bright Creseyde
That every word was gospel that ye seyde
But who may bet begyle, if him list
Than he on whom men wenen best to tryste
What shall I done, my Pandarus alas?
I feel now so sharp a new pain
Sens that there is no remedy in this caas
That bet were it, I with mine ho^des twayn
My seluen slow, than always thus to plain
For through ye death my woe should have an end
There every day with life my self I shende
Pandare answerde and said, alas the while
That I was borne, have I not said er this
That dreams many a manner man begyle
And why? for folk expounden hem amys
How darste thou said that false thy lady is
For any dream, right for thyn own dread
Let be this thought, you can no dremes read
Paraue^ture there thou dreamest of this bore
It may so be that it may signifye
Her father, which that old is and eke hoar
Again the son lythe on point to dye
And she for sorrow gynneth weep and cry
And kysseth him, there he lythe on ye ground
Thus should you thy dreme aright expound
How might I than done (quod Troylus)
To know of this, yea were it never so lyte
Now say thou wisely (quod this Pandarus)
My read is this, sens thou can well endyte
That hastily a letter thou her write
Through which you shall well bringen about
To know a sothe, of that thou art in doubt
And se now why? for this I dare well said
That if so is, that she untrue be
I can not trowen that she wol write again
And if she write, thou shall full sone yse
As whether she has any lyberte
To come again, or else in some clause
If she be let, she woll assygne a cause
Thou have not written to her sens yt she went
Nor she to the, and this I durst lay
There may such cause ben in her entente
That hardely thou wolt thy seluen say
That her abode the best is for you tway
Now write her than, and thou shall feel sone
A sothe of all, there is no more to done
Acorded ben to this conclusyoun
And that anon, these ylke lords two
And hastily sat Troylus adoun
And rolleth in his heart to and fro
How he may best discryuen her his woe
And to Creseyde his own lady dear
He wrote right thus, and said as ye may here.
The copy of the letter.
RIght fresh flower, whose I have been and shall
Withoute^ part of else where service
With heart, body, life, lust, thought, and all
I woeful wight, in every humble wise
That tongue can tell, or heart may deuyse
As often as matter occupyeth place
Me recommaunde unto your noble grace
Lyketh it you to weten sweet heart
As ye well know, how long time agon
That ye me left in aspre pains smerte
when that ye went, of which yet bote non
Have I non had* but ever worse bygon
Fro day to day am I, and so mote dwell
while it you list, of well and woe my well
For which to you, with dredeful heart true
I write, as he that sorrow drives to write
My woe, that every hour increases new
Complaynyng as I dare, or can endyte
And that defaced is that may ye wit
The tears, which that from mine eyes rain
That wolden speak, if yt they durst and plain
You first beseech I, that your eyes clear
To took on this defouled ye not hold
And over all this, that ye not lady dear
wol vouchsafe this letter to behold
And by the cause eke of my (...) cold
That sleeth my wit, if aught amys me sterte
Foryeue it me, mine own sweet heart
If any servant durst or ought of right
Upon his lady pitously complain
Than wene I that I ought be that wight
Co^sydred this, that ye these months twayn
Have tarried, there ye sayden sothe to sayn
But ten days ye nolde in host soiourne
But in two months, yet ye not return
But for as much, as me mote needs like
All that you list, I dare not plain more
But humbly, with soroufull syghes syke
You write I mine vnresty sorrows sore
Fro day to day, desyryng ever more
To known fully, if your will it were
How ye have fared and don while ye be there
Whose welfare and heal eke god increase
In honor such, that upward in degree
It grow always, so that it never cease
Right as your heart aye can my lady free
Deuyse, I pray to god so mote it be
And grant it that ye soon upon me rewe
As wisely as in all I am to you true
And if you lyketh known of the fare
Of me, whose woe there may no wit discryue
I can no more, but chest of every care
At writing of this letter I was on live
Al ready out my woeful ghost to drive
which I delay, and hold him yet in hand
Upon the sight of matter of your sonde
Mine eyes two in vayn, with which I se
Of soroufull tears salt arn woxen wellis
My song in playnt of mine aduersyte
My good in harm, mine ease eke woxe^ hell is
My joy in woe, I can sey now naught ellis
But turned is, for which my life I wary
Every joy prease in his contrary
Which with your coming home aye^ to Troy
Ye may redress, and more a thousand sithe
Than ever I had encressen in me joy
For was there never heart yet so blythe
To have his life, as I shall ben as swythe
As I you se, and though no manner routhe
Can meuen you, yet thinks on your truth
And if so be my gylte has death deserved
Or if you list no more upon me se
In guerdon yet of that I have you served
Beseech I you, mine own lady fre
That her upon ye wolden write me
For love of god, my right lode sterre
That death may make an end of al my werre
If other cause aught does you for to dwell
That with your letter ye may me recomforte
For though to me your absence is an hell
with patience I woll my woe comfort
And with your lettre of hope I wol disporte
Now writes sweet, and let me thus not plain
with hope or death, delyuereth me fro pain
Iwys mine own dear heart true
I wot that when ye next upon me se
So lost have I mine heal, and eke mine hew
Creseyde shall not conne known me
Iwys mine hertes day, my lady fre
So thursteth aye mine heart to behold
Your beauty, that uneath my life I hold
I say no more, all have I for to sey
To you well more than I tell may
But whether that ye do me live or dey
Yet pray I god, so give you right good day
And fares well goodly fair fresh may
As ye that life or death me may command
And to your truth aye I me reco^maunde
With heal such, that but ye yeuen me
The same heal, I shall none heal have
In you lythe, when you list that it so be
The day in which me clothen shall my grave
And in you my life, in you might for to save
Me fro disease of all pains smerte
And fare now well mine own sweet heart
Le vostre T.


This lettre forth was sent unto Creseyde
Of which her answer in affecte was this
Full pitously she wrote again, and seyde
That also sone as she might ywis
She would come, and mende all that was amys
And finally she wrote and said then
She would come, ye, but she nyste when
But in her letter made she such feestes
That wonder was, and swore she loved him best
Of which he found but botomlesse byhestes
But Troylus thou may now eest and west
Pype in an Iuy leefe if that the lest
Thus gothe the world, god shylde us fro mischaunce
And every wight that meneth troth auau^ce
Encreasen began the woe fro day to night
Of Troylus, for taryeng of Creseyde
And lessen began his hope and eke his might
For which al down he in his bed him leyd
He ne ete, drunk, ne slept, ne word seyde
Imagynyng aye that she was unkind
For which well nigh he wext out of his mind
This dreme, of which I told have eke beforn
May never come out of his remembrance
He thought aye well, he had his lady lorne
And that Jove's, of his purueyaunce
Him showed had in sleep the signyfiaunce
Of her untruth, and his disauenture
And that the bore was showed him in figure
For which he for Sybille his suster sent
That called was Cassandre eke all about
And all his dream he told her er he stente
And her besought assoylen him the doubt
Of the strong boore, with tuskes stout
And finally, within a little stounde
Cassandre him began thus his dreme expou^de
She began first smyle, and said o brother dear
If thou a soth of this desyrest to know
Thou must a few of old stories here
To purpose how that fortune overthrow
Has lords old, through which wtin a throw
Thou shall this bore know, and of what kind
He comen is, as men in books find
Diane, which that wroth was and in ire
For greeks nolde done her sacrifyce
Ne encens upon her altar set on fire
She for that greeks gonne her so dispyse
wrake her in a wonder cruel wise
For with a bore, as great as ox in stall
She made up frete her corn and vynes all
To slay the bore was al ye country raised
Among which there came this bore to se
A maid, one of this world the best ypraysed
And Meleager, lord of that country
He loved so this fresh maiden fre
That with his manhood, er he would stente
This bore he slough, and her ye heed he sent
Of which, as old books tellen us
There rose a conteke and a great envy
And of this lord descended Tideus
By lygne or else old books lie
But how this Meleager began to dye
Through his mother, woll I you not tell
For all to long it were for to dwell
She told eke how Tideus, er she stente
Unto the strong cite of Thebes
(To claymen kingdom of the cite) went
For his felawe dan Polimites
Of which the brother dan Ethiocles
Full wrongfully of Thebes held ye strentgh
This told she by process all by length
She told eke how Hemonydes asterte
when Tydeus slough fyfty knights stout
She told eke all the prophesies by heart
And how that seven kings with her route
Besiegeden the cite all about
And of the holy serpent, and the well
And of the furyes al she began him tell
Associat profugum, Tydeus primo Polimidem
Tidea legatum docet insidiasque secundis
Tertius Hermodien canit et vates latitantes
Mors fury Leuine quinto narrantur et angues
Quartus habet reges ineuntes prelia septem
Archynon bustum, sexto ludique leguntur
Dat Graios Thebes vatem septimis vmbris
Octauo cecidit Tibeus spes vita pelagis
Ipomedon nono moritur, cum Parthonepeo
Fulmine percusso, decimo Canapus superatur
Vndecimo lose perimunt per vulnera fratres
Argiuam flentem, narrant duodenis et ignem.
Of Archinories buryeng, and the plays
And how Amphiorax fill through ye ground
How Tideus was slain, lord of Argeyes
And how Hypomedon in a little stounde
was dreynte, and deed Parthonepe of wound
And also how Campaneus the proud
with tho^der dynte was slain, ye cried loud
He ga^ eke tell him how that either brother
Ethiocles and Polimites also
At a scarmyshe, each of hem slough other
And of Argynes weeping and her mo
And how ye town was brent she told eke tho
And tho descended down from iestes old
To Diomede, and thus she spoke and told
This ylke bore betokens Diomede
Tideus son, that down descended is
Fro Meleager, that made the bore to blede
And thy lady, where so she be ywis
This Diomede her heart has, and she his
weep if thou wolte or leave, for out of doubt
This Diomede is in, and thou art out
Thou say not soth (quod he) thou sorceresse
with all thy false ghost of prophecy
Thou wenest ben a great deuyneresse
Now see thou not this fool of fantasye
Paynen her on ladies for to lie
Away (quod he) there Jove's give the sorrow
Thou shall be falls paraue^ture yet to morrow
As well thou might lain on good Alceste
That was of creatures (but men lie)
That ever weren, kyndest and the best
For when her husbonde was in ieopardye
To dye him self, but if she would dye
She chese for him to dye, and gone to hell
And starfe anon, as us the books tell
Cassandre gothe, and he with cruel heart
Foryate his woe, for anger of her speech
And from his bed all suddenly he sterte
As though al hole him had ymade a leche
And day by day he began enquire and seche
A sothe of this, with all his full cure
And thus he dryueth forth his adventure
Fortune, which that permutacion
Of things has, as it is her committed
Through purueyaunce and disposycion
Of high Jove, as reygnes shall ben flytted
Fro folk i^ folk, or wha^ they shall ben smytted
Began pull away the feathers bright of Troy
Fro day to day, till they ben bare of joy
Among all this, the fine of the ieoperdy
Of Hector began approchen wonder blyue
The fate would his soul should vnbodye
And shapen had a mean it out to drive
Against which fate him helps not to strive
But on a day to fyghten began he wend
At which alas, he caught his lives end
For which me thinks every manner wight
That haunteth arms, ought to bewail
The death of him that was so noble a knight
For as he drough a king by thauentayle
Unware of this, Achilles through the mayle
And through the body began him for to ryue
And thus ye worthy knight was refte of live
For whom as old books tellen us
was made such woe, ye tongue it may not tell
And namely the sorrow of Troylus
That next him was of worthynesse the well
And in this woe began Thoylus to dwell
That what for sorrow, love, and for vnreste
Full often a day he bade his heart breast
But nathlesse, though he began him despair
And dredde aye that his lady was untrue
Yet aye on her his heart began repair
and as these lovers don, he sought aye new
To get again Creseyde bright of hew
And in his heart he went her excusing
That Calcas caused al her taryeng
And often time he was in purpose great
Him seluen like a pilgrim to disgyse
To seen her, but he may not countrefeate
To ben unknown of folk that weren wise
Ne find excuse aryght that may suffyse
If he among the greeks known were
For which he wept full often many a teere
There he wrote yet often time al new
Full pytously, he left it not for sloth
Besechyng her, sens that he was true
that she wol come again and hold her troth
For which Creseyde upon a day for routh
I take it so, touching al this matere
wrote him again, and said as ye may here
Cupides son, ensample of godlyhede
O sword of knighthode, sours of ge^tilnesse
How might a wight in turment and in dread
And healelesse you send, as yet gladness
I hertlesse, I sick, I in distress
Sens ye with me, nor I with you may deal
You neither send I heart may nor heal
Your letters full the paper al yplaynted
Conceived has mine hertes pity
I have eke seen with tears al depaynted
Your letter, and how that ye requyren me
To come again, which yet ne may not be
But why, lest that this letter fou^den were
No mention ne make I now for feere
Grievous to me (god wot) is your unrest
Your haste, and that the gods ordinance
It seems not ye take it for the best
Nor other thing nys in your remembrance
As thinks me, but only your plesaunce
But beth not wroth, and that I you beseech
For that I tarry is al for wicked speech
For I have herd well more than I wend
touching us two, how things have ysto^de
which I shall with dissimulyng amend
and beth not wroth I have eke understand
How ye ne do but holden me in hand
But now no force, I can not in you guess
But al troth and al gentylnesse
Come I wol, but yet in such disioynte
I sto^de as now, yt what year, or what day
That this shall be, that can I not apoynte
But in effect I pray you as I may
of your good word, and of your friendship aye
For trewely while that my life may dure
As for a friend ye may in me assure
Yet pray I you on yuel ye ne take
That it is short, which that I to you write
I dare not there I am well letters make
Ne never yet ne could I well endyte
Eke great effect men write in place lyte
Thentent is al, and not the letters space
And fares well, god have you in his grace
La vostre C.
This Troylus thout this letter al strange
when he it saw, and soroufully he sight
Him thought it like a kalendes of eschaung
But finally he full ne trowen might
That she ne would him holde^ that she hight
For with full yuel will list him to leave
yt loves well in such case though him grieve
But nathlesse, men said that at the last
For any thing, men shall the soth se
And such a case betydde, and that as fast
That Troylus well understood that she
Nas not so kind, as that her ought be
And finally he wot now out of doubt
That al is lost, that he has been about
Stood on a day in his melancolye
This Troylus, and in suspectioun
Of her, for whom he wend to dye
And so befyl, that throughout Troy town
As was the gyse, yborne was up and down
A manner cote armure, as says the storye
Beforne Deiphebe, in sign of his victory
The which cote, as tells Lollius
Diephebe it had rent fro Diomede
The same day and when this Troylus
It saw, he began to taken of it head
Auysyng of the length and of the bread
And all the work, but as he began behold
Full suddenly his heart began to cold
As he that on the coler fond within
A broche, that he Creseyde yaue at morrow
That she from Troy must needs twyn
In remembrance of him, and of his sorrow
And she him laid again her faith to borow
To keep it aye, but now full well he wist
His lady nas no longer on to tryst
He goth him home, and began full sone send
For Pandarus, and al this new chance
and of this broch he told him word and end
Complaynyng of her hertes variaunce
His long love, his troth, and his penance
And after death, without words more
Full fast he cried, his rest him to restore
Than spoke he thus, O lady mine Creseyde
where is your says, and where is your behest?
where is your love, where is your troth he said
of diomede have ye now all this feast?
Alas, I would have trowed at the leest
That sens ye nolde in troth to me stand
That ye thus nolde have holden me in ho^de
who shall now trowen on any oaths mo?
Alas I never would have wend er this
That ye Creseide could have chaunched so
Ne but I had agylte, and done amys
So cruel wend I not your heart ywys
To slay me thus, alas your name of truth
Is now fordon, and that is al my routhe
was there none other broche you list let
To feffe with your new love (quod he)
But thylke broche that I with teeres wete
You yaue, as for a remembrance of me
None other cause alas, ne had ye
But for dispyte, and eke for that ye mente
Al utterly to shown your intent
Through which I se, that clean out of your mind
Ye have me cast, and I ne can nor may
For all this world, within mine heart find
To vnlonen you a quarter of a day
In cursed time I borne was welaway
That you that done me al this woe endure
Yet love I best of any creature
Now god (quod he) me send yet the grace
That I may meten with this Diomede
And trewly if I have might and space
Yet shall I make I hope his sides blede
Now god (quod he) that ought taken head
To forthren troth, and wrongs to punice
why nylt thou don a vengeance of this vice
O Pandarus, that in dremes for to tryst
Me blamed have, and wont art often vpbreyde
Now may thou seen thy self, if that ye list
How true is now thy nece bright Creseyde
In sundry forms (god it wot) he seyde
The gods shown both joy and tene
In sleep and by my dream it is now seen
And certainly, withouten more speech
From hence forth, as ferforth as I may
Mine own death in arms wol I seche
I retche not how soon be the day
But trewly Creseyde, sweet may
whom I have with all my might yserued
That ye thus done, I have it not deserved
This Pa^darus that al these things herd
And wyste well he said as soth of this
He not a word again to him answerde
For sorry of his friends sorrow he is
And shamed for his nece has done amys
And stante astonyed of these causes tway
As still as stone, o word ne could he say
But at the last thus he spoke, and seyde
My brother dear, I may do the no more
what should I said, I hate ywys Creseyde
And god it wot I wol hate her evermore
And that thou me besoughtest done of yore
Having unto mine honor ne my rest
Right no regard, I did all that the least
If I did aught, that might lyken the
It is me lefe, and of this treason now
God wot that it a sorrow is to me
And dredelesse, for hertes ease of you
Right feign I would amend it, wist I how
And fro this world, almighty god I pray
Deliver her soon, I can no more say
Great was the sorrow and playnt of Troylus
But forth her course fortune aye began hold
Creseyde loves the son of Tydeus
And Troylus mote weep in cares cold
Such is this world, who so it can behold
In each estate is little hertes rest
God leave us to take it for the best
In many cruel battle out of dread
Of Troylus, this ylke noble knight
(As men may in these old books read)
was seen his knygthod, and his great might
And dredelesse his ire day and night
Full cruelly the greeks aye abought
(and always most this Diomede) he sought
And often time (I find) that they met
with bloody strokes, and with words great
Assayeng how her spears weren whette
And god it wot, with many a cruel heat
Began Troylus upon his helm to beat
But nathlesse, fortune it naught ne would
Of outher hand that either dyen should
And if I had ytaken for to write
The arms of this ylke worthy man
Than would I of his battaylles endyte
And for that I to written first began
Of his love, I have said as I can
His worthy deeds, who so hem list here
Read Dares, he can tell hem al yfere
Besechyng every lady bright of hew
And every gentle woman, what she be
Al be it that Creseyde was untrue
That for that gylt ye be not wroth with me
Ye may her gylt in other books se
And gladder I wol write, if you lest
Penelopes troth, and good Alcest
Ne I say not this al only for these men
But most for women that betrayed be
Throu false folk, god give he^ sorrow ame^
That with her great wit and subtylte
Betrayen you, and this meneth me
To speak, and in effect you al I pray
Beth ware of men, and herkeneth what I say
Go little book, go my little tragedy
There god thy maker yet er that I dye
So send me might to make some comedye
But little book, make thou none envy
But subject ben unto al poesye
And kiss the steps, where as you see pace
Of Vergil, Ouide, Homer, Lucan, and Stace
And for there is so great diuyrsite
In english, and in writing of our tongue
So pray I to god, that none miswrite the
Ne the mysse meter, for defaute of tongue
And read where so thou be, or else song
That thou be understand, god I beseech
But yet to purpose of my rather speech
The wrath, as I began you for to sey
Of Troylus, the greeks boughten dear
For thousands his hands maden dey
As he that was wothouten any pere
Save in his time Hector as I can here
But welaway, save only gods will
Dispytously him slough the feirse Achyl
And wha^ that he was slain in this manner
His light ghost, full blisfully is went
Up to the holownesse of the seventh spear
In his place letyng eueryche element
And there he saw, with full auysement
The arratykes sterres, herkenyng armonye
with sownes full of heuenysse melodye
And down from thence, fast he began auyse
This little spotte of earth, that with the sea
Enbraced is, and fully began despise
This wretched world, and held al vanite
To respect of the plain felicite
That is in heaven above, and at the last
There he was slain, his loking down he cast
And in him self he lough, right at the woe
Of hem that wepten for his ^erh so fast
And dampened al our works yt follows so
The blind lust, which that may not last
And shulden al our heart on heaven cast
And forth he went, shortly for to tell
There as Mercury sorted him to dwell
Such fine has lo, this Troylus for love
Such fine has al his great worthynesse
Such fine has his estate royal above
such fine his lust, such fine has his noblesse
Such fine has false worlds brotelnesse
And thus began his loving of Creseyde
As I have told, and in this wise he deyde
O young fresh folks, he or she
In which ye love up grows with your age
Repayreth home from worldly vanite
And of your hertes, up casts the visage
To thylke god, that after his image
You made, and thinks all nys but a fair
This world yt passes sone, as flowers fair
And loves him, yt which that right for love
Upon a cross our souls for to bey
First starfe and rose, and sit in heaven above
For he nyl falsen no wight dare I sey
That wol his heart al holy on him ley
And sens he best to love is, and most meke
what needs feigned loves for to seek
Lo here of paynems, cursed old rytes
Lo here what al her gods may avail
Lo here this wretched worlds appetytes
Lo here the fine and guerdon for travail
Of Jove, Apollo, of Mars, and such raskayle
Lo here the form of old clerks speech
In poetrye, if ye her books seche
O moral Gower, this book I direct
To the, and to the Philosophical Strode
To vouchsafe there need is to correct
Of your benignityes and zeles good
and to that sothfast Christ yt starfe on roode
wythal mine heart, of mercy ever I pray
And to the lord aright, thus I speak and say
Thou one, two, and three, eterne on live
That raignest aye in three, two and one
Vncircumscript, and all may circumscryue
Us from visible and invisible fone
Defend, and to thy mercy euerychone
So make us Jesus to thy mercy digne
For love of maid, and mother thine benign
Thus ends the fyfth book and last of Troylus: and here follows the pyteful
and dolorous testament of fair Creseyde
The testament of Creseyde
ADolye seasonne till a careful dyte
Should coresponde, and be equiuolent
Right so it was wha^ I began to write
This tragedy, yt weder right fervent
when Aries in mids of the lent
showers of hayle can fro the north descend
that scantly fro the cold I mit me defend
Yet nevertheless within mine orature
I stood, wha^ Titan had his beams bright
withdrawn down, and scyled under cure
And fair Venus the beautye of the night
Vprayse, and set unto the west full right
Her golden face in oppositiowne
Of god Phoebus direct discendinge down
Throuout ye glass her bemes brast so fair
That I might se on every side me by
The northern wind had purifyed the air
And shed his mysty clouds fro the sky
The froste fresed, the blastes bytterly
Fro pole Artike come whisking loud and shyll
And caused me remove against my will
For I trusted that Venus loves queen
To whom sometime I hight obedience
My saded heart of love she would make grene
And thereupon with humble reverence
I thought to pray her hye magnifycence
But for great cold as than I let was
And in my chamber to the fire can pas
Though love be hot, yet in a man of age
It kyndleth not so soon as in youtheed
Of whom the blood is flowyng in a rage
And in the old, the courage dull and deed
Of which the fire outward is be remeed
To help by phisyke where ye nature failed
I am expert, for both I have assayed
I made the fire and beaked me about
Than took I drink my spirits to conforte
And armed me well fro the cold therout
To cut the winter night and make it short
I took a queare, and left al other sport
written by worthy Chaucer glorious
Of fair Creseyde, and lusty Troylus
And there I found after that Diomede
Received had that lady bright of hew
How Troylus nere out of his wit abrede
And wept sore, with visage pale of hew
For which wanhope his tears began renew
while esperous reioysed him again
Thus while in joy he lived and while in pain
Of her behest he had great comfortynge
Trusting to Troy yt she would make retour
which he desired most of al erthly thing
For why she was his only paramoure
But when he saw passed both day and hour
Of her gayncome, in sorrow can oppress
His woeful heart, in care and heaviness
Of his distress me needs not rehearse
For worthy Chaucer in that same book
In goodly terms, and in ioly verse
Compyled has his cares who will look
To break my sleep another queare I took
In which I found the fatal desteny
Of fair Creseyde, which ended wretchedly
who wot if all that Chaucer wrote be true
Nor I wotte not if this narration
Be authoryzed, or forged of the new
Of some poet by his invention
Made to report the lamentation
And woeful end of this lusty Creseyde
And what distress she was in or she deyde
when Diomede had al his appetyte
And more fulfilled of this fair lady
Upon another set was al his delight
And send to her a lybel repudy
And her excluded fro his company
Than desolate she walked up and down
As some men saine, in the court as comune
O fair Creseyde, the flower and a per se
Of Troy and Greece, how were thou fortunate
To change in fylth al thy femynite
And be with fleshly lust so maculate
And go among the greeks early and late
So giglotlyke, taking thy soul pleasaunce
I have pity the should fall such mischaunce
Yet nevertheless, what ever me^ deem or say
In scornful langage of thy brutelnesse
I shall excuse, as ferforth as I may
Thy womanheed, thy wisdom and fayrnesse
The which fortune has put to such distress
As her pleased, and nothing through the gylte
Of the, through wicked langage to be spilte
This fair lady on this wise destitute
Of al comfort and consolation
Right privily without fellowship or refute
Disheuelde, passed out of the town
A mile or two unto a mansioun
Bylded full gay, where her father Calcas
which tha^ among the greeks dwelling was
when he her saw, the cause he can inquire
Of her coming, she said syghyng full sore
Fro Diomede had gotten his desire
He wore weary and would of me no more
quod Calcas daughter, weep thou not therefore
Parauenture al comes for the best
welcome to me thou art full dear a gest
This old Calcas, after the law was tho
was keeper of the temple as a priest
In which Venus and her son Cupido
were honored, and his chamber was nest
To which Creseyde with bale enewed in breast
Used to pass, her prayers for to say
while at the last upon a solemn day
As custom was, the people far and nere
Before the noone, unto the temple went
with sacrifyce, devout in their manner
But still Creseyde heavy in her intent
In to the church would not her self present
For gyuyng the people any demyng
Of her expulse fro Diomede the king
But passed in to asecrete oratore
where she might weep her woeful desteny
Behind her back, she closed fast the door
And on her knees bare fell down in hye
Upon Venus and Cupide angerly
She cried out, and said in this wise
Alas that ever I made you sacrifyce
Ye gave me ones a divine responsayle
That I should be the flower of love in Troy
Now am I made an unworthy outwayle
And al in care translated is my joy
who shall me gyde? who shall me now co^uoy
Sith I fro Diomede, and noble Troylus
Am clean excluded, as abiecte odious
O false Cupyde, none is to wit but thou
And thy mother of love, that blind goddace
Ye caused me understand always and trow
The seed of love was sowem on my face
and aye grew grene throu your souple grace
But now alas, yt seed with frost is slain
And I fro lovers left and al forlayne
when this was said, down in an ecstasy
Rauyshed in sprite, in a dream she fell
And by apparaunce herd where she did lie
Cupide the king tynkyng a silver bell
which men might here fro heaven in to hell
At whose sound before Cupide aperes
the seven planets discendyng fro their speres
which has power of all thing generable
To rule and stere by their great influence
weder and wind, and course variable
And first of al Saturn gave his sentence
which gave to Cupide little reverence
But as a boystous churl in his manner
Came crabbedly with austryne look and chere
His face frounced, his lere was like ye leed
His teth chattred, and sheuered with the chyn
His eyes drouped hole sonken in his heed
Out at his nose the myldrop fast began ryn
with lyppes blo, and chekes leave and thyn
The yse yekels yt fro his here down honge
was wonder great, and as a spear as long
Attour his belte his lyarte locks lay
Feltred vnfayre, ouerfret with frostes hoar
His garment and his gate fall gay of gray
His widdred wede fro hi^ ye wind out wore
A boustous bow within his hand he bore
Under his gyrdel a fashe of felone flayns
Feddred with yse, and heeded with holstayns
Than Jupiter right fair and amiable
God of the sterres in the fyrmament
And norice to al thing generable
Fro his father Saturn far different
with burly face, and brows bright and brent
Upon his heed a garlonde wonders gaye
Of flowers fair, as it had been in May
his voice was clear as crystal was his eien
As goldde^ wier so glettring was his hear
His garmente and his gyte full gay of grene
with golden lystes gylte on every gear
A burly brande about his myddle he bear
In his right hand he had a grounde^ spear
Of his father, the wrath fro us to bear
Next after him came Mars the god of ire
Of strife, debate, and all discentioun
To chyde and fight, as feirse as any fire
In hard harness hewmo^de and habergioun
And on his haunch a rousty fell fauchoun
And in his hand he had a rousty sword
writhyng his face with many angry word
Shaking his brande, before Cupide he come
with reed visage, and grisely glowyng eyes
And at his mouth a blubber stood of foam
Like to a boore, whettinge his tuskes keyn
Right tulsure like, but temperaunce in tene
An horn blew with many boustous brag
which all this world with war has made to wagge
Tha^ fair Phoebus, lantern and la^pe of light
Of man and be, both fruit and florishyng
Tender norice, and banysher of night
And of the world, causyng by his mouyng
And influence, life in all erthly thing
without comfort of whom of force to naught
Must go dye, yt all this world has wrought
As king royal, he rode upon a chare
The which Phiton sometime gyded unright
the bryghtnesse of his face wha^ it was bare
Non might behold, for persing of his sight
This golden carte with fiery beams bright
Four yoked stedes full different of hew
But bayt or tyring through the speres drew
The first was sord, with mane as reed as rose
Called Eoye in to the orient
The second stead to name, hight Ethyose
whitely and pale, and some dele ascendent
The third Perose, right hot and eke fervent
The fourth was black, called Phelologee
which rolleth Phoebus down in to the sea
Venus was there present, that gods gay
Her sons quarrel to defend and make
his own complaynt, cladde in a nyce array
the one half grene the other half sable blake
white here as gold, kembet and shed a bake
But in her face seemed great variaunce
while parfite troth, and whiles inco^staunce
Under smylyng she was dissimulate
Prouocatyue with blynkes amorous
And suddenly changed and alterate
Angry as any serpent venomous
Right pungityue with words odious
Thus variau^t she was, who list take keep
with one eye laugh, and with ye other weep
In tokenyng that al flesshly paramour
which Venus has in rule and governance
Is sometime sweet, sometime bitter and sour
Right unstable and full of variaunce
Mynged with careful joy and false pleasau^ce
Now hot now cold, now blythe, now full of woe
now grene as lefe, now widred and ago
with book in hand, than come Mercurious
Right eloquent and full of rethorye
with polyte terms and delicious
with pen and ynke to report all ready
Setting songs, and syngen merely
His hode was red hecled attour his crown
Like till a poet of the old fassyoun
Bores he bare with fine electuares
And sugared syropes for digestion
Spyces belongyng to the potiquares
with many wholesome sweet confectioun
Doctor in phisyke cled in a scarlet gown
And furred well as such one ought to be
Honest and good, and not a word couth lie.
Next after him come lady Synthia
The last of al, and swyftest in her spear
Of color black, busked with horns two
And in the night she lysteth best tapere
Hawe as the leed, of color nothing clear
For all the light she boroweth at her brother
Tytan, for of her self she has none other
Her gyte was gray and full of spots blak
And on her breest a churl painted full even
Bearyng a bush of thorns on his back
which for his theft mit clime no ner ye heaven
Thus wha^ they gadred were ye gods seven
Mercurius they chosed with one assent
To be forespeker in the parlyment
who had been there and lykyng for to here
His facondetonge, and terms exquisyte
Of rethorike the practyke he might lere
In brefe sermon, a preignau^t sentence write
Before Cupide, valyng his cappe alyte
Sper is the cause of that vacatioun
And he anon showed his ententioun
Lo quod Cupide, who wol blaspheme ye name
Of his own god, either in word or deed
To all gods he does both loss and shame
And should have bitter pains to his mede
I say this by yonder wretch Creseyde
The which through me was sometime flour of love
Me and my mother she statelye began reprove
Saying of her great infelicitie
I was the cause, and my mother Venus
She called a blind gods and might not se
with sclaunder and defame injurious
Thus her living unclean and lecherous
She would retort in me and my mother
To who^ I showed my grace above al other
And sith ye are al seven delicate
Participant of deuyne sapience
This great iniure done to our hye estate
Me think with pain we should make recompense
was never to gods done such violence
As well for you, as for my self I say
Therefore go help to revenge I you pray
Mercurius to Cupide gave answer
And said, sir king: my counsel is that ye
Refer you to the highest planet here
And take to him the lowest of degree
The pain of Creseyde for to modefye
As god Saturn with him take Synthia
I am content (quod he) to take they two
Than thus proceeded Saturn and the moon
when they the matter rypely had degest
For the despyte to Cupid that she had done
And to Venus open and manifest
In all her life with pain to be oppressed
And turme^t sore, with syknesse incurable
And to all lovers be abominable.
This doleful sentence Saturn took on hand
And passed down where careful Creseyd lay
And on her heed he laid a frosty wande
Than lawfully on this wise can he say
Thy great fayrnesse, and all thy beauty gay
Thy wanton blood, and eke thy golden here
Here I exclude fro the for euermeere.
I change thy mirth into melancoly
which is the mother of all pensyuenesse
Thy moyster and thy hete into cold and dry
Thy insolence, thy play, and thy wanto^nesse
To great disease, thy pomp and thy richesse
Into mortal need and great penuritie
Thou suffer shall, and as a beggar dye
O cruel Saturn froward and angrye
Hard is thy dome, and to malicyous
Of fair Creseyd why have thou no mercy
which was so sweet, gentle, and amorous
withdraw thy sentence and be gracyous
As thou were never, so shows through thy deed
A wrekeful sentence given on Creseyd
Tha^ Synthia, when Saturn past away
Out of her seat, descended down belyue
And red a byll on Creseyde where she lay
Conteynyng this sentence diffynityue
Fro heal of body here I the depryue
And to thy syknesse shall be no recure
But in dolor thy days to endure
Thy crystal eyes menged with blood I make
Thy voice so clear vnplesaunt here and hace
Thy lusty lere ouerspred with spots blake
And lumpes hawe apering in thy face
where thou come each man shall fly ye place
Thus shall thou go beggyng fro house to house
with cup and clapper like a lazarous
This dooly dream, this ugly visioun
Brought till an end, Creseyd fro it awoke
And all that court and conuocatioun
Vanyshed away, than rose she up and took
A polished glass, and her shadow couth look
And wha^ she saw her vysage so deformate
If she in heart were woe, I ne wit god wate
weeping full sore, lo what it is (quod she)
with froward langage to move and stere
Our crabbed gods, and so is seen on me
My blasphemyng now have I bought full dear
All erthly joy and mirth I set arere
Alas this day, alas this woeful tide
when I began with my gods to chyde
Be this was said, a child came fro the hal
To warn Creseyde the supper was ready
First knocked at the door, and eft couth call
Madam, your father byddeth you com i^ hy
He has maruayl so long on groufe ye lie
And says your beedes beth to long so^dele
The gods wot al your intent full well
Quod she fair child, go to my father dear
And pray him come to speak with me anon
And so he did, and said daughter what chere
Alas (quod she) father, my mirth is gone
How so (quod he) and she can al expone
As I have told, the vengeance and the weak
For her trespass Cupide on her couth take
He looked on her ugly lepers face
The which before was white as lely floute
wryngyng his hands, ofttymes said alas
That he had lived to se that woeful hour
For he knew well, that there was no sucour
To her syknesse, and you doubled his pain
Thus was there care ynowe betwyxe hem twain
wha^ they together mourned had full lange
quod Creseyde father, I would not be kende
Therefore in secret wise ye let me gange
To you hospital at the towns end
And thither some meat for charity me send
To live upon, for all mirth in this earth
Is fro me gone, such is my wicked werth
when in a mantell and a Beuer hat
with cup and clapper wonder privily
He opened a secret gate, and out thereat
Conueyde her, that no man should espy
There to a vylage half a mile thereby
Delivered her in at the spyttel house
And daily send her part of his almous
Some knew her well, and some had no knowledge
Of her, because she was so deforma^e
with byles blake ouerspred in her visage
And her fair color faded and alterate
Yet they presumed for her hye regrate
And still mournyng she was of noble kyn
with better will, there they took her inn
The day passed, and Phoebus went unto rest
The clouds black on every side all the sky
God wot if Cresede were a sorrowful gest
Seeing that uncouth fare and herbory
But meat or drink she dressed her to lie
In a dark corner of the house alone
And on this wise weeping, she made her moan.
Here follows the complaynt of Creseyde
O Sop of sorrow sonken into care
O caytife Creseyd now and euermare
Gone is thy joy, and al thy mirth in earth
Of all blythenesse now art thou black and bare
There is no salve may help thy sare
Fell is thy fortune, wicked is thy werth
Thy bliss is banysshed and thy bale vnberde
Under the great god if I graven ware
where men of Greece ne yet of Troy might herd
where is thy chamber wantonly besene
with burly bed, and bankers brouded been
Spyces and wine to thy collatioun
The cups al of gold and silver shene
Thy sweet meats served in plates clean
with sauery sauce of a good facioun
Thy gay garments with many goodly goune
Thy plesau^t laune pynned with golden pene
Al is arere thy great royal renoune.
where is thy gardeyne with thy greces gay
And fresh flowers, which you queen Floraye
Had painted plesauntly in every pane
where thou were wont full merrily in May
To walk and take the dew be it was day
And here the merry and mauyse many one
with ladies fair in carollyng to gone
And se the royal renkes in the raye
This leper loge take for thy goodly bour
And for thy bed, take now a bonche of stro
For wayled wine and meets thou had tho
Take mouled breed, pyrat and syder sour
But cup and clapper is al now ago.
My clear voice and my courtly carollynge
Is rank as roke, full hidous here and hace
Deformed is the figure of my face
To look on it no people has lykyng
Sosped in sight, I say with sore syghinge
Lying among the leper folk alas.
O ladies fair of Troy and Greece attend
My freyle fortune, mine infelicitie
My great myschef which noma^ can amend
And in your mind a myrrour make of me
As I am now peradventure that ye
For all your might may come to ye same end
Or else worse if any worse may be
Beware therefore aproches nere your end
Nout is your fayrnesse but a fading flower
Nout is your famous laud and hye honor
But wind inflate in other men's ears
Your rosyng red to rotyng shall retour
Example make of me in your memore
which of such things, woeful witness bears
All wealth in earth as wynd away it wears
Beware therefore aprocheth nere your hour
Thus chydyng with her drery destiny
weeping, she woke ye night fro end to end
But all in vain her dole, her careful cry
Mit not remedy, ne yet her mourning me^d
A leper lady rose, and to her wend
And said: why spurnest thou again ye wall
To slay thy self and mend nothing at all
Since that thy weping but doubleth thy woe
I counsel the make virtue of a need
Go learn to clap thy clapper to and fro
And learn after the law of lepers led
There was no bote but forth with tha^ she yede
Fro place to place, while cold and hu^gre sore
Compelled her to be a rank beggore
That same time of Troy the garnysoun
which had the cheftayne worthy Troylus
Through ieopardy of war had stryke^ down
Knights of Greece in no^bre maruaylous
with great triumph and laud victorious
Again to Troy right royally they rode
The way where Creseyde with the leper stood
Seeing that company come all with o steue^
They gave a cry, and shoke cups good speed
worthy lords, for gods love of heaven
To us lepers, part of your alms deed
Than to her cry noble Troylus took head
Having pytie, nere by the place began pass
where Creseyd sat, not weti^g what she was
Than upon him she kest up both her eyes
And with a blynke it come intyl his thought
That he sometime her face before had seyn
But she was in such plite he knew hernout
Yet than her look into his mind he brout
The sweet vysage and amorous blenkynge
Of fair Creseyd, sometime his own derling
No wonder was, suppose in mind that he
Took her figure so soon, and lo now why
The ydoll of a thing in case may be
So deep emprynted in the fantasy
That it defends the wits outwardly
And so appears in form and like estate
within the mind as it was figurate
A spark of love than till his heart couth spri^g
And kyndeled his body in a fire
with hot fever, in swet and trymblynge
Him took, while he was ready to expyre
To bear his shylde his breest begone to tire
within a while he changed many a hew
And nevertheless not one another knew.
For knyghtly pytie and memoriel
Of fair Creseyd, a gyrdle began he take
A purse of gold, and many a gay jewel
And in ye skyrt of Creseyd down can shake
Tha^ rode away, and not a word he spoke
Pensife in heart while he came to ye town
And for great care oftsith almost fell down
The lepre folk to Creseyde than couth draw
To se the equal distributioun
Of ye almous, but when the gold they saw
Each one to other privily can rowne
And said: you lord has more affectioun
How ever it be unto you lazarous
Than to us all, we know by his almous
what lord is you (quod she) have ye no feel?
That does to us so great humanity
Yes quod a lepre man, I know him well
Sir Troylus it is a knight gentle and free
when Creseyde understood that it was he
Styffer tha^ stele there stert a bitter stound
Thrughout her heart, and fyl down to ye ground
when she ouercom with syghyng sore and sad
with many a careful cry and cold atone
Now is my breast with stormy stou^des stad
wrapped in woe wretch fulwyl of one
Than fell in swoun full often or she would f^ne
And ever in her swouning cried she chus
O false Creseyd, and true knight Troylus.
Thy love, thy laud, and all thy gentylnesse
I compted small in my prosperity
So effated I was in wantonness
And clambe upon the fykel whele so hye
All faith and love I promoted to the
was in thy self fekle and furyous
O false Creseyde, and true knight Troylus
For love of me thou kept countenance
Honest and chaste in conuersatioun
Of all women protector and defense
Thou were, and helped their opynioun
My mind on fleshly foul affectioun
was enclyned to lusts lecherous
Fie false Creseyde, o true knight Troylus
Lovers beware, and take good head about
whom yt ye love, for when ye suffer pain
I let you wit there is right few thrughout
who^ ye may trust to have true love again
Prove wha^ ye wol your labor is in vain
Therefore I read ye take them as ye find
For they are as sad as wethercock in wynd
Because I know the great unstableness
Bryttell as glass, unto my self I say
Trustyng in other as great brutelnesse
As inconstaunt, and as untrue of faye
Thou some be true, I wot rit few ar they
who fyndeth truth, let him his lady ^^se
None but my self as now I woll accuse
when this was said, with paper she sat down
And in this manner made her testament
Here I bequeth my corse and caryoun
with worms and with toodes to be rent
My cup, my clapper, and mine ornament
And al my gold these leper folk shall have
when I am deed, to bury me in grave
This royal ring set with this Rubye red
which Troylus in dowry to me send
To him again I leave it wha^ I am deed
To make my careful death unto him kende
Thus I conclude shortly and make an end
My sprit I leave to Diane where she dwells
To walk with her in waste wodes and wells.
O Diomede thou have both broche and belt
which Troylus gave me in tokenyng
Of his true love, and with the word she swelt
And soon a leper man took of the ring
Than buried her withouten tarying
To Troylus forth with the ring he bare
And of creseyde the death he can declare
when he had herd her great infirmity
Her legacy, and lamentatioun
And how she ended in such poverty
He swelt for woe and fell down in a swoun
For sorrow his heart to brast was boun
Syghyng full sadly said I can no more
She was untrue, and woe is me therefore.
Some says he made a tomb of marble gray
And wrote her name and superscription
And laid it on her grave where as she lay
In golden letters co^taynynge this reasoun
Lo fair ladies, Creseyde of Troy ye town
Sometime co^pted the flower of womanhed
Under this stone late leper lies deed.
Now worthy women in this balade short
Made for your worship and instruction
Of charity I monysh and exhort
Mynge not your love with false disception
Bear in your mind this sore conclusion
Of fair Creseyde, as I have said before
Sith she is deed I speak of her no more.
Thus ends the piteful and dolorous testament of fair Creseyde: And
hereafter follows the legende of good women.
The legende of good women.
A Thousand times I have herd men tell
That there is joy in heaven and pain in hell
And I accord it well that it is so
But nathelesse, yet wot I well also
That there nys none dwelling in this country
That either has in heaven or hell ybe
Ne may of it none other ways wytten
But as he herd said, or found it written
For by assaye there may no man it preue
But god forbede, but men should leave
well more thing than they han seen with eye
Men shall not wenen every thing a lie
But if him self it sees, or else it does
For god wot thing is never the less soth
Though every wight ne may it not yse
Bernarde the monk ne saugh al parde
Than mote we to books that we find
(Through which ye old things ben in mind
And to the doctrine of these old wise)
Give credence in every skylfull wise
That tellen of these old appreued stories
Of holiness, of reygnes, of victories
Of love, of hate, of other sundry things
Of which I may not make rehersynges
And if that old books were away
Ylorne were of remembrance the kay
well ought us than honouren and believe
These books, there we han non other preue
And as for me, though yt I can but lyte
On books for to read I me delight
And to hem give I faith and full credence
And in mine heart have been in reverence
So hertely, that there is game none
That fro my books makes me to gone
But it be seldom on the holy day
Save certainly wha^ yt the month of May
Is comen, and yt I here the fowls sing
And that the flowers gynnen for to spring
Farewell my book, and my deuotioun
Now have I than eke this conditioun
That of all the flowers in the mede
Than love I most these flowers white and red
Such yt men callen dayesies in our town
To hem have I so great affectioun
As I said erst, when comen is the May
That in my bed there daweth me no day
That I nam up, and walkyng in the mede
To seen this flower against the sun sprede
when it up ryseth early by the morrow
That blysful sight softneth al my sorrow
So glad am I, when that I have presence
Of it, to done it all reverence
As she that is of all flowers flower
Fulfilled of al virtue and honor
And ever ylyke fair, and fresh of hew
And ever I love it, and ever ylke it new
And ever shall, till that mine heart dye
All swear I not of this, I wol not lie
There loved no wight hoter in his live
And when that it is eve I run blythe
As Soon as ever the sun gynneth west
To seen this flour, how it woll go to rest
For fear of night, so hates she darkness
Her chere is plainly spread in the brightness
Of the sun, for there it woll unclose
Alas that I ne had English ryme or prose
Suffisaunt, this flower to preyse aryght
But helps ye that han conning and might
Ye lovers that can make of sentement
In this case ought ye be diligent
To forthren me somewhat in my labor
whether ye ben with the lose or with the flower
For well I wot, that ye han here beforne
Of making, ropen, and lad away the corn
And I come after, glenyng here and there
And am full glad, if I may find an ere
Of any goodly word that ye han left
And though it happen me to rehersen efte
That ye han in your fresh songs said
Forbereth me, and beth not evil apayde
Sith that ye se, I do it in the honor
Of love: and eke in service of the flower
whom yt I serve, as I have wit or might
She is the clerenesse and the very light
That in this dark world me wint and ledeth
The heart within my sorrowful breast you dredeth
And loves so sore, yt ye ben verily
The mastres of my wit, and nothing I
My word, my works, is knytte so in your bond
That as an harp obeys to ye hond
And make it sown after his fyngerynge
Right so mow ye out of my heart bring
Such voice, right as you list, to laugh or pain
Be ye my guide, and lady sovereign
As to mine erthly god, to you I call
Both in this work, and my sorrows all
But wherefore that I spoke to give credence
To old stories, and done hem reverence
And that men musten more thing believe
Then men may seen at eye, or else preue
That shall I seyne, when that I se my time
I may not all at ones speak in ryme
My besy ghost, that thursteth always new
To seen his flower so yo^ge, so fresh of hew
Constrained me, with so gredy desire
That in mine heart I feel yet the fire
That made me to rise er it were day
And this was now ye first morrow of May
with dreadful heart, and glad devotion
For to ben at the resurrection
Of this flower, when that it should unclose
Again the sun, that rose as reed as rose
That in the breast was of the beast that day
That Angenores daughter ladde away
And down on knees anon right I me set
And as I could, this fresh flower I great
Knelynge always, till it unclosed was
Upon the small, soft, sweet gras
That was with flowers sweet embrouded all
Of such swetnesse, and such adour over all
That for to speak of gu^me, herb, or tree
Comparyson may none ymaked be
For it surmounteth plainly all odoures
And of rich beautye all flowers
Forgotten had the earth his poor estate
Of winter, that him naked made and mate
And with his sword of cold so sore grieved
Now has the ate^pre sun all that releued
That naked was, and clad it new again
The small fowls, of the ceason feign
That of the panter and the net ben seaped
Upon the fouler, that hem made awhaped
In winter, and destroyed had her brood
In his dispite hem thought it did hem good
To sing of him, and in her song despise
The foul chorle, that for his couetyse
Had hem betrayed, with his sophistrye
This was her song: The fouler we defye
And all his craft, and some songen clear
Lays of love, that joy it was to here
In worshyppyng and praysynge of her make
And for the new blysfull summers sake
Upon the branches full of blosmes soft
In her delight, they turned hem full often
And songen, blessed be saint Valentyne
For on his day I chese you to be mine
wythouten repenting, mine heart sweet
And therwythall her beckes gonnen mete
yeldynge honor, and humble obeysaunce
To love, and dydden her other obseruaunce
That longs unto love, and to nature
Constrewe that as you list, I do no cure
And tho that had done unkindness
As does the Tidyfe, for new fangelnesse
Besought mercy of her trespasynge
And humbly song her repenting
And sworen on the blosomes to be true
So that her makes would upon hem rewe
And at the last maden her accord
Al found they Danger for the time a lord
Yet Pity, through his strong gentyl might
Forgave, and made mercy passen right
Through innocence, and ruled curtesye
But I ne cleape it not innocence folly
Ne false pity, for virtue is the mean
As Etycke says, in such manner I mean
And thus these fowls, void of all malice
Acordeden to love, and laften vice
Of hate, and song all of one accord
welcome summer, our governor and lord
And zephirus, and Flora gentelly
Yaue to the flowers soft and tenderly
Her swote brethe, and made hem for to sprede
As god and goddess of the floury mede
In which me thought I might day by day
Dwellen always, the ioly monthe of May
wythouten sleep, wythoute^ meat or drink
Adowne full softly I began to synke
And leaning on my elbowe and my side
The long day I shope me for to abide
For nothing else, and I shall not lie
But for to look upon the deysye
That well by reason men it call may
The dayesy, or else the eye of the day
The empryce, and flower of flowers all
I pray to god that fair mote she fall
And all that louen flowers, for her sake
But nathelesse, ne wene not that I make
In praysynge of the flower again the leefe
No More then of the corn again the sheefe
For as to me nys lever none ne lother
I nam with holden yet with never another
Ne I not who serves leefe, ne who ye flower
well brouken they her service or labor
For this thing is all of another tonne
Of old storye, er such thing was begone
when yt the sun, out of the south began west
And that this flower began close, and began to rest
For derknes of ye night, ye which she dredde
Home to mine house, full swyftly I me spedde
To gone to rest, and erly for to rise
To seen this flour to sprede, as I deuyse
And in a little herber that I have
That benched was on turues fresh ygraue
I bade men should me my couche make
For deyntie of the new summers sake
I bade hem strawen flowers on my bed
when I was laid, and had mine eyes hedde
I fell a sleep, and slepte an hour or two
Me met how I lay in the medowe tho
To seen this flower, that I love so and dread
And from a far came walkyng in the mede
The god of Love, and in his hand a queen
And she was cladde in royal habyte grene
A fret of gold she had next her here
And upon that a white crown she beer
with florouns small, and I shall not lie
For all the world right as a dayesye
Ycrowned is, with white leaves lyte
So were the florouns of her corown white
For of o perle fine oriental
Her white corowne was ymaked all
For which the white corowne, above ye grene
Made her like a dayesye for to seem
Consydred eke her fret of gold above
Iclothed was this mighty god of Love
In sylke embrouded, full of grene greues
In which a fret of reed rose leaves
The freshest sens ye world was first bego^ne
His gylte here was corowned with a son
Instead of gold, for heaviness and weight
Therewith me thout his face shone so bright
That well uneaths might I him behold
And in his hand, me thout I saw him hold
Two fiery darts, as the gledes read
And angelyke his wings saw I sprede
And all be that men said, that blind is he
Algate me thought that he might se
For sternely on me he began behold
So that his lokyng does mine heart cold
And by the hand he held this noble queen
Crowned with white, and clothed al in grene
So womanly, so benygne, and so meke
That in this world, though yt men would seek
Half her beauty should they not find
In creature that formed is by kind
And therefore may I said, as thinks me
This song, in praysyng of this lady fre.
Hyde Absolon thy gylte tresses clear
Hester lay thou thy meekness al adoun
Hyde Ionathas al thy frendely manner
Penelopee, and Marcia Catoun
Make of your wyfehode no comparysoun
Hyde ye your beauties, I soude and Heleyne
My lady comes, that all this may distayne
Thy fair body, let it not apere
Lauyne, and thou Lucrece of Rome town
And Polixene, that boughten love so dear
And Cleopatras, with all thy passyoun
Hyde ye your truth of love, and your renoun
And thou Tisbe, that have of love such pain
My lady comes, that all this may distayne
Hero, Dido, Laodomia, all yfere
And Phillis, hangyng for the Demophoun
And Canace, espied by thy chere
Hipsyphile betrayed with Iasoun
Makes of your troth neytherboste ne soun
Nor Hypermistre, or Ariadne, ye twain
My lady comes, that all this may distayne
This balade may full well ysongen be
As I have said erst, by my lady fre
For certainly, all these mow not suffyse
To apperen with my lady in no wise
For as the sun woll the fire distayne
So passes all my lady sovereign
That is so good, so fair, so debonayre
I pray to god that ever fall her fair
For and comfort ben of her presence
I had been deed, wythouten any defense
For dread of Loves words, and his chere
As when time is, herafter ye shall here
Behind this god of Love upon the grene
I saw coming of ladies nynetene
In royal habyt, a full easy pace
And after hem came of women such a trace
That sens that god Adam had made of earth
The third part of mankind, or the ferthe
Ne wend I not by possibylyte
Had ever in this wide world ybe
And true of love, these women were echon
Now whether was yt a wonder thing or non
That right anon, as that they gonne espy
This flower, which that I clepe the dayesye
Full suddenly they stynten all at ones
And kneled down, as it were for the nones
And songen with o voice, heal and honor
To truth of womanhede, and to this flour
That bears our alder prise in fyguryng
Her white corowne bears the wytnessyng
And with that word, acompas enuyroun
They sytten hem full softely adown
First sat the god of love, and sithe his queen
with the white corowne, clad all in grieve
And sythen all the remenaunt, by and by
As they were of estate, full curtesly
Ne not a word was spoken in the place
The mou^tenau^ce of a furlong way of space
I knelyng by this flower, in good entente
Abode to known what this people mente
As still as any stone, till at the last
This god of love, on me his eyes cast
And said, who kneleth there: and I answerde
Unto his askyng, when that I it herd
And said, sir it am I, and come him nere
And salued him* (quod he) what do thou here
So nygh mine own flower, so boldly
It were better worthy trewly
A worm to nighen nere my flower tha^ thou
And why sir (quod I) and it like you?
For thou (quod he) art thereto nothing able
It is my relyke, digne and delytable
And thou my foe, and all my folk werreyest
And of mine old servants thou missayest
And hyndrest hem, with thy translation
And let folk from her devotion
To serve me, and hold it folly
To serve love, thou may it not deny
For in plain text, wythouten need of gloss
Thou have translated the Romau^t of ye Rose
That is an heresye against my law
And make wise folk fro me withdraw
And of Creseyde, thou have said as the list
That makes men to women less tryste
That been as true as ever was any stele
Of thyn answer auyse the right well
For though thou renyed haste my lay
As other wretches have done many a day
By saint Venus, that my mother is
If that thou live, thou shall repenten this
So cruelly, that it shall well be seen
Tho spoke this lady, clothed al in grene
And said, god right of your curtesye
Ye mote harken if he can replye
Against all this, that ye have to him meued
A god ne should not be thus agreued
But of his deyte he shall be stable
And thereto gracious and merciable
And if ye nere a god, that known all
Than might it be, as I you tellen shall
This man to you may falsely ben accused
That as by right, him ought ben excused
For in your court is many a losengeour
And many a queynt toteler accusour
That Tabouren in your ears many a soun
Right after her ymaginatioun
To have your daliaunce, and for envy
These ben the causes, and I shall not lie
Envy is lauender of the court always
For she ne parts neither night ne day
Out of the house of Caesar thus says Dant
who so that goes algate she wol not want
And eke perauenter for this man is nyce
He might done it, gessynge no malice
But for he uses things for to make
Him recketh naught of what matter he take
Or him was boden make thylke twey
Of some person, and durst it not wythsey
Or him repents utterly of this
He ne has not done so grievously amys
To translaten that old clerks written
As though that he of malice would endytten
Dyspyte of love, and had him self it wrought
This should a ritwise lord have i^ his thought
And not be like tyrauntes of Lombardy
That have no reward but at tyranny
For he that king or lord is naturell
Him ought not be tyrant ne cruel
As is a fermour, to done the harm he can
He must think it is his liege man
And is his treasour, and his gold in cofre
This is the sentence of the philosophre
A king to keep his lieges in justice
wythouten doubt that is his office
All wol he keep his lords in her degree
As it is right and skyll, that they be
Enhaunced and honored, and most dear
For they ben half gods, in this world here
Yet mote he done both right to pore and rich
All be that her estate be not both ylyche
And have of poor folk compassyon
For lo, the gentell kind of the lion
For when a fly offends him or byteth
He with his tail away the fly smyteth
All easily, for of his gentrye
Him deyneth not to wreke him on a fly
As does a curre, or else another be
In noble courage ought ben areest
And wayen every thing by equite
And ever have regard unto his own degree
For sir, it is no maystrye for a lord
To dampne a man, without answer of word
And for a lord, that is full foul to use
And it so be, he may him not excuse
But asks mercy with a dredefull heart
And profereth him, right in his bare sherte
To ben right at your own judgment
Than ought a god by short auysement
Consydre his own honor and his trespace
For sithe no cause of death lies in this case
You ought to ben the lightlyer mercyable
Leteth your ire, and bethe somewhat tretable
The man has served you of his connynges
And forthred well your law in his makinges
All be it that he can not well endyte
Yet has he made leude folk delight
To serve you, in preysyng of you name
He made the book, yt hight the house of Fame
And eke the death of Blaunche the duchess
And the Parlyment of Fowls, as I guess
And all the love of Palamon and Arcyte
Of Thebes, though the story is known lyte
And many an hympne, for your holydaies
That hyghten balades, roundels, virelayes
And for to speak of other holiness
He has in prose translated Boece
And made the life also of saint Cecyle
He made also, gone is a great while
Origenes upon the Maudelayne
Him ought now to have the less pain
He has made many a ley, and many a thing
Now as ye be a god, and eke a king
I your alceste, whylom queen of Trace
I ask you this man right of your grace
That ye him never hurt in all his live
And he shall swearen to you, and that blyue
He shall never more agylten in this wise
But shall maken as ye woll deuyse
Of women true in loving all her life
where so ye woll, of maiden or of wife
And forthren you, as much as he misseyde
Or in the Rose, or else in Creseyde
The god of Love answered her thus anon
Madame (quod he) it is so long agon
That I you knew, so charitable and true
That never yet, sens the world was new
To me ne found I better none than ye
If that I woll save my degree
I may nor wol not werne your request
All lyth in you, does with him as you lest
I all foryeue withouten longer space
For who so yeueth a yefte or does a grace
Do it be time, his thank shall be the more
And demeth ye what he shall do therefore
Go thank now my lady here (quod he)
I rose, and down I set me on my kne
And said thus: Madame, the god above
For yield you that the god of Love
Have maked me his wrath to foryeue
And grace so long for to live
That I may know sothly what ye be
That have me helped, and put in this degree
But trewly I wend, as in this caas
Naught have agylte, ne done to love trespass
For why, a true man withouten dread
Has not to parten with a thieves deed
Ne a true lover ought me not to blame
Though that I speak a false lover so^e shame
They ought rather with me for to hold
For that I of Creseyde wrote or told
Or of the Rose, what so mine author meant
Al gate god wotte it was mine intent
To forthren troth in love, and it cheryce
And to ben ware fro falsnesse and fro vice
By which ensample, this was my menyng
And she answered, let be thine arguyng
For love ne woll not countrepleted be
In right ne wrong and learn that of me
Thou haste thy grace, and hold ye right thereto
Now wol I sayn what penance you shall do
For thy trespace, understand it here
Thou shall while yt thou lyuest yereby year
The most party of thy time spend
In making of a gloriouse legende
Of good women, maidens, and wives
That weren true in loving all her lives
And tell of false men that hem betrayen
That all her life ne do not but assayen
How many women they may done a shame
For in your world that is now hold a game
And though the like not a lover be
Speak well of love, this penance give I the
And to the god of love I shall so pray
That he shall charge his servants by any way
To fortheren the, and well thy labor quyte
Go now thy way, this penance is but lyte
And wha^ this book is made, give it ye queen
On my behalf, at Eltham, or at Shene
The god of love began smyle, and than he said
wost thou (quod he) where this be wife or maid
Or queen, or countess, or of what degree
That has so little penance yeuen the
That haste deserved sore for to smerte
But pity renneth sone in gentle heart
That may you seen, she kytheth what she is
And I answerde, nay sir so have I blys
No more, but that I se well she is good
That is a true tale by mine hoode
(quod Love) and thou know well parde
If it be so that thou auyse the
Haste thou not in a book in thy cheste
The great goodness of the queen Alceste
That turned was in to a dayesye
She that for her husbonde chese to dye
And eke to gone to hell, rather than he
And Hercules rescued her parde
And brought her out of hell again to blys
And I answerde again, and said yes
Now know I her, and is this good Alceste
The dayesye, and mine own hertes rest
Now feel I well the goodness of this wife
That both after her death, and in her life
Her great bounty doubleth her renoun
well has she quyt me mine affectioun
That I have to her flower the dayesye
No wonder is though Jove her stellyfye
As tells Agaton, for her great goodness
Her white corowne bears of it witness
For also many virtues had she
As small florouns in her corowne be
In remembrance of her, and in honor
Cibylla made the dayesy and the flour
I crowned all with white, as men may se
And Mars yaue to her a corown reed parde
Instead of Rubies set among the white
Therewith this queen wox red for sha^e a lyte
when she was praised so in her presence
Than said Love, a full great negligence
was it to the, that ylke time thou made
(Hyde Absolon thy tresses) in balade
That thou forgete her in thy song to set
Sithe that thou art so greatly in her debt
And wost well that calendar is she
To any woman, that wol lover be
For she taught all the craft of true loving
And namely of the wyfehode the lyueng
And all the bounds that she ought keep
Thy little wit was thylke time a sleep
But now I charge the upon thy life
That in thy Legend thou make of this wife
when thou haste other small ymade before
And fare now well, I charge the no more
But er I go, thus much I wol the tell
Ne shall no true lover come in hell
These other ladies sitting here a row
Ben in my balade, if thou constable hem know
And in thy books, all thou shall hem find
Have hem now in thy legende all in mind
I mean of hem that been in thy knowing
For here ben twenty thousand mo syttyng
Than thou know, good women all
And true of love, for aught that may befall
Make the metres of hem as the lest
I mote gone home, the sun draws west
To paradys, with all this company
And serve always the fresh dayesye
At Cleopatras I woll that thou begin
And so forth, and my love so shall thou win
For let se now what man that lover be
wol done so strong a pain for love as she
I wot well that thou may not al it ryme
That such lovers did in her time
It were to long to reden and to here
Suffyseth me thou make in this manner
That thou reherce of all her life the great
After these old authors lysten for to treat
For who so shall so many a storye tell
Sey shortly or he shall to long dwell
And with that word my books began I take
And right thus on my legende began I make.
Thus ends the Prologue.
Here begins the legende of Cleopatras queen of Egypt.
AFter the death of Ptholome the king
That al Egypt had in his gouernyng
Reigned his queen Cleopatras
Till on a time byfell there such a caas
That out of Rome was sent a senator
For to conqueren realms and honor
Unto the town of Rome, as was vsaunce
To have the world at her obeysaunce
And sothe to say, Antonius was his name
So fyl it, as fortune him ought a shame
when he was fallen in prosperyte
Rebel unto the town of Rome is he
And over all this, the suster of Cesare
He left her falsely, er that she was ware
And would algates han another wife
For which he took with Rome and Caesar strife
Nathelesse, for sothe this ylke senator
Was a full worthy gentle werryour
And of his death it was full great damage
But love had brought this man in such a rage
And him so narowe bounden in his laas
And all for the love of Cleopatras
That all the world he set at no value
Him thout there was nothing to him so due
As Cleopatras, for to love and serve
Him thought that in arms for to sterue
In the defense of her, and of her right
This noble queen, eke loved so this knight
Through his deserte, and for his chyualrye
As certainly, but if that books lie
He was of person, and of gentylnesse
And of discretion, and of hardynesse
worthy to any wight that lyuen may
And she was fair, as is the rose in May
And for to maken short is the best
She woxe his wife, and had him as her lest
The weddyng and the feast to deuyse
To me that have ytake such emprise
And so many a storye for to make
It were to long, lest that I should slake
Of thing that bears more effect and charge
For men may ouerlade a ship or barge
And for thy, to effect than woll I skyppe
And all the remenaunt, I woll let it slyppe
Octauian, that wood was of this deed
Shope him an hooste on Antony to lead
All utterly, for his destruction
with stout romans, cruel as lion
To ship they went, and thus I let hem sail
Antonius was ware, and woll not fail
To meten with these romans, if he may
Took eke his read, and both upon a day
His wife and he, and all his host forth went
To ship anon, no longer they ne stente
And in the sea it happed hem to mete
Up goth the trumpe, and for to shoute and shete
And paynen hem to set on with the son
with grisly sown, out goth the great gonne
And hertely they hurtlen in all at ones
And fro ye top, down comes ye great stones
In gothe the grapenell so full of crokes
Among the ropes ran the sheryng hokes
In with the polaxe preaseth he and he
Behind the maste, begins he to fly
And out again, and drives hem over board
He stycketh him upon his spears orde
He rent the sail with hokes like a sithe
He brings ye cup, and byddeth hem be blyth
He pours peesen upon the hatches slyder
with pottes full of lyme, they gone to gyder
And thus the long day in fight they spend
Till at the last, as every thing has end
Antony is shent, and put him to the flight
And all his folk to go, that best go might
Flees eke the queen, withal her purpre sail
For strokes, which yt went as thick as hayle
No wonder was, she might it not endure
And when that Antony saw ye adventure
Alas (quod he) the day that I was borne
My worship in this day thus have I lorne
And for despair, out of his wit he sterte
And xofe him self anon throughout ye heart
Er that he ferther went out of the place
His wife, that could of Caesar have no grace
To Egypt is fled, for dread and for distress
But herkeneth ye that speken of kyndenesse
Ye men that falsely swearen many an oath
That ye wol dye, if that your love be wroth
Here may ye seen of women such a troth
This woeful Cleopatre has made such routh
That there nys tongue none that may it tell
But on the morrow, she wol no longer dwell
But made her subtle werkme^ make a shrine
Of all the rubyes and the stones fine
In all Egypt, that she could espy
And put full the shrine of spycerie
And let ye corse enbaume, and forth she fette
This deed corse, and in the shrine it shette
And next the shrine a pyt than does she grave
And all the serpents that she might have
She put hem in that grave, and thus she seyde
Now love, to who^ my sorouful heart obeyde
So ferforthly, that fro that blysfull hour
That I you swore, to ben all freely your
I mean you, Antonius my knight
That never wakyng in the day or night
Ye nere out of mine hertes remembrance
For well or woe, for carole, or for dance
And in my self, this covenant made I tho
That right such as ye felten well or woe
As ferforthe as it in my power lay
Unreprovable unto my wyfehod aye
The same would I felen, life or death
And thilke covenant, while me lasts breath
I woll fulfill, and that shall well be seen
was never unto her love a trewer queen
And with ye word, naked with full good heart
Among the serpents in the pytte she sterte
And there she chese to have her buryeng
Anon the nedders gonne her for to stynge
And she her death receives with good chere
For love of Antony that was her so dear
And this is storyall, sothe it is no fable
Now er I find a man thus true and stable
And woll for love his death so freely take
I pray god let our heads never ache.
Here ends the legende of Cleopatras, and here follows the legende of Tisbe
of Babylon.
AT Babylon whylom fell it thus
The which town the queen Simyramus
Let dytchen all about, and walls make
Full hye, of hard tyles well ybake
There were dwelling in this noble town
Two lords, which yt were of great renown
And woneden so nygh upon a grene
That there nas but a stone wall hem between
As often in great towns is the won
And soth to said, yt one man had a son
Of all that land, one of the lustyest
That other had a daughter, the fairest
That eastward in ye world was tho dwelli^g
The name of eueryche, began to other spryng
By women that were neighbors about
For in that country yet wythouten doubt
Maidens ben ykept for ielousye
Full streyte, lest they dydden some folly
This young man was cleped Piramus
Tysbe hight the maid (Naso says thus)
And thus by report, was her name yshoue
That as they woxe in age, so woxe her love
And certain, as by reason of her age
There might have been bitwixt hem marriage
But that her fathers nolde it not assente
And both in love ylyke sore they burnt
That none of all her friends might it let
But privily sometime yet they met
By sleyght, and spaken some of her desire
As wrye the glede, and hotter is the fire
Forbid a love, and it is ten times so wode
This wall, which yt betwixt hem both stood
was cloven a two, right fro the top adoun
Of old time, of his foundation
But yet this clyfte was so narowe and lyte
It was not seen, dear enough a myte
But what is that, that love can not espy
Ye lovers two, if that I shall not lie
Ye founden first this little narowe clyfte
And with a sound, as soft as any shryfte
They let her words through the clyfte pace
And tolden, while yt they stoden in the place
All her complaynt of love, and all her woe
At every time when they durst so
On that one side of the wall stood he
And on that other side stood Tysbe
The sweet sown of other to receive
And thus her wardeyns would they dysceyue
And every day this wall they would threte
And wyshe to god, that it were down ybete
Thus would they said, alas you wicked wall
Through thine envy, thou us let all
why nyit thou cleave, or fallen all a two
Or at the leest, but thou would so
Yet would thou but ones let us mete
Or ones that we might kyssen sweet
Then were we cured of our cares cold
But nathelesse, yet be we to the hold
In as much as thou suffrest for to gone
Our words through thy lime and eke thy stone
Yet ought we with the ben well apayde
And when these ydell words weren said
The cold wall they woollen kiss of stone
And take her leave, and forth they wolde^ gone
And this was gladly in the euentyde
Or wonder early, lest men it espyde
And long time they wrought in this manner
Till on a day, when Phoebus began to clear
Aurora with the stremes of her hete
Had dried up the dew of herbs wete
Unto this clyfte, as it was wont to be
Come Piramus, and after come Tisbe
And plyghten troth, fully in her fay
That ylke same night to steal away
And to begyle her wardeyns euerychone
And forth out of the city for to gone
And for the feldes ben so broad and wide
For to mete in o place at o tide
They set marks, her metynges should be
There king Ninus was graue^, under a tree
For old paynems, that ydolles heryed
Vseden tho in feldes to ben buried
And fast by this grave was a well
And shortly of this tale for to tell
This covenant was affyrmed wonder fast
And long hem thought that the sun last
That it nere gone under the sea adoun
This Tisbe has so great affectioun
And so great liking Piramus to se
That when she saw her time might be
At night she stale away full privily
with her face ywympled subtelly
For all her friends (for to save her troth)
She has forsake alas, and that is routhe
That ever woman would be so true
To trusten man, but she the bet him knew
And to the tree she goes a full good pace
For love made her so hardy in this case
And by the well, adowne she began her dress
Alas, then comes a wild lioness
Out of the wodde, wythouten more areest
with bloody mouth, of stranglyng of a be
To drynken of the well there as she sat
And when that Tisby had espied that
She ryst her up, with a full drery heart
And in a cave, with dreadful foot she sterte
For by the moon she saw it well wythall
And as she ran, her wymple let she fall
And took no head, so sore she was a whaped
And eke so glad that she was escaped
And thus she sat, and lurketh wonder still
when that this lioness has drunk her fill
About the well began she for to wind
And right anon the wymple began she find
And with her blody mouth it all to rent
when this was done, no longer she ne stente
But to ye wodde her way the^ has she nome
And at the last this Piramus is come
But all to long (alas) at home was he
The moon shone, men might well yse
And in his way, as that he come full fast
His eyes to the ground adowne he cast
And in the sonde, as he beheld adoun
He saw the steps broad of a lyoun
And in his heart he suddenly agrose
And pale he wexte, therwyth his heart arose
And nere he came, and found the wymple torn
Alas (quod he) the day that I was borne
This o night will both us lovers slay
How should I asken mercy of Tisbee
when I am he that have you slain, alas
My bidding has you slain in this caas
Alas, to bydde a woman gone by night
In place there as peril fallen might
And I so slow, alas I ne had be
Here in this place, a furlonge way cry
Now what lyoun that is in this foreste
My body mote he rent, or what best
That wild is, gnawen mote he mine heart
And with that word, he to ye wymple sterte
And kyst it often, and wept on it full sore
And said wymple alas, there nys no more
But thou shall feel as well the blood of me
As thou haste felt the bledynge of Tisbe
And with yt word, he smote him to ye heart
The blood out of the wound as broad sterte
As water, when the conduyt broken is
Now Tisbe, which that wist not this
But sitting in her dread, she thought thus
If it so fall that my Piramus
Be comen hither, and may me not yfynde
He may me holden false, and eke unkind
And out she comes, and after him began espyen
Both with her heart, and with her eyes
And thought, I woll him tellen of my dread
Both of the lioness and of my deed
And at the last her love then has she found
Beatynge with his heels on the ground
All blody, and therwythall abacke she sterte
And like the wawes, quappe began her heart
And pale as box she woxe, and in a throw
Auysed her, and began him well to know
That it was Piramus her heart dear
who could write which a deedly chere
Has Tisbe now, and how her here she rent
And how she began her self to turmente
And how she lies and swouneth on ye ground
And how she wept of teeres full his wound
How medleth she his blood, with her complaint
How with his blood, her seluen began she paynt
How clyppeth she the deed corse, alas
How does this woeful Tisbe in this caas
How kysseth she his frosty mouth so cold
who has don this? and who has been so bold?
To sleen my lefe, o speak Piramus
I am thy Tisbe, that the calls thus
And therwythall she lyfteth up his heed
This woeful man, that was not fully deed
when that he herd the name of Tisbe cryen
On her he cast his heavy deedly eyes
And down again, and yeldeth up the ghost
Tisbe ryst up, without noise or boost
And saw her wymple and his empty sheth
And eke his sword, yt him has don to death
Then spoke she thus, thy woeful hand (quod she)
Is strong enough in such a work to me
For love shall give me strength and hardynesse
To make my wound large enough I guess
I woll the folowen deed, and I woll be
Fellow, and cause eke of thy death (quod she)
And though yt nothing save the death only
Might the fro me depart truly
Thou shall no more depart now fro me
Then fro the death, for I woll go with the
And now ye wretched jealous fathers our
we that weren whylom children your
we prayen you, wythouten more envy
That in o grave we moten lie
Sens love has brought us this pitous end
And ryghtwyse God, to every lover send
That loves truly more prosperity
Then ever had Piramus and Tisbe
And let no gentle woman her assure
To putten her in such an adventure
But god forbid but a woman can
Ben as true and loving as a man
And for my part, I shall anon it kyth
And with ye word, his swerd she took swyth
That warm was of her loves blood, and hot
And to the heart she her seluen smote
And thus are Tisbe and Piramus ygo
Of true men I find but few mo
In all my books, save this Piramus
And therefore have I spoken of him thus
For it is deynte to us men to find
A man that can in love be true and kind
Here may ye seen, what lover so he be
A woman dare, and can as well as he.
Here ends the legende of Tysbe of Babylon, and here follows the legende of
Dido queen of Cartage.
Glory and honor Virgyle Mantuan
Be to thy name, and I shall as I can
Follow thy lantern, as thou go byforne
How Eneas to Dido was forsworn
In thine Eneyde, and Naso woll I take
The tenor and the great effects make
when Troy brought was to dystruction
By greeks sleyght, and namely by Synon
Faynynge the horse offered unto Minerue
Through which yt many a troya^ must sterue
And Hector had after his death apered
And fire so wode, it might not ben stered
In all the noble toure of Ilion
That of the city was the chief dongeon
And all the country was so low ybrought
And Priamus the king fordone and naught
And Eneas was charged by Venus
To flyen away, he took Ascanius
That was his son, in his right hand and fled
And on his back he bare, and with him led
His old father, cleped Anchyses
And by the way his wife Creusa he lees
And mokell sorrow had he in his mind
Er that he could his felawshyp find
But at the last, when he had hem found
He made him ready, in a certain stounde
And to the sea full fast he began him hye
And sayleth forth, with all his company
Toward Itayle, as would destynee
But of his auentures in the sea
Nys not to purpose for to speak of here
For it acordeth not to my matere
But as I said, of him and of Dido
Shall be my tale, till that I have do
So long he sailed in the salt see
Till in Libye uneath arrived he
So was he with the tempest all to shake
And when that he the haven had ytake
He had a knight was called Achatees
And him of all his felawshyp he thees
To gone with him, the country for tespye
He took with him no more company
But forth they gone, and left his ships ride
His feere and he, wythouten any gyde
So long he walks in this wilderness
Till at the last he met an hunteresse
A bow in hand, and arowes had she
Her clothes cutted were unto the knee
But she was yet the fairest creature
That ever was yformed by nature
And Eneas and Achates she grette
And thus she to hem spoke, wha^ she he^ met
Saw ye (quod she) as ye han walked wide
Any of my sustren walk you beside
With any wild bore, or other be
That they have hunted to in this forest
I tucked up, with arowes in her caas
Nay sothly lady (quod this Eneas)
But by thy beauty, as it thinks me
Thou myghtest never erthely woman be
But Phoebus suster art thou, as I guess
And if so be that thou be a goddess
Have mercy on our labor and our woe
I nam no goddess sothly (quod she) tho
For maidens walken in this country here
with arowes and with bow, in this manner
This is the realm of Libye, there ye been
Of which that Dido lady is and queen
And shortly told all the occasyon
why Dido came in to that regyon
Of which as now me lysteth not to ryme
It needs not, it nere but loss of time
For this is all and some, it was Venus
His own mother, yt spoke with him thus
And to Cartage she bad he should him dyght
And vanyshed anon out of his sight
I could follow word for word Vergyle
But it would lasten all to long while
This noble queen that clypped was Dido
That whylom was the wife of Sitheo
That fayrer was then the bright son
This noble town of Cartage has begone
In which she raygneth in so great honor
That she was hold of all queen's flour
Of gentyllesse, of fredome, and of beautee
That well was him that might ones see
Of kings and lords so desired
That all ye world her beauty had yfyred
She stood so well in every wyghtes grace
when Eneas was come unto the place
Unto the master temple of all the town
There Dido was in her deuocioun
Full privily his way then has he nome
when he was in the large temple come
I can not said, if that it be possible
But Venus had him maked invisible
Thus says the book wythouten any lees
And when this Eneas and Achates
Hadden in this temple ben over all
Then found they depaynted on a wall
How Troy and all the land dystroyed was
Alas that I was borne (quod Eneas)
Through ye world our shame is kyd so wide
Now it is painted on every side
we that weren in prosperity
Ben now dysclaundred, and in such degree
No longer for to lyuen I ne keep
And with yt word, he brast out for to weep
So tenderly, that routhe it was to seen
This fresh lady of the cite queen
Stood in the temple, in her estate royal
So rychely, and eke so fair with all
So young, so lusty, with her eyes glade
That if that god, that heaven and earth made
would have a love, for beauty and goodness
And womanheed, troth, and semelynesse
whom should he louen, but this lady sweet?
There nys no woman to him half so mete
Fortune, that has the world in governance
Has suddenly brought in so new a chance
That never was there yet so frened a caas
For all the company of Eneas
which we wend have lorne in the sea
Armed is naught far fro that cite
For which the greatest of his lords, some
By adventure ben to the cite come
Unto the same temple for to seek
The queen, and of her socour her beseke
such reno^e was there spro^ge of her goodness
And when they had told all her dystresse
And all her tempest and all her hard caas
Unto the queen appeared Eneas
And openly beknewe that it was he
who had joy then, but this meyne
That hadde^ found her lord, her governor
The queen saw they did him such honor
And had herden often of Eneas, er tho
And in her heart had routh and woe
That ever such a noble man as he
Shall ben dysherited in such degree
And saw ye man, yt he was like a knight
And suffysaunt of person and of might
And like to ben a very gentylman
And well his words he besette can
And had a noble vysage for the nones
And formed well of brawne and of bones
And after Venus, had such fayrnesse
That no man might be half so fair I guess
And well a lord him seemed for to be
And for he was a stranger, somewhat she
Lyked him the bette, as god do boot
To some folk, often new thing is swote
Anon her heart has pity of his woe
And with pity, love came also
And thus for pity and for gentylnesse
Refreshed must he ben of his dystresse
She said: certes, that she sorry was
That he has had such peril and such caas
And in her friendly speech, in this manner
She to him spoke, and said as ye may here.
Be ye not Venus son and Anchyses
In good faith, all the worship and encrees
That I may goodly done you, ye shall have
Your ships and your meyne shall I save
And many a gentle word she spoke him to
And commanded her messangers to go
The same day wythouten any fail
His ships for to seek, and hem vytayle
Full many a be she to the ships sent
And with the wine she began hem to present
And to her royal paleys she her spedde
And Eneas always with her she led
what needs you the feestes to dyscryue
He never better at ease was in his live
Full was the feast of deynties and richesse
Of instruments of song, and of gladness
And many an amorous lokynge and deuyse
This Eneas is come to paradyse
Out of the swolowe of hell, and thus in joy
Remembers him of his estate in Troy
To dauncynge cha^bres full of paramentes
Of rich beds, and of pauementes
This Eneas is led after the meet
And with the queen when that he had seete
And spyces parted, and the wine agone
Unto his chamber was he ladde anon
To take his ease, and for to have his rest
with all his folk, to done what so hem lest
There nas courser well ybrydled none
Ne stead for the iustynge well to gone
Ne large palfrey, easy for the nones
Ne iowell fret full of rich stones
Ne sackes full of gold, of large wight
Ne ruby none that shyneth by night
Ne gentle hauten faukon heronere
Ne hounde for heart, wild bore, or dear
Ne cup of gold, with floreyns new ybet
That in the land of Libye may ben get
That Dido ne has it Eneas ysent
And all is paid, what that he has spent
Thus ca^ this honorable queen her gestes call
As she that can in fredome passen al
Eneas sothely eke, without lees
Has sent to his ship by Achates
After his son, and after rich things
Both scepter, clothes, broches, and eke rings
Some for to wear, and some to present
To her, that al these noble things him sent
And bad his son how that he should make
The presentynge, and to the queen it take
Repaired is this Achates again
And Eneas full blysfull is and feign
To seen his young son Ascanyus
For to him it was reported thus
That Cupido, that is the god of love
At prayer of his mother hye above
And the likeness of the child ytake
This noble queen enamoured for to make
On Eneas, but of that scripture
Be as be may, I make of it no cure
But soth is this, ye queen has made such chere
Unto this child, that wonder is to here
And of the present that his father sent
She thanked him often in good intent
Thus is this queen in pleasaunce and joy
with all these new lusty folk of Troy
And of the deeds has she more inquired
Of Eneas, and all the storye lered
Of Troy, and all the long day they twey
Entendeden for to speak and for to pley
Of which there began to breden such a fire
That sely Dido has now such desire
with Eneas her new geste to deal
That she lost her hew and eke her heal
Now to theffecte, now to the fruit of all
why I have told this storye, and telle^ shall
Thus I begin, it fell upon a night
when that the moon vpreysed had her light
This noble queen unto her rest went
She sygheth sore, and gone her self turmente
She waketh, waloweth, and made many braid
As done these lovers, as I have herd said
And at the last, unto her suster Anne
She made her moan, and rit thus spak she tha^
Now dear suster mine, what may it be
That me agasteth in my dreme (quod she)
This ylke new troyan is so in my thought
For that me thinks he is so well ywrought
And eke so lykely to ben a man
And therwyth so mykell good he can
That al my love and life lies in his cure
Have ye not herd him tell his adventure?
Now certes Anne, if that ye read me
I woll feign to him ywedded be
This is ye effect, what should I more seyne
In him lies all, to do my live or deyne
Her suster Anne, as she yt could her good
Said as her thought, and somdele it withstode
But here of was so long a sermonynge
It were to long to make rehersynge
But finally, it may not be wythstonde
Love woll love, for no wight wol it wonde
The dawning up ryst, out of the sea
This amerous queen charge her meyne
The nets dress, and spears broad and kene
An hunting woll this lusty fresh queen
So prycketh her this new ioly woe
To horse is all her lusty folk ygo
Unto the court the hounds ben ybrought
And up on courser swyfte as any thought
Her young knights heaven all about
And of her women eke an huge route
Upon a thycke palfraye, paper white
with sadell reed, enbrouded with delight
Of gold the bars, up enbossed high
Sat Dido, all in gold and perrey wrygh
And she is fair, as is the bright morrow
That heals sick folks of nyghtes sorrow
Upon a courser, startlynge as the fire
Men might turn him with a little wyre
But Eneas, like Phoebus to deuyse
So was he fresh arrayed in his wise
The fomy brydell, with the bytte of gold
Governs he right as him self has would
And forth, this noble queen, this lady ride
On hunting, with this troyan by her side
The heerde of hearts, founden is anon
with hey gobet, prycke thou, let gone, let gone
why nyll the lion comen or the bear
That I might him ones mete^ with this spear
Thus said this young folk, and up they kill
The wild hearts, and have hem at her will
Among al this, to romblen began the heaven
The thonder rored with a grysly steven
Down come ye rain, with hayle and slet so fast
with heuens fire, that made so sore agaste
This noble queen, and also her meyne
That each of hem was glad away to fly
And shortly fro the tempest her to save
She fled her self, into a little cave
And with her went this Eneas also
I not with hem if there went any mo
The auctoure makes of it no mention
And here began the deep affection
Bytwixt hem two this was ye first morrow
Of her gladness, and gynnyng of her sorrow
For there has Eneas ykneled so
And told her all his hurt and all his woe
And sworn so deep to her to be true
For well or woe, and change for no new
And as a false lover, so well can plain
That sely Dido rewed on his pain
And took him for husbo^de, and became his wife
For ever more, while that hem last life
And after this, when yt the tempest stente
with mirth out as they came, home they went
The wicked fame up rose, and that anon
How Eneas has with the queen ygone
In to the cave, and demed as hem lest
And when ye king (yt Yarbas hight) it wist
As he that had her loved ever his life
And wowed her to have to his wise
Such sorrow as he has maked, and such chere
It is a ruthe and pity for to here
But as in love, aldaye it happeth so
That one shall laughen at another woe
Now laugheth Eneas, and is in joy
And more richesse, then ever was in Troy
O sely woman, full of innocence
Full of pity, of truth, and contynence
what maked you to men to trusten so?
Have ye such routh upon her feigned woe
And have such old ensamples you beforne
Se ye not all how they ben forsworn
where se ye one, that he ne has lafte his lefe
Or ben unkind, or done her some myschefe
Or pylled her, or bosted of his deed
Ye may as well it seen, as ye may read
Take heed now of this great gentylman
This troyan that so well her please can
That fayneth him so true and obeysynge
So gentle, and so preuy of his doing
And can so well done all his obeysaunce
To her, at feestes and at dance
And when she goes to temple, and home ageine
And fasten till he has his lady seyne
And bearen in his deuyses for her sake
Not I not what, and songs would he make
Iusten, and done of arms many things
Send her letters, tokens, broches, and rings
Now herkneth how he shall his lady serve
There as he was in peril for to sterue
For honger and for myschefe in the sea
And desolate, and fled fro his country
And all his folk with tempest al to driven
She has her body and eke her realm yeuen
In to his hand, there she might have been
Of other land then of Cartage a queen
And lived i^ joy enough, what would ye more
This Eneas, that has thus deep yswore
Is weary of his craft within a throw
The hot ernest is all ouerblowe
And privily he does his ships dyght
And shapeth him to steal away by night
This Dido has suspection of this
And thought well that it was all amys
For in his bed he lies a night and syketh
She asks him anon, what him mislyketh
My dear heart, which that I love most
Certes (quod he) this night my fathers ghost
Has in my sleep, me so sore turmented
And eke marcury his message has presented
That needs to the conquest of Itayle
My destyne is soon for to sail
For which me thinks, broste^ is mine heart
Therwyth his false teeres out they sterte
And takes her within his arms two
Is that in ernest (quod she) woll ye so
Have ye not sworn, to wife me to take
Alas, what woman woll ye of me make?
I am a gentyl woman, and a queen
Ye woll not fro your wife thus foul flene
That I was borne alas, what shall I do?
To tellen in short, this noble queen Dido
She seeks halowes, and does sacrifyce
She kneleth, cries, yt routhe is it to deuyse
Coniureth him, and proffreth him to be
His thral, his servant, in the best degree
She falls him to foot, and swouneth there
Discheuyle with her bright gylt here
And says, have mercy, let me with you ride
These lords, which ye wonnen me beside
woll me destroyen only for your sake
And ye woll me now to wife take
As ye have sworn, tha^ wol I give you leave
To sleen me with your swerd, now sone at eve
For than yet shall I dyen as your wife
I am with child, and give my child his life
Mercy lord, have pytie in your thought
But all this thing avails her right nout
And as a traitor forth began to sail
Toward the large country of Itayle
And thus has he left Dido in woe and pyne
And wedded there a lady hight Rauyne
A cloth he laft, and eke his sword sto^dynge
when he fro Dido stale in her slepyng
Right at her beds heed, so began he hye
when that he stale away to his nauye
which cloth, wha^ sely Dido began awake
She has it kyst full often for his sake
And said, o sweet cloth, while jupiter it lest
Take my soul, unbind me of this unrest
I have fulfilled of fortune all the course
And thus alas, withouten his socourse
Twenty time if wouned has she than
And when that she unto her suster Anne
Co^playned had, of which I may not write
So great routh I have it to endyte
And bad her norice and her sustren gone
To fetchen fire, and other things anon
And said that she would sacrifye
And when she might her time well aspy
Upon the fire of sacrifyce she sterte
And with his sword she rofe her to the heart
But as mine auctor says, yet thus she said
Or she was hurt, beforne or she deyed
She wrote a letter anon, and tus began
Right so (quod she) as the white swan
Against his death begins for to sing
Right so to you I make my co^playnyng
Not that I trow to getten you again
For well I wot it is all in vain
Syns yt the gods ben co^trarions to me
But syn my name is lost through you (quod she)
I may well lose a word on you or letter
All be it, I shall be never the better
For thilke wind yt blew your ship away
The same wind has blowaway your fay
But whosoever wol all this letter have in mind
Read Ouyde, and in him he shall it find
Here ends the legende of Dido queen of Cartage: And here follows the legend
of Hypsiphile and Medea.
THou rote of false lovers, duke Jason
Thou sleer, deuourer, and confusion
Of gentle women, gentle creatures
Thou made thy reclaymyng and thy lures
To ladies of thy scathlyche apparaunce
And of thy words farsed with pleasaunce
And of thy feigned troth, and thy manner
with thine obeysaunce and humble chere
And with thy counterfayted pain and woe
There other falsen one, thou falsed two
O often swore thou, that thou would dye
For love, when thou ne feltest malady
Save foul delight, which thou call love
If that I live, thy name shall be shoue
In englysh, that thy disceyte shall be know
Have at the Jason, now thine honor is blow
But certes, it is both routh and woe
That love with false lovers works so
For they shall have well better love and chere
Than he that has bought love full dear
Or had in arms many a blody box
For ever as tender a capon eats the fox
Though he be false, and has ye foul betrayde
As shall the good man yt therefore paid
Although he have to ye capon skill and right
The false fox wol have his part at night
On Jason this example is well ysene
By Hypsiphyle and Medea the queen
In Thessalye, as Ouyde tells us
There was a knight that hight Pelleus
That had a brother which that hight Eso^
And wha^ for age he might uneaths gone
He yaue to Pelleus the gouernyng
Of al his reygne, and made him lord and king
Of which Eson, this Jason getten was
That in his time, and in all ye land there nas
Not such a famous knight of gentleness
Of fredome, of strength, and of lustynesse
After his fathers death he bare him so
That there was none that list ben his so
But did him al honor and company
Of which this Pelleus has great envy
Imaginyng, that Jason might be
Enhaunced so, and put in such degree
with love of lords of his regyoun
That from his reign, he may be put adoun
And in his wit a night compassed he
How Jason might best destroyed be
withouten sclaunder of his compasment
And at the last he took aduysement
That to sende^ him into some far country
There as this Jason may destroyed be
This was his wit, al made he to Jason
Great chere of look, and of affectioun
For dread lest his lords it espyde
So fill it, as fame ronneth wide
There was such tydyng over al, and such loos
That in an isle that called was Colcos
Beyond Troy estwarde in the sea
That there was a ram that men might se
That had a flees of gold yt shone so bright
That now her was there such another sight
But it was kept always with a drogoun
And many other maruayles up and down
And with two bulls maked al of bras
That spytte^ fire, and much thing there was
But this was eke the tale nathelees
That whosoever would wynnen thilke flees
He must both, or he it win might
with the bulls and the dragon fight
And king Otes lord was of that isle
This Pelleus bethought upon this wyle
That he his neuewe Jason would exhort
To saylen to that land, him to disport
And said, neuewe, if it might be
That such worship might fall the
That thou this famous tresure might win
And bring it my region within
It were to me great plesaunce and honor
Than were I hold to quyte thy labor
And all the costs I woll my self make
And chose what folk thou wolt with thetake
Let se now, dare thou taken this voyage
Jason was young, and lusty of courage
And undertook to done this ylke emprise
Anon Argus his ships can deuyse
with Jason went the strong Hercules
And many an other that he with him ches
But whosoever asks, who is with him gone
Let him read Argonautycon
For he woll tell a tale long enough
Philoctetes anon the sail up drough
when the wind was good, and began him hye
Out of his country, Called Thessalye
So long he sailed in the salt see
Till in the isle of Lemnon arrived he
Al be this not rehearsed of Guydo
yet says Ouyde in his epystles so
And of this isle lady was and queen
The fair young Hypsiphile the shene
That whylom Thoas daughter was the king
Hypsiphile was gone in her playing
And romyng on the cleuys by the sea
Under a bank anon espied she
where lay the ship, that Jason began aryue
Of her goodness adowne she sends blyue
To weten, if that any strange wight
with tempest thither were yblowe anyght
To don him sucour, as was her vsaunce
To furthren every wight, and don plesaunce
Of very bounty and of curtesye
This messenger adowne him began to hye
And found Jason and Hercules also
That in a cogge to land were ygo
Hein to refreshen, and to take the air
The morning attempre was and fair
And in her way this messenger hem met
Full co^nyngly these lords two he great
And did his message, askyng hem anon
If yt they were broken or ought woe begone
Or had need of lodesmen or vytayle
For socour they should nothing fail
For it was utterly the queen's will
Jason answered mekely and still
My lady (quod he) thank I hertely
Of her goodness, us needs truly
Nothing as now, but that we weary be
And come for to play out of the sea
Till that the wind be better in our way
This lady rometh by the clyffe to play
with her meyne, endlonge the stronde
And fyndeth this Jason, and this other stond
In spekyng of this thing as I you told
This Hercules and Jason began behold
How yt the queen it was, and fair her great
Anon right as they with this lady met
And she took head, and knew by her manner
By her arraye, by words and by chere
That it were gentlemen of great degree
And to the castle with her ledeth she
These strange folk, and does hem great honor
And asks hem of travail and of labor
That they have suffered in the salt see
So that within a day, two or three
She knew by the folk yt in his ships be
That it was Jason full of ronomee
And Hercules that had the great loos
That soughten the auentures of Colcos
And did hem honor more than before
And with hem dealed ever longer the more
For they ben worthy folk wtouten lees
And namely most she spoke with Hercules
To him her heart bare, he should be
Sad, wise, and true of words auysee
withouten any other affection
Of love, or any other ymagynacion
This Hercules has this Jason praised
That to the sun he has it up raised
That half so true a man there nas of love
Under the cope of heaven that is above
And he was wise, hardy, secret and rich
Of these.iii. points there nas non him lyche
Of fredome passed he, and lustyhede
All tho that lyuen, or ben deed
Thereto so great a gentleman was he
And of Thessalye lykely king to be
There nas no let, but that he was aghast
To love, and for to speak shamefast
Him had lever him self to murdre and dye
Than that men should a lover him espy
As would god that I had iyeue
My blood and flesh, so yt I might live
with you nones, yt he had ought where a wife
For his estate, for such a lusty life
She shulden led, with this lusty knight
And all this was compassed on the night
Betwixt him Jason, and this Hercules
Of these two here was a shrende lees
To come to house upon an innocent
For to bedote this queen was her intent
And Jason is as coye as is a maid
He looks pytously, but naught he said
But freely yaue he to her counsaylers
Yeftes great, and to her officers
As would God I leyser had and time
By process, all his woing for to ryme
But in this house, if any false lover be
Right as him self now does, right so did he
with faynyng, and with every subtyl deed
Ye get no more of me, but ye wol read
Thoriginall that tells all the caas
The soth is this, yt Jason wedded was
Unto this queen, and took of her substance
whatso him list unto his purueyaunce
And upon her begat children two
And drough his sail, and saw her never mo
A letter sent she him certain
which were to long to written and to said
And him reproves of his great untruth
And prays him on her to have some routh
And on his children two, she said him this
That they be like of all thing ywys
To Jason, save they couth not begyle
And prayed god, or it were long while
That she that had his heart yreft her fro
Must fynden him untrue also
And that she must both her children spyll
And all tho that suffers him his will
And true to Jason was she al her life
And ever kept her chaste, as for his wife
Ne never had she joy at her heart
But dyed for his love of sorrows smerte
To Colcos come is this duke Jason
That is of love deuourer and dragon
As Matyre appeteth form always
And from form to form it passen may
Or as a well that were botomlesse
Right so can Jason have no pees
For to desyren through his appetyte
To done with gentyl women his delight
This is his lust and his felicity
Jason is roomed forth to the city
That whylom cleped was Iasonicos
That was the master town of al Colcos
And has ytolde ye cause of his coming
Unto Otes, of that country king
Praying him yt he must done his assaye
To get the fleese of gold, if that he may
Of which the king assenteth to his boon
And does him honor, as it is to done
So ferforth, yt his daughter and his heir
Medea, which that was so wise and fair
That fayrer saugh there never man with eye
He made her done to Jason company
At meat, and sit by him in the hall
Now was Jason a semely man withal
And like a lord, and had a great renoun
And of hi look as royal as a lyoun
And goodly of his speech, and familiere
And could of love all the craft and art plenere
withouten book, with eueryche obseruaunce
And as fortune her ought a foul mischau^ce
She woxe enamored upon this man
Jason (quod she) or ough I se or can
As of this thing, ye which ye ben about
Yea and your self I put in much dout
For whosoever woll this adventure atcheue
He may not well asterten, as I leave
withouten death, but I his help be
But nathelesse, it is my will (quod she)
To forthren you, so that ye shall not dye
But tournen sound home to your Thessaly
My right lady (quod this Jason) tho
That ye have of my death or of my woe
Any regard, and done me this honor
I wot well that my might ne my labor
May not deserve it in my lives day
God thank you, there I ne can ne may
Your man am I, and lowly you beseech
To ben my help, withouten more speech
But certes for my death shall I not spare
Tho began this Medea to him declare
The peril of this case fro point to point
Of his battle, and in what disioynt
He mote stand, of which no creature
Save only she, ne might his life assure
And shortly right to the point for to go
They ben accorded fully betwixe hem two
That Jason shall her wed as true knight
And term yset to come soon at night
Unto her chamber, and make there his oath
Upon the gods that he for lefe or loath
Ne should her never falsen night ne day
To ben her husbond while he live may
As she that from his death him saved here
And hereupon at night they met yfere
And does his oath, and goth with her to bed
And on the morrow upward he him sped
For she has taut him how he shall not fayl
The fleese to win, and stynten his battle
And saved him his life, and his honor
And gat him a name as a conqueror
Right through the sleight of her enchau^tme^t
Now has Iaso^ the fleese, and home is went
with Medea, and treasoures full great won
But vnwyst of her father she is gone
To Thessaly, with duke Jason her lefe
That afterward has brout her to mischef
For as a traitor he is from her go
And with her left young children two
And falsely has betrayed her, alas
And ever in love a chief traitor he was
And wedded yet the third wife anon
That was the daughter of king Creon
This is the mede of loving and guerdon
That Medea received of duke Jason
Right for her troth, and for her kyndnesse
That loved him better tha^ her self I guess
And left her father, and her heritage
And of Jason this is the vassalage
That in his days nas never none yfounde
So false a lover going on the ground
And therefore in her letter thus she said
First wha^ she of his falsenesse him vnbraid
why lyked me thy yelowe here to se
More than the bounds of mine honesty
why lyked me thy youth and thy fayrnesse
And of thy tongue, ye infinite graciousnesse
O had thou in thy conquest deed ybe
Full mykel untruth had there dyed with the
well can Ouyde her letter in verse endyte
which were as now to long for to write.
Here ends the legende of Hipsyphile and Medea. And here follows the legende
of Lucresse of Rome.
NOw mote I said thexilyng of kings
Of Rome, for her horrible doings
Of the last king Tarquinivs
As says Ouyde and Tytus Liuius
But for that cause tell I not this story
But for to praysen, and drawn in memory
The very wife, the very Lucresse
That for her wyfehode and her steadfastness
Not only that these paynyms her commend
But that cleped is in our legende
The great Austyn, that has compassioun
Of this Lucrece that starfe in Rome town
And in what wise, I wol but shortly treat
And of this thing I touch but the great
when Ardea besieged was about
with Romans ye full stern were and stout
Full long lay the siege and little wroughten
So yt they were half idle as hem thoughte^
And in his play Tarquinius the young
Began for to iape, for he was light of tongue
And said, that it was an idle life
Noman did there more than his wife
And let us speak of wives that is best
Praise every man his own as him lest
And with our speech let us ease our heart
A knight (that hight Colatyn) up stert
And said thus, nay sir, it is no need
To trowen on the word, but on the deed
I have a wife (quod he) that as I trow
Is holden good of all that ever her know
Go we to Rome to night, and we shul se
Tarquinius answered, that lyketh me
To Rome be they come, and fast hem dight
To Colatyns house, and down they light
Tarquinius, and eke this Colatyne
The husbond knew ye efters well and fine
And full privily into the house they gone
Nor at the gate, porter was there none
And at the chamber door they abide
This noble wife sat by her beds side
Discheueled, for no malice she ne thought
And soft woll says Liui that she wrought
To kepen her fro sloth and idleness
And bad her servants done her business
And asks hem what tidings heren ye
How says men of the siege, how shall it be?
God would the walls were fallen adowne
Mine husbo^d is to long out of this town
For which dread does me so to smerte
Right as a swerd, it styngeth to mine heart
when I think on this or of that place
God save my lord, I pray him for his grace
And therwithall full tenderly she began weep
And of her work she took no more keep
But mekely she let her eyes fall
And thylke semblaunt sat her well withal
And eke her tears full of heaviness
Embelesed her wyfelye chastnesse
Her countenance is to heart digne
For they accordeden in deed and sign
And with that word her husbo^d Colatin
Or she of him was ware came stertlyng in
And said, dread the not for I am here
And she anon vprose with blysful chere
And kyssed him, as of wives is the won
Tarquinius this proud kings son
Conceived has her beautye and her chere
Her yelewe here, her bounty, and her manner
Her hew, her words yt she has co^playned
And by no craft her beauty was not feigned
And caught to this lady such desire
That in his heart he brent as any fire
So woodly, that his wit was al forgoten
For well thought he she should not be gotten
And aye the more he was in despair
The more coueyteth, and thought her fair
His blind lust was all his couetyng
On morrow wha^ the bird began to sing
Unto the siege he comes full privily
And by him self he walks sobrely
The image of her recordyng always new
thus lay her here and thus fresh was her hew
Thus sat, thus span, this was her chere
Thus fair she was, and this was his manner
All this conceyte his heart has new ytake
And as the sea, with tempest al to shake
That after when the storm is al ago
Yet wol the water quap a day or two
Right so, though yt her form were absent
The plesaunce of her form was present
But nathelesse not plesaunce, but delight
Or an unrightful talent with despyte
For maugre her, she shall my lemman be
Hap helps hardy man always (quod he)
what end that I make, it shall be so
And gyrt him with his sword, and began to go
And he forth right, till to Rome he come
And al alone his way that he has nome
Unto the house of Colatyne full right
Down was ye sun, and day has lost his light
And in he come, unto a privy halke
And in the night full theuelye can he stalk
when every wight was to his rest brought
Ne no wight had of treason such a thought
whether by window, or bo other gyn
with sword ydrawe shortly he comes in
There as she lay, this noble wife Lucresse
And as she woke, her bed she felt press
what be is that (quod she) that wayeth thus
I am the kings son Tarquinius
(quod he) but and thou cry, or any noise make
Or if thou any creature awake
By thilke god that formed man of live
This swerd through thine heart I shall riue
And therwithall unto her throat he sterte
And set the sword all sharp on her heart
No word she spoke, she has no might thereto
what shall she said, her wit is al ago
Right as a wolf yt fayneth a lamb alone
To whom shall she compain or make moan
what, shall she fight with an hardy knight
well wot men a woman has no might
what, shall she cry, or how shall she atterte
That has her by ye throat with sword at heart
She asks grace, and said al yt she can
No wolt thou not (quod this cruel man)
As wisely Jupiter my soul save
I shall in the stable slay thy knave
And lay him in thy bed, and loud cry
That I the fande in such auoutry
And thus thou shall be deed, and also lose
Thy name, for thou shall not chese
This romans wives louede^ so her name
At thilke time, and dredden so the shame
That what for fere of slander and dred of death
She lost both at ones wit and breath
And in a swough she say, and woxe so deed
Men myghten smite of her arm or heed
She feleth nothing neither foul ne fair
Tarquinius that art a kings heir
And should, as by lynage and by right
Done as a lord, and a very knight
why have thou done despyte to cheualrye?
why have thou done thy lady vylanye?
Alas of ye this was a vylaynous deed.
But now to ye purpose, in the story I read
when he was gone, and this mischau^ce is fall
This lady sent after her friends all
Father, mother, and husbond all yfere
And discheueled with her here clear
In habyt such as women used tho
Unto the burying of her friends go
She sat in hall, with a sorrowful sight
Her friends asken what her aylen might
And who was deed, and she sat aye weeping
A word for shame ne may she forth out bring
Ne upon hem she durst not behold
But at the last of Tarquiny she hem told
This ruful case, and all this thing horrible
The woe to tell, were impossible
That she and all her friends make at ones
All had folks hertes, ben of stones
It might have maked hem upon her rewe
Her heart was so wisely and so true
She said, that for her gilt ne for her blame
Her husband should not have the soul name
That would she not suffren by no way
And they answerde all unto her faye
That they foryaue it her, for it was right
It was no gylt, it lay not in her might
And sayden her samples many one
But all for naught, for thus she said anon
Be as be may (quod she) of forgyuyng
I will not have no forgyft for nothing
But privily she caught forth a knyfe
And therwithall she raft her self her life
And as she fell adowe, she cast her look
And of her clothes, yet head she took
For in her falling, yet she had a care
Lest that her fete, or such things lay bare
So well she loved clennesse, and eke troth
Of her had all the town of Rome routh
And Brutus has by her chaste blood swore
That Tarquin should ybanished be therefore
And all his kyn, and let the people call
And openly the tale he told hem all
And openly let carry her on a bear
Through all the town, yt men may se and here
The horrible deed of her oppressioun
Ne never was there king in Rome town
Syns thilke day, and she was holden there
A saint, and ever her day yhalowed dear
As in her law: and thus ends Lucresse
The noble wise Tytus bears witness
I tell it, for she was of love so true
Ne in her will she changed for no new
And in her stable heart, sad and kind
That in these women men may al day find
There as they cast her heart, there it dwells
For well I wot, that Christ him self tells
That in Israel, as wide as is the land
That so great faith in all ye land he ne fond
As in a woman, and this is no lie
And as for men look ye such tyranny
They done all day, assay them whosoever list
The trewest is full brotell for to tryst.
Here ends the legende of Lucrece of Rome, and here follows the legende of
Ariadne of Athenes.
IVdge infernal Mines, of Crete king
now comes thy lot thou come on the ring
Not for thy sake only, written is this storye
But for to cleape again unto memory
Of Thesius the great untruth of love
For which the gods of heaven above
Ben wroth, and wrath has take for thy syn
Be red for shame, now I thy life begin
Mynos yt was the mighty king of Crete
That had an hundred cities strong and great
To schole has sent his son Androgeus
To Athenes of the which it happed thus
That he was slain lerning philosophye
Right in that city, not but for envy
The great Mynos of the which I speak
His sons death is come for to wreke
Alcathoe he besieged hard and long
But nathelesse the walls be so strong
And Nisus, that was king of that city
So chyualrous, that little dredeth he
Of Mynos or his host, took he no cure
Till on a day befell an adventure
That Nisus daughter stood upon the wall
And of the siege saw the manner all
So happed it, that at scarmishyng
She cast her heart upon Mynos the king
For his beauty, and his chiualrye
So sore, that she wend for to dye
And shortly of this process for to pace
She made Mynos wynnen thylke place
So that the cite was al at his will
To sauen whom him list, or else spyll
But wyekedly he quyt her kyndnesse
And let her drenche in sorrow and distesse
Nere that the gods had of her pity
But that tale were to long as now for me
Athenes wan this king Mynos also
As Alcathoe, and other towns mo
And this the effect, ye Mynos has so driven
Hem of Athenes, that they mote him yeuen
Fro year to year, her own children dear
For to be slain, as ye shall after here
This Mynos has a mo^ster, a wicked be
That was so cruel, that without areest
wha^ yt a man was brought in to his presence
He nolde him eat, there helps no defense
And every third year, wythouten doubt
They casten lotte, as it came about
On rich and poor, he must his son take
And of his child he must present make
To Mynos, to save him or to spyll
Or let his beeste devour him at his will
And this has mynos done right in dispyte
To wreke his son was set al his delight
And make hem of Athenes his thral
Fro year to year, while he lyuen shall
and who^ he sayleth when this town is won
This wicked custom is so long yronne
Till of Athenes king Egeus
Mote senden his own son Theseus
Sens that the lotte is fallen him upon
To ben devoured, for grace is there non
and forth is ladde this woeful young knight
unto the country of king Mynos full of might
And in a prison fettred fast is he
Till the time he should yfreten be
well may thou weep, O woeful Theseus
That art a kings son and dampened thus
Me thinks this, that thou art deep yhold
To whom that saved the fro cares cold
And now if any woman help the
well ought thou her servant for to be
And ben her true lover year by year
But now to come again to my matere
The toure, there this Theseus is throw
Down in the bottom derke and wonder low
was ioynyng to the wall of a foreyne
Longyng unto the doughtren tweyne
Of Mynos, that in her chambres great
Dwelten above the maystre street
Of the town, in joy and in solas
Not I not how, it happed par caas
As Theseus complained him by night
The kings daughter, that Ariadne hight
And eke her suster Phedra, herden al
His complaynte, as they stood on the wall
And looked upon the bright moon
Hem list not to go to bed so soon
And of his woe they had compassion
A kings son to be in such prison
And ben devoured, thought hem great pity
Than Ariadne spoke to her suster fre
And said: Phedra leave suster dear
This woeful lords son may ye not here
How pitously he complayneth his kynne
And eke his poor estate that he is inn?
And gyltlesse, certain now it is routh
And if ye wol assent by my troth
He shall ben helped how so that we do
Phedra answerde, ywys me is as woe
For him, as ever I was for any man
And to his help the best read that I can
Is, that we done the gayler privily
To come and speak with us hastily
And don this woeful man with him to come
For if he may this monster overcome
Tha^ were he quyte, there is non other boot
Let us well taste him at his heart root
That if it so be, that he a weapen have
where that he is life dare keep or save
Fyghten with this fend, and him defend
For in the prison, there as he shall discende
Ye wot well, that the beast is in a place
That is not derke, and has ro^me and eke space
To welde an axe, or sword, staff, or knyfe
So that me thinks he should save his life
If that he be a man, he shall do so
And we shall make him balls eke also
Of wexe and towe, that when he gapeth fast
Into the beestes throat he shall hem cast
To sleke his honger, and encomber his teth
And right anon, when that Theseus seth
The beast acheked, he shall on him leepe
To sleen him, or they comen more to heepe
This weapen shall the gayler, or that tide
Full privily within the prison hyde
And for the house is crencled to and fro
And has so queynte ways for to go
For it is shapen as the mase is wrought
Thereto have I a remedy in my thought
That by a clewe of twyne, as he has gone
The same way he may return anon
Following always ye threde as he has come
And when this be is overcome
Than may he flyen away out of this stead
And eke the gayler may he with him led
And him auaunce at home in his country
Sens that so great a lords son is he
This is my read, if that ye dare it take
what should I longer sermon of it make
The gayler comes, and with him Theseus
when these things ben accorded thus
Down sat Theseus upon his kne
The right lady of my life (quod he)
I sorouful man, ydampned to the death
Fro you, whiles that me lasts breath
I wol not twynne, after this adventure
But in your service, thus I wol endure
that as a wretch unknow, I woll you serve
For evermore, till that mine heart sterue
Forsake I wol at home mine heritage
And as I said, been of your court a page
If that ye vouchsafe that in this place
Ye grant me to have such a grace
that I may have, not but my meat and drink
And for my sustynaunce yet wol I swinke
Right as you list, yt Mynos ne no wight
Sens that he saw me never with even sight
Ne no man else shall me espy
So slyly, and so well I shall me gye
And me so well disfygure, and so low
That in this world there shall no man me know
To have my life, and to have presence
Of you, that none to me this excellence
And to my father shall I send here
This worthy man, that is your gaylere
And him so guerdon, that he shall well be
One of the greatest men of my country
And if I durst said, my lady bright
I am a kings son, and eke a knight
As would god, if that it might be
Ye weren in my country al three
And I with you, to bear you company
Than should ye seen if that I thereof lie
And if that I profer you in low manner
To ben your page, and seruen you right here
But I you serve as lowly in that place
I pray to Mars to give me such grace
That shames death on me there mote fall
And death and pouerte to my friends al
And that my spirit by night mote go
After my death and walk to and fro
That I mote of traytoure have a name
For which my spirit mote go to do me shame
And if I claim ever other degree
But ye vouchsafe to give it me
As I have said, of shames death I dey
And mercy lady, I can naught else sey
A semly knight was this Theseus to se
And young, but of twenty year and three
But who so had ysene his countenance
he would have wept for routh of his penance
For which this Ariadne in this manner
Answerde to his profer and to his chere
A kings son, and eke a knight (quod she)
To been my servant in so low degree
God shylde it, for the shame of women al
And lene me never such a case befall
And send you grace, and sleyght of heart also
You to defend, and knyghtly to sleen your foe
And leene here after I may you find
To me, and to my suster here so kind
That I ne repent not to give you life
Yet were it better I were your wife
Sith ye ben as gentyl borne as I
And have a realm not but fast by
Than yt I suffered your gentyllesse to sterue
Or that I let you as a page sterue
It is no profit, as unto your kyurede
but what is yt, that man woll not do for dread
And to my suster sith that it is so
That she mote gone with me, if that I go
Or else suffer death as well as I
That ye unto your son as trewely
Done her be wedded, at your home coming
This is the final end of al this thing
Ye swear it here upon all that may be sworn?
Ye lady mine (quod he) or else to torn
Mote I be, with the Mynotaur or to morrow
And haueth here of mine heart blod to borow
If that ye wol, if I had knyfe or spear
I would it letten out, and thereon swear
For that at erste, I wotte ye would me leave
By Mars, that is chief of my believe
So that I might lyuen, and not fail
To morrow for to taken my battle
I nolde never fro this place fly
Till that ye should the very proof se
For now, if that the soth I shall you say
I have loved you full many a day
Though ye ne wist not, in my country
And aldermoste desired you to se
Of any erthly living creature
Upon my troth I swear, and you assure
This seven year I have your servant be
Now have I you, and also have ye me
My dear heart, of Athenes Duchess
This lady smyleth at his steadfastness
And at his hertely words and at his chere
And to her suster said in this manner
And sothly suster mine (quod she)
Now be we duchesses both I and ye
And sykerde to the regals of Athenes
And both hereafter lykely to be queen's
And saved fro his death a kings son
As ever of gentyl women is the won
To save a gentyl man, enforth her might
In honest cause, and namely in his right
me thi^keth no wight ought us hereof blame
Ne bearen us therefore an yuel name
And shortly of this matter for to make
This Theseus of her has leave ytake
And every point was performed in deed
As ye have in this covenant herd me read
his wepe^, his clew, his thing yt I have said
was by the gayler in the house ylayd
There as the Mynotaur has his dwelling
Right fast by the door, at his entryng
And Theseus is ladde unto his death
And forth unto this Mynota^re he geth
And by the teaching of this Adriane
He overcame this be, and was his bane
And out he comes by the clewe again
Full privily, when he this be has slain
And the gayler gotten has a barge
And of his wives treasure began it charge
And took his wife, and eke her suster fre
And by the gayler, and with hem al three
Is stole away out of the land by night
And to the country of Enupye him dyght
There as he had a friend of his knowing
There feesten they, there dau^sen they and sing
And in his arms has this Adriane
That of ye be has kept him fro his bane
And get him there a noble barge anon
And of his country folk a full great wone
and takes his leave, and homward sayleth he
And in an isle, amydde the wild see
There as there dwelte creature none
Save wild beestes, and that full many one
He made his ship a land for to set
And in that isle, half a day he let
And said, that on the land he must him rest
His maryners have done right as him lest
And for to tell shortly in this case
when Ariadne his wife a sleep was
For that her suster fayrer was than she
He takes her in his hand and forth goth he
To ship, and as a traitor stale away
while that this Ariadne a sleep lay
And to his countreywarde he sayleth blyue
A twenty dyuelway, the wind him drive
And found his father drenched in the sea
Me list no more to speak of him parde
These false lovers, poison be her bane
But I wol turn again to Adriane
That is with sleep for werynesse ytake
Full soroufully her heart may awake
Alas, for the mine heart has pity
Right in the dawnyng awaketh she
and gropeth in the bed, and fond right nout
Alas (quod she) that ever I was wrought
I am betrayed, and her here to rent
And to the stronde bare foot fast she went
And cried: Theseus mine heart sweet
where be ye that I may not with you mete?
And might thus with beestes been yslayne
The holow rocks answerde her again
No man she saw, and yet shone the moon
And hye upon a rock she went soon
And saw his barge, saylyng in the sea
Cold woxe her heart, and right thus said she
Meker than ye, find I the beestes wyld
Has he not sin, that he her thus begylde
she cried, O turn again for routh and sin
Thy barge has not al his meyne inn
Her kerchefe on a pole stycked she
Ascaunce he should it well yse
And him remember that she was behind
and turn again, and on the stronde her find
But al for naught, his way he is gone
And down she fell a swowne on a stone
And up she ryst, and kyssed in all her care
The steps of his fete, there he has fare
And to her bed right thus she speaks tho
Thou bed (quod she) yt have received two
Thou shall answer of two, and not of one
where is the greater part, away gone
alas, where shall I wretched wight become?
For though so be that bote none here come
Home to my country dare I not for dread
I can my self in this case not read
what should I tell more her co^playnyng
It is so long* it were an heavy thing
In her epistle, Naso tells all
But shortly to the end tell I shall
The gods have her helped for pity
And in the sign of Taurus men may se
The stones of her crown shine clear
I will no more speak of this matere
And thus this false lover can begyle
His true love, the dyuel quyte him his wyle
Here ends the legende of Ariadne and here follows the legende of Phylomene.
THou yeuer of the forms that have wrought
The fair world, and bare it in thy thought
Eternallye, er thou thy work began
why made thou unto the slander of man
Or al be that it was not thy doing
As for that fend, to make such a thing
why suffredest you that Tereus was bore?
That is in love so false and so forswore
That fro this world up to the first heaven
Corrumpeth, when ye folk his name neuen
And as to me, so grislye was his deed
That when that I this foul storye read
Mine eyes wexen foul, and sore also
Yet lasts the venyme of so long ago
That infecteth him that would behold
The storye of Tereus, of which I told
Of Trace was he lord, and kynne to Mart
The cruel god that stante with blody darte
And wedded had he with blysful chere
king Pandyonis fair daughter dear
That hight Progue, flower of her country
Though Juno list not at the feast be
Ne Hymeneus, that god of weddyng is
But at the feast ready been ywys
The furys three, with all her mortal bronde
The oule al night about the balkes wonde
That prophet is of woe, and of mischaunce
This revel, full of song and full of dance
Last a fourtenyght, or little less
But shortly of this storye for to pass
(For I am weary of him for to tell)
Five year his wife and he together dwell
Till on a day she began so sore long
To seen her suster that she saw not long
That for desire she nyst not what to say
But to her husbonde began she for to pray
For gods love, that she mote ones gone
Her suster for to seen, and come again anon
Or else but she mote to her wend
She prayed him yt he would after her send
And this was day by day al her prayere
with al hu^blesse of wisehode, word and chere
This Tereus let make his ships yare
And in to Greece him self is forth yfare
Unto his father in law began he pray
To vouchsafe, that for a month or twaye
That Phylomene his wives suster might
On Progne his wife, but ones have a sight
And she shall come to you again anon
My self with her, I will both come and gone
And as my hertes life I will her keep
This old Pandion, this king began weep
For tenderness of heart, for to leave
His daughter gone, and for to give her leave
Of al this world he loved nothing so
But at the last leave has she to go
For Phylomene with salt tears eke
Began of her father grace for to beseke
To seen her suster, that her longs so
And him enbraceth, with her arms two
And there al so young and fair was she
That when that Tereus saw her beauty
And of array, that there was none her lyche
And yet of beauty was she to so rich
He cast his ^iry heart upon her so
That he would have her, how so that it go
And with his wyles kneled, and so prayde
Till at the last Pandion thus said
Now son (quod he) that art to me so dear
I the betake my young daughter dear
That bears the key of al mine hertes life
And great well my daughter, and thy wife
And give her leave sometime for to pley
That she may se me ones or I dey
And sothly he has made him rich feast
And to his folk, the most and eke the leest
that with him came, and yafe him gifts great
And him co^ueyeth through yt master street
Of Athenes, and to the sea him brought
And turns home no malice he ne thought
The ores pulls forth the vessel fast
And in to Trace arryueth at the last
And up in to a forest he her led
And to a cave privily him spedde
And in this derke cave, if her list
Or naught, he badde her for to rest
Of which her heart agrose, and said thus?
where is my suster, brother Tereus?
And there wythal she wept tenderly
And quoke for fear pale and pytously
Right as the la^be, that of the wolf is bitte^
Or as the culuer, yt of the Egle is smytten
And is out of his claws escaped
Yet it is a ferde, and a waped
Lest it be hente eftsoon: so sat she
But utterly it may none other be
By force has this traitor done a deed
That he has refte her of her maydenhede
Maugre her heed, by strength and by his myt
Lo here a deed of men, and that a right
She cried suster with full loud steven
And father dear help me god in heaven
Al helps not, and yet this false thief
Has done this lady yet a more mischefe
For fear, lest she should his shame cry
And done him openly a vyllany
And with his sword her tongue of kerfe he
And in a castle made her for to be
Full privily in prison evermore
And kept her to his usage and to his store
So that she ne might never more astarte
O sely Phylomene, woe is in thine heart
Huge been thy sorrows, and wonder smert
God wreke the, and send the thy bone
Now is time I make an end sone
This Tereus is to his wife ycome
And in his arms has his wife ynome
And pytously he wept, and shoke his heed
And swore her, that he found her sister deed
For which this sely Progne has such woe
That nygh her sorouful heart brake in two
And thus in teeres let I Progne dwell
And of her suster forth I woll you tell
This woeful lady ylerned had in youth
So that she worken and enbrauden couth
And weauen in stole the radeuore
And it of women has be woued yore
And sothly for to said, she has her fyl
Of mete and drink, of clothyng at her will
And couth eke read well enough and endyte
But with a pen she could not write
But letters can she weaue, to and fro
So that by the year was al a go
She had wouen in a stames large
how she was brout fro Athenes in a barge
And in a cave how that she was brought
And all the thing ye Tereus has wrought
She wave it well, and wrote the storye above
How she was served for her susters love
And to a man a ring she yaue anon
And prayed him by signs for to gone
Unto the queen, and bearen her that cloth
And by sign swore many a oath
She should him give what she getten myt
This man anon unto the queen him dight
And took it her, and all the manner told
and wha^ yt Progne has this thing behold
No word she spoke, for sorrow and eke for rage
But feigned her to gone on pilgrimage
To Baccus temple, and in a little stounde
Her dombe suster syttyng has she found
weeping in the castle her self alone
Alas the woe, constraynte, and the moon
that Progne upon the dombe suster makes
In arms eueryche of hem other takes
And thus I let hem in her sorrow dwell
The remenaunt is no charge to tell
For this is al and some, thus was she served
That never agylte, ne deserved
Unto this crewel man, that she of wyste
Ye may beware of men if that you list
For all be that he would not for shame
Done as Tereus, to lose his name
Ne serve you as a murderer or a knave
Full little while shul ye true him have
that wol I sayn al were he now my brother
But yt so be that he may have another
Here ends the legende of Phylomene, and here follows the legende of Phillis.
BY prove, as well as by auctorite
That wicked fruit comes of wicked tree
That may ye find, if that it lyketh you
But for this end I speak this as now
To tell you of false Demophon
In love a falser herd I never non
But it were his father Theseus
God for his grace fro such one keep us
Thus these women prayen, that it here
Now to the effect turn I of my matere
Dystroyed is of Troy the cite
This Demophon came saylyng in the sea
Toward Athenes, to his paleys large
with him came many a ship and many a barge
Full of folk, of which full many one
Is wounded sore, and sick and woe begone
And they have at the seige long ylayne
Behind him came a wynd, and eke a rain
that shofe so sore, his sail might not sto^de
Him were lever than all the world alonde
So hunteth him the tempest to and fro
So derke it was, he could no where go
And with a wave brusten was his stere
His ship was rent so low, in such manner
That carpenter could it not amend
The sea by night as any torche brende
For wood, and posseth him up and down
Till Neptune has of him compassioun
And Thetis Chorus, Tryton, and they al
And maden him up on land to fall
whereof that Phillis lady was and queen
Lycurgus daughter, fayrer unto seen
Than is the flower again the bright son
Uneath is Demophon to land ywonne
weak and eke weary, and his folk forpyned
Of werynesse, and also enfamyned
And to the death he was almost ydryuen
His wise folk counsel have him yeuen
To seken help and socour of the queen
And loken what his grace might been
And maken in that land some cheuesaunce
And kepen him fro woe, and fro mischaunce
For sick he was, and almost at the death
Uneath might he speak, or draw brethe
And lythe in Rodopeya him for to rest
wha^ he may walk, him thout it was best
Unto the country to seken for socour
Men knew him well, and did him honor
For at Athenes duke and lord was he
As Theseus his father has ybe
That in his time was great of renoun
No man so great in all his regioun
And like his father of face and of stature
And false of love, it came him of nature
As does the fox Renarde, the foxes son
Of kind he could his old fathers won
without lore, as can a drake swymme
when it is caught, and carried to the brymme
this honorable queen phillis does him chere
Her lyketh well his sport and his manner
But I am agroted here beforne
To write of hem yt in love been forsworn
And eke to have me in my legende
which to perform, god me grace send
Therefore I pass shortly in this wise
Ye have well herd of Theseus the gyse
In the betrayeng of fair Adriane
That of her pity kept him fro his bane
At short words, right so Demophon
The same way, and the same pathe has gone
That did his false father Theseus
For unto Phillis has he sworn thus
To wedden her, and her his troth plyght
And pyked of her all the good he might
wha^ he was hole and sound, and had his rest
And does with Phillis, what so yt him lest
As well I could, if that me list so
Tellen al his doing to and fro
He said to his country mote he sail
For there he would her weddyng apparayle
As fyl to her honor, and his also
And openly he took his leave tho
And to her swore he would not soiourne
But in a month again he would return
And in that land let make his ordinance
As very lord, and took the obeysaunce
well and humbly, and his ships dyght
And home he goth the next way he might
For unto Philles yet came he naught
And that has she so hard and sore ybought
Alas as the storye does us record
She was her own death with a cord
when she saw that Demophon her trayed
but first wrote she to him, and fast him prayed
He would come and deliver her of pain
As I reherce shall a word or twain
Me list not vouchsafe on him to swynke
Dispenden on him a pen full of ynke
For false in love was he, right as his sire
The dyuel set her souls both on a fire
But of the letter of Phylles wol I write
A word or twain, althou it be but lyte
Thyn hostess (quod she) O Demophon
Thy Phillis, which that is so woe begone
Of Rhodopeye, upon you mote complain
Over the term set betwyxt us twain
That ye ne holden forward, as ye said
Your ancre, which ye in our haven laid
Hight us, that ye would comen out of dout
Or that the moon ones went about
But times four, ye moan has hyde her face
Sens thylke day ye went fro this place
And four times light the world again
But for all that, yet shall I sothly said
Yet has the streme of Scython not brought
From Athenes the ship, yet came it naught
And if that ye the term reken would
As I or other true lovers do should
I plain not (god wot) beforne my day
But all her letter written I ne may
By order, for it were to me a charge
Her letter was right long, and thereto large
But here and there, in ryme I have it laid
There as me thought that she has well said
She said, the sails comes not again
Ne to the word, there nys no fey certain
But I wot why ye come not (quod she)
For I was of my love to you so fre
And of the gods that ye have swore
That her vengeance fall on you therefore
Ye be not suffysaunt to bear the pain
To much trusted I, well may I said
Upon your lynage, and your fair tongue
And on your teeres, falsely out wrong
How could ye weep so by craft? (quod she)
May there such teeres feigned be?
Now certes, if ye would have in memory
It ought be to you but little glory
Ta have a sely maid thus betrayde
To god (quod she) pray I, and often have prayde
That it be now the greatest price of all
And most honor, that ever you shall befall
And when thine old aunceters painted be
In which men may her worthynesse se
Then pray I god, thou painted be also
That folk may reden, forth by as they go
Lo this is he, that with his flatterye
Betrayed has, and done her villanye
That was his true love, in thought and deed
But sothly of o point yet may they read
That ye ben like your father, as in this
For he begyled Ariadne ywys
with such an art, and such subtelte
As thou thy seluen haste begyled me
As in that point, all though it be not feyre
Thou folowest certain, and art his heir
But sens thus synfulfy ye me begyle
My body mote ye seen, within a while
Right in the haven of Athenes fletynge
wythouten sepulture and buryenge
Though ye ben harder then is any stone
And when this letter was forth sent anon
And knew how brotel and how false he was
She for dyspayre fordyd her self alas
Such sorrow has she, for she beset her so
Beware ye women of your subtle foe
Sens yet this day, men may ensample se
And trusts now in love no man but me.
Here ends the legende of Phillis, and here follows the legende of
Hipermester.
IN Greece whylom weren brethren two
Of which that one was called Danao
That many a son has of his body won
As such falls lovers often co^-
Among his sons all there was one
That aldermoste he loved of euerychone
And when this child was borne, this Danao
Shope him a name, and called him Lyno
That other brother called was Egiste
That was of love as false as ever him list
And many a daughter got he in his life
Of which he got upon his right wife
A daughter dear, and did her for to call
Hypermestra, youngest of hem all
The which child of her natiuite
To all good thewes borne was she
As lyked to the gods or she was borne
That of the shefe she should be the corn
The werdes that we clepen destyne
Has shapen her, that she must needs be
Pytous, sad, wise, true as stele
And to this woman it accords well
For though yt Venus yaue her great beauty
with Jupiter compowned so was she
That conscience, troth, and dread of shame
And of her wyfehode for to keep her name
This thought her was felicyte as here
And reed Mars, was that time of the year
So feeble, that his malice is him rafte
Repressed has Venus his craft
And what with Venus, and other oppression
Of houses, Mars his venym is a don
That Hypermester dare not handle a knyfe
In malice, though she should lose her life
But nathelesse, as heaven began tho turn
Two badde aspectes, has she of Saturn
That made her to dye in prison
And I shall after make mention
Of Danao and Egystes also
And though so be yt they were brethren two
For thylke time nas spared no lynage
It lyked hem to maken marriage
Betwyxte Hypermestre, and him Lino
And casten such a day it shall be so
And full accorded was it utterly
The array is wrought, the time is fast by
And thus Lyno has of his fathers brother
The doghter wedded, and each of he^ has other
The torches brennen, and the lamps bright
The sacrifyce ben full ready dyght
Thensence out of the fire reketh soote
The flower the leefe, is rent up by the root
To maken garlandes and crowns hye
Full is the place of sound of mynstralcye
Of songs amourous of marriage
As thylke time was the plain usage
And this was in the paleys of Egyste
That i^ his house was lord, right as him list
And thus that day they driven to an end
The friends taken leave, and home they wend
The night is comen, ye bryd shall go to bed
Egyste to his chamber fast him spedde
And pryuely let his daughter call
when yt the house voyded was of hem all
He looks on his daughter with glad chere
And to her spoke, as ye shall after here
My right daughter tresour of mine heart
Sens first yt day, that shape^ was my sherte
Or by the fatal suster had my dome
So nigh mine heart never thing ne come
As thou Hypermestre, daughter dear
Take heed what thy father says the here
And work after the wyser euermo
For alderfyrst daughter I love the so
That all the world to me nys half so lefe
Ne nolde read the to thy myschefe
For all the good under the cold moon
And what I mean, it shall be said right soon
with protestacion, as said these wise
That but thou do, as I shall the deuyse
Thou shall be deed, by him yt al has wrout
At short words thou ne scapest naught
Out of my paleys, or that thou be deed
But thou consent, and work after my reed
Take this to the fearful conclusyon
This Hypermister cast her eyes down
And quoke as does the leefe of aspe grene
Deed wext her hew, and like as asshen to seen
And said: lord and father all your will
After my might, god wot I shall fulfill
So it be to me no confusyon
I nyll (quod he) have none excepcion
And out he caught a knyfe, as rasour kene
Hyde this (quod he) that it be not ysene
And when thine husband is to bed go
while that he slepeth, cut his throat a two
For in my dremes it is warned me
How that my neuewe shall my bane be
But which I not, wherefore I woll be syker
If thou say nay, we two shall have a byker
As I have said, by him that I have sworn
This Hipermister has nigh her wit forlorn
And for to passen harmless out of yt place
She granted hi^, there was none other grace
And wythal a costrel takes he tho
And said, hereof a draught or two
Give him drink, when he goes to rest
As he shall sleep as long as ever the least
The narcottikes and a pies ben so strong
And go thy way, lest yt him think to long
Out comes ye bryd, and with full sobre chere
As is of maidens often the manner
To chamber brought, with revel and with song
And shortly, lest this tale be to long
This Lino and she beth brought to bed
And every wight out at the door him spedde
The night is wasted, and he fell a slept
Full tenderly begins she to weep
She ryst her up, and dredfully she quaketh
As does the brau^che, that zephirus shakes
And hushte were all in Argone that cite
As cold as any frost now wexeth she
For pity by the heart strayned her so
And dread of death does her so much woe
That thryse down she fill, in such a were
She ryste her up, and stakereth here and there
And on her hands fast looks she
Alas, shall mine hands bloody be
I am a maid, and as by my nature
And by my semblaunt, and by my vesture
Mine hands ben not shapen for a knyfe
As for to reave no man fro his life
what dyuell have I with the knyfe to do?
And shall I have my throat corue a two?
Then shall I blede alas, and be shende
And needs this thing mote have an end
Or he or I mote needs lose our life
Now certes (quod she) sens I am his wife
And has my faith, yet is it bette for me
For to be deed, in wisely honest
Then be a traitor, living in my shame
Be as be may, for ernest or for game
He shall awake, and rise and go his way
Out at this gutter, er that it be day
And wept full tenderly upon his face
And in her arms began him to embrace
And him she roggeth, and awaketh soft
And at the wyndowe lepe he fro the lofte
when she has warned him, and don him boot
This Lino swyfte was, and light of foot
And from her ran, a full good paas
This sely woman is so weak, alas
And helpelesse, so that er she far went
Her cruel father did her for to hente
Alas Lyno, why art thou so unkind
why ne haste thou remembered in thy mind
And taken her, and led her forth with the
For when she saw that gone away was he
And that she might not so fast go
Ne folowen him, she sat down right tho
And till she was caught, and fettred in prison
This tale is said for this conclusyon.
Thus end the legendes of good women.
A goodly Balade of Chaucer.
MOther of norture, best be loved of all
And freshest flower, to who^ good thrift god se^de
Your child, if it lust you me so to call
All be I unable my self so to pretend
To your dyscrecion I recomende
Mine heart and all, with every circu^stau^ce
All holy to be under your governance
Most desire I, and have, and ever shall
Thing, which might your herts ease amend
Have me excused, my power is but small
Nathelesse of right ye ought to commend
My good will, which feign would entende
To do you service, for all my suffysaunce
Is holy to be under your governance
Meulx un: in heart, which never shall apall
Aye fresh and new, and right glad to dyspende
My time in your service, what so befall
Besechynge your excellence to defend
My symplenesse, if ignorance offend
In any wise, sith that mine affyaunce
Is holy to ben under your governance
Daysy of light, very ground of comfort
The Suns daughter (ye hight) as I read
For when he westreth, farwell your dysporte
By your nature anon right for pure dread
Of ye rude night, yt with his boystous wede
Of darkness, shadoweth our emyspere
Then closen ye, my lives lady dear
Dawynge the day, to his kind resort
And Phoebus your father, with his stremes read
Adorneth the morrow, consumynge the sort
Of mysty clouds, that wolden ouerlede
True humble hertes, with her mystyhede
Nere comfort a days, when eyes clear
Dysclose and sprede my lives lady dear
Ie vouldray: but great god dysposeth
And makes casuell by his providence
Such thing, as ma^s frele wit purposes
All for the best, if that our conscience
Not grutche it, but in humble patience
It receive, for God says without fable
A faithful heart ever is acceptable
Cautels, who so uses gladly gloseth
To eschew such it is right high prudence
what ye said ones, my heart opposes
That my writing iapes in your absence
Pleased you much better then my presence
Yet can I more, ye be not excusable
A faithful heart ever is acceptable
Quaketh my pen, my spyrit supposes
That in my writing ye find wol some offense
Mine heart welkneth thus sone, anon it rises
Now hot, now cold, and efte in feruence
That mysse is, is caused of negligence
And not of malice, therefore beth mercyable
A faithful heart ever is acceptable.
Lenuoye.
Forth co^playnt, forth lacking eloquence
Forth little lettre of endytynge lame
I have besought my ladies sapience
Of thy behalf, to accept in game
Thine inabilite, do thou the same
Abide, have more yet: Ie serve Iouesse
Now forth, I close the in holy Venus name
The shall unclose my hertes gouerneresse.
FINIS.
Thus ends this balade: And here follows the book of Boecius de consolatione
philosophy.
Boethius de consolatione Philosophy.

The first book of Boecius.
Carmina qui quondam studio florente peregi
Flebilis heu mestos cogor inire modos.

ALas, I weeping am constrained to begin verse of soroufull matter, that whylom
in flourisshynge study made delitable dytees For lo, rendynge muses of poets,
endyten to me things to be written, and drery teeres. At last no dread ne
might overcome tho muses, that they ne weren fellows and folouden my way, that
is to say: when I was exiled, they that weren of my youth whylom weleful and
grene, comforten now soroufull wyerdes of me old man: for elde is comen
unawarely upon me, hasted by ye harms that I have, and sorrow has commanded
his age to be in me. Heeres hoar arne shadde ouertymelyche upon my heed* and
the slack skin trembles of mine empted body. Thylke death of men is weleful,
that ne comes not in years that beswete but comes to wretches often ycleped.
Alas, alas, with how deefe an eere death cruel turns away fro wretches, and
nayeth for to close weeping eyes. While fortune unfaithful favored me with
light goods, the soroufull hour, that is to say, the death, had almost
dreynt mine heed: But now for Fortune cloudy has changed her deceyuable
chere to mewarde, mine vnpytous life draws alonge vnagreable dwellynges. O ye
my friends, what or whereto auaunted ye me to ben welefull? for he that has
fallen, stood in no steadfast degree.

Hec dum mecum tacitus ipse reputarem, queremoniamque lachrimabilem stili
officio designarem: astitisse mihi supra verticem visa est mulier reuerendi
admodum vultus, oculis ardentibus, and vltra communem. etc.
IN the mean while that I still recorded these things with my self, and
marked my wepely complaynt with office of poyntell: I saugh stondynge abouen
the hight of mine heed, a woman of full great reverence by semblaunte: Her eyes
brennynge, and clear seeing over the commen might of men, with a lively color,
and with such vigor and strength, that it ne might not ben nempned, all were
it so that she were full of so great age, that men ne wolden not trowe^ in no
manner that she were of our elde. The stature of her was of doutous judgment,
for sometime she constrained and shronke her seluen like to the commen mesure of
men: And sometime it seemed that she touched the heaven with the height of her
heed. And wha^ she houe her heed hyer, she perced the self heaven, so that the
sight of men lokynge was in ydell: her clothes were maked of right delye
thredes and subtle craft of perdurable matiere. The which clothes she had
wouen with her own hands, as I knew well after by her self declaryng, and
showing to me the beauty: the which clothes a derknesse of a forleten and
dispysed elde had dusked and derked, as it is wont to derke by smoked images.
In ye netherest he^me or bordure of these clothes, men read ywouen therein a
grekishe A. that signifies the life Actyue, and above that letter in the highest
bordoure a grekysshe C. that signyfyeth the life Contemplatyfe. And between
these two letters there were seen degrees nobly wrought in manner of ladders, by
which degrees men might clymben from the netherest lettre to the vpperest:
Nathelesse hands of some men hadden kerue that clothe by violence or by
strength, and euerych man of hem had borne away such pieces as he might geten.
And forsothe this foresaid woman bare small books in her right hand, and in
her lift hand she bare a scepter. And when she saw these poetycall muses
approchyng about my bed, and enditynge words to my wepynges, she was a little
amoued, and glowed with cruel eyes. Who (quod she) has suffered approchen to
this sick man these comen trompettes, of which is the place, that men callen
Theater, the which only ne aswagen not his sorrows with remedies, but they
would feden and nourishe him with sweet venym? Forsothe that been tho that with
thorns and prickynges of tale^tes of affections, which that been nothing
fructuous nor profitable, distroyen the corn plentuous of fruits of reason.
For they holden hertes of men in usage, but they ne deliver no folk fro
maladye. But if the muses had wythdrawen fro me with your flatteryes any an
uncunning and unprofitable man, as ben wont to find comenly among the
people, I would well suffer the less grievously. For why, in such an
unprofitable man, mine ententes were nothing endamaged. But ye wythdrawen fro
me this man, that has been nourysshed in my studyes or schools of Eleaticis
and of Achademicis in Greece. But goth now rather away ye mermaydens, which
that been sweet till it be at the last, and suffers this man to be cured and
heled by my muses, that is to say, by my notefull sciences. And thus this
company of muses yblamed, tasten wrothly the chere downwarde to the earth, and
showing by reednesse her shame, they passed^n soroufully the thressholde. And
I of whom the sight plounged in teeres was derked, so that I ne might not
know, what that woman was of so imperyall auctorite, I woxe all abashed and
stonyed, and cast my sight down to the earth, and began still for to abide
what she would done afterward. Than came she nere and set her down upon the
vtterest corner of my bed, and she beholdynge my chere that was cast to the
earth, heavy and grievous of weeping, co^playned with these words (that I shall
said) the perturbacion of my thought.

Heu quam precipiti mersa profundo,
Men's hebet, and propria luce relicta,
Tendit ad externas ire tenebras:
Terrenis quoties flatibus acta,
Crescit in immensum noxia cura.
Hic quondam celo liber aperto. etc.

ALas, how the thought of this man dreynt in ouerthrowyng depnesse, dulleth and
forletteth his propre clerenesse, mynting to gone in to forayne derkenesse, as
often as his anoyous busynes wexeth without mesure, that is driven with worldely
wyndes. This man that whylom was free, to whom the heaven was open and known,
and was wont to gone in heavenly paths, and saw the lightness of the reed
sun, and beheld the sterres of the cold moon, and which sterre in heaven
uses wandrynge recourses yflytte by diverse spheres. This man ouercomer had
comprehended all this thing by nombre of acomptyng in astronomye. And over
this he was wont to seken the causes, whence ye sownyng wyndes mouen, and
besyen the smothe water of the sea. And what spyrite tourneth the stable heaven.
And why the sterre ryseth out of the reed este, to fallen in the westren wawes.
And what attempreth the lusty hours of the first summer ceason, and hyghteth
and apparayleth the earth with rosy flowers. And who makes the plentuous
Autumpne in full years fleten with heavy grapes. And eke this man was wont to
tell the diverse causes of nature that were hid. Alas how lightly is empted
the light of his thought, and his neck is pressed with heavy cheynes, and
bears his chere enclyned a down for the great weight, and is constrained to
loken on the fool earth.

Sed magis medicine (inquit) tempus est quam querele. Boe. Tu^ vero totis in me
intenta luminibus.


Philo. Tune ille es (a^t) qui nostro quondam lacte nutritus, nostriseducaius
alime^tis, i^ virilis animi robur cuaseras* etc.



But time is now of medicine (quod she) more tha^ complaynte: Forsothe than
she entendyng to me ward with all the lokyng of her eyes said. Ar^e not thou
he (quod she) that whylom I nourished with my milk, and fostred with my metes,
were escaped and comen to the courage of a parfayte man? Certes I yaue the such
armures, that if thou thy self ne had first cast hem away, they shulden
have defended the in sykernesse, that may not be ouercomen. Know thou not
me? why art thou still? is it for shame or for astonyeng? It were me lever it
were for shame, but it seems me that astonyenge has oppressed the. And when
she saw me not only still, but rather without office of tongue and all dombe,
she laid her hand softely upon my breast, and said: Here is no peril (quod
she) he is fallen in to a lytarge, which that is a comune sycknesse to hertes
that been disceyued. He has a little foryeten him self. But certes he shall
lightly remembren him self, if so be that he has known me or now. And that
he may done so, I will wype his eyes a little that be derked by the cloud of
mortal things. These words said she, and with the lap of her garneme^^
yplited in a frou^ce she dried mine eyes that weren full of the wawes of my
wepynges.

Tunc me discussa liquerunt nocte tenebre: Luminibusque prior redit vigor. Vt
cum precipiti glomerantur sidera choro. Nimbosisque polus stetit imbribus. Sol
latet, ac non dum celo venientibus astris. etc.
THus when that night was discussed away, derkenesse for let me, and to mine
eyes repaired again her first strength And right as by ensample, as the son
is hid when the sterres ben couerde with clouds, by a swyfte wind that
hight Chorus, and the firmament stante derked by wete plungy clouds. And that
the sterres not aperen upon the heaven, so that the night seems sprad upon the
earth. If than the wind that hight Boreas, ysent out of the cave of the
country of Trace, beats this night, that is to said, chaseth it away, and
discovers the closed day, than shyneth Phoebus yshaken with sudden light,
and smyteth with his beams in marueylyng eyes.

Haud aliter tristicie nebulis dissolutis, hausi celum, and ad cognoscenda^
medicantis faciem, mentem recepi. Itaque vbi in ea^ deduxi oculos, intuitumque
defixi, respicio nutricem meam, i^ cuius ab adolescentia. etc.
RIght so and no other wise, ye clouds of sorrow dissolved and done away, I
took heaven and received mind to known the face of my phisycien: so that I
set mine eyes upon her and fastened my lokyng. I beheld my norice Philosophy
in whose house I had conuersed fro my youth, and I said thus. O thou
maystresse of al virtues descended from the sovereign sete, why art thou comen
in to this solitary place of mine exile? Art thou comen for thou art made
coulpable with me of false blames? O (quod she) my norice, should I forsake the
now, and should I not parten with the by comen travail ye charge that thou
haste suffered for envy of my name? Certes it were not lefull ne syttyng to
Philosophy to leten without company the way of him yt is innocent: Should I
than redoute my blame, and agrise as though there were befallen a new thing?
For trowest thou that Philosophy be now alder first assailed in peryls by
folk of wicked manner? Have I not stryuen with full great strife in old time
before the age of my Plato, against the foolehardynesse of folly? And eke the
same Plato living, his master Socrates deserved victory of unrightful death
in my presence. The heritage of the which Socrates, the heritage is to said
the doctrine, of the which Socrates in his opinyon of felycite, that I cleape
welefulnesse: when that the people of Epycuriens and Stoiciens, and many other
enforced them to go rauishe, every man for his part, that is to said: that
eueryche of hem would drawn to the defense of his opinyon the words of
Socrates. They as in party of their pray to drawn me cryenge and debatynge
therayenst, and coruen and renten my clothes that I had wouen with mine own
hands. And with tho clothes that they had araced out of my clothes they wenten
away, wenynge that I had gone with hem every dele. In which Epicuryens and
Stoiciens for as much as there seemed some traces and steps of my habyte: The
folly of wenyng tho Epicuryens and Stoiciens my famyliers, perverted some
through the error of the wicked multitude of hem: This is to said for they
seemed Philosophers they were^ pursued to the death and slain. So if thou have
not known the exilynge of Anaxagoras, ne the enpoysonynge of Socrates, ne the
turmentes of zeno, for they weren strangers, yet myghtest thou have known the
Sen^cas, the Canios, and the Soranos: Of which folk the renomme is neither
over old ne vnsolempne. The which men nothing else ne brought to the death,
but only for they were informed of my manners, and semeden most unlike to the
studyes of wicked folk. And for thy thou ought not to wondren, though that
I in the bitter see be driven with tempests blowynge about. In the which this
is my most purpose, that is to sayn to displesen wicked men. Of which shrewes
all be the hooste never so great, it is to dispyse, for it is not governed with
no leader of reason, but it is rauyshed only by fletynge error, fol^ly and
lightly. And if they sometime make an hooste ayenste us, assail us as strenger:
our leder draws together his richesses in to his tour, and they ben
ententyfe about sarpleris or sachelles unprofitable for to taken. But we that been high abouen, syker from all tumulte and wood noise, warnestored and
enclosed in such a paleys, whyther as that claterynge or anoyeng folly may not
attain, we scorn such raueners and henters of foulest things.

Quisquis composito serenus euo,
Factum sub pedibus egit superbum:
Fortunamque tuens vtra^que rectus,
Inuictum potuit tenere vultum. etc.

WHo so it be that clear of virtue, sad, and well ordynate of living, that has
put underfoot the proud wyerdes, and looks vpryght upon either fortune, he
may holden his chere vndyscomfyted. The rages ne the manaces of the sea
commonynge and chasynge unware heat from the bottom, ne shall not move that
man, ne the unstable mountain that hight Vesenus, that writheth out through
his broken chymeneyes smokynge fyres, ne the way of thonder leyte, that is
wont to smyten high toures ne shall not move that man. Whereto than wretches
dread ye tyrauntes, that been wood and felonous with any strength? Hope after
nothing, ne dread thou not: and so shalt thou disarmen the ire of thylke
vnmyghty tyraunte. But who that quakynge dredeth or desires thing that is not
stable of his right, that man that so does has cast away his shilde, and is
removed fro his place, and enlaseth him in the chain, with the which he may
be drawn.

Sentis ne (inquit) hec? atque animo illabuntur tuo? Expers ne es lyre? Quid
fles? Quid lachrimis manas? Si opera^ medicantis expectas, oportet vt vulnus
detegas tuum. etc.
FElyst thou (quod she) these things? and entren they aught in thy courage?
Art thou like an ass to the harp? Why wepest thou? Why spyllest tho teeres?
If thou abydest after help of thy leche, ye behooves discover thy wound. Tho
I had gathered strength in my courage and answerde and said, and needs it (quod
I) of rehersynge or of amonicion, and shows it not enough by him self the
sharpness that wexeth wood against me? Ne moves it not the to se the ^ace or
the manner of this place? Is this the librarye that thou had chosen for a
right certain syege to the in mine house, there as thou dysputest often with me
of the science of things, touching dyuynite and touching mankind? Was than
mine habyte such as it is now? was my face or chere such as is now, when I
sought with the secrets of nature, when thou enformedest my manners and the
reason of all my life, to thensample of the order of heaven? Is not this the
guerdon that I refer to the, to whom I have be obeysaunt? Certes thou
enformedest by the mouth of Plato this sentence, that is to said: that comen
things or comynaltees weren blisfull, if they that had studied all fully to
wisdom gouerneden thylke things: or else if it so befell that the governors
of comynaltees studiden to get wisdom, thou saydest eke by the mouth of the
said Plato, that it was a necessary cause, wise men to taken and desyren the
governance of comen things, for that the gouerneme^tes of cytes yleft in the
hands of felonous tourmentours, cytezeins ne shulden not bryngen in Pestilence
and destruction to good folk. And therefore I following thylke auctours desired
to put forth in execution and in act of comen administracion thylke things,
that I had learned of the among my secret restyng whiles, thou and god that put
in the thoughts of wise folk, ben knowing with me, that nothing ne brought
me to maistrye or dignyte but the comen study of all goodness. And therefore
comes it that between wyked folk and me have been grievous dyscordes, that ne
myghten not be released by prayers: for this lyberte has the fredom of
conscience, that the wrath of more mighty folk has always ben dispysed of
me for sauacyon of right. How often have I resysted and wythstande that man
that hight Canigast, that made always thassaute aienst the prosper fortunes of
poor feoble folk? How often eke have I put of or cast out him Triguyl
provost of the Kings house, both of the wrongs that he had begone to done,
and eke fully performed? How often have I covered and defended by ye
auctorite of me put against peryls, that is to said: put mine auctorite in
peril for the wretched poor folk that the couetyse of strangers unpunished
turmenteden always with miseases and greuau^ces out of nombre? Never man yet
drowe me fro right to wrong. When I saw the fortunes and the rychesses of the
people of the prouynces ben harmed and amenused, either by privy rauynes or by
comen trybutes or cariages, as sorry was I as they that suffreden the harm.
Gloss. When that Theodorike King of Goths in a deed year had his garners full
of corn, and commanded that no man should bye no corn till his corn were
sold, and at a grievous dear price: Boece wythstode that ordinance, and
overcame it, knowing all this the king Theodorike him self. Coempcion is to
say comen achate or byenge together, that were astablysshed upon the people by
such a manner imposycion, as who so bought a busshell of corn, he must yeuen
the King the fyfthe part. Textus. wha^ it was in the sore hongry time, there
was establysshed grievous and unprofitable coempcion, that men seen well it
should greatly turmenten and endomagen all the prouynce of Campayne. I took
strife against the Provost of the pretorie for the comen profit. And the
knowing of it, I overcame it, so that the coempcio^ was not asked ne took
effect.

Paulyne a counsaylour of Rome, the rychesses of the which Paulyne the hounds
of the paleys, that is to say, thoffycers wolden have devoured by hope and
couetyse: yet draw I out of the jaws of hem that gapeden. And for as much as
the pain of the accusacion aiuged beforne ne should not suddenly henten ne
punyshen wrongfully Albyne a cou^saylour of Rome, I put me against the hates and
indignacions of the accusour Ciprian. Is it not than enough sens that I have
purchased great discordes against my self? But I ought be more assured against
other folk, that for the love of ryghtwysnesse I never reserved nothing to my
self to hem ward of the Kings hall, by which I were the more syker. But
through tho same accusours accusynge I am condemned. Of the nombre of which
accusours one Basilius yt whylom was chased out of ye kings service is now
compelled in accusynge of my name for need of forayne money. Also Opilion and
Gaudencius have accused me: Albe it so that the justice regal had whylom demed
them both to gone in to exyle for her trecheryes and frauds without nombre.
To which judgment they nolden not obey, but defended hem by the sykernesse of
holy houses, that is to said, stedden in to seyntwary: And than when this was
apperceyued by the king, he commanded but if they voyded the cite of Rauenne
by certain day assigned, that men should marke^ hem on ye forheed with an
hot iron, and chasen hem out of the town. Now what thing seems might be
lykened to this cruelte, for certes this same day was received the accusyng of
my name by thylke same accusours? what may be said hereto? Has my study and
my conning deserved thus, or else the foresaid dampnacion of me made them
ryghtfull accusours or no? Was not I had greythed death to al good men, algates
fortune a shamed of this? Certes all had not fortune ben asshamed ye innocence
was accused, yet ought she have had shame of ye fylthe of mine accusours. But
ask thou in some of what gylte I am accused. Men said that I would sauen the
company of the senators. And desyrest thou to heren in what manner I am
accused, that I should have distourbed the accusoure to bearen letters, by
which he should have made the senators gyltye against the kings royal
mayeste? O maystresse, what demest thou of this? shall I forsake this blame,
that I ne be no shame to the? Certes I have would it (that is to say) the
sauacion of the senate, ne I shall never let to wylne it, and that I confess
and am a know, but thentente of the accusoure to ben distourbed shall cease.
Shall I cleape that a felonye or a sin that I have desired the sauacyon of
the order of the senate? And certes had thylke same senate done through her
decretes and her iugeme^tes as though it were a sin and a felonye, that is to
wylne the sauacyon of them. But folly that lies always to him self, may not
change the merit of things, ne I trow not by the judgment of Socrates that
it were lefull to me to hyde the sothe, ne assente to leasynges: but certes
how so ever it be of this, I put it to gessen or prysen of the judgment of the
and of wise folk, of which thing all the ordinance and the sothe (for as
much as folk that been to comen after our days shall known it) I have put
it in scripture and in remembrance. For touching the letters falsely made, by
which letters I am accused to have hoped the fredome of Rome, what apertayneth
me to speken thereof. Of which letters the fraud had been showed apertely, if I
had had lybertye for to have used and ben at confession of mine accusours, the
which thing in all needs has great strength. For what other fredom may men
hopen? Certes I would that some other fredome might be hoped, I would than have
answerde by the words of a man that hight Camus: for when he was accused of
Canyus, Caesar Germans son, that he was knowing and consenting of a
coniuracion ymade against him. This Canyus answerde thus: if I had wyste it,
thou had not wyste it. In which thing sorrow has not so dulled my wit,
that I plain only that shreude folk apparaylen felonyes against virtue, but
I wonder greatly how that they may perform things that they have hoped for
to done, for why ne will ne shreudenesse that comes perauenture of our
defaute. But it is like a monstre and a marvel how that in the present
sight of god, may ben acheued and performed such things, as every felonous
manne has conceived in his thought against innocents. For which thing one of
thy famylyers not vnskylfully asked thus. If god is: whence comen wicked
things But all had it ben lefull that felonous folk, that now desyren the
blood and the death of al good men, and eke of the Senate, have wylned to gone
distroyen me, whom they have seen always batayllen and defenden good men, and
eke all the senate, that had not deserved of the fathers (that is to said of
the senators) that they shulden will my destruction. Thou remembrest well as I
guess that when I would done or said any thing thou thy self always present
ruledest me. At the city of Verone when that the king gredy of comen
slaughter, cast him to transporten upon all the order of the senate the gylte
of his royal mayestye, of the which gylte that Albyne was accused, with how
great sykernesse of peril to me, defended I all the senate? Thou wottest well
that I say sothe, ne I ne auaunted me never in praysynge of my self. For
always when any wight receives precious renome in auauntynge of him self or
his works, he amennseth the secree of his conscience. But now thou may
well seen to what end I am comen for mine innocencye, I receive pain of false
felonye, for gwerdone of very virtue. And what open confession of felonye had
ever judges so accordaunte in cruelte, that is to said, as mine accusynge
has, that either error of man's wit, or else condicyon of fortune, that is
uncertain to all mortal folk ne submytted some of hem, that is to say, yt it
ne enclyned some judge to have pity or co^passyon. For all though I had been
accused that I would brenne holy houses, and stra^gle priests with wicked
sword, or that I had greythed death to al good me^, algates the sentence should
have punished me present confessed and convict. But now I am removed from the
cite of Rome almost. V.C.M. paas, I am without defense dampened to proscrepcion
and to death, for the studyes and bountyes that I have done to the Senate.
But o well been they worthy of merit, as who says: nay there might yet never
non of hem be conuicte of such a blame as mine is. Of which trespace mine
accusours seen full well the dignite, for they would derken it with medlyng of
some felonye. They baren me on hand and said, that I had polute and defouled
my conscience with sacrilege for couetyse of dignity: and certes thou thy
self that art planted in me, chacedest out of the siege of my courage al
couetise of mortal things, ne sacrilege ne had no leave to have a place in me
before thine eyes. For thou droppedest every day in mine ears and in my
thought thylke commandment of Pythagoras, that is to say: Men shall seruen
to God, and not to gods. Ne it was not convenient ne none need to taken help
of the foulest spirits, I that thou have ordeigned and set in such
excellence that thou made me like to God, and over this the right clean
secret chamber of mine house, that is to say my wife, and the company of mine
honest friends, and my wives father, as well holy as worthy to be reuerensed
for his deeds, defenden me from al suspection of such blame. But oh malice. For
they that accusen me taken of the philosophy feyth of so great blame for they
trowen that I have had affynite to malefyce or enchauntement, because that I am
replenyshed and fulfilled with thy teachynges and informed of thy manners. And
thus it suffyceth not only yt thy reverence ne aueyle me naught, but if thou
of thy frewyll rather be blemyshed with mine offencion. But certes to the
harms that I have, there betydethe yet this increase of harm, that the
gessynge and the judgment of much folk ne loke^ no thing to the deserts of
things, but only to the aue^ture of fortune, and iudgen that only such
things been purueyed of God, which that temporal wylfulnesse commands.
Glosa. As thus, that if a wight have prosperity, he is a good man and worthy to
have that prosperyte, and who so has aduersite, he is a wicked man, and God
has forsake him, and he is worthy to have that aduersyte. This is the opinion
of some folk, and thereof comes that good gessyng first of all thing
forsaked wretches. Certes it greueth me to think right now in diverse
sentences that the people says of me: And thus much I say, yt the last charge
of contraryous fortune is this, that when any blame is laid upon a catyfe,
men wenen that he has deserved that he suffrethe And I that am put away from
good men, and dispoyled of dignites, and defouled of my name by gessynge have
suffered turmentes for my good deeds. Certes me seems yt I se the felonous
couynes of wicked me^ habou^den in joy and in gladness: and I se that every
lorel shapeth him to find new frauds for to accuse good folk and I se yt
good folk be overthrown for dread of my peril, and every luxurious
turme^tour dare done al felonye unpunished, and be excited thereto by yeftes,
and innocents be not only dispoyled of sykernesse, but of defense. And thereto
me list to crien to god in this manner.

O stelliferi conditor orbis, qui perpetuo nixus solio, rapido celum turbine
versas, legemque pati sydera cogis, vt nu^c pleno lucida cornu. Totis fratris
obuia flammis condat stellas luna minores: Nu^c obscuro pallida cornu Phebo
proprior lumina pardat. etc.
THou maker of ye whele that bears the sterres, which that art fastened to
thy perdurable chair, and turneste the heaven with a rauyshing sweyghe, and
constrayneste the sterres to suffer thy law: so that you moan sometime shynyng
with her full horns metynge with all the beams of thy sun her brother,
hydeth the sterres yt been less. And sometime wha^ the moon pale, with her
derke horns approaches the su^ne leseth her lyghtes: and yt the even sterre
Hesperus, which that in the first time of the night brings first her cold
arysynge, comes eft again her used course, and is pale by the morrow at rysynge
of the sun, and than yclyped Lucifer. Thou restrayneste the day by shorter
dwelling in the time of the could winter that makes the leaves fall. Thou
deuydest the swyft tides of the night, when the hot summer is comen. Thy
might attempreth the variaunte seasons of the year, so that zephirus the
debonayre wynd brings again in ye first so^mer season the leaves yt the wind
that hight Boreas, has refte away in Antumpne, that is to say, the last end
of summer, and the seeds yt the sterre that hyghte Arcitures sewe, bewoxen
high corns, wha^ the sterre Sirius enchafeth hem. There is nothing vnbounden
from this old law, ne forletteth the work of his propre estate. O thou
governor, gouernynge al things by certain end, why refusest thou only to
govern the works of men by dew manner: why suffrest thou, that slyding
fortune tourneth so great enterchaunges of things, so that anoyous pain that
should duly punish felons, punysheth innocents: And folk of wicked manners
sytten in high chayres, and annoyeng folk treden (and ye vnryghtfully) on the
necks of holy me^. And virtue clear and shynyng naturelly, is hyde in derke
derkenesses and the rightful man bears the pain and the blame of the felons.
Ne the forsweryng, ne the fraud couerde and kempt with a false color, ne
annoyeth not to shreudenesse, the which shreudnesse, when hem list vsen her
strength, they reioysen hem to put under hem the sovereign kings, which that
the people without nombre dreden. O thou what so ever thou be that knytteste
all bonds of things, look on these wretches, erthes, we men that been not a
foul part, but a fair part of so great a work: we been tourmented in this
see of fortune. Thou gouernoure, wythdrawe and restreyne the rauyshing flodes,
and fasten and ferme these erths stable with thylke bond, with which thou
gouernest heaven that is so large.

Hec vbi co^tinuato dolor delatraui: illa vultu placido, nihilque meis questu
b^s mota. Phi. Cum te (inquit) me^^m, lacrimantemque vidissem: illico miserum
exulemque cognoui. Sed quam id longinquum esset exilium. etc.
When I had with a continual sorrow sobbed or broken out these things, she
with her chere pesible, and nothing amoued with my complayntes said thus.
when I say the (quod she) soroufull and weeping, I wyste anon that thou were
a wretch and exiled: But I wyste never how far thine exyle was, if thy tale
ne had yshewed it me. But certes al be thou far fro thy country, thou narte
not put out of it, but thou haste failed of thy way and gone amysse. And if
thou haste lever for to wene that thou be put out of thy country, than haste
thou put out thy self, rather than any other wyghte has, for no wyghte (but
thou thy self) ne might never have done that to the: For if thou remember the
of what country thou art borne, it nys not governed by Emperors ne by
government of multitude, as weren the countries of hem of Athenes, but one
Lord and one king, and that is God, that is Lord of thy country, which that
reioyseth him of the dwelling of his cytezeyns and not for to put hem in
exyle. Of the which Lord it is a fredome to be governed by the bridle of him
and obey to his justice. Haste thou forgotten thylke old law of thy city, in
the which city it is ordained and establyshed, that what wyghte has lever
found therein his seat, or his house than else where, he may not be exiled by
no right from that place? For who so that is contained within the paleys of
thylke city, there is no dread that he may deserve to be exiled. But who so
lets the will tenhabyte there he forletteth also to deserve to be a Citezeyn
of thylke City. So that I say, that the face of this place ne mouethe me not
so mykell, as thine own face. Ne I ne ask not rather the walls of thy
lybrarye, apparayled and wrought with yuore and with glass, than after the
seat of thy thought, in which I put not whylome books, but I put that, that
makes books worthy of price or precious: that is to say sentence of my
books. And certainly of thy deserts bestowed in comen goods, thou haste said
sothe: but after the multitude of thy good deeds thou have said few. And of
the honesty or of the falsenesse of things yt been opposed against the, thou
haste remembered th^nges that be known to al folk. And of the felonyes and
frauds of thine accusours, it seems the to have touched it forsooth ryghtfully
and shortly al myghten tho same things vetter and more plentuously been couth
in the mouth of the people that knows all this. Thou have eke blamed greatly
and complained of the wrong full deed of the Senate. And thou have sorowed for
my blame and thou have wopen for the damage of thy renoune that is apeyred: and
thy last sorrow enchased again fortune, complaynest the guerdons be not eue^ly
yolden to the deserts of folk. And in thy latter end of thy wood muse, thou
praydeste that thylke peace that governs the heaven should govern the earth.
But for that many tribulacions of affections have assailed the and sorrow and
ire and weeping to drawn the diversely, as you art now feoble of thought myghtyer
remedies ne shullen not yet touchen the, for which we wyllen somdele vsen
lyghter medicynes, so that thylke passions that been waxen hard in swellynge
by perturbations flowyng in to thy thought, mowen wax easy and soft to receive
the strength of a more mighty and more egre medicyne by an easyer touching.

Cum Phebi radiis grave cancri sidus mestuat, tum qui largo negantibus, suleis
semina credidit, elusus Cereris fide, quarnas pergat ad arbores Nunquam
purpureu^ nemus lecturus violas petas. etc.
WHa^ that the heavy sterre of the Cancre enchaseth by ye beams of Phoebus: that
is to said, when that Phoebus the son is in the sign of the Cancre, who so
yeueth than largelye his seeds to ye feldes that refusen to receive hem, let
him gone begyled of trust that he had to his corn, to akehornes of oaks. If
thou will gather violettes, ne go thou not to the purple wodde, when the field
chyrkynge agriseth of cold, by the felnesse of the wind that hight Aquilone.
If thou desyrest or will vsen grapes, ne seek thou not a gloutons hand to
strain and press the stalks of the vine in the first summer ceason. For
Baccus the God of wine, has rather yeue^ his yeftes to Autumpne the later
end of summer. God tokeneth and assigns the times ablyng hem to her proper
offices, ne he suffers not the stou^des, which that him self has divided
and constrained to been ymedled together: and for thy he that forletteth
certain ordinance of doing by overthrowing way, he has no glad issue or end
of his works.

Primum igitur, pateris ne me pauculis rogationibus statum tue me^tis
attingere, atque te^tare? vt quis modus sit tue curacionis intelligam. etc.
FIrst would thou suffer me to touch and assay the estate of thy thought by a
few demaundes, so that I may understand by, the manner of thy curacio^? Ask me
(quod I) at thy will, that thou wolte, and I shall answer. Tho said she thus:
whether weneste thou (quod she) that this world be governed folyshly by happes
and fortunes, or else wenest thou that there be in it any government of reason?

B. Certes (quod I) I ne trow not in no manner that so certain things should
be moved by fortunous fortune, but I wot well that God, maker and maysteris
governor of his work, ne was never yet day that might put out of the
sothnesse of that setence.


P. So is it (quod she) for the same thing sange thou a little here beforne,
and bewayledst and weptest, that only men were put out of the cure of God,
for all other things thou ne douteste not, that they nere governed by reason.
But ough, I wonder certes greatly why yt thou art sick, sens that thou art
put in so wholesome a sentence: But let us seken deper. I coniecte that there
lacks I not what. But say me this. Sens that thou ne douteste not that this
world be governed by God, with which gouernayle takeste thou head yt it is
governed? Uneath (quod I) know I the sentence of thy questyon, so that I ne
may not yet answeren to thy demau^des. I was not disceiued (quod she) that
there ne failed somewhat, by which the malady of perturbacion is crepte in to
thy thought, so as the strength of thy paleis shynyng is open: but say me this.
Remembrest thou what is the end of things? and whyder thentencion of all kind
te^deth? I have herd told it sometime (quod I) But drerynesse has dulled my
memory. Certes (quod she) thou wotest well whence al things be comen and
proceden. I wot well (quod I) and answered, that god is beginnynge of al. And
how may this be (quod she) that sens thou knoweste the beginning of things,
that thou ne know not what is the end of things, but such ben the
customs of perturbation, and this power they hanne that they may move a man
from his place, that is to say, from the stablenesse and perfection of his
knowing, but certes they may not all arace him, ne alien him in all: but I
would that thou woldeste answer to this. Remembrest thou that thou art a man?


B. why should I not remember that (quod I)


Phi. May thou not tell me tha^ (quod she) what thing is a man? Ask thou
not me (quod I) whether yt I be a reasonable mortal beast, I wot well and
confess that I am it. wist thou never yet yt thou were any other thing (quod
she)? No (quod I). Now well know I (quod she) other cause of thy malady, and
that right great: Thou have left for to known thy self what thou art, through
which I have plainly founden the cause of thy maladye, or else the enter of
recouerynge of thy heal. For why? For thou art confounded with foryetynge of
thy self: For thou soroudeste that thou art exiled of thy propre goods. And
you ne wyste what is the end of things, for thy demeste thou that felonous and
wicked me^, be mighty and welful: and for thou haste foryeten by which
gouernementes the world is governed, for thy wenest thou that these mutacions
of fortune fleten without governor. These ben the causes not only to maladye,
but certes great causes to death: But I thank the auctour and the maker of
heal, that nature has not al forleten the. I have great nouryshing of thine
heal, and that is the soth sentence of governance of the world, that thou
byleuest that the gouernyng of it is not subject ne vnderput to the folly of
these happes aue^turous but to the reasonne of god, and therefore dout the
nothing, for of this little spark thine heat of life shall shine. But for as
much as it is not time yet of faster remedies and the nature is of thoughts
thus disceyued, that as often as they cast away soth opinions, they clothen hem
in false opinions. Of the which false opinions the darkness of perturbacion
wexeth up, that co^foundeth the very insyght. And that derkenesse shall I
somewhat assaye to make^ thynne and weak by light and meanelyche remedies, so
that after that the darkness of disceyuyng things be done away, thou may
know the shynyng of very light.


Nubibus atris co^dita nullum fundere possunt sydera lumen. Si mare voluens
turbidus auster misceat estu^ Vitrea dudum, parque serenis. etc.
THe sterres covered with black clouds ne mow yeten adoun no light, if the
trouble wind that hight Auster, turning and walowyng the sea medleth the
heat, that is to said the boylynge up from the bottom. The wawes that were
whylom clear as glass, and like to the fair bright days, withstant anon the
syghtes of men, by the filth and ordure that is resolved. And the fleting
streme that reyleth down diversely from high mountaygnes is arrested and
resisted often time by thencou^tryng of a stone, that is departed and fallen from
some rock And for thy, if thou wylt loken and deem sothe with clear light, and
holden the way with a right path, weyue thou joy, drive fro dread fleme thou
hope, ne let no sorrow approach, that is to said: Let none of these four
passions overcome or blende the. For cloudye and dark is thylke thought and
bound with brydels, where as these things reignen.

Explicit liber primus.
POst hec paulisper obticuit, atque vbi attentionem meam modesta taciturnitate
collegit, sic exorsa est. Si penitus egritudinis tuc causas, habitumque. etc.
The second book of Boecius.
AFter this she stynte alytell, and after that she had gadered by a temper
stylnesse mine atte^tion, as who so might said thus. After these things she
stynt a little, and she aperceyued by a temper stylnesse, that I was ententyfe
to heren her, she began to speak in this wise. If I (quod she) have
understood and known utterly, the causes and the habit of thy malady, thou
languyshest and art defected for desire and talent of thy rathar fortune. She
that ylke fortune only that is changed as thou faynest to the ward, has
perverted the clerenesse and the estate of thy courage. I understand the feel
or manyfolde colors and disceytes of thylke merueylous monstre fortune, and
she uses full flateryng familiaryte with hem that she enforces to begyle, so
long, till that she confound with insufferable sorrow, hem that she has left
in despair unpurveyed. And if thou remembrest well the kind, the manners, and
the deserte of thylke fortune, thou shall well know that as in her thou never
ne had, ne have ylost any fair thing: But (as I trow) I shall not greatly
trauaylen to done the reme^bren on these things. For thou were wont to
hurtelen and dispysen her with many words, when she was blandyshynge and
present, and pursudeste her with sentences that weren drawn out of mine
enter, that is to say, of mine enformacyon: but no sudden mutation ne betydeth
not without a manner chau^gyng of corages. And so it is befall, that thou art a
lytyl departed fro the peace of thy thought, but now is time that thou drink
and ataste some soft and delytable things so yt when they be entered within
the, it mowen make way to strenger drynkes of medictus. Come now forth
therefore the suasion of swetnesse rethoryen, which that goth only the right
way, while she forsakethe not mine estatutes. And with Rethoryke come forth
musyke a damosel of our house, that syngeth now lyghter modes or prolacions
and now heuyer. What ayleth the man* what is it that has cast the into
murnyng and in to weeping? I trow that thou haste seen some new thing and
uncouth? Thou wenest that fortune be changed again me* but thou weneste wrong
if that thou wene always tho ben her manners. She has rather kept as to the
ward, her proper stablenesse in the chaungynge of her self: right such was
she flatterde the and dysceyued the, with unlawful lykynges and false
welefulnesse. Thou haste now known and atteynte the doubtous or double vysage
of thylke blind goddess fortune. She that yet couerethe and wymplethe her to
other folk, has showed her self every deal to the: If thou apporuest her
and think that she is good, use her manners and plain the not, and thou
agryfeste her false trechexye, dispyse and cast away her that plays so
harmefullye, for she that is now cause of so much sorrow to the, should be to
the cause of peace and of joy. She has forsaken the forsothe, the which that
never man may be syker that she ne shall forsaken him. Gloss. But nathlesse
some books have the text thus Forfoth she has forsaken the, ne there nys no
man syker that she ne has not forsaken. Holdeste thou than thylke
welefulnesse precious to the that shall passen, and is present dear worth to
the, which that nys not fayethfull for to dwell, and when she gothe away that
she brings a wight in sorrow. For sens she may not be with holden at a man's
will, she makethe him a wretch when she depertethe fro him. what other thing
is styttyng fortune, but a manner showing of wretchenesse that is to come. Ne
it suffices not only to loken on thing that is present before the eyes of a
man, but wisdom looks and measures the end of things, and the same
chaungynge from one to another, that is to said, from aduersyte in to
prosperyte, makethe that the manaces of fortune ne been not for to dreden, ne
the flateryng to be desired. Thus at the last it behouethe the to suffren with
even will in patience, all that is done within the flower of fortune, that is to
say in this world, sith thou have ones put thy neck under ye yoke of her. For
if thou wolt written a law of wending and of dwelling to fortune, which that
thou haste chosen freely to been thy lady: Art thou not wrongful in that, and
makeste fortune wroth and asper by thine impacience, and yet thou may not
chaungen her?

If thou co^myttest and be takeste thy sails to the wind, thou shalt be
shouen, not thither that thou woldeste, but whyder that the wind shoueth the.
If thou casteste thy seeds in the feldes, thou shouldeste have in mind yt the
ears ben among otherwhile plenteous, and otherwhile bareyn. Thou have
betaken thy self to the governance of fortune, and for thy it behooves the to
ben abeysaunt to the manners of thy lady. Enforceste thou the to aresten or with
holde^ the swyftnesse and the sweygh of her turning whele? O thou fool of all
mortal fools, if fortune began to dwell stable, she cessed than to ben
fortune.

Hec cum superba verterit vices dextra, exestuantis more fertur Euripi. Dudu^
tremendos se^a proterit reges humilemque victi subleuat fallax vultu^. No^ illa
dura mesiros audit, haud curat fletus. etc.
WHa^ Fortune with a proud right hand with turned her changing stoundes, she
fares like the manners of the boylynge Eurype.

Glosa Euripe is an arm of the sea, ye ebbeth and sloweth, and sometime the
streme is on o side and sometime on that other

Text. She crewel fortune casts adoun kings that whylom weeren ydrad, and
she disceiuable enhaunceth up the humble cheer of him that is discomfyted, ne
she nether hereth ne recketh of wretched wepynges. And she is so hard, that
she laugheth and scorneth the weeping of hem, the which she has maked to weep
with her frewil. Thus she plays and thus she proves her stre^gthes, and
shows a great wonder to al her servants if that a wyghte is seen welefull,
and overthrow in an hour.

Vellem autem pauca tecum Fortune ipsius verbis agitare. Tu igitur an ius
postulet animaduerte. P. Quid tu o homo ream me agis quotidianis querelis. etc.
CErtes I would pleden with the a few things, vsyng the words of fortune:
take heed now thy self, if that she ask right.

O thou man, wherefore makeste thou me gyltye by thine every days playnynges?
what wrong have I done the? what goods have I beraft the yt were thine?
Strive or pleate with me before what judge that you wylt, of the possession, of
rychesses, or of dignites, and if thou may shown me, that ever any mortal
man has received any of tho things to been his in proper, than will I
grant freely, that thylke things were thyn which that thou ask. when that
nature brought the forth out of thy mothers womb I received the naked and
nedye of all things, and I nourished the with all my rychesses, and was redye
and ententyfe through my favor to sustain the: and that makes the now
impacient against me. And I enuyronned the with all habondaunce and shynyng of
al goods, that been in my right now it lyketh me to wythdrawe mine hand Thou
have had grace as he that has used forayne goods. Thou haste no right to
plain the, as though thou haddeste utterly forlorn, al thy things. why
playneste thou tha^? I have done the no wrong. Richesses, honors, and such
other things ben of my right. My servants known me for her lady: they come
with me, and departed when I wend. I dare well afferme hardely, yt if tho
things, of which thou playneste that thou have forlorn had been thine, thou
ne had not lorn hem. Shall I tha^ be defended only to use my right? Certes
it is leful to ye heaven to make clear days and after that to overcome tho same
days with derke nyghtes. The year has eke leave to apparayle the vysage of ye
earth, now with flowers, and now with fruit and to co^founde hem sometime with
raynes and with cold. The sea has eke his right to been sometime calm and
blandyshynge, with smoth water and sometime to be horrible with wawes and with
tempests. But couetyse of men, that may not be staunched shall it bind me to
be steadfast, sythen that steadfastness is uncouth to my manners? Such is my
strength, and such play I play comenly. I turn the whirlyng whele with the
tournyng cerkle. I am glad to chaungen the loweste to the highest, and the highest
to the lowest. worth up if thou wolte, so it be by this law, that thou ne
hold not that I do the wrong, though thou discende adowne when the reasonne
of my play asks it. wist thou not how Cresus king of Lidiens of which king
Cyrus was full sore aghast a little beforene that this Cresus was caught of Cyrus,
and led to the fire to be brent, but that a rain descended from heaven that
rescowed him? And is out of mind how that Paulus consul of Rome, when he had
taken the king of Perciens, weped pytously for the captivity of the self
king? what other thing bewaylen the cryinge of tragedyes, but only the deeds
of fortune, that with an aukewarde stroke ouertourneth the realms of great
nobley. Gloss. Tragedye is to said, a ditee of a prosperity for a time that
ends in wretchedness. Learned not thou in Greece when thou were young, that
in the entry or in the seller of Jupiter, there ben couched two tonnes, that
one is full of good, that other is full of harm?

what right haste thou to plain, if thou have taken more ple^teously of the
good side that is to said, of richesse and prosperity? And what eke if I be
not al departed from the? what eke if thy mutable yeueth ye right full cause of
hope to have yet better things Nathelesse, dismaye the not in thy thought And
thou that art put in the common realm of all, ne desire not to lyuen by thine
own propre right.

Si qua^tas rapidis flatibus incitus Pontus versat arenas: Aut quot stelliferis
edita noctibus celo sydera fulgent: Tantas fundat opes, nec retrahat manum
pleno copia cornu: Humanum miseras had ideo genus Cesset slere querelas. etce
Though plentye goddess of richesse hylde a down with a full horn, and
withdraw not her hand, as many richesse as the sea turns upward sands,
when it is moved with rauyshyng blastes, or else as many rychesses as there
shynen bright sterres in the heaven on the sterry nyghtes: yet for all ye
mankind would not cesse to weep wretched playntes. And al be it so, that god
received her prayers, and yeueth hem as fool large much gold, and
apparayleth coueytous folk with noble or clear honors: yet seems him have
gotten nothing. But always cruel rauyne deuouryng all that they have gotten
shows other gapynges, that is to say, gapen and desyren yet after more
rychesses. what brydles might witholden to any certain end the disordinate
couetyse of men, when ever the rather that it flees in large yeftes, the more
brenneth in hem the lust of having? Certes he that quakyng and dreadful weneth
him self nedy, he ne lives neuermore rich.

His igitur, si pro se tecu^, verbis for tuna loqueretur, quod profecto co^tra
hisceres, non haberes. At si quid est, quo querelam tuam iure tuearis, proferas
oportet. etc.
Therefore if that fortune spoke with the for her self in this manner, for sothe
thou ne haddeste not what thou myghtest answer. And if thou have any thing,
wherewith thou may ryghtfully defenden thy co^playnte, it behooves the to
shown: and I wol yeuen to ye space to tellen it.

Boece. Certainly (quod I) than, these ben fair things, and anointed with honey
swetnesse of rethoryke and musycke, and only while they be heard and sown in
ears, they ben delicious. But to wretches it is a deper felyng of harm, this
is to said, that wretches felen the harm, that they suffer more grievously,
than the remedies or ye delytes of these words may gladden or comfort hem. So
that when these things stinten for to sown in ears, ye sorrow that is in set
greueth the thought.


P. Right so it does (quod she) For these ne ben yet no remedies of the
maladye, but they been a manner norysshyng of thy sorrows, that rebel against
thy curacion. For when time is I shall move and aiust such things that percen
hem full deep But nathelesse that thou shall not wylne to leeten thy self a
wretch. Haste thou foryeten the nombre and the manner of thy welfulnesse? I
speak not how yt the sovereign men of the city took the in cure, and keeping
when thou were orphesyn of father and of mother, and were chosen in affinity
or princes of the city. And thou began rather to belefe and dear, tha^ for to
be a neighbor, the which thing is the most precious kind of any propinquite
or alyaunce that may be^ who is it that ne said tho that thou ne were right
welefull, with so great nobley as thy fathers in law, and with the chastity of
thy wife, and with thoportunitie and noblesse of thy masculyne children, that
is to said, thy sons. And over all this (me list to passen of come^ things)
how thou had in thy youth dignityes, that were warned to old men, but it
deliteth me now to comen to the synguler vpheapyng of thy welefulnesse. If any
fruit of mortal things may have any wight or price of welefulnesse, myghtest
thou ever foryeten for any charge of harm that might befall, the remembrance
of thylke day, that thou saw thy two sons made counsaylours, and lad
together from thy house, under so great assemble of senators, and under the
blythenesse of the people* and when thou saw hem set in the court in hye
chayres of dignities. Thou rethorien or pronouncer of kings praysynges
deseruedst glory of wit and of eloquence when thou sitting between thy two
sons counsaylours, in the place that hyghte Cyrco, and fulfylleddest the
byddyng of the multitude of people that was sprad about the with so large
praysynge and laud, as men sing in vyctoryes. Tho yaue thou to fortune as I
trow, that is to say, tho feodest thou fortune with glorious, and
deceyueddest her, when she acoyed and norysshed the as her own delyces. Thou
bare away of fortune a yeft, that is to say, such guerdon that she never
yafe to private man will thou therefore lay a reckoning with fortune? She has
now first twinked upon the with a wicked eye. If thou consydre the nombre and
the manner of thy blysses and of thy sorrows, thou may not forsaken that
narte yet blysfull. For if therefore thou wenest thy self not welefull, for
thou things that semeden joyful been passed, there nys not why you should
seem thy self a wretch, for things that seem now sorry, passed also Art thou
now comen a sudden geste into the shadow or tabernacle of this life? or
trowest thou that any steadfastness be in man's things? when often a swyft hour
dissolueth the same man, that is to say, when the soul departed from the body.
For although that selde is there any faith that fortunous things would
dwellen, yet nathelesse, the last day of man's life is a manner death to fortune
and also to thilke that has dwelt. And therefore what wenest thou darre recke,
if thou forlette her in dyinge, or else that she fortune forlette in flyinge
away.


Cum polo phoebus roseis quadrigis Lucem spergere ceperit: Pallet albentes
hebetata vultus Flaminis stella prementibus. etc.
When Phoebus the sun begins to spread his clerenesse with rosen charyottes,
than the sterre dymmed paleth her white cheres by the flambes of the sun,
that overcomes the sterre light, that is to said, when the sun is risen,
the day sterre wexeth pale, and leseth her light: For the great lyghtnesse of
the sun, when the wodde wexeth rodye of rosen flowers in the first somer
season, through the breath of the wind zepherus that wexerh warm, if the
cloudye wind Auster blow fellyche, than goth away fayrenesse of thorns.
Often the sea is clear and calm with mouynge floudes, and often the horrible
wind Aquilon moves boylynge tempests, and ouerwhelueth the sea. If the
form of this world is so selde stable, and if it turns by so many
entrechaunges: will thou than trusten in the tomblynge fortunes of men? wylt
thou trowen on flyttyng goods? It is certain and establysshed by law
perdurable, that nothing that is engendered is steadfast, ne stable.

Tum ego, vera inquam, co^memoras o virtutum omnium nutrix: nec inficiari
possum prosperitatis mec velissimum cursum. Sed hoc est quid. etc.
THan said I thus: O norice of al virtues, thou say full soth ne I may not
forsake ye right swift course of my prosperity that is to said, that the
prosperitye, ne be comen to me wondre swyftlye and soon

But this is a thing that greatly smerteth me, when it reme^breth me. For in
all aduersites of fortune the most vnsely kind of contraryous fortune is to
have been weleful.

P. But that thou abyest thus (quod she) ye turment of thy false opinion, yt
may thou not rightfully blamen ne aretten to things, as who says, that thou
have yet many haboudaunces of things. Textus. For all be it so that the idle
name of aue^turous welfulnesse moves yt now it is leful that thou reken with
me of how many things thou have yet ple^tie. And therefore if that thylke
thing that thou had for more precious in all thy richesse of fortune be
kept to the yet by the grace of god vnwe^med and vndefouled may thou than
plain ryghtfully upon the myschefe of fortune, sythe^ thou have yet thy best
things? Certes yet lives in good point thilke precious honor of mankind.
Symachus thy wives father, which that is a man made of all sapience, and
virtue, the which man thou would bye with yt price of thine own life, he
bewayleth the wro^ges that men done to the, and not for him self. For he
lives in sykernesse of any sentence put ayenste him. And yet lives thy wife,
that is attempre of wit, and passing other women in clennesse of chastity.
And for I would closen shortelye her bountyes, she is like her father: I tell
the, that she lives loath of this life, and keeps to the only her ghost, and is
al mate and ouercomen by weeping and sorrow for desire of the. In the which
thing only I mot grau^ten the, that thy will fullness is amenused.

what shall I said eke of thy two sons counsailours, of which as of children
of her age there shyneth the likeness of the wit of her father and of her
elde father? And sythen the sovereign cure of all mortal folk is to sauen her
own lives, if thou know thy self, thy goods make the more welful for yet
been there things dwelled to the ward, that noman douteth that they ne be^
more dereworth to the tha^ thine own life.

And for thy, dry thy teeres, for yet is not every fortune hateful to
thewarde, ne over great tempest, ne has not yet fallen upon the when thine
ancres cleuen fast: that neither wol suffren the comfort of this time present,
ne the hope of time coming to passen, ne to faylen.


B. And I pray (quod I) that fast mote they holden: for the whiles that they
holden, howsoever that things ben, I shall well fleten forth and escape^. But
thou may well seen how great apparayles, and array, that me lacks that be
passed away from me.


P. I have somewhat auaunced and farthered the (quod she) if that thou anoye not
or forthynke not of all thy fortune, as who says, I have somewhat comforted the
so that thou temptest not the thus with all thy fortune, sythen thou haste yet
thy best things. But I may not suffren thy delices that playnest so weeping
and anguyshous, for that there lacks somewhat to thy welfulnesse. For what man
is he that is so sad, or of great perfyte welefulnesse, that he ne stryueth
and playneth on some half again the quality of his estate? for why full
anguishious thing is the condition of man's goods. For either it comes not al
together to a wight, or else it ne lasts not perpetuell. For some man has
great richesse, but he is asshamed of his ungentle lynage. And some man is
renomed of noblesse of kynred, but he is enclosed in so great anguysshe of
need of things, that him were leauer that he were unknow. And some man
abounds both in richesse and noblesse, but yet he bewayleth his chaste life,
for he ne has no wife. And some man is, and selily married, but he has no
children, and nomisheth his rychesses to strange folk. And some man is
gladded with children, but he wepeth full sore for the trespass of his son,
or of his daughter. And for this there ne accords no wight lightly to the
condition of h^s fortune. For always to every man there is in somewhat, that
unassayed, he ne wot nout or else he dredeth, that he has assayed. And add
this also, that every weleful man has a full delycate felyng: so that but if
all things be fallen at his own will, he is impacient, or is not used to have
none adversity, anon he is thrown down for every little thing. And full
little things ben tho that withdrawn the sum, or the perfection of
blysfulnesse fro hem that been most fortunate. How many men trowest thou would
demen hem self to be almooste in heaven, if they myghten attain to the leest
party of ye re^naunt of thy fortune? This same place that thou clepest exyle,
is countreye to hem that enhabyten here.


And for thy nothing wretched, but wha^ thou wenest it, as who says: Thou thy
self ne no wight else nis a wretch, but wha^ he weneth him self he is a
wretch by reputacyon of his courage. And ayenwarde: Al fortune is blysful to a
man, by the agreabylitie or by the egallitie of him that suffers it. what man
is that, that is so welefull, that nolde chaungen his estate wha^ he has lost
his patience? The swetnesse of man's welefulnesses is spraynt with many
bitternesses The which welefulnesse, although it seem sweet and joyful to him
that uses it, yet may it not ben witholden, that it ne goes away when it
woll.

Than is it well seen how wretched is the blysfulnesse of mortal things,
that neither it dureth perpetuel with hem, that every fortune receyuen
agreablye or egally, ne it delyteth not in all to them that been anguysshyous.

O ye mortal folk, what seek ye than blysfulnesse out of your own self,
which is put in your self? Error and follye confounds you. I shall show
the shortly the point of soueraygne blysfulnesse.

Is there any thing to the more precious than thy life? Thou wylt answer, nay.

Than, if it so be that thou art mighty over thy self, that is to said, by
tranquyllitie of thy soul, than haste thou thing in thy power, that thou
noldest never lese^: Ne fortune may not bynemme it the. And that thou may
know, that blysfulnesse ne may not stand in things that been fortunous and
temporel, now understand and gather it together thus.

If blysfulnesse be the soueraygne good of nature that lives by reason: ne
thylke thing is not soueraynge good that may be taken away in any wise.

For more worthy thing is and more digne thylke thing that may not be take
away. Than shows it well that the unstableness of fortune, may not attain
to receue very blysfulnesse.

And yet moreover what man that this tomblynge welefulnesse leads, either he
wot that it is chargeable, or else he wot it not? And if he wot it not, what
blysfull fortune may there be in the blyndenesse of ignorance? And if he wot,
that it is chau^geable, he mote always been adradde, that he ne lose that
thing, that he ne doubts not but that he may lesen it. As who says, he
mote always be aghast, least he lose that, that he woteth right well he may lose.
For which the continuell dread that he has, ne suffers him not to be
welefull. Or else if he lose it, he weneth to be despised and forleten. Certes
eke that is a full little good, that is borne with even heart when it is lost,
that is to said, that men do more force of the loss, than of the having.

And for as much as you thy self art he, to who^ it has be showed and preued by
full many demonstrations as I wot well, that the souls of men, ne mowen
not dyen in no wise. And eke syns it is clear and certain, that fortunous
welefulnesse ends by the death of the body: it may not be doubted that if
death may take away blysfulnesse, that all the kind of mortal thing ne
discendeth into wretchedness by the end of death.

And sythen we know well, that many a man has sought the fruit of
blysfulnesse, not only with suffrynge of death, but eke with suffrynge of
pains and tourmentes: how might than this present life make men blisfull, syns
that thylke self life ended it ne makes folk no wretches.

QVisquis volet perennem
Cautus pouere sedem,
Stabilisque nec sonori
Sterni flatibus Euri
Et fluctibus minantem
Curat spernere pontum
Montis cacumen alti
Bibulas vitet arenas. etc.

WHat manner of folk, ware and stable that will founden hem a perdurable seat,
and ne will not be cast down, with the loud blastes of the wind Eurus, and
will dispyse the sea menasyng with floudes: Let him eschew to buylden on the
coppe of the mou^taygne, or in the moist sands. For if the fell wind Auster
tourmenteth the coppe of the mountaygnes with all her strengthes, and the lose
sands refusen to bear the heavy weyghtes.

And for thy, if thou wylt flyen the peryllous adventure, that is to say, of
the world have mind certaynlye to set thine house of a merry seat in a low
stone.

For although the wind troublynge the sea, thondre with ouerthrowyng, thou
that art put in quyete, and welefull, by strength of thy paleys, shall lead
a clear age, scornynge the woodnesse and the yres of the air.

Sed quoniam rationum iam in te mearum fomenta descendunt, paulo validioribus
vtendum puto. Age enim. Si iam caduca ac momentaria fortune. etc.
But, for as much as the nourysshynges of my reason descenden now into the, I
trow it were time to vsen a little strenger medicens. Now understand here, all
were it so, that ye yeftes of fortune ne were not brytle ne transytorye, what
is there in hem that may be thine in any time? or else that it ne is foul, if
that it be looked and consydred perfectlye. Rychesses ben they precious by the
nature of them self, or else by the nature of the? what is most worth of
richesse? is it not gold or might of money assembled? Certes that gold and
that money shyneth and yeueth better renoume to hem that dispenden it, than to
thylke folk that mokeren it: for auaryce makes always muckerers to ben hated,
and largess makes folk clear of renoume. For sith that such things as ben
transferred from one man to an other, ne may not dwell with no man, certes,
than is that money precious, when it is translated in to other folk, and
stynten to be had by usage of large yeuynge of him that has yeuen it. And
also if all the money that is over all in all the world, were gathered toward
one man, it should make al other men to be neadye as of that. And certes a
voice all hole, that is to said, without amenusyng, fulfylleth together the
hearing of much folk. And when they been apassed, needs they maken hem
poor, that forgone tho rychesses.

O, strayte and nedye clepe I these rychesses, syns that many folk ne may not
have it all, ne all ne it not comen to one man with out poverty of all other
folk. And the shynynge of gemmes, that I call precious stones, draws it not
the eyes of folk to hem ward, that is to said, for the beautye? But certes,
if there were beauty or bounty in shynynge of stones, thylke clerenesse is of
the stones hem self, and not of men. For which I wonder greatly, that men
maruailen on such things. For why, what thing is it, that if it wants
mouynge and ioynture of soul and body, that by right might semen a fair
creature to him that has a soul of reason? For all be it so, that gemmes
drawn to hem self a little of the last beauty of the world, through the
entente of her creatoure, and the distinction of hem self, yet for as mykel as
they ben put under your excellency, they ne have not deserved by no way, that
ye should maruelen on hem. And the beauty of feldes delyteth it not mikell unto
you?

B. why should it not delyten us, since that it is a right fair portion of the
right fair work, that is to said, of this world? And right so ben we gladed
sometime of the face of the sea, when it is clear: And also marueylen we on the
heaven and on the sterres, and on the son and on the moon.


Phi. Aperteyneth (quod she) any of thylke things to the why dare thou
glorifye the in the shynyng of any such things? Art thou distyngued and
embelysed by the spryngynge flowers of the first summer season? Or swells thy
plentye in fruits of summer? why art thou rauyshed with ydell joys? why
embracest thou strange goods, as they were thine? Fortune ne shall never
make, that such things ben thine, that nature of things has maked forayne
from the? Sothe it is, that withouten doubt the fruits of the earth owe^ to be
to the norysshynge of beestes. And if thou wylt fulfill thy need after that it
suffiseth to nature, than is it no need that thou seek after the superfluitye
of fortune. For with full few things with full little things nature has her
apayed. And if thou wolt achoken the fulfyllyng of nature with superfluityes:
Certes, thylke things that thou wolt thresten and pouren into nature, shullen
be vnioyful unto the, or else anoyous wenest thou eke, that it be a fair thing
to shine with diverse clothynges? Of which clothing, if the beautye be
agreeable to loken upon, I woll maruaylen on the nature of the matter of thylke
clothes, or else on the workman that wrought hem. Does also a long route of
meynye make the a blysfull man? the which servants if they ben vycious of
conditions, it is a great charge and destruction to the house, and a great
enemy to the lord him self. And if they ben good men, how shall strange and
forayne goodness be put in the nombre of thy rychesses? So that by all these
forsayde things, it is clearly showed, that never one of thylke things that
thou accomptedst for thy goods, nas not thy good. In which things if there be
no beautye to be desired, why shouldeste thou be sorry to lose them? or why
shouldeste thou rejoice the to holden hem? For if they ben fair of their own
kind, what appertains that to the? for also well shoulden they have been
fair by hem self, though they were departed from all thy rychesses. For why?
fair ne precious were they not, for that they comen among thy rychesses. But
for they seemed fair and precious, therefore thou had lever reken hem
amongst thy rychesses. But what desyrest thou of fortune with so great afare?
I trow thou sekest to drive away need with abundaunce of things: but certes
it tourneth you all in to the contrary. For why, certes it neadeth of full
many helpynges to kepen the dyuersities of precious hostilementes. And sothe it
is, that of many things they have need, that many things have. And ayenwarde,
of little thing needs him that measures his fill, after the need of kind,
and not after thoutrage of couetise. It is so than, that ye men have no propre
good set in you, for such ye moten seek outward in forayne, and subject
things. So is than the condition of things turned up so down, that a man
that is a deuyne be, by merit of his reason, thinks that him self nys
neither fair ne noble, but if it be through possession of hostilime^tes, that
ne han no souls: And certes, all other things ben apayed of her own
beauties: But ye men that be semblable to god by your reasonable thought
desyren to apparaylen your excellent kind of ye loweste things. Ne ye
vnderstonden not how great a wrong is done to your creatoure: For he would
that mankind were most worthy and noble of any erthly things and ye thresten
down your dignityes benethen the lowest things.


For if that all the good of every thing be more precious, than is thylke
thing, whose that the good is, sith ye demen that the foulest things ben
your goods: than submytten ye, and put your selue^ under the foulest things
by your estimation: and certes this betydeth not without your deserte For
certes, such is the condition of all man kind, that only when it has
knowing of it self, than passes it in noblesse all other things. And when
it forletteth the knowinge of it self, than it is brought benethen all
beestes. For why, all other living beestes han of kind to known not hem
self, but when that men letten the knowing of hem self, it comes hem of
vice. But how broad shows the error and the follye of you men, that wenen
that any thing may ben apparayled with strange apparelmentes* but forsooth
that may not be done. For if a wight shyneth with things that been put to him:
As thus. If thylke things shynen with which a man is apparelled: Certes
thylke things been commended, and praised, with which he is apparelled, but
nathelesse, thing that is covered and wrapped under that, dwells in his
fylth. And I deny that thylke thing be good, that anoyeth him that has it.
Gab I of this? Thou wolt say nay. Certes, riches have anoyed full often hem
that han had tho richesse: sytht that every wicked shrewe is for his
wickedness the more gredye after other folks rychesses, wheresoever it be in
any place, be it gold or precious stones, and weneth him only most worthy
that has hem. Thou tha^ that so besy dredrest now the sword and the spear,
if thou had entered in the pathe of this life avoid wayfaryng man, than
would thou sing beforne the thief, as who says a poor man that bears no
richesse on him by the way, may boldly sing beforne thieves for he has not
whereof to be robbed. O precious and right clear is the blysfulnesse of mortal
richesse, that when thou have gotten it, than have thou lorne thy sekernesse.

Felix nimium prioretas, Contenta fidelibus aruis, Nec inerti perdita luxu
Facili que sera solebat Ieiunia soluete glande, Nec bacchia munera norat
Liquido confundere melle, Nec lucida vellera serum. etc.
BLysfull was the first age of men, they helden hem apayde with the metes that
ye true feldes broughten forth, they ne destroyed nor disceyued not hem self
with outrage, they weren wont lyghtlye to slaken her hunger at even with
^^rhornes of oaks, they ne could not medel you yefte of Bacchus to the clear
honey, that is to said they could make no piement or clarre: Ne they could not
medell the bright fleeces of the country of Seryens with the venym of Tiry,
this is to sayn, they could not dyen white fle^es of Syrien country with the
blood of a manner shelfyssh, that men fynden in Tyrie, with which blood men dyen
purple, they slepten wholesome slepes upon the grass, and dronken of the rennyng
waters, and lain under the shadows of the hye Pyne trees. Ne no geste or
stranger ne carfe yet the hye see with oores or with ships, ne they ne
hadden seyn yet no new strondes to leden marchaundyse in to diverse countrees.
Tho weren the cruel claryons full hust and full still. Ne blood yshad by egre
hate, ne had deyed yet armures. For where to, or which woodnesse of enemies
would first mouen arms, when they sawen cruel wounds, ne none meedes be of
blood yshad? I would that our times should turn again to tholde manners. But
the anguishous love of having in folk burns more cruellye than the mountayn
of Ethna, that ay bre^neth. Alas, what was he that first dalfe up the gobbettes
or the weyghtes of gold, covered under earth, and the precious stones that
wolden have be hid? He dalfe up precious peryls, that is to said, that he
that hem first up dalfe, he dalfe up a precious peril, for why, for the
preciousnesse of such thing has many man ben in peril.

Quid autem de dignitatibus, potentiaque disseram, quas vos, vere dignitatis,
ac potestatis inscii, celo exequatis? Que si in improbissimum quemque
ceciderint. etc.
But what shall I say of dignytees and powers, the which ye men that neither
known very dignyte ne very power, areysen hem as high as the heaven* the
which dignytes and powers, if they comen to any wicked man, they done as great
domages and distructions, as does the flambe of the mountain Ethna, wha^ the
flambe waloweth up, ne no deluuy ne does so cruel harms. Certes ye remember
well (as I trow) that thylke dignyte that men cleape the imperye of
counsaylours, the which whylom was beginning of fredom, your elders coueyted
to have done away that dignyte for the pride of the counsaylours. And right for
that same your elders before that time had done away out of the cite of Rome
the kings name, that is to said, they nolde have no longer no King. But
now, if so be that dignytees and powers ben yeuen to good men, the which
thing is full selde, what agreeable things is there in tho dignytees and
powers, but only the goodness of folk that vsen hem? And therefore is it
thus, that honor comes not to virtue because of dignyte: and ayenwarde,
honor comes to dygnyte for cause of virtue. But which is thylke your
dereworth power that is so clear and so requyrable? O ye erthlye beestes,
consider ye not over which thing that it seems that ye have power? Now if
thou saw a mouse among other myce, that challenged to him selfwarde right and
power over all other myce, how great scorn would thou have of it? Glosa.
So fares it by men, the body has power over the body: for if thou look well
upon the body of a wight, what thing shall thou find more freel than is
mankind? the which men full often be slain by bytyng of flies, or else with
entryng or crepyng worms in to the priuytees of man's body. But where shall
men fynden any man that may exercisen or haunten any right upon an other man,
but only on his body, or else upon things that been lower than the body, the
which I clepe fortunes possessions?

May thou have ever any commandment over a free courage? May thou remeue
fro the estate of his propre rest, a thought that is cleuynge together in him
self by steadfast reason?

As whylom a tyrau^t wened to confound a free man of courage, and he wend to
constrayn him by tourmentes, to maken him discoueren and accusen folk, that
wysten of a coniuracyon, which I cleape a confederacye that was cast against
this tyrant: but this freman bote of his own tongue, and cast it in the
vysage of thylke wood tyrant. So that the turmentes that this wood tyrau^t
wend to have made matter of cruelte, this wise man made it matter of virtue. But
what thing is it that a man may do to an other man, that he ne may receyuen
the same thing of other folk in him self? Or thus: what may a man don to
folk, that folk ne may done to him the same? I have herd told of
Busirides that was wont to sleen his gestes, that herbroden in his house: and
he was slain him self by Hercules that was his geste. Regulus had taken in
battle many men of Affryke, and cast hem into fetters: but sone after he
must yeuen his hands to be bound with the cheynes of hem that he had whylom
ouercomen. Wenest thou than, that he be mighty that has power to done a
thing, that other ne may done in him that he has in other? And yet more
over, if so were that these dignytes or powers hadden any propre or naturel
goodness in hem, never nolde they comen to shrewes. For contraryous things ne
ben wont to ben yfeloushypped togythers. Nature refuses that contraryous
things ben joined. And so as I am in certain that wicked folk have dignytees
often time, tha^ shows it well that dignytees and powers ne ben not good of her
own kind, sens that they suffren hem self to cleauen or ioynen hem self to
shrewes. And certain the same thing may I most dignely iugen and said of all
the yeftes of fortune, that most plenteously comen to shrewes, of which
yeftes I trow it ought be consydred that no man douteth that he is strong, in
whom he sees strength: and in whom swyftnesse is, sothe it is that he is
swifte. Also musyke makes musyciens, and physike makes physiciens, and
rethoryke eke rethoriciens. For why, the nature of every thing makes his
propertye, ne it is not entremedled with theffecte of co^traryous things. But
certes rychesses may not restrain avarice vnstanched. Ne power ne makes not a
man mighty over him self, which that vicious lusts holden distrayned with
chains that ne mowe^ not be vnbounden. And dignitees, that be yeuen to shreude
folk, not only ne makes hem not digne, but shows rather all openly, that
they ben unworthy and indigne. And it is thus. For certes ye have joy to
cleape things with false names, that bearen hem in all the countraye, the which
names ben full often reproved by the effect of the same things. So that these
ylke rychesses ne oughte^ not by right to be cleped rychesses, ne such power
ne ought not to be cleped power, ne such dignyte ne ought not to be cleaped
dignyte. And at last I may conclude the same thing of all the yeftes of
fortune: In which there nys nothing to be desired, ne that has in him self
naturel bountye, as it is well ysene, for neither they ioyne^ hem not always to
good men, ne maken hem always good, to whom they ben joined.

Nouimus, quantas dederit ruinas
Vrbe flammata, patribusque cesis,
Fratre qui quonda^ ferus interempto,
Matris effuso maduit cruore.
Corpus and visu gelidum pererrans,
Ora non tinxit lachrymis: sed esse,
Censor extincti potuit decoris. etc.

WE have well known, how many great harms and distructions were done by
the emperor Nero. He let brennen the cite of Rome, and made slay the senators,
and he cruel whylo^ slough his brother. And he was made moist with the blood
of his mother, that is to say, he let sleen and slytten the womb of his
mother, to seen where he was conceived, and he looked on every halue of her deed
cold body, ne no teere wette his face, but he was so herd herted that he might
be domes man or judge of her deed beautye. And nathelesse yet governed this Nero
by scepter all the people that Phoebus may seen coming fro his vttrest
arysyng, till he hyde his beams under ye wawes, that is to said he governed
all the peoples by scepter imperyall, that the son gothe about fro Eest to
west. And eke this Nero governed by scepter all the peoples that be under the
cold sterris that hyghten the Septentrions: that is to said, he governed all the peoples that be under the party of the North. And eke Nero governed all
ye peoples that ye violent wind Nothus skorelyth and baketh the brennyng
sands by his dry heat, that is to say, all the peoples in the Southe. But
yet ne might not all his power turn the woodnesse of this wicked Nero. Alas
it is a grievous fortune, as often as a wicked sword is joined to cruel venim,
that is to say, venomous cruelte to lordshyppe.

Tum ego. Scis (inquam) ipsa, minimu^ nobis ambicionem mortalium rerum fuisse
dominatam. Sed materiam gerendis rebus optauimus, quo ne virtus tacita
consenesceret. P. Et ilia. Atqui hoc vnum est. etc.
THa^ said I thus. Thou wotest well thy self, that the couetyse of mortal
things ne hadden never lordshype in me. But I have well desired matter of
things to done, as who says, I desire to have matter of gouernaunces over
comynaltees, for virtue still should not elden: that is to sayn, that lest er
that he wext old, his virtue that lay now still, ne should not perysshe
vnexercysed in governance of commune: for which men might speken or written of
his good government. P.

Forsothe (quod she) and that is a thing that may drawn to governance such
hertes as ben worthy and noble of her nature: But nathelesse it may not drawn
or tellen such hertes as ben ybrought to the full perfection of virtue, that
is to said couetyse of glory and renome, to have well administered the common
things, or done good deserts to profit of the common. For se now and
consider, how little and how void of all price is thylke glory, cercayne
thing is as thou haste learned by the demonstracion of Astronomye, that all the
enuyronnyng of the earth about, ne halte but the reason of a prick, at the
regard of the greatness of the heaven, that is to sayn, that if here were
maked comparison of the earth to the gretnesse of heaven, men would iudgen in all
that ne held no space. Of the which little regyon of this world, the fourth
part of the earth is inhabyted with living beestes that we known, as thou
haste thy self ylerned by Ptholome that proves it. And if thou had
wythdrawen and abated in thy thought for thylke fourth party, as much space
as the sea and the mareys conteynen and ouergone: as much space as the regyon
of drought ouerstretcheth, that is to said sands and deserts, well uneath
should there dwellen a right strayte place to the habitacion of men. And ye
that be enuyronned and closed with the least prycke of thylke prycke, thynken
ye manifesten or publyshen your renome and done your name for to ben borne
forth. But your glory that is so narowe and so strayte throngen in to so
little bounds, how mykell conteyneth it in larges and in great doing. And
also set thereto, that many a nacyon diverse of tongue and of manners, and eke
of reason of her living, ben inhabyted in the close of thylke habytacle, the
which nacyons what for diffyculte of ways, and what for diuersyte of langage,
and what for defaulte of vnusage, and entrecomunyng of marchaundyse: not only
the names of synguler men ne may not stretchen, but eke the fame of cities may
not stretchen. At the last, certes in the time of Marcus Tullius as him self
writ in his book that the renome of the commune of Rome ne had not yet passed
ne clomben over the mountain that hight Caucasus, and yet was Rome well waxen
and redoubted of the Parthes, and eke of other folk enhabytynge about. See
thou not than how strayte and how compressed is thylke glory that ye
trauaylen about to shown and to multeplye? May than the glory of a synguler
romayne stretche^ thither as the fame of the name of Rome may not clymben ne
passen? And eke see thou not that the manners of diverse folk and her laws
ben dyscordante among hem self, so that thylke thing that some men judge
worthy of praising, other folk iuge^ that, that is worthy of tourment? And
hereof comes it that though a man delyteth him in praysynge of his renome, he
may not in no wise bryngen forth ne spreden his name to many manner peoples,
and therefore every man ought to be apayde of his glory that is publyshed
among his own neighbors, and thylke noble renome shall be restrained within
the bounds of tho manner folk. But how many a man that was full noble in his
time, has the wretches and nedy foryetyng of writers put out of mind and done
away all be it so that certes thylke things profyten little, the which
things and writings long and derke elde do away both hem and eke her
auctours. But ye men semen to getten you a pardurabylite when ye thynke^ in
time coming fyoure ame shall lasten. But nathelesse, if thou will make
comparyson to the endless spaces of eternyte, what thing haste thou, by which
thou may reioysen the of long lasting of thy name? For if there were made
comparyson of the abydyng of a moment to ten thousand winter, for as much as
both tho spaces ben ended, for yet has the momente some portion of it all
though it be little? But nathelesse thylke self nombre of years, and eke as
many years as thereto may be multyplyed, ne may not certes be co^parysoned to
the perdurabylite that is endelesse. For of things which that have end may be
made comparyson, but of things which that been withouten end, to things that
have end may be maked no comparyson. And for thy is it yt all though renome as
of long time as ever the list to thynke^, were thought, to the regard of the
eternyte that is vnstauncheable and infynite, it ne should not only seem
little, but plainly right naught. But ye semen certes ye can do nothing a right
but if it be for the audyence of the people, and for idle rumors. And ye
forsaken the great worthynesse of conscience and of virtue, and ye seken your
guerdones of the small words of strange folk. Have now here and understand
in the lyghtnesse of such pride and vein glory, how a man skorned festynally
and meryly such vanyte. Whylome there was a man that had assayed with
stryuynge words an other man, the which not for usage of very virtue, but
for proud vain glory, had taken upon him falsely the name of a philosopher.
This rather man that I spoke of, thought he would assaye, wheder he thylke were
a phylosophre or no, that is to say, if that he would have suffered lightly in
patience, the wro^ges that were done to him. This feigned philosophre took
patience a little while: and when he had received winds of outrage, he as in
stryuynge again and reioysynge of him self, said at last thus. Understand
thou not, that I am a philosophre? That other man answered again betyngly and
said: I had well understand it, if thou had holden thy tongue still. But
what is to these noble worthy men, for certes of such folk speak I that seken
glory with virtue. What is it (quod she) what atteyneth fame to such folk,
when the body is resolved by the death at the last? for if so be that men dyen
in all, that is to say body and soul, the which thing our reason defends
us to believe: than is there no glory in no wise. For what should thylke glory
(...), when he, of whom thylke glory is said to be, nys right naught in no
wise. And if the soul which that has in it self science of good works,
vnbounden from the prison of therthe, wendeth freely to the heaven, dispyseth it
not than all erthlye occupacyon, and being in heaven reioyseth that it is
exempt from all erthly things? as who says, than recketh the soul never of no
glory of renome of this world.

Quicunque solam mente precipiti petit, Summumque credit gloriam, Late patentes
etheris cernat plagas, Artumque terrarum situm, Breuem replere non valentis
ambitum. etc.
WHo so that with overthrowing thought only seeks glory of fame, and weneth
that it be souerain good, let him loken upon the broad showing countries of ye
heaven, and upon the strayt seete of this earth, and he shall be ashamed of
thencrease of his name, that may not fulfill the little compass of the earth. O
what coueyten proud folk to lyften up her necks in idle in the deedly yoke
of this world? For all though that renome ysprad passing to forne peoples,
goth by diverse tongues, and all though great houses of kynredes shynen by clear
tytles of honors, yet nathelesse death dispyseth all high glory of fame, and
death wrappeth togythers the high heedes and the low, and makes egall and
even the hyeste with the lowest.

Where wonne^ now the bones of true Fabricius? what is now Brutus, or stern
Caton? The thynne fame yet lastyng of her idle names, is marked with a few
letters. But all though that we have known the fair words of the fame of
hem, it is not yeuen to know hem that been deed and consumpt. Lyggeth than
still all utterly vnknowable, ne fame ne makes you not know. And if ye wene
to live the longer for wind of your mortal name, when one cruel day shall
rauyshe you: than is the second dwelling to you close. The first death he
clepeth here the departing of the body, and the second death here the
styntynge of the renome of fame.

Sed ne me inexorabile contra fortunam gerere bellum putes, est aliquando, cum
de hominibus fallax illa non nihil been mereatur: tum sciliret cum se aperit.
etc.
But for as much as thou shall not wene^ (quod she) that I bear an vntretable
battle against fortune, yet sometime it befalls that she (deceyuable)
deserves to have right good thank of men: and that is when she her self
opens, and when she discovers her fro^te, and shows her manners.
Perauenture yet understand thou not that I shall say. It is a wondre that I
desire to tell, and therefore uneath may I vnplyten my sentence with words. For
I deem that contraryous fortune profyteth more to men than fortune debonayre.
For always when fortune seems debonayre, than she lies falsely, byhetyng the
hope of welfulnesse. But forsothe contraryous fortune is always sothfaste, wha^
she shows her self unstable through her chaungyng. The amiable fortune
disceyueth folk: the contrary fortune teaches. Thamyable fortune blyndeth
with ye beauty of her false goods, the hertes of folks that vsen hem. The
contrary fortune unbinds hem, with the knowing of freele welefulnesse.
Thamyable fortune may thou seen always wyndy and flowynge, and ever
mysknowynge of her self. The contrary fortune is attempre and restrained and
wise, through exercise of her aduersyte. At the last amyable fortune with her
flatterynges, draws myswandrynge men fro the sovereign good: the contraryous
fortune leads often folk again to sothefaste goods, and haleth hem again as
with an hoke. Wenest thou than that thou ought to leten this a little thing,
that this aspre and horrible fortune has dyscouered to the, the thoughts of
thy true friends? For why, this ylke fortune has departed and uncovered to
the both the certain vysages, and eke the doutous visages of thy fellows.
When she departed away fro the, she took away her friends and laft the thy
friends. Now when thou were rich and weleful, as the seemed, with how mykel
would thou have bought the full knowing of this that is to said, the
knowing of thy very friends? Now plain the not than of richesse lorne, sith
thou haste found the most precious kind of richesse, that is to said, thy
very friends.

Quod mundus stabili fide, Concordes variat vices, Quod pugna^cia semina, Fedus
perpetuum tenent. etc.
THat the world with stable faith varyeth accordable chaungynges, that the
contraryous qualitees of elements holde^ among hem self alyaunce perdurable,
that Phoebus the son with his golden charyot brings forth the rosy day, that
the moon has commandment over the nyghtes: which nyghtes Esperus the even
sterre has, that you see gredy to flowen constrayneth with a certain end his
floodes, so that it is not lefull to stretche his broad terms or bounds upon
the earth: All this ordinance of things is bounden with love, that governs
earth and see, and also has commandment to the heaven. And if this love
slaked the bridels, all things that now louen hem togythers wolden make
battle co^tinuelly, and stryuen to fordone the facion of this world, the
which they now leden in accordable faith, by fair mouynges. This love
holds together people joined with an holy bond, and knytteth sacrament of
marriage of chaste loves. And love ends laws to true felawes. O welefull were
mankind if thylke love that governs the heaven, governed your corages.

Here ends the second book, and follows the third.
I Am cantum illa finierat, cum me audiendi auidum, stupe^temque arrectis adhuc
auribus carminis mulcedo defixerat. Itaque paulo post O inquam summum lassorum
solame^ animorum, quantum me. etc.
BY this she had ended her song: wha^ the swetnesse of her dyte had through
perced me, that was desirous of herkening. And I astonyed had yet straight mine
eeres, yt is to said to harken the bette what she should say, so that a
little here after I said thus. O thou that art sovereign comfort of corages
anguishous, so thou have remounted and norisshed me with the weight of thy
sentences, and with delight of syngyng, so that I trow not that I be vnperegal
to the strokes of fortune as who says, I dare well now suffren all
thassautes of fortune, and well defend me from her. And tho remedies, which
that thou saydest here beforn, that weren right sharp, not only that I am not
agrysen of hem now, but I desirous of herynge, ask greatly to heren the
remedies. Than said she thus. That feled I well (quod she) when that thou
ententyfe and still, rauyshedest my words: and I abode till thou had such
habyte of thy thought, as thou haste now, or else till that I my self had
maked it to the same habyte, which that is a more very thing. And certes the
remenante of things that been yet to say ben such, that first when men taste
hem they ben bytynge: But when they ben received within a wight, than ben they
sweet. But for thou say that thou art so desirous to harken hem, with how
great brennynge would thou glowen, if thou wystes whyder I would leden the?

B. whyder is that (quod I)


P. To thylke very blysfulnesse (quod she) of which thine heart dremeth. But
for as much as thy sight is occupied and distourbed of erthly things, thou
may not yet seen thylke self welefulnesse.


B. Do (quod I) and show me what thylke very welfulnesse is, I pray the
without taryeng.


P. That wol I gladly don (quod she) for cause of the. But I wol first marken
by words, and I will enforcen me to inform the thylke false cause of
blysfulnesse, which that thou more know: so that wha^ thou haste beholden
thylke false goods, and turned thine eyes so to that other side, thou may
known the clerenesse of very blysfulnesse.


Qui serere ingenuum volet agru^, Liberat arna prius fruticibus. Fall. erubos,
filicemque resecat. etc.
WHo so wol sow a field plenteous, let him first delyueren it of thorns, and
kerue a sonder with his hoke the bushes and the fern, so that the corn may
come^ heavy of eres and of greyues Honey is ye more sweet if mouths have first
tasted savors that be wycke. The sterres shinen more agreably, when the wind
Nothus leteth his plungye blastes. And after that Lucyfer the day sterre has
chased away the dark night, the day the fayrer leads the rosen horse of
the son. And right so thou, beholdynge first the false goods begin to
wythdrawe thy neck fro the earthly affections, and afterward the very
goods shullen entren into thy courage.

Tum defixo paululum visu, et velut in angustam sue mentis sedem recepta, sic
cepit P. Omnis mortalium cura qua^ multiplicium studiorum labor exercet. etc.
THo fastened she a little the sight of her eyes, and she with drew her sight,
as it were in to the strayte seete of her thought: and began to speak right
thus. All the cures (quod she) of mortal folk, which yt trauaylen hem in many
manner studyes, gone certes by diverse ways: but nathelesse they enforce^ hem
all to comen only to the end of blysfulnesse. And blysfulnesse is such a good,
that who so has gotten it, he ne may over that thing more desire. And this
thing forsooth is so sovereign good, that it conteyneth in him self all manner
of goods, to the which good if there failed any thing, it might not ben
sovereign good, for then were some good out of this sovereign good, that might
be desired. Now is it clear and certain, that blysfu^nesse is a parfyte
state, by the congregation of all goods, the which blysfulnesse (as I have
said) all mortal folk enforcen hem to get by diverse ways. For why, the
couetyse of every good is naturelly planted in the hertes of men: but the
myswandrynge error, misledeth hem into false goods Of ye which men, some of
hem wene^ that sovereign good be to lyuen without need of any thing. And other
men demen, ye sovereign good be right dygne of reverence, and enforcen hem to
be reverenced among her neighbors by the honors that they have got. And
some folk there ben that holden that right hye power be sovereign good, and
enforcen hem for to reignen, or else to ioynen hem to hem that reygne^ And it
seems to other folk, that noblesse of renome be the sovereign good, and
hasten hem to getten hem glorious name by the arts of werre or of peace. And
many folk mesuren and gessen, that sovereign good be joy and gladness, and
wenen that it be right blysful thing to plu^gen in voluptuous delytes. And
there ben some folk, that entrechaungen the causes and ye ends of these
foresaid goods: As they that desyren rychesses to have power and delites, or
else they desire power for to have money, or for cause of reno^me. In these
things and such other is turned all the entencion of desyrynges and works of
me^, as thus: Noblesse and favor of people, which that yeueth to al men, as
it seems hem, a manner clerenesse of renomme: and wife and children, that me^
desyren, for cause of delight and meriness. But forsooth friends ne shullen not
be rekened among the goods of fortune, but of virtue, for it is a full holy
manner thing. All these other things forsooth be taken for cause of power, or
else for cause of delight. Certes now am I ready to referren the goods of the
body, to these foresaid things abouen For it seems that strength and
greatness of body yeuen power and worthynesse, and that beauty and swyftnesse
yeuen glory and renomme: and health of body seems to yeuen delight. In all
these things it seems only that blysfulnesse is desired: for why, thylke
thing that every man desires most over all things, he demeth that it be
sovereign good. But I have dysfyned, that blysfulnesse is sovereign good, for
which every wight demeth that thylke estate yt he desires over all things,
that it be blysfulnesse. Now have thou the^ before thine eyes almost all the
purposed form of the welefulnesse of mankind that is to said, richesse,
honors, power, glory and delytes, the which delight only co^sydered he
Epicurus, and iuged and establysshed that delight is the sovereign good: for as
much as all other things, as him thought byrefte away joy and mirth from
the heart But I return again to the studyes of men of which men the courage
always reherseth and seeks ye sovereign good, all be it so that it be with a
dyrked memory, but he note by which pathe, right as a dronken man note naught
by which path he may return home to his house. Seems it then that folk
forleyen and erren to enforcen hem to have need of nothing? Certes there is
none other thing that may so much performen blysfulnesse, as an estate
plenteous of all goods, that ne has need of none other thing, but that is
suffysaunt of him self unto him self. And folyen such folk then that wenen,
yt thylke thing that is right good, that it is eke right worthy of honor and
of reverence: certes nay. For that thing nys neither foul ne worthy to be
despised, that well nygh all the entencion of mortal folk trauaylen to get
it. And power eke ought not to be rekened among goods. What else? For it nys
not to wene, that thylke thing that is most worthy of all things be feeble
and without strength And clerenesse of renome, ought that to been despised?
Certes there may no man forsake, that all thing that is right excellent and
noble, that it ne seems be right clear renomed. For certes it needs not to
say, that blysfulnesse be anguyshous ne drery, ne subject to greuaunces ne
sorrows, sens that in right little things folk seken to have and to vsen that
may delyten hem. Certes these ben the things that men wyllen and desyren to
geten: and for this cause desyren they rychesses, dygnytees, regnes, glory,
and delytes. For thereby wenen they to have suffysaunce, honor, power, renome,
and gladness. Then is it good that men seken thus by so many diverse studyes,
in which desire it may not lightly be showed, how great is the strength of
nature For how so men have diverse sentences and dyscordynges, algates men
accorden al in loving the end of good.

Quantas rerum flectit habenas Natura potens, quibus immensum Legibus orbe^
prouida seruet, Stringatque ligans irresoluto, Singula nexu, placet arguto,
Fidelibus lentis promere cantu. etc.
IT lyketh me to show by subtyl song with slack and delytable sown of
strings, how that nature myghtely enclyneth and flytteth the government of
things and by such laws she purucyable keeps the great world, and how she
byndyng restrayneth al things by a bond yt may not be vnbounden. Al be it so
yt the lions of the country of Pene beren the fair chains, and taken meats
of the hands of folk, that yeuen it hem, and dreden her sturdye masters, of
which they be wont to suffer beatinges, if that her horrible mouths ben
bledde, that is to feign of beestes devoured: her courage of time passed that
has been idle and rested repayreth again, and they roren grievously, and
remembren on her nature, and slaken her necks from her chains unbound, and
her maistre first to torn with blody tethe, assayeth the wood wrathes of hem,
that is to said, they frette^ her master. And the jangling bird that
syngeth on the hye branches, that is to said in the wodde, and after is
enclosed in a strayt cage, all though the plyenge business of me^ give hem
honyed drynkes, and large meats with sweet study: yet nathelesse if thylke
bird skyppynge out of her strayte cage, sees the agreeable shadows of the
woddes, she defouleth with her fete her meat yshadde, and seeks on morning
only the wodde, and twytereth desiring the wodde with her sweet wise. The
yerde of a tree that is haled adown by mighty strength boweth redyly the croppe
adowne: but if that the hand that is bare let it gone again, anon the croppe
looks vpryght to the heaven. The son Phoebus that falls at even in the
westren wawes, returns again eftsoon his carte by a pryue pathe there as it
is wont arise. All things sek^n again to her propre course, and all things
reioysen on her retournynge again to her nature: ne none ordinance is betake^
to things, but that has joined the end to the beginning, and has made the
course it self stable, yt it change not fro his propre kind.

Vos quoque a tertena animalia, te nui licet imagine, vestrum tame^ principium
somniatis. Verumque illum be atitudinis finem, licet minime perspicaci. etc.
CErtes also ye men that been earthly beestes dreame^ always your beginning,
although it be with a thine ymaginacyon, and by a manner thought all be it not
clearly ne perfytly ye loken from a far to thylke very fine of blysfulnesse.
And therefore naturell entencyon leads you to thylke very good, but many
manner errors mystourneth you therfro. Consider now if that be thylke things,
by which a man weneth to get him blisfulnes if that he may comen to thylke
end, that he weneth to come to by nature. For if that money, honors, or these
other foresaid things bryngen to men such a thing that no good ne fail them
ne seems to fail: Certes the^ woll I grant that they be maked blysful by
things that they have gotten. But if so be that thylke things ne mowen not
perform that they byheten, and that there be defaut of many goods, shows it
not then clerelye yt false beute of blysfulnesse is known and atteynt in
thylke things? First and forward thou thy self, that had haboundaunce of
richesse not long agone, I ask the that in thabundaunce of all thylke
richesse, if thou were never anguyshous or sorye in thy courage of any wrong or
greuau^ce, that betyde the in any side

B. Certes (quod I) it ne remembers me not, that ever I was so free of my
thought, that I ne was always in anguyshe of somewhat.


P. And was that not (quod she) for that the lacked somewhat that thou noldeste
not have lacked? or else thou had yt thou noldest have had?


B. Right so it is (quod I)


P. Then desyredest thou the presence of ye one, and thabsence of that other.


B. I grant well (quod I)


P. Forsooth (quod she) then needs there somewhat that every man desires.


B. Yea there needs (quod I)


P. Certes (quod she) and he yt has lack or need of ought, nys not in every
way suffysaunt to him self.


B. No (quod I)


P. And thou (quod she) in all the ple^te of thy richesse had dest thylke lack
of suffysaunce?


B. What else (quod I)


P. Then may not riches maken that a man nys nedy, ne that he be sufficient to
him self: and yet that was it that they behete^ as it seemed. And eke certes I
trow that this be greatly to consider, that money has not in his own kind,
that it ne may been bynomed of hem that have it maugre hem.


B. I know it well (quod I)


P. Why should thou not beknowen it (quod she) when every day the strenger
folk bynomen it from the febler maugre hem? Fro whence come else all these
forayne complayntes, quarrels, or pleadings, but for that men asken her money
that has been benomed hem by strength or by gile, and always maugre hem?


B. Right so it is (quod I)


P. Then has a man need (quod she) to seken him foreign help, by which he may
defend his money.


B. Who may say nay (quod I)


P. Certes (quod she) and him neded none help, if he ne had no money that he
might lose.


B. That is douteles (quod I)


P. Then is this thing turned in to the contrary (quod she) for riches, that
men wenen should maken suffysaunce, they maken a man rather have need of
forayne help. Which is the manner or ye gyse (quod she) that richesse may
driven away need? Rich folk may they neither have ho^ger ne thurst? These
rich men may they feel no cold on their limbs in winter: but you wilt
answer that rich men have enough, wherewith they may stau^chen her honger, and
slaken her thurst and done away cold. In this wise may need ben comforted by
richesse, but certes need ne may not al utterly be done away. For if this
need that always is gapynge and gredy be fulfilled with the richesse and any
other thing, yet dwells then a need that mote be fulfilled. I hold me still,
and tell not how that little thing suffyseth to nature: but certes to avarice
suffiseth notynough of nothing For sin that richesse ne may not all done
away need, and they make^ their own need what may it then be, that ye wenen
that rychesses mowen yeuen you suffysaunce?


Quamuis fluente dives auri gurgite Non expleturas cogat auarus opes. etc.
AL were it so, that a noble covetous man had a river or a gutter fletynge al
of gold, yet should it never staunche his couetyse: and all though he had his
neck charged with precious stones of the reed see and though he do eere his
feldes plenteous with an hundred oxen, never ne shall his bytynge besynes
forleten him while he lives, ne the light rychesses ne shall not bearen him
company when he is deed.

Sed dignitas honorabilem, renerendu^que, cui prouenerint, reddunt Nu^ vis ea
est magistratibus, vt vte^tium mentibus virtutes inserant, victa depellant.
etc.
But dygnitees to whom they be comen, maken they him honorable and reuerente?
have they not so great strength that they may putten virtue in hertes of
folks, that vsen the lordshyp of hem, or else may they done away the vices?
Certes they be not wont to done away wickedness, but they be wont rather to
show wickedness. And thereof comes it yt I have right great dysdayne, that
dygnitees ben yeuen to wicked men. For which thing Catullus cleped a counsel
of Rome (that hight Nonius) postome of boche, as who says, he cleped him a
congregation of vices in his breast, as a postome is full of corrupcion: al were
Nonius set in a chair of dygnitee. See thou not then, how great vylonies
dignitees done to wicked men? certes unworthiness of wicked men should be the
less seen, if they nere renomed of none honor. Certes thou thy self ne
myghtest not be brought with as many peryls as thou myghtest suffer, that thou
would bear the magystrate with decorate that is to said, that for peril
that might be fall the by ostence of the king Theodryke, thou noldest not be
fellow in governance with Decorate, when thou saw that he had wicked courage
of a licorous shrew and of an accusour. Ne I may not for such honors iugen
hem worthy of reverence, that I deem and hold unworthy to have thylke same
honors. Now if thou saw a man that were fulfylde of wisdom, certes thou ne
myghtest not deem that he were unworthy to the honor, or else to the wisdom
of which he is fulfilled.

B. No (quod I)


P. Certes (quod she) dygnytees aperteynen properly to virtue, and virtue
transporteth dygnite anon to thylke man, to which she her self is conjoined.
And for as much as honors of people ne may not make folk dygne of honor,
it is well seen clerly, that they ne have no propre beautye of dygnitee. And
yet men oughten take more head in this: for if a wyghte be in so much the more
outcaste, that he is despised of most folk, so as dygnytee ne may not maken
shrewes worthy of no reverence, then makes dygnite shrewes rather despised
the^ praised, the which shrewes dygnite shows to much folk. And forsooth
not unpunished, yt is to said, that shrewes reuengen hem again ward upon
dignitees. For they yelden again to dygnytees as great guerdons, when they
dyspotten and defoulen dygnitees with her bylonye. And for asmoch as thou now
know that thylke very reverence ne may not comen by these shadowy
transytorye dygniters, understand now thus: that if a man had used and had
many manner dygnitees of consuls, and were perauenture comen among strange
nations, should thylke honor maken him worshypfull and redouted of strange
folk? Certes if that honor of people were a naturell yefte to dygnitees, it
ne might never cessen no where among no manner folk to done his office. Right
as a fire in every country ne stynteth not to enchaufen and maken hot. But for
as much as for to been honorable or reverent, ne comes not to folk of her
propre strength of nature, but only of ye false opinion of folk, that is to
said, that w^^en that dygnitees make^ folk dygne of honors anon therefore
when they comen there as folk ne known not thylke dygnytes, her honors
vanyshen away and that anon. But that is among strange folk may thou
said. Ne among hem there they were borne, ne dured not thylke dygnitees
always Certes the dygnite of the prouostry of Rome was whylom a great power:
now is it nothing but an idle name, and the rent of the senatorie a great
charge. And if a wight whylom had thoffyce to taken head to the d^tayles of the
people, as of corn and of other things, he was holden among hem great But
what thing is more now outcast then thylke prouostry. As I have said a little
here beforne, that thylke thing that has no propre beauty of it self,
receives sometime price and shynynge, and sometime leseth it by thopinion of
vsaunces. Now if that dygnyters then ne mow not make folk dygne of
reverence, and if that dygnites were foul of her will, by the fylthe of
shrewes, and if dygnytees lesen her shynynge by chau^gynge of times, and if
they wexen foul by estimacyon of people, what is it yt they han in hem self
of beauty, that ought to be desired? as who says, none: then ne mowen they
yeuen no beauty of dygnite to none other.


Quamuis se tyrio superbus ostro Comeret ei niueis lapillis. etc.
AL be it so, that the proud Nero with all his wode luxure, kembe him and
apparelled him with fair purpure of Tire, and with white peerles. Algates yet
thereof he hateful to all folk, this is to say that all was he behated of all
folks, yet this wicked Nero had great lordshyppe. And yaf whylom to the
reverent Senators the vnworshypful seats of dygnitees. Vnworshypfull seats
he cleapeth here, for that Nero that was so wicked yane the dygnitees.

Who would then reasonably wenen, that blysfulnesse were in such honors, as
been ^euen by bycious shrewes.

An vero regna, regumque familia ritas efficere potentem valent? Quid ^^. etc.
But reygnes and familiaritees of kings, may they maken a man to been mighty?
How else? When his blysfulnesse dureth perpetually. But certes the old age
oftymes passed, and eke of present time now, is full of ensamples, how ye
kings have changed into wretchedness, out of her welfulnesse. O, a noble
thing and a clear thing is power, that nys not founden mighty to keep it
self. And if that power of realms be author and maker of blysfulnesse, if
thylke power lacks on any side, amenuseth it not thylke blysfulnes, and
brings in wretchedness* But yet al be it so, that the realms of mankind
stretchen broad, yet mote there ^ede ben much folk, over which that every
king ne has no lordshyp ne commandment. And certes upon thylke side that
power falls, which that makes folk blysful Right on that same side no
power enters underneath that makes hem wretches. In this manner then moten
kings have more portion of wretchedness then of welefulnesse

A tyrant that was king of Cecyle, that had assayed yt peril of his estate,
showed by similitude the dredes of realms by gastnesse of a swearde, that
honge over the heed of his samylyer. What thing is then this power that may
not done away the hytynges of business, ne eschew the pryckes of dread?

And certes yet wolden they lyuen in sykernesse, but they may not. And yet
they gloryfyen hem in her power. Hold thou then that thylke man be mighty,
that thou see that he would done that he may not done? And hold thou then
him a mighty man, that has enuyronned his sides with me^ of arms or
sergeau^tes, and dreddeth more hem that he makes aghast, then they dreden him,
and that is put in the hands of his servants, for he should seem mighty?
But of familyers or servants of kings, why should I tell the any thing,
sith that I my self have showed the, that realms hem self been full of great
feblesse? The which famylyers certes the royal power of kings in hole estate
and in estate abated, full often throws adowne.

Nero constrained Senecke his famylyer and his master, to chesen on what death
he would dye. Antonius commanded yt knights slowen with her swords Papinian
his familyer, which Papinyan had been lo^gtyme full mighty among hem of the
court, and yet certes they wolden both have renounced her power. Of which two
Seneck enforced him to yeuen to Nero his richesse, and also to have gone into
solytarye exyle. But when the great weight, that is to said, of lords power
or of Fortune, draws hem that shullen fall, neither of hem ne might do that
he would. what thing is then thylke power, that though men have it, yet they
ben agaste and when thou would have it, thou art not syker? And if thou
would forleten it, thou may not eschewen it. But whether such men ben
friends at need, as been counsayled by fortune, and not by virtue? Certes such
folk as welefull fortune makes friends, co^trarious fortune makes him
enemies. And what pestilence is more mighty for to anoy a wight, then a
famylyer enemy?

Qui se volet esse potentem, Animos domet ille feroces: Nec victa libi dine
colla. etc.
WHo so woll be mighty, he mote dau^ten his cruel corages, ne put not his
neck ouercomen, under the foul raynes of lecherye. For all be it so, that ye
lordshyp stretch so far, that the countreye of Inde quaketh at thy
commandments, or at thy laws. And that the last isle in the sea, that hight
Tyle, bethrale to the: yet if thou may not putten away thy foul derke
desires, and dryue^ out fro the, wretched co^playntes: Certes it nys no power
that thou haste.

Gloria vero quam fallax sepe, quam turpis est. Vnde non iniuria tragicus
exclamat. O gloria gloria millibus mortalium nihil aliud facta, nisi auri um
inflatio magna. etc.
But glory, how dysceyuable and how foul is it often? For which thing, not
skylfully a tragedye that is to said, a maker of dytees yt hyghten tragedies,
cried and said: O glory glory (quod he) thou narte no thing else to thousands
of folks, but a sweller of ears. For many have full great renome by the false
opinion of the people.

And what thing may be thought fouler then such praysynge? For thylke folk
that been praised falsely, they mooten needs have shame of her praysynges. And
if that folk have getten hem thank or praysynge by her deserts: What thing
has thylke pryse eched or increased to the conscience of wise folk, that
measuren her good, not by the rumoure of the people, but by the sothfastnesse
of conscience? And if it seem a fair thing, a man to have increased and sprad
his name, then follows it, that it is demed to been a foul thing, if it ne
be ysprad and increased But as I said a little here before, that sithe there
mote needs ben many folks, to which folk the renome of a man ne may not comen
it befalls, that he that thou wenest be glorious and renomed, seems in the
next part of therthes, to ben without glory and without renome. And certes
among these things I ne trow not that the pryse and the grace of the
people, nys neither worthy to been remembered, ne comes of wise judgment, ne is
ferme perdurably. But now of this name of gentylesse: What man is it that ne
may well seen how vain and how flyttynge it is? For if the name of
gyntylesse be referred to renome and clerenesse of lynage, then is gentell name
but a forayne thing, that is to say, to hem that glorifyen hem of her lynage.
For it seems that gentyles be a manner praysynge, that comes of the deserts
of auncesters. And if praysyng makes gentylles, the^ moten they needs ben
gentle, that been praised. For which thing it follows, that if thou ne have
no gentylnesse of thy self, that is to said pryse, that comes of thy
deserte, forayne gentyllesse ne makes the not gentle. But certes if there be
any good in gentyllesse, I trow it be all only this: that it seems as that a
manner necessite be imposed to gentylmen, for that they ne should not outragen
or forleauen fro the virtues of her noble kynred.

Omne hominu^ genus in terris Simili surgit ab ortu. Vnus enim rerum pater est.
Vnus cuncta ministrat. etc.
ALL the lynage of men, that been in earth ben of semblable birth. One alone is
father of things: one alone ministers all things: He yafe to ye sun his
beams: He yafe to the moon her horns: he yafe to men the earth: he yafe the
sterres to the heaven: he enclosed with members the souls that comen from his
hye seat. Then comen all mortal folk of noble seed. Why noysen ye or bosten
of your elders? For if ye look your beginning and god your father author and
your maker, then nys there no forelyued wight or vnge^tyll, but if he nouryshe
his courage unto vices, and forlete his proper birth.

Quid autem de corporis voluptatibus loquar, quarum appetentia quidem plena est
anxietatis. etc.
But what shall I said of delyces of body, of which delyces the desyrynges ben
full of anguyshes, and the fulfyllynges of hem ben full of penance? How great
sicknesses and how great sorrows vnsuffrable, right as a manner fruit of
wickedness ben thylke delyces wont to bryngen to the bodies of folks that
vsen hem? of which delyces I not what joy may ben had of her moning. But this
wot I well that whosoever woll reme^bren him of his lurures, he shall well
understand, that the issues of delyces ben sorrowful and sorye.

And if thylke delyces now maken folk blysful, tha^ by ye same cause mote^
these beestes ben cleped blysfull, of which beestes all the entention hastes
to fulfill her bodily iolitie. And the gladness of wife and children were an
honest thing, but it has been said that it is over mokel against kind, that
children have been founden tourmenters to her fathers, I not how many. Of which
children how bytyng is every condition, it neadeth not to telle^ it the, that
have or this time assayed it, and art yet now anguishous. In this time approve
I the sentence of my disciple Euripidis that said, that he that has no
children, is welefull by infortune.

Habet hoc voluptas omnis stimulis agit fruentes: A piumque par vola^tium vbi
gratia mella fuit: Fugit et nimis teuaci ferit icta corda morsu etc
EVery delight has this, that it an guyssheth hem with pryckes yt vsen it. It
resembles to these fliynge flies that we clepen bees, that after that he has
shed his agreeable honyes, he flies away, and styngeth the hertes of hem that
been smytten with bytyng ouerlonge holden.

Nihil igitur dubium est, quin he ad beatitudiuem vie deuia quedam sint: nec
perducere eo quemquam valiant. etc.
NOw is it no dout than, that these ways ne be a manner misleadynges to
blysfulnesse: ne that they ne mowen not leaden folk thider as they beheten to
leeden hem. But with how great harms these forsayde ways ben enlaced, I
shall show you shortly.

For why, if thou enforcest the to assemble money, thou must byreuen him his
money that has it. And if thou wolte shynen with dignities, thou must besechen
and supplyen hem, that yeuen tho dygnities. And if thou coueytest by honor to
goone beforne other folks, thou shalt defoule thy self through humblesse of
asking. If thou desyrest power, thou shall by awaytes of thy subjects
anoyusly be cast under by many paryls. Ask thou glory* thou shalt ben so
distracte by aspre things that thou shall forgone sikernesse. And if thou
would leden thy life in delytes, every wight shall despisen the, and forlee^
the as thou yt art thrall to thing, yt is right foul and bryttel, yt is to
said, servant to thy body. Now is it than well ysene, how little and how
bryttel possessyon they coueyten, that putten the goods of the body above her
own reason. For may thou surmounten these olyfauntes in greatness or in
weight of body? or may thou be stre^ger than the bull? May thou be swyfter
than the tygre? Behold the spaces and the stablenesse and ye swyfte course of
heaven, and stynt sometime to wondren on foul things The which heaven certes
nis not rather for these things to be wondered upon, than for the reason by
which it is governed. But the shynyng of thy form, that is to said, the
beautye of thy body, how swyftly passing is it, and how transitory? certes
it is more flyttynge than the mutabylitie of flowers of the summer season. For
so as Aristotel tells, that if that men had eyes of a beast that hight
lynx, so that the lokynge of folk might peercen through tho things that
withstonden it. who so looked than in then: trayles of the body of Alcibiades,
that was full fabre in the superfycie without, it should seem right foul.

And for thy, if thou semest fair, thy nature ne makes not that, but the
disceiuau^ce of feblenesse of the eyes that looken. But praise the goods of
the body as much as ever ye list, so yt thou know algates yt what so it be,
that is to said, of the goods of the body, which that thou wondreste upon
may been destroyed or else dissolved by the heat of a fever of three days. Of
which for said things I may reducen this shortly in a sum, that these wordly
goods, which yt ne mowen yeuen yt they behighten, ne ben not parfyte by the
congregation of all goods, that they ne be not ways ne paths yt bryngen men
to blysfulnesse, ne maken men to be blysfull.

Heu heu q^ miseros tramite deuios abducit ignorantia: Non aurum in viridi
queritis arbore. etc.
ALas, which follye, and which ignorance mysleadeth wandryng wretches from
the path of very good. Certes, ye seken no gold in grene trees, ne ye gadren
not precious stones in vynes, ne ye ne hyden not your gynnes in hye mountains
to catchen fysh: of the which ye may maken rich feestes.

And if ye like to hunt to Roes, ye ne go not to the foordes of the water that
hight Thyrene. And over this, men know well the crekes and the cauernes of the sea yhid in ye sloudes, and known eke which water is most plenteous of white
perles, and known which water abounds most of red purpure that is to said,
of a manner shelfysh, with which men dyen purpure: and known which stro^des
abounden most of tender fysshes, or of sharp fysshes, that hight Echynes. But
folk suffren hem self to ben so blind, that hem ne retchen not to know
where thylke goods ben yhid, which that they coueten, but plungen hem in
earth, and seken there thylke good that surmounteth the heaven, that bears
the sterres. what prayer may I maken that be digne to the nyce thoughts of
men? But I pray that they coueyten richesse and honors, so that when they
have gotten tho false goods, with great travail, that thereby they mowen
known the very goods.

Hactenus mendacis formam felici tatis ostendisse sufficerit, quod si
perspicaciter intuearis, ordo est deinceps, etc
IT suffyseth that I have said hitherto, the form of false welefulnesse, so
yt if thou look now clearly: the order of mine entention requires from hence
forth to shown the very welfulnesse.

B. For sothe (quod I) I se well now, that suffysaunce may not common by
riches, ne power by realms, ne reverence by dignities, ne gentlesse by glory,
ne joy by delyces.


Phi. And haste thou well known the causes (quod she) why it is?


Boece. Certes me seems (quod I) that I se hem, right as though it were
through a little clyfte: But me were leauer known hem more openly of the.


P. Certes (quod she) the reason is already. For thylke thing that symply is
one thing without any deuysyon, the error and folly of mankind deuydeth and
departs it and mysleadeth it, and transporteth from very and parfyte good to
goods that be false and vnparfyte. But say me this: wenest thou, that he that
has need of power, that him ne lacks nothing?


B. Nay (quod I)


P. Certes (quod she) you say aryght for if so be that there is a thing that
in any part be febler of power, certes as in that it mote needs be nedy of
forayne help.


Bocce Right so it is (quod I)


Phi. Suffisaunce and power ben of one kind.


B. So seems, quod I


Philoso. And demest thou (quod she) that a thing that is of this manner, that
is to say suffysaunt and mighty, ought been dispysed, or else that it be right
digne of reverence above all things?


B. Certes (quod I) it is no dout that it is right worthy to be reverenced.


P. Let us adden (quod she) reverence to suffysaunce and to power, so that we
demen yt these three things he all one thing.


B. Certes quod I, let us adden it if we will grant the soth.


P. what demest thou (quod she) than is that a dark thing and not noble, that
is suffysau^t, reverent, and mighty? or else that it is right noble and right
clear by celebrat of renoume? Co^sydre tha^, quod she, as we have granted here
beforne, that he that ne has no need of nothing, and is most mighty and most
digne of honor, if him needs any clerenesse of renoume, which clerenesse he
might not graunten of him self: so for lack of thylke clearenesse he might
semen the febler on any side, or the more outcaste.

Gloss. That is to say, nay: For who so that is suffysaunt mighty, and
reuerente, clearenesse of renoume follows of the forsayde things: he has it
all ready of his suffysaunce.


B. I may not quod I, deny it, but I mot graunten as it is, that this thing
is right celebrable by clerenesse of renoume and noblesse.


Phil. Than follows (quod she) that we adden clerenesse of renoume to the
foresaid things, so that there be among hem no dyfferencee.


Boece. This is a consequence (quod I)


Philoso. This thing than (quod she) that ne has need of no forayne thing,
and that may do all thing by his strengthes, and that is noble and
honorable, is it not a merry thing and joyful?


Boece. But whence (quod I) that any sorrow might come to this thing that is
such: certes, I may not think.


Philosop. Than mote we graunten (quod she) that this thing be full of
gladness, if the forsayde things be sothe. And certes, also mote we graunten,
that suffisaunce, power, noblesse, reverence and gladness be only diverse by
names, but her substance has no diversity.


Boece. It mote nedelye be so (quod I)


Philosophia. Thylke thing than (quod she) that is one, and simple in his
nature, the wickedness of men departs and deuydeth it. And when they
enforcen hem to getten party of a thing, that ne has no part they ne getten
hem neither thylke party, that nys none, ne the thing all the whole that they
desire.


Boece. In which manner quod I.


Philosphia. Thilke man, quod she, that se^heth richesse to flyen poverty: he
ne trauayleth him not for to get power, for he has leauer be dark and vile,
and eke with draws from him self many naturell delytes, for he nolde leese
the money that he has assembled. But certes, in this manner, he ne gets him
no suffysaunce, yt power for lets, and that molestie prycketh, and that
fylthe makes outcaste, and that darkness hydeth. And certes, he that
desires only power, wastes and scattreth richesse, and despyseth delyces
and eke honor that is with out power, ne he ne prayseth glory nothing. Certes,
thus see thou well, that many things faylen to him: For he has sometime
default of many necessities, and many anguisshes byten him. And when he may not
don tho defautes away, he forleteth to be mighty, and that is the thing that
he most desires. And right thus may I make semblable reasons of honor, of
glory, and of delytes. For so every of these forsayde things is the same that
these other things been, that is to said all one thing. whosoever seeks to
getten that one of these, and not yt other, he ne gets not that he desires.


B. what say thou, that if that a man couete to getten all these things
together.


P. Certes (quod she) I would say that he would get him sovereign
blysfulnesse, but that shall he find in tho things that I have showed, that
mow not yeuen that they beheten.


B. Certes, no (quod I)


Philo. Than (quod she) ne shullen men not by no way seken blysfulnes in such
things as men wenen, that they ne mow given but one thing syngulerly of all
that men seken.


Boece. I grant well (quod I) ne none sother thing may be said.


P. Now have thou than (quod she) the form and the cause of false
welefulnesse: Now turn and flyt again to thy thought, for there shall thou
seen anon thylke very blysfulnesse, that I have behyght the.


B. Certes (quod I) it is clear and open, though it were to a blind man: And
that shewedst thou me a little here beforne, when thou enf^rcedest the to show
me the causes of the false welefulnesse. For (but if I be begyled) than is
thylk very blissfulness and parfyte, that perfytely makes a man suffysaunt,
mighty, honorable, noble and full of gladness. And for thou shall well know,
that I have well understood these things within my heart: I know well that
thylke blysfulnesse that men verelye yeuen one of the forsayde things, syns
they been all one: I know doutlesse, that thylke thing is full of blysfulnesse.


P. O my norice (quod she) by this opinion I say, that thou art blysfull, if
thou put this thereto that I shall said.


B. what is that (quod I)?


Phy. Trowest thou that there be any thing in this erthly mortal tomblyng
things, that may bryngen this estate?


Bo. Certes (quod I) I trow it not: and thou have showed me well that over
thylke good there nis nothing more to ben desired.


P. These things tha^ (quod she) that is to said, erthly suffysau^ce and
power, and such things erthlye, they semen likeness of very good, or else it
seems that they yeuen to mortal folk a manner of goodness, that ne be not
parfyte: but thylke good that is very and parfyt, that may they not yeuen.


B. I accord me well (quod I).


Phi. Than (quod she) for as much as thou have known, which is thilke very
blysfulnesse, and eke which thylke things ben, that lain falslye blysfulnesse,
that is to say, that by disceyte semen very goods: Now behooves the to know
whence and where thou mow seek thylke very blysfulnesse.


B. Certes, quod I that desire I greatly, and have abyde^ long time to harken
it.


P. But for as much (quod she) as it lyketh to my disciple Plato in his book of
Thimeo, that in right little things men shulden beseech the help of God: what
iudgest thou that be now to done, so that we may deserve to find the seat
of thylke soueraygne god?


B. Certes (quod I) I deem that we shullen clepe to the father of al godges,
for withouten him nys there nothing founded aryght.


P. Thou say aryght (quod she) and began anon to syngen right thus.


O qui perpetua mundum ratione gubernas. Terrarum celique sator, qui tempus ab
euo, ire iubes, stablisque manens das cuncta moueri. Quem non externe
pepulerunt fingere cause. etc.
O Thou father soueraygne and creator of heaven and of erthes that gouernest
this world by perdurable reason, that commaundest the times to gone, sith that
age had beginning. Thou that dwell thy self aye steadfast and stable, and
yeuest all other things to be meued, ne foreyne causes ne cesseden yt never to
compoun work of flottring matter but only the form of soueraygne good yset
within the without envy, that meued the freely. Thou that art alderfayrest,
bearing the fair world in thy thought: formedest this world to thy likeness
semblable of the fair world in thy thought. Thou drawest all thing on thy
soueraygn enampler, and commaundest that this world perfetlyche ymaked, have
freely and absolute his perfyte parties. Thou byndest the elements by no^bres
proporcionables, that the cold things mowen accorden with the hoote things,
and the dry things with the moist: That the fire that is purest, ne fle not
ouerhye, ne that the heaviness ne draw notte adowne ouerlow the erthes that be
plonged in the waters. Thou knyttest together the mean soul of treble kind
mouyng al things, and deuidest it by members acccording And when it is thus
divided, it has assembledde amouynge into roundes, it goes to turn again to
him self, and enuyroneth a full deep thought, and turns the heaven by
semblable image. Thou, by even like causes enhauncest the souls and the less
lives, and hablynge hem to heyght by light waynes or carts. Thou sowest hem
into heaven and into earth, and when they be converted to the by thy benign
law, thou make hem return again to the by again leding fire. O father, give
thou to the thought to styen up into thy strayte sete, and grant him to
enuyronne the well of good. And ye light ysounde grant him to fyxen the clear
syghtes of his courage in the: and scatre thou, and to break the weyghtes and
the clouds of erthly heaviness, and shine thou by thy brightness, for thou
clerensse art thou art pesyble rest to debonayre folk, thou thy self art
beginning, bearer, leader, path and term to look on the that is our end.

Quoniam igitur, q^ sit imperfecti que etiam perfecti boni forma vidisti nunc
demonstrandum reor. etc.
FOr as much than, as thou have seen which is the fourm of good, that nys not
parfyt and the form of good which that is parfyte, now trow I that it were
good to show in what this perfection of blysfulnesse is set And in this thing
I trow that we shall first inquire for to weten, if that any such manner good
as thylke good as thou have d^fynyshed a little here beforne, that is to sayn
soueraygne good, may be founden in the nature of things. For that vain
ymaginacion of thought ne disceiue us not, and put us out of the sothfastnesse
of thilke thing that is submytted to us. But it may not be denied that thylke
ne is, and that is right as a well of all goods. For all thing that is cleped
imparfyte, is proved imparfyte, by the amenusynge of perfection of thing that
is parfyte. And hereof comes it, that in every thing general, if that men
seen any thing that is vnparfyte: certes thilke thing general, there mote be
some thing that is perfyte. For if so be that perfection is done away, men
may not think ne say from whence thylke thing is, that is cleped imperfyte.
For the nature ne took another beginning of things amenused and imperfyte, but
it proceeds of things that been al hole absolute, and discendeth so down into
the vttrest things, and in to things empty and without fruit. But as I have
showed a little here beforne, that if there be a blysfulnesse that be freyle
and vain, and imparfyte, there may no man dout, that there nis
somblysfulnesse, that there is sad, steadfast and parfyte.

B. This is concluded (quod I) fermely and sothfastly.


P. But consydre also (quod she) in whom this blissfulness inhabyteth. The
common accord and conceyte of the courage of men proves and grants, ye
god prince of all things is good. For so as nothing may be ^hout better than
good, it may not be douted than, that he that nothing nis better tha^ he nis
good. Certes, reason shows that god is so good, that it proves by very
force, that parfyte good is in him. For if God nis such, he ne may not ben
prince of all thing. For certes, somthyng possessynge in it self parfyte good,
should be more worthy than God: and it should semen that thilk thing were
first and older than God. For we have showed apertly, that all things yt been
parfyte, ben first, or things that been imparfyte. And for thy, for as much as
that my reason or my process ne goo not away without an end, we owe^ to
graunten that the sovereign good is ryghtfull of souerayn parfyte good. And we
have establysshed, yt the sovereign good is very blysfulnesse, tha^ mote it
needs be, that very blysfulnesse is set in sovereign good.


B. This take I well (quod I) ne this ne may not be withsayde in no manner.


P. But I pray the (quod she) se now how thou may prouen holily, and
without corruption, this that we have said that the sovereign God is full of
right sovereign good.


B. In which manner (quod I)


P. wenest thou ought (quod the) that the father of al things has taken
thilke souerayn good any where out of him self? Of which sovereign good, men
proves that he is full. Right as thou might thinke^, that god yt has
blysfulnesse in him self, and thilk blissfulness that is in him were diverse in
substance. For if thou wene, yt God has received thylke good out of him self,
thou may wene, that he that yaue thilke good to God be more worthy than God.
But I am beknowe and confess, and that right dignly, that God is right worthy
above al things And if so be, yt this good be in him by nature but that is
diverse from him by wenynge reason, syns we speken of God prince of all things.
Feign who so feign may, who was he that conjoined these things together. And
eke at the last se well, that a thing that is diverse fro any thing, that
thylke thing nys not that same thing, for which it is vnderstonden to ben
diverse. Than follows it well, that thylke thing yt by his nature is diverse
from sovereign good, that thing is not sovereign good. But certes, it were a
felonous cursednesse to thynken, yt of him that nothing nis more worth. For
always of all things the name of hem ne may not ben better than her begynner.
For which I may concluden by right very reason, that thylke that is beginning
of al things, thilke same thing is sovereign God in his substance.


B. Thou have said ryghtfully (quod I)


Philoso. But we have granted (quod she) that the sovereign good is
blysfulnesse.


Boece. That is soth (quod I)


Philosophye. Than (quod she) we moten needs graunten and confessen, that
thilke same sovereign good be God.


Boece. Certes (quod I) I ne may not deny ne withstand the reasons purposed:
and I se well that it follows by strength of the premises.


Phylo. Look now (quod she) if this be proved yet more fermely thus, that
there ne mowe^ not ben to sovereign goods that been diverse among hem self.
For certes, the goods that been diverse among hem self, that one is not that
the other is. Than ne mowen neither of hem be parfyte, so as either of hem
lacks to other, but that that nys not parfyte, men may seen apertly that it
nys not sovereign. The things than that been soueraynly good, ne mowen by no
way be diverse. But I have well concluded, that blysfulnesse and God been the
sovereign good, for which it mote neades been that sovereign blysfulnesse is
sovereign dignity.


Boce. Nothing (quod I) is more sothefast than this, ne more ferme by reason,
ne a more worthy thing than god may not be concluded.


Philosophy. Upon these things than (quod she) right as these geometricie^s
when they have showed their propositions ben wont to bryngen in things that
they clepen porrismes or declaracions of forsaid things, right so woll I give
the here as a corallarye, or a mede of crown. For why, for as much as by the
getting of blysfulnesse, men been maked blysfull: and blysfulnesse is
dignity. Than is it manifest and open, that by the getting of dignity men
be^ maked blysfull, right as by the getting of justice. And by the gettyng of
sapyence they be maked wise, right so needs by the semblable reason, when they
have gotten dyuinitie, they be made gods. Than is every blysfull man a god.
But certes, by nature there nys but one god, but by the participacion of the
diuynitie, there ne lets, ne dystourbeth nothing, that there ne be many
gods.


Boece. This is (quod I) a fair thing and a precious, clepe it as thou will
be it Corollarye, or Porrisme, or Mede of crown, or declarynge.


Philosophy. Certes (quod she) nothing nys fayrer than is the thing that by
reason should be added to these forsayde things.


Boece. what thing (quod I)


Phylosoph. So (quod she) as it seems, that blysfulnesse contains many
things, it were for to weten whether that all these things maken or conioynen
as a manner body of blysfulnesse, by the diversity of parties, of members, or
else if any of all these things be such that it accomplysshe by him self the
substance of blysfulnesse. So all these other things ben referred and brought
to blysfulnesse, that is to say, as to the chief of hem.


Boece. I would (quod I) that thou made me clearly to understand what thou
say, and what thou recordeste me the forsayde thing.


Philosophye. Have I not judged (quod she) that blysfulnesse is good?


Boece. Yes forsooth (quod I) and that sovereign good.


Philoso. Add than (quod she) thylke good that is made blysfulnesse to all the
forsayde things. For thylke same blysfulnesse, that is demed to be soueraygne
suffysaunce, thylke self is sovereign power sovereign reverence, sovereign
clerenesse or noblesse, and sovereign delight. what say thou than of al these
things, that is to say suffysaunce, power, and these other things? Ben they
than as members of blysfulnesse, or ben they referred and brought to sovereign
good, right as al things that been brought to the chief of hem?


Boece. I understand well (quod I) what thou purposeste to seek: but I desire
for to harken, that thou show it to me.


Philoso. Take now thus the discretion of this question (quod she.) If all
these things (quod she) weren members to felicity, than weren they diverse
that one from that other: and such is the nature of parties or of members,
that diverse members compownen a body.


Boece. Certes (quod I) it has well be showed here beforne, that all these
things ben all one thing.


Philo. Than ben they mo members (quod she.) For else it should seem, that
blissfulness were conjoined all of o membre aloone, but that is a thing that
may not be done.


Boece. This thing (quod I than) ^^s not doutous but I abide to hearken the
remnaunt of thy questyon.


Philo. This is open and clear (quod she) that all other things ben referred
and brought to good. For therefore is suffysau^ce required, for it is demed to
be good, and for thy is power required, for men trowen also that it be good.
And this same thing mowen we thynken and coniecten of reverence, of noblesse
and of delight. Than is sovereign good, the sum and the cause of all that
ought to ben desired. For why, thylke thing that withholdeth no good in it
sell, ne semblaunce of good, it ne may nor well in no manner be desired ne
required. And contrary: For though that things by her nature ne ben not good,
algates if men wenen that they ben good, yet ben they desired as though they
were verelye good. And therefore it is said, that men ought to wene by right,
that bounty been the sovereign fine and the cause of all the things that been
to requyren. But certes, thilke that is cause for which me^ requiren any thing,
it seems that thilke same thing be most desired, as thus: If that a wyghte
would ryden for cause of heal, he ne desires not so much ye mouinge to ryden
as the effect of his heal. Now than syns that al things ben required for
the grace of good, they ben not desired of al folk more than the same good.

But we have granted that blysfulnesse is that same thing, for which that
all these other things been desired. Than is it thus that certes only
blysfulnesse is required and desired. By which thing it shows clerelye, that
of good and blysfulnesse is all one and the same substance.


Boece. I se not (quod I) wherefore that men might discorden in this.


Philosoph. And we have showed, that God and very blysfulnesse is all one
thing.


Boe. That is soth (quod I).


Phi. Than mow we conclude sykerly, that the substance of God is set in
thylke same good, and in none other place


Huc oe^s pariter venite capti, Quos fallar ligat improbis catenis, Terrenas
habitans libido mentes. Hic erit vobis requies laborum. etc.
Comes all together now ye that been ycaughte, and bound with wicked
chains, by the deceyuable delight of earthlye things inhabytinge in your
thought. Here shall be the rest of your labor: here is the haven stable in
quiet pesyble. This alone is the open refute to wretches, that ^s to said,
that ye that be combred and deceived with worldly affectious, comes now to
this souerayn good that is God: that is refute to hem that wyllen comen to him.
All the things that the river Tagus yeueth you with his golden grauels, or else
all the things that the river Hennus yeueth with his reed brynke: or ye Indus
yeueth, that is next the hot party of the world, that medleth the grene
stones with the white: ne should not cleren the loking of your thought, but
hyden rather your blind courage within her derkenesse. All that lyketh you here
and excyteth and moves your thoughts, the earth has noryshed it within his
low caves. But ye shynyng, by which the heaven is governed, and whence that his
strength, that escheweth the derke ouerthrowyng of ye soul, and who so ever
may known thylke light of blysfulnesse, he will said, that the white beams
of the su^ne ne be not clear.

Assentior (iuquam) cu^cta enim firmissi mis nexa rationibus constant. Tu^
illa, quanti, inquit, tu estima bis, si bonum ipsum, quid sit, agnoueris* etc.
BOece. I assente me (quod I) for all things ben strongly bounden with right
ferme reasons.


Philoso. How much will thou praysen it (quod she) if that thou know what
thylke good is?


Boece. I wol praise it (quod I) by price without end, if it shall betyde me
to know also together god that is good.


Phi. Certes (quod she) that shall I do the by very reason, if that those
things, that I have concluded a little here beforne, dwelle^ only in her
grau^tyng.


B. They dwellen granted to the (quod I) yt is to said, as who says, I
grant to thy foresaid conclusyons.


Philoso. I have showed the (quod she) that the things that been required of
many folk ne been not very goods ne perfect. For they been diverse that one
from ye other. And so as each of hem is lacking to other, they ne have no power
to bring a good, that is full and absolute. But than at erste been they very
good, wha^ they been gathered together all in to one form, and in to one
werkynge: so that thylke thing that is suffysaunt, thylke same is power, and
reverence, noblesse, and mirth. And forsothe but if all these things be all
one same thing, they ne have not whereby that they mow be put in the nombre of
things that ought to be required and desired.


Boece. It is showed (quod I) ne hereof may there no man douten.


Phi. The things than (quod she) that ne been no goods, when they been
diverse, and when they begynnen to be al one thing, than been they goods, ne
comes it not tha^ by the gettyng of unity, that they be maked goods.


Boece. So seems it (quod I)


Philo. But al thing that is good (quod she) graunteste thou that it be good
by the participation of good or no?


Boece. I grant it (quod I)


Philoso. Than must thou granted (quod she) by semblable reason that one and
good be one same thing. For of things, of which the effect nys not
naturelly diverse, needs her substance must be one same thing.


Boece. I ne may not deny it, (quod I)


Philoso. Haste thou not known well (quod I) that all thing that is, has so
long his dwelling and his substance, as long as it is one, but when it
forletteth to been one, it must needs dyen and corrumpen together?


B. In which manner (quod I)


Philo. Right as in beestes (quod she) when the soul and the body been
conjoined in one, and dwellen together, it is cleped a be: and when her
unite is distroyed by the dysceuerau^ce of that one from that other, than
shows it well yt it is a deed thing and it is no longer no beast. And the body
of a wight while it dwells in one form by conjunction of members, it is
well seen that it is a figure of mankind: And if the parties of the bydye be
divided and disceuered that one from that other, that they distroye the unite,
ye body forleteth to be, that it was beforne. And who so would renew in the same
manner by all things, he should seen yt without dout every thing is in his
substance, as long as it is one. And when it forleteth to be one, it dies
and perishes.


Boece. wha^ I consider (quod I) many things, I se none other.


Philoso. Is there any thing (quod she) that in as much as it lives
naturelly, that forleteth the talent or the apetyte of his being, and desires
to come to death and to corruption?


Boece. If I consider (quod I) the beasts that have any manner nature of
wyllyng and nyllyng, I ne find no be but if it be constrained fro without
forth, that forleteth or dyspyceth the entencion to lyuen and to duren, or
that will his thanks hasten him to dyen. For every beast trauayleth him to
defend and keep the sauacion of his life, and escheweth death and dystruction.
But certes I doubt me of herbs and trees, that ne have no feeling souls, ne
no naturell workings, serving to appetytes, as beasts have: whether they
have appetyte to dwell, and to duren.


Philosoph. Certes (quod she) thereof dare the not doubt. Now look upon the
herbs and trees, for they wexen first in such place as been couenable to
hem: in which places they mow not dyen ne dryen, as long as her nature may
defend hem. For some of hem wexen in feldes, and some wexen in mou^taignes,
and other wexe in mareys, and other cleauen on rocks, and some wexen ple^teous
in sondes. And if any wight enforce him to bear hem in to other places, they
wexen dry. For nature yeueth to every thing that is conueniente to him, and
trauayleth that they ne dye, as long as they have power to dwellen and to
lyuen. what will thou said of this, that they drawn all her nouryshynges by
her roots, right as they hadde^ her mouths yplou^ged within the earthes, and
sheaden by her maryes her wodde and her bark? And what will thou said of
this, that thylke thing that is right soft, as the marye is, that is always
hid in the seat all within, and that is defended from without by the
steadfastness of wodde, and that the vttereste barks is put against the
distemperaunce of the heaven, as a defendoure, mighty to suffr^^ harm? And
thus certes may thou well seen, how great is the dyligence of nature: For
all things renouelen and publyshed hem with seed ymultyplyed. Ne there nys no
man, that ne wot well that they ne been right as a foundemente and edefyce,
for to duren not only for a time, but right as for to dure perdurably by
generation. And yt things eke, that men went ne have no souls, ne desire they
not by semblable reason to kepen that is his, that is to said, that is
according to her nature in conservation of her being and enduryng? For
wherefore else bears lyghtnesse the flambes up, and the weyghte presses the
earth adowne, but for as much as thylke places and thylke mouinges be
couenable to eueryth of hem. And forsothe every thing keeps thylke, that is
according and propre to him, right as things that been contraryous and
enemies corrumpen hem. And yet the hard things (as stones) cleauen and holden
her parties together right fast and hard, and defenden hem in withsta^dyng,
that they ne departen lightly and yeuen place to hem, that breaken or deuyde^
hem: but nathlesse they retournen again soon in to the sam things from whence
they be araced. But fire f^eeth and refuses all deuysyon. Ne I ne treat not
now here of wylful mouinges of the soul that is knowing, but of naturell
entention of things, as thus: Right as we swalowen the meat that we receyuen,
and ne think not on it, and as we draw our breath in slepyng, that we weten
while we slepen. For certes in the beestes the love of her lyuynges ne of her
beynges, ne comes not of the wylnynges of the soul, but of the begynnynges of
nature for certes thoroughe constraynynge causes will desires and embraseth
full often times the death, that nature dredeth, that is to sayn as thus: that a
man may be constrained so by some cause, that his will desires and takes the
death, which that nature hates and dredeth full sore. And some time we seen
the contrary, as thus: yt the will of a wight disturbeth and constrayneth that,
that nature always desires and requires, that is to say yt works of
generation, by the which generation only dwells and is sustained the long
durabylite of mortal things, as thus. This charity and this love that every
thing has to him self, ne comes not of the mouynge of the soul, but of
the entencion of nature. For the purueyaunce of God has yeuen to things,
that been create of him this, that is a full great cause to lyuen and to duren,
for which they desyren naturelly her life, as long as ever they mowen: for
which thou may not dreden by no manner, that all things that been any where,
that they ne require^ naturelly the ferme stablenesse of perdurable dwelling,
and eke the eschewyng of destruction.


Boece. I confess (quod I) that I se well now, and certainly withouten dout,
the things that a while ago semeden uncertain to me


Philoso. But (quod she) thylke thing that desires to be and dwell
perdurablye, he desires to been one: for if that one were distroyed, certes
being should there none dwellen to no wight.


Boece. That is sothe (quod I)


Philo. Than (quod she) desyren all things one


Boece. I assent (quod I)


Phi. And I have showed (quod she) that thilke same one is, thilke that is good.


Boece. Yea forsooth (quod I)


Phi. All things than (quod she) requyren good, and thylke may thou
discriuen thus: Good is thylke thing that every wight desires


Boece. There ne may be thought no more very thing (quod I) for either all
things be referred and brought to naught, and floteren without gouernoure
dispoyled of one as of her propre head, or else if there be any thing, to
which that all things tenden and hyen to, that thing must be the sovereign
good of all goods.


Philosoph. Than said she thus: O my norice (quod she) I have great gladness
of the, for thou haste fixed in thy heart the myddell sothfastnesse, that is to
sayue the prycke, but this thing has be discovered to the, in that thou
saydeste, that thou wystest not a little here beforne.


Boece. what is that (quod I)


Philo. That thou ne wystest not (quod she) which was the end of things, and
certes that is the thing that every wight desires. And for as much as we
have gathered and comprehended, that good is thylke thing that is desired of
all, than mote we needs confessen, that good is the fine of all things.


Quisquis profunda me^te vestigat verum, Cupitque nullis elle deuiis falli, Iu
se reuoluat intimi lucem visus. etc.
WHo so sekethe sothe by a deep thought, and coueteth to been disceyued by no
miswayes, let him rollen and treaten with him self, the light of his inward
sight: and let him gatheren again enclynynge in to a compase the long mouynges
of his thoughts. And let him teachen his courage, that he has enclosed and
hyde in his treasours, all that he has compassed or sought fro without: And
than thylke thing that the black clouds of error whylome had covered, shall
light more clearly than Phoebus him self ne shyneth. Glosa. who so will seek the
deep grounds of sothe in his thought, and woll not be disceyued by false
proposicions, that gone a mysse from the troth, let him well examine and roll
within him self, the nature and proprietes of the thing. And let him yet
eftesones examyne and rolle^ his thoughts by good deliberacion, or that he
deem. And let him teachen his soul, that it has by naturel pryncyples
kyndlyche yhydde within it self, all the troth, the which he ymagineth to
been in things without: and than all the darkness of his mysknowynge, shall
seem more enydently to the sight of his understanding, than the sun ne
seems to the sight without forth. For certes the body bringing the weight of
foryeting, ne has not chaced out of your thought all the clerenesse of your
knowing, for certaynlye, the seed of sothe holds and cleaves within your
courage, and it is awaked and excited by the wyndes and by the blastes of
doctrine. For wherefore else demen ye of your own will yt ryghtes wha^ ye be
asked, but if so were that the norishing of reason ne lived, yplunged in the
deep of your heart, that is to said, how should men demen the sothe of any
thing that were asked, and if there nere a root of sothfastnesse that were
yplunged and hyd in naturel princyples, the which sothfastnesse lived within
the depenesse of the thought. And if so be, that the muse and the doctrine of
Plato syngeth sothe, all that every wight lerneth, he ne does nothing else
than, but records, as men recorden things that been foryeten.

Tum ego, Platoni (inquam) vehementer assentior. Nam me horum sam secundo
commemoras. Primum quod memoriam corporea contagione. etc.
THan said I thus. I acorde me greatly to Plato, for thou recordest and
reme^breste me these things yet the second time, that is to say, first when
I left my memory by the contrarious conjunction of the body with the soul: and
eftsoon afterward, when I lost it confounded, by thy charge and by the
burdone of my sorrow, and than said she thus.

If thou look (quod she) first the things that thou haste granted, it ne
shall not been right far, that thou ne shalt remembren the ylke thing,
that thou saydest that thou nystest not.

Boece. what thing (quod I)


P. By which gouermente (quod she) that this world is governed.


Boece. I remember it well (quod I) and I cconfesse well, that I ne wyste it
naught. But all be it so, that I se now from a far, what thou purposest,
algates I desire yet to harken it of the more plainly.


Philoso. Thou ne wendest not (quod she) a little here beforne, that men should
dout that this world is governed by God.


Boe. Certes (quod I) ne yet ne doubt I it not ne I nyll never wene that it
were to doubt, as who says, but I wot well that God governs this world.
And I shall answeren the by what reasons I am brought to this This world (quod
I) of so many diverse and contraryous parties, ne might never have been
assembled in o form, but if there were one, that co^ioyned so many diverse
things. And ye same diversity of her natures that so discorden, that one fro
that other must departen, and vnioynen the things that been conjoined, if
there ne were one that contained, that he has conjoined and ybounde. Ne the
certain order of nature ne should not bring forth so ordeyne mouynges, by
places, by times, by doings, by spaces, by qualytees, if there ne were one that
were aye steadfast dwellinge, that ordained and disposed these diuersytees of
mouynges. And thylke thing what so ever it be, by which that al things been
ymaked, and ladde, I clepe him God, that is a word that is used to al folks.


Philoso. Than said she: Sith thou felyste thus these things, I trow that I
have little more to done, that thou mighty of welfulnesse, hole and sound, ne
se eftsoon thy country. But let us loken the things that we have purposed
here beforne. Have I not nombred and said (quod she) that suffysaunce is in
blysfulnesse? And we have accorded that God is thylke same blysfulnesse.


Boece. Yes forsooth (quod I).


Philoso. And that to govern this world (quod she) ne shall he never have
need of none help fro without. For else if he had need of any help, he ne
should not have no full suffysaunce.


Boe. Yes thus it more needs be (quod I).


Philo. Then ordained he by him self alone al things (quod she).


Boe. That may not be denied (quod I)


Philoso. And have showed thee God is the same good.


Boe. It remembers me well (quod I)


Philoso. Than ordeyneth he al things by thylke good (quod she) sith he which
we have accorded to be good governs all things by him self. And he is a key
and a steyre, by which the edifyce of this world is kept stable and without
corrumpynge.


Boece. I accord me greatly (quod I) And I have apperceyued alytle beforne,
that you would say thus. All were it so, yt it were by a thynne suspeccyon.


Phi. I trow well (quod she). For as I trow, thou ledest now more ententyflye
thine eye, to loken the very goods. But nathlesse, ye thing that I shalll tell
the, yet ne shows not less to lo^^.


Boece. what is that (quod I).


Philoso. So as men trow (quod she) and that right fully, that God governs
al things by the key of his goodness. And al these same things that I have
taught the hasten hem by naturel ente^cyon to come to good, there may no man
doubten that they ne been governed voluntaryly. And that they ne co^uerten hem
of her own good will to her ordeynoure. As that they been according and
inclinyng where governor and to her king.


Boece. It mote needs be so (quod I) for the realm ne should not seem
blysfull, if there were a ^oke of mysdrawynges in diverse parties, or the saving
of obediente things, ne should not be then.


Philo. Is there nothing (quod she) yt keeps his nature, that enforces him
to gone against God?


Boece. No, quod I.


P. and if yt any thing enforced him to wythstande God, might it auaylen at
last again him that we have granted to be almighty by the right of
blissfulness?


Boece. Certes ^^od I, all utterly it ne might not avail him.


Philoso. Then is there nothing, quod (...) that either may or will wythstande
to his sovereign God.


Boece. I trow not, quod I.


Philyso. Then, quod she, is thylke the sovereign God, that all things
gouernethe strongly, and ordeyneth hem softly.


Boece. Then said I thus, I delight me, quod I, not only in thendes or in the
sum of the reasons that thou haste concluded and proved, but thylke words
that thou vseste, delyten (...) much more, so that at last fools, yt sometime
renden great things, oughten been ashamed of hem self, that is to said,
that we fools that reprehe^den wyckedly ye things that touchen gods
governance, we oughten been ashamed our self. As I. that ^ard that God
refuses only the works of men, and ne entermeteth not of it.


Philoso. Thou haste well herd, quod she, the fables of the poets, how the
gyauntes assayleden heaven, with the gods: but forsothe the debo^^^e force of
God dysposed hem as it was worthy, yt is to sayn, distroyed ye grau^tes as it
was worthy. But wylt you that we reyione^ together thylke same reasons? For
perauenture of such conjunction may sterten up some fair spark of soth.


B. Do, quod I, as list.


P. ^enest thou, quod she, yt God ne be almighty?


Boece. No man is in doubt of it certes, quod I.


Philoso. No wight ne douteth it, if he be in his mind, quod she. But he that
is almighty, there nys nothing that he ne may.


Boe. That is soth, quod I.


Philo. May God do yuel, quod she?


Boece. Nay forsooth, quod I,


Philo. Than is yuell nothing (quod she) sith that he ne may done none yuell,
that may done all things.


Boece. Scornest thou me (quod I) or else playest thou, or deceyuest thou me,
that haste so wonnen with thy reasons the house of Dedalus so entrelasyng that
it is unable to be unlaced, yt thou otherwhyle entrest there thou issuest, and
otherwhyle issuest there thou entrest? Ne foldest thou not together by
replication of words a manner wonderful cercle or enuyronnyng of ye simplicite
dyuine? For certes a little here beforn when thou began at blysfulnesse, thou
saydest that it is sovereign good, and that god is the blysfulnesse, for which
thou yaue me as a couenable yefte, that is to saine, that no wight nys blysful,
but if he be god also there with, and saydest eke, that ye form of good is the
substance of God and of blysfulnesse. And saydest that thylke one is thylke
same good, that is required and desired of all the kind of things. And thou
prouedest in disputyng, that God governs all the things of the world, by
the governance of bountye: And saydest that al things would obeyen to him, and
saydest that the nature of yuell is nothing. And these things shewdest thou
not with no reasons taken fro without, but by proves in cercles and homlyche
knowing. The which proves drawn to hem self her faith and her accord
eueriche of hem of other.


Philo. Than said she thus I ne scorn not, ne play, ne dis^eyue the: but I
have showed the thing that is greateste over al things, by the yefte of god,
that we whylom prayden. For this is the form of dyuine substance, that is
such, that it ne slydeth not into vtterest forayne things, ne receives not no
strange things in him. But right as Permenides sayden in greek, of thylke
divine substance: He said thus, that thylke dyuine substance turns the
world and the mouable cercle of things, while the ylke dyuine substance
keeps it self without mouynges, that is to said, that he month never mo,
and yet it moves al other things But nathlesse, if I have styred reasons that
be not taken fro without the compace of the thing, of the which we treaten,
but reasons that been bestowed within compace there nys not why thou should
meruaylen sith thou have learned by the sentence of Plato, that needs the words
mote been cosyns to the things, of which they speken.


Felix qui potuit boni, fontem vise relucidu^. Felix qui potuit grauis. etc.
BLyssed is that man that may seen the clear well of good: Blysfull is he that
may vnbynden him from the bounds of heavy earth. The poet of Thrace Orpheus,
yt whylom had right great sorrow, for the death of his wife. After that he had
maked and constrained by his wepely songs, the wodes mouable to re^ne, and had
maked the ryuers to stonden still, and had maked the hearts and hyndes to ioynen
dredelesse her sides to cruel lions, to harken his song, and had maked that
the hare was not agaste of ye hou^de which was pleased by song: So when the
most ardaunt love of his wife, brende the entrayles of his breast, ne the
songs yt had ouercomen all things, ne myghten not aswagen her lord Orpheus,
he playned him of the heaven gods, which that were cruel to him, he went him
to the houses of the he: And he tempered his blandyshyng song^s, b^ resonnynge
of strings, and spoke and long in weeping, all that ever he had received and
laued out of the noble wells of his mother Caliope the goddess. And he sange
with as much as he might of weeping, and with as much as love, that doubled
his sorrow might yeuen him and teach him, and co^moned the hell, and required
and besoughte by sweet prayer, the lords of souls in hell of releasynges,
that is to say, to yelden him his wife. Cerberus the porter of hell, with his
three heads was caught, and all abashed of the new song. And ye three
goddesses, Furyes and vengeresses of felonyes, that tourmenten and agaste^ the
souls by anoye woxen soroufull and sorye, and tears wepten for pity. Tho was
not the head of Ixion tonemented, by the ouerthrowynge whele. And Tantalus,
that was distroyed by the woodnesse of long thurst, dispysed the floodes to
drink. The foul that hight Vultur, that eats the stomach or the gyserne of
Tityus is so fulfilled of his song, that it nyll eaten ne tyren no more. At
the last the Lord and judge of souls was moved to myserirordies and cried: we
been ouercome^ (quod he) give we to Orpheus his wife to bear him company, he
has well ybought her by his songs and his dyties: but we will putten a law
(...) this, and couenaunte in the yefte, that is to sayn, yt till he be out of
hell, if he look behind him, that his wife shall come again unto us. But what
is he that may give a law to lovers? love is a greater law and a stronger to
him self than any law that me^ may yeuen. Alas, when Orpheus and his wife
were almost at the terms of the night, that is to said, at the last bounds
of hell, Orpheus looked backewarde on Eurydice hy^ wife, and lost her, and was
dead. This table apertayneth to you all, who so ever desires or seeks to lead his thought in to the sovereign day, that is to say to clerenesse of
sovereign good. For who so ever be so ouercomen that he fix his eyes into the
pytte of hell, that is to said: who so ever set his thoughts in erthly
things, all yt ever he has drawn of ye noble good celestial, he leseth it,
when he looks to the helles, this is to said into low things of the earth.

Thus ends the third book of Boece, and here after follows the fourth.
HEc cum philosophia dignita te vultus, et oris grauitate seruata, leniter,
suauiter que cecinisset, Tum ego nondum penitus insiti meroris oblitus. etc.
WHen Philosophy had songen softly and delectably the foresaid things keeping
ye dignite of her chere, and the weyghte of her words, I the^ that ne had all
utterly foryeten the weeping and the mourning that was set in mine heart,
forbrake the entencion of her, that intended yet to said some other things.

O (quod I) thou that art gyderesse of very light, the things that thou have
said me hitherto, ben to me so clear and showing by the dyuyne lokynge of hem,
and by thy reasons, that they ne mowen ben ouercomen. And thylke things, that
thou toldest me, all be it so that I had whylom foryeten hem, for ^he sorrow of
the wrong that has be done to me: yet nevertheless they ne weren not utterly
unknown to me. But this same is namely a right great cause of my sorrow, so
yt as the governor of things is good, if that yuels mowe^ ben by any ways:
or else if that yuels passen without punyshyng, the which thing only, how worthy
is it to ben wo^dred upon. Thou consydrest it well thy self certainly. But yet
to this thing there is yet an other thing joined more to be wondered upon. For
felonye is emperesse, and floureth full of richesse, and virtue nys not all only
with out medes, but it is cast down, and eke fortroden under the fete of
felonous folk: and it abyeth the tourmentes instead of wicked f^ions. Of all
which things there is no wight may maruaylen enough ne complaynen, that such
things be done in the reygne of god, that al things wot, and al things
may, and ne will not only but good things Then said she thus: Certes (quod
she) that were a great maruayle, and an abashyng with out end, and well more
horrible then all the monsters, if it were as thou wenest, that is to said,
that in the right ordain house of so much a father and an ordaynour of meyne
that the vessels that been foul and vile, should ben honored and heryed, and
the precious vessels should ben defouled and vile. But it is not so, for if the
things, that I have concluded a little here beforne, ben kept hole and
vnaraced, thou shalt well know by the authorite of god (of the whose reygne I
speak) that certes the good folk be always mighty and shrewes ben always
outcaste and feeble. Ne the vices be never more without pain ne the virtues ne
be not without mede. And that blysfulnesse comes always to good folk and
infortune comes always to wicked folk And thou shall well known many things
of this kind, that should ceasen thy playntes and strengthen the with steadfast
sadness. And for thou have seen the form of very blysfulnesse by me that have
whylom showed it the, and thou haste known in whom blysfulnesse is set:
althynge treated, that I trow be necessary to put forth, I shall shown the the
way, that shall bryngen the again unto thine house: and I shall fyxe feathers in
thy thought, by which it may arysen in heyght, so that all tribulation ydone
away, thou by my gydynge and by my pathe, and by my fledes, shalt mowen
return hole and sound into thy country.

Sunt etenim pen volueres michi, Que celsa conscendunt polt Quas sibi cli
velox men's induit. etc.
THen for thy swyfte feathers yt surmounten the heyght of the heaven, when the
swyft thought has clothed it in tho feathers, it dyspiseth the hateful
erthes, and surmounteth the rou^denesse of the great air, and it sees the
clouds behind his back, and passes the heyghte of the regyon of the fire,
that enchaufeth by the swyfte mouynge of the fyrmament, till that he aryseth
into the houses, that bearen the sterres, and joins the way with the sun
Phoebus, and felowshyppeth the way of the old cold Saturnus, and he ymaked a
knight of the clear sterre, that is to saye^, when the thought is made gods
knight, by the seeking of clear truth to comen to the very knowledge of god.
And thilk soul re^neth by ye clerk of sterrres, in all the places there as the
shynynge night is ypaynted, that is to said the night that is cloudlesse. For
on nyghtes that be cloudlesse, it seems that the heaven were painted with
diverse images of sterres. And when he has done there enough, he shall forleten
the last heaven, and he shall presen and wenden on the back of the swyft
fyrmament, and he shall be maked parfyte of the worshypfull light of god. There
holds the lord of things the scepter of his might, and attempreth the
gouernementes of the world and the shynynge judge of things, stable in him
self, governs ye swyft carte or wayne that is to said, the cyrculer mouynge
of the sun. And if thy way ledeth ye again, so that thou be brought thither,
then wylt thou say, that is the country that thou requyrest, of which thou ne
had no mind: but now it remembers me well, here was I borne, here wol I
faste^ my degree, here wol I dwell. But if the lyketh then to loken on the
darkenesses of the earth, that thou haste forleten, then shalt thou seen, that
these felonous tyrauntes, that the wretched people dredeth now, shullen ben
exyled from thylke fair country.

Tu^ ego pape inqua^, vt magna promittis. Nec dubito, qui possis efficere tu
modo que^ exitaneris, ne moreris.
THen said I thus: O I wonder me that thou behetest me so great things. Ne I
ne doubt not that thou ne may well perform that thou behetest: but I pray
the this that thou ne tarry not, to tell me thylke things, that thou have moved.

Ph. First (quod she) thou must needs know, that good folk ben always strong
and mighty, and the shrewes ben feeble and deserte, and naked of all
strengthes. And of these things certes eueryche of hem is declared and showed
by other. For as good and evil ben two contraries, if so be that good be sted
fast, then shows the feblesse all openly. And if thou know clearly the
frelnesse of yuel, the steadfastness of good is known. But for as much as the
faith of my sentence shall be the more ferme and haboundaunt, I woll gone by
that one way and by that other, and I woll conferme the things that been
purposed now on this side, and now on that side. Two things there ben, in
which the effect of all the deeds of mankind stands that is to said, will
and power: and if that one of these two fails, there nys nothing that may
be done. For if that will lacks, there nys no wyghte that undertakes to do
that he wol not done: And if power fails the will nys but idle, and stante
for naught. And thereof comes it, that if thou se a wight that would getten
that he may not getten, thou may not doubt that power ne fails him to
haven that he would.


Boece. This is open and clear (quod I) ne it ne may not been denied in no
manner


Philo. And if thou se a wight (quod she) that has done that he would done,
thou nyll not doubt, that he ne has had power to done it.


Bo. No (quod I)


P. And in that that every wight may in that me^ holden hem mighty to done a
thing In so much as a man is mighty to done a thing, in so much men hold
him mighty: and in that that he ne may, in that men demen hem to be feeble.


Boece. I confess it well (quod I)


Phi. Remember the (quod she) (...) I have gathered and showed by the forsayde
reasons that all the entencion of the will of mankind, which that is ladde by
diverse studyes, hastes to comen to blysfulnesse.


Boece. It remembers me well (quod I) that it has been showed.


Philoso. And records the naught then (quod she) that blysfulnesse is thylke
same good that men requyren, so that when blysfulnesse is required of all?


Boece. It records me not (quod I.) For I have it always in my memory fyxed.


Phi. All folk then (quod she) good and eke badde enforcen hem without
dyfference of entencion to comen to good.


Boece. This is very consequence (quod I).


Philoso. And certain is (quod she) that by getting of good be men maked good.


Boece. That is certain (quod I)


Philo. Then getten good men that they desyren.


Boece. So it seems (quod I.)


P. But wicked folk (quod she) if they getten the good that they desyren, they
ne mowen not be wicked.


Boece. So it is (quod I)


P. Then so as that one and that other (quod she) desyren the good, and the
good folk getten the good, and not the wicked folk: Then it is no doubt that
the good folk ne be mighty and wicked folk be feeble.


Boece. Who so that ever douteth of this, he ne may not consider the nature of
things ne the co^seque^ce of reasons.


Philoso. And over this, quod she, if that there ben two things that have one
sam purpose by kind, and that one of hem pursues and perfourmeth that same
thing by naturell office, and that other ne may not do^^ thylke office
naturell, but follows by other manner, the^ is couenable to nature, him that
accomplysheth his purpose kyndly, and yet he ne accomplysheth not his own
purpose: whether of these two demest thou for more meghtye?


Boece. If that I coniecte quod I, that thou would say, algates I desire yet
to harken it more plainly of the.


P^iloso. Thou nyl^e not the^ deny, quod she, (...) the mouement of going nys
in men by kind.


Boece. No forsooth, quod I.


Philo. Ne thou doutest not, quod she, that thylke naturell office of going,
ne be the office offere*


Boece. I ne doubt it not, quod I.


Philoso. Then, quod she, if that a wyghte ^e mighty to move and goes upon
his ^ete, and another, to whom thylke naturel office of fete lacks,
enforseth him to go crepy^ge on his hand, which of these two ought to be
holden the more mighty by right.


Boece. Knytte forth, quod I, the remnaunt.


Philosophia. For no wight ne douteth* that he that may gone by naturel office
of ^ete, ne be more mighty then he that ne may not. But the sovereign good,
quod she, that i^ even like purposed to the good and to the badde. The good
folk seken it by naturell office of virtues, and shrewes enforcen hem to
getten it by diverse couetyses of earthly things, which that nys no naturell
office to getten thylke sovereign good. Trowest thou that it be any otherwise?


Boece. Nay, quod I. For the consequence is open and showing of things that
I have granted, that needs good folk moten ben mighty, and shrewes moten
been feeble and vnmyghtye.


Philosophia. Thou rennest aryght beforne me, quod she, and this is the
judgment, that is to said, I judge of right, as these leches been wont to
hopen of sick folk, when they apperceyuen, that nature is redressed and
wythstandeth to the maladye. But for I se the now all ready to the
wythstandynge, I shall show the more thylke and continuell reasons. For look
how greatly shows the feblenesse and infyrmite of wicked folk, that ne
mowen not comen to that her naturell entencion leads hem: And yet almost
thylke naturell entencion constrayneth hem. And what were to demen then of
shrewes, if thylke naturell help had forlette^ hem, the which naturell help
of entencion goes always beforne hem, and is so great, that uneath it may be
ouercomen? Consider then how great defaute of power, and how great feblesse
there is in wicked felonous folk, as who says, ye greater thing that is
coueyted, and the desire not accomplyshed, of the less might is he that
coueyteth it, and may not accomplish. And for thy philosophy says thus by
sovereign good: Ne shrewes ne requyren not light medes ne vain games, which
they ne may not folowen ne holde^, but they faylen of thylke su^me of the
heyght of things, that is to said, sovereign good. Ne these wretches ne comen
not to theffecte of sovereign good, the which they enforcen hem only to getten
by nyghtes and by days, in getting of which good the strength of good folk
is full well ysent. For right as thou myghtest demen him mighty of going, yt
goes on his fete till he might comen to thylke place, fro the which place
there ne lay no way further to be gone: right so must thou needs demen him
for right mighty, which that gets and attayneth to the end of all things,
which that been to desyren, beyond the which end there nys nothing to
desire. Of the which power of good folk men may conclude, that we wicked men
semen to be barayne and naked of all strength. For why forletten they virtues
and folowen vices, nys it not for that they ne known not the goods? But what
thing is more feeble and more caytyfe, then is the blyndnesse of ignorance? or
else they known well which things they oughte^ folowen, but lechery and
couetyse overthrows hem mysturned. And certes so does dystemperaunce to
feeble men, that mow not wrast len again these vices. Ne know they not well that
they forletten the good wylfullye, and tournen hem wylfully to vices. And in
this wise they ne forlete^ not only to be mighty, but they forleten al utterly
in any wise for to ben. For they that forlete^ the comune fine of all things
that been, they forleten also therwythall for to ben. And perauenture it should
semen to some folk, that this were a maruayle to said, that shrewes, which
that conteynen the more parts of men, ne been not, ne have no being. But
natheles it is so, and thus stante this thing. For they that be shrewes, I
deny not, but that they be shrewes, but I deny symply and plainly that they
ne be not, ne have no being. For right as thou myghtest feign of the carayne
of a man, that it were a deed man: so grant I well forsooth that vicious folk
ben wicked, but I ne may not absolutely and symplye grant that they ben. For
thylke thing that with holds order and keeps nature, thylke thing is and
has being. But what thing fails that, that is to say, he that forleteth
naturel order he forleteth thylke being that is set in his nature? But thou
wolt said, yt shrewes mowen. Certes that ne deny I not: but certes her power
ne dyscendeth not of strength, but of feblenesse, for they mowen done
wickedness, the which they ne might not, if they myghten dwellen in the form
and in the doing of good people. And thylke power shows euydently, yt they
mowe^ right naught For so as I have gadred and proved a little here beforn,
that evil is not, and so as shrewes may only but shreudnesse. This conclusyon
is al clear, that shrewes ne mow right naught, ne have no power. And for as
much as thou understand which is the strength of this power, I have
defynyshed a little here beforne, that no thing nys so mighty as sovereign good.


Boece. That is soth (quod I)


P. And thylke sovereign good may done none evil.


Boece. Certes no (quod I)


Philo. Is there any wight the^ (quod she) that weneth that men mowen done al
things?


Boe. No man (quod I) but if he be out of his wit.


Phi. But certes shrewes mowen don yuels (quod she)


Boece. Yea would god (quod I) that they ne myghten done none


Phi. Then (quod she) so as he that is mighty to done only good things, he
may done all things, and they that been mighty to done yuell things, ne
mowen not all things, then is it open thing and manifest, that they that
mowen done yuell ben of less power. And yet to prove this co^clusyon there
helps me this, that I have showed here beforne, that all power is to be
nombred among things that men oughten require. And I have showed that all
things that oughten been desired be referred to god, right as to a manner
heyght of her nature: but for to mowen done yuell and felonye, ne may not ben
referred to god. Then is not yuell of the nombre of things that oughten to
been desired and required. Then is it open and clear that the power ne the
mouynge of shrewes nys no power. And of all these things it shows well that
the go^d folk ben certainly mighty, and the shrewes doutlesse vnmyghty. And it
is clear and open that thylke sentence of Plato is very and soth, that says
that only wysemen may done that they desyren, and shrewes mowen h^^^ten that
hem lyketh, but that they desyre^, that is to said to come to sovereign good,
they ne have no power to accomplish that For shrewes done what hem list, when
b^ tho things in which they delyten, they wenen to attain to thylke good that
they desyren, but they ne getten ne attain not thert^ for vices ne comen not
to blysfulnesse.


Quos vides sedere celsos Sol^ culmine regis Purpura claros intent. etc.
WHo so that the couertures of he^ vain apparaylles might strypen of these
proud kings, that tho^ see sytten an high in her chayres glytterynge in
shynynge purpure, enuyronned with sorrowful armures, manassynge with cruel
mouth, blowynge by woodnesse of heart, he should seen that thylke lords be^ren
within her corages full strayte chains: for letherye tourmenteth hem on that
one side with gredye venymes and troublable ire, that arayseth in hem the
floode of troublynges, tourmenteth on that other side, her thought or sorrow
halte hem weary and ycaught, or slydynge and dysceyuynge hope tourmenteth hem.
And therefore sithe thou see one heed, that is to said, one tyrant bearen so
many tyrannyes, then ne does thylke tyrant not that he desires sith he is
cast down with so many wicked lords, that is to said, so many vices that
have so wyckedly lordshyps over him.

Vides ne igitur qua^do in ceno probra voluantur, que probitas luce
resplendeat, in quo perspicuum est nunquam bonis premia. etc.
See thou not the^ in how great fylthe these shrewes ben ywrapped, and with
which clerenesse these good folk shynen? In this shows it well that to good
folk ne lacked never mo her medes, ne shrewes ^^en never more tourmentes. For
of al things that be done, thylke thing for which ^^y thing is done, it
seems as by right, that thylke thing be ye mede of that, as thus if a man
renneth in the stadye or in the forlonge for the crown: then lies the mede in
the crown for which he re^neth. And I have ^hewed that blysfulnesse is thylke
same good for which that all things ben done. The^ is thylke same good
purposed to the works of mankind, right as a common mede, which mede ne may
not be dysceuered from good folk: For no wight as by right, from thensforth
that him lacks goodness, ne shall be cleped good: for which thing folk of
good manners her medes ne forsake hem never mo ^or al be it so that shrewes
waxen as wood as hem list against good folk, yet nevertheless the crown of
wysemen, ne shall not fallen ne fade^ fro forayne shreudnesse, ne benym men not
fro ye courage of good people her pro^^ honor. But if any wight reioysed him of
goodness, that he had taken fro without, is who says, if a man had his
goodness if any other man then of him self: certes he yt ^aue him thylke
goodness, or else some other wight might bynome it him. But for as much as to
every wight his propre bounte ^eueth him his mede, then at erst shall he fayken
of mede when he forleteth to be good. And at the last, so as al medes ben
required, for me^ wenen yt they be good, who is he that ^olde deem, that he
that is right mighty of good, were partelesse of mede? And of what mede shall
he be reguerdoned? Certes ofright fair mede and right great, abouen all medes.
Remember the of thilke noble corallarie yt I yaue the a little here beforne,
and gather it together in this manner. So as god him self is blysfulnesse, then
is it clear and certain, that all good people ben maked blysfull, for they ben
good, and thylke people that been blysful, it accords and is couenable to be
gods. Then is ye mede of people such, that no day ne shall enpayren it, ne
no wickedness shall dryken it, ne power of no wight ne shall not amenuse it,
that is to said, that been maked gods. And sith it is thus, that good me^ ne
faylen never more of her mede, certes no man ne may doubt of the vndepartable
pain of shrewes, that is to said, yt the pain of shrewes departs not from
hem self never mo. For so as good and evil, and pain and medes be contrary,
it mote needs be, that right as we se betyden in guerdone of good, that also
mote the pain of the yuel answer by the contrary parties to shrewes. Now
then so as bountye and prowes ben mede to good folk also is shreudnesse it
self tourme^t to shrewes Then who so ever is enteched and defouled with pain,
he ne douteth not, that he is enteched and defouled with evil. If shrewes then
woollen praysen hem self, may it semen to hem that they ben wythoute^ party of
tourment, sith they ben such that the vttrest wickedness, yt is to say,
wicked thewes, which is the vttrest and worst kind of shreudnesse, ne
defouleth ne entecheth not hem only, but enfecteth and enuenymeth greatly. And
also look on shrewes, that been the contrary party of good men, how great
pain feloushyppeth and fouleth hem: for thou have learned a little here beforne,
that all thing that is and has being, is one, and thylke same one is good:
then is this ye consequence, yt it seems well, that all thing yt is and has
being, is good, yt is to said, as who says, that being, unite and goodness
is al one. And in this manner it follows then, yt al thing that fails to be
good, it stynteth for to be and for to have any manner being: wherefore it is yt
shrewes stynten for to be yt they weren. But thylke other form of ma^kinde,
that is to said, yt form of the body without, shows that these shrewes
weren whylom men, wherefore when they been perverted and turned into malice,
certes the^ they have forlorn the nature of mankind: But so as only bountye
and prowess may enhau^sen every man, over men: then mote it needs be that
shrewes, which that shreudenesse has cast out of the condycyon of mankind,
been put under the merit and deserte of men. Then betydeth it, that if thou
see a wyghte which that is transfourmed into vices, thou may not wene
that he be a man: For if he be ardaunt in auaryce, and that he be a rauenour by
vyolence of forayne richesse, thou shalt said that he is like a wolf. And if
he be felonous and wythouten rest, and exercise his tongue to chydynges, thou
shalt lyken him to the hounde. And if he be a pryuy awaytour hid, and
reioyseth him to rauysh by wyles, thou shalt said him like to the fox
whelps. And if he be distempred and quaketh for ire, men shall wenen that he
bears the courage of a lion. And if he be dredful and flyenge, and dredeth
things which that ne oughten not to be dredde, men shall hold him like to the
heart. And if he be slow and astonyed and lache, men shall hold him like to
an ass. And if he be light and unsteadfast of courage, and changes aye his
studyes, me^ shall hold him like to the birds. And if he be plonged in foul
and unclean luxuryes, he is wythholden in the foul delyces of the foul sow.
Then follows it, yt he that forleteth bounte and prowess, he forleteth to be
a man, sith he ne may not passen in the condition of god, he is turned into a
be.

Vela Naricii ducis, Et vagas pelago rates, Eurus appulit insule Pulchra qua
residens dea, Solis edita semine. etc.
EVrus the wind aryued the sails of Vlixes duke of the country of Narice and
his wrandrynge ships by the sea into ye isle there as Circes ye fair gods
daughter of the sun dwells, that medleth to her new gestes, drynkes that been touched and maked with enchau^teme^tes. And after that her hand mighty
over the herbs had changed her gestes into diverse manners, that one of hem is
covered his face with form of a Boor, that other is changed into a Lion of
the country of Marmorike, and his nails and his tethe wexen. That other of hem
is newlyche changed into a wolf, and howleth when he would weep, that other
goes debonayrly in the house as a Tygre of Inde. But all be it so that the
godheed of Mercury that is cleped the bird of Archady has had mercy of the
duke Vlixes beseged with diverse yuelles, and has vnbounden hem fro the
pestilence of his hostess, algates the rowers and the maryners hadden by this
ydrawen into her mouths, and dronken the wicked drynkes. They that weren woxen
swyne, hadden by this ychaunged her meat of bread, for to eaten akorne of
Ookes. None of her lymmes ne dwells with hem hoole, but they have lost the
voice and the body, only her thought dwells with hem stable, that wepeth and
bewayleth the monstrous chaungynge that they suffren. O over light hand, as
who says feeble and light is the hand of Circes the enchaunteresse, that
chau^geth the bodies of folk into beestes to regard and to comparyson of
mutacyon that is maked by vices, at the herbs of Circes ne be not mighty, for all be it so that they may chaungen the lymmes of the body, algate yet they may
not change the hertes, for within is yhyd the strength and the vygoure of me^
in the secretour of her hertes, that is to said, the strength of reason, but
thylke venymes of vices to drawn a man to hem more myghtely then ye venym of
Cuces, for vices been so cruel that they persen and through passen the courage
within, and though they ne anoye not the body, yet vices wooden to destroyen
men by wound of thought.

Tu ego fateor, inquam, nec iniuria dici video viciosos, tam et si humani
corporis speciem seruent. etc.
THen said I thus: I confess and am aknowe it (quod I) ne I ne se not that men
may say, as by right, that shrewes ben changed in to beestes, by the qualite
of her souls, all be it so that they kepen yet the form of the body of
mankind: but I would not of shrewes, of which the thought cruel and wood,
woodeth always to the destruction of good men, that it were lefull to hem to
done that.

Certes (quod she) ne it is not lefull to hem as I shall well show the in
couenable place: but nathelesse if so were that thilke that men wene ben leful
to shrewes, were bynommed he^, so that they ne might not anoyen or done harm
to good men, certes a great party of the pain to shrewes should ben alleged
and releued. For all be it so that it ne seem credyble thing perauenture to
some folk, that it mote needs be yt the shrewes ben more wretches and sely,
when they may full done and parfourme that they coueyten, than if they might
not accomplyste that they coueyten: For if so be that it be wretchydnesse to
wylne^ to don yuel, than is it more wretchedness to mowe^ done yuell, without
which mowyng, the wretched will should languyshe without effect. Than sithe
every of these things has his wretchydnesse, that is to said, will to done
yuell, and mowyng to done yuell, it mote needs be that they shrewes be
constrained by her vnselynesses, that wolen and mowen and parfourmen felonyes
and shreudnesses

Boece. I acorde me (quod I) but I desire greatly, that shrewes losten soon
thylke vnselynesse, that is to sayn, that shrewes weren d^spoyled of mowyng to
done yuel.


Phi. So ^ullen they (quod she) sooner perauenture than thou woldeste, or sooner
than they hem self wene: for there nys nothing so late in so short bounds of
this life, that is long to abide, namely to a courage immortell. Of which
shrewes the great hope and the hye compassynges of shreudnesse, is often
destroyed by a sodeyn end or they be ware. And that thing establyshed to
shrewes, the end of her shreudnesse, for if that shreudnesse makes wretches
than must he needs be most wretch that longest is a shrewe, the which wciked
shrewes would I demyn aldermoost caytyfes and vnsely, if her shrewdness ne
were fynysshed at leest way by vtterest death, for if I have concluded sothe of
the vnselynesse of shrewdnes, than shows it plainly, that thilke wretchedness
is wythouten end, the which is certain to be perdurable.


Boece. Certes (quod I) this conclusyon is hard and wonderful to grant. But
I know well that it accords much to things that I have granted here
beforne.


Philo. Thou haste (quod she) right estymacyon of this. But who so ever wene
that it be a hard thing to accord him to a conclusyon, it is right that he
show that sum of yt premises ben false, or else he mote show that the
collacyon of proposycyons nys not spedeful to a necessary conclusyon. And if
it ne be not so, but yt the premysses ben ygraunted, there nys not why he
should blame the argument. For this thing that I shall tell the now, ne shall
not seem less wonderful, but of the things that been taken. Also it is
necessary, as who says it follows of that which that is purposed beforne.


Boe. What is that (quod I)


Phi. Certes (quod she) that is, yt these wicked shrewes be more blysfull or
else less wretches that abyen ye tourmentes that they have deserved, than if no
pain of Justice ne chastysed hem. Ne this ne say I not now, for that any man
might think that the manners of shrewes ben coryged and chastysed by
vengeance, and that they be brought to the right way by the dread of
tourment, ne for that they yeuen to other folks ensample to styen fro vices.
But I understand yet in another manner, that shrewes ben more vnsely when they
ne be not punyshed, all be it so that there ne be had no reason or law of
correction ne none ensample of lokynge.


Boece. And what manner shall that been (quod I) other than has be told here
beforne?


Phi. Have we not granted than (quod she) that good folk ben blysfull, and
shrewes ben wretches?


Boece. yes (quod I)


Philo. Than (quod she) if that any good were added to the wretchedness of
any wight, nys he not more weleful, than he that ne has no medlyng of good in
his solitarye wretchedness?


Boece. So semyth it (quod I.)


Philo. And what say thou than (quod she) of thylke wretch that lacks al
goods, so that no good nys meddled in his wretchedness, and yet over all his
wickedness, for which he is a wretch, that there be yet another yuell anexed
and knyt to him, shall not men demen him more vnsely, than thylke wretch, of
which the vnselynesse is releued by the participacyon of some good?


Boece. Why should he not (quod I.)


Phi. Than certes (quod she) han shrewes when they ben punysshed somewhat of
good anexed to her shrewdness, that is to said, the same pain that they
suffre^, which that is good, by yt reason of Justice. And wha^ thilke same
shrewes escapen without tourme^t, tha^ have they somewhat more of yuel, yet over
the wickedness that they han done, that is to sayn, defaute of pains, which
defaute of pain thou haste granted is yuell, for the deserte of felonye.


Boece. I ne may not deny it (quod I)


Phi. Much more than (quod she) ben shrewes vnselye when they ben wrongfully
delivered fro pain, than wha^ they ben punished by rightful vengeance. But
this is open thing and clear, that it is right that shrewes ben punyshed, and
it is wickedness and wrong that they escapen unpunished.


Boece. Who might deny it (quod I)


Philo. But (quod she) may any man deny that all that is right ne is good:
and also the contrary, that all that is wrong is wicked.


Boece. Certes (quod I) these things ben clear enough, and that we have
concluded a little here beforne. But I pray the that thou tell me if thou
accordest to letten no tourment to the souls, after that the body is ended by
the death, that is to sayn understand thou aught, that souls have any
tourment after the death of the body.


Phi. Certes (quod she) yea, and that right great of which souls (quod she) I
trow that some ben tourmented by asprenesse of pain, and some souls I trow
ben exercysed by a pourgynge meekness, but my counsel nys not to determyne
of this pains. But I have trauayled and told yet hyderto, for thou should
know that the mowynge of shrewes, which mowynge the seems to be unworthy,
nys no mowynge, and eke of shrewes, of which thou playnedest that they ne were
not punyshed that thou would se that they ne weren never mo withouten the
tourmentes of her wickedness. And of the license of the mowynge to done yuell,
that thou praydest that it might sone be ended, and that thou would feign
lernen that it ne should not long endure. And that shrewes ben more vnsely if
they were of longer during, and most vnsely if they weren perdurable. And
after this I have showed the, that more vnsely ben shrewes when they escapen
without her ryghtfull pain, than when they been punyshed by ryghtfull
vengeance. And of this sentence follows it, that than ben shrewes constrained
at the last with most grievous tourment, wha^ men wene that they ne be not
punyshed*


Boece. When I consider thy reasons (quod I) I ne trow not that men sayn any
thing more verily. And if I turn again to the studyes of men, who is he to
whom it should seem, that he ne should not only leven these things, but eke
gladly harken hem.


Philo. Certes (quod she) so it is, but men may not, for they have their eyes
so wont to the derknesse of erthly things, that they ne may not lift hem up
to the light of clear sothfastnesse. But they be^ like to birds of which the
night lyghtneth her lokynges, and the day blyndeth hem. For wha^ men loken not
the order of things, but her lusts and talentes, they wene that either the
leave or the mowynge to done wickedness, or else the scapynge without pain be
weleful. But consider the judgment of the perdurable law for if thou conferme
thy courage to the best things, thou ne have no need of no Judge to yeuen the
price or mede, for thou have joined thy self to the most excellent things.
And if thou have inclined thy studies to the wicked things, ne seek no foreyne
wrekery out of thy self, for thou thy self have thrist thy self in no wicked
things, right as thou might loke^ by diverse times the foul earth and the
heaven, and that all other things stynten fro without, so that thou were in
neither ne se nothing more. Than should it semen to the, as by only reason of
lokyng, that thou were now in the sterres and now in the earth, but the people
looks not on these things. What than, shall we than aproche us to hem that I
have showed that been like to beestes? And what would thou sayn of this, if
that a man had al forlorn his sight, and had foryeten that he ever saw, and
wened that no thing failed him of perfection of mankind? Now we which mighte^
seen the same things, would we not said that he were blind, ne also ne
accords not the people to that I shall sayn, the which thing is sustained by
as strounge foundementes of reason, that is to sayn, that more vnsely ben they
that do^ wro^ges to other folk, than they that the wrong suffren.


Boe. I would heren thilke same reasons (quod I)


Philo. Denyest thou (quod she) that all shrewes ne ben worthy to have
tourment? Nay (quod I)


Philo. But (quod she) I am certain by many reasons, that shrewes ben vnsely.


Boece. It accords (quod I)


Phil. Than ne doutest thou not (quod she) that thylke folk that been worthy of
tourment, that they ne be wretches.


Boece. It accords well (quod I)


Philoso. If thou were tha^ set a judge or a knower of things, whether
trowest thou that men should tourmenten hem that has done wrong, or else hem
that suffered the wrong?


Boece. I doubt not (quod I) that I nolde do suffycient satisfaction, to hem
that have suffered wrong, by the sorrow of hem that has done wrong.


Philo. Than seems it (quod she) that the doer of wrong is more wretch, than
he that suffered wrong.


Boece. That follows well (quod I)


Philo. Than (quod she) by these causes and by other causes, that been enforced
by the same rote, that fylth or sin by the propre nature of it makes men
wretches, and it shows well, that the wrongs that men don nys not the
wretchedness of him that receives the wrong, but the wretchedness of him
that does the wrong. But certes (quod she) these orators or advocates done
all the contrary, for they enforcen hem to commone the Iuges to ^a^e pity of
hem that done the greuaunces and the wrongs, the which shrewes it were a more
couenable thing, that the accusours or advocates, not wroth, but pyteous and
debonayre ledden tho shrewes that have done wrong to the judgment, right as
men leden syke folk to the leche, for that they shulden sekyn out the maladyes
of sin by tourment. And by this covenant either the entente of advocates
should cessen in all, or else if the office of the advocates would better
profyten to men, it should be turned in to the habyte of accusacyo^, that is to
sayn, they shulden accuse shrewes and not excusen hem. And eke the shrewes hem
self, if it were lefull to hem to seen at any clyfte the virtue that they have
forletten, and sawen that they should put ten adowne the fylthes of her vices by
the tourmentes of pains, they ne oughten not right for ye recompensacyon, for
to gete^ hem bounte and prowess, which that they have lost, demen and hold
that the ylke pains weren tourmentes to hem, and eke they wolden refuse the
attendaunce of her advocates, and taken hem self to her Iuges and to her
accusours, for ye which it betydeth, that as to the wise folks, there nys no
place yletten to hate, yt is to said, that hate ne has no place among wise
men. For no wight nyl haten good men, but if he were over much a fool and for
to haten shrewes, it nys no reason for right as languysshynge is maladye of
body right so ben vices and sin maladye of courage. And so as we ne deem not
that they which that been syke of her body, ben worthy to ben hated, but rather
worthy of pity. Well more worthy not to ben hated, but for to ben had in pity
ben they, of which the thoughts ben constrained by felonous wickedness, that
is more cruel than any languysshynge of body.


Quid ta^tos iuuat excitare motus, Et propria fatum sollicitate manu? Si mortem
petitis, propinquat ipsa, Sponte sua, volucres nec remoratur equos. etc.
WHat delyteth you to excyten so great mouynge of hatredes, and to haste^ and
busyen the fatal disposycyon of your death with your propre hands, that is to
sayn, by batayls or conteke? For if ye axen the death, it hastes him of his
own will, ne death ne taryeth not his swyfte horse. And the men that the
serpents, and the lion, and the tygre, and the beer, and the bore, seken to
sleen with their tethe, yet thylke same men seken to sleen eueryche of hem
other with sword. Lo, for her manners ben diverse and discordaunt, they mouen
vnryghtful hosts and cruel batayles, and wylnen to perysshe by entrechaungynge
of darts, but the reason of cruelte nys not enough rightful, will thou tha^
yelden a couenable guerdon to the deserts of men? love rightfully good folks,
and have pity on shrewes.

Hinc ego video inquam, que sit vel felicitas vel miseria in ipsis proborum
atque improborum meritis constituta. Sed in hac ipsa fortuna populari. etc.
This I se well (quod I) either what blissfulness, or else what vnselynesse is
establysshed in the deserts of good men and of shrewes. But in this ylke
fortune of the people I se somewhat of good, and somewhat of yuell. For no wise
man had not lever be exiled poor and nedye, and namelesse, than for to dwellen
in his cite, and stouren of richesse, and be redoutable of honor, and strong
of power. For in this wise more clerelye and wytnesfullye is the office of wise
men treated, than the blysfulnesse of power, and governors, is as it were
shadde among the people, that be neighbors and subjects, sithe that namely
prison, law, and these other tourmentes of laufull pains, be rather owed to
felonous cytezyns: for the which felonous cytezyns the pains be establyshed,
more tha^ for good people.

Boe. than I marvel greatly (quod I) why that the things be so mysse
entrechaunged, that tourmentes of felonyes pressen and confounden good people,
and shrewes rauyshen medes of virtue, and ben in honors and great estates. And
I desire eke for to weten of the, what seems the to be the reason of this so
wrongful a conclusyon. For I would wonder well the less, if I trowed that all
things were meddled with fortunous hap. But now crepeth and increases mine
astonyenges god governor of things that so as god yeueth oftymes to good men
goods and myrthes, and to shrewes yuels and aspre things: and yeueth again to
good folk hardenesse, and to shrewes he grau^teth hem her will, and that they
desyren. What dyfference may there be between that that god does, and hap
of fortune, if men know not the cause why it is.


Philo. Ne it is no marvel (quod she) though that men wenen, that there be
somewhat folysshe and confuse, when the reason of the order is unknown: but
although that thou ne know not the cause of so great a dysposycion,
nathelesse, for as much as god the good governor attempreth and governs the
world, ne doubt the not but all things ben don aryght.


Si quis Areturisidera nescit, Mergatque seras equore flammas, Propin quasummo
cardine labi, Cum nimis seleris explicet ortus, Cur legate tardus plaus^ra
Boots. etc.
WHo so that know not the sterres of Arcture, turned to ye souerayn center or
point, that is to said, turned nyghe to the sovereign pole of the fyrmament,
and wot not why the sterre Boots passes or gathers his waynes, and
dreucheth his late ^^^bes in ye see, and why that Boots the ste^^e unfolds
his ouerswyfte arysynges, than shall he wondre^ of the law of the high (...).
And eke, if that be ne know not why that the horns of the full moon waren
pale and infecte, by the bounds of the derke night, and how the moon derke
and confuse, discourreth the sterres that she had covered by her clear vysage.
The comune error moves folks and makes weary her basyns of brass by thylke
strokes, that is to say, that there is a manner people that hight Coribantes,
that wenen that wha^ the moon is in the eclypse that it be enchaunted, and
therefore for to ^^srue the moon, they beaten be ba^^ns with thylke strokes.
Ne no man ne wondreth wh^ the blastes of the wind Chorus, beten the strondes
of the sea, by quakyng flodes. Ne no man ne wondreth when the weight of the
snow, harded by the cold, is resolved by the brennynge heat of Phoebus the
son, for here seen men redily the causes. But the causes yhydde, that is to
said in heaven, (...) the breasts of men. The mouable people is astonyed of all
things that comen selde and suddenly in our age, but the troubly error of
our ignorance departs fro us, so that if they wysten the cause why that
such things betyden, ceetes they should cease to se^^^ wonders.

Ita est inquam. Sed cum tui muneris sit latentium rerum causas euoluere,
velatasque caligine explicare rations queso vti hinc decernas. etc.
THus it is (quod I) but so as thou haste yeuen or beheyght me to unwrap the
hid causes of things, and to discover me ye reasons covered with derknesse* I
pray the, that thou deuyse and judge me of this matter, and that thou do me to
understand it, for this miracle of this wondre troubles me right greatly. And
tha^ she a little what smiling said. Thou cleapest me (quod she) to tell that
is greatest of all things, that mowen ben asked, and to the which question
uneath is there aught enough to lauen it, as who says, uneath is there any
thing to answer perfetely to thy questyon, for the matter of it is such, that
when o doubt is determined and cut away, there waxen other doutes without
nombre, right as the ^eedes of Idre the serpent waxen, the which serpent
Hercules slough: ne there ne were no ^^^ere ne none end, but if a wight
constrained the doutes, by a right lively and quycke fire of thought, that is
to said, by vygoure and strength of wit. For in this matter men weren wont
to maken questyo^s of the symplicite of the purueyaunce of god, and of the
order of destyne, and of sodeyne hap, and of knowenge of predestynacyon divine.
And of the liberte of frewyll, the which things thou the self apperceyuedest
well, of what weight (...) ben. But for as much as the knowinges of these
things is a manner porcyon or me^^^^ to yt, all be it so that I have little time
to done it, yet nevertheless I would enforcen me to shewe^ somewhat of it: but
al though the norysshynges of dyte of musyke delyteth the thou must suffren
and forbearen a little of thylke delight, while that I wene to the resons knytte
by order.

Boe. As it lyketh to the (quod I) so do.


Philo. Tho spoke she right as by another beginning, and said right thus. The
engendryng of all things (quod she) and all the progressyons of mouable
nature, and (...) that moves in any manner, takes his causes his order and his
fourmes, of the stablenesse of divine thought: And thylke divine thought that
is set and put in the toure, that is to said, in the heyght of the symplicyte
of god, stablysheth many manner gises to the things that been to done, the
which manner when that men loken it, in the pure clennesse of the dyuyne
intellygence, is cleaped pur^^yaunce. But when thylke manner is referred by men,
to things that it moves or disponeth, than of old men it was cleaped
destenye, the which things, if that any might looks well in his thout, the
strength of that one and of that other, he shall lightly mow seen, that these
two things ben diverse. For pourueyaunce is thylke dyuyne reason, that is
establyshed in the sovereign prince of things, the which pourueyaunce
dysponeth all things. But certes destynye is the disposycyon and the
ordinance cleuynge to mouable things, by the which disposycyon the
pourueyaunce knytteth all things in her order: For pourueyaunce enbraseth all
things to heap, all though they be diverse, and all though they be infynite,
but destenye certain departs and ordayneth all things syngulerly, and
deuydeth in mouyng, in places, in forms, and in times, as thus: Let the
vnfoldynge of temporal or dynaunce assembled and oned in the lokynge of the
divine thought be cleaped purueyau^ce and thylke same assemblynge and onynge
divided and vnfolden, let that be called destenye. And al be it so that these
things ben diverse, yet nevertheless hanged that one on that other, for why,
the order destynable proceeds of the symplycyte of pourueyaunce. For right as
a werkeman perceyueth in his thought, the form of a thing that he woll make,
and moves the effect of the work, and leads that he had looked beforne in
his thought symply and presently by corporal or dynaunce: certes right so god
in his purueyaunce dysponeth syngulerlye and stably, the things that be to
done, but he admynistreth in manners and in diverse times by destenye, thylke
same things that he has disponed, than whether destenye be exercised either
by some divine spirytes, servants to the dyuyne pourueyaunce, or else by some
soul, or else by all nature seruyng to god, or else by the celestyall mouynges
of sterres, or else by the virtue of angels, or else by diverse subtyltie of
dyuels, or else by any of hem, or else by hem all, the destynable ordinance is
wouen and accomplyshed. Certes it is open thing that the pourueyaunce is an
vnmonable and simple form of things to done, and the mouable bond and the
temporal ordinance of things, which that the divine symplicite of
pourueyaunce has ordained to done, that is destenye. For which it is that all
things that been put under destenye, ben certes subjects unto pourueyaunce, to
which pourueyaunce destenye it self is subject and under, but some things
ben put under purueyau^ce, that surmounten the ordinance of desteny: And tho
ben thylke that stablye ben fyxed nyghe to the first godheed, they surmounten
the order of destinable mouablyte. For right as cercles turnen about a same
center or about a point, thylke cercle that is innerest or most within, he
joins to ye symplesse of ye myddle, and is as it were a center or a point to
that other cercles, that tourne^ about him: and thilke that is vtterest,
compassed by a larger enuyronnynge, is unfold by larger spaces, in somoche as
it is fertherest fro the myddelest symplycite of the point. And if there be
any thing that knytteth and feloushippeth him self to thylke myddle point, it
is constrained in to symplycite, that is to say, in to vnmouablite, and it
cease to ben shadde and flytte dyuersly. Right so by semblable reason thylke
thing that departs furtherest fro the first thought of god, it is vnfolden
and also submytted to greater bonds of destyne, and in so much is the thing
more free and loce fro dignyte, as it asks and holds nerre to thylke center
of things, that is to said, to god. And if the thing cleaves to the
steadfastness of the thought of god, and be without mouynge, certes it
surmounteth the necessyte of destenye. Than such comparyson as is skyllynge to
understanding, and of thing that was engendered to thing that is of time to
eternyte, and of the cercle to the ce^tre, right so is the order of mouable
destyne, to the stable symplycite of pourueyaunce. Thylke ordinance moves the
heaven and the sterres, and attempreth the elements together among hem self,
and transformeth hem by entrechaungeable mutacyon. And thylke same order neweth
again all things growyng and falling adowne, by semblable progressyons of seeds
and of sexus, that is to said, male and female: and this ylke order
constrayneth the fortunes and the deeds of men by a bond of causes, not able
to be vnbounden: the which destinable causes when they passen out fro the
begynnynges of immovable purueyaunce, it mote needs be that they ne be not
mutable, as thus: Be the things well governed, if that ye symplicite dwelling
in the divine thought, shows forth the order of causes unable to be bowed.
And this order constrayneth by the propre stabylite the mouable things, or else
they shulden flete folily. For which it is, that things semen confuse and
troublye to us men, for we ne mowen not consider thylke ordinance.
Nevertheless, the propre manner of every thing, dressyng him to good disponeth
hem all, for there nys nothing done for yuell, for thylke thing that is done by
wicked folk, nys not don for yuel. The which shrewes, as I have showed full
plenteously seek good, but wicked error misturneth hem, ne the order coming
fro the point of sovereign good, ne enclynteh not fro his beginning. But thou
may say, what unrest may ben a worse confusyon, tha^ that good men have
sometime aduersyte, and sometime prosperyte: and shrewes have now also things
that they desyren, and now things that they haten. Whether men ly^e now in
such holiness of thought, as who says, be men now so wise, that such folk
as they demen to be good folk or shrewes, that it mote needs be, that folk be
such as they wenen? But in this manner domes of me^ discorden, that thilke men
that some folk demen worthy of mede, other folk deem hem worthy of tourment,
but let us grant: I suppose that some man may well deem or know the good
people and the badde, may he th^n know and se thylke innerest attemperaunce
of courage, as it has be wont to be said of bodies, as who says: may a man
speken of complexions and attempraunce of bodies, ne it ne is not, as who
says, but it is like a marvel or a miracle to hem that ne known it not, why
that sweet things be couenable to some bodies that been hole, and to some
people bitter things be couenable: and also why some people ben helped with
light medicynes* and some people ben helped with bitter medicines: but
nathelesse tho that known the manner and the attempraunce of heal and of
malady, ne meruayleth it nothing. But what other thing seems health of corages
but b^^^e: and what other thing seems maladi of courage but vices. Who is else
keeper of good and driuer a way of yuel, but god the governor and leder of
thoughts: the which god, when he has beholden from the high toure of his
purueyaunce, he knows what is couenable to any wight, and leans hem that he
wot well that is couenable to he^. Lo, hereof comes and hereof is done this
miracle of the order destynable when god that all knows does such thing, of
which thing unknowing folk ben asto^nyed, but for to constrayne, as who
says, but for to comprehend and tell a few things of the dyuine depenesse,
the which that man's reason may understand. Thylke man that thou wenest to
been right just and right keeping of equite, the contrary of that seems to the
dyuine purueyaunce that all wot. And Lucan my familyer tells, that the
victorious cause lyked to the gods, and the causes overcome lyketh to Caton.
Thanne what so ever thou may seen that is done in this world unhoped or else
unknown, certes it is the right order of things, but as to thy wicked
opinion, it is a confusion. But I suppose ye some man be so well thewed, that
the dyuine judgment and the judgment of mankind accorden hem together of him:
but he is so unsteadfast of courage, that if any aduersite come to him, he wol
forleten peraue^ture to continue innocence, by the which he ne may not
withholden fortune: than the wise dispensacion of god spares him, the which
man aduersite might enpayren, for ye God will not him to travail, to who^ yt
travail ^^s not couenable. An other man is perfyte in all virtues, and is an
holy man and nygh to God, so that the purueyaunce of God would deem, that it
were a felony that he were touched with any aduersytees, so that he woll
^^^^re, that such a man be with any bodyly malady moved. But so (as said the
philosophy yt more excellent is by me said in great that virtues have edifyed
the body of the holyman, and often time it betydeth, that ye su^me of things
that been to done is taken to govern to good folk, for yt the malice
habou^daunt of shrewes should been abated. And god yeueth and departs to
other folk prosperitees and aduersitees meddled to heap, after the qualyte of
her corages, and remordethe some folk by aduersitees, for they ne should not
waxen proud by long welefulnes. And other folk he suffers to be trauayled
with hard things, for that they should con^ermen the virtues of courage, by
the exer^^tacio^ of usage of patience. And other folk dreden more than they
oughten, the which they myghten well bearen, and some dispyse that they mow
not bear, and thylke folk God leads in to experience of hem self by aspre
and soroufull things. And many other folk have bought honorable renome of
this world, by the price of gloriouse death And some men that ne mow not been
ouercomen by tourment have yeuen ensample to other folk, that virtue may not
been ouercomen by aduersitees. And of all these things there nys no dout, that
they ne ben done rightfully and ordaynly, to the parfite good of hem, to whom
we seen these things betyde. For certes that adversities comes sometime to
shrewes, and sometime that they desyren, it comes of these foresaid causes. And
of sorouful things that betiden to shrewes certes no man ne wondreth, for all
men wene that they have deserved it, and that they been of wicked merit. Of
which shrewes the turmente agasteth sometime other to done felonyes: and sometime
it amendethe hem that suffers the tourmentes. And the prosperyte that is
yeue^to shrewes, shows a great argument to good people, what thing they
should demen of thylke welfulnesse, which prosperity me^ seen often serve to
shrewes: In which thing I trow that God dispenses for parauenture the nature
of some man is so ouerthrowyng to yuell and so vncouenable, ye the nedy
pouerte, of his household might rather agreue him to done felonyes, and to the
maladye of him God puts remedy to yeuen him richesse. And some other man
beholds his conscience defouled with sins and makes co^paryson of this
fortune and of him self, and dredethe parauenture that the blysfulnesse, of
which the usage is joyful to him, that the lesynge of thylke blysfulnesse ne
be not sorrowful to him, and therefore he would change his manners: and for he
dredeth to lose his fortune, he forletethe his wickedness. To other folks
welfulnesse is yeuen vnworthylye, the which overthrows hem in to destruction
that they han deserved, and to some other folk is yeue^ power to punishe^, for
that it shall be cause of contynuacyon, and exercysynge to good folks, and
cause of turme^t to shrewes. For so as there nys none aliaunce bitwene good
folks and shrewes, ne shrewes ne mowen not accorden among hem self: and why
not? For yt shrewes discorden of hem self by her vices the which vices al to
renden her consciences, and done often time the things, which things when they
have done hem, they deem that tho things ne should not have be done, for
which thing the sovereign purueyaunce has maked often time miracle: so that
shrewes have maked shrewes to been good men. For wha^ that some shrewes seen
that they suffer wrongfully felonyes of other shrewes, they waxen eschaufed in
to hate of hem that annoyed hem, and retourne^ to the fruit of virtue. Than
they studyen to be unlike to hem that they have hated. Certes only is this the
dyuyne might, to the which might yuels been than good, when it uses the yuels
couenably, and draws out the effect of any good, as who says, that yuell
is good only to the might of God, for the might of god ordeyneth thylke yuel
to good For one order enbraceth all things, so that what wyghte departs from
the reason of ^hylke order that is assygned to him, algates yet he slydeth in
to another order, so that nothing is lefull to folly in the realm of dyuyne
purueyaunce, as who says, nothing is without ordinance in the realm of
dyuyne pourueaunce, sith that the right strong God governs all things in
this world for it is not leful for men to comprehend by wit ne vnfolden by
word all the subtyl ordinance and the dysposycyon of the divine intent, for
only it ought to suffyse to have looked that God him self, maker of al natures
ordayneth all things to good, while that he hastes to wythholde the things
that he has maked in to his semblaunce, that is to say, for to wythholden ye
things in to good for he him self is good. He chaseth out al yuels fro the
bound of his comynaltyes, by ye order of the necessyte destynable: for which
it follows, yt if thou look the purueyaunce ordeynynge the things that men
wenen be outragyous or aboundaunt in erthes, thou shalt not seen in no place
nothing of yuell. But I se now that thou art charged with the weight of the
questyon, and weary with length of my reason, and that thou abydeste some
swetenes of song, take tha^ this draut and when thou art well refreshed and
refect thou shall be more steadfast to stye in to high er questyons or things.


Si vis celsi inra tonantis, Plura solers cernere me^te, Aspice summi culmina
celi.
IF thou wise wolte demen in thy pure thought, ye rightes or the laws of the
hye thonder, that is to said of God, look thou and behold the heyghtes of the
sovereign heaven: There kepen the sterres by rightful alyau^ce of things her
old peace: The su^ne ymoued by his roody fire, ne dystourbeth not the cold
circle of the moon ne the sterre ycleped the Beer that enclyneth his rauyshing
courses, abouten the sovereign heyght of this world. Ne the same sterre Vrsa,
nys never mo wasshen in the deep westren see, ne coueiteth not to dyen his
flambes in the sea of the Occian although it se other sterres yplou^ged in the sea: And Hesperus the sterre boodeth and tells always the late nights: and
Lucifer the sterrre brings again the clear day. And thus makes love
enterchau^geable, ye perdurable courses, and thus is discordable battle yput
out of the country of the sterres. This accordaunce atempreth by euynlike
manners the elements, that the moist things sleyuyng with the dry things,
yeuen place by stoundes: and that the cold things ioynen hem by faith to the
hot things, and that the light fire aryseth in to heyghte, and the heavy
erthes aualen by her weyghtes: by the same causes the flourye year yeldeth
sweet smelles in the first somer season warming and the hot somer dries the
corns, and Autumpne comes again heuye of apples, and the fletyng rain
bedeweth the winter, this attemperaunce nourishes and brings forth al
things that bears life in this world, and thylke same attemperaunce
rauyshyng hydeth, benymeth, and drencheth under the last death all things
yborne. Among these things sytteth the high maker, king and lord, well and
beginning, law and wise judge, to done equity, and governs and enclyneth the
brydles of things: And tho things that he stereth to gone by mouynge, he
wythdraweth and aresteth, and affermeth the mouable or wandrynge things. For
if that he ne called not again the right going of things. And if that he ne
co^streyned hem not eftsoon in to roundnesses enclyned, the things yt been
now co^tynued by stable ordinance, they should departen from her well that is
to said from her beginning and fallen, that is to said, tournen into naught.
This is the common love to al things: and all things asken to been holden by
the fine of good, for else ne myghten they not lasten, if they ne come not
eftesones again by love returned to the cause that has give hem being, that is
to said God.

Ia^ne igitur vides quid hec omnia q^ diximus co^sequantur? Quid nam inquit?
Omnem inquit. etc.
See thou not than, what thing follows all the things that I have said?

Boece. what thing (quod I)?


P. Certes (quod she) all utterly, that fortune is good


Boe. And how may that be (quod I)? Now understand (quod she). So as al
fortune, wheder so it be joyful fortune or aspre fortune, is yeue^ either
because of guerdonyng, or else of exercisyng of good folks, or else because to
punyshen, or else chastisen shrewes: Than is all fortune good, the which
fortune is certain, that it be either ryghtful, or else profitable.


Boe. Forsooth this is a full very reason (quod I). And if I consider the
pourueyaunce and the destyne that thou taughteste me alytle here beforne, this
sentence is sustained by steadfast reasons. But if it like unto the, let us
nombren hem among thylke things, of which thou saydest a little here beforne,
that they ne were not able to been wened to the people.


P. why so (quod she)?


B. For that the common word of men (quod I) misuseth this manner speech of
fortune, and said often times, that the fortune of some wight is wicked.


Philoso. will thou than (quod she) that I approach a little to the words of
the people so that it seem not to hem that I be not over much departed, as fro
the usage of ma^kinde


Boece. As thou wolte (quod I).


Philo. wenest thou not (quod she) that all thing that profits is good?


Boece Yes (quod I)


Phi. Certes all thing that exerceth or corrigeth it profyteth.


Boece. I confess well (quod I)


Philoso. Than it is good (quod she).


Boece. why not (quod I).


Philoso. But this is the fortune (quod she) of hem that either be put in
virtue, and bataylen against aspre things, or else of hem that enclynen and
declinen fro vices, and taken the way of virtue.


Boece. This ne may I not deny (quod I).


Philo. But what say thou of the merye fortune that is yeuen to good people
in guerdon, demeth ought the people that it be wicked?


B Nay forsooth (quod I) but they demen as it is sothe, that it is right good.


Philo. what say thou of the other fortune (quod she) that all though that
it be aspre and restrayneth the shrewes by ryghtfull tourment, weneth aught the
people that it be good?


Boe. Nay (quod I) but the people demeth that is most wretched of all things
yt may be thought


Philoso. ware now and look well (quod she) lest we in following the opinion of
the people, have confessed and concluded thing which that is unable to been
wened to the people.


Boece. what is that (quod I).


Philoso. Certes (quod she) it follows or comes of things that been
granted, that al fortune what so ever it be, of hem that been either in
possession of virtue, or in the increase of virtue, or else in the purchasing
of virtue, that the ylke fortune is good, and that all fortune is right wicked
to hem that dwellen in shrewednesse, as who says, and thus weneth not the
people.


Boece. That is sothe (quod I) Albe it so that no man dare confess it, ne
know it.


Philoso. why so (quod she). For right as the strong man ne seems not to a
bashen or disdayne^, as oftime as he hears the noise of baytayle: Ne also it
seems not to the wise man to bearen it greuouslye, as often as he is led in to
strife of fortune. For both to that one man and eke to that other, thylke
dyffyculte is the matter to that one manne of increase of his gloryouse renome,
and to that other man to conserve his sapyence, that is to say, to the
asprenesse of his estate, for therefore is it called virtue for that it
sustayneth and enforces by his strengthes, so that it nys not ouercomen by
aduersyties Ne certes thou that art put in increase or in the heyghte of
virtue, ne haste not comen to fleten with delyces, and for to walken in bodyly
lust. Thou sowest or plantest a full eygre battle in thy courage against every
fortune: For that the soroufull fortune confound the not, ne that the merry
fortune ne corru^pe the not, occupye the mean by steadfast stre^gthes. For all
that ever is under the mean or all that ouerpasseth the mean, dyspyceth
welefulnesse, as who says, it is vicious, and ne has no mede of his
travail, for it is set in your hand, as who says, it lies in your power
what fortune you is leuest, that is to say good or yuel, for all fortune that
seems sharp or aspre, if it ne be exercise not ye good folk, ne chastyse the
wicked folk, it punysheth.


Bella bis binis operatus annis, Vltor atrides phrigierumis. etc.
THe werker atrides, that is to said Agamemnon, ye wrote and continued the
battle by ten year, recouerd and purged in wrekynge, by the destruction of
Troy, the lost cha^bres of marriage in his brother, that is to say, that
Agamemnon wan again Heleyne, that was Menelaus wife, his brother. In the mean
while that thilke Agamemnon desired to yeuen sails to the greeks navy, and
brought again the wyndes by blood: He unclothed him of pity of father, and the
sorye priest yeueth in sacrifyeng, the wretched cuttynge of the throat of the
daughter, that is to say that Agame^non let cut the throat of his daughter by
the priest, to maken aliaunce with his gods, and for to have wynd with which
he might wenden to Troy. Itacus, that is to say vlixes, bewepte his fellows
ylorne, the which fellows the feirs Poliphemus lyggynge in his great cave, had
fretten and dreynt in his empty womb But nathlesse Poliphemus wood for his
blind vysage yield to Vlixes joy, by his sorouful teeres, that is to say,
that Vlixes smote out the eye of Poilphemus that stood in the forheed, for
which Vlixes had joy, when he saw Poliphemus weeping and blind. Hercules is
celebrable for his hard traueyle, he daunted the proud Ceutaurus half horse
half man, and berafte the dyspoylyng fro the cruel lion, yt is to say, he
slough ye lion, and berafte him his skin. He smote the birds yt hgiht Arpyes
with certain arowes. He rauyshed apples fro the wakyng dragon: and his hand
was the more heavy for the golden metal. He drough Cerberus the hounde of hell
by the triple chains. He ouercomer, as it is said, has put an vnmeke lord
fodder to his cruel horse, that is to say Hercules slough Dyomedes, and made
his horse to freten him: and he Hercules slough I dra the serpente, and burnt
the venym. And Achileus the flood defouled in his forheed, dreynt his shamfast
vysage in his strondes that is to say, that Achileus could transfigure him
self into diverse likeness, and as he faught with Hercules, at last he turned
him into a bull, and Hercules brake one of his horns: and he for shame hyd him
in his river. And over that he Hercules cast adowne Antheus the gyaunte in the
strondes of Lybi^. And Cacus appeysed the wrathes of Euander, that is to say
that Hercules slought the monstre Cacus, and appeysed with that death the wrath
of Euander. And the bristled bore marked with vomes the shulders of Hercules,
the which sholders the hye cercle of heaven should thrist. And ye last of his
labors was yt he sustained the heaven upon his neck vnbowed, and he deserved
eftsoon the heaven to be the last end of travail. Goth now then ye strong
men there as the great ensample ^edeth you. O nyce me^ why make ye your backs,
as who says: o ye slow and delicate me^ why se ye adversities, and ne fight
not against hem by virtue, to wynne^ ye mede of heaven: ^o^ the mede ouercome^,
yeueth ye sterres, yt is to said, that when that erthly lust is ouercomen, a
man is maked worthy to the heaven.

Here ends the fourth book of Boece, and follows the fyfth.
Dixierat, orationisque cursum ad alia quedam tractanda atque expedien da
vertebat. B. Tum ego, recta quidem inquam. etc.
SHe had said and turned the course of her reason to some other things to be
treated and to be sped.

B. Tha^ said I, certes rightful is thine amonesting and full digne by
auctorite. But that thou saidest whylo^, that the question of the divine
purueyau^ce, is enlaced with many other questions, I understand well and
prove it, by the same thing But I ask, if that thou wenest that hap be any
thing in any ways, and if thou wenest that hap be any thing, what is it?


P. Than (quod she) I haste me to yelden and assoylen to the det of my behest,
and to shewe^ and open the way, by which way thou may come again to thy
country: but al be it so yt the things which that thou ask, been right
profitable to know, yet been they diverse, somewhat fro the path of my purpose
and it is to dout, that thou ne be maked werye by mysse ways, so that thou ne
may not suffyse to measure the right way.


B. Ne dout the there of nothing (quod I). For to known thylke things
together, in the which things I delight me greatly, yt shall been to me instead of rest, sith it nys not to douten of the things following, when every
thing of thy desputacyon shall have been steadfast to me, by vndoutous faith.


Phi. Than (said she) that manner wol I done to the, and began to speaken right
thus. Certes (quod she) if any wight definyshe hap in this manner, that is to
sayn, that hap is betiding ybrought forth by folysh mouynge, and by no knyttyng
of causes, I conferme that hap nys right naught in no wise, and I deem all
utterly, that hap nys, ne dwells but a voice, as who says but an ydell
word, without any signification of thing committed to that voice. For what
place might been left or dwelling in folly and to disordinaunce, sith that God
leads and constrayneth al things by order, for this sentence is very soth,
that nothing has his being of naught, to the which sentence, none of these
old folk ne wythsayde never, al be it so that they ne understand it not, by
God, prince and begynner of workynge but they casten, as a manner foundemente of
subject material, that is to said, of the nature of all reason. And if that
any thing is waxen or come^ of no causes tha^ shall it seem yt thylke thing is
comen or woxen of naught But if this ne may not be done, than is it not
possible that hap be any such thing, as I have definyshed a little here beforne.


Boece. How shall it than be (quod I) nys there than no thing that by right may
been cleped either hap or else adventure or fortune? or is there ought, albeit
so that it is hyd fro the people to which thing these words been couenable?


Phi. Mine Aristotle (quod she) in the book of his phisyke, definysheth this
thing by short reason, and nigh to the soth.


B. In which manner (quod I)


P. As often (quod she) as men done any thing for grace of any other thing,
and another thing than thylke thing that men entenden to done betideth by some
causes, it is ycleped hap, right as a man dalfe the earth because of tyllynge of
the field, and found there a gobet of gold bedoluen, than wene^ folk that it
is befall by fortunous betydyng. But forsooth it nys not of naught, for it has
his propre causes, of which causes ye course vnforeseen and unware, seems to
have maken hap. For if the tyller of the field ne dolue not in the earth, and if
the hyder of the gold ne had hyd the gold in that place, the gold ne had not
been found. These been than the causes of the abredgynge of fortuit hap, the
which abredgyng of fortuit hap comes, of causes of encountrynge and flowyng
together to hem self, and not by the entencion of the doer. For neither the
hyder of the gold, ne the deluer of the field, ne vnderstoden not that the
gold should have been found. But as I said, it betyde and ra^ne together,
that he dalfe there as yt other had hid the gold Now may I thus definish
hap. Hap is an unware betydynge of causes, assembled in things that been done
for some other thing But thilke order procedinge by vneschuable betiding
togider, which ye descends from the well of purueyaunce, yt ordeyneth al
things in her places and in her times makes, that the causes rennen and
assemblen together.


Rupis Achemence scopulis vbi versa sequentum, Pectoribus fugit spicula. etc,
TIgris and Eufrates resolue^ and springe^ of o well, in ye cragges of the roch
of the country of Achemenee, there as the fleing batayls fixen her darts
returning, in ye breasts of hem yt folowe^ him. And sone after the same ryuers
Tigris and Eufrates, vnioyne^ and departen her waters, and if they comen
together, and ben assembled and cleped together into o course, tha^ mote^ thilk
things fleten together, which that ye water of the entrechaungyng flood
brings. The ships and the stocks araced with the flood mote^ asse^blen,
and the waters ymedled, wrappethe or implies many fortunell happes or manners,
the which wandrynge happes nathelesse, thylke declinynge lowness of the earth
and the flowynge order of the slydyng water governs. Right so fortune that
seems, as it fleteth with slaked or ungoverned brydels, it suffers brydles,
yt is to said to been governed, and passes by thylke law that is to said, by
the dyuine ordinance.

Animaduerto iuquam, idque vti tu dicis ita esse, consencio. Sed in hac
hereutium. etc.
This understand I well (quod I) and I accord me that it is right as you
say. But I ask if there be any lyberte of fre will in this order of causes,
that cleuen thus together in hem self, or else I would wyten, if that the
destinal cheyne co^strayneth the mouynge of the courages of men

Philo. Yes (quod she) there is lyberte of frewyll, ne there was never no
nature of reason, that it ne had lyberte or frewyll. For every thing that may
naturally vse^ reason, it has dome by which it decerneth and demeth every
thing. Than knows it by it self things that been to flyen, and things that
been to desiren, and thilke thing that any wight demeth to been desired, that
askethe or desires he, and flies the ylke thing that he troweth be to flyen.
Wherefore in all things that reason is, in him also is lyberte of willing and
of nylling but I ne ordeyne not, as who says, I ne grant not, the this
liberte be even like in all things. For why in the soueraynes deuynes
substaunces, that is to said, in spirits judgment is more clear and will not
corrumpe and mighty redye to speden things that been desired. But the souls
of men moten needs ben more fre, when they loken hem in the speculacyon or
lokynge of the dyuyne thought, and less fre when they slyden in to the bodies,
and yet less fre when they been gathered together and comprehended in erthly
members, but the last seruage, is when that they been yeuen to vices, and have
yfal from the possession of her proper reason. For after that they have cast
away her eyes fro the light of the sovereign sothfastnesse, to low things
and dark, anon they darken by the cloud of ignorance, and be troubled by
felonous talentes, to the which talentes when they approchen and assenten, they
heapen and encreasen, the seruage which they have joined to hem self. And in
this manner they ben caytiues fro her proper lyberte, the which thing nathlesse
the lokyng of the divine pourueyau^ce sees, that al things beholds and
sees fro eterne, and ordeyneth hem euerych in her merytes, as they ben
predestinate, and it is said in greek, that al things he sees, and al things
he hears.


Puro clarum lumine phebum Melli^^ui canit oris Homerus. etc.
HOmer with the honye mouth, yt is to sayn, Homer with the sweet dities
syngeth, that the sun is clear by pure light. Natheles yet ne may it not by
ye infirm light of his beams, breken or percen the inward entrayles of the
earth, or else of the sea. So ne sees not God maker of the great world to him
that looks al things from an high ne understands nothinges by heaviness of
earth, ne ye night ne withstandeth not to him by the black clouds, thylke God
sees in o stroke of thought all things that been, weren, or shul come: and
thylke God, for he looks and sees al things alone, thou may same that he
is the very sun.

Tum ego en inquam difficiliore rursus ambiguitate confundor. etc.
THan said I thus, now am I confounded by a more hard doubt than I was*

Philoso. what doubt is that (quod she) for certes I coniecte by such things
thou art troubled.


B. It seems (quod I) to repugnen and to contrary greatly, that God knows
beforne all things, and that there is any fredom or lyberte, for if so be that
God looks al things beforne, ne God ne may not been deceived in no manner.
Tha^ mote it needs be, yt all things the which that the purueyaunce of God
has seen beforne to come, for which if that God knows toforne, not only yt
works of men but also her counsayles and her wylles, than ne shall there be no
liberty of arbytre, ne certes, there ne may be none other deed, ne no will,
but thylke which that the divine purueyaunce that ne may not be disceyued,
has sealed beforne, for if that they myghten wrythen away in other manner tha^
they ben purueyed, than ne should there be no steadfast prescience of thing
to comen, but rather an uncertain opinion: the which thing to trowen of god, I
deem it felonye and unlawful. Ne I ne prove not thylke same reason, as who
says, I ne allow not, or I ne praise not thylke same reason, by which yt
some men wenen that they mow assoylen and vnknytten the knotte of this
questyon.

For certes they seyn, that thing nis not to comen, for that the purueyau^ce of
god has seen beforne that it is to comen, but rather ye contrary, and that is
this, that for that the things is to comen, that therefore ne may it not ben
hyd from the purueyaunce of god And in this manner this necessity slideth aye^
into the contrary party, ne it ne behooves not needs, that things betyden
that been ypurueyed, but it behooves needs, that things that been to comen ben
ypurueyed, but as it were ytrauayled, as who says ye thilk answer proceeds
right as though men trauayleden or weren busye to enquyren, the which thing is
cause of the which things. As whether the prescience is cause of the
necessity of things to comen, or else that ye necessity of things to comen,
is cause of the purueyaunce. But I ne enforce me not now to shown it yt the
betyding of things ywist beforne is necessary, how so or in what manner, that
the order of causes has it self, although that it ne seem not that the
prescie^ce bring in necessity of betydynge, to things to comen. For certes if
that any wight sytteth, it behooves by necessity that the opinion be soth of
him that coniecteth that he sytteth and again ward also is it of the contrary,
for if the opynyo^ be soth of any wight for that he sytteth, it behooves by
necessiitie that he sit. Than is here necessity in that one and in that other:
for in that one is necessity of sitting, and certes in that other is
necessitye of soth. But therefore ne sytteth not a wight for that the opinion of
the sitting is soth but the opynion is rather sothe, for that a wight sytteth
beforne. And thus although that the cause of the sothe comes of that other
side, as who says, that although the cause of soth comes of the sitting,
and not of the true opynion, algates yet is there a commune necessity in that
one and in that other. Thus seweth it, that I may make se^blable skylles of the
purueyaunce of God, and of things to comen. For although that for that things
been to comen, therefore been they purueyed, and not certes, for they been
purueyed, therefore ne betyde they not, nathelesse it behooves by necessity,
that either the things to comen been ypurueyed of god or else that the things
that been purueyed of god betyden. And this things only suffyseth enough to
destroien the fredome of our arbytre, that is to say, of our fre will. But
certes now shows it well how far fro the soth, and how up sodowne is this
thing that we seen that the betydyng of temporal things is cause of the eterne
prescience.

But for to wenen that God purueyeth the things to comen: what other thing is
it but for to wene, that thylke things that betyde whylom, ben causes of
thylke souerain purueyaunce yt is in God. And hereto add I yet this things,
that right as when yt I wot that a thing is, behooves by necessity that
thylke self thing be, and eke when I have known that any thing shall betyde^
so behooves it by necessity that thylke same things betyde. So follows it
than, that the betydyng of the things wist beforne, ne may not be eschued, and
at the last, if that any wight wene a thing to ben otherwise than it is, it nys
not only vnscience, but it is disceyuable opinion, full diverse and far fro
the soth of science. wherefore if any thing be so to comen, that the betydyng of
it ne be not certain ne necessary, who may weten beforne that thylke thing
is to comen. For right as science ne may not be meddled with falsenesse, as who
fayeth, that if I wot a thing, it ne may not be false that I ne wot it, right
so thylke thing that is conceived by science, ne may not be none otherwise
than as it is conceived, for that is the cause why that science wants
lesynge, as who says, why that wetyng ne receives not lesynge of that it
wot, for it behooves by necessity, that every thing be right, as science
comprehends it to be.

what shall I than said, in which manner knows god beforne al ye things to
come^ if they ne be not certain, for if yt he deame that they ben to comen
vneschuably, and so may be that it is possible, yt they ne shullen not comen,
god is disceyued, but not only to trowen yt god is disceyued, but for to speak
it with mouth, it is a felonous sin. But if that god wot, that right so as
things ben to comen, so shulle^ they come^: so that he wot egally, as who
says indifferently, that things may be done, or else not ydone. what is
thylke prescience that ne comprehends no certain thing ne stable, or else
what dyfference is there between the prescie^ce of thylk iape worthy deuyning
of Tiresie deuynour that said: All that I say (quod he) either it shall be, or
else it ne shall not be, or else how much is worth the deuyne presciene more
than the opynion of mankind, if so be that it demeth the things uncertain,
as men done. Of the which domes of men, the betyding nis not certain. But if
so be, that non uncertain things ne may ben in him that is right certain
well of all things, than is the betydyng certain of thylke things which that
he has wist be forne fyrmely to comen, for which it follows that the fredome
of the counsayles, and of the works of mankind nys none, sith that the thout
of God that sees althinges without error of falsenesse, byndeth and
constrayneth hem to a betydyng by necessity. And if this thing be ones
ygraunted and received, this is to said, yt there nys no fre will: than shows
it well how great destruction and how great domages there folowen of things of
mankind, for in idle ben there than purposed and behyght, meedes to good
folk, and pains to bad folk, sith that no mouyng of free courage voluntarye,
ne has not deserved hem, that is to said, neither mede ne pain. And it
should seem than that thylke thing is alderworst, which that is now demed for
aldermoost just and most rightful. That is to sayn, that shrewes ben punyshed,
or else that good folk be yguerdoned, the which folks seen that her propre will
ne sent hem to that one, ne to that other. That is to said, neither to good ne
harm: but co^streyneth hem certain necessity of things to comen, tha^ ne
shullen there never been, ne never weren vice ne virtue, but it shullen rather
be confusyon of all deserts meddled without discretion. And yet there follows
an other inconvenience, of the which there ne may be thought no more felonous,
ne more wicked and that is thus, that so as the order of things is idle, and
comes of ye purueyaunce of god, ne that nothing nys lefull to the counsayles
of mankind, as who says, that me^ have no power to don nothing ne will
nothing, than follows it that our vices ben referred to the maker of all
good, as who says: than follows it, that God ought to have the blame of our
vices, sith he co^strayneth us by necessity to done vices: tha^ nys there no
reason to hopen in god ne to prayen to god, for what should any wight hopen to
god, or why should he praye^ to god, since that the ordinance of desteny, which
ye ne may not ben enclyned, knytteth and streyneth all things that men may
desyren. Tha^ should there be done away thylke only alyaunce between God and
man, that is to said, to hopen and to prayen. But by the price of
ryghtousnesse and of very meekness, we deseruen the guerdon of divine grace,
which yt is inestimable, that is to say, that is so great that it ne may not
ben full praised, and this is only the manner, that is to say, hope and prayers.
For which it seems that me^ woll speak with god, and by reason of supplication
be^ conjoined to thylke clerenesse, that nys not approchen no rather or that
men seke^ it and impetren it. And if men ne wene not ye hope ne prayers ne have
no strengthes by the necessity of things to comen received, what thing is
there than by which we mowen be^ conjoined and cleauen to thylke sovereign
prince of things. For which it behooves by necessity that the lignage of
mankind, as thou song a little here beforne, be departed, and vnioyned from
his well, and faylen of his beginning, that is to said, God.


Que nam discors fe dera rerum Causa resoluit: quis tanta deus?
WHat dyscordable cause has to rent and vnioyned the byndyng or the alyaunce
of things, that is to said, the conjunctions of God and of man?

which god has establyshed so great batayl between these two sothfast or very
things that is to said, between the purueyaunce of god and free will, that
they ben syngular and divided, ne that they ne woollen not ben meddled ne coupled
together? But there nys no discord to the very things, but they cleuen away
certain to hem self. But ye thout of man confounded and overthrown by the
dark members of the body, ne may not by fire of his darked lokynge, that is
to said, by the vigor of his insyght, while ye soul is in the body, known
the thyn subtel knyttynges of things. But wherefore eschaufeth it so by so
great love to fynden thylke notes of soth ycouered, that is to said, wherefore
eschaufeth the thought of man by so great desire, to know thylke
notifications that been yhid under the couertures of soth? wot it ought thylke
thynhes that it anguyshous desires to know? As who sath, nay. For noman ne
trauayleth for to weten things that he wot: and therefore ye text says thus.
But who trauayleth to weten things yknowe? and if that he ne knows hem not,
what seeks thylke blind thought? what is he that desires any things, of
which he wot right naught? As who says, who so desyrech any things, needs
somewhat he knows of it, or else he ne could not desyren it: or who may follow
things yt ne been not ywyste, and though yt he seek the things where shall he
find hem? what wight that is all uncunning and ignorant may know the form
that is yfounde?

But when the soul beholds and sees the hye thought, yt is to sayn god,
tha^ knows it together the sum and singuralities, that is to said, the
principles, and euerych of hem by him self. But now while the soul is hid in
the cloud, and in the darkness of the me^bres of the body, it ne has not
all foryeten it self, but it wtholdeth the sum of things and leseth the
singularities. Than who so ye seeks sothenesse, he nys in neither another
habyte, for he wot not all, ne he ne has not all foryeten, but yet him
remembers ye sum of things that he withholdeth, and asks counsel, and
retreateth deplyche things ysene beforne, that is to said, the great sum
in his mind, so that he mow adoe^ the parts that he has foryeten, to
thylke parties that he has withholden.

Tum illa: Vetus inquit, hec est de prouide^tia q^rela: Marcoque Tullio. etc
THan said she, this is (quod she) the old question of the purueyau^ce of God.
And Marcus Tullius when he divided the deuynacyons, that is to said in his
books that he wrote of deuynacions, he moved greatly this questyon, and thou
thy self have ysought it much, and utterly and long but yet ne has it not
been determined ne espied fermely and diligently of any of you, and the cause
of this darkness and of this difficulty is, for that the mouyng of the
reason of mankind ne may not mouen to, that is to said, applien or ioynen the
simplicity of the deuyne prescience, the which simplicity of the deuyne
prescience, if that me^ mighten thynke^ it in any manner. That is to sayn that
if men myghten think and comprehe^den the things yt god sees him self, than
there dwelled utterly no dout, the which reason and cause of difficulties, I
shall assay at last to show and to speden, when I have first yspenden and
answered to thy reasons by which thou art moved, for I ask why thou wenest
that thylk reasons of hem that assoylen this question ne be not spedefull
enough ne sufficient, the which solucyo^ or the which reason, for yt it demeth,
that the prescience is not of necessity of things to come, as who says, any
other way tha^ thus, but that thylke things that the prescience wot beforne,
ne may not vnbetyden, that is to said, that they moten betyde. But than if
that prescience ne puts no necessity to things to comen, as thou thy self
haste confessed it, and be know a little here beforn what cause or what is it,
as who says, there may no cause be, by which that the ends voluntary of
things myghten be constrained to certain betydyng. For by grace of position
so that thou may the better understand this that follows, I suppose that
there ne be no prescience: Than ask I (quod she) in as much as apperteyneth
to that, shulden than things that comen of free will be constrained to
betyding by necessity?

Boece. Nay (quod I)


Phi. Than ayenwarde (quod she) I suppose yt there be prescience, but that it
ne puts no necessity to things, than trow I that thilk same fredome of
will shall dwellen all hole and absolute and vnbounde^. But thou will said,
that al be it so, that prescience nis not cause of the necessity of betyding
to things to comen, algates yet it is a sign, that the things been to
betyden by necessity. By this manner than, although the prescience had never
be, yet algates or at lest way, it is certain thing that ends of betydynges
of things to comen shulden be necessary. For every thing shows and
signifies only what the thing is, but it ne makes not the thing that it
signifies. For which it behooves first to show that nothing ne betydeth,
that it ne betydeth by necessity: so that it may appear, that the prescience
is sign of necessity, or else if there nere no necessitye, certes, thylke
prescyence ne might not be sign of thing that nys not. But certes, it is now
certain, that the prove of this ysusteyned by steadfast reason, ne shall not
been lad ne proved by signs ne by arguments, taken fro without, but by causes
couenable and necessary. But thou may said, how may it be that the things
ne betyden not, that been purueyed to comen? But certes, right as we trowe^
that the things which that the purueyaunce wot beforne, to come^ ne be not to
betyden. But that ne should we not demen, but rather although they shall
betyden, yet ne have they no necessitye of her kind to betiden: and this may
thou lightly apperceiuen by this that I shall sayn. For we seen many things
when they ben beforne our eyes, right as men seen the carter workynge in the
tournyng and in the attempryng or adressing of his carts or chariots and by
this manner, as who says, may thou understand of al other workmen. Is
there tha^ any necessity, or who says in our lokynge, that constrayneth or
compels any of thylke things to be done so?


Boece. Nay (quod I) for in idle and in vain were all the effect of craft, if
that al things weren moved by constraynynge of our eyes, or of our sight.


Philosoph. The things than (quod she) that when that men done hem, ne have no
necessity that men done hem, eke tho same things first or they be done, they
ben to comen without necessitye: for why, there be some things to betyden, of
which the ends and the betydinges of hem ben absolute and quyte of all
necessity. For certes, I ne trow not that any man would said this, that the
things that men done now that they ne were to betyden first, yer they were
done. And thylke same things, although men hadden wist hem beforne, yet they
have free betydynges. For right as science of things present ne brings in no
necessity to things that men done, right so to the prescience of things to
commen, ne brings in no necessity to things betiden But thou may said,
that of thylke same it is douted, as whether that of thylke things that ne
have non issues and betydinges necessaryes, if thereof may ben any pres^^^te.

For certes, they semen to discorden, for thou wenest that if that things been
seen before that necessity follows hem, and if necessity fails hem, they
ne might not be^ wist before, and that nothing may be comprehended by science
but certain. And if tho things ne have no certain betydynges, be purueyed as
certain it should be darkness of opinion, not sothfastnesse of science. And
thou wenest that it be diverse for the holenesse of science, that any manne
should deem a thing to be otherwise than it is it self, and the cause of this
error is, that of all the things that every wyghte has know, they wene
that tho things be^ know onylye by the strength and by the nature of the
things that been wist or know and it is all the contrary: for all that ever
is know, it is rather comprehended and know not after his strength and his
nature, but after the facultye, that is to said, the power and the nature of
hem that known. And for that this thing should now show by a short ensample
of roundnesse of a body otherwise than the sight of the eye knows it, and
otherwise than the touching.

The lokynge, by casting of his beams, wayreth and sees from a far all the
body together, without mouynge of it self, but the touching cleueth to the
round body, and moves about the enuyronnynge, and comprehends the parties
by roundenesse, and the man him self otherwise beholds him, and otherwise
ymagynacyon, and otherwise reason, and otherwise intelige^ce for the wit
comprehends withoutforthe the figure of the body of man, that is vnstablyshed
in the matter subject. But the ymaginacion comprehends only the figure with
out the matter. Reason surmounteth ymaginacion, and comprehends by universal
lokyng the common speech, but the eye of intelligence is higher, for it
surmounteth the enuyronyng of the university, and looks over that, by pure
subtlety of thought. Thylke same simple form of man, that is perdurable in
the divine thought, in which this ought greatly to be considred, that the
highest strength for to comprehenden things embraces and contains the lower
strength, but ye lower strength ne aryseth not in no manner to the hyer
strength. For wit ne may co^prehende nothing out of matter, ne that imaginacyon
ne looks not the universal speces ne reason ne takes not the simple form,
so as intelligence takes it. But intelligence that looks all abouen, when it
has comprehended the form, it knows and demeth all the things that been
under the form, but she knows hem in thylke manner, in which it
comprehends thylk same simple form yt ne may never ben known of none of yt
other, that is to say, to non of the three foresaid strengthes of the soul, for
it knows the university of reason, and the figure of ymaginacion, and the
sensyble material conceived by wit, ne it uses not ne of reason, ne of
ymaginacion ne of wit withoutforth but it beholds al things, so as I shall
say by a stroke of thought fermely without discourse of collacion. Certes reason
when it looks any thing universal, it ne uses not of ymaginacyon ne wit, and
algates yet it co^prehendeth the things ymaginable and se^syble, for reason is
she that diffinyssheth the universal of her conceyte right thus. Man is a
reasonable two foted be, and how so that this knowing is universal, yet nis
there no wight that ne wot well that a man is a thing ymaginable and sensyble,
and this same consydreth well reason, but that nys not by ymaginacion, nor by
wit, but it looks it by reasonable conception. Also ymaginacyon, all be it
so, that it takes of wit the beginning, to seen and fourmen the fygures
algates, although that wit ne were not present, yet it enuyroneth and
comprehe^deth all things sensyble, not by reason sensyble of demyng, but by
reason ymaginatife See thou not than, that all the things in knowing vsen
more of her faculty, or of her power, than they done of the faculty or power
of things that been to known, ne that is no wrong, for so as every judgment
is the deed or doing of him that demeth, it behooves that every wight
perform his work and his intention not of forayne power, but of his propre
power.


Quondam porticus at tulit, Obscuros minium senes. etc.
THan the porche, that is to say a gate of the town of Athnes there as
philosophers hadden congregation to dispute thilk porche brought sometime old
men full dark in her sentences, that is to say, philosophers that hyghten
stoiciens, ye wend that images and sensibylities, that is to say, sensyble
ymaginacions or else ymagynacyons of sensible things, were emprinted into souls
fro bodies withoutforth, as who says thylke stoiciens wenden that the soul
had be naked of him self, as a myrrour or a clean perchemyne, so that al
fygures musten first comen fro things fro without into souls, and ben emprinted
into souls, right as we ben wont sometime by a swyft poyntell to fyxen
letters emprinted in the smothnesse or in the playnesse of the table of wax,
or in the parchemyne that has no figure ne note in it. Gloss. But now argues
Boece against that opynion, and says thus. But if the thryuynge soul ne
implyteth nothing* that is to said, ne does thing by his propre mouynge, but
suffers and lies subject to the fygures and to the notes of bodies
withoutforth, and yeldeth images ydel, evil and vain in the manner of a
myrrour, whence thryueth than or whence comes thilke knowing in our soul,
ye discerns and beholds all things, and whence is thilke strength that
beholds the synguler things or else whence is the strength that dyuydeth
things yknowe, and thylke strength that gathered together things divided, and
strength that choseth the entrechaunged way. For sometime it heaueth the heed,
that is to say, that it heaueth up the ententio^ to right high things, and
sometime it descends into right low things: and when it returns into him
self, it reproves and destroys the false things by the true things.
Certes, this strength is cause more effycient and much more mighty, to seen
and to known things, than thylke cause that suffers and receives the notes
and fygures impressed in manner of matter. Algates the passion, that is to say,
the suffraunce or the wit in the quycke body goth before exciting and monyng
the strengthes of the thought, right so as when that clearenesse smyteth the
eyes, and moves hem to seen, or right so as voice or sown hourleth to the
ears, and co^moueth hem to hearken, than is the strength of the thought moved
and excyted cleapeth forth to semblable mouynges the speces that it halte
within it self, and adds the speces to the notes, and to things
withoutforth, and meddleth the images of things withoutforth, to things hyd
with in him self.

Quod si in corporibus sencie^dis qua^ nis efficiant instrumenta sensuum. etc.
But what is that, in bodies to be seled, that is to say, in the taking and in
the knowing of bodyly things. And all be it so, yt the qualities of bodies
that be object fro withoutforth, mouen and entalenten the instruments of the
wits, and all be it so, that the passion of the body, that is to said, the
wit or the suffraunce goes beforne the strength or the worchynge courage, the
which passion or suffrau^ce clepeth forth the deed of the thought in it self,
and moves and excyteth in this mean while, the fourmes that resten
withinforth, and insensyble bodies, as I have said, our corages nis not taught
or emprynted by passion to know these things, but demeth and knows of his
own strength the passion or suffraunce, subject to the body: much more tha^
tho things ben absolute and quyte fro all talentes or affections of bodies, as
god or his angels, ne folowen not in decernynge things object fro wtoutforth,
but they acco^plysshe^ and speden the deeds of her thought By this reason than
there comen many manner of knowynges to diverse, and to differrynge substaunces.
For the wit of the body the which wit is naked and dispoyled of all other
knowing, thylke wit comes to beestes, the which ne mowen not mouen hem
self here and there, as oysters and muskels and other such shelfysh of the sea, that cleue^ and ben norysshed to rocks, but ye ymaginacion comes of
remuable beestes, that semen to have talent to flyen or to desire^ any thing
But reason is alonelye the lynage of mankind, right as intelligence is alonly
the divine nature, of which it follows, that thilk knowing is more worth
than is either syns it knows by his propre nature, not only his subject,
as who says: it ne kneweth not alonely that appertains properly to his
knowing, but it knows the subjects of al other knowynges.

But how shall it than be, if that wit and ymaginacion stryuen again reasonynge
and said that of thylke universal thing that reason weneth to seen, yt it
nis right naught for wit and ymaginacion said, that that is sensyble or
ymagynable, it ne may not ben universal. Than is there either the judgment of
reason sothe, ne that there nys no thing sensyble, or else for that reason wot
well, that many things be subject to wit and to ymaginacyon: than is the
conceptio^ of reason vain and false, which that looks and comprehends, that
that is sensyble and synguler, as universal. And if that the reason would
answer against these two, that is to say, to wit and ymaginacion, and say that
sothly she her self, that is to said reason, looks and comprehends by
reason of universality, both that that is sensible, and that that is
ymaginable, and thylke two, yt is to said, wit and ymaginacion, ne mowen not
stretchen hem self to the knowing of universality, for that the knowing of
hem, ne may not exceaden ne surmounten the bodyly fygures. Certes of the
knowing of things men oughten rather yeuen more credence to the more steadfast,
and to ye more perfyte judgment in this manner stryuyng, than we that have
strength of reasoning and of ymagynacion, and of wit, that is to say, by
reason and by ymaginacion, we would rather praise the cause of reason, as who
says, than the cause of wit and of ymagynacion. Semblable thing is it, that
the reason of mankind ne weneth not that the divine intellyge^ce, beholds or
knows things to come, but right as the reason of mankind knows hem: for
thou arguyst thus, that if that it ne seem not to men, that some things have
certain betydinges, they ne may not be wyste before certainly to betyden, and
than is there no prescience of thylke things: and if we trow that prescience
be in these things, than is there nothing that betydeth by necessyte. But if
we might have judgment of the divine thought, as we ben parteners of reason,
right so as we have demed, that it behooves by ymagynacion and wit, and
beneth reason, right so would we demen that it were rightful thing, that man's
reason ought to submyt it self to be beneth the divine thought, for which if
we may, as who says, that if we may I counsel that we enhaunce us in the
heyght of thylke sovereign intellygence, for there shall reason well seen that
that it ne may not behold in it self, and certes that is thus, in what manner
the prescience of god sees al things and diffynysheth, all though they have
no certain betydynges: ne this is none opinion, but rather the symplicite of
the sovereign science, that is not shette within no manner of bounds.

Quam variis terras animalia per meant ^iguris. Namque alia extento sunt
corpore. etc.
THe beestes passen by ye erthes by full diverse figures, for some of he^ have
her bodies straut, and crepen in the duste, and drawn after hem a trace or a
forough continued, that is to say, as nedders and snayles, and other beestes,
by the wandrynge lyghtnesse of her wings beaten the wyndes, and over swymmen
the spaces of the long air, by most flyeng. And other beestes gladen hem
self, to dyggen her traces or her steps in the crthe with her going or with
her fete, and to gone either by the grene feldes, or else to walken under the
woods. And all be it so that thou see that they discorden by diverse fourmes,
algates her faces enclyned heauyeth her dull wits, only the lynage of man
heaueth highest his hye heed, and stands light with his vpryght body, and
beholds the erthes under him. And but if thou erthly man waxest yuell out of
thy wit, this figure amonesteth the, that ask the heaven with thy right
vysage, and have areysed thy forheed to bearen up on high thy courage, so that
thy thout ne be not heuyed ne put low under foot, sith that thy body is so
high areysed.

Quoniam igitur vti paulo ante monstratum est, omne quod scitur. etc.
Therefore than, as I have showed a little here beforn, yt all thing yt is wist
nys not known by this nature propre, but by ye nature of he^ yt co^prehenden
it. Let us loken now in as much as it is lefull to us, as who says, let us
loken now as we may, which that is the estate of the divine substance, so
that we may well know eke what his science is.

The commune judgment of all creatures reasonables than is, that God is eterne.
Let us consydre than what is eternyte, for certes that shall shown us together
the divine nature and the divine science. Eternyte than is perfyte possessyon,
and all together of life intermynable, and that shows the more clearly by the
co^paryson or collacyon of temporal things. For all thing that lives in
time, it is present, and proceeds fro preterytees in to futures, that is to
said, from time passed in to time coming: ne there nys nothing establysshed
in time, that may enbracen together all the space of this life, for certes yet
ne has it not taken the time of to morrow, and it has lost that of
yesterday. And certes in the life of this day, ye ne lyue^ no more, but right
as in this mouable and transytorye moment. Than thylke thing that suffers
temporal condycion, al though that it never began to be, ne though it never
cease to be (as Arystoteles demed of the world) and although the life of it be
stretched with infynite of time, yet algates nys it no such thing, as men
might trowen by right that it is eterne. For all thought that it comprehend
and enbrace the space of the life infynite, yet algates ne embraseth it not ye
space of the life all together, for it ne has not the futures that be not yet:
ne it ne has no longer the preteritees that be^ don or passed. But thylke
thing than, that has and comprehends together all the plenty of the life
intermynable, to whom there ne fails naught of the future, and to whom there
nys naught of the preterite escaped or passed, thylke same is ywitnessed and
proved by right to ben etern.

And it behooves by necessyte that thylke thing be always present to him self,
and co^petent, as who says, always present to him self, and so mighty, that
all be right at his pleasaunce, and that he have all present the infynyte of ye
mouable time. Wherefore some men trowen wrongfully, that when they heren that it
seemed to Plato, that this world had never beginning of time, that it never
shall have faylyng: they wene in thylke manner, that this world be maked
eterne, with his maker, as who says, they wene that this world and god be
maked together eterne. And that is a wrongful wenynge, for other thing it is
to be ladde by the life interminable, as Plato granted to the world, and
other thing it is to embrace together, al ye presence of the life that is
intermynable, which thing is clear and manifest to the divine thought. Ne it
ne should not seem to us that god is elder than things that been maked by
quantyte of time, but rather by ye prosperyte of his simple nature. For this
ylke infynyte mouynges of temporal things follows this presentary estate of
this life immouable and so as it ne may not countrefayten ne feign it, ne be
euenlyke to it for ye immobilyte, that is to say, that is in the eternyte of
god, it fails and falls in to mouyng fro the symplicite of the presence of
god, and disencreaseth in ye infynite quantyte of future and preterite. And so
as it may not have together all the plenty of the life, algates yet for as
much as it cease never for to ben in some manner, yet it seems somdele to us,
that it follows and resembles thylke thing, that it ne may not attain to ne
fulfyllen, and byndeth it self to some manner presence of this little moment,
the which presence of this little and swift moment, for that it bears a manner
image or likeness of the aye dwelling of god: it grants to such manner
things, as it betydeth to, that it seems hem, as these things have been, and
ben. And for that the presence of such little moment ne may not dwell, therefore
it rauyshed and took thinfynite way of time, that is to say, by succession, and
by this manner it is done, for that it should continue the life in going, of yt
which life it ne might not enbrace the plentye of dwelling. And for thy if we
woollen put worthy names to things that folowen Plato, let us say than
sothlye, that god is eterne, and that the world is perpetuell. Than sith every
judgment knows and comprehends by his own nature, things that been subject
unto him, there is to god always an eterne and a presentarye estate. And the
science of him that ouerpasseth all temporal moment, dwells in symplycite of
his presence, and enbraseth and consydereth all the infynyte spaces of times
preterytes, and of times futures, and looks in his simple knowing all things
of preterite, right as they were^ ydon presentlye right now. If thou will
than thynken and advise the prescyence, by which it knows all things, thou
ne shall not demen it as prescience of things to comen but thou shall demen
more ryghtfully that it is science of presence or of instaunce that never ne
fails, for which it nys not ycleped preuidence, but it should rather ben
cleaped purneyaunce, which is establyshed full far fro right low things,
and beholds from a far all things, right as it were fro the hye heyght of
things. Why ask thou than, or why dysputest thou tha^, that thylke things
ben done by necessyte, which that been ysene and yknowen by the deuyne sight,
sithe that forsooth men ne maken not thylke things necessary, which that they
seen ben ydone in her sight, for adds thy beholdynge any necessyte, to thylke
things which thou beholdest present?

Boe. Nay (quod I)


Philo. Certes (quod she) than, if men myghten maken any digne co^paryson or
collacyon of the presence dyuyne, and of the presence of mankind: right so as
ye seen some things in this temporal presence, right so sees god all thing
by his eterne presence, wherefore this divine prescience ne changes not the
nature of the property of things, but beholds such things present to him
ward, as they shulden betyden to you ward in time to comen. Ne it ne
confounds not the iugementes of things, but by one sight of his thought he
knows the things to comen, as well necessary as not necessary. Right so when
ye seen together a man walk on the earth, and ye sun arysen in the heaven, all
be it so that ye seen together that one and that other: yet nevertheless ye
demen and discernen, that that one is voltu^ary, and that other is necessary:
Right so than the divine lokyng, beholding al things under him, ne troubles
not the qualyte of things that been certainly present to him ward, but as to
the condycyon of time, forsooth they ben future, for which it follows, that
this nys none opinyon, but rather a sted fast knowing ystrengthed by
sothnesse, that when that god knows any thing to be, he ne vnwote not that
thilke thing wants necessyte to be, this is to said, that when that god
knows any thing to betyde, he wot well yt it ne has no necessyte to
betyde. And if thou seyst here that thylke thing that god s^eth to betyde, it
ne may not vnbetyde, as who says it mote betyde, and thilke thing that ne
may not vnbetyde, it mote betyden by necessyte, and that thou streyn me to this
name of the necessyte. Certes I will well confessen and be known a thing of
full sad troth, but uneath shall there any wight mow seen it or come thereto,
but if that he be beholder of the deuyne thought, for I will answer the thus,
that thylke thing that is future, when it is referred to the deuyne knowing,
than it is necessary. But certes when it is vnderstande^ in his own kind, men
seen it utterly fre and absolute fro al necessyte. For certes there ben two
manners of necessytees, that one necessyte is simple, as thus, that is behooves
by necessyte, that all men ben mortal or deedly. Another necessyte is
condicyonel, as thus, if thou wost that a man walks, it behooves by necessyte
that he walk, thylke thing than that any wight has yknowe to be, it ne may
not be none otherwise than he knows it to be. But this condition ne draws
not with her thilk necessyte simple, for certes this necessite condicionall, ye
propre nature of it ne makes it not, but the adiection of the condycyon makes
it. For no necessyte ne constrayneth a man to gone, that goth by his propre
will, al be it so that when he goth, that it is necessary that he gothe. Right
on this same manner than, if that the purueyaunce of god sees any thing
present, tha^ mote thylke thing ben by necessyte, although that it ne have no
necessyte of his own nature. But certes the futures that betyden by fredom of
arbytrie, god sees hem al together present. These things tha^ if they ben
referred to the deuyne sight, than ben they maked necessary by the condicyon of
the deuyne knowing. But certes, if thylke things ben considered by hem self,
they ben absolute of necessyte, and ne forleten not, ne cessen not of the
lyberte of her own nature. Tha^ certes without doubt all the things shullen
ben don, which that god woot beforne that they ben to comen and betyden of
free arbytrie, or of frewyll, that al be it so that they betyden, yet algates
ne lose they not her propre nature in being, by the which first or they weren
done, they hadden power not to have betyde.


Boe. What is this to said than (quod I) that things ne be not necessary by
her propre nature, so that they comen in all manners in the likeness of
necessyte, by condicyo^ of the divine science?


Philo. This is the difference (quod she) that tho things which that I
purposed the a little here beforne, that is to sayn, son arysyng, and the man
walkyng that therwhyles that thylke things ben done, they ne might not ben
undone. Nathelesse that one of hem or it was done, it behooves by necessyte
that it was done, but not that other. Right so it is here that the things
which that god has present, withouten doubt they shullen ben, but some of hem
dyscendeth of the nature of things, as ye sun arysynge, and some discendeth
of the power of the doers, as the man walking.


Boece. Than said I, no wrong, that if these things be referred to the divine
knowing, than ben they necessary, and if they ben consydred by hem self, than
ben they absolute fro the bond of necessyte. Right so as all things that
apereth or shows to the wits, if thou refer hem to reason it is
universal, and if thou look it or refer it to it self, than is it synguler.
But now if thou say thus, that if that it be in my power to chaungen my
purpose, than shall I voyden the pourueyaunce of god, when perauenture I shall
have changed the things which that he knows beforne.


Phi. Than shall I answeren the thus: Certes thou may well change thy
purpose, but for as much as the present sothnesse of the divine purueyaunce
beholds that thou may change thy purpose, and whether thou change it or
no, and why derwarde that thou turn it, thou ne may not eschew the divine
prescience: right so thou ne may not fly the sight of the present eye all
though that thou turn thy self by thy fre will in to diverse actions. But
thou may said again to this thus: How shall it than be, shall not the divine
science ben changed by my dysposycion, when that I will one thing now, and
now another thing? And thylke prescience ne seems it not to entrechaunge
stoundes of knowing, as who says ne shall it not semen to us, that the dyuyne
prescience entrechaungeth his diverse stou^des of knowing, so that it know
sometime one thing, and sometime it knows the contrary of that thing? Philo.

No forsothe (quod she) for the divine sight renneth beforne and sees all the
futures, and clepeth hem again, and retourneth hem to the propre prescience of
his propre knowing, ne he entrechaungeth not, so as thou wenest the stoundes
of his foreknowynge, as now this, now that: but he dwelling aye comes
beforne, and enbraseth at o stroke all the mutacions. And this prescience to
compreheden and to seen all things, god ne has not taken it of the betydinges
of things to comen, but of his propre symplicite. And hereby is assoyled
thylke things that thou put a little here beforne, that is to sayn, that
it is unworthy thing to said yt our futures yeuen cause of the prescie^ce of
god. For certes strength of the divine science, which that enbraseth all
things by his presentarie knowing, establyssheth manner to all things, and it
ne owes not to latter things. And sithe yt these things ben thus, that is to
said, that necessyte is not in things by the divine prescience, than is there
fredom of arbytrie that dwells hole and vnwemmed to mortal me^, ne the laws
ne purposen not wicked medes and pains to the wyllynges of men, that been
vnbounde^ and quyte of all necessyte: And god beholder and foreweter of al
things dwells above, and the present eternyte of sight renneth always with
the diverse qualyte of our deeds, dispensynge or ordeynyng medes to good men,
and tourmentes to wicked me^. Ne in ydell ne in vain ne ben there not put in
god hope and prayers, that ne mowen not ben vnspedefull, ne without effect,
when they ben ryghtfull.

Withstand than and eschew thou vices, worship and love thou virtues, areyse
thy courage to rightful hopes, yield thou humble prayers and high. Great
necessyte of prowess and of virtue is encharged and commanded to you if ye
nyll not dissimulen, sith that ye worchen and done, that is to said, your
deeds and your works beforn the eyes of the judge, that sees and also that
demeth al things. Deo gracias.


Thus ends the book of Boecius of the consolacion of philosophy, and
herafter follows the dream of Chaucer.
The dream of Chaucer.
I Have great wonder by this light
How I live, for day ne night
I may not sleep, welnye naught
I have so many an idle thought
Purely for defaute of sleep
That by my truth, I take no keep
Of nothing, how it comes or gothe
Ne me nys nothing lefe nor loathe
All is ilyche good to me
Joy or sorrow, where so it be
For I have felyng in no thing
But as it were a mased thing
Al day in point to fall adoun
For sorrowful ymagynacyoun
Is always holy in my mind
And well ye wot, against kind
It were to lyuen in this wise
For nature would not suffyse
To none erthly creature
Not long time to endure
Without sleep, and be in sorrow
And I ne may, ne night ne morrow
Sleep, and this melancolye
And dread I have for to dye
Defaute of sleep and heaviness
Has slain my spyrite of quickness
That I have lost all lustyheed
Such fantasyes ben in mine heed
So I not what is best to do
But men might ask me why so
I may not sleep, and what me is
But nathelesse, who ask this
Leseth his askyng trewly
My seluen can not tell why
The sothe, but trewly as I guess
I hold it be a sycknesse
That I have suffered this eight year
And yet my boot is never the nere
For there is phisycien but one
That may me heal, but that is done
Pass we over until efte
That will not be, mote need be left
Our first matter is good to keep
So when I saw I might not sleep
Till now late, this other night
Upon my bed I sat vpryght
And bade one reche me a book
A romaunce, and he it me took
To read, and drive the night away
For me thought it better play
Than play either at Chesse or tables
And in this book were written fables
That clerks had in old time
And other poets, put in ryme
To read, and for to be in mind
while men loved the law of kind
This book ne spoke, but of such things
Of queen's lives, and of kings
And many other things small
Among all this I fond a tale
That me thought awonder thing.
This was the tale: There was a king
That hight Seys, and had a wife
The best that might bear life
And this queen hight Alcyone
So it befyll, thereafter sone
This king woll wenden over see
To tellen shortly, when that he
Was in the sea, thus in this wise
Such a tempest began to rise
That brake her maste, and made it fall
And clefte her ship, and dreynt hem all
That never was found, as it tells
Board ne man, ne nothing else
Right thus this king Seys lost his life
Now for to speak of Alcyone his wife
This lady that was left at home
Has wonder, that the king ne come
Home, for it was a long term
Anon her heart began to yerne
And for that her thought ever mo
It was not well, her thought so
She longed so after the king
That certes it were a pytous thing
To tell her hertely soroufull life
That she had, this noble wife
For him alas, she loved alderbest
Anon she sent both eest and west
To seek him, but they found naught
Alas (quod she) that I was wrought
And where my lord my love be deed?
Certes I nyll never eat breed
I make a vow to my god here
But I mow of my lord here
Such sorrow this lady to her took
That trewly, I that made this book
Had such pity, and such routhe
To read her sorrow, that by my truth
I farde the worse all the morrow
After to thynken on her sorrow
So when this lady could here no word
That no man might find her lord
Full often she swowned, and said alas
For sorrow, full nyghe wood she was
Ne she could no read but one
But down on knees she sat anon
And wept, that pity was to here
A mercy sweet lady dear
(quod she) to Juno her goddess
Help me out of this distress
And give me grace my lord to se
Soon, or wete where so he be
Or how he fares, or in what whyse
And I shall make you sacrifyse
And holy yours become I shall
With good will, body, heart and all
And but thou wolte this, lady sweet
Send me grace to sleep and mete
In my sleep some certain sweuen
where through that I may know even
whether my lord be quick or deed
With that word she hynge down the heed
And fell in a swoune, as cold as stone
Her women caught her up anon
And brought her in bed all naked
And she forweped and forwaked
was weary, and thus the deed sleep
Fell on her, or she took keep
Through Juno, that had herd her boon
That made her to sleep soon
For as she prayde, right so was done
In deed, for Juno right anon
Called thus her messangere
To do her erande, and he come nere
when he was come, she bad him thus
Gobet (quod Juno) to Morpheus
Thou know him well, the god of sleep
Now understand well, and take keep
Say thus on my half, that he
Go fast in to the great see
And bid him that on all thing
He take up Seys body the king
That lies full pale, and nothing rody
Bid him crepe in to the body
And do it gone to Alcyone
The queen, there she lies alone
And show her shortly it is no nay
How it was dreynt this other day
And do the body speak right so
Right as it was wonned to do
The whiles that it was alive
Go now fast, and hye the blyue.
This messanger took leave and went
Upon his way, and never he stente
Till he came to the dark valey
That stante between rocks twey
There never yet grew corn ne gras
Ne tree, ne naught that ought was
Be ne man, ne naught else
Save that there were a few wells
Came rennynge fro the clyffes adowne
That made a deedly slepynge sown
And rennen down right by a cave
That was under a rock ygraue
Amyd the valey wonder deep
There these gods lay aslepe
Morpheus and Eclympasteyre
That was the god of slepes heir
That slepte, and did none other work
This cave was also as derke
As hell pytte, over all about
They had good leyser for to route
To vye who might sleep best
Some hynge her chynne upon her breast
And slepte vpryght her heed yhed
And some lay naked in her bed
And slepte whiles their days last
This messangere come rennyng fast
And cried ho ho, awake anon
It was for naught, there herd him none
Awake (quod he) who lies there
And blewe his horn right in her eere
And cried awaketh wonder hye
This god of sleep, with his one eye
Cast up, and asked who clepeth there
It am I (quod this messangere)
Juno bade thou should gone
And told him what he should done
As I have told you here before
It is no need rehearse it more
And went his way when he had said
Anon this god of sleep abrayde
Out of his sleep and began to go
And did as he had bydde him do
Took up the deed body soon
And bare it forth to Alcione
His wife the queen, there as she lay
Right even a quarter before day
And stood right at her beds fete
And called her right as she hete
By name, and said: My sweet wife
Awake, let be your sorrowful life
For in your sorrow, there lies no read
For certes sweet love, I am but deed
Ye shall me never on live yse
But good sweet heart that ye
Bury my body, for such a tide
Ye mow it find, the sea beside
And farewell sweet, my worlds bliss
I pray god your sorrow lysse
To little while our bliss lasts
with that her eyes up she casts
And saw naught, alas (quod she) for sorrow
And dyed within the third morrow
But what she said more in that swowe
I may not tell you as now
It were to long for to dwell
My first matere I will you tell
wherefore I have told this thing
Of Alcione, and Seys the king
For thus much dare I say well
I had be doluen euerydel
And deed, right through defaute of sleep
If I ne had red, and take keep
Of this tale next before
And I will tell you wherefore
For I ne might for bote ne bale
Sleep, or I had read this tale
Of this dreynte Seys the king
And of the gods of slepynge
when I had red this tale well
And ouerloked it euerydele
Me thought wonder, if it were so
For I had never herd speak or tho
Of no gods, that could make
Men to sleep, ne for to wake
For I ne knew never god but one
And in my game, I said anon
And yet me list right evil to pley
Rather then that I should dey
Through defaute of slepynge thus
I would give thylke Morpheus
Or that gods dame Juno
Or some wight else, I ne rought who
To make me sleep, and have some rest
I will give him the alther best
Yeft, that ever he abode his live
And here onwarde, right now as blyue
If he woll make me sleep a lyte
Of down of pure downs white
I woll give him a fether bed
Rayed with gold, and right well cled
In fine black Sattyn doutremere
And many a pylowe, and every bear
Of cloth of raynes to sleep on soft
Him their not need to turn often
And I woll give him all that falls
To his chamber and to his halles
I woll do paynte with pure gold
And tapyte hem full many fold
Of one suit this shall he have
If I wist where were his cave
If he can make me sleep sone
As did the goddess, queen Alcione
And thus this ylke god Morpheus
May win of me mo fees thus
Then ever he wanne, and to Juno
That is his goddess, I shall so do
I trow that she shall hold her paid.
I had uneath that word ysayde
Right thus as I have told you
That suddenly I nyst how
Such a lust anon me took
To sleep, that right upon my book
I fell aslepe, and therwyth even
Me met so inly such a sweuen
So wonderful, that never yet
I trow no man had the wit
To coone well my sweuen read
No naught Joseph without dread
Of Egypt, he that rad so
The kings metynge Pharao
No more then could the lest of us
Ne not scarsly Macrobeus
He that wrote all the auysyon
That he met king Scipion
The noble man the Affrican
Such meruayles fortuned then
I trow a read my dremes even
Lo thus it was, this was my sweuen.
Me thought thus, that it was May
And in the dawning there I lay
Me met thus in my bed all naked
And looked forth, for I was waked
with small fowls a great hepe
That had afraid me out of my sleep
Through noise, and swetnesse of her song
And as me met, they sat among
Upon my chamber rofe without
Upon the tyles over all about
And eueryche song in his wise
The most solemn seruyse
Be note, that ever man I trow
Had herd, for some of hem song low
Some high, and all of one accord
To tell shortly at o word
was never herd so sweet steven
But it had be a thing of heaven
So merry a sown, so sweet entunes
That certes for the town of Tewnes
I nolde, but I had herd hem sing
For all my chamber began to ring
Through singing of her ermony
For instrument, nor melody
was no where herd, yet half so sweet
Nor of accord half so mete
For there was none of hem that feigned
To sing, for each of hem him payned
To find out many crafty notes
They ne spared not her throtes
And soth to said, my chamber was
Full well depaynted, and with glass
were all the wyndowes, well yglased
Full clear, and not an hole ycrased
That to behold it was great joy
For holly all the storye of Troy
was in the glasynge ywrought thus
Of Hector, and of king Priamus
Of Achylles, and of king Laomedon
And eke of Medea, and of Jason
Of Paris, Heleyne, and of Lauyne
And all the walls with colors fine
were paynte, both text and gloss
And all the Romaunce of the rose
My wyndowes were shyt echone
And through the glass the sun shone
Upon my bed with bright bemes
with many glad gyldy stremes
And eke the welkyn was so fair
Blewe, bright, clear was the air
And full atempre, forsooth it was
For neither to cold, ne hot it nas
Ne in all the welkyn was no cloud
And as I lay thus wonder loud
Me thought I herd an hunte blow
Tassay his great horn, and for to know
whether it was clear, or horse of sown
And I herd going both up and down
Men horse, hounds, and other thing
And all men speak of hunting
How they would slay the heart with strength
And how the heart had upon length
So much enbosed, I not now what
Anon right when I herd that
How that they would, on hunting gone
I was right glad, and up anon
Took my horse, and forth I went
Out of my chamber, I never stente
Till I come to the field without
There over took I a great route
Of hunters, and eke of foresters
And many relayes and lymers
And hyed hem to the forest fast
And I with hem, so at the last
I asked one ladde, a lymere
Say fellow, who shall hunte here
(Quod I) and he answered again
Sir, the Emperor Octauien
(Quod he) and is here fast by
A gods half, in good time (quod I)
Go we fast, and began to ride
when we come to the forest side
Every man did right sone
As to hunting fell to dove
The master hunte, anon foot hot
with his horn blewe three mote
At the vncouplynge of his hounds
within a while the heart found is
Ihalowed, and rechased fast
Long time, and so at the last
This heart roused and stale away
Fro all the hounds a preuy way
The hounds had ouershot him all
And were upon a defaulte yfall.
Therwyth the hunte, wonder fast
Blewe a forloyne at the last
I was go walked fro my tree
And as I went, there came by me
A whelpe, that fawned me as I stood
That had yfolowed, and could no good
It came and crepte to me as low
Right as it had me yknowe
Held down his heed, and joined his eeres
And laid all smoth down his heeres
I would have caught it anon
It fled, and was fro me gone
As I him followed, and it forth went
Down by a floury grene it went
Full thycke of grass, full soft and sweet
with flowers feel, fair under fete
And little used, it seemed thus
For both Flora, and zepherus
They two, that make flowers grow
Had made her dwelling there I trow
For it was on to behold
As though the earth envy would
To be gayer then the heaven
To have mo flowers, such seven
As in the welken sterres be
It had forget the pouerte
That winter, through his cold morowes
Had made it suffer, and his sorrows
All was foryeten, and that was seen
For all the wood was woxen grene
Swetnesse of dew, had made it wax
It is no need eke for to axe
where there were many grene greues
Of thycke of trees, so full of leaves
And every tree stood by him selue
Fro other, well ten foot or twelve
So great trees, so huge of strength
Of forty or fyfty fedome length
Clean without bow or stycke
with croppes broad, and eke as thycke
They were not an ynche a sonder
That it was shadde over all under
And many an heart, and many an hynde
was both before me, and behind
Of fawnes, sowers, buckes, does
was full of the wodde, and many roes
And many squyrels, that sete
Full high upon the trees and ete
And in her manner made feestes
Shortly, it was so full of beestes
That though Argus, the noble countour
Sat to reken in his countour
And reken with his fygures ten
For by tho fygures new al ken
If they be crafty, reken and nombre
And tell of every thing the nombre
Yet should he fail to reken even
The wonders me met in my sweuen
But forth I romed, right wonder fast
Donwe the wodde, so at the last
I was ware of a man in black
That sat, and had yturned his back
To an ooke, an huge tree
Lord thought I, who may that be
what eyleth him to sytten here
Anon right, I went nere
Then found I sytte, even vpryght
A wonder welfarynge knight
By the manner me thought so
Of good mokell, and right young thereto
Of the age of four and twenty year
Upon his berde, but little here
And he was clothed all in black
I stalked even unto his back
And there I stood, as still as ought
The sothe to say, he saw me naught
For why he hynge his heed adowne
And with a deedly, sorouful sown
He made of ryme, ten verses or twelve
Of a complaynt, to him selue
The most pity, the most routhe
That ever I herd, for by my truth
It was great wonder that nature
Might suffer any creature
To have such sorrow, and he not deed
Full pytous pale, and nothing reed
He said a lay a manner song
without note, without song
And was this, for full well I can
Rehearse it, right thus it began
I have of sorrow so great wone
That joy get I never none
Now that I se my lady bright
which I have loved, withal my might
Is fro me deed, and is agone
And thus in sorrow, left me alone
Alas, death what ayleth the
That thou noldest have taken me
when that thou took my lady sweet
Of all goodness, she had none mete
That was so fair, so fresh, so fre
So good, that men may well se
when he had made thus his complaynte
His sorrowful heart, began fast faynte
And his spirits wexen deed
The blood was fled, for pure dread
Down to his heart, to maken him warm
For well it feled the heart had harm
To wete eke, why it was adradde
By kind, and for to make it glad
For it is membre principal
Of the body, and that made all
His hew change, and wexe grene
And pale, for there no blood is seen
In no manner lymme of his
Anon therwyth, when I saw this
He farde thus yuell, there he sete
I went and stood right at his fete
And grette him, but he spoke naught
But argued with his own thought
And in his wit, dysputed fast
why, and how his life might last
Him thought his sorrows were so smerte
And lay so cold upon his heart
So through his sorrow, and holy thought
Made him that he herd me naught
For he had welnye lost his mind
Though Pan, that me^ clepeth god of kind
were for his sorrows never so wroth
But at the last, to said right sothe
He was ware of me, how I stood
Before him, and did of my hoode
And had ygret him, as I best could
Debonayrly, and nothing loud
He said, I pray the be not wroth
I herd the not: to said the sothe
Ne I saw the not, sir truly
Ah good sir, no force (quod I)
I am right sorry, if I have ought
Dystroubled you, out of your thought
Foryeue me, if I have mysse take
Yes, thamendes is light to make
(Quod he) for there lies none thereto
There is nothing myssayde, nor do
Lo how goodly spoke this knight
As it had be another wight
And made it neither tough ne queynt
And I saw that, and began me aqueynt
with him, and found him so tretable
Right wonder skylfull, and reasonable
As me thought, for all his bale
Anon right, I began find a tale
To him, to look where I might ought
Have more knowlegynge of his thought
Sir (quod I) this game is done
I hold that this heart be gone
These huntes can him no where se
I do no force thereof (quod he)
My thought is thereon never a dele
By our lord (quod I) I trow you well
Right so me thinks by your chere
But sir, o thing woll ye here
Me thinks in great sorrow I you se
But certes sir, if that ye
would ought dyscure me your woe
I would, as wise god help me so
Amend it, if I can or may
Ye mow prove it by assay
For by my troth, to make you hole
I woll do all my power hole
And tells me, of your sorrows smerte
Parauenter it may ease your heart
That seems full sick under your side
with that he looked on me a side
As who says nay, that will not be
Grant mercy good friend (quod he)
I thank the, that thou would so
But it may never the rather be do
No man may my sorrow glade
That makes my hew to fall and fade
And has mine understanding lorne
That me is woe, that I was borne
May naught make my sorrows slide
Not all the remedies of Ouide
Ne Orpheus, god of melodye
Ne Dedalus, with his plays slye
Ne heal me, may no phisicien
Naught Ipocras, ne Galien
Me is woe, that I live hours twelve
But who so woll assaye him selue
whether his heart can have pity
Of any sorrow, let him se me
I wretch, that death has made all naked
Of all the bliss that ever was maked
I wroth, werste of all wyghtes
That hate my days, and my nyghtes
My life, my lusts, be me loathe
For all fare and I be wroth
The pure death is so full my so
That I would dye, it will not so
For when I follow it, it will fly
I would have him, it nyl not me
This is pain without reed
Always dyenge, and be not deed
That Tesyphus that lies in hell
May not of more sorrow tell
And who so wyste all, by my truth
My sorrow, but he had routhe
And pity of my sorrows smerte
That man has a fendly heart
For who so sees me first on morrow
May said he has met with sorrow
For I am sorrow, and sorrow is I
Alas, and I will tell the why
My sorrow is turned to playnynge
And all my laughter to weeping
My glad thoughts to heaviness
In travail is mine idleness
And eke my rest, my well is woe
My good is harm, and ever woe
In wrath is turned my playnyng
And my delight in to sorowyng
Mine heal is turned in to sickness
In dread is al my sykernesse
To derke is turned al my light
My wit is folly, my day is night
My love is hate, my sleep wakyng
My myrthe and melis, is fasting
My countenance is nycete
And al abawed, where so I be
My peace pleadynge, and in werre
Alas, how might I fare werre
My boldness is turned to shame
For false fortune has played a game
At the Chesse with me, alas the while
The trayteresse falfe, and full of gyle
That all behoteth, and nothing halte
She goes vpryght, and yet she halte
That baggeth foul, and looks fair
The dyspytous debonayre
That scorneth many a creature
An ydole of false purtrayture
Is she, for she woll sone wryen
She is the monstres heed ywryen
As fylthe, over ystrowed with flowers
Her most worship and her flowers
To lain, for that is her nature
without faith, law, or mesure
She false is, and ever laughing
with one eye, and that other weeping
That is brought up, she set all down
I lyken her to the Scorpiowne
That is a false flattering be
For with his heed be makes feast
But all amyd his flaterynge
with his tail he will stynge
And enuenym, and so will she
She is the enuyous charity
That is aye false, and seems well
So turns she her false whele
About, for it is nothing stable
Now by the fire, now at table
Full many one has she thus yblent
She is play of enchauntement
That seems one, and is not so
The false thief, what has she do
Trowest thou, by our lord I will the say
At the Chesse with me she began to play
with her false draughtes full diverse
She stale on me, and took my feers
And when I saw my feers away
Alas, I couth no longer play
But said, farewell sweet ywys
And farewell all that ever there is
Therwyth fortune said, check here
And mate in the mydde point of the checkere
with a paune errant, a^s
Full craftyer to play she was
Then Athalus that made the game
First of the Chesse, so was his name
But god would I had ons or twyse
Iconde, and know the ieoperdyse
That could the Greek Pithagores
I should have playde the bet at ches
And kept my feers the bet thereby
And though whereto, for truly
I hold that wyshe not worth a stre
It had be never the bet for me
For fortune can so many a wyle
There be but few, can her begyle
And eke she is the less to blame
My self I would have do the same
Before god, had I ben as she
She ought the more excused be
For this I say, yet more thereto
Had I be god, and might have do
My will, when she me feers caught
I would have draw the same draught
For also wise, god give me rest
I dare well swear, she took the best
But through that draught I have lorne
My bliss, alas that I was borne
For evermore I trow truly
For all my will, my lust holy
Is turned, but ye, what to done
By our lord it is to dye sone
For nothing I leave it naught
But live and dye, right in this thought
For there nys planet in fyrmament
Ne in air ne in earth none element
That they ne give me a yefte echone
Of weeping when I am alone
For when that I advise me well
And bethynke me every dele
How that there lies in reckoning
In my sorrow for nothing
And how there lives no gladness
May glad me of my dystresse
And how I have lost suffysaunce
And thereto I have no pleasaunce
Then may I say, I have right naught
And when all this falls in my thought
Alas, then am I overcome
For that is done, is not to come
I have more sorrow then Tantale
And when I herd him tell this tale
Thus pytously, as I you tell
Uneath might I longer dwell
It did mine heart so much woe
A good sir (quod I) say not so
Have some pity on your nature
That formed you to creature
Remembers you of Socrates
For he ne counts not three strees
Of naught that fortune could do
No (quod he) I can not so
why so good sir, yes perde (quod I)
Ne say not so, for truly
Though ye had lost the feerses twelve
And ye for sorrow murdered your selue
Ye should be dampened in this ease
By as good right as Medea was
That slough her children for Jason
And Phyllis also, for Demophon
Hynge her self, so welaway
For he had broke his term day
To come to her: Another rage
Had Dido, the queen eke of Cartage
That slough her self, for Eneas
was false, which a fool she was?
And Ecquo dyed, for Narcisus
Nolde not love her, and right thus
Has many another folly done
And for Dalida dyed Sampson
That slough him self with a pylere
But there is no man alive here
would for her feers make this woe
why so (quod he) it is not so
Thou wotest full little what thou menest
I have lost more then thou wenest
How that may be (quod I)
Good sir, tell me all holy
In what wise, how, why, and wherefore
That ye have thus your bliss lore
Blythely (quod he) come sit down
I tell the upon a condicioun
That thou shall holly with all thy wit
Do thine entente to harken it
Yes sir: Swear thy troth thereto
Gladly do then hold here to
I shall right blythly, so god me save
Holly with all the wit I have
Here you as well as I can
A gods half (quod he) and began
Sir (quod he) sith first I couthe
Have any manner wit fro youth
Or kyndely understanding
To comprehend in any thing
what love was, in mine own wit
Dredelesse I have ever yet
Be trybutary, and give rent
To love holly, with good entente
And through pleasaunce, become his thrall
with good will, body, heart and all
All this I put in his seruage
As to my lord, and did homage
And full devoutly I prayde him to
He should beset mine heart so
That it pleasaunce to him were
And worship to my lady dear
And this was long, and many a year
(Er that mine heart was set o where)
That I did thus, and nyste why
I trow it came me kyndely
Paraunter I was thereto most able
As a white wall, or a table
For it is ready to ketche and take
All that men will therein make
whether so men woll portrey or paynte
Be the works never so quaynte.
And thylke time I fared right so
I was able to have learned tho
And to have conde, as well or better
Paraunter, either art or letter
But for love came first in my thought
Therefore I forgate it naught
I chees love to my first craft
Therefore it is with me lafte
For why, I took it of so young age
That malice had my courage
Not that time, turned to no thing
Through to mokell knowlegynge
For that time, youth my maystresse
Governed me in ydelnesse
For it was in my first youth
And tho full little good I couthe
For all my works were flyttyng
That time, and al my though varyeng
Al were to me ilyche good
That I knew tho, but thus it stood
It happed that I came on a day
In to a place, there that I sey
Trewly the fairest company
Of ladies, that ever man with eye
Had seen togythers in o place
Shall I clepe it hap, either grace
That brought me there, not but fortune
That is to lain full comune
The false trayteresse perverse
God would I could clepe her werse
For now she worcheth me full woe
And I wol tell sone why so
Among these ladies thus echone
Soth to said, I saw one
That was like none of the route
For I dare swear, without doubt
That as the so^mers sun bright
Is fayrer, clerer, and has more light
Than any other planet in heaven
The moon, or the sterres seven
For all the world, so had she
Surmounted hem al of beauty
Of manner, and of comlynesse
Of stature, and of well set gladness
Of goodlyhede, and so well besey
Shortly what shall I more sey
By god and by his halowes twelve
It was my sweet, right all her selue
She had so steadfast countenance
So noble port, and mayntenaunce
And love* that well herd my bone
Had espied me thus sone
That she full sone in my thought
As help me god, so was I cought
So suddenly, that I ne took
No manner counsel, but at her look
And at mine heart, for why, her eyes
So gladly I trow mine heart seyne
That purely tho, mine own thought
Said it were better serve her for naught
Than with an other to be well
And it was soth, for every dele
I will anon right tell the why
I saw her dance so comely
Caroll and sing so swetely
Laugh and play so womanly
And look so debonayrly
So goodly speak and so friendly
That certes I trow that neuermore
Nas seen so blysful a tresore
For every here on her heed
Soth to say it was not reed
Ne neither yelowe, ne brown it nas
Me thought most like gold it was
And which eyes my lady had
Debonayre, good, glad, and sad
Simple, of good mokell, not to wide
Thereto her look nas not aside
Ne overthwart, but beset so well
It drew and took up every dele
All that on her began behold
Her eyes seemed anon she would
Have mercy, folly wenden so
But it was never the rather do
It nas no counterfeyted thing
It was her own pure lokyng
That the goddess dame nature
Had made hem open by measure
And close, for were she never so glad
Her lokyng was not folyche sprad
Ne wyldly, though that she played
But ever me thought her eyes said
By god my wrath is all foryeue
Therewith her list so well to live
That dullness was of her adrad
She nas to sobre ne to glad
In all things more measure
Had never I trow creature
But many one with her look she heart
And that sat her full little at heart
For she knew nothing of her thought
But whether she knew or knew it naught
Algate she ne rought of him a stre
To get her love no nere nas he
That wo^ned at home, than he in Inde
The foremost was always behind
But good folk over all other
She loved as man may do his brother
Of which love she was wondre large
In skillful places that bear charge
But which a vysage had she thereto
Alas my heart is wondre woe
That I ne can descryuen it
Me lacks both englysh and wit
For to undo it at the full
And eke my spyrites ben so dull
So great a thing for to deuyse
I have no wit that can suffyse
To comprehend her beauti
But thus much I dare said that she
was white, rodye, fresh, and lively hewed
And every day her beauty newed
And nygh her face was alderbest
For certes nature had such lest
To make that fair, that truly she
was her chief patron of beauty
And chief ensample of all her work
And monstre, for be it never so dark
Me thinks I se her euermo
And yet moreover though al tho
That ever lived, were now alive
Ne would have found to discryue
In all her face, a wicked sign
For it was sad, simple, and benign
And such a goodly sweet speech
Had that sweet, my lives leche
So friendly, and so well ygrounded
Upon al reason so well yfounded
And so tretable to all good
That I dare swear well by the rood
Of eloquence was never found
So sweet a sownyng facounde
Ne trewer tonged, ne scorned less
Ne bet could heal: That by the mass
I durst swear, though the pope it song
That there was never yet through her to^g
Man ne woman greatly harmyd
As for her was all harm hyd
Ne less flattryng in her word
That purely her simple record
was found as true as any bond
Or troth, of any man's hand
Ne chyde she could never a dele
That knows all the world full well
But such a fayrnesse of a neck
Had that sweet, that bone nor brecke
Nas there none seen, that myssat
It was white, smothe, straight, and pure flat
without hole, or canell bone
And by semyng she had none
Her throat, as I have now memoire
Seemed as a round tour of yuoire
Of good greatness, and not to great
And Fair white she hete
That was my ladies name right
She was thereto fair and bright
She had not her name wrong
Right fair shulders, and body long
She had, and arms every lyth
Fattysh flesshy, not great there with
Right white hands, and nails red
Round breasts, and of good bread
Her hyppes were: a straight flat back
I knew on her none other lack
That all her lymmes nere pure sewyng
In as far as I had knowing
Thereto she could so well play
what that her list, that I dare say
That was like to torche bright
That every man may take of light
Enough, and it has never the less
Of manner and of comlynesse
Right so farde my lady dear
For every wight of her manner
Might catch enough, if that he would
If he had eyes her to behold
For I dare swear well, if that she
Had among ten thousand be
She would have be at the best
A chief myrrour of all the feast
Though they had stand in a row
To men's eyes, that could have know
For where so men had played, or waked
Me thought the fellowship as naked
without her, that I saw ones
As a crown without stones
Truly she was to mine eye
The soleyn Fenix of Arabye
For there lives never but one
Ne such as she, ne know I none
To speak of goodness, truly she
Had as much debonayrtie
As ever had Hester in the Bible
And more, if more were possible
And soth to said, therwithall
She had a wit so general
So hole enclyned to all good
That all her wit was set by the roode
without malice, upon gladness
And thereto I saw never yet a less
Harmfull, than she was in doing
I say not that she ne had knowing
what harm was, or else she
Had could no good, so thinks me
And truly for to speak of troth
But she had had, it had be routh
Thereof she had so much her dele
And I dare said, and sweet it well
That troth him self over all and all
Had chose his manner principal
In her, that was his restyng place
Thereto she had the most grace
To have steadfast perseueraunce
And easy attempre governance
That ever I knew, or wist yet
So pure suffraunt was her wit
And reason gladly she understood
It followed well, she could good
She used gladly to do well
These were her manners every dele
Therewith she loved so well right
She wrong do would to no wight
No wight might do her no shame
She loved so well her own name
Her lust to hold no wight in hand
Ne be thou syker, she would not fond
To hold no wight in balaunce
By half word, ne by countenance
But if men would upon her lie
Ne send men into walakye
To Pruyse, and to Tartarie
To Alisandrie, ne into Turkye
And bid him fast, anon that he
Go hoodlesse into the dry see
And come home by the Carrenare
And sir, be now right ware
That I may of you here said
worship, or that ye come again
She ne used no such knackes small
But therefore that I tell my tale
Right on this same I have said
was holy all my love laid
For certes she was that sweet wife
My suffysaunce, my lust, my life
Mine hope, mine heal, and all bless
My worlds welfare, and my goodesse
And I holy hers, and euerydale
By our lord (quod I) I trow you well
Hardly your love was well beset
I not how ye might have do bet
Bet, ne not so well (quod he)
I trow sir (quod I) parde.
Nay leave it well: Sir so do I
I leave you well, that truly
You thought that she was the best
And to behold, the alderfayrest
whosoever had looked her with your eyes?
with mine, nay all that her seyen
Said and swore, it was so
And though they ne had, I would tho
Have loved best my lady fre
Though I had had all the beauty
That ever had Alcibyades
And all the strength of Hercules
And thereto had the worthynesse
Of Alisaundre, and all the richesse
That ever was in Babiloyne
In Cartage, or in Macedoyne
Or in Rome, or in Niniue
And thereto also hardy be
As was Hector, so have I joy
That Achiles slough at Troy
And therefore was he slain also
In a temple, for both two
were slain, he and Antigelius
And so says Dares Frigius
For love of Polixena
Or ben as wise as Mynerua
I would ever, without dread
Have loved her, for I must need
Need* nay truly I gabbe now
Naught need, and I woll tellen how
For of good will mine heart it would
And eke to love her, I was hold
As for the fairest and the best
She was as good, so have I rest
As ever was Penelope of Greece
Or as the noble wife Lucrece
That was the best, he tells thus
The Romayne Titus Lyuius
She was as good, and nothing like
Though her stories be autentyke
Algate she was as true as she
But wherefore that I tell the
when I first my lady seye
I was right young, soth to say
And full great need I had to learn
when mine heart would yerne
To love it was a great emprise
But as my wit would best suffyse
After my young chyldly wit
without dread I beset it
To love her in my best wise
To do her worship, and the seruyse
That I conde tho, by my troth
without faynyng, either sloth
For wonder feign I would her se
So mokell it amended me
That when I saw her a morrow
I was waryshed of al my sorrow
Of alday after till it were eve
Me thought nothing might me grieve
were my sorrows never so smerte
And yet she sit so in mine heart
That by my troth, I nolde naught
For all this world, out of my thought
Leave my lady, no truly
Now by my troth sir (quod I)
Me thinks ye have such a chance
As shryft without repentance
Repentance, nay fie (quod he)
Should I now repent me
To love, nay certes than were I well
werse than was Achitophel
Or Antenor, so have I joy
The traitor that betrayed Troy
Or the false Genellon
He that purchased the trayson
Of Roulande, and of Olyuere
Nay, while I am alive here
I nyll foryet her never mo
Now good sir (quod I) tho
Ye have well told me here before
It is no need to rehearse it more
Now ye saw her first, and where
But would ye tell me the manner
To her, which was your first speech
Thereof I would you beseech
And how she knew first your thought
whether ye loved her or naught
And tells me eke what ye have lore
I herd you tell here before
ye said, thou notest what thou menest
I have lost more than thou wenest
what loss is that (quod I tho)
Nyl she not love you is it so
Or have ye aught done amys
That she has left you, is it this
For gods love tell me al
Before god (quod he) and I shall
I say right as I have said
On her was al me love laid
And yet she nist it not never a dele
Not long time, leave it well
For be right syker, I durst naught
For all this world, tell her my thought
Ne I would have wrathed her truly
For woste thou why, she was lady
Of the body that had the heart
And whosoever has that may not asterte
But for to keep me fro idleness
Truly I did my business
To make songs as I best could
And often time I song hem loud
And made songs, this a great deal
Although I could not make so well
Songs, ne knew the art all
As could Lamekes son Tuball
That found out first the art of song
For as his brothers hamers ronge
Upon his anuelt up and down
Thereof he took the first sown
But greeks said of Pithagoras
That he the first fynder was
Of the art, Aurora tells so
But thereof noforce of hem two
Algates songs this I made
Of my felyng, mine heart to glade
And lo, this was alther ferst
I not where it were the werst
Lord it makes mine heart light
when I think on that sweet wight
That is so semely on to se
And wysh to god it might so be
That she would hold me for her knight
My lady that is so fair and bright
Now have I told the, soth to say
My first song upon a day
I bethought me what woe
And sorrow that I suffered tho
For her, and yet she wist it naught
Ne tell her durst I not my thought
Alas thought I, I can no read
And but I tell her, I am but deed
And if I tell her, to say right soth
I am adrad she woll be wroth
Alas, what shall I than do
In this debate, I was so woe
Me thought mine heart brast arwayne
So at the last, soth for to said
I bethought me that nature
Ne formed never in creature
So much beauty truly
And bounty without mercy
In hope of that, my tale I told
with sorrow, as that I never should
For needs, and maugre mine heed
I must have told her, or be deed
I not well how that I began
Full evil rehearse it I can
And eke as help me god withal
I trow it was in the dismal
That was the ten wounds of Egypt
For many a word I over skypt
In my tale for pure fere
Lest my words mysse set were
with sorrowful heart and wounds deed
Soft and quakyng for pure dread
And shame, and styntyng in my tale
For ferde, and mine hew all pale
Full often I wext both pale and red
Bowyng to her I hynge the heed
I durst not ones look her on
For wit, manner, and all was gone
I said: mercy, and no more
It nas no game, it sat me sore.
So at the last, soth to said
when that mine heart was come again
To tell shortly al my speech
with hole heart I began her beseech
That she would be my lady sweet
And swore, and hertely began her hete
Ever to be steadfast and true
And love her always freshly new
And never other lady have
And all her worship for to save
As I best could, I swear her this
For yours is all that ever there is
For evermore mine heart sweet
And never to false you, but I mete
I nyll, as wise god help me so
And when I had my tale ydo
God wot she accounted not a stre
Of my tale, so thought me
To tell shortly, right as it is
Truly her answer it was this
I can not now well countrefete
Her words, but this was the great
Of her answer, she said nay
All utterly, alas that day
The sorrow I suffered and the woe
That truly Cassandra that so
Bewailed the destruction
Of Troy, and of Illion
Had never such sorwe as I tho
I durst no more say thereto
For pure fear, but stale away
And thus I lived full many a day
That truly I had no need
Further than my beds heed
Never a day to seche sorrow
I found it ready every morrow
For why, I loved her in no gere
So it befell an other year
I thought ones I would fond
To do her know, and understand
My woe, and she well understood
That I ne wylled thing but good
And worship, and to keep her name
Over al things, and dread her shame
And was so busy her to serve
And pytie were I should sterue
Since that I willed none harm iwys
So when my lady knew all this
My lady yaue me all holy
The noble yeft of her mercy
Saving her worship by all ways
Dredlesse, I mean non other ways
And therewith she yaue me a ring
I trow it was the first thing
But if mine heart was ywaxe
Glad, that it is no need to axe
As help me god, I was as blyue
Raised, as fro death to live
Of al happes the alder best
The gladdest and the most at rest
For truly that sweet wight
when I had wrong, and she the right
She would always so goodly
Foryeue me so debonayrly
In all my youth, in all chance
She took me in her governance
Therewith she was always so true
Our joy was every lyche new
Our hertes weren so even a pair
That never nas that one contrayre
To that other, for no woe
For soth ilyche they suffered tho
O bliss and eke o sorrow both
Ilych they were both glad and wroth
Al was us one without were
And thus we lived full many a year
So well, I can not tell how
Sir (quod I) where is she now
Now (quod he) and stynt anon
Therewith he woxe as deed as stone
And said alas that I was bore
That was the loss, that here before
I told the, that I had lorne
Bethink the, how I said here beforne
Thou wost full little what thou menest
I have lost more than thou wenest
God wot alas, right that was she
Alas sir how, what may that be
She is deed: Nay: Yes by my troth
Is that your loss, by god it is routh.
And with that word right anon
They began to struck forth, all was done
For that time the heart huntyng
with that me thought that this king
Began homewarde for to ride
Unto a place was there beside
which was from us but a lyte
A long castle with walls white
By saint John on a rich hill
As me met, but thus it fill
Right thus me met, as I you tell
Than in the castle there was a bell
As it had smyt hours twelve
Therewith I awoke my selue
And found me lying in my bed
And the book that I had red
Of Alcione and Seys the king
And of the gods of slepyng
I found it in mine hand full even
Thought I, this is so queynt a sweuen
That I would by process of time
Fond, to put this sweuen in ryme
As I can best, and that anon
This was my sweuen, now it is done.
Explicit.
MY master. etc. when of Christ our king
was asked, what is troth or sothfastnesse
He not a word answered to that asking
As who says, no man is all true I guess
And therefore though I hight to express
The sorrow and woe that is in marriage
I dare not written of it no wickedness
Lest I my self fall efte in such dotage.
I woll not say how that it is the chain
Of Sathanas, on which he gnaweth ever
But I dare said, were he out of his pain
As by his will, he would be bounden never
But thylke doted fool that eft has lever
Ychayned be, than out of prison crepe
God let him never fro his woe disceuer
Ne no man him bewail, though he weep.
But yet lest thou do worse, take a wise
Bet is to wed, then bren in worse wise
But you shall have sorrow on thy flesh thy life
And be^ thy wives thral, as sayn these wise
And if that holy writ may not suffyse
Experience shall the teach, so may hap
Take the way lever to be take in Fryse
Than efte to fall of weddyng in the trappe.
This little wryt, proverbs or fygures
I send you, take keep of it I read
Unwise is he, that can no well endure
If thou be syker, put the not in dread
The wife of Bathe I pray you yt ye read
Of this matter that we have on hand
God grant you your life freely to lead
In fredome, for foul is to be bond.
Explicit.
The assemble of fowls.
THe life so short, ye craft so long to learn
Thassaye so hard, so sharp the co^quering
The dredful joy always that flyt so yerne
All this mean I by love that my feeling
Astonyeth with his wondrefull werkynge
So sore iwys, that when I on him think
Naught wet I well, whether I flete or sink
For all be that I, know not love in deed
Ne wot how that he quyteth folk her hyre
Yet happeth me full often in books read
Of his miracles, and of his cruel ire
There read I well, he wol be lord and sire
I dare not said, his strokes be sore
But god save such a lord, I can no more
Of usage, what for lust, and what for lore
On books read I often, as I you told
But wherefore I speak all this, naught yore
Agone, it happed me to behold
Upon a book was ywrytten with letters old
And thereupon a certain thing to learn
The long day full fast I rad and yerne.
For out of old feldes, as men says
Comes all this new corn fro year to year
And out of old books, in good faith
Comes all this new science that men lere
But now to purpose, as of this matere
To read forth, it began me so delight
That all that day me thought it but lyre.
This book of which I make mencyon
Entytled was right thus, as I shall tell
Tullius, of the dream of Scipion
Chapiters seven it had, of heaven and hell
And earth, and souls that therein dwell
Of which as shortly as I can it treat
Of his sentence, I woll you said the great
First tells it, when Scipion was come
In Affryke, how he meteth Massynysse
That him for joy, in arms has ynome
Than tells he her speech, and all the bliss
that was betwixe hem, till ye day began mysse
And how his auncestre Affrykan so dear
Began in his sleep that night till him apere
Than tells it, that from a sterry place
How affrikan has him Cartage showed
And warned him beforne, of al his grace
And said him what man, lered either leude
That loves comune profit, well ytheude
He should into a blysfull place wend
There as the joy is wythouten any end
Than asked he, if folk that here been deed
Have life, and dwelling in another place
And Affrikan said ye, without any dread
And how our present lives space
meant but a manner death, what way we trace
And rightful folk, shul gone after they dye
To heaven, and showed him the Galaxie
Than showed he him, the little earth ye here is
To regard of the heuens quantyte
And after showed he him the nine speris
And after that the melodye herd he
That comes of thylke speres thrice three
That wells of musyke been, and melodye
In this world here, and cause of armonye
Than said he him, sens earth was so lyte
And full of turment, and of hard grace
That he ne should him in this world delight
That told he him, in certain years space
That every sterre, should come into his place
There it was first, and al should out of mind
That in this world is done, of al ma^kinde
Than prayed him Scipion, to tell him all The way to come into that heaven bliss
And he said: First know thy self immortal
And look aye besely, that thou werch and wisse
To comune profit, and thou shall not miss
To come swyftly, unto that place dear
That full of bliss is, and of souls clear
And brekers of the law, sothe to said
And lykerous folk, after that they ben deed
Shul whirle about ye world always in pain
Till many a world be passed, out of dread
And than foryeuen al her wicked deed
than shullen they come, to that blysful place
To which to comen, God send the grace
The day began faylen, and the derke night
That reueth beestes from her business
Berafte me my book for lack of light
And to my bed I began me for to dress
Fulfilled of thought, and besy heaviness
For both I had thing, which that I nolde
And eke I ne had that thing that I would
But finally my spyrite at last
For weary of my labor all that day
Took rest, that made me to sleep fast
And in my sleep I met, as that I lay
How Affrikan, right in the self array
That Scipion him saw, before that tide
was come, and stood right at my beds side
The weary hunter: slepyng in his bed
To wodde again his mind goth anon
The judge dremeth, how his plees be spedde
The carter dremeth, how his carts gone
the rych of gold, ye knight fight with his fone
The sick met he drynketh of the tonne
The lover met, he has his lady won
Can I not said, if that the cause were
For I had radde of affrikan beforne
That made me to mete that he stood there
but thus said he: thou have the so well borne
In lokynge of mine old book al to torn
Of which Macrobie rought not a lyte
That somdele of thy labor would I quyte
Citherea, thou blysful lady sweet
That with thy fire bro^de, dauntest wha^ ye lest
That made me this sweuen for to mete
be thou my help in this, for thou may best
As wisely as I seygh the north north west
when I began my sweuen for to write
So give me might, to ryme it and endyte
This foresaid Affrikan me hente anon
And forth with him to a gate brought
Right of a park, walled with grene stone
and over ye gate, with letters large ywrot
There were verse ywritten, as me thought
On either half, of full great difference
of which I shall you say, the plain sentence
Through me men gone into ye blysful place
Of hertes heal, and deedly wounds cure
Through me men gone into the well of grace
There grene and lusty May, shall ever endure
This is the way to all good adventure
Be glad thou reder, and thy sorrow of cast
Al open am I, pass in and speed the fast
Through me me^ gone, tha^ spoke ye other side
Unto the mortal strokes of the speere
Of which disdain and danger is the gyde
There never tree shall fruit, ne leaves beer
this streme you ledeth to the sorouful weere
There as the fyshe in prison is all dry
The eschewyng is only the remedy
These verses of gold and asure ywritten were
Of which I began, astouyed to behold
For with that one, increased al my fear
And with that other began my heart to bold
That one me hette, that other did me cold
No wit had I, for error for to chese
To enter or slye, or me to save or lose
Right as between Adamantes two
Of even weight, a piece of iron set
Ne has no might to move to ne fro
For what that one may hale, that other let
So fared I, that I nyst where me was bet
To enter or leave, till Affrikan my gyde
Me hente and shoue in, at the gates wide
And said, it stands written in thy face
Thine error, though thou tell it not me
But dread the not, to come into this place
For this writtyng is nothing meant by the
Ne by none, but he loves servant be
For thou of love, have lost thy taste I guess
As sick man has, of sweet and bytternesse
But nathlesse, although thou be dull
That thou caust not do, yet may thou se
For many a man, that may not stand a pull
Yet lyketh it him, at the wrestlyng for to be
And demeth yet, whether he do bet, or he
And if thou had connyng for tendyte
I shall the show matter of to write
And with yt my hand in his he took anon
Of which I comfort caught, and went in fast
But lord so I was glad, and well begone
For over al, where I mine eyes cast
were trees clad with leaves yt aye shall last
Each in his kind, with color fresh and grene
As Emeraude, that joy it was to seen
The bylder Oak, and eke the hardy ash
The pyller elm, the coffer unto carayne
The box pype tree, holme to whyppes lashe
The saylynge fyrre, ye cypres death to plain
The shoter ewe, the aspe for shaftes plain
The Olive of peace, and eke yt dronken vine
The victor Palm, the laurer to dyuyne
A gardeyne saw I, full of blosomed bowis
Upon a river, in a grene mede
There as swetnesse, evermore enough is
with flowers white, blew, yelow, and read
And cold well stremes, nothing deed
That swo^men full of small fyshes light
with sins read, and scales silver bright
On every bough the birds herd I sing
with voice of aungel, in her armony
that busyed hem, her birds forth to bring
The little pretty conyes, to her play began hy
And further al about, I began espy
The dredeful Roe, ye bucke, the heart, and hynde
Squyrels, and beestes small of gentyl kind
Of instruments, of strings in accord
Herd I so play, a rauyshynge swetnesse
That God, that maker is of al and lord
Ne herd never better, as I guess
Therwyth a wind, uneath it might be less
Made in the leaves grene, a noise soft
Accordaunt to the fowls song on lost
The air of the place, so atte^pre was
That never was there greuaunce of hot ne cold
There was eke every wholesome spyce and grace
Ne no man may there wax sick ne old
yet was there more joy a thousand fold
Than I can tell, or ever could or might
There is ever clear day, and never night
Under a tree, beside a well I sey
Cupyde our lord, his arowes forge and fyle
And at his fete, his bow al ready ley
And well his daughter te^pred all the while
The heedes in the well, with her wyle
She couched hem after, as they should serve
Some to slay, and some to wound and carue
Tho was I ware of pleasau^ce anon right
And of array, lust, beauty, and curtesy
And of the craft, that can and has the might
To done beforce, a wight to done folly
Disfygured was she, I will not lie
And by him self, under an oak I guess
Saw I delight, that stood with gentylnesse
Than saw I beauty, with a nyce atyre
And youth full of game and iolyte
Folehardenesse, flatery, and desire
Messagery, mede, and other three
Her names shall not here be told for me
And upon pyllers great of Jasper long
I saw a temple of brass yfounded strong
And about the temple, daunced always
women ynowe, of which some there were
Fair of hem self, and some of hem were gay
In kyrtyls al disheueled went they there
That was their office ever, fro year to year
And on the temple, saw I white and fair
Of downs sitting, many a thousand pair
And before the temple door full soberly
Dame peace satte, a curteyne in her hand
And her beside, wonder dyscretly
Dame Patience sitting there I found
with face pale, upon an hyl of sonde
And alther next, within and without
Behest and art, and of her folk a rout
within the temple, of syghes hot as fire
I herd a swough, that began about ren
which syghes were engendered with desire
That made every heart for to bren
Of new flambe, and well espied I then
That all the cause of sorrows, yt they dry
Come of the bitter gods ialousye
The god Pyriapus, saw I as I went
within the temple, in sovereign place stand
In such arraye, as when the ass him shent
with cry by nigt, and with scepter in hand
Full busely men began assay and sonde
Upon his heed to set of sundry hew
Garlandes, full of fresh flowers new
And in a preuy corner, in disporte
Found I Venus, and her porter Richesse
That was full noble, and hauten of her port
Derke was that place, but after lyghtnesse
A saw a lyte, uneaths it might be less
And on a bed of gold, she lay to rest
Till that the hot sun began to west
Her gylte heeres, with a gold threde
Ybounde were, vntressed as she lay
And naked from the breast unto the head
Men might her se, and sothly for to say
The remenaunt, covered well to my pay
Right with a little kerchefe of valence
There was no thycker cloth of defense
The place gave a thousand savors sote
And Bacchus god of wine, sat her beside
And Ceres next, that does of hunger bote
And as I said, a mids lay Cupyde
To whom on knees, the young folks cried
To be their help, but thus I let her lie
And farther in the temple, I began espys
That in dispyte of Dyane the chaste
Full many a bow ybroke, hynge on the wall
Of maidens, such as gone her times waste
In her service, and painted over al
Of many a storye, of which I touch shall
A few, as of Calixte and Athalante
and many a maid, of which ye name I want
Semyramus, Caudace, and Hercules
Byblys, Dydo, Tysbe, and Piramus
Tristram, Isoude, Paris, and Achilles
Heseyne, Cleopatre, and Troylus
Sylla, and eke the mother of Romulus
All these were painted on that other side
And al her love, and in what plyte they did
When I was comen again into the place
That I of spoke, that was so sote and grene
Forth walked I tho, my seluen to solace
Tho was I ware, where there sat a queen
That as of light, the so^mer sun shene
Passes the sterre, right so over measure
She fayrer was than any creature
And in a launde, upon an hyl of flowers
was set this noble goddess Nature
Of branches were her halles and her boures
I wrought, after her craft and her mesure
Ne there nas foul, yt comes of engendrure
That there ne were priest, in her presence
To take her dome, and give her audience
For this was on saint Valentynes day
when every foul comes to chese her make
Of every kind, that men think may
And that so huge a noise began they make
That earth, see, and tree, and every lake
So full was, that uneath there was space
For me to stand, so full was all the place
And right as Alayne, in the playnt of kind
Deuyseth Nature, of such array and face
In such array, men might her there find
This noble Empress full of al grace
Bad every foul to take her own place
As they were wont always, fro year to year
On saint Valentynes day, to standen there
That is to say, the fowls of rauyne
were highest set, and than the fowls small
That eaten, as that nature would enclyne
As worm or thing, of which I tell no tale
But water foul, sat lowest in the dale
and fowls yt lives be sede sat on they grene
And that so many, that wonder was to seen
There might men the royal Egle find
That with his sharp look perseth the son
And other Egles, of a lower kind
Of which that clerks well deuysen con
There was the tyrant with his feathers don
And grene, I mean yt goshauke yt does pyne
To birds, for his outragyous rauyne
The ge^tyl fauco^, yt with his fete distreyneth
The kings hand, the hardy sperhauke eke
The quales foe, the merlyon that peyneth
Him self full often, the lark for to seek
There was the dove, with her eyes meke
The ielous swan, against his death yt syngeth
The oule eke, that of death the bode brings
The crane, the geant, with his trompes sown
The thief the choughe, and the chateryng pie
The scorning Iaye ye Eles foe the herowne
The false lapwyng, full of treachery
The stare, that the counsel can bewry
The tame Ruddocke, and the cowarde kyte
The Cock, that horiloge is of thorpes lyte
The sparow Venus son, and the nyghtyngale
That clepeth forth the fresh leaves new
The swalowe murdrer of the flies small
That maken honey, of flowers fresh of hew
The wedded turtel, with his heart true
The pecocke, with his au^gel feathers bright
The Fesaunt, scorner of the cock by night
The waker gose, the cuckowe ever unkind
The popyngey, full of delycasy
The drake stroyer of his own kind
The storke, wreker of auoutry
The hot cormeraunt, full of glotony
The rauyn and the crow with her voice of care
The throstle old, and the frosty feldefare
what should I say, of fowls of every kind
That in this world have feathers and stature
Men might in that place assembled find
Before that noble gods of Nature
And each of them did his busy cure
Benignely to chese, or for to take
By her accord, his formell or his make
But to the point, Nature held on her hand
A formal Egle, of shap the gentyllest
That ever she among her works fond
The most benign, and eke the goodlyest
In her was every virtue, at his rest
So farforth, that Nature her self had bliss
To look on her, and often her beck to kiss
Nature, the vycar of the almighty lord
That hot, cold, heavy, light, moist and drey
Has knytte, by even nombre of accord
In easy voice, began to speak and say
Fowls take heed of my sentence I pray
and for your own ease, in fordri^g of your need
As fast as I may speak, I will me speed
Ye know well, how on saint Valentines day
By my statute, and through my governance
Ye do chese your makes, and after fly away
with hem, as I prick you with pleasaunce
But nathlesse, as by ryghtful ordinance
May I not let, for all this world to win
But he that most worthyest is, shall begin
The tercel Egle, as ye know full well
The foul royal, above you al in degree
The wise and worthy the secret true as stele
The which I have formed, as ye may se
In every part as it best lyketh me
It needs not his shappe you to deuyse
He shall first chese and speken in his gyse
And after him by order shall ye chese
After your kind eueryche as you lyketh
And as your hap is, shall ye win or lose
But which of you, that love most entrikith
God send him her, yt sorest for him siketh
And there withal, the Tercel began she call
And said, my son the choice is to the fall
But nathlesse, in this condition
Must be the choice, of euerych that is here
That she agree to his election
who so he be, that should been her fere
This is our usage always, fro year to year
and who so may at this time have his grace
In blysful time he came into this place
with heed inclined, and with full humble chere
This royal Tercell spoke, and tarried naught
Unto my sovereign lady, and not my fere
I chose and chese, with will, heart, and thought
The formel on your hand, so well ywrout
whose I am al, and ever will her serve
Do what her lust, to do me live or sterue
Besechyng her of mercy, and of grace
As she that is my lady sovereign
Or let me dye, here present in this place
For certes, long may I not live in pain
For in my heart is coruen every vain
Having regard only to my troth
My dear heart, have on my woe some routh
And if I be found to her untrue
Dysobeysaunt, or wylful negligent
A vauntour, or in process love a new
I pray to you this be my judgment
That with these fowls I be al to rent
That ylke day, that she me ever find
Unto her untrue, or in my gylte unkind
And sith that none loves her so well as I
Although she never of love me behet
Tha^ ought she be mine, through her mercy
For other bond, can I none on her knet
For well nor woe, never shall I let
To serve her, how far so that she wend
Say what you list, my tale is at an end
Right as the fresh reed rose new
Against the summer sun colored is
Right so for shame, al waxen began the hew
Of this formel, when she herd all this
Neither she answerde well, ne said amys
So sore abashed was she, till that nature
Said, daughter dread you not, I you assure
Another Tercel Egle spoke anon
Of lower kind, and said that should not be
I love her better than ye do, by saint Ihon
Or at leest, I love her as well as ye
And longer have served her in my degree
and if she should have loved for long loving
To me alone had be the guerdonyng
I dare eke say, if she me find false
Unkind, iangler, or rebel in any wise
Or iolous, do me hang by the halse
And but I bear me in her seruyse
As well as my wit can me suffyce
Fro point to point, her honor for to save
Take she my life, and all the good I have
The third tercel Egle, answerde tho
Now syrs, ye se the little leyser here
For every soul cries out to be ago
Forth with his make, or with his lady dear
And eke Nature her self, ne will not here
For taryeng her, not half that I would sey
And but I speak, I must for sorrow dey
Of long service, auaunt I me nothing
But as possible is me to dye to day
For woe, as he that has be languyshyng
This twenty winter, and well it happen may
A man may serve better, and more to pay
In half a year, although it were no more
Tha^ some man does, yt has served full yore
I ne say not this by me, for I ne can
Do no service, that may my lady please
But I dare say, I am her trewest man
As to my dome, and faynest would her please
At short words, till that death me cease
I will be hers, whether I wake or wynke
And true in all that heart may bethynke
Of al my life, sith that day I was borne
So gentyl plee, in love or other thing
Ne herd never no man me beforne
who so that had leyser and connyng
For to reherce their chere, and their spekyng
And from the morrow began this spech last
Till downwarde went the su^ne wonder fast
The noise of fowls for to be delyuerde
So loud range, have done and let us wend
That well wend I yt wod had al to shiuerd
Come of they cried, alas ye will us shende
wha^ shall your cursed pledinge have an end
How should a judge, either party leave
For ye or nay, without any preue
The gose, the ducke, and the cuckowe also
So cried keke keke, cuckoo queke queke hy
That through mine ears ye noise went tho
The gose said than, all this nys worth a ^^ye
But I can shape hereof a remedy
And will say my verdyte fair and swythe
For water foul who so be wroth or blythe
And I for wormfoule, said ye fool cuckoo
For I will of mine own authorite
for common speed, take on me the charge now
For to deliver us, it is great charity
Ye may abide a while yet parde
(Quod the Turtel) if it be your will
A wight may speak, it were as good be still
I am a sede foul, one the vnworthyest
That wot I well, and leest of connyng
But better it is, that a wyghtes tongue rest
Than entremete him of such doing
Of which he neither read can nor sing
And who so it does, full foul him self acloyeth
For o^^ice vnco^mitted, often anoyeth
Nature which that always had an ear
To murmur of the lewdness behind
with faconde voice said, hold your tongues there
And I shall sone, I hope a counsel find
You for to deliver, and fro this noise unbind
I charge, of every flock ye shall one call
To say the verdyte of you fowls al
Assented were, to this conclusyon
The birds al, and fowls of rauyne
Have chosen first, by plain eleccyon
The Tercelet of the faucon to dyffyne
All her sentence, and as him lust to termyne
And to Nature, him they did present
And she accepts him with glad intent
The tercelet said than, in this manner
Full herd it were, to preue it by reason
who loves best, this gentyl formel here
For euerych has such replication
that by skylles may none be brought adoun
I can not se, that arguments avail
Than seems it, there must be battle
Al ready quod these Egles tarcelles tho
Nay syrs (quod he) if that I durst it say
Ye do me wrong, my tale is not ydo
For syrs, takes not agrefe I pray
It may not be as ye would, in this way
Ours is ye voice, yt has the charge in hand
And to the Iuges dome, ye must stand
And therefore peace I say, as to my wit
Me would think, how that the worthyest
Of knyghthode, and lengest had used it
Most of estate, of blood the gentyllest
were syttyng for her, if that her lest
And of these three, she wot her self I trow
which that he be, for it is light to know
The water fowls, have their heedes laid
Together, and of short auysement
when eueryche had his verdyte said
They said sothly, al by one assent
How that the goos, with the faconde gent
That so desires, to pronounce our need
Shall tell our tale, and prayed to god her speed
And for these water fowls, tho began
The goose to speak, and in her cakelynge
She said, peace now, take keep every man
and harken which a reason I shall forth bring
My wit is sharp, I love no rarying
I say I read him, tho he were my brother
But she will love him, let him love another
Lo here a parfyte reason of a gose
(Quod the sperhauke) never mote she the
Lo, such a thing it is to have a tongue lose
Now parde fool, yet were it better for the
Have hold thy peace, than show thy nicete
It lies not in his wit, nor in his will
But soth is said, a fool can not be still
The laughter arose, of gentyl fowls al
And right anon, the sede fowls chosen had
The Turtel true, and began her to hem call
And prayed her to say, the soth sad
Of this matter, and asked what she rad
And she answered, that plainly her intent
She would show, and sothly what she meant
Nay, god forbede a lover should change
The Turtel said, and wexte for shame all reed
Though that his lady, evermore be strange
Yet let him serve her always, till he be deed
Forsooth, I praise not the goses reed
For tho she dyed, I would none other make
I will be hers, till that the death me take
well ybourded (quod the ducke) by my hat
That men should love always causeless
who can a reason find, or wit in that
Daunceth he merry, that is myrthlesse
who should recke, of that is rechelesse
Ye qucke yet (quod the ducke) full well and fair
There be mo sterres in the sky then a pair
Now fie churl (quod the gentyl Tercelet)
Out of the donghyl, came that word aryght
Thou can not se, which thing is well beset
Thou farest by love, as oules do by light
The day he^ blinds, full well they se by night
Thy kind is of so low wretchedness
That what love is, thou can not se nor guess
Tho began ye cuckowe put him forth in preace
For foul that eats worm, and said blyue
So I (quod he) may have my make in peace
I retche naught, how long that ye strive
Let each of hem be soleyn all her live
This is my read, sens they may not accord
This short lesson, needs not record
Yea, have the glutton fylde his paunche
Then are we well, said the Emerlon
Thou murdrer of ye heisugge, on the brau^che
That brought the forth, thou rufull glotton
Live thou soleyn, worms corruption
For no force is, of lack of thy nature
Go leude be thou, while ye world may dure
Now peace (quod Nature) I command here
For I have herd all your opinion
And in effect, yet be we never the nere
But finally, this is my conclusion
That she her self shall have her election
Of whom her list, who so be wroth or blyth
Him yt she cheseth, he shall her have as swyth
For sith it may not here dyscussed be
who loves her best, as said the Tercelet
The^ wol I done this favor to her, that she
Shall have right him, on who^ her heart is set
And he her, that his heart has on her knet
This judge I Nature, for I may not lie
To none estate, I have none other eye
But as for counsel, for to chose a make
If I were reason, then would I
Counsel you, the royal tercell take
As said the tercelet, full skylfully
As for the gentyllest, and most worthy
which I have wrought so well to my plesa^ce
That to you it ought ben a suffysaunce
with dredful voice, ye formel her answerde
My ryghfull lady, goddess of Nature
Soth is, that I am ever under your yerde
As is eueryche other creature
And must be yours, while my life may dure
And therefore grant me my first boon
And mine intent, you woll I say right soon
I grant it you (quod she) and right anon
This formel Egle spoke in this degree
Almighty queen, unto this year be done
I ask respyte for to auysen me
And after that to have my choice all fre
This all and some, that I would speak and sey
Ye get no more, al though ye do me dey
I woll not seruen Venus, ne Cupide
Forsooth as yet, by no manner way
Now sens it may none other ways betyde
(Quod Nature) here is no more to say
Then would I that this fowls were away
Each with his make, for taryeng le^ger here
And said hem thus, as ye shall after here
To you speak I, ye tercelets (quod Nature)
Beth of good heart, and serves all three
A year is not so long to endure
And each of you pain him in his degree
For to do well, for god wot quyte is she
For you this year, what after so befall
This entremes, is dressed fro you all
And when this work brought was to an end
To every foul, Nature yaue his make
By even acorde, and on her way they wend
And lord the bliss and joy that they make
For each of hem began other in his wings take
And with her necks, each began other wind
Tha^kyng always, ye noble goddess of kind
But first were chosen fowls for to sing
As year by year, was always her vsaunce
To sing a roundell at her departing
To do Nature honor and pleasaunce
The note I trow, maked was in France
The words were such, as ye may here find
The next verse, as I now have in mind
Qui bien aim tarde oublie.
Now welcome so^mer, with thy suns soft
That haste this winter wethers ouershake
Saint Valentyne, thou art full hye on lofte
which dryuest away, the long nyghtes blake
Thus syngen small fowls for thy sake
well have they cause for to gladen often
Sens each of hem recovered has his make
Full blysful may they sing when they awake.
And with the shoutynge when her song was do
That fowls made, at her flight away
I woke, and other books took me to
To read upon, and yet I read always
I hope ywys to read so some day
That I shall mete somthynge for to fare
The bet, and thus to read I nyll not spare.
Explicit.
The Flower of Curtesy.
IN Feuerier, when yt froslye moon
was horned, full of Phoebus fyry light
And that she began to reyse her streams sone
Saint Valentyne, upon thy blysfull night
Of duty, when gladis every wight
And fowls chese, to void her old sorrow
Eueryche his make, upon the next morrow
The same time, I herd a lerke sing
Full lustely, again the morrow gray
Awake ye lovers, out of your slombrynge
This glad morrow, in all the haste ye may
Some obseruaunce does unto this day
Your choice again of heart to renew
In confyrmynge, for ever to be true
And ye that be of choosing at your large
This lusty day, by custom of nature
Take upon you the blysfull holy charge
To serve love, while your life may dure
with heart, body, and all your besy cure
For evermore, as Venus and Cipride
For you dysposeth, and the god Cupyde
For joy owe we plainly to obey
Unto this lords mighty ordinance
And mercylesse rather for to dye
Then ever in you be founden variaunce
And though your life be meddled with greuau^ce
And at your heart closet be your wound
Beth always one, there as ye are bound
That when I had herd and lysted long
with devout heart, the lusty melody
Of this heavenly comfortable song
So agreeable, as by ermonye
I rose anon, and fast began me hye
Toward a grove, and the way take
Fowls to seen, eueryche chose his make
And yet I was full thursty in languyshyng
Mine ague was so fervent in his hete
when Aurora, for drery complaynyng
Can dystyll her crystal teeres wete
Upon the soil, with silver dew so sweet
For she durst for shame not apere
Under the light of Phoebus beams clear
And so for anguyshe of my pains kene
And for constraynte of my syghes sore
I set me down, under a laurer grene
Full pytously, and always more and more
As I beheld in to the holtes hoar
I began compain mine inward deedly smerte
That aye so sore crampeth at mine heart
And while that I in my drery pain
Sat, and beheld about on every tree
The fowls sytte, always twain and twain
The^ thought I thus, alas what may this be
That every foul has his lyberte
Freely to chose, after his desire
Eueryche his make, thus fro year to year
The sely wrenne, the tytemose also
The little redbrest, have free election
To flyen yfere, and together go
where as hem list, about enuyron
As they of kind have inclinacion
And as Nature, empress and gyde
Of every thing list to provide
But man alone, alas the hard stounde
Full cruelly, by kinds ordinance
Constrained is, and by statute bound
And debarred from all such plesaunce
what meneth this, what is this purueyau^ce
Of god above, again all right of kind
without cause, so narow man to bind
Thus may I seen and plain, alas
My woeful hour, and my dysauenture
That doulfully stand in the same caas
So far behind, from all health and cure
My wound abides like a sursanure
For me fortune so felly list dyspose
My harm is hyd, that I dare not dysclose
For I my heart have set, in such a place
where I am never lykely for to speed
So far I am hyndred from her grace
That save danger, I have none other mede
And thus alas, I not who shall me read
Ne for mine help shape remedy
For Male bouche, and for false envy
The which twain, aye sto^deth in my wey
Malyciously, and false suspection
Is very cause also that I dey
Gynnyng and rote of my destruction
So that I feel, in conclusyon
with her traynes, that they wol me shende
Of my labor, that death mote make an end
Yet or I dye, with heart, will, and thought
To god of love, this auowe I make
As I best can, how dear that it be bought
where so it be, that I sleep or wake
while Boreas does the leaves slake
As I have heyght, plainly till I sterue
For well or woe, that I shall her serve
And for her sake, now this holy time
Saint Valentyne, somewhat shall I write
Al though so be, that I can not ryme
Nor curyously by no craft endyte
Yet lever I have, that she put the wit
In uncunning, then in negligence
what ever I say, of her excellence
what ever I say, it is of dute
In sothfastnesse, and no presumpcion
This I ensure to you that shall it se
That it is all under correction
what I reherce in co^mendacion
Of her, that I shall to you as blyue
So as I can, her virtues here dyscryue.
Right by example, as the somer son
Passes the sterre, with his beams shene
And Lucyfer, among the skies done
A morrow shows, to void nyghtes tene
So verily, wythouten any wene
My lady passes, who so takes head
All tho alive, to speak of womanhede
And as the Ruby has the soueraynte
Of rich stones, and the regalye
And the rose of sweetness and beauty
Of fresh flowers, without any lie
Right so in sothe, with her goodly eye
She passes all, in bounty and fayrenesse
Of manner eke, and of gentylnesse
For she is both the fairest and the best
To reken all, in very sothfastnesse
For every virtue is in her at rest
And furthermore, to speak of steadfastness
She is the rote, and of semelynesse
The very myrrour, and of governance
To all example, wythouten variaunce
Of port benygne, and wonder glad of chere
Having evermore her true aduertence
Always to reason, so that her desire
Is brydeled aye, by wit and prouydence
There to of wit, and of hye prudence
She is the well, aye deuoyde of pride
That unto virtue, her seluen is the gyde
And over this, in her daliaunce
Lowly she is, dyscrete and wise
And goodly glad, by attemperaunce
That every wight, of high and low degree
Are glad in heart, with her for to be
So that shortly, if I shall not lie
She named is, the Flower of Curtesye
And there to speak of femynyte
The least mannyshe in comparison
Goodly abashed, having aye pity
Of hem that been in tribulacion
For she alone is consolacion
To all that arne in myschefe and in need
To comfort hem, of her womanhede
And aye in virtue is her besy charge
Sad and demure, and but of words few
Dredefull also of tongues that been large
Eschewynge aye hem, that lysten to hew
Above her heed, her words for to show
Dyshonestly to speak of any wight
She deedly hates, of hem to have a sight
The heart of whom, so honest is and clean
And her intent, so faithful and entere
That she ne may, for all the world sustene
To suffer her eeres any word to here
Of friend nor foe, neither far ne nere
Amysse resonynge, yt hinder should his name
And if she do, she wexeth reed for shame
So trewly in menynge she is in set
without chaungynge, or any doubleness
For bounty and beauty, are together knette
In her person, under faythfulnesse
For void she is of newfanglenesse
In heart aye one, for ever to persevere
There she is set, and never to dysseuer
I am to rude, her virtues euerychone
Connyngly to dyscryue and write
For well ye wot, color have I none
Like her dyscrecion, craftily to endyte
For what I say, all it is to lyte
wherefore to you, thus I me excuse
That I aqueynted am not with no muse
By rethoryke, my style to govern
In her praise and co^mendacyon
I am to blind, so hylye to dyscerne
Of her goodness, to make dyscripcion
Save thus I say in conclusion
If that I shall shortly commend
In her is naught, that nature can amend
For good she is, like to Polycene
And in fayrenesse, to the queen Helayne
Steadfast of heart, as was Dorigene
And wifely troth, if I shall not feign
In constaunce eke and faith, she may attain
To Cleopatre, and thereto as setrone
As was of Troy, the white Antygone
As Hester meke, like Judith of prudence
Kind as Alcest, or Marcia Catoun
And to Grisylde like in patience
And Arladne of dyscrecioun
And to Lucrece, that was of Rome town
She may be lykened as for honest
And for her faith, unto Penelope
To fair Phyllis, and to Hipsiphiles
For innocence, and for womanhede
For semelynesse unto Canace
And over this, to speak of goodlyhede
She passes all that I can of read
For word and deed, that she naught ne fall
Acorde in virtue, and her works all
For though that Dido with wit sage
was in her time steadfast to Enee
Of hastynesse yet she did outrage
And so for Jason did also Medee
But my lady is so auysee
That bou^ty and beautye, both in her demeyne
She makes bountye always sovereign
This is to mean, bountye goes before
Lad by prudence, and has the souerainte
And beautye follows, ruled by her lore
That she ne send her in no degree
So that in one, this goodly fresh fre
Surmountynge al, wythouten any were
Is good and fair, in one person yfere
And though that I for very ignorance
Ne may dyscryue her virtues by and by
Yet on this day for a remembrance
Only supported under her mercy
with quakynge hand, I shall full humbly
To her hynesse, my rudeness for to quyte
A little balade, here byneth endyte
Ever as I can suppryse in mine heart
Always with fear, betwyxte dread and shame
Lest out of lose, any word asterte
In this meter, to make it seem lame
Chaucer is deed, that had such a name
Of fair making, that without wene
Fairest in our tongue, as the Laurer grene
we may assaye for to countrefete
His gaye style, but it will not be
The well is dry, with the lycoure sweet*
Both of Clye, and of Caliope
And first of all, I woll excuse me
To her that is ground of goodlyhede
And thus I say, until her womanhede
Balade simple.
With all my might, and my best entente
With all the faith that mighty god of kind
Me yaue, sith he me soul and knowing sent
I chese, and to this bond ever I me bind
To love you best, while I have life and mind
Thus herd I fowls in the daunynge
Upon the day of saint Valentyne sing
Yet chese I at the beginning, in this intent
To love you, though I no mercy find
And if you list I dyed, I would assent
As ever twynne I quycke out of this line
Suffyseth me to seen your feathers ynde
Thus herd I souls in the morning
Upon the day of saint Valentyne sing
And over this, mine hertes lust to bente
In honor only of the wodde bind
Holy I give, never to repent
In joy or woe, where so that I wind
To sore Cupide, with his eyes blind
The fowls all, when Tytan did spring
with devout heart, me thought I herd sing.
Lenuoye.
Pryncesse of beauty, to you I represent
This simple dyte, rude as in making
Of heart and will, faithful in mine intent
Like as this day, fowls herd I sing.
Here ends the Flower of Curtesy and here after follows, how pity is deed
and buried in a gentle heart.
Pity yt I have sought so yore ago
with heart sore and full of besy pain
yt in this world was never wight so woe
without death, and if I shall not feign*
My purpose was, pity to complain
Upon teh crueltye and tyraunye
Of love, that for my troth does me dye
And that I by length of certain years
Had ever in one, sought a time to speak
To Pity ran I, all by spreynt with teeres
To prayen her on Cruelte me awreke
But or I might with any word out break
Or tell her any of my pains smerte
I found her deed, and buried in an heart
Adowne I fell, when I saw the hearse
Deed as a stone, while yt the sown me last
But up I rose, with color full diverse
And pytously on her mine eyes I cast
And nerer the corse I began preasen fast
And for the soul, I shope me for to pray
I was but lorne, there was no more to say
Thus am I slain, sith that Pity is deed
Alas that day that ever it should fall
what manner man dare now hold up his heed
To whom shall now any sorrowful heart call
Now Cruelte has cast to stee us all
In idle hope, folk redelesse of pain
Sith she is deed, to whom shall we compain
But yet increases me this wonder new
That no wight wot that she is deed but I
So many men as in her time her knew
And yet she deyde so suddenly
For I have sought her ever full besely
Sith I had first wit or mind
But she was deed er I could her find
About her hearse there stoden lustely
wythouten any mo, as thought me
Bounty, perfytly well armed and rychely
And fresh Beauty, Lust, and Iolyte
Assured manner, youth, and Honest
wisdom, Estate, Dread, and Governance
Confedred both by bond and alyaunce
A complaynt had I written in my hand
To have put to Pity, as a byll
But I there all this company fond
That rather would all my cause spyll
Then do me help, I held my playnt still
For to those folk wythouten fail
without pity, there may no byll avail
Then leave all virtues, save only pity
Keeping the corse, as ye have herd me said
Confedred by bond unto Cruelte
And be assented when I shall be slain
And I have put my complaynte up again
For to my foes, my byll I dare not show
The effect, which says thus in words few
Humblest of heart, highest of reverence
Benign sloure, crown of virtues all
Shows unto your royal excellence
Your servant, if I durst me so call
His mortal harm, in which he is yfall
And naught all only for his woeful fare
But for your renome, as he shall declare
It sto^deth thus, that your contrary cruelte
Alyed is against your regalye
Under color of womanly beauty
For men should not know her tyranny
with bounty, Gentyllesse, and Curtesye
And has depryued you of your place
That is high beauty, apertenaunt to your grace
For kyndly, by your heritage right
Ye be annexed ever unto bounte
And verily ye ought do your might
To help troth in his aduersite
Ye be also the corowne of beauty
And certes if ye want in these twain
The world is lore, there is no more to said
Eke what avails manner and gentyllesse
without you, benign creature
Shall cruelte be your gouerneresse
Alas, what heart may it long endure
wherefore but ye rather take cure
To break that peryllous alyaunce
Ye fleen hem that been in your obeysaunce
And further, if ye suffer thus
Your renome is fordo in a throw
There shall no man wete what pity is
Alas, that ever your renome is fall so low
Ye be also fro your heritage ythrowe
By cruelte, that occupyeth your place
And we dyspayred, that seken your grace
Have mercy on me, thou Herenus queen
That you have sought, so tenderly and sore
Let some streme of light on me be seen
That love and dread you ever longer ye more
For sothly to said, I bear so sore
And though I be not connyng for to plain
For gods love have mercy on my pain
My pain is this, that what so I desire
That have I not, ne nothing like thereto
And ever sets desire mine heart on fire
Eke on that other side where that I go
what manner thing that may increase my woe
That have I ready unsought every where
Me lacks but my death, and then my beat
what needs to show percell of my pain
Sith every woe, that heart may bethynke
I suffer, and yet I dare not to you plain
For well I wot, though I wake or wynke
Ye recke not whether I flete or synke
And nathelesse yet my troth I shall sustene
Unto my death, and that shall well be seen
This is to said, I will be yours ever
Though ye me slay by cruelte your fo
Algate my spirit shall never dysceuer
Fro your service, for any pain or woe
Sith ye be yet deed, alas that it is so
Thus for your death, I may weep and plain
with heart sore, and full of besy pain.
Explicit.
La belle dame sans mercy.
Half in a dream, not fully well awaked
The golden sleep me wrapped under his wyng
Yet not for thy I rose, and well nygh naked
All sodaynlye my self remembryng
Of a matter, leuynge all other thing
Which I must do wythouten more delay
For hem, which I durst not dysobey
My charge was this, to translate by and by
All thing forgive, as part of my penance
A book, called La belle dame sauns mercy
which master Aleyne made of remembrance
Chief secretary with the king of France
And here upon a while I stood musing
And in my self greatly ymagenynge
What wise I should perform ye said process
Considering by good aduysement
My uncunning, and my great symplenesse
And again ward the strayte commandment
which that I had, and thus in mine intent
I was vexed and turned up and down
And yet at last, as in conclusyon
I cast my clothes on, and went my way
This foresaid charge having in remembrance
Till I came to a lusty grene valey
Full of flowers, to se a great pleasaunce
And so boldly with their benign suffraunce
which read this book, touching this matere
Thus I began, if it please you to here.
Not long ago, riding an easy paas
I fell in thought of joy full desperate
with great disease and pain so that I was
Of all lovers the most unfortunate
Sith by his darte, most cruel full of hate
The death has take my lady and maystresse
And left me sole, thus dyscomfyte and mate
Sore languysshynge, and in way of distress
Than said I thus, it falls me to cesse
Either to ryme, or dytees for to make
And I surely to make a full promise
To laugh no more, but weep in clothesblake
My joyful time (alas) now does it slake
For in my self I feel no manner of ease
Let it be written, such fortune (as I take)
which neither me, nor non other does please
If it were so, my will or mine intent
Constrained were, a joyful thing to write
My pen could never know, what it meant
To speak thereof, my tongue has no delight
Tho with my mouth I laugh, much or lyte
Mine eyes should make a coutenau^ce untrue
My heart also, would have thereof dyspyte
The weeping tears, have so large issue
These sick lovers I leave, that to hem lo^ges
which led their life in hope of alegeaunce
That is to say, to make balades and songs
Every of hem, as they feel their greuaunce
For she that was my joy, and my plesaunce
whose soul I pray god, of his mercy save
She has my will, mine hertes ordinance
which lies here, within this tomb ygraue
Fro this time forth, time is to hold my pees
It weryeth me, this matter for to trete
Let other lovers put hem self in prees
Their season is, my time is now forgete
Fortune by strength, the forcer has vnshete
wheryn was sperde all my worldly richesse
And all the goods, which that I have get
In my best time of youth, and lustynesse
Love has me kept under his governance
If I mysdyd, god grant me forgyuenesse
If I did well, yet felt I no pleasaunce
It caused neither joy nor heaviness
For when she dyed, that was my maystres
My welfare, than made the same purchase
The death has shette my bonds of wytnes
which for nothing mine heart shall never pase
In this great thought, sore troubled in mind
Alone thus rode I, all the morrow tide
Till at the last it happed me to find
The place, wherein I cast me to abide
when that I had no further for to ride
And as I went, my lodging to puruey
Right soon I herd, a little me beside
In a garden, where mynstrels began to play
With that anon, I went me backer more
My self and I, me thought we were ynowe
But twain yt were my friends here before
Had me espied, and yet I wot not how
They came for me, awaywarde I me drowe
Somewhat by force, somewhat by her request
That in no wise, I could my self rescowe
But needs I must come in and se the feast
At my coming, the ladies euerchone
Bad me welcome, god wot right gentylly
And made me chere, every one by one
A great deal better than I was worthy
And of their grace, showed me great curtesy
with good disport, because I should not mourn
That day I bode still in their company
which was to me, a gracyous soiourne.
The bordes were spread, in right little space
The ladies sat, each as hem seemed best
There were no deedly servants in the place
But chosen men, right of the goodlyest
and some there were, parauenture most freshest
That saw their iuges full demure
without semblaunt, either to most or lest
Natwithstandyng, they had hem under cure
Among all other, one I began espy
which in great thought, full often came and went
As one that had been rauyshed utterly
In his language, not greatly dylygent
His countenance he kept with great tourment
But his desire far passed his reason
For ever his eye, went after his intent
Full many a time, when it was no season
To make chere, sore himself he payned
And outwardly he feigned great gladness
To sing also, byforce he was constrained
For no pleasaunce, but very shamfastnesse
For the complaynte of his most heaviness
Came to his voice, always without request
Like as the sown of birds does express
when they sing loud, in frythe or in forest
Other there were, that served in the hall
But none like him, as after mine advise
For he was pale, and somewhat lean withal
His speech also trymbled in fereful wise
And ever alone, but when he did seruyse
All black he ware, and no deuyse but plain
Me thout by him, as my wit could suffyse
His heart was nothing in his own demeyne
To feast hem all, he did his dylygence
And well he could, right as it seemed me
But evermore, when he was in presence
His chere was done, it would none other be
His schole master had such authorite
That all the while he bode still in the place
Speak could he not, but upon her beauty
He looked still, with right a pytous face
With that his heed he turned at the last
For to behold the ladies euerychone
But ever in one, he set his eye steadfast
On her, which his thought was most upon
For of his eyes, the shot I knew anon
which ferefull was, with right humble requests
Than to my self I said, by god alone
Such one was I, or that I saw these iestes
Out of the prese he went full easily
To make stable his heavy countenance
And wot ye well, he syghed wonderly
For his sorrows and woeful remembrance
That in him self, he made his ordinance
And forthwithall came to bring in the mess
But for to judge, his most woeful penance
God wot it was a pytous entremesse
After dinner anon, they hem auaunced
To dance above the folks euerychone
And forthwithal, this heavy man he daunced
Sometime with twain, and sometime with one
Unto hem all, his chere was after one
Now here now there, as fell by adventure
But ever among, he drew to her alone
which he most dred, of living creature
To mine advise, good was his purueyau^ce
when he her chase, to his maystres alone
If that her heart were set to his pleasaunce
As much as was her beauteous person
For who so ever sets his trust upon
The report of the eyes, wythouten more
He might be deed, and graven under stone
Or ever he should, his hertes ease restore
In her failed nothing, that I could guess
One wise nor other, preuy nor perte
A garyson she was, of al goodlynesse
To make a frounter, for a lovers heart
Right young and fresshe, a woman full couerte
Assured well of port, and eke of chere
well at her ease, withouten woe or smerte
Al underneath the standerde of daungere
To se the feast, it weryed me full sore
For heavy joy does sore the heart travail
Out of the prese, I me withdraw therefore
And set me down alone behind a trayle
Full of leaves, to se a great marvel
with grene wrethes ybounden wonderly
The leaves were so thycke withouten fail
That throughout, no man might me espy
To this lady he came full curtesly
wha^ he thought time to dau^ce with her a trace
Set in an herber, made fule plesauntly
They rested hem fro thens but a little space
Nygh hem were none, of a certain compace
But only they, as far as I could se
Save the trayle, there I had chose my place
There was no more between hem two and me
I hard the lover syghyng wonder sore
For aye the more, the sorer it him sought
His inward pain he could not keep in store
Nor for to speak, so hardy was he naught
His leche was nere, ye gretter was his thout
He mused sore, to conquer his desire
For no man may to more penance be brought
That in his heat, to bring him to the fire
The heart began to swel within his cheste
So sore strayned, for anguisshe and for pain
That al to pieces almost it to breast
when both at ones, so sore it did constrayne
Desire was bold, but shame it began refrain
That one was large, the other was full close
No little charge was laid on him certain
To keep such werre, and have so many fose
Full often times to speak, him self he payned
But shamfastnesse and dread, said ever nay
Yet at the last, so sore he was constrained
when he full long had put it in delay
To his lady, right thus than began he say
with dredeful voice, weeping, half in a rage
For me was purueyed, an unhappy day
when I first had a sight of your vysage
I suffer pain god wot, full hot brennynge
To cause my death, all for my true seruyse
And I se well, ye recke thereof nothing
Nor take no head of it, in no kind wise
But when I speak after my best advise
Ye set it at naught, but make thereof a game
And though I sewe, so great an entrepryse
Yet peyreth not your worship nor your fame
Alas, what should it be to you preiudyce
If that a man do love you faithfully
To your worship, eschewynge every vice
So am I yours, and will be verily
I challenge naught of right, and reason why
For I am hole submyt unto your service
Right as ye list it be, right so will I
To bind my self, where I was in frau^chise
Lamant Though it be so, that I can not deserve
To have your grace, but always live in dread
Yet suffer me, you for to love and serve
withouten maugre, of your most goodlyhede
Both faith and troth I give your woma^hede
And my service without any calling
Love has me bound, without wage or mede
To be your man, and leave all other thing

La dame When this lady had herd all this language
She gave answer, full soft and demurely
without chaungynge of color or courage
Nothing in haste, but mesurably
Me thinks sir, your thought is great folly
Purpose ye naught, your labor for to cese
For thinks not, whiles ye live and I
In this matter, to set your heart in pease

Lamant There may none make the peace, but only ye
which are the ground and cause of all this war
For with your eyes, the letters written be
By which I am defied and put a far
Your plesaunt look, my very lode star
was made herande, of thilke same defyaunce
which utterly behyght me for to bar
My fayhtfull trust, and all mine affyaunce

La dame To live in woe, he has great fantasy
And of his heart also slypper hold
That only for beholdynge of an eye
Can not abide in peace, as reason would
Other or me, if ye list ye may behold
our eye^ are made to look, whi should we spare
I take no keep, neither of young ne old
who feleth smerte, I counsel him beware

Lamant. If it be so, one hurt another sore
In his defaute, that feleth the greuaunce
Of very right, a man may do no more
Yet reason would it were in remembrance
And sith fortune only by her chance
Has caused me to suffer all this pain
By your beauty, with all the cyrcumstaunce
why list ye have me, in so great dysdayne

La dame. To your person, ne have I no dysdayne
Nor never had trewly, ne naught will have
Nor right great love, nor hatred in certain
Nor your counsel to know, so god me save
If such love be in your mind ygraue
That little thing, may do you dyspleasau^ce
You to begyle, or make you for to rave
I will not cause, no such encomberaunce

Lamant. What ever it be, yt me has thus purchased
wenynge has not dysceyued me certain
But fervent love, so sore has me ychased
That I unware, am casten in your chain
And sith so is, as fortune list ordain
All my welfare, is in your haundes fall
In eschewynge of more myscheuous pain
who sonest dies, his care is leest of all

La dame. This syckenesse is right easy to endure
But few people, it causes for to dye
But what they mean, I know it very sure
Of more comfort, to draw the remedy
Such be there now, playnyng full pytously
That feel god wot, not alther grettest pain
And if so be, love hurt so grievously
Less harm it were, one sorrowful tha^ twayn

Lamant. Alas madame, if that it might you please
Much better it were, by way of gentylnesse
Of one sorry, to make twain well at ease
Than him to destroy that lives in distress
For my desire is, neither more nor less
But my service, to do for your pleasaunce
In eschewynge all manner doubleness
To make two joys, instead of one greuau^ce

La dame. Of love I seek, neither pleasaunce nor ease
Nor have therein no great affyaunce
Though ye be sick, it does me nothing please
Also I take no head of your pleasaunce
Chese who so will, her hertes to auaunce
Fre am I now, and free will I endure
To be ruled by man's governance
For erthely good, Nay, that I you ensure

Lamant. Love, which that joy and sorrow does depart
Has set the ladies out of all seruage
And largely does grant hem for her part
Lordshyp and rule of every manner of age
The poor servant, naught has of auantage
But what he may get only by purchesse
And he that ones, to love does his homage
Full often times, dear bought is the richesse

La dame. Ladies be not so simple, thus I mean
So dull of wit, so sotted in folly
That for words, which said be of ye spleen
In fair langage, painted full plesauntly
which ye and mo, hold schools of daily
To make hem all, great wonders to suppose
But sone they can away, their heedes wrye
And to fair speech, lightly their eres close

Lamant. There is no man, that tangleth busyly
And sets his heart, and all mind therefore
That by reason, may plain so pytously
As he that has much heaviness in store
whose heed is hole, and says that it is sore
His feigned chere, is hard to keep in mewe
But thought, which is unfeigned evermore
The words preueth, as the works show

La dame. Love is subtell, and has a great awayte
sharp in working, in gabbing great plesau^ce
And can hem venge, of such as by dysceyte
would feel and know, his secret governance
And makes hem to obey his ordinance
By cherefull ways, as in hem is supposed
But when they fall in to repentance
Than in a rage, her counsel is disclosed

Lamant. Sith for as much, as god and eke nature
Has auaunced love, to so hye degree
Much sharp is the point, thus am I sure
Yet greueth more the fault, where ever it be
who has no cold, of heat has no deynte
The one for that other, asked is express
And of plesaunce, knows none certain
But it be one, in thought and heaviness

La dame As for pleasaunce, it is not always one
That you think sweet, I think it bitter pain
Ye may not me co^strayne, nor yet right none
After your lust to love, that is but vayn
To challenge love by right, was never seyne
But heart assent, before bond and promise
For strength and force, may not attain
A will that stands enfeffed in fraunchyse

Lamant Right fair lady, god mote I never please
If I seek other right in this case
But for to show you plainly my disease
And your mercy to abide, and eke your grace
If I purpose your honor to deface
Or ever did, god and fortune me shende
And that I never unrightfully purchase
One only joy, unto my lives end

La dame Ye and other, that swear such oaths fast
And so condemn, and cursen to and fro
Full sykerly ye wene your oaths last
No longer than the words ben ago
And god, and eke his saints laughe also
In such sweryng, there is no steadfastness
And these wretches that have full trust thereto
After they weep and waylen in distress

Lamant He has no courage of a man trewly
That secheth plesaunce, worship to dispyse
Nor to be called forth, is not worthy
The earth to touch, ye air in no kyns wise
A trusty heart, a mouth without feyntyse
Thus be the strength of every manner name
And who that lays his faith for little pryse
He leseth both his worship and his fame

La dame. A cursed heart, a mouth that is curteyse
Full well ye wot they be not according
Yet feigned chere, right soon may he^ apeyse
where of malice is set all her workynge
Full false semblaunt they bear, and true semyng
Her name, her fame, her tongues but feigned
worship in hem is put in forgetting
Naught repented, nor in no wise co^playned

Lamant. Who thinks ill, no good may him befall
God of his grace grant each man his desert
But for his love, among your thoughts all
As think upon my woeful sorrows smert
For of my pain, wheder your tender heart
Of sweet pity, be not therwyth agreued
And of your grace, to me were discouerte
That by your mean, sone should I be releued

La dame. A lightsome heart, a folly of pleasaunce
Are much better, the less while they abide
They make you think, and bring you in atrau^ce
But that sycknesse, will sone be remedyde
Respyte your thought, and put al this aside
Full good disporte werieth me all day
To help nor hurt, my will is not aplyde
who troweth me not, I let hem pass away

Lamant. Who has a bird, a faucon, or a hounde
That follows him for love in every place
He cherishes him, and keeps him full sound
Out of his sight, he will not him enchace
And I that set me wits in this case
On you alone, wythouten any change
Am put under, much farther out of grace
And less set by, than other that be strange

La dame. Though I make chere to every man about
For my worship, and for mine own frau^chyse
To you I nyl do so, wythouten doubt
In eschewynge all manner preiudyse
For wot ye well, love is so little wise
And in believe, so lightly will be brought
That he takes all at his own deuyse
Of thing god wot, yt serves him of naught

Lamant. If I by love, and by my true service
Lose ye good chere yt strangers have always
whereof shall serve my troth in any wise
Less than to him, that comes and goth all day
which holds of you nothing, yt is no nay
Also in you is lost, as to my semynge
All curtesy, which of reason will say
That love for love, were lawful desiring

La dame. Curtesy is alyed wonder nere
To worship, which him loves tenderly
And he will not be bound for no prayere
Nor for no gifts, I say you verily
But his good chere, depart full largely
where him lyketh, as his conceyte will fall
Guerdon constrained a gift done thankfully
These twayn ca^ never accord nor never shall

Lamant. As for guerdon I seek none in this case
For that desert, to me it is to hye
wherefore I ask your pardon and your grace
Sithe me behooves death, or your mercy
To give the good where it wants truly
That were reason, and a curtyse manner
And to your own much better were worthy
Tha^ to strangers, to show hem lovely chere

La dame What call ye good, feign would I yt I wist
That pleases one, another smerteth sore
But of his own, to large is he that list
Give much, and lose his good name therefore
One should not make a grant, little ne more
But the request were right well according
If worship be not kept and set before
All that is left, is but a little thing

Lamant In to this world was founded never none
Nor under heaven creature ybore
Nor never shall, save only your person
To who^ your worship touches half so sore
But me which have no season less ne more
Of youth ne age, but still in your service
I have no eyes, no wit, nor mouth in store
But all be given to the same office

La dame. A full great charge has he wythouten fail
That his worship keeps in sykernesse
But in danger he sets his travail
That fesseth it with others business
To him that longs, honor and noblesse
Upon none other should not be awayte
For of his own, so much has he the less
That of other, much folowet hthe conceyte

Lamant Your eyes has set ye prynt, which that I feel
within my heart, that where so ever I go
If I do thing, that sowneth unto well
Needs must it come from you, and fro no mo
Fortune will this, that I for well or woe
My life endure, your mercy abiding
And very right will, that I think also
Of your worship, above all other thing

La dame. To your worship se well, for that is need
That ye spend not your season all in vain
As touching mine, I read you take no head
By your folly, to put your self in pain
To overcome is good, and to restrain
An heart, which is disceyued follyly
For worse it is to break than bow certain
Better bow, than to fall suddenly

Lamant. Now fair lady think, sith it first began
That love has set mine heart under his cure
It never might, ne truly I ne can
None other serve, while I shall here endure
In most fre wise, thereof I make you sure
which may not be withdraw, this is no nay
I must abide all manner adventure
For I may neither put to nor take away

La dame. I hold it for no gift in sothfastnesse
That one offreth, where it is forsake
For such a gift is abandoning express
That with worship again may not be take
He has an heart full fell that list to make
A gift lightly, that put is to refuse
But he is wise, that such conceyte will slake
So that him need, neither to study ne muse

Lamant. He should not muse, yt has his service spent
On her, which is a lady honorable
And if I spend my time to that intent
Yet at the lest, I am not reprouable
Of feigned heart, to think I am unable
Or I mystoke, when I made this request
By which love has of entreprise notable
So many hertes gotten by conquest

La dame. If that ye list do after my counsel
Seche a fayrer, and of more higher fame
which in service of love, will you prevail
After your thought, according to the same
He hurts both his worship and his name
That follyly, for twain hi^ self will trouble
And he also leseth his after game
That surely can not set his points double

Lamant. This your counsel, by ought that I can se
Is better said than done, to mine advise
Though I believe it not, forgive it me
Mine heart is such, so hole without feyntyse
That I ne may give credence in no wise
To thing, which is not sowning unto truth
Other counsel I se, be but fantasyse
Save of your grace, to show pity and ruth

La dame. I hold him wise that works no folly
And when him list, can leave and part therfro
But in conning, he is to learn truly
That would him self conduyte, and can not so
And he that will not after counsel do
His suit he puts in to dysperaunce
And all the good that should fall him to
Is lost and deed, clean out of remembrance

Lamant. Yet will I sewe this matter faithfully
whiles I live, what ever be my chance
And if it hap, that in my truth I dye
Than death shall do me no displeasaunce
But when that I, by your hard suffraunce
Shall dye so true, and with so great a pain
Yet shall it do me much the less greuau^ce
Than for to live a false lover certain

La dame. Of me get ye right naught, this is no fable
I will to you be neither hard nor strayte
And right will not no man customable
To think ye should be sure of my conceyte
who secheth sorrow, his be the receyte
Other counsel can I not feel nor se
Nor for to learn, I cast me not to awayte
who will thereof, let him assaye for me

Lamant. Ones must it be assayde, that is no nay
with such as be of reputacyon
And of true love, the right honor to pay
Of free hertes gotten by dew ransom
For frewyl holds this opinion
That it is great duresse and discomforte
To keep a heart in so strayte a prison
That has but one body for his disporte

La dame. I know so many causes meruaylous
That I must need of reason think certain
That such adventure is wonder peryllous
And yet well more, the coming back again
Good or worship, thereof is seldom seen
where I ne will make such array
As for to find a pleasaunce, but a barayne
when it shall cost so dear the first assaye

Lamant. Ye have no cause to dout of this matter
Nor you to mean with no such fantasyse
To put me far al out as a stranger
For your goodness can think and well advise
That I have made a pryse in every wise
By which my truth shows open evidence
My long abydyng, and my true service
May well be known by plain experience

La dame. Of very right he may be called true
And so must he be take in every place
That can discern, and set as he ne knew
And keep the good, if he it may purchase
For who yt prays, or swereth in any case
Right well ye wot, in yt no troth is preued
Such has there been, and are, that gete^ grace
And lose it sone, when they have it acheued

Lamant. If truth me cause by virtue sovereign
To show good love, and always find contrary
And cherish yt, which sleeth me with ye pain
This is to me a lovely adversary
when ye pity, which long on sleep does tarry
Has set the fine of al my heaviness
Yet her comfort to me most necessary
Shall set my will more sure in stablenesse

La dame. The woeful wight, what may he think or say
The contrary of al joy and gladness
A sick body, his thought is always
From hem that felen no sore nor sickness
Thus hurtes been of diverse business
which love has put to great hyndraunce
And truth also, put in forgetfulness
when they full sore begin to sigh askaunce

Lamant. Now god defend, but he be harmless
Of al worship or good that may befall
That to werst tourneth by his lewdness
A gift of grace, or any thing at all
That his lady vouchsafe upon him call
Or cherishes him in honorable wise
In that defaute, what ever he be that fall
Deserves more than death to suffer twyse

La dame. There is no judge yset on such trespace
By which of right, love may recovered be
One curses fast, another does manace
Yet dies none, as far as I can se
But keep her course always in one degree
And evermore, their labor does increase
To bring ladies by their great subtelte
For others gylte, in sorrow and disease

Lamant. Albeit so, one does so great offense
And is not deed, nor put to no justice
Right well I wot him gayneth no defense
But he must end in full mischeuous wise
And all ever said, god will him dispyse
For falshed is ever full of cursedenesse
that his worship may never have interprise
where it reygneth, and has the wylfulnesse

La dame. Of that have they no great fere now a daise
Such as will say and maynteyne it thereto
That steadfast truth is nothing for to praise
In hem that keep it long in well or woe
Their busye hertes passen two and fro
They be so well reclaymed to the lure
So well learned hem to wythholde also
And al to chau^g wha^ love should best endure

Lamant. When one has set his heart in stable wise
In such a place, as is both good and true
He should not flyt, but do forth his service
Always withouten change of any new
As soon as love begins to remewe
Al plesaunce goth anon in little space
As for my party, that shall I eschew
while the soul abides in his place

La dame. To love truly, there as it ought of right
Ye may not be mystaken doutlesse
But ye be foul dysceyued in your sight
By light understanding, as I guess
yet may ye well repele your business
And to reason have some attendaunce
Much better tha^ to abide by folly simplenes
The feeble socour of disperaunce

Lamant. Reason, counsel, wisdom, and good advise
Been under love arested euerychone
To which I can accord in every wise
For they be not rebel, but still as a stone
Their will and mine, be meddled al in one
And therwyth bouden with so strong a cheyne
That as in hem, departing shall be none
But pity break the mighty bond atwayne

La dame. Ye love not your self, what ever ye be
That in love stand forgete in every place
And of your woe, if ye have no pity
Others pite believe ye not to purchase
But be fully assured, as in this case
I am always under one ordinance
To have better trust not after grace
And all that leueth, take to your plesaunce

Lamant. Have my hope so sure and so steadfast
That such a lady should not lack pity
But now alas, it is shyt up so fast
That danger shows on me his cruelte
And if she se the virtue fail in me
Of true service, though she do fail also
No wonder were, but this is my surete
I must suffer, which way that ever it go

La dame. Leave chys purpose I read you for the best
For the longer ye keep, it is in vain
The less ye get, as of your hertes rest
And to rejoice it shall you never attain
wha^ ye abide good hope to make you feign
Ye shall be found asotted in dotage
And in the end, ye shall know for cartayne
Hope shall pay the wretches for her wage

Lamant. Ye say as falls most for your plesaunce
And your power is great, al this I se
But hope shall never out of my remembrance
By which I feel so great aduersite
For when nature has set in you plente
Of al goodness by virtue and by grace
He never assembled hem, as seemed me
To put pity out of his dwelling place

La dame. Pity of right ought to be reasonable
And to no wight do no great disauauntage
There as is need, it should be profitable
And to the pytous showing no damage
If a lady will do so great outrage
To show pity and cause her own debate
Of such pity comes dispitous rage
And of such love, also right deedly hate

Lamant. To comfort hem that live al comfortless
That is no harm, but comfort to your name
But ye that have a heart of such duresse
And a fair lady I must affirm the same
If I dust say, ye win all this defame
By cruelte, which sytteth you full ill
But if pity, which may al this attain
In your high heart may rest and tarry still

La dame. what ever he be that says he loves me
And perauenture I leave well it be so
Ought he be wroth, or should I blamed be
Though I did not as he would have me do
If I meddled with such or other mo
It might be called pity mercylesse
And afterward if I should live in woe
Than to repent, it were to late I guess

Lamant. O marble heart, and yet more hard parde
which mercy may not perce for no labor
More strong to bow than is a mighty tree
what avails you to show so great rygour
Pleases you more to se me dye this hour
Before your eyes, for your disport and play
Than for to show some comfort and socour
To respyte death, which chaseth me always

La dame. Of your disease, ye may have allegeaunce
And as for mine, I let it over slake
Also ye shall not dye for my pleasaunce
Nor for your heal, I can not surety make
I will not hurt my self for others sake
weep they, laugh they, or sing they, I warant
For this matter, so will I undertake
That none of hem shall make thereof auaunt

Lamant. I can not skyl of love by god alone
I have more cause to weep in your presence
And well ye wot, auauntour am I none
For certainly, I love better scilence
One should not love by hertes credence
But he were sure to keep it secretly
For a vauntour is of no reverence
when that his tongue is his most enemy

La dame. Male bouch in court, has great commandment
Each man studyeth to say the worst he may
These false lovers in this time now present
They serve best to iangle as a Iay
The most secret ywys, yet some men say
How he mistrusted is in some partyse
wherefore to ladies wha^ so men speak or say
It should be byleued in no wise

Lamant Of good and ill shall be, and is always
The world is such, the earth is not al plain
They yt be good, ye proof shows every day
And otherwise great villony certain
It is reason, though one his tongue distayne
with cursed spech, to do him self a shame
That such refuse, should wrongfully remain
Upon the good renomed in their fame

La dame Such as be naught, when they here tidings new
That each trespass shall lightly have pardon
They that pursuen to be good and true
will not set by none ill disposition
To contynewe in every good condition
They are the first that fallen in damage
And full freely the hertes habandon
To little faith, with soft and fair langage

Lamant. Now know I well of very certaynte
If one do truly, yet shall he be shente
Sith al manner of justice and pity
Is banished out of a ladies entente
I can not se, but al is at one stente
The good, the ill, the vice, and eke the virtue
Such as be good, such have ye punishment
For the trespass of hem that live untrue

La dame. I have no power you to do greuaunce
Nor to punyshe none other creature
But to eschew the more encomberaunce
To keep us from you al, I hold it sure
False semblaunce, has a face full demure
Lightly to catch these ladies in a wait
wherefore we must, if we will here endure
Make right good watch, lo this is my co^ceyte

Lamant. Sith that of grace, a goodly word not one
May now be had, but always kept in store
I appele to god, for he may here my moan
Of the duresse, which greueth me sore
And of pity, I complain furthermore
which he forgate, in all his ordinance
Or else my life to have ended before
which so sone am put out of remembrance

La dame. My heart nor I have done you no forfeyte
By which ye should complain in any kind
Nothing hurts you but your own co^ceite
Being your self, for so ye shall it find
Thus always let this synke in your mind
That your desire shall never recovered be
Ye noy me sore, in wastyng al this wind
For I have said enough, as seems me

Lamant. This woeful man rose up in all his pain
And so departed with weping countenance
His woeful heart, almoost to brast in twain
Full like to dye, walking forth in a trance
And said death come forth, thy self auaunce
Or that mine heart forgete his properte
And make shorter al this woeful penance
Of my pore life, full of aduersyte

Fro the^s he went, but whither wist I nout
Nor in what part he drew in sothfastnesse
But he no more was in his ladies thought
For to the dance anon she began her dress
And afterward, one told me thus express
He rent his here, for anguyshe and for pain
And in him self took so great heaviness
That he was deed within a day or twain
Lenuoy.
THe true lovers thus I beseech you all
Such auentures fly hem in every wise
And as people defamed ye hem call
For they truly do you great preiudyse
His castelles strong stuffed with ordinance
For they have had long time by their office
The hole country of love in obeysaunce
And ye ladies, or what estate ye be
Of whom worship has chose his dwelling place
For gods love do no such cruelte
Nor in no wise ne foul not the trace
Of her that here is named ryghtwysly
which by reason me seems in this case
May be called, La belle dame sans mercy
Go little book, god send the good passage
Chese well thy way, be simple of manner
Look thy clothyng be like thy pylgrimage
And specially let this be thy prayere
Unto hem all, that they will read or here
where thou art wrong after her help to call
The to correct in any part or al
Pray hem also with thine humble service
Thy boldness to pardon in this case
For else thou art not able in no wise
To make thy self appear in any place
And furthermore beseech hem of her grace
By her favor and supportacion
To take in gre this rude translation
The which god wot stands full destitute
Of eloquence, of meter, and colors
Like as a be naked without refute
Upon a plain to abide all manner showers
I can no more, but ask of hem socours
At whose request you were made in this wise
Commaundyng me with body and seruyse
Right thus I make an end of this prosses
Besechyng him, that all has in balaunce
That no true man be vexed causeless
As this man was, which is of remembrance
And all that done her faithful obseruaunce
And in her troth purpose hem to endure
I pray god send hem better adventure.
Explicit.
Of queen Annelida and false Arcite.
O Thou feyrs God of arms Mars the read
That in thy frosty country called Trace
within thy gryslye temples full of dread
Honored art as patron of that place
with the Bellona Pallas full of grace
Be present, and my song continue and gye
At my beginning thus to the I cry
For it full deep is sonken in my mind
with pytous heart in English to endyte
This old story, in latin which I find
Of queen Annelyda and false Arcyte
That elde, which all can frete and byte
And it has freten many a noble story
Has nygh devoured out of our memory
Be favorable eke thou Polymnia
On Pernaso that has thy susters glade
By Elycon, not far from Cirsa
Syngest with voice memorial in the shade
Under the Laurer which that may not fade
And do that I my ship to haven win
First follow I Stace, and after him Corinne
Iamque domos patrias Cithic post aspera gentis, Prelia laurigero suburente
Thesea curru, Le tifici plausus missusque ad sidera vulgi.

when Theseus with wars long and great
The aspre folk of Cithe has overcome
The laurer crowned in his chair gold beat
Home to his country houses is ycome
For which the people blysful all and some
So cryden, that to the sterres it went
And him to honouren did al her entente
Before this duke, in sign of victory
The trompes come, and in his baner large
The image of Mars, and in token of glory
Men might se of tresour many a charge
many a bright helm and many a spear and targe
Many a fresh knight and many a blysfull rout
On horse and on foot, in all the field about
Ipolyta his wife, the hardy queen
Of Cithya, that he conquered had
with Emelye her young suster shene
Fair in a chare of gold he with him lad
that all the ground about her chare she sprad
with brightness of beauty in her face
Fulfilled of largess and of grace
with his triumph and laurer corowned thus
In all the flower of fortunes yeuyng
Let I this noble prince Theseus
Toward Athenes in his way rydyng
And fond I wol in shortly to bring
The slye way of that I began to write
Of queen Annelyda and false Arcyte
Mars yt through his furious course of ire
The old wrath of Juno to fulfill
Has set the peoples hertes both on fire
Of Thebes and Greece, and eueryche other to kyl
with blody spears never rested still
But throng now here now there among hem both
That euerich other slew so were they wroth
For when Amphiorax and Tydeus
Ipomedon, and Partynope also
were deed, and slain proud Campaneus
And wha^ ye wretched thebans brethren two
were slain, and king Adrastus home ago
So desolate stood Thebes and so bare
That no wight could remedy of his care
And when the old Creon began espy
How yt the blood royal was brought adoun
He held the city by his tyranny
And did the gentyls of that regyoun
To been his friends, and dwell in the town
So what for love of him, and what for awe
The noble folk were to the town ydrawe
Among al these Annelyda the queen
Of Ermonye, was in that town dwelling
That fayrer was than the sun shene
throuout ye world so began her name spring
That her to se had every wight lykyng
For as of troth is there none her lyche
Of all the women in this world rich
Young was this queen, of twentye year old
Of myddle stature, and of such fayrenesse
That nature had a joy her to behold
And for to speken of her steadfastness
She passed has Penelope, and Lucresse
And shortly if she shall been comprehended
In her might nothing been amended
This Theban knight eke soth to said
was young, and thereto wythal a lusty knight
But he was double in love and nothing plain
And subtyl in that craft over any wight
And with his co^nyng wan this lady bright
For so ferforth he began her troth assure
That she him trusts over any creature
what should I said, she loves Arcyte so
That when that he was absent any throw
Anon her thought her heart brast a two
For in her sight to her he bare him low
So that she wend have al his heart yknow
But he was false, it nas but feigned chere
As needs not such craft men to lere
But nevertheless full mykel business
Had he, er that he might his lady win
And swore he would dyen for distress
Or from his wit he said he would twynne
Alas the while, for it was routh and sin
That she upon his sorrows would rewe
But nothing thinks the false as does the true
Her fredom found Arcyte in such manner
That al was his, that she has much or lite
Ne to no creature made she chere
Further than it lyked to Arcyte
There was no lack, with which he might her wit
She was so ferforth yeuen him to please
That all that lyked him, did her ease
There nas to her no manner letter sent
That touched love, from any manner wight
That she ne showed him or it was brent
So plain she was, and did her full might
That she nyl hyde nothing from her knight
Lest he of any untruth her vpbreyde
without bode his heart she obeyed
And eke he made him ialous over her
That what any man had to her said
Anon he would prayen her to swear
what was ye word, or make him yuel apayd
Tha^ wend she out of her wit have brayd
But al was but sleyght and flaterye
without love he feigned ielousy
And all this took she so debonairly
That al his will, her though it skillful thing
And ever the longer she loved him tenderly
And did him honor as he were a king
Her heart was to him wedded with a ryng
For so ferforth upon troth is her intent
That where he goth, her heart with him went
wha^ she shall eat, on him is so her thought
That well uneath of meat took she keep
And when she was to her rest brought
On him she thought always till that she sleep
when he was absent, privily does she weep
Thus lives fair Annelyda the queen
For false Arcyte, that did her all this tene
This false Arcyte, of his newfanglenesse
For she to him so lowly was and true
Took less deynte for her steadfastness
And saw another lady proud and new
And right anon he clad him in her hew
wot I not whether in white, reed, or grene
And falsed fair Annelyda the queen
But nevertheless, great wonder was it none
Though he were false, for it is ye kind of man
Sith lameth was, that is so long agone
To be in love as false as ever he can
He was the first father that began
To louen two, and was in bigamye
And he found tents first, but if men lie
This false Arcyte, somewhat must he feign
when he was false, to coueren his traytorye
Right as an horse, ye can both byte and plain
For he bare her in hand of trecherye
And swore he could her doubleness espy
And al was falsenesse, that she to him meant
Thus swort this thief and forth his way he went
Alas what heart might endure it
For routh or woe, her sorrow for to tell
Or what man has the connyng or the wit
Or what man might within the chamber dwell
If I to him rehersen shall the hell
That suffers fair Annelyda the queen
For false Arcyte, that did al this tene
She wepeth, wayleth, and swouneth pitously
To ground deed she falls as a stone
Crampysheth her lymmes crokedly
She speaks as her wit were al agone
Other color than ashen has she none
Ne none other word speaks she much or lite
But mercy cruel heart mine Arcyte
And this endures, till that she was so mate
yt she ne has foot on which she may sustene
But forth languyshyng ever in this estate
Of which Arcyte has neither roth ne tene
His heart was else where new and grene
that on her woe, ne deyneth him not to think
Him recketh never whether she flete or sink
This new lady holds him so narowe
Up by the brydel, at the staves end
That every word he dred it as an arowe
Her danger made him both bow and bend
And as her lust, made him turn or wend
For she ne granted him in her living
No grace, why that he has to sing
But drove him forth, uneath list her know
That he was servant unto her ladyshyp
But lest he were proud, she held him low
Thus serves he, without meat or syp
She sent him now to land, and now to ship
And for she yaue him danger al his fyl
Therefore she had him at her own will
Ensample of this, ye thrifty women all
Take heed of Annelyda and false Arcyte
That for her list him, her dear heart call
And was so meke, therefore he loved her lyte
The kind of man's heart is to delight
On thing that straung is, also god me save
for what the may not get, yt would they have
Now turn we to Annelyda again
That pyneth day by day in languyshyng
But when she saw that her ne gate no geyn
Upon a day full soroufully weeping
She cast her for to make a complaynyng
And with her own hand she began it write
And sent it to her theban knight Arcyte
The complaynt of Annelyda to false Arcyte.
SO thyrled with ye point of remembrance
The sword of sorrow whet with false plesau^ce
Mine heart bare of bliss and black of hew
That turned is to quakyng all my dance
My surety in a waped countenance
Syns it avails naught to ben true
For who so true is, it shall her rewe
That serves love, and does her obseruaunce
Always to one, and changes for no new
I wot my self as well as any wight
For I loved one with al mine heart and might
More than my self an hundred M. sith
And called him my hertes life, my knight
And was all his, as far as it was right
And wha^ yt he was glad, than was I blyth
And his disease was my death as swythe
And he again his troth has me plyght
For evermore his lady to me kythe.
Now is he false alas, and causeless
And of my woe he is so routhlesse
That with a word him list not ones dayne
To bring again my sorrowful heart in pees
For he is caught up in an other lees
Right as him list, he laugheth at my pain
And I ne can mine heart not restrain
For to love him yet always nevertheless
And of all this I not to whom to plain.
And should I plain, alas the hard stound
Unto my fo, that yaue mine heart a wound
And yet desires that mine harm be more
Now certes ferther wol I never be found
None other help, my sores for to sound
My desteny has shaped so full yore
I woll none other medicine ne lore
I woll ben aye there I was ones bound
That I have said, be said for evermore
Alas, where is become your gentleness
Your words full of pleasaunce and humblesse
Your obseruaunce in so low manner
Your awaytyng, and your business
On me that ye called your maystresse
Your sovereign lady in this world here
Alas, is there neither word ne chere
Ye vouchsafe upon mine heaviness
Alas your love, I bye it all to dear
Now certes sweet, though that ye
Thus causeless the cause be
Of my deedly adversity
Your manly reason ought it to respyte
To slay your friend, and namely me
That never yet in no degree
Offended you, as wisly he
That all wot of woe my soul quyte.
But for I was so plain Arcyte
In all my works much and lyte
And was so besy you to delight
Mine honor save, meke, kind and free
Therefore ye put in me this wit
Alas, ye retche not a myte
Though that the sword of sorrow byte
My woeful heart through your cruelty
My sweet fo, why do ye so for shame
And think ye ye furthred be your name
To love anewe, and ben untrue aye
And put you in slaundre now and blame
And do to me adversity and grame
That love you most, god thou wost always
Yet turn again, and yet be plain somedaye
And than shall this yt now is mys ben game
And all foryeue while I live may.
Lo heart mine, all this is for to said
As whether shall I pray or else plain
which is the way to done you to be true
For either mote I have you in my chain
Or with the death ye mote depart us twayn
There beth none other mean ways new
For god so wisely on my soul rewe
As verily ye sleen me with the pain
That mow ye seen unfeigned on mine hew
For thus ferforth have I my death sought
My self I murdre with my privy thought
For sorrow and routh of your unkindness
I weep, I wayle, I fast, al helps naught
I void joy that is to speak of ought
I void company, I fly gladness
who may auaunt her better of heaviness
Tha^ I, and to this plyte have ye me brout
without gylte, me needs no witness.
And should I pray, and weyuen womanhed
Nay rather death, than do so foul a deed
And ask mercy and gyltlesse, what need
And if I plain what life I led
You recketh not, yt know I out of dread
And if I unto you mine oaths bid
For mine excuse, a scorn shall be my mede
Your chere floureth, but it will not sede
Full long agone I might have taken head.
For though I had you to morrow again
I might as well hold Apryll from rain
As hold you to maken steadfast
Almighty god, of troth the sovereign
where is ye troth of man, who has it slain
She yt hem loves, shall hem find as fast
As in a tempest is a rotten mast
Is that a tame be, that is aye feign
To run away, when he is lest aghast
Now mercy sweet, if I missay
Have I ought said out of the way
I not, my wit is all away
I fare as does ye song of chaunteplure
For now I plain, and now I pley
I am so mased, that I dey
Arcyte has borne away the key
Of al my world, and my good adventure
For in this world there nis no creature
walkyng in more discomfyture
Than I, ne more sorrow endure
For if I sleep a furlonge way or twey
Than thinks me that your figure
Before me stant, clad in asure
Efte to profre a new assure
For to ben true, and mercy me to prey
The long night, this wondre sight ydrye
That on the day for such a fraye I dye
And of all this right naught twys ye retche
Ne neuermore mine eyes two ben dry
And to your routh, and to your troth I cry
But welaway, to far ben they to fetch
Thus holds me my destenie a wretch
But me to read out of this dread or gye
Ne may my wit (so weke is it) not stretche
Than end I thus, sith I may do no more
I give it up, for now and evermore
For I shall never efte putten in balaunce
My sykernesse, ne learn of love the lore
But as ye swan, I have herd say full yore
Against his death woll sing in his penance
So sing I here the desteny and chance
How that Arcyte Annelyda so sore
Has thrilled with the point of remembrance.
when that Anneleda this woeful queen
Has of her hand written in this wise
with face deed, betwixt pale and grene
She fell a swoune, and sithe she began to rise
And unto Mars avoweth sacrifyce
within the temple with a sorrowful chere
That shapen was, as ye may plainly here.
Explicit.
The assemble of Ladies.
IN Septembre at the falling of the lefe
The fresh season was all together done
And of the corn was gathered the shefe
In a garden about.ii. after none
There were ladies walking as was her won
Four in no^bre, as to my mind does fall
And I the fyfth, the symplest of hem all.
Of gentlewomen fair there were also
Disportyng hem eueryche after her gyse
In cross alleyes walkyng by two and two
And some alone after her fantasyese
Thus occupied we were in diverse wise
And yet in troth we were not all alone
There were knights and squyres many one
whereof I served, one of hem asked me
I said again, as it fell in my thought
To walk about the mase in certayntie
As a woman that nothing rought
He asked me again whom that I sought
And of my color, why I was so pale
Forsooth (quod I) and thereby lyth a tale.
That must we wete (quod he) and that anon
Tell on let se, and make no taryinge
Abide (quod I) ye ben a hasty one
I let you wete it is no little thing
But for because ye have a great longyng
In your desire, this process for to here
I shall you tell the plain of this matere.
It happed thus, that in an after noone
My feloushyp and I by one assent
when all other besynesses were done
To pass our time, into this mase we went
And took our ways each after our intent
Some went inward, and went they had gone out
Some stood in ye mid, and looked all about
And soth to say, some were full far behind
And right anon, as ferforth as the best
Other there were so mased in her mind
Always were good for hem both eest and west
Thus went they forth and had but little rest
And some her courage did hem sore assail
For very wrath they did step over ye rail.
And as they sought hem self to and fro
I gate my self a little advantage
All forweryed, I might no ferther go
Thou I had won right great for my viage
So came I forth into a strayte passage
which brout me to an herber fair and grene
Made with benches full crafty and clean.
That as me thought, there might no creature
Deuyse a better by a due proporcioun
Safe i^ was closed well I you ensure
with masonry, of compass enuyroun
Full secretly with stayres going down
In mids ye place with turnyng whele certain
And upon that a pot of margelayne
with margaretes growing in ordinance
To show hem self as folk went to and fro
That to behold it was a great pleasaunce
And how they were acco^panyed with mo
Ne momblysnesse and souenesse also
The pour penses were not disloged there
Ne god wot her place was every where
The flore and bench was paued fair and smoth
with stones square of many diverse hew
So well joined, that for to say the soth
Al seemed one, that none other knew
And underneath the streams new and new
As silver bright springyn in such a wise
That whence it came, ye could it not deuyse
A little while was I all alone
Beholding well this delectable place
My fellowship were coming euerychone
So must we now abide for a space
Remembryng of many diverse case
Of time passed, with syghes deep
I set me down, and there I fell aslepe
And as I slept, me thought thercame to me
A gentlewoman, metely of stature
Of great worship she seemed for to be
Attyred well, not high but by measure
Her countenance full sad and demure
Her colors blewe, all that she had upon
There came no mo but her self alone
Her gown well was enbraudred certainly
with stones after her own deuyse
In her purfyl, her word by and by
(Bien et loyalment) as I could deuyse
Than prayde I her in any manner wise
That of her name I mit have remembrance
She said, she was called Perseueraunce
So furthermore to speak was I bold
where she dwelled, I prayed her for to say
And she again full curtesly me rolde
My dwelling is, and has be many a day
with a lady: what lady I you pray?
Of great estate, thus warn I you (quod she)
what call ye her? Her name is Loyalty
In what office stand ye, or in what degree?
(quod I to her) that would I wete right feign
I am (quod she) unworthy though I be
Of her chamber her husher in certain
This rod I bear, as for a token plain
Like as ye know the rule in such service
Appertaynyng is to the same office
She charged me by her commandment
To warn you and your fellows euerychone
That ye should come there as she is present
For a counsel, which shall be now anon
Or seven days be comen and gone
And furthermore, she bad that I should say
Excuse there might be none, nor delay
An other thing was not forget behind
which in no wise I would but ye knew
Remember well, and bear it in your mind
All your fellows and ye must come in blewe
Every lyche able, your matters for to sue
with more, which I pray you think upon
Your words on your sleues euerychone
And be not abashed in no manner wise
As many ben, in such an high presence
Make your request, as ye can best deuyse
And she gladly will give you audience
There is no grefe, nor no manner offense
wherein ye feel that your heart is displeased
But with her help right sone ye shall be eased
I am right glad (quod I) ye tell me this
But there is non of us that knows ye way
As of your way (quod she) ye shall not mys
Ye shall have to gyde you day by day
Of my fellows, I can no better say
Such one as shall tell you ye way full right
And Dyligence this gentlewoman hight
A woman of right famous governance
And well cheryshed I tell you in certain
Her fellowship shall do you great pleasaunce
Her port is such, her manner true and plain
She with glad chere will do her besy pain
To bring you there, now farewell I have done
Abide said I, ye may not go so sone
why so (quod she) and I have far to go
To give warnyng in many diverse place
To your fellows, and so to other mo
And well ye wot I have but little space
Now yet (quod I) ye must tell me this case
If we shall any men unto us call
Not one (quod she) may come among you all
Not one than said I, eygh benedicite
what have I done, I pray you tell me that
Now by my life I trow but well (quod she)
But ever I can believe there is somewhat
And for to say you troth more can I not
In questyons I may nothing be to large
I meddle no further than my charge
Than thus (quod I) do me to understand
what place is there this lady is dwelling
Forsooth (quod she) and one sought all this land
Fayrer is none, though it were for a king
Devised well, and that in every thing
The toures hye, full pleasant shall ye find
with phanes fresh, turning with every wind
The chambres and parlers of a sort
with bay windows, goodly as may bethout
As for daunsyng, and other wise disport
The galeryes right well ywrought
That well I wot, if ye were thither brought
And take goodhede thereof in every wise
Ye wol it think a very paradyse
what hight ye place (quod I) now say me that
Plesaunt regard (quod she) to tell you plain
Of very troth (quod I) and wot ye what?
It may right well be called so certain
But forthermore this would I wit rit fayn
what I should do as soon as I come there
And after whom I may best enquere.
A gentlewoman, a porter of the yate
There shall ye find her name is coutenau^ce
If ye so hap, ye come early or late
Of her were good to have some acquaintau^ce
She can you tell, how ye shall you auaunce
And how to come to her ladies presence
To her words I read you give credence.
Now it is time I part you fro
For in good faith I have great business
I wot right well (quod I) that it is so
And I thank you of your great gentleness
Your comfort has yeuen me hardynesse
That now I shall be bold withouten fail
To do after your advise and good counsel
Thus parted she, and I left all alone
with that I saw (as I beheld aside)
A woman come, a very goodly one
And forth withal as I had her espyde
Me thought anon it should be the gyde
And of her name anon I did enquere
Full womanly she yaue me this answer
I am (quod she) a simple creature
Sent from the court, my name is Diligence
As soon as I might come I you ensure
I tarried not after I had license
And now that I am come to your presence
Look what service I can do or may
Command me, I can no further say.
I thanked her, and prayed her to come nere
Because I would se how she was arrayed
Her gown was blew dressed in good manner
with her deuyse, her word also that said
(Tant que i^ puis) and I was well apayed
And than wist I withouten any more
It was full true that I had herd before
Though we took now before a little space
It were full good (quod she) as I could guess
How far (quod I) have we unto the place?
A days journey (quod she) but little less
wherefore I read that we outward dress
For I suppose our fellowship is past
And for nothing I would not we were ye last
Tha^ departed we at ye springyng of ye day
And forth we went soft and easy pace
Till at the last we were on our journey
So far outward, yt we might se the place
Now let us rest (quod I) a little space
And say we as devoutly as we can
A Pater noster for saynct Iulyan
with all my heart I assent with good will
Much better shall we speed wha^ we have done
Tha^ tarried we, and said it every dyl
And when the day was past far after none
we saw a place, and thither came we soon
which round about was closed with a wall
Semyng to me full like an hospital.
There found I one had brought al mine array
(A gentlewoman of mine acquayntaunce)
I have marvel (quod I) what manner way
Ye had knowledge of all this ordenaunce
Yes yes (quod she) I herd perseueraunce
How she warned her fellows euerychone
And what array ye should have upon
Now for my love (quod I) this I you pray
Sith ye have take upon you all the pain
That ye would help me on with mine array
For wit ye well I would be gone right fayn
All this prayer needs not certain
(quod she again) come of and hye you sone
And ye shall se anon it shall be done
But this I dout me greatly, wot ye what
That my fellows be passed by and gone
I warn you (quod she) that are they not
For here they shall assemble euerychone
Notwithstanding I counsayl you anon
Make you ready, and tarry you no more
Ytis no harm though ye be there before
So than I dressed me in mine array
And asked her, whether it were well or no
It is right well (quod she) unto my pay
Ye need not care to what place ever ye go
And whiles that she and I debated so
Came Diligence and saw me al in bl^we
Sister (quod she) right well broke ye your now
Discretion purueyour.
Than went we forth and met at adventure
A young woman, an offycer semyng
what is your name (quod I) good creature
Discretion (quod she) without lesynge
And where (quod I) is your most abiding
I have (quod she) this office of purchase
Chief purueyour that longs to this place
Acquayntaunce herbyger.
Fair love (quod I) in all your ordenaunce
what is her name that is the herbyger
Forsooth (quod she) her name is acquayntau^ce
A woman of right gracious manner
Tha^ thus quod I, what strangers have ye here
But few quod she, of high degree ne low
Ye be the first, as ferforth as I know
Countenance porter.
Thus with tales we came straight to ye yate
This young woman departed was and gone
Came Diligence and knocked fast therate
who is without (quod countenance) anon
Truly (quod I) fair sister here is one
which one quod she, and therwithal she lough
I Diligence, ye know me well enough
Than opened she the gate, and in we go
with words fair she said full gently
Ye are welcome ywis, are ye no mo?
Not one quod she, save this woman and I
Now than quod she, I pray you hertly
Take my chamber for a while to rest
Till your fellows come, I hold it best
I thanked her, and forth we go euerychon
Till her chamber without words mo
Came diligence and took her leave anon
where ever ye list quod I, now may ye go
And I thank you right hertely also
Of your labor, for which god do you mede
I can no more, but Jesus be your speed
Than countenance asked me anon
Your fellowship, where ben they, quod she
Forsooth quod I, they be coming euerychone
But where they are I know no certayntie
without I may hem at this wyndowe se
Here will I stand awayting ever among
For well I wot they will not be long.
Thus as I stood musyng full busily
I thought to take good head of her array
Her gown was blewe, this wot I verily
Of good fasion and furred well with gray
Upon her sleue her word this is no nay
which said thus, as my pen can endyte
(A moy que ie voy) written with letters white
Than forthwithal she came straight to me
Your words quod she, fayn would I yt I knew
Forsooth quod I, ye shall well know and se
And for my word I have none, this is true
It is enough that my clothing be blewe
As here before I had commandment
And so to do I am right well content
Largess steward.
But tell me this I pray you hertely
The stuarde here say me what is her name
She hight largess, I say you surely
A fair lady and of right noble fame
when ye her se, ye will report the same
And under her to bid you welcome all
There is Belchier marshal of the hall.
Now all this while that ye here tarry still
your own matters ye may well have in mind
But tell me this, have ye brought any byll
Yea yea (quod I) and else I were behind
where is there one, tell me that I may find
To who^ yt I may show my matters plain
Surely quod she, unto the Chambrelayne
Remembrance Chambrelayne.
The cha^brelayne quod I, say ye true
Yea verily quod she, by mine advise
Be not aferde, unto her lowly sewe
Yt shall be done quod I, as ye deuyse
But ye must know her name in any wise
Truly (quod she) to show you in substance
wtouten fayning her name is Remembrance.
The secretarye she may not yet be forget
For she does right much in every thing
wherefore I read, when ye have with her ymet
Your matter hole tell her without fayninge
Ye shall her find full good and full loving
Tell me her name (quod I) of gentleness
By my good soth quod she, Auysenesse.
That (quod I) for her is passing good
For every byll and sedule she must se
Now good (quod I) come stand there as I stood
My fellows be coming, yonder they be
Is it iape, or say ye sothe (quod she)
In iape, nay nay, I say you for certain
Se how they come together twain and twain
Ye say full soth (quod she) that is no nay
I se coming a goodly company
They ben such folk quod I, dare I say
That list to love think it verily
And for my love I pray you faithfully
At any time, when they upon me call
That ye woll be good friend to hem all
Of my frendshyp quod she, they shall not mysse
And for their ease to put thereto my pain
God yield it you (quod I) but take you this
How shall we know who is the cha^brelayne
yt shall ye well know by her word certain
what is her word sister, I pray you say
(Plus ne purroy) thus writes she always
Thus as we stood together she and I
Even at the yate my fellows we^ each one
So met I hem, as me thout was goodly
And bade hem welcome all by one and one
Than came forth Countenance anon
Full hertely fair systers all (quod she)
Ye be right welcome into this country,
I counsel you to take a little rest
In my chamber, if it be your pleasaunce
when ye be there, me think it for the best
That I go in, and call Perseueraunce
Because she is of your acquayntaunce
And she also will tell you every thing
How ye shall be ruled of your coming
My fellows al and I, by one advise
were well agreed to do like as she said
Than we began to dress us in our gyse
that folk should say we were not vnpurueyd
And good wagers among us there we laid
which of us was attyred most goodlyest
And of us al which should be praised best.
The porter came and brought Perseueraunce
She welcomed us in curtyse manner
Think ye not long (quod she) of your attendaunce
I wol go speak unto the harbigere
That she puruey for your lodging here
Than will I go unto the Chambrelayne
To speak for yon, and come anon again
And when she departed was and gone
we saw folks coming without the wall
So great people, that nombre could we none
Ladies they were, and gentylwomen all
Clothed in blewe echone her word wythall
But for to know her word or her deuyse
They came so thycke, yt I ne might i^ no wise
With that anon came in Perseueraunce
And where I stood, she came straight to me
Ye ben (quod she) of mine old acquayntaunce
You to enquere the bolder would I be
what word they bear each after her degree
I you pray tell it me in secret wise
And I shall keep it close on warantyse
We ben five ladies (quod I) all in fere
And gentylwomen four in company
when they begyne to open her matere
Than shall ye know her words by and by
^ut as for me I have none verily
And so I told Countenance here before
All mine array is blewe, what needs more
Now than (quod she) I woll go again
That ye may have knowleg, what ye should do
In soth (quod I) if ye would take the pain
Ye did right much for us, if ye did so
The rather sped, the sooner may we go
Great cost always there is in taryenge
And long to sewe it is a weary thing
Than parted she, and came again anon
Ye must (quod she) come to the chamberlayne
We be now ready (quod I) euerychone
To follow you, when ever ye list certain
we have none eloquence to tell you plain
Besechynge you we may be so excused
Our true meaning, that it be not refused
Than went we forth after Perseueraunce
To se the prees it was a wonder case
There for to pass it was great combraunce
The people stood so thycke in every place
Now stand ye still (quod she) a little space
And for your ease somewhat I shall assay
If I can make you any better way
And forth she goth, among hem euerychone
Making a way, yt we might through pass
More at our ease, and when she had so done
She beckende us to come, where as she was
So after her we followed more and las
She brout us straight unto ye cha^brelayne
There left she us, and tha^ she went again
We salued her as reason would it so
Full humbly besechyng her great goodness
In our matters that we had for to do
That she would be good lady and maystresse
Ye be welcome (quod she) in sothfastnesse
And se what I can do, you for to please
I am ready, that may be to your ease
we followed her unto the chamber door
Systers (quod she) come ye in after me
But wete ye well, there was a paued store
The goodlyest, that any wight might se
And furthermore about than looked we
On each corner, and upon every wall
which was made of Burell and Crystal
wherein was graven of stories many one
First how Phyllis, or womanly pity
Dyed pyteously for love of Demophone
Next after was the story of Tysbe
How she slew her self under a tree
Yet saw I more, how in a rit pytous caas
For Antony was slain Cleopatras
That other side was Hawes the she^e
Full untruely disceyued in her vain
There was also Annelida the queen
Upon Arcyte how sore she did complain
All these stories were graued there certain
And many mo, than I reherce you here
It were to long to tell you all in fere
And because the walls shone so bright
with fine vmple they were all over sprad
To that intent folk should not hurt her sight
And through it the stories might be rad
Than furthermore I went, as I was lad
And there I saw without any fail
A chair set, with full rich aparayle
And five stages, it was set fro the ground
Of Cassydony full curyously wrought
with four pomelles of gold, and very round
Set with saphirs, as good as could be thout
That wot ye what, if it were through sout
As I suppose, fro this country to Inde
Another such it were right far to find
For wete ye well, I was right nere that
So as I durst, beholding by and by
Above there was a rich cloth of estate
wrought with the nedle full straungely
Her word thereon, and thus it said trewly
A endure to tell you in words few
with great letters, the better I hem knew
Thus as we stood, a door opened anon
A gentylwoman, semely of stature
Berynge a mace, came out her self alone
Sothely me thought a goodly creature
She spoke nothing to loud, I you ensure
Nor hastily, but with goodly warning
Make rome (quod she) my lady is coming
With that anon I saw Perseueraunce
How she held up the tapet in her hand
I saw also in right goodly ordenaunce
This great lady within the tapet stand
Coming outward, I woll ye understand
And after her a noble company
I could not tell the nombre sykerly
Of their names I would nothing enquere
Further than such as we would sewe unto
Save a lady, which was the chauncellere
Attemperaunce sothely her name was so
For us needs with her have much to do
In our matters, and always more and more
And so forth to tell you furthermore
Of this lady, her beauty to discryue
My conning is to simple verily
For never yet the days of my live
So inly fair I have seen none trewly
In her estate assured utterly
There wanted naught, I dare well assure
That longed to a goodly creature
And furthermore to speak of her array
I shall you tell the manner of her gown
Of clothe of gold, full rich it is no nay
The color blewe of a right goodly facyou^
In taberde wise, the sleues hangyng adown
And what purfyl there was, and in what wise
So as I can I shall it you deuyse
After a sort, the collar and the vente
Like as Armyne is made in purfelynge
with great perles full fine and orient
They were couched all after one worchynge
with diamondes instead of powderynge
The sleues and purfell of assyse
They were made like in every wise
About her neck a sort of fair rubyes
In white flowers of right fine enamayle
Upon her heed set in the fairest wise
A cercle of great balays of entayle
That in ernest to speak without fail
For young and old, and every manner age
It was a world to loken on her vysage
Thus coming forth to sit in her estate
In her presence we kneled down euerychone
Presentynge our bylles, and wot ye what
Full humbly she took hem by one and one
when we had done, than came they al anon
And did the same each after her manner
Knelyng at ones, and rysynge all in fere
And wha^ this was don, and she set in her place
The chamberlayne she did unto her call
And she goodly coming unto her a pace
Of her intent knowing nothing at all
Void back the preace (quod she) up to the wall
Make large room, but look ye do not tarry
And take these bylles to the secretarye
The chamberlayne did her commandment
And came again, as she was bid to do
The secretarye there being present
The bylles were delivered her also
Not only ours, but many other mo
Than the lady with good aduyce again
Anon wythall, called her chamberlayne
We woll (quod she) the first thing that ye do
The secretarye ye do make come anon
with her bylles, and thus we will also
In our presence she read hem euerychon
That we may take good aduyce thereon
Of the ladies that been of our counsel
Look this be done, wythouten any fail
When the chamberlayne wyste of her intent
Anon she did the secretarye call
Let your bylles (quod she) be here present
My lady it will: Madame (quod she) I shall
And in presence she will ye hem call
With good will I am ready (quod she)
At her pleasure, when she commands me
And upon that was made an ordinance
They yt came first her bylles should be read
Full gentelly than said Perseueraunce
Rayson it will they were sonest spedde
Anon wythall, upon a tapet spredde
The secretarye laid hem down echone
Our bylles first she read one by one
The first lady bearyng in her deuyse
Sans que iamays, thus wrote she on her byl
Complaynyng sore, and in full pytous wise
Of promise made, with faithful heart and will
And so broken against all manner skyll
without deserte, always on her party
In this matter, desyryng a remedy
Her next following, her word was i^ this wise
(Vng sanz chau^ger) and thus she did compain
though she had be guerdoned for her service
Yet nothing like as she that took the pain
wherefore she could in no wise her restrain
But in this case sewe until her presence
As reason would to have recompense
So furthermore, to speak of other twain
One of hem wrote after her fantasy
(Vncques puis lever) and for to tell you plain
Her complaynt was full pytous verily
For as she said, there was great reason why
As I can remember this matere
I shall you tell the process all in fere
Her byl was made complaynyng in her gyse
That of her joy, her comfort and gladness
was no surete, for in no manner wise
She said therein no point of stablenesse
Now ill now well, out of all sykernesse
Full humbly desiring of her high grace
Soon to show her remedy in this case
Her felawe made her byll, and thus she said
In playnynge wise there as she loved best
whether she were wroth or well apayde
She might not se when she would faynest
And wroth she was in very ernest
To tell her word, as ferforth as I wot
(Entierment vostre) right thus she wrote
And upon that she made a great request
with heart and will, and all that might be done
As until her that might redress it best
For in her mind there might she find it sone
The remedy of that which was her boon
Rehersynge that she had said before
Besechynge her it might be so no more
And in like wise as they had done before
The gentylwomen of our company
Put her bylles, and for to tell you more
One of hem wrote (cest sanz dire) verily
And her matere hole to specify
with in her byll she put it in writynge
And what it said, ye shall have knowing
It said god wot, and that full pytously
Like as she was disposed in her heart
No mysfortvne that she took grievously
Al one to her was the joy and smerte
Sometime no thank for all her good deserte
Other comfort she wanted non coming
And so used, it grieved her nothing
Desiring her, and lowly besechynge
That she would for her seek a better way
As she that had been her days living
Steadfast and true, and wylbe always
Of her felawe, somewhat I shall you say
whose byl was red next forth withal
And what it meant, rehersen you I shall
(En diu est) she wrote in her deuyse
And thus she said withouten fail
Her truth might be take in no wise
like as she thout, wherefore she had marvel
For troth sometime was wont to take avail
In every matere, but all that is ago
The more pity that it is suffered so
Much more there was, whereof she should co^playn
But she thout it to great enco^brau^ce
So much to write, and therefore in certain
In god and her she put al her affiaunce
As in her word is made a remembrance
Beseching her, that she would in this case
Show unto her the favor of her grace
The third she wrote rehersing her greuau^ce
Yea, wot ye what? a pitous thing to here
For as me thout she felt great dysplesau^ce
One mit right well perceive it by her chere
And no wonder, it sat her passing nere
Yet loathe she was to put it in writing
But need wol have course in every thing
(Soyes ensure) this was her word certain
And thus she wrote in a little space
There she loved, her labor was in vain
For he was set all in another place
Full humbly desiring in that case
Some good comfort her sorrow to appese
That she might live more at hertes ease
The fourth surely me thought she liked well
As in her port, and in her behauynge
And (bien moneste) as far as I could feel
That was her word till her welbelongynge
wherefore to her she prayed above all thing
Full hertely to say you in substance
That she would send her good continuance
Ye have rehearsed me these bylles all
But now let se somewhat of your intent
It may so hap, parauenture ye shall
Now I pray you while I am here present
Ye shall have knowledge parde what I meant
But thus I say, in truth and make no fable
The case it self is inly lamentable
And well I wot ye woll think the same
Like as I say, when ye have herd my byll
Now good tell on, I hate you by saint Iame
Abide a while, it is not yet my will
Yet must ye wete by reason and by skyll
Since ye have knowledge of yt was don before
And thus it is said without words more
Nothing so lefe as death to come to me
For fynall end of my sorrows and pain
what should I more desire as seem ye
And ye knew al aforne it for certain
I wot ye would, and for to tell you plain
without her help that has all thing in cure
I can not think that it may long endure
As for my truth it has beproued well
To say the sothe, I can say no more
Of full long time and suffered every dele
In patience, and keep it all in store
Of her goodness, besechynge her therefore
That I might have my thank in such wise
As my deserte serves of iustyse
When these bylles were rad euerychone
The ladies took a good aduysement
And hem to answer by one and one
She thought it was to much in her intent
wherefore she yaue hem commandment
In her presence to come both one and all
To give hem her answer in general
What did she than suppose ye verily?
She spoke her self, and said in this manner
we have well seen your bylles by and by
And some of hem pytous for to here
we wol therefore ye know all this infere
within short time, our court of parlyment
Here shall be hold in our palace present
And in all this, wherein ye find you grieved
There shall ye find an open remedy
In such wise as ye shall be releued
Of all that ye reherce here thoroughly
As for the date ye shall know verily
That ye may have a space in your coming
For dyligence shall it tell you by writing
We thanked her in our most humble wise
Our felaushyp, each one by one assente
Submyttyng us lowly till her seruyse
For as we thout, we had your travail spent
In such wise as we held us content
Than each of us took other by the sleue
And forth withal, as we should take our leave
All suddenly the water sprange anon
In my visage, and therwythall I woke
where am I now thought I, all this is gone
All mased, and up I began to look
with that anon I went and made this book
Thus symply rehersyng the substance
Because it should not be out of remembrance
Now verily your dream is passing good
And worthy to be had in remembrance
For though I stand here as long as I stood
It should to me be none encombraunce
I took therein so inly great pleasaunce
But tell me now what ye the book do call
For I must wete: with right good will ye shall
As for this book, to say you very right
Of the name to tell you in certaynte
Lassemble de dames, thus it hight
How think ye? that name is good parde
Now go farewell, for they call after me
My felawes all, and I must after sone
Read well my dreme, for now my tale is done
FINIS.
The conclusions of the Astrolabie.
LItell Lowys my sun, I perceive well by certain euyde^ces thine abilite to
learn sciences, touching nombres, and proporcions: and also well co^sydre I thy
besye prayer in especyall to learn the tretyse of the Astrolabe. Than for as
much as a philosopher says, he wrappeth him in his friend, that co^descendeth
to the ryghtfull prayers of his friend: Therefore I have given the a suffycient
Astrolaby for our orizonte, compowned after the latytude of Oxenford: upon ye
which by medyacyon of this little treatise, I purpose to teach the a certain
nombre of conclusyons, pertaining to this same instrument. I say a certain of
conclusyons for three causes, the first cause is this. Trust well that all the
conclusyons that have be founde^, or else possyblye might be found in so noble
an instrument as is the Astrolabye, ben unknown perfytely to any mortal man
in this regyon, as I suppose. Another cause is this, that sothlye in any carts
of the Astrolabye that I have ysene, there ben some conclusyo^s, that woll not
in all things perform her byhestes: and some of hem ben to hard to thy
tender age of ten year to conceive. This treatise divided in five parts will I
show the wonder light rules and naked words in english, for latin ne canste
thou yet but small, my little son. But never the less suffyseth to the these
true conclusyons in english, as well as suffyseth to this noble clerks
Greeks these same conclusyons in greek, and to arabyens in arabyke, and to
jews in Hebrewe, and to the Latin folk in Latin: which Latyne folk had hem
first out of other diverse langages, and write hem in her own tongue, that his
to said in Latyne.

And god wot that in all these languages and in many mo, have these
conclusyons ben suffycyently learned and taught, and yet by diverse rules, right
as diverse paths leade^ diverse folk the right way to Rome.

Now woll I pray mekely every person discrete, that redeth or hereth this
little treatise, to have my rude entendyng excused and my superfluyte of
words, for two causes. The first cause is, for that curyous endytyng and hard
sentences is full heavy at ones, for such a child to learn. And the second
cause is this, that sothly me seems better to written unto a child twyse a
good sentence, than he forgette it ones. And Lowis if it so be that I show the
in my lyth English, as true conclusyons, touching this matter, and not only
as true, but as many and subtle conclusyons as ben yshewed in Latyne in any
commune tretyse of the Astrolabye, conne me the more thank, and pray God save
the king that is lord of this language, and all that him faith bears, and
obeys eueryche in his degree, the more and the less. But consydreth well,
that I ne usurp not to have founden this work of my labor or of mine engyne,
I nam but a leude compylatour of the labor of old Astrologiens, and have it
translated in mine English only for thy doctrine: and with this sword shall
I sleue envy.

The first party.
THe first party of this treatise shall reherce the fygures and the members
of thine Astrolabye, because that thou shalt have the greater knowing of
thine own instrument.

The second party.
The second party shall teache the to werken the very practyke of the
foresaid conclusyons as ferforthe and all so narowe as may be showed in so
small an instrument portatyfe about. For well wot every astrologien, that
smallest fractions ne wol not be showed in so small an instrument, as in subtle
tables calcused for a cause.

The third party.
The third party shall contain diverse tables of longytudes and latytudes of
sterres, fyxe in the Astrolabye. And tables of the declinacyons of the sun,
and tables of the longytude of cytes and towns. And tables as well for the
gouernacyon of the clock, as for to find the altitude meridyan, and many an
other notable co^clusyon after the kalenders of the reverent clerks friar John
Some. and friar N. Lenne.

The fourth party.
The fourth party shall be a theorike to declare the meaning of the
celestyall bodies, with the causes, the which the fourth party in specyal
shall show in a table of the very menynge of the moon from one to one
every day and every sign, after thine Almanake. Upon the which table there
follows a canone, suffycyent to teach as well in manner of workynge in the
same conclusyons, as to know in our oryzonte, with which degree of zodiac the
Moon aryseth in any latytude, and the arysynge in any Planete after his
latytude fro the eclyptyke line.

The fyfte party.
The fyfthe party shall ben an introductorye after the statutes of our
Doctors, on which thou may learn a great part of the general rules of
theoryke in Astrologye. In which fyfthe party thou shall find tables of
equacyons of houses, after the latitude of Oxenforde, and tables of dignytees
of Planettes, and other notefull things, if god vouchsafe and his mother the
maiden, mo than I behete.

The ring.
Thy Astrolabye has a ring to putten on thy thombe on thy right hand, in
taking of the heyght of things. And take keep, from hence forward I woll
cleape the heyght of heavy thing, that is take by the rule, the altytude
wythouten mo words.

The turet.
This ring renneth in a manner of a turet fastened to the mother of thine
Astrolabye, in a room a space that it dystroubeleth not the instrument to
hangen after his right centure.

The mother of thine Astrolabye is thickest by the brinkes, that is the vtmoste
ryng with degrees: and all the myddle within the ring shall be thynner, to
receive the plates for diverse clymates, and also for the rethe, that is shape
in manner of a net, or else after the web of a loppe.

The mother.
The mother of thine Astrolaby is the thickest plate perced with a large hole,
that receives in her womb the thynne plates compowned of diverse clymates, and
thy reete shapen in manner of a net or of a web of a loppe.

Of the four lines.
This mother is divided on the backhalfe with a line, that comes discendynge
fro the ring down to the netherest bordure, the which line, fro the foresaid
ring unto the center of the large hole amydde, is cleped south line, or else
the line merydionall: And the remenaunt of this line down to the bordure is
cleped the north line, or all the line of the mydnight.

Of four lines Eest, West, North, and Southe.
OVerthwarte this foresaid long line there crosses him another line of the
same length, fro Eest to West, of the which line, from a little cross in the
bordure unto the centure of the large hole, is cleped the Eest line, or else the
line oriental: and the remenaunt of the line, fro the foresaid Oriental unto
the bordure, is ycleped the west line, or the line occidentall. Now have thou
here the four quarters of thyn Astrolabye, divided after the four principal
plages or quarters of the fyrmament.

Which is the right side, and which is the lift.
THe Eest side of the Astrolaby is cleaped the right side, and the weste side
is cleaped the lift side. Foryet not this little Lowys. Put ye ring of thine
Astrolabye upon the thombe of thy right hand, and than will his right side by
toward thy lift side, and his lift side woll be toward thy right side. Take
this rule general as well on the back as on the womb side. Upon the end of
this Eest line (as I first said) is ymarked a little cross, where as
evermore generallye is consydred the entering of the Eest degree, in the which
the sun aryseth.

The degrees fro the Eest line to the South.
FRo the little cross up to the end of the meridionall line under the ring
shalt thou find the bordure, divided with.xc. degrees, and by that same
proporcio^ is every quarter of thyn Astrolaby divided, over ye which degrees
there ben nombres of augrym, that deuyden thylke same degrees fro.v. to.v. as
shows by long strykes bytwen: of ye which long strykes the space between
conteyneth a mile way, and every degree of thylke bordure co^teyneth four
minutes, that is to say, four mynutes of an hour.

Of the twelve signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, and the other.
Under the co^pas of thilke degrees ben written the names of the twelve signs,
as Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Ca^cer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius,
Capricornus, Aquaries, and pisses. And ye nombres of the degrees of the signs
ben written in augrymatioue, and with long diuysious from five to five,
deuydeth from the time that ye sign enters unto the last end. But
understand well, that these degrees of signs ben euerych of hem consydred
of.lx. mynutes, and every mynute of.lx. secondes, and so forth into small
fractions infynite, as says Alcabucius. And therefore know well that a degree
of the bordure conteyneth.iiii. mynutes, and a degree of a sign contains.lx.
mynutes, and have this in mind.

The cercle of the days.
Next this follows the cercle of the days, that been fygured in manner of the
degrees, that conteynen in nombre. CCClxv. divided also with long strykes
from.v. to.v. and the no^bres of augrim written under the cercle.

The cercle of the.xii. months.
Next the cercle of days follows the cercle of the.xii. names of the
months, that is to say, Ianuarius, Februarius, Marcius, Apryll, Maius,
Iunius, Julius, August, September, October, November, December. The names of
these mo^thes taken her names, some for properties and some by statutes of
emperors, and some by other lords of Rome. Eke of these mo^thes, as lyked to
Julius Caesar and Caesar Augustus, some were ycompowned of diverse no^bres of
days, as July and August. Then has Ianuarius.xxxi. days. Februarius.xxviij.
Marcius.xxxi. April.xxx. May.xxxi. Iunius xxx. August.xxxi. September.xxx.
October, xxxi. November.xxx. December.xxxi. Nathelesse all though that Julius
Caesar took two days out of Feueryre and put hem in his month of July, and
Augustus Caesar cleped the month of Auguste after his name, and ordained it
of.xxxi. days, yet trust well that the sun dwells therefore never the more
ne the less in one sign then in another.

The names of the holy days.
Then follows the names of the holy days in the calendar, and next hem ye
letters A.B.C. on which they fallen.

The scale of the Astrolabye.
NExt the foresaid cercle of the A.B.C under the cross line is marked the
scale, in manner of two squyers, or else in manner of ledders that serves by his
xxij. points, and his dyuysions of full many subtle conclusyon of this
forsayde scale: For the cross line unto the very angle, is cleped Vmbra recta,
or else vmbra extensa, and the nether party vmbra versa.

The rule.
Then have thou a broad rule that has on every end a square plate, parted
with certain holes, some more and some less, to receyuen the streams of the
sun by day, and eke by mediacion of thine eye, to know the altytude of the
sterres by night.

The pyn, which is ymagined to be pole artyke and the horse.
Then is there a large pyn in manner of an exyltre, that goth through the hole
that halt the tables of the clymathes in ye reeth, in the womb of the mother,
through which pynne there goes a little wedge, the which is cleped the horse,
that strayneth all the parts together. This foresaid great pynne in manner of an
exyltre, is ymagende to be pole artyke in thine Astrolabye.

For lines on the womb side.
The womb side of thine Astrolabye is also divided with a long cross in four
quarters from Eest to west, from South to North from right side to left side,
as is ye backsyde.

The degrees of the womb side.
The border of the which womb side is divided fro the point of the Eest line
unto the point of the South line under ye ring in.xc. degrees, and by the
same proporcion is every quarter divided, as is the backsyde, that
amou^teth.CCC.lx. degrees. And under stand well that the degrees of this
border been answering and consenting to the degrees of equinoctial that is
divided in the same nombre, as every other cercle is in the hye heaven. This
border is divided also with xxiij. letters, and a small cross above the south
line, that shows the.xxiiij. hours equales of the clock. And I have
said.v. of these degrees maken a mile way, and three mile way maken an hour,
and every degree of this border conteyneth.iiij. mynutes, and every mynute.lx.
seco^des. Now have I told the twyse and for the more declaracion.

Of the three princypall cercles.
THe plate under the reete is dyscryued with three cercles, of which the leest is
cleped the cercle of Cancer, because that the heed of Cancer turns evermore
co^centryke upon the same cercle. In this half of Cancer is the greatest
declinacion northewarde of the son, and therefore is he yclypped Solsticium of
summer, which declinacion after Ptholome, is.xxiij. degrees and.l. minutes, as
well in Cancer as in Capricorn. This sign of Cancer is cleped the tropyke of
summer of tropos, that is to said ayenwarde. The mydle cercle in wydnesse of
this iij. is cleped ye cercle equinoctial, upon which turns ever more ye
heedes of Aries and Libra. And understand well, that evermore this cercle
equinoctial turns justly fro very Eest to very west, as I have showed in
the sphere solid. This same cercle is cleped also the wayer of the day, for
when ye sun is in the hedde of Aries and Libra, then been days and nyghtes
like of length in all the world, and therefore been these two signs called
equinoctis. And all that moves with in these heedes of Aries and Libra, is
ycalled northwarde, and all that meueth without these heedes, his meuynge is
cleped Southwarde, as for ye equinoctial, take keep of the latytudes North and
South, and forget it not By this cercle equinoctial ben consydred the xxiiij.
hours of the clock, for evermore the arysynge of.xv. degrees of the
equinoctial makes an hour equal of the clock. This equinoctial is cleped
the mydwaye of the first meuynge, or else of the sun. And note that the first
meuynge is cleped meuynge of the first mouable of the eight sphere, which
meuynge is fro Eest to weste, and again into Eest. Also it is cleped gyrdell
of the first meuyng, for it departs the first mouable, that is to said, the
sphere in two like parties eue^ dystante fro the poles of this world. The
wydest of these three cercles princypall is cleped ye cercle of Capricorn, and
turns evermore concentryke upon the same cercle. In the heed of this foresaid
Capricorn is ye greatest declinacyon Southwarde of the sun, and therefore it
is deped Solsticium of winter. This sign of Capricorn is also cleped the
tropyke of winter, for then begins ye sun to come again to us ward.

Of the almicanteras, the sygnet, and what is thine orizonte.
Upon this forsayde plate ben compased certain cercles, that hyghten
almicanteras: of which some of hem semen parfyte cercles, and some semen
imparfyte. The centure that stands amyddest the narowest cercle is cleped the
sygnet. And the netherest cercle, that deuydeth the two emysperies that is the
party of the heaven above the earth, and the party byneth. These almica^teras
ben compowned by two and two, all be it so that on diverse astrolabies some
almycanteras ben divided by one, and some by two, and some by three, after ye
quantyte of the Astrolabye. This foresaid signet is ymagined to be the very
point over the crown of thy heed, and also this sygnet is the very pole of
the orizonte in every region.

What ben thine azimutes.
From this sygnet (as it seems) there comen crooked stryke^, like to the claws
of a loppe, or else like to ye werk of a womans call in keruynge ouerthwarte
the almycanteras, and these same strykes or dyuysions ben cleped Azimutes, and
they deuyden the orizontes on thine Astrolabye in.xxiiij. dyuysions. And these
azimutes serve to know the costs of the fyrmament, and to other conclusyons,
as for to know the sygnet of the sun and of every sterre.

Of the.xij. hours of the planetes,
Next these azimutes, under the cercle of Ca^cer, ben the.xij. dyuysions
embolyfe, much like to the shap of the azimutes that shown the spaces of
hours of planetes.

Thy reete or else thy zodiake.
THy reete of thyn Astrolaby which is thy zodiake shapen in manner of a net or
of a loppe web, after ye old dyscripcyon, which you may turn up and down
as thy self lyketh, conteyneth certain no^bre of sterres fyxe, with her
longitudes and latitudes determinate, if so be that the maker have not erred.
The names of the sterres ben written in the margin of thy reete there they sit,
of the which sterres the small point is cleped the centure. And understand,
that all the sterres syttyng within the zodiake of thine astrolabye, been
cleped sterres of the north, for they arysen by the north eest line, and all ye
remnaunt fyxes out of the zodiake, ben ycleped sterres of the southe, but I
say not that they arysen all by the south eest line, witness of Aldebera^ and
also Algomysa. Generally understand this rule, that thylke sterres that been
cleped sterres of ye north, arysen rather the^ the degree of her longitude, and
all the sterres of the south arysen after the degree of her longitude, that is
to said, sterres in thine astrolabye. The measure of longitude of sterres
ytaken in the line ecliptyke of heaven, under ye which line when that the sun
and the moon ben line right, else in the superfycie of this line, then is the
eclyps of the sun or of the moon, as I shall declare and eke the cause why:
but sothlye the eclyptike line of thy zodyake is the vtterest bordure of ye
zodiake there thy degrees been marked. The zodiake of thy astrolaby is shapen
as a compace, which that conteyneth a large bread, as after the quantyte of thy
astrolabye, in ensemple that the zodyake of heaven is ymagyned to be a
superfycyes, containing the latitude of 12 signs, where as all the remnaunt of
cercles in heaven ben ymagyned very lines wythouten any latytude a mids the
celestyall zodiake is ymagyned a line, which that is cleped ye eclyptyke line
under the which line is evermore the way of the sun. Thus ben there 6
degrees of the zodiake of that one side of the line, and 6 degrees on that
other. The zodiake is divided in 12 princypall deuysyons, that departen the 12
signs, and for ye straytnesse of thine astrolabye, then is every small
dyuisyon in a sign yparted by two degrees and two, I mean degrees containing
60 mynutes and this foresaid heuenysh zodiake is cleped the cercle of the
signs, or the cercle of beestes. For zodiake in language of greek sowneth
beestes in laten tongue, and in the zodiake ben the 22 signs that have names of
beestes, because when the sun enters in any of the signs, he takes the
property of such beestes, or else for that the sterres that been there ben
fired ben disposed in sign of beestes or shape like beestes, or else when the
planettes ben under the signs they tra^smue us by her influences, operacions,
and effects, like to operacions of beestes: And understand also, that when an
hot planet comes in to an hot sign, tha^ enters his hete, and if a planet
be cold, than amenuseth his coldenesse, because of the hot sign: And by
this conclusyon may thou taken ensample in all signs, be they moiste or dry,
mouable or fyxe, reckenynge the qualyte of the planettes as I first said. And
euerych of these 12 signs has respect to a certain parcel of the body of a
man, and has it in governance: as Aries has thine heed, and Taurus thy neck
and thy throat, Gemini thine arm holes and thine arms, and so forth, as
shall be showed more plainly in the fyfth party of this treatise. The zodiake
the which is party of the eight sphere, ouerkerueth the equinoctial, and he
ouerkerueth him again in even parts, and that one half declyneth southwarde,
and that other northwarde, as plainly declares the treatise of the sphere.

The labell.
Then haste thou a labell that is shapen like a rule, save that it is straight
and has no plates on either end, but with the small point of the forsayde
labell shalt thou calcule the equacions in ye bordure of thine Astrolabye as
by thine almury.

The almury, the deutycle of Capricorn, or else the calculere.
Thine almury is cleped the de^tycle of Capricorn, or else the calculere, this
same almury set fyxe in the heed of Capricorn, and it serves of many a
necessary conclusion in equacion of things, as shall be showed.

Here begin the conclusyons of thine Astrolabye to find the degree in the
which the sun is day by day, after his course about.
Reckon and know which is the day of the month, and lay thy rule upon the
same day, and then woll the very point of thy rule verily sytten on the
bordure upon the degree of the son. Ensample as thus. The year of our lord
1391 ye 12 day of March at myddaye, I would know the degree of the sun, I
sought in the backhalf of mine Astrolabye, and found the cercle of the days
the which I knew by the names of the months written under the same cerkle:
tho laid I my rule over the foresaid day, and found the point of my rule in
the border upon the first degree of Aries, a little within the degree: and thus
knew I this conclusyon. Another day I would know ye degree of my sun, and
this was at mydday in the 13 day of Decembre, I found the day of the month
in manner as I said: tho laid I my rule upon the foresaid 13 day, and found
the point of my rule upon the first degree of Capricorn, a little within the
degree, and then had I of this conclusion the very experience.

To know the altytude of the sun either of celestial bodies.
PVt the ring of thine Astrolabye up on thy right thombe, and turn thy lift
side again the light of ye sun and remeue thy rule up and down till the
stream of the sun shine through both holes of the rule: Look then how many
degrees this rule is areysed fro the little cross upon the rest line, and take
there the altytude of thy sun: and in this same wise may thou know by
night ye altytude of ye moon or of the bright sterres. This chapter is so
general ever in one yt there needs no more declaracion, but forget it not.

To know the degree of the sun and of thy zodiake, by the day in the
backsyde of thine Astrolabye.
Then if thou will wete the reckoning to know which is the day in thy
calender of the month that thou art in, lay thine Astrolabye, that is to
say the allydatha, upon the day in the calender of thine Astrolabye, and he
shall show the thy degree of the sun.

To know every time of the day by light of the sun, and every time of the
night by the sterres fyxe, and eke to know by night or by day the gree of the
sign that ascends on the eest orizont, which is cleped comenly ascendent.
TAke the altytude of the sun when the list, as I have said and set the degree
of the sun (in case that it be before the myddle of the day) among thine
Almicanteras on the eest side of thine astrolabye: and if it be after the mydle
of the day, set the degree of the sun upon the west side. Take this manner of
setting for a general rule ones for ever. And when thou have ysette ye degree
of the sun upon as many almyca^teras of heyght as was the sun, taken by thy
rule, lay over thy label upon the degree of the sun, and then woll the point
of the labell sytten in the bordure upon the very tide of the day. Ensample of
this. The year of our lord 1391 the 12 day of March, I would know the tide
of the day, I took the altitude of my sun, and found that it was 25
degrees, and 30 mynutes of heyght of ye bordure in the backsyde, tho turned I
mine astrolabye, and because it was before myddaye I turned my reete, and set
the degree of the sun, that is to say, the first degree of Aries in the right
side in mine astrolabye, upon the 25 degree and 30 mynutes of heyght, among my
almycanteras: Tho laid I my labell upon the degree of my sun, and found the
point of my labell in the bordure on the capitale letter, that is cleped an X.
Tho reckened I all the capital letters fro ye line of mydnyght unto the
foresaid letter X. and found it was 9 of the clock of the day. Tho looked I
over my eest orizont and found there the 12 degree of Geminius asce^dynge,
which that I took for mine ascende^t and in this wise had I the experience for
evermore in which manner I should know ye tide of the day, and eke mine
ascende^t. Tho would I wete that same night following the hour of the night,
and wrought in this wise: among an heap of sterres it lyked me to take the
altytude of the fair white sterre that is cleaped the Alhabor, and found her
sitting on the weste side of the line of mydde day 18 degrees of heyght, taken
by my rule on the backsyde. Tho set I the ce^ture of this alhabor upon 18
degrees among my almycanteras upon the westsyde, because that he was found
upon the weste side: Tho laid I my label over the degree of the sun, that
was dyscended under the weste orizont, and reckened all the letters capitalles
fro the line of myddaye unto ye point of my labell in the bordure, and found
that it was after noone, passed 7 of the clock the space of 11 degrees. Tho
looked I down upon my eest orizonte, and found there 20 degrees of Libra
ascendyng whom I took for mine ascendent, and thus learned ones for ever, to
know in which manner I should come to the hour of the night and to mine
ascendent, as verily as may be taken by so small an instrument. But nathelesse
this rule in general will I warn the for ever: Ne make thou never none
ascende^t at noone of the day. Take a just ascendent of thine Astrolabye, and
have set iustlye a clock, when any celestial body, by the which thou wenest
govern thilke things, ben nigh the southe line: for trust well, when ye sun
is nere the meridional line, the degree of the sun remeueth so long
concentryke upon thine almycanteras, that sothely thou shalt err fro the
just ascendent. The same conclusyon say I by my centure of my sterre fyxe by
the night, and moreover by experience I wot well that fro our orizonte fro
eleven of the clock unto one in taking of the just ascendent in a portatyfe
astrolabye, it is to hard to know, I mean from eleven of ye clock before
noone, till one of the clock next following: and for the more declaracion lo
here thy figure next after this rule that follows

To know the degree of the sun in thy zodiake by the days in the backsyde
of thine Astrolabye.
Then thou wolte weten to reckon and know which is the day of the month that
thou art in, and lay the rule of thy Astrolabye, that is to say the
allidatha upon the day in the calender of thine astrolaby, and he shall show
the thy degree of the sun.

Special declaracion of the ascendent.
THe ascendent sothly, is as well in all natiuites as in questions, and as in
elections often times is a thing, which that these astrologiens greatly
obseruen, wherefore me seems convenient, sens I speak of the ascendent, to make
of it a special declaracion. The ascendent sothly to take it at the largest,
is thylke degree that ascends at any of these foresaid times on ye eest
orizont: and therefore, if that any planet ascend at thilke same time in the
forsaid same gre of his lo^gitude, me^ say yt the ylkeplanet is in horoscopo,
but sothly ye house of ye ascendent, that is to say, ye first house or theest
angle, is a thing more broad and large, for after the statutes of
astrologiens, what celestial body that is 5 degrees above thylke degree that
ascends on the orizont, or with in that nombre, that is to said nere the
degree that ascends, yet recke^ they thylke planette in the ascendent, and
what planet that is under thylke degree that ascends the space of 15 degrees,
yet said they that planette is like to him that is the hour of the ascende^t.
But sothly if he pass the bounds of the for said spaces above or byneth, they
said that thylke planette is falling fro the ascendent: yet saine these
astrologiens that the ascende^t and eke the lord of the ascendent, may be
shape^ for to be fortunate or unfortunate: as thus A fortunate ascendent clepen
they when that no wicked planette of Saturn or Mars, or else the tail of the
dragon is in the house of the ascendent, ne that no wicked planette have no
aspecte of enemyte upon the ascende^t but they woll cast yt they have fortunate
planette in her ascendent, and yet in his felicite, and then say they that it
is well. Furthermore they said that fortune of an ascendent is the contrary of
these foresaid things. The Lord of the ascendent said they, that he is
fortunate when he is in good place for the ascendent, and eke the lord of the
ascendent is in an angle or in a succede^t where he is in his dygnite, and
conforted with frendely aspectes received, and eke he that may se the
asce^dent not retrograde ne combuste, ne joined with no shrewe in the same
sign, ne that he be nor in his dyscencion, ne reigned with no planette in his
dyscencions, ne have upon him none aspecte unfortunate, and then they said
that he is well. Nathelesse these been obseruaunces of Judicial matter and
rytes of paynyms, in which my spirit has no faith ne knowing of her
horuscopum, for they said that every sign is departed in 3 even parts, by
10 degrees and thylke porcyon they clepen a face. And although a planette have
a latytude fro ye eclyptyke, yet said somfolke so that the planette arise in
that same sign, with any degree of the foresaid face, in which his longitude is
rekened. And yet is ye planet in horoscopo be in natiuitees or in election.

To know the very equacion of the degrees of the sun, if it so be that it
fall betwyxe to almicanteras.
FOr as much as the almicanteras of thine Astrolaby ben compouned by two and
two, where as some almycanteras in sondrye astrolabyes ben co^powned by one or
else by two, it is necessary to thy lernyng, to teache ye first to know and
wyrch with thine instrument: wherefore when yt the degree of ye sun falls between
two almyca^teras or else if thyn almyca^teras ben graue^ with over great a point
of a co^pace, for both these things may cause error as well in knowing of ye
tide of ye day as of the very ascendent. Thou must werken in this wise: set
the degree of the sun upon the higher almycanteras as of both, and wait
well where thy almurye touches the bordure, and set there a prycke of ynke,
set adowne again the degree of the son upon the nether almycanteras of
both, and set there another prycke: remeue then thy almurye in the bordure
even amyddes both pryckes, and this woll leaden iustlye the degree of ye sun
to sytte between both ye almycanteras in his right place. Lay then the label
on the degree of the sun, and find in the bordure the very tide of the day
or of the night. And also verily shalt thou find upon thy cest orizont thy
ascendent.

To know the spring of the dawning and the end of the euenyng, the which
ben cleped the two crepusculis.
Set the nadyre of thy su^ne upon 1^ degrees of heyght among thine
almycanteras on the weste side, and lay thy labell on the degree of the sun,
and then shall the point of the labell show the spring of the day: also
set the nadyre of the sun upon the 18 degrees of the heyght among thine
almycanteras on the eest side, and lay over thy labell upon ye degree of the
sun, and with the point of thy labell find in the bordure the end of thine
evening, that is very night. The nadyre of the sun is thilk degree that is
opposyte to the degree of the sun in the.320. sign, as thus. Every degree
of Aries by order, is nadyre to every degree of Libra by order, and Taurus to
Scorpion, Gemini to Sagittarius, Ca^cer to Capricorn, Leo to Aquary, Virgo to
Pisces. And if any degree in thy zodyake be dark, his nadyre shall declare him.

To know the arche of the day, that some folk callen the day artifyciall, fro
the sun arysynge till it go down.
SEt the degree of the sun upon thine Eest orizonte, and lay thy labell on
the degree of the sun and at the point of thy labell in the bordure set a
prycke: turn than thy reet about, till the degree of the sun sit upon the west
orizont, and lay the labell upon the same degree of the sun, and at ye point
of the labell set an other prycke. Reckon than the quantity of time in the
bordur betwixt both pryckes, and take there thine arche of thy day: the
remnaunte of the bordure under the orizonte, is the arche of the night. Thus
may thou reken both arches of every portion where that thou lykest, and by
this manner of weckynge may thou se how long that any star fyxe dwells
about the earth, fro the time that he ryseth till he go to rest. But the day
naturell, that is to said.24. hours is the revolution of the equinoctial,
with as much party of the zodyake, as the Sun of his propre moving passes
in the mean while.

To turn the hours inequalles, and the hours equalles.
KNow the nombre of the degrees in the hours inequalles, and depart hem
by.15. and take there thine hours equalles.

To know the quantity of the day vulgar, that is to say, fro spring of the
day unto the very night.
KNow thy quantity of thy coepusclys, as I have it taught in the chapter
before, and add hem to the arche of the day artificial, and take there thy
space of all the hole day vulgar unto the very night. In the same manner
may thou work to know the vulgar night.

To know the hours inequalles by day
Understand well, that these hours inequalles ben cleped hours of the
planetes: and understand well that sometime ben they longer by day than they be
by night, and sometime contrary. But understand thou well, that evermore
generally the hours inequall of the day, with the hours inequall of the
night, conteyneth.30. degrees of the bordure, the which bordure is evermore
answeryng to the degrees of ye equinoctial, wherefore depart the arche of the
day artificyall in.12. and take there the quantity of the hour inequall by
day, and if thou abate the quantity of the hour inequall by day out of.360.
degrees, than shall the remnaunt that leaves, perform the hour inequall by
night.

To know the quantity of hours equalles.
THe quantities of hours equalles, that is to said, the hours of the clock,
ben departed by.15. degrees all ready in the bordure of thy Astrolabye, as
well by night as by day generally for evermore. what needs anymore
declaracyon? wherefore when the list to know how many hours of the clock
been passed, or any part of any of these hours ben to come^ fro such a time
to such a time, by day or by night, know the degree of thy sun, and lay
thy labell on it: than turn thy reete about jointly with thy labell, and
with the point of it reken in the bordre fro the Sun arysyng into the same
place there thou desyrest by day as by night.

This conclusion wol I declare in the fourth party of the last chapter of this
treatise, so openly that there shall lack no word that needs declaracyon.

Specyal declaracion of the hours of the planetes.
Understand well that evermore from the arysynge of the Sun till it goo to
rest, the nadyre of the Sun shall show the hour of the planete, and fro
that time forward all the night, till the sun arise, than shall the very
degree of the sun show the hour of the planet. Ensample as thus. The.1^.
day of March fell upon a saturday peradventure, and at the rysynge of the
Sun I found the second degree of Aries syttyng upon mine eest orizont,
albeit was but little. Than found I the second degree of Libra nadyre of my
sun, discendyng on my west orizont, upon which west orizont every day
generally at the son arysyng enters the hour of any planet, under the
forsayde west orizonte, after the which planet the day bears his name, and
ends in the next stryke of the planete, under the forsayde weste orizonte:
and ever as the sun clymbeth upper and upper, so goes his nadyre downer and
downer, and echynge fro such strykes the hours of planetes, by order as they
sytten in heaven. The first hourre inequall of every saturdaye is Saturn,
and the second to Iupyter, the third to Mars, the fourth to the Sun, the
fyfth to Venus, the syxt to Mercurius, the seventh to the moon, and than again
the eight to saturn, the nynth to Jupiter, the 10. to Mars the enleuenth to
the sun, the twelfth to venus. And now is my Sun gone to rest as for that
saturday, than shows the very degree of the sun the hour of Mercury, entryng
under my west orizonte at even. And next him succedeth the moon, and so forth
by order planet after planet, in hour after hour all the night long till the
sun arise. Now ryseth the Sun the sundaye, by the morrow, and the nadyre of
the sun upon the west orizont, shows me the entryng of ye hour of the
foresaid sun. And in this manner succedeth planet under planet, fro Saturn
unto the moon, and from the moon up again to Saturn, hour after hour
generally: and thus know I this conclusyon.

To know with which degree of the zodiake any star fyxe in thine Astrolaby
aryseth upon the Eest orizont, although the orizont be in an other sign.
SEt the centure of the star upon the Eest orizonte, and look what degree of
any sign that sytteth upon the same orizont at the same time: and understand
well, that with the same degree aryseth the same star. And this marvelous
arysyng with a strong degree in an other sign, is because that the latitude
of the star fyxe is either North or South fro the equinoctial. But sothly,
the latitudes of planetes ben comenly reckened fro the eclyptyke, because that
none of hem declineth but few degrees out fro the bread of the zodyake. And
take good keep of this chapter of arysyng of celestial bodies, for there
trusts well, that neither moon neither star in our ambolyfe orizont, that
aryseth with the same degree of his longitude, save in one case, and that is
when they have no longitude fro the eclyptyke line. But nevertheless sometime
is eueryche of these planettes under the same line.

To know the declinacyon of every degree in the zodiake fro the equinoctial
cer^^e.
SEt the degree of any sign upon the line meridional, and reckon his altitude
in the almycanteras fro the Eest orizont up to ye same degree set in the
foresaid line, and set there a prycke* Turn up than thy reet, and set the
heed of Aries or Libra in the same meridionall line, and set there an other
prycke. And when that is done, consydre the altytudes of hem both: for sothly
the difference of thylke altitude is the declynacyon of thylke degree fro the
equinoctial. And if it so be that thylke degree be Northwarde fro the
equinoctial, than is his declinacyon North, and if it be southward than is it
South.

To know for what latitude in any regyon the almycanteras in my tables ben
compowned.
REken how many degrees of almicanteras in the meridionall line, be from the
cercle equinoctial unto the sygnet, or else from the pole artike unto the north
orizonte, and for so great a latitude or so small a latitude, is the table
compowned.

To know the latitude of the sun in the mids of the day, that is cleped
the altitude meridian.
SEt the degree of thy sun upon the line meridionall, and reken how many
degrees of almicantras ben betwyxt thine eest orizont, and the degree of thy
sun and take there thine altitude meridian, that is to said, ye highest
degree of the sun as for that day. So may thou know in the same line the
highest line that any star fyxe clymbeth by night, this is to sayn, that
when any star fyxe is passed the line meridional, than begins it to
discende, and so does the sun.

To know the degree of the Sun by the reet for a manner coriouste.
Seek busily with thy rule, ye highest of the sun in the mids of the day,
turn than thine astrolaby, and with a pryck of ynke mark the nombre of the same
altitude in the line meridionall. Turn than thy reet about till thou find a
degree of thy zodiake according with the prycke, this is to said, syttyng on
the prycke, and in soth thou shall find but 2. degrees in all the zodiake of
that condition And yet thylke.2. degrees ben in diverse signs. Than may thou
lightly by the seasen of the year know the sign in which is the sun.

To know which day is like to other in length throughout the year.
Look which degrees ben ylyke from the heedes of Cancer and Capricorn, and
look when the sun is in any of thilk degrees than ben the days like of
length that is to said, that as long is that day in the month, as was such
a day in such a month there varyeth but little. Also if thou take two days
naturelles in the year ylyke far from either points of the equinoctial in
the opposyte parties, than as long is the day artificial, on that one day as
on that other: and eke the contrary.

This chapter is a manner declaracion to conclusyons that follows.
Understand well, that thy zodiake is departed into half cercles, from the
heed of Capricorn unto ye heed of Cancer, and ayenwarde from the heed of
Cancer unto the heed of Caprycorne. The heed of Caprycorne is the loweste
point, where as the sun goth in winter, and the heed of Cancer is ye highest
point, in which the Sun goes in Summer. And therefore understand well that
any two degrees that been ylyke far from any of these two heedes, trust well,
that thylke two degrees ben like declynacyon, be it Southwarde or Northwarde,
and the days of hem be like of length, and the nyghtes also, and shadows
ylyke, and the altitudes ylyke at myddaye for ever.

To know the very degree of any manner star strange after his latitude,
though he be indetermynate in thine astrolaby, sothly to the troth thus he
shall be known.
TAke the altytude of thy star when he is on the eest side of the line
meridional as nygh as thou may guess, and take an ascendent anon right by
some manner star fyxe which thou know, and forget not the altitude of the
first star ne thine ascendent.

And when that this is done, aspye dylygentlye when this same first star
passes any thing to the southwestwarde, and catch him anon right in the same
nombre of the altitude on the west side of this line meridionall, as he was
caught on the Eeste side, and take a new ascendent anon right by some manner
fyxe, the which that thou know, and forget not this second ascendent. And
when this is done, reken tha^ how many degrees ben betwixt the first ascende^t
and the second ascendent, and reken well ye mydle degree betwixt both
ascendentes, and set thylke mydle degree upon thine eest oryzont, and than look
what degree sit upon the line meridional and take there ye very degree of the
ecliptyke, in which the star stands for the time. For in the eclyptyke is
the longitude of a celestial body, rekened even fro ye half of the heed of
Aries unto the ends of Pisces, and his latitude reckened after the quantity of
his declination North or south toward the poles of this work. As thus: if it
be of the sun or any fyxe star, reckon this latitude or his declinacyon fro
the equinoctial cercle, and if it be of a planete, reken than the quantity of
his latitude from the ecliptike line, albeit so that from the equinoctial may
the declinacion or the latitude of any body celestial be rekened after the
sight North or South, and after the quantity of his declinacion. And yet so
many the latytude or the declinacion of any body celestial save only of the
sun, after his sight north or South. And after the quantity of his
declinacion be rekened from the ecliptike line, fro which line al planetes
sometime declyne North or South, save only the forsayde sun.

To know degrees of longitudes of fire sterres, after that they ben determinat
in thine astrolabye, if it so be that they ben truly set.
SEt ye center of the ster upon the line meridionall, and take keep of thy
zodyake, and look what degree of any sign sit upon the same line meridional at
the same time, and there the degree in which the star stands, and with the
same degree comes the same star unto the same line from the orizonte.

To know in special the latitude of our center, I mean after the altitude of
Oxenforde and the heyght of our pole.
Understand well, that as far is the heed of Aries or Librain the equinoctial
from our orizonte, as is the synet from the poole artyke, and as hye as the
pole artyke from the orizont, as the equinoctial is far from the synet, I
preue it thus by the latitude of Oxenforde, understand well that the heyght of
our pole artyk from our north orizont is.51. degres, and.5^. minutes, than is
the synet from the pole artyke ^1 degrees and.10. minutes, than is the
equinoctial from our synet.51. degrees and.5^. mynutes, than is our south
orizonte from our equinoctial.58. degrees and.10. mynutes. Understand well
this rekening also, forget not that the synet is.90. degrees of heyghte from
the orizont, and our equinoctial is.^^. degrees from our pole artyk. And this
short rule is soth, that the latitude of any planete in a regyon, is the
distaunce from the synete unto the equinoctial.

To prove the latitude of any place in a regyon by the press of the heyght of
the pole artyke in that same place.
IN some wynters night when the firmament is clear and thycke starred, wait a
time till that every sterre fyxe sit line right perpendiculer over the pole
artyke, and clepe that ster A. and wait an other sterre that sit line right
under A. and under the pole, and clepe that sterre F. and understand well that
F is not consydred but only to declare that A that sit ever on the pole. Take
than anon right the altitude of A from the orizont, and forget it not: let A
and F goo farewell, till against the dawning a great while, and come than
again, and abide till that A is even under the poole under F. for sothly than
will F sit over ye pole, take than eftsoon, the altitude of A, from the
orizont, and note as well the second altitude as ye first altitude. And wha^
that this is done, reken how many degrees yt the first altitude A exceded his
altitude, and take half the ilke porcio^ that is exceded and add it to his
second altitude, and take there the eleuacion of the poole, and eke the
altitude of thy regyon. For these two ben of one no^bre, that is to said, as
many degrees as thy pole is eleuate, so much is the latitude of thy regyon.
Ensample as thus: Parauenture the altitude of A, in the euenyng is.62. degrees
of heyght, than will the second altitude or the dawnyng be.21. that is to sayn
less than.92. that was his first altitude at even. Take than the half of.62,
and add it to.21. that was his second altitude, and than have thou the heyght
of thy pole, and the latitude of thy regyon. But understand well to preue this
conclusyon and many an other fair co^clusyon, thou may have a plomet
bangyng on a line higher than thine heed on a perch, and that line mote hang
even perpendiculer betwyxt the poole and thine eye, and than shall thou se if A
sit even over the pole and over F at even. And also if F sit even over the pole
and over A or day.

An other conclusyon to preue the heyght of the pole artyke from the orizont.
TAke any ster fire that ever desce^deth under the orizont in thylke region,
and co^sydre his highest altitude, and his lowen altitude from the orizont, and
make a nombre of these altitudes, take than and abate half ye nombre, and take
there the eleuacyon of the pole artyke in that same regyon, and for the more
declaracyon. etc.

An other conclusion to preue the latitude of a region that ye ben in.
Understand well that the latitude of any place in a regyon is verelye the
space betwixt the sign of hem that dwellen there, and the equinoctial cercie,
north or south, taking the measure in the meridionall line, as shows in the
almica^tras of thine astrolabye, and thylke space is as much as the pole
artyke is hye in ye same place from the orizont. And than is ye depressyon of
the pole artentyke beneth the orizo^t the same quantity of space, neither more
ne less, that if thou desire to know this latitude of the regyon, take the
altitude of the sun in the mydle of the day, when the sun is in the heed of
Aries or of Libra, for than moves the sun in the line equinoctial, and
abate the nombre of the same Suns altitude out of.90. degrees, and than is
the remnaunt of the nombre that leueth the altitude of the region, as thus. I
suppose that ye sun is thilke day at noone.38. degrees of heyght, abate
than.38. degrees out of.90. so leaves there.52. than is.52. degrees the
latitude, I say not this but for ensample. for well I wot the latitude of
Oxenforde is certain mynutes less. Now if it be so that the thinks to long
a tarying to abide till that the sun be in ye heed of Aries or of Libra, than
wait when that ye Sun is in any other degree of the zodiake and consydre the
degree of this declinacion be northwarde from the equinoctial, abate than from
the suns altitude at noone the nombre of his declinacion, and than haste thou
the highest of the heedes of Aries and Libra, as thus. My sun parauenture is
in the.10. degree of Leo almoost.56. of heyght at noone, and his declinacion is
almoost.18. degrees Northwarde from the equinoctial, abate than thylke.18.
degrees of declinacion out of the altitude at noone, than leaves.38. degrees,
^o there the heed of Aries or Libra, and thine equinoctial in that regyon.
Also if so be that the suns declynacyon be Southwarde from the equinoctial,
add than thylke declynacyon to the altitude of the sun at none, and take
there the heedes of Aries and Libra and thine equinoctial, abate than the
heyght of the equinoctial out of.90. degrees, and than leaves there.38.
degrees, that is the distaunce of the regyon from the equinoctial of any
sterre fyxe that thou know, and take the nether elongacion lengthen from the
same equinoctial line, and work after the manner aforesaid.

Declaracyon of the ascencion of signs, as well in cercle direct, as in
oblyque.
THe excelle^ce of ye sphere solyde among other noble co^clusio^s shows
manifest ye diverse asce^cio^s of signs in diverse places, as well in right
cercles as in embolyfe cercle These auctours written that thilke sign is cleped
of right ascencyon, with which the more part of the cercle equinoctial and
the less part of the zodyake ascends, and thilke sign ascends embolyfe,
with which the less of the zodiake equinoctial, and the more part of the
zodiake ascends, and ever mo the arche of the day and the arch of ye night is
there ylyke long, and the sun twyse every year passing through the signet
of her heed, and 2. summers and.2. wynters in a year have these foresaid
people, and the almycantras in her Astrolabye ben straight as a line, so has
showed in this figure. The vtilities to know the ascencyons of signs in the
right cercle is this. Trust well that be mediations of thylke ascencyons these
Astrologiens by her tables and her instruments known verily the ascencion of
every degree and mynute in all the zodiake in the embolyfe cercle, as shall be
showed. And note that this foresaid right oryzont that is ycleped orizo^te
rectum, deuideth the equinoctial into right angles, and embolyfe orizont where
as the poole is enhaunced upon the orizont, overcomes the equinoctial in
embolyfe angles.

This is the conclusyon to know the asce^cyons of signs in the right cercle,
that is circulus directus.
SEt the heed of what sign the list to know the ascending on the right cercle
upon the line meridionall, and wait where thine almury touches the bordure,
and set there a prycke, turn than thy rete westwarde, till the end of the
forsayde sign, set upon the meridionall line, and eft sons wayt where thine
almury touches ye bordure, and set there an other prycke. Reckon than the
nombres of degrees in the bordure betwyxt both pryckes, and take than the
ascencyon of the sign in the right cercle, and thus may thou work with
every porcyo^ of the zodyake.

To know the astencions of signs in the embolyfe cercle in every regyon, I
mean in circulo obliquo.
SEt the heed of the signs which as the list to know his ascencio^ upon the
eest orizonte, and wait where thine almurye touches ye bordure, and set there
a prycke, turn than thy reete upward till the end of the same sign, set
upon the eest orizonte, and wait eftsoon where as thine almury touches ye
bordure, and set there an other prycke, reken than the nombre of the degrees in
the bordure betwyxt both pryckes, and take there the ascencyon of the sign in
the embolyfe cercle. And understand well, that all the signs in the zodyake,
from the heed of Aries unto the end of Virgo, ben cleaped signs of the north
from the equinoctial, and these signs arysen betwyxt the very eest and the
very north in our orizonte generally for ever and all the signs from the heed
of Libra, unto the end of Pisces, ben cleped signs of the south fro the
equinoctial, and these signs arysen evermore betwyxte the very Eest and the
very South in our orizont, also every sign betwyxte the heed of Caprycorne
unto the end of Gemini arises in our orizont in less than two hours
equalles, and these same signs from the heed of Caprycorne unto the end of
Gemini ben called tortuous signs or crooked signs, for they risen embolife in
our orizont, and these crooked signs been obedient to the signs that been of
the right ascencion. These signs of the right ascencion ben from the heed of
Cancer unto the heed of sagitarye, and these signs arysen more vpryght than
does the other, and therefore they ben called soueraygne signs, and every of
hem arises in more space than in two hours, of which signs Gemini obeys to
Cancer, and Taurus to Leo, and Aries to Virgo, Pisces to Libra, Aquarius to
Scorpio, and Capricorn to Sagittarye, and thus evermore two signs that been
far from the heed of Capricorn obeys eueryche of hem to other.

To know justly the four quarters of the world, as eest, west, south and
north.
TAke the altitude of thy sun, when thou list, and note well the quarter of
the world, in which the sun is from the time by the asimutes, turn than
thine astrolaby and set the degree of the sun in ye almycantras of his
altytude, on thylke side that the sun standethe, as is in manner of taking of
hours, and ley thy labell on the degree of the sun, and reken how many
degrees of the sun ben between the line meridional and the point of thy
labell and note well the nombres. Turn than again thine astrolabye, and set
the point of thy great rule there thou take thine altytudes upon as many
degrees in his bordure from his meridionall, as was the point of thy labell
from the line merydyonall on the womb side. Take than thine astrolabye with
both hands sadly and slylye, and let the sun shine through both holes of
thy rule, and slylye in thylke shynynge ley thine astrolabye couche adoun even
upon a plain ground, and than will the meridional line of thine astrolabye be
even southe, and the Eest line will lie even Eest, and the weste line west, and
the North line North, so that thou work softely and auysely in the couchynge,
and thou have thus four quarters of the firmament. etc.

To know the altitude of planetes from the way of the sun, whether they
been North or south fro the way aforesaid.
Look wha^ a planete is on ye line meridionall, if that her altitude be of the
same height that is the degree of the sun for that day and than is the planet
in the verey way of the sun, and has no latitude. And if the altitude of
the planet be hyer tha^ the degree of the sun, than is the planette North
from the way of the sign Southe, a quantyte of latitude as shows by thine
Almicantras, and if the altitude be less tha^ the degree of the sun, than is
the planette Southe from the way of the sun, such a quantyte of latitude as
shows by thine almicantras. This is to feign from the way of the sun in
every place of the zodiake, for on the morrow the sun will be in another
degree.

For to know the sygnet for the arysyng of the sun, this is to said the
party of the orizonte in which the su^ne arises.
THou must first consider that the su^ne aryseth not in the verey Eest sygnet,
sometime by North Eest and sometime by South Eest, sothly the sun aryseth
evermore in the verey Eest in our orizonte, but if he be in the heed of Aryes
or Libra. Now is thine orizonte departed in to.24. parts of thy mynutes in
sygnyfycacyon of.24. parts of the world, though it be so that shypmen reken
all that parties.32. Tha^ is there no more but wait in the which mynute that
the sun enters at his arysynge, and take there the signet of the rysinge of
the sun.

The manner of division of thine astrolaby is thus enjoined, as in this case.
First it is divided in four places principally with the line that comes fro
the Eest to the weste, and than with another line that goth fro the South to
the North, than is it divided in small parties of mynutes, as Eest and Eest by
Southe, where that is the first mynute above ye eest line, and so forth fro
party to party till that thou come again to the Eest line. Thus thou might
understand the signet of every sterre in which party he aryseth.

To know in which party of the firmament is the conjunction.
Consider the time of the conjunction by the calendar, as thus: how many hours
that the conjunction is fro mydday of the day before, as shows the canon of
the calendar. Reken than that nombre in the bordure of thyn astrolaby, as thou
were wont to do in knowinge of the hours of the day or of ye night and lay
thy label over the degree of the sun than will the point of the labell sytte
upon the hour of the conjunction. Look than in which mynute the degree of the
sun sytteth, and in that party of the fyrmament is the conjunction.

To know the sygnet of the altitude of the sun.
THis is no more to say, but any time of the day take ye altitude of ye
su^ne, and by the mynutes in which he ascends thou might se in which party
of the firmamente he is, and in the same wise might thou se by night of any
sterre wheder he sit Eest, west, or South, or any part bytwixe, after ye name
of the minutes in which the sterre stands.

To know sothly the longitude of the moon or any planette that has no
latitude fro the time of the ecliptyke line.
TAke the altitude of the moon, and reken thine altitude up among thine
Almycantras on which side that the moon stands, and set there a prick.
Take than anon right upon the mones side the altitude of every sterre fix
that thou know, and set his circle upon his altitude among thine
almyca^tras, there the sterre is founden, wait than of which degree the
zodiake is, to which the prycke of the altitude of the moon, and there take
the degree in which the moon stands. This conclusion is verey sothe of the
sterres in thine astrolabye, and standen after the truth. Some treatise of
the astrolabye makes none exception whether ye moan have latitude or none, nor
whether side of the moon ye altitude of the sterre be found. And note if the
moon show her self by day, than may thou wortch ye same conclusion by the
su^ne as well as by the sterre fix.

This is the werchynge of the conclusyon to know whether any planet be
direct or retrograde.
TAke the altitude of any sterre that is cleped a planette and note it well,
and anon right take ye altitude of some sterre fix that thou know and note
it well also, and come again the third or the fourth night next following,
for tha^ thou shall perceive well the meuynge of the planette whether he meue
forward or bacwarde, and wait well than when the sterre fyxe is in the same
altitude that she was when thou took her first altitude of the foresaid
planette and note it well, for trust well if so be that the planette be in the
right side of the meridionall line, so that his second altitude be less than
the first altitude was, than is the planette direct, and if he be in the west
side in that condition, tha^ is he retrograde, and if so be that this planette
be in the Eest side when his altitude is take, so that the second altytude be
more than his first altitude, tha^ is he retrograde and if he be in the west
side of the line medidionall, than is he derecte but contrary mouynge of these
parties is the course of the moon, for sothly the moon moves the contrary
fro either planettes in her eclyptyke line, but in none other manner.

The conclusyon of equacyons of houses after the astrolabye.
Set the beginning of the degree yt ascends upon the end of the 3 hour
inequall, tha^ will the line of the second house sit upon the line of mydnyght,
remeue than the degree that ascends, and set him upon the end of the 10 hour
inequall, tha^ will the beginning of the 3 house sit upon the midnight line,
bring up again the same degree that ascends first, and set him upon the Eest
orizont, and tha^ will the beginning of the 4 house sit upon the mydnyght line.
Take than the nadere of the degree yt ascends first and set him upon the end
of the 2 hour inequall, and than will the beginning of the 5 house sit upon the
mydnyght line. Take than the nadere of the ascendente and set him upon the end
of the 4 hour inequal and than will the beginning of the 6 house sit upon the
mydnyghte line. The beginning of the 7 house is nadere of the ascendent and
the beginning of the 8 house is nadere of the second, and the beginning of the
9 house is nadere of the 3 and the beginning of the 10 house is nadere of the 4
and the beginning of the 11 house is nadere of the 5 and the beginning of the
12 house is nadere of the 6 house.

Another manner of equacyons of houses by the astrolabye.
TAke thine ascendent, and than thou have the 4 angles, for well thou wotest
that the apposyte is of thine ascendente, that is to say, the beginning of the
7 house sit upon the west orizonte, and the beginning of the 10 house upon the
line meridionall, and his opposite upon the line of mydnight, than lay thy
label upon the degree that ascends and reken than fro the point of thy labell
all the degrees in the bordure till that thou come to the meridionall line, and
depart al thylke degrees into 3 even parts, and take there the even porcyons
of 3 other houses for to lay thy labell over every of these 3 parties, and
tha^ thou might se by the label in the zodiake the beginning of these 3 houses
fro the ascendente, that is to say the 12 next above thine ascendent, and
than the 11 house and the 10 house upon the meridional line, as I first said
the same wise wyrtch fro the ascendent down to the line of mydnyght, and thus
thou have three houses, that is to say, the beginning of the second, the
third, and the fourth house: than is the nadyre of these three houses, the
beginning of these 3 houses that follows.

To find the line meridionall, to dwell fyxe in any certain place.
TAke a round plate of metal for warpinge the border the better, and make
thereupon a just compace a little within the bordure, and lay this round plate
upon an even ground, or some even stone, or on even stock fix in the
ground, and lay it even by a rule in the center of the compace, stycke an even
pynne or a wyre vpryghte, the smaller the better, and set thy pin or thy
wyre by a plo^me rules end vpryght even, and let this pynne be no longer than
a quarter, of thy diameter of the compace fro the pynne, and wait besyly
about 10 or 11 of the clock when the sun shows, when the shadow of the
pynne enters any thing with the cercle of the compace one here bread, and
make there a prick with ynke, abide than still waiting on the sun after one
of the clock, till that the shadow of the pynne or of the wyre pass any
thing out of the cercle or compace, be it never so little, and set there a
prick. Take tha^ a compace and measure even the middle bytwyxe both the
pryckes, and set there a prycke: take than a rule and draw a stryke even fro
the pynne unto the myddle prick, and take there the line meridional for
evermore, as in the same place. And if thou draw a cross overthwart the
compace justly over the line meridionall, than haste thou Eest and west, and
per co^sequens the oppositife, that is south and North.

Description of the meridionall line, and of the longitudes and latitudes of
cities and towns as well as of clymates.
This line meridional is but a manner description of a line ymagined, that
passes upon ye poles of the world, and by the sygnet of our heed: and it is
cleped the sygnette, for in what place that any man is at any time of the year
when the su^ne by meuyng of the firmament comes to his meridionall place, than
is it the verey myddaye that we clepe noone, and therefore it is cleaped the
line of myddaye. Than take heed that evermore of two cities or of towns, of
which the one approaches nerer the Eest than does the other town, trust
well that thylke two twones have diverse meridians. Take keep also yt the arche
of the equinoctial, that is contained and bounded between the two meridians, is
cleped ye lo^gitude of the town. And if so be that two towns have meridian
like, or one meridian, than is the distaunce of hem both like far: and in
this manner they change not her meridian, but sothly they change her
almicanteras for the haunsynge of the poole and the distaunce of the sun. The
longitude of a clymate may be cleaped the space of the earth, fro the beginning
of the first clymate unto the last end of the same clymate, even direct
against the pole artike, thus say some auctours. And some clerks say, that if
men cleape the latitude of a center the arch meridian, that is contained or
intercepte betwixt the sygnette and the equinoctial, than they say that the
distaunce fro the equinoctial unto the end of the clymate, even ayenste the
poole artyke, is the longitude of the clymate for South.

To know with what degree of the zodiake that any planette ascends on the
orizont, where his latitude be North or South.
Know by thine almynake the degree of the eclyptike of any sign, in which
that the planette is rekened for to be and that is cleped the degree of his
longitude. And know also the degree of his latitude fro the eclyptyke, North
or southe, and by these ensamples following in especial, thou may wirch with
every sign of the zodiake. The longitude perauenture of Venus or of an other
planet was of Capricorn, and the latitude of him was northwarde.

Degrees fro the ecliptyke line, than took I a subtyl compace, and cleped the
one point of my compace A, and that other F, tha^ took I the point of A, and
set it in the celyptyke line, and my zodiake in the degree of the longitude of
heedes, that is to say, in the heed of Capricorn, and than set I the point
of F, upward in the same sign, because that the altitude was North, upon the
latitude of Venus, yt is to say, in the degree fro the heed of Capricorn, and
thus have I the degrees betwyxe my two pricks, than laid I down softly my
compace, and set the degree of ye longitude upon the orizont, tha^ took I and
waxed my labell in manner of a pair of tables, to receive distinctly ye prick
of my compace, than took I this foresaid labell, and laid it fix over the
degree of my longitude, tha^ took I up my compace and the point of A, in ye
wax of my label, as I could guess over the eclyptike line in the end of the
longitude, I set the point over endelonge on the labell, upon the space of
the latytude inward and on the zodiake, yt is to say northward fro the
ecliptyke: Tha^ laid I down any compace, and looked well in the way upon the
eclyptyke of A, and F, than turned I my reete till that the prick of F, sat
upon the orizont: Than saw I well that the body of Venus in her latytude of
degrees septe^trionals, ascends in the end of degree fro the heed of
Capricorn. And note that in this manner thou myghtest werche with any latitude
septemerionall in all signs: But sothly the latitude meridional of a planet in
Capricorn may not be take, because of the little space betwyxt the eclyptyke
and the bordure of the astrolabye, and sykerlye in all other signs it may be
take. Also the degree perauenture of Jupiter or of any other planet was in the
first degree of Pisces in longitude, and his latitude was degrees meridionall.
Than took I the point of A, and set it in the first degree of Pisces on the
ecliptyke, than set I the point downwarde of F, in the same sign, because
that the latiude was South degrees, that is to say, fro the heed of Pisces,
and thus have I degrees betwyxe both pricks. Than set I the degree of the
longitude upon the orizont, than took I my labell and laid him fix upon the
degree of longitude, than set I the point of A, on my labell eue^ over the
ecliptyke line in the end of the degree of the longitude, and I set the
point of F, endelonge on my label the space of degrees of the latitude out
ward fro the zodiake, that is to say, southwarde fro the ecliptyke toward the
bordure and than turned I my reete till the point of F, sat upon the
orizont, than saw I well that the body of Jupiter in his latytude of degrees
meridionall, ascends with the degree of Pisces in horescopo. And in this manner
thou may wyrch with any latitude as I said first, save in capricorn. And
thou will plye this craft with the arysinge of the moon, look thou reckon
well the course of hour by hour, for she dwells in a degree of her
longitude but a little while, as thou woste well: but nevertheless, if thou
legen well her very menyng by the tables, or after her course hour by hour,
thou shall do well enough.

Vmbra recta.
IF thou wylt wyrche with Vmbra recta, if thou might come to the base of the
tower, in this manner shall thou wyrch: Take the altitude of the tower with both
hooles, so that the rule lie eue^ on a point. Ensample, as thus. I se him
through the point of 4, than mete I ye space betwyxe me and the toure, and I
find it 20 foot, than behold I how 4 is to 12, and I find it is the third
part of 12. Right so the space betwixe the and the toure is the third part
of the altitude of the toure: tha^ thryse 20 foot is the highest of the toure,
with the addicion of thine own body fro thine eye. If the rule fall on 5, than
is 5 times 12 the highest of the toure.

Vmbra versa.
IF thou may not come to the base of the toure, and thou fix him through the
nombre of 1, set there a prick at thy foot, tha^ go nere the toure, and se
him through at the point of 2, and set there another prycke, and than behold
how 1 has him to 12, and thou shall find that he has him 12 sythes, than
behold how 2 have him to 12, and thou shall find it 6 sythes, and therefore the
space betwixe 2 pryckes is 6 times thine altitude. And note that at the first
altitude of 1 thou set a prycke, and afterward when thou see him through
at 2, there you set a prycke tha^ thou fyndest between 30 foot, than thou
shalt find that 10 is the 8 part of 80, than is a foot the altytude of the
toure, but if it fall upon another point, as thus. It falls on 6 at the
second taking it, when it falls on 4, than shalt thou find that 6 is the
second part of 12, and 4 is the third part of 12 by the third part, yt is
to say, the space betwyxe 2 pryckes, twyse the heyght of the toure, and if the
difference were 3, tha^ would it be three times the height. Et sic de singulis
Another manner wyrchyng by vmbra recta. If thou may not come by the base of
the toure, wyrche in this wise: Set thy rule upon 1 till thou se the altitude,
and set at thy foot a prick, and than set thy rule upon 2, and so do in the
same manner: than look what is the difference betwyxe 1 and 2, and thou shalt
find that it is one. Than mesure that space betwyxe the two pryckes, and that
is the 12 part of the altitude of the toure, and so of al other. 7

Vmbra recta.
IF thy rule fall upon the 8 point on the right shadow, tha^ make the figure
of 8 than look how much space of fete is betwyxe the and the toure, and
multiply that by 12, and when thou have multyplyed it by the same nombre, than
deuyde it by the nombre of 8, and keep the residewe, and add thereto thy heyght
unto thine eye, to the residue, and that shall be the very heyght of the toure.
And thus may thou worche on the same side from one to 12. etc. Vmbra recta.

Another manner of working upon the same side. Look upon what point thy rule
falls wha^ thou see the top of the tour through the two holes, and tha^
mete the space from thy foot to the base of the toure, and right as the
nombre of the point has him self to 12, right so the mesure betwyxe the
and the toure, has him self to the heyght of the same tour. Ensample as thus.
I set case thy rule fall upon 8, than is 8 two third parts of 12, so is the
space two third parts of the toure.

Vmbra versa.
TO know the heyghte of the points of Vmbra versa. If thy rule fall upon 3
wha^ thou see the top of the tour, set a prick there thy foot sto^deth and
go nere till thou may se the same top at the point of 4, and set there
another prycke, than mete how many foot is betwyxe the two pryckes, and the
heyght up to thine eye, and that shall be the heyght of the tour. And note that
three is the 4 part of 12, and 4 is the 3 part of 12. Now passrth 4 the no^bre
of 3 by distaunce of 1, therefore the same space with thy heyght to thine eye,
is the height of the toure. And if it were so that there were two or three
distaunces in the nombres, so should the mesure betwixt the pryckes betwyse or
thrysethe heyght of the toure.

Vmbra recta.
TO know the heyght if thou may not come to the base of the thing, set
thy rule upon what point thou will, so that thou may se the top of the
thing through the two holes, and make a mark there as thy foot sto^deth, and
go nere or farther, till thou may se it through another point, and make there
another mark, and look what difference is betwixt the two points in the
scale, and right as that difference has him to 12, right so the spaces
betwyxt the two marks, has him to the heyght of the thing. Ensample. I set
the ease yt thou see it through at the point of 4, and after at the point of
3. Now passes the nombre of 4 the nombre of 3 the distaunce of 1, and right as
this difference of one has him self to 12, right so the mesure betwixt both
the marks, has him to the heyght of the same thing, putting thereto the
height of thy self to thine eye. And thus may thou work from 1 to 12.

Vmbra versa.
FVrthermore, if thou will know in vmbra versa, by the craft of vmbra recta,
I suppose to take thine altitude at the point of 4 and makeste a mark, and
than thou go nere till thou haste it at the point of 3 and make there
another mark than must thou divide 144 by 4, the nombre that comes thereof
shall be 36, and after deuyde 144 by 3, and the no^bre yt comes thereof is 48,
tha^ look what difference is betwixt 36 and 48, and that shall thou find 12,
and right as 12 has him to 12, so the space betwixt the two pryckes, has him
to the altitude of the thing.

Here ends the conclusions of the Astrolabie.
The complaynt of the black knight.
IN May when Flora the fresh lusty Queen
The soil has cladde, in grene, reed, and whyghte
And Phoebus began to shed his stremes shene
Amydde the bulle, with all the beams bryghte
And Lucifer, to chase away the night
Again the morrow our orizont has take
To bid al lovers out of her sleep awake
And hertes heavy for to comfort
From dreryheed, of heavy nyghtes sorrow
Nature bade hem rise, and hem disporte
Again the goodly glad gray morrow
And hope also, with saint Johan to borow
Bade in dispire of danger and despair
For to take the wholesome lusty air
And with a syghe I began for to abreyde
Out of my slomber, and suddenly up sterte
As he (alas) that nyghe for sorrow deyde
My syckenesse sat aye so nigh my heart
But for to find socour of my smerte
Or at the least some release of my pain
That me so sore halte in every vein
I rose anon, and thought I would gone
Into the wodde, to here the birds sing
when that the mysty vapoure was agone
And clear and fair was the moronyng
The dew also like silver in shynyng
Upon the leaves, as any baume sweet
Till fyry Tytan with his persaunt hete
Had dried up the lusty lycour new
Upon the herbs in the grene mede
And that the flowers of many diverse hew
Upon her stalks gonne for to sprede
And for to splaye out her leaves in bread
Again the sun, gold burned in his spear
That down to hem cast he his beams clear
And by a river forth I began costey
Of water clear, as byrell or crystal
Till at the last I found a little wey
Toward a park, enclosed with a wall
In compace round, and by a gate small
who so that would, freely might gone
In to this park, walled with grene stone
And in I went to here the birds song
which on the branches, both in plain and vale
So loud sange, that all the wood ronge
like as it should shyuer in pieces small
And as me thought, that the nyghtyngale
with so great might, her voice began out wrest
Right as her heart for love would breast
The soil was plain, smothe, and wonder soft
All ouersprad with tappettes that Nature
Had made her self: covered eke alofte
with bows grene, the flowers for to cure
That in her beautye they may long endure
From all assaute of Phoebus fervent fere
which in his sphere so hot shone and clear
The air attempre, and the smoth wind
Of zepherus, among the blosomes white
So wholesome was, and so norishing by kind
That small buddes, and round blosomes lyte
In manner began of her brethe delight
To give us hope there fruit shall take
Against Autumpne ready for to shake
I saw the Daphene closed under rynde
Grene Laurer, and the wholesome Pyne
The Myrre also, that wepeth ever of kind
The Cedres hye, vpryght as a line
The Fylberte eke, that low does enclyne
Her bows grene, to the earth adoun
Unto her knight called Demophoun
There saw I eke the fresh hauthorne
In white motley, that so swote does smell
Ash, fyrre, and oak, with many a young acorne
And many a tree mo then I can tell
And me beforne I saw a little well
That had his course, as I began behold
Under an hill, with quycke streams cold
The gravel gold, the water pure as glass
The banks round, the well enuyronynge
And soft as velvet the young grass
That thereupon lustely came spryngynge
The suit of trees about compasynge
Her shado we cast, closyng the well r^
And all the herbs growyng on the g^
The water was so wholesome, and so vert^
Through might of herbs growyng bes^
Not like the well where as Narcisu^
Yslayne was, through vengeance of (...)
where so covertly he did hyde
The grain of death upon each brinke
That death mote follow, who ye ever d^
Ne like the pytte of the Pegace
Under Pernaso where poets slepte
Nor like the well of pure chastyte
which that Diane with her nymphs kept
when she naked in to the water lepte
That slow Acteon with her hondes fell
Only for he came so nyghe the well
But this well that I here reherce
So wholesome was, that it would aswag^
Bollen hertes, and the venym peerce
Of pensyfeheed, with all the cruel rage
And ouermore refesshe the vysage
Of hem that were in any werynesse
Of great labor, or fallen in distress
And I that had through danger and dis^
So dry a thrust, thought I would assa^
To taste a draught of this well or t^
My bitter langour if it might alaye
And on the bank anon down I lay
And with mine heed, unto the well I ra^
And of the water drank I a good drau^
whereof me thought I was refresshed
Of the brennyng that sat so nigh my he^
That verily anon I began to feel
An huge part released of my smerte
And therwithal anon up I sterte
And thought I would walk and sem^
Forth in the park, and in the holtes h^
And through a launde as I yed a pace
And began about fast to behold
I found anon a delectable place
That was beset with trees young and (...)
whose names here for me shall not be tol^
Amydde of which stood an herber gre^
That beched was, with colors new and clean
This herber was full of flowers gende
Into the which, as I behold began
Betwyxe an hulfere and a wodbende
As I was ware, I saw where lay a man
in black, and white color pale and wan
And wonder deedly also of his hew
Of hurtes grene, and fresh wounds new
And ouermore dystrayned with sycknesse
Beside all this he was full greuouslye
For upon him he had an hot access
That day by day him shoke full pytously
So that for constraynynge of his malady
And hetly woe, thus lyenge all alone
It was a death for to here him groan
whereof astonyed, my foot I began wythdrawe
Greatly wondering what it might be
That he so lay, and had no felawe
Ne that I could no wight with him se
whereof I had routh, and eke pity
And began anon, so softely as I could
Among the bushes privily me to shroude
If that I might in any wise aspye
what was the cause of his deedly woe
Or why that he so pytously began cry
On his fortune, and on ure also
with all my might I laid an eere to
Every word to mark what he said
Out of his swough among as he abrayde
But first, if I should make mention
Of his person, and plainly him dyscryue
He was in sothe, without excepcion
To speak of manhood, one the best on live
There may no man again troth strive
For of his time, and of his age also
He proved was, there men should have ado
For one the best thereto of bread and length
So well ymade by good proporcion
If he had be in his deliver strength
But thought and sycknesse were occasyon
That he thus lay in lamentacion
Gruffe on the ground, in place desolate
Sole by him self, awhaped and amate
And for me seems that it is syttyng
His words al to put in remembrance
To me that herd all his complaynyng
And all the ground of his woeful chance
If there wythall I may you do pleasaunce
I woll to you so as I can anon
Like as he said, reherce euerychone
But who shall help me now to complain
Or who shall now my style gye or led
O Niobe, let now thy teeres rain
Into my pen, and help eke in need
Thou woeful Mirre, yt felest mine heart blede
Of pytous woe, and mine hand eke quake
when that I write, for this man's sake
For unto woe accords complaining
And doleful chere unto heaviness
To sorrow also, syghynge and weeping
And pytous mourning unto drerynesse
And who that shall write of dystresse
In party needs to know felyngly
Cause and root of all such malady
But I alas, that am of wit but dull
And have no knowing of such matere
For to dyscryue, and write at the full
The woeful co^playnte, which yt ye shall here
But even like as does a skryuenere
That can no more, what that he shall write
But as his master beside does endyte
Right so fare I, that of no sentement
Say right naught in conclusyon
But as I herd when I was present
This man complain, with a pytous soun
For even like without addicioun
Or dysencrease, either more or less
For to reherce anon I woll me dress
And if that any now be in this place
That feel in love brennynge or feruence
Or hyndred were to his ladies grace
with false tongues, that with pestilence
Slay true men, that never did offense
In word nor deed, ne in her intent
If any such be here now present
Let him of routh lay to audience
with doleful chere, and sobre countenance
To here this man, by full hye sentence
His mortal woe, and his perturbaunce
Complaining, now lyenge in a trance
with lokes vpcaste, and rufull chere
Theffecte of which was as ye shall here.
The thout oppressed with inward syghes sore
The paynful life, the body languishing
The woeful ghost, the heart rent and tore
The pytous chere pale in complaining
The deedly face, like ashes in shynynge
The salt tears that from mine eyes fall
Parcel declare, ground of my pains all
whose heart is ground to blede in heaviness
The thought resceyte of woe, and of complaynt
The breast is chest of dole and drerynesse
The body eke so feeble and so faynte
with hot and cold mine axes is so maynte
That now I chyuer, for defaute of heat
And hot as glede, now suddenly I sweat
Now hot as fire, now cold as ashes deed
Now hot for cold, now cold for hete again
Now cold as yse, now as coals reed
For hete I brenne, and thus betwyxe twain
I possed am, and al forcast in pain
So that my hete plainly as I feel
Of grievous cold is cause every dele
This is the cold of inward hye dysdayne
Cold of dyspyte, and cold of cruel hate
This is the cold yt ever does his besy pain
Against troth to fight and debate
This is the cold that the fire abate
Of true meaning, alas the hard while
This is the cold that woll me begyle
For ever the better that in troth I mente
with all my might faithfully to serve
with heart and all to be diligente
The less thank, alas I can deserve
Thus for my troth danger does me sterue
For one that should my death of mercy let
Has made despyte new his sword to whet
Against me, and his arowes to fyle
To take vengeance of wylfull cruelte
And tongues false through her slightly wyle
Han gonne awarre, that will not stynted be
And false envy, wrath and enuyte
Have conspyred against all right and law
Of her malice that troth shall be slawe
And male bouche, began first the tale tell
To sclaundre troth of indignacion
And False report so loud range the bell
That mysbyleue and false suspection
Have troth brought to his dampnacion
So that alas, wrongfully he dies
And falsnesse now his place occupyeth
And entered is in to trouthes land
And has thereof the full possessyon
O ryghtful god that first the troth fond
How may thou suffer such oppressyon
That falshode should have jurisdiction
In trouthes right to slay him gyltlesse
In his fraunchyse he may not live in pees
Falsely accused, and of his fone foringed
without answer, while he was absent
He dampened was, and may not be excused
For cruelte sat in judgment
Of hastynesse without auysement
And badde Dysdayne do execute anon
His ingement in presence of his fone
Attorney may none admytted been
To excuse troth, ne a word to speak
To faith or oath the judge list not seen
There is no gain, but he will be wreke
O lord of troth to the I call and clepe
How may thou se thus in thy presence
without mercy murdered innocence
Now god that art of troth sovereign
And see how I lie for troth bound
So sore knytte in loves fyrye chain
Eue^ at ye death through gyrte with many a wou^d
That lykely are never for to sound
And for my troth am dampened to the death
And not abide, but draw alonge the brethe
Consider and se in thine eternal right
How yt mine heart professed whylom was
For to be true with all my full might
Only to one, the which now alas
Of volunte without any trespass
Mine accusours has taken unto grace
And cherysheth hem, my death for to purchase
what means this? what is this wonder bre
Of purueyaunce if I shall it call
Of god of love, that false hem so assure
And true alas, down of the whele ben fall
And yet in soth, this is the worst of all
that falshed wrongfully of troth has ye name
And troth a^e^ward of falshed bears ye blame
This blind chance, this stormy aue^ture
In love has most his experience
For who yt does with troth most his cure
Shall for his mede find most offense
That serves love with all his diligence
For who can feign under lowlyhede
Ne fails not to find grace and speed
Fol I loved one, full long sith agone
with all mine heart, body and full might
And to be deed my heart can not gone
From his heste but hold that he has hight
Though I be banyshed out of her sight
And by her mouth dampened that I shall dey
Unto my behest, yet I will ever obey
For ever sith that the world began
who so list look, and in story read
He shall aye find that the true man
was put abacke where as the falshede
Yfurthered was, for love takes none head
To slay the true, and has of hem no charge
where as the false goes freely at her large
I take record of Palamydes
The true man, the noble worthy knight
That ever loved, and of his pain no relees
Notwithstanding his ma^hode and his might
Love unto him did full great unright
For aye the bet he did in chylualrye
The more he was hyndred by envy
And aye the better he did in every place
Through his knyghthode and busy pain
The ferther was he from his ladies grace
For to her mercy might he never attain
And to his death he could it not refrain
For no daungere, but aye obey and serve
As he best could, plainly till he sterue
what was the fine also of Hercules
For all his conquest and his worthynesse
That was of strength alone peerles
For like as books of him list express
He set pyllers through his hye prowess
Away at Gaddes for to sygnifye
That no man might him pass in chyualrye
The which pyllers far beyond Inde
Be set of gold, for a remembrance
And for all that was he set behind
with hem that love list febly auaunce
For him set last upon a dance
Against whom help may no strife
For all his troth he lost his life
Phoebus also for all his persaunt light
when that he went here in earth low
Unto the heart with Venus sight
Ywounded was through Cupides bow
And yet his lady list him not to know
Though for her love his heart did blede
She let him go, and took of him no head
what shall I say of young Piramus?
Of true Tristram, for all his hye renown
Of Achylles, or of Antonius
Of Arcite, or of him Palamowne
what was the end of her passyoune
But after sorrow death, and then her grave
Lo here the guerdon that these lovers have
But false Jason with his doubleness
That was untrue at Calkos to Medee
And Theseus, rote of unkindness
And with these two eke the false En^e
Lo thus the false aye in one degree
Had in love her lust and all her will
And save fashode, there was none other skyll
Of Thebes eke the false Arcyte
And Demephoon eke for his slouthe
They had her lust and all that might delight
For all her falshode and great untruth
Thus ever love alas, and that is routhe
His false lieges forthereth what he may
And sleeth the true ungoodly day by day
For true Adon was slain with the bore
Amydde the forest in the grene shade
For Venus love he felt all the sore
But Vulcanus wiht her no mercy made
The foul chorle had many nyghtes glade
where Mars her knight and her man
To find mercy comfort none he can
Also the young fresshe vpomedes
So lusty fre as of his courage
That for to serve with all his heart he ches
Athalans so fair of her vysage
But love alas quitte him so his wage
with cruel daungere plainly at the last
That with the death guerdonlesse he past
Lo here the fine of loves seruyse
Lo how that love can his servants quyte
Lo how he can his faithful men despise
To slay the true men, and false to respyte
Lo how he does the sword of sorrow byte
In hertes, such as most his lust obey
To save the false and do the true dey
For faith nor oath, word, ne assurance
True meaning, awayte, or business
Still port, ne faithful attendaunce
Manhood ne might in arms worthynesse
Pursuit of worship nor hye prowess
In strange land riding ne travail
Full little or naught in love does avail
Peril of death, nor in see ne land
Hunger ne thirst, sorrow ne syckenesse
Ne great empryses for to take on hand
Shedynge of blood, ne manfull hardynesse
Ne often woundynge at sautes by dystresse
Nor in partynge of life, nor death also
Al is for naught, love takes no head thereto
But lesynges with her flaterye
Through her falshed, and with her doubleness
with tales new, and many feigned lie
By false semblaunt and cou^trefete hu^blesse
Under color depaynte with steadfastness
with fraud covered under a pytous face
Accept be now rathest unto grace
And can him self now best magnifye
with feigned port and presumpcion
They haunte her cause with false surquidre
Under meaning of double entencion
To think one in her opinion
And say another, to set him self alofte
And hinder troth, as it is seen full often
The which thing, I bye now al to dear
Thanked be Venus, and the God Cupide
As it is seen by mine oppressed chere
And by his arowes that stycken in my side
That save death, I nothing abide
Fro day to day, alas the hard while
when ever his darte that him list to fyle
My woeful heart for to ryue a two
For taute of mercy, and lack of pity
Of her that causes all my pain and woe
And list not ones of grace for to se
Unto my troth through her cruelte
And most of al I me complain
That she has joy to laugh at my pain
And wylfully has my death sworn
All gyltlesse, and wot no cause why
Save for the troth that I had aforne
To her alone to serve faithfully
O god of love, unto the I cry
And to thy blende double deyte
Of this great wrong I complain me
And unto thy stormy wylfull variaunce
Yment with change and great unstableness
Now up now down, so re^nyng is thy chance
That the to trust may be no sekernesse
I wit it nothing but thy doubleness
And who that is an archer and is blind
Marketh nothing but shoteth by wind
And for that he has no dyscrecion
without advise he let his arowe go
For lack of sight, and also of reason
In his shotynge it happeth often so
To hurt his friend rather then his fo
So does this god with his sharp flone
The true sleeth, and lets the false gone
And of his woundyng, this you worst of al
when he hurts does to so cruel wreche
And makes the sick for to cry and call
Unto his foe for to be his leche
And hard it is for a man to seche
Upon the point of death in ieopardye
Unto his foe to find remedy
Thus fares it now even by me
That to my foe yt gave mine heart a wound
Mote ask grace, mercy, and pity
And namely there where none may be found
For now my sore my leche will confound
And god of kind so has set mine ure
My lives foe to have my wound in cure
Alas the while now that I was borne
Or that I ever saw the bright son
For now I se that full long aforne
Or I was borne, my desteny was sponne
By Parcas systerne to slay me if they conne
For they my death shopen or my sherte
Only for troth I may it not asterte
The mighty goddess also of nature
That under god has the governance
Of worldly things committed to her cure
Dysposed have through her wise purueiau^ce
To give my lady so much suffysaunce
Of all virtues, and therwythall puruyde
To murdre troth, has take danger to gyde
For bounte, beauty, shappe, and semelyhed
Prudence, wit, passyngly fayrnesse
Benygne port, glad chere with lowlyhed
Of womanhede right plenteous largeness
Nature did in her fully impresse
when she her wrought, and alther last disdain
To hinder troth she made her cha^berlayne
when mystrust also, and false suspection
with mysbyleue she made for to be
Chief of counsel to this conclusyon
For to exyle troth, and eke pity
Out of her court to make mercy flee
So yt dyspyte now holds forth her reyne
Through hasty believe of tales yt men feyne
And thus I am for my troth, alas
Murdered and slain, with words sharp and kene
Gyltlesse god wot of all trespass
And lie and blede upon this cold grene
Now mercy sweet, mercy my lives queen
And to your grace of mercy yet I preye
In your service that your man may deye
But if so be that I shall dye algate
And that I shall none other mercy have
Yet of my death let this ben the date
that by your will I was brout to my grave
Or hastily, if that you list me save
My sharp wounds that ache so and blede
Of mercy charm, and also of womanhede
For other charm plainly is there none
But only mercy, to help in this case
For though my wounds blede ever in one
My life, my death, stands in your grace
And though my gylte be nothing, alas
I ask mercy in all my best entente
Ready to dye, if that ye assente.
For there against shall I never strive
In word ne work, plainly I ne may
For lever I have then to be alive
To dye sothly, and it be to her pay
Yea though it be this same day
Or when that ever her list to deuyse
Suffyseth me to dye in your seruyse
And god yt know ye thought of every wight
Right as it is, in every thing thou may se
Yet er I dye, with all my full might
Lowly I pray to grant unto me
That ye goodly, fair, fresh and fre
which only slay me for defaute of rothe
Or that I dye, ye may know my troth
For that in soth suffiseth me
And she it know in every circumstaunce
And after I am well paid that she
If that her list of death to do vengeance
Unto me that am under her ligraunce
It sytte me not her dome to dysobeye
But at her lust wylfully to deye
without grutchynge or rebellyon
In will or word, holy I assent
Or any manner contradiction
Fully to be at her commandment
And if I dye, in my testament
My heart I send, and my spirit also
what so ever she list with hem to do
And alder last to her womanhede
And to her mercy, me I recomaunde
That lie now here betwyxte hope and dread
Abiding plainly what she list command
For utterly this nys no demand
welcome to me while me lasts brethe
Right at her choice where it be life or death
In this ma^er more what might I feign
Sith in her hand, and in her will is all
Both life and death, my joy and al my pain
And finally my heste hold I shall
Till my spirit by desteny fatal
when that her list fro my body wend
Have here my troth, and thus I make an end
And with that word he began sygh as sore
Like as his heart ryue would at wayne
And held his peace, and spoke no word more
But for to se his woe and mortal pain
The teres gonne fro mine eyes rain
Full pytously for very inward r^the
That I him saw, so long wishing for troth
And all this while my self I kept close
Among the bows, and my self gonne hyde
Till at the last the woeful man arose
And to a lodge went there beside
where all the May, his custom was tabyde
Sole to complain of his pains kene
From year to year under the bows grene
And for because that it drew to the night
And that the son his arc diurnall
Ypassed was, so that his persaunt light
His bright bemes and his stremes all
were in the waves of the water fall
Under the bordure of our occyan
His chare of gold, his course so swyftly ran
And while the twylyght and the rows read
Of Phoebus light were deaurat alyte
A pen I took, and began me fast speed
The woeful playnte of this man to write
word by word as he did endyte
Like as I herd and could hem to report
I have here set, your hertes to disporte
If ought be mysse, lay the wit on me
For I am worthy for to bear the blame
If any thing mysse reported be
To make this dytte for to seem lame
Through mine vnco^ning, but for to sayn the same
Like as this man his complaynt did express
I ask mercy and forgyuenesse
And as I wrote, me thought I saw a far
Far in the west lustely appear
Esperus the goodly bright sterre
So glad, so fair, so persaunt eke of chere
I mean Venus with her bemes clear
That heavy hertes only to releue
Is wont of custom for to show at eve
And I as fast fell adowne on my kne
And even thus to her began I to prey
O lady Venus so fair upon to se
Let not this man for his truth deye
For that joy thou had when thou leye
with Mars thy knight, when Vulcanus fond
And with a chain vnuysyble you bond
Together both twaye in the same while
That all the court above celestyall
At your shame began laughe and smyle
Ah, fair lady wylly fond at all
Comfort to careful, o gods immortal
Be helping now, and do thy dilygence
To let the stremes of thine influence
Descend down, in fortheryng of the troth
Namely of hem that lie in sorrow bound
show now thy mit and on her woe have routh
Er false danger sle hem and confound
And specially let thy might be found
For to socoure what so that thou may
The true man that in the herber lay
And all true forther for his sake
O glad sterre, O lady Venus mine
And cause his lady him to grace take
Her heart of stele to mercy so enclyne
Er that thy bemes go up to declyne
And er that thou now go fro us adowne
For that love thou had to Adowne
And when she was gone to her rest
I rose anon, and home to bed went
For weary me thought it for the best
Prayenge thus in all my best entente
That all true, that be with danger shente
with mercy may in release of her pain
Recured be, er May come efte again
And for that I ne may no longer wake
Farewell ye lovers all that be true
Prayenge to god, and thus my leave I take
That er the son to morrow be rissen new
And er he have again rosen hew
That each of you may have such a grace
His own lady in arms to embrace
I mean thus, in all honest
without more ye may together speak
what so ye list at good lyberte
That each may to other her heart break
On ialousyes only to be wreke
That has so long of his malice and envy
werred truth with his tyranny.
Lenuoye.
Pryncesse pleases it to your benygnyte
This little dyte to have in mind
Of womanhode also for to se
Your man may your mercy find
And pity eke, that long has be behind
Let him again be provoked to grace
For by my truth it is against kind
False danger to occupye his place
Go little quayre unto my lives queen
And my very hertes sovereign
And be right glad, for she shall the seen
Such is thy grace, but I alas in pain
Am left behind, and not to whom to plain
For mercy, ruthe, grace, and eke pity
Exiled be, that I may not attain
Recure to find of mine aduersyte.
Explicit.
A preyse of women.
ALl tho that list of women evil to speak
And fayn of hem worse than they deserve
I pray to god that her necks to break
Or on some evil death mote tho ianglers stern
For every man were holden hem to serve
And do hem worship, honor, and service
In every manner that they best could deuyse
For we out first to think on what manner
they bring us forth, and what pain they endure
First in our birth, and sith fro year to year
How busely they done their busy cure
To keep us fro every mysauenture
In our youth when we have no might
Our self to keep, neither by day nor night
Alas, how may we say on hem but well
Of whom we were fostred and ybore
And ben al our succoure, and ever true as stele
And for our sake full often they suffer sore
without women were all our joy lore
wherefore we ought all women to obey
In all goodness, I can no more say
This is well known, and has been or this
That women ben cause of al lyghtnesse
Of knighthode, norture, eschewyng al malis
Increase of worship, and of al worthynesse
Thereto curteys and meke, and ground of all goodness
Glad and merry, and true in every wise
That any gentyl heart can think or deuyse
And though any would trust to your untruth
And to your fair words would aught assent
In good faith me thinks it were great ruth
That other women should for her gylt be she^t
That never knew ne wist nout of her intent
Ne list not to here ye fair words ye write
which ye you pain fro day to day tendyte
But who may be ware of your tales untrue
That ye so busyly paynt and endyte
For ye will swear that ye never knew
Ne saw the woman, neither much ne lyte
Save only her to whom ye had delight
As for to serve of all that ever ye sey
And for her love must ye needs dey
Tha^ will ye swear that ye knew never before
what love was ne his dreadful obseruaunce
But now ye feel that he can wound sore
wherefore ye put you in to her governance
who^ love has ordained you to serve and do plesau^ce
with all your mit your little lives space
which ends sone, but if she do you grace
And than to bed will ye soon draw
And sone sick ye will you than feign
And swear fast your lady has you slawe
And brout you suddenly in so high a pain
That fro your death may no man you restrayn
with a dangerous look of her eyes two
That to your death must ye needs go
Thus will ye morn, thus will ye syghe sore
As though your heart anon i^ two would breast
And swear fast that ye may live no more
Mine own lady, that might if ye lest
Bring mine heart somdele in to rest
As if you list mercy on me to have
Thus your untruth will ever mercy crave
Thus wol ye plain, tho ye nothing smerte
These innocent creatures for to begyle
And swear to hem, so wounded is your heart
For her love, that ye may live no while
Scarsly so long as one might go a mile
So hyeth death, to bring you to an end
But if your souerayn lady list you to amend
And if for routh she comfort you in any wise
For pity of your false oaths sere
So ye innocent weneth yt it be as you deuyse
And weneth your heart be as she may here
Thus for to comfort, and somewhat do you chere
Than woll these ianglers deem of her full ill
And said that ye have her fully at your will
Lo how ready her tongues ben, and pressed
To speak harm of women causeless
Alas, why might ye not as well say the best
As for to deem hem thus gyltlesse
In your heart ywis there is no gentylnesse
that of your own gylte, list thus women fame
Now by my troth, me thynk ye be to blame
For of women comes this worldly well
wherefore we ought to worship he^ evermore
And though it mishap one, we out for to hele
For it is all through our false lore
That day and night, we pain us evermore
with many an oath, these women to begyle
with false tales, and many a wicked wyle
And if falshede should be reckened and told
In women, iwys full truth were
Not as in men, by a thousand fold
Fro all vices twys they stand clear
In any thing that ever I could of here
But if entysyng of these men it make
That hem to flatteren connen never slake
I would feign were where ever ye could here
without men's tising, what women did amys
For there ye may get he^, ye lie fro year to year
And many a gabbynge ye make to hem iwys
For I could never here, ne known er this
where ever ye could find in any place
That ever women besought you of grace
There ye you pain, with all your full might
with all your heart, and all your business
To pleasen hem, both by day and night
Prayeng hem of her grace and gentylnesse
To have pity upon your great distress
And ye they would on your pain have routh
And slay you not, sens ye mean but trouh
Thus may ye se that they ben fautelesse
And innocent to all your works slye
And all your crafts that touch falsnesse
They know hem not, ne may hem not espy
So swear ye, that ye must needs dye
But if they would of her womanheed
Upon you rewe, er that ye be deed
And than your lady, and your hertes queen
Ye call hem, and therwyth ye sygh sore
And say, my lady I trow that it be seen
In what plyte that I have lived full yore
But now I hope that ye woll no more
In these pains suffer me for to dwell
For of all goodness, iwys ye be the well
Lo which a painted process can ye make
These harmless creatures for to begyle
And when they sleep, ye pain you to wake
And to bethink you on many a wicked wyle
But ye shall se the day yt ye shall curse ye while
That ye so besily did your intent
Hem to begyle, that falshede never meant
For this ye know well, though I would lie
In women is all truth and steadfastness
For in good faith, I never of hem sye
But much worship, bounte, and gentilnesse
Right coming, fair, and full of meekness
Good and glad, and lowly you ensure
Is this goodly angelyke creature
And if it hap a man be in disease
She does her business, and her full pain
with all her might, him to comfort and please
If fro his disease she might him restrain
In word ne deed iwys she wol not feign
But with all her might, she does her besinesse
To bring him out of his heaviness
Lo what gentyllesse these women have
If we could know it for our rudeness
How besy they be us to keep and save
Both in heal, and also in sycknesse
And always right sorry for our distress
In every manner, thus show they routhe
That in hem is all goodness and truth
And sith we find in hem ge^tilnesse and troth
worship, bounte, and kyndenesse evermore
Let never this ge^tilesse, through your sloth
In her kind truth be aught forlore
That in woman is, and has been full yore
For in reverence of the heuens queen
we ought to worship all women that been
For of all creatures yt ever were get and borne
This wot ye well, a woman was the best
By her was recovered ye bliss yt we had lorn
And through yt woman shall we come to rest
And ben ysaued, if that our self lest
wherefore me thinks, if that we had grace
we oughten honor women in every place
Therefore I read, that to our lives end
Fro this time forth, while yt we have space
That we have trespaced, pursue to amend
Prayenge our lady, well of all grace
To bring us unto that blysfull place
There as she and all good women shall be in fere
In heaven above, among the angels clear.
Explicit.
The house of Fame.
GOd turn us every dreme to good
For it is wonder thing by the rood
To my wit, what causes sweuenes
On the morrow or on euenes
And why the effect follows of some
And of some it shall never come
why that it is an auysion
And why this a reuelacyon
why this a dreme, why that a sweuen
And not to every man lyche even
why this a fantome, why that oracles
I not: but who so of these miracles
The causes know bette than I
Defyne he, for I certainly
Ne can hem not, ne never think
To busy my wit for to swynke
To know of her signifycations
The gendres, ne distynctions
Of the times of hem, ne the causes
Or why this is more than that is
Or give folks complexions
Make hem dreme of reflections
Or else thus, as other said
For the great feblenesse of her brain
By abstynence, or by sycknesse
Prison, strife, or great distress
Or else by dysordynaunce
Or natural accustomaunce
That some men be to curyous
In study, or melancolyous
Or thus: so inly full of dread
That no man may him bote read
Or else that devotion
Of some, and contemplacyon
Causen such dremes often
Or that the cruel life vnsofte
Of hem that loves leden
Often hopen much or dreden
That purely her impressyons
Causen hem to have visyons
Or if spyrites han the might
To make folk to dream on night
Or if the soul of proper kind
Be so perfyte as men find
That it wot what is to come
And that he warns all and some
Of eueryche of her auentures
By auysyons, or by fygures
But that our flesh has no might
To understand it a right
For it is warned to derkely
But why the cause is, not wot I
well worth of this thing clerks
That treaten of that, and of other works
For I of none opinion
Nyll as now make mencyon
But only that the holy Rood
Turn us every dream to good
For never sithe I was borne
Ne no man else me beforne
Met I trow steadfastly
So wonderful a dream as I.
The tenthe day now of Decembre
The which, as I can remember
I woll you tellen every dele
But at my beginning trusts well
I woll make invocation
with a devout special devotion
Unto the god of sleep anon
That dwells in a cave of stone
Upon a streme that comes fro Let
That is a fludde of hell vnswete
Beside a fulke, that men clepe Cymery
There slepeth aye this god vnmery
with his slepy thousand sonnis
That always to sleep her won is
And to this god that I of read ^
Pray I, that he woll me speed
My sweuen for to tell a right
If every dreme stand in his might
And he that mouer is of all
That is and was, and ever shall
So give hem joy that it here
Or all that they dreme to year
And for to stand al in grace
Of her loves, or in what place
That hem were leuest for to stand
And shield hem from pouerte and shonde
And from every unhappy and disease
And send hem that may hem please
That takes well and scorneth naught
Ne it misdeme in her thought
Through malycious entencion
And who so through presumpcion
Or hate or scorn, or through envy
Dispyte or ^ape, or felony
Mysdeme it, pray I Jesus good
Dreme he barefote or dreme he shood
That every harm that any man
Has had sithe the world began
Befall him thereof or he stern
And grant that he may it deserve
Lo, with right such a conclusyon
As had of his auisyon
Cresus, that was king of Lyde
That high upon a gybet did
This prayer shall he have of me
I am no bette in charity.
Now harken, as I have you said
What that I met or I abrayde
Of Decembre the tenthe day
When it was night, to sleep I lay
Right as I was wont to done
And fill a sleep wonder soon
As he that was weary forgo
On pylgrimage miles two
To the corpse of saint Leonarde
To maken lythe, that erst was hard
But as I slepte me met I was
within a temple ymade of glass
In which there were mo images
Of gold, standing in sondrie stages
In mo rich tabernacles
And with perre mo pynnacles
And mo curyous portratures
And queynt manner of fygures
Of gold work, than I saw ever
But certainly I nyst never
where that it was, but well wist I
It was of Venus redely
This temple, for in purtreture
I saw anon right her figure
Naked fletyng in a see
And also on her heed parde
Her rose garlande white and read
And her comb to kembe her head
Her dounes, and dan Cupido
Her blind son, and Vulcano
That in his face was full brown
But as I romed up and down
I found that on the wall there was
Thus written on a table of bras
I woll now sing if that I can
The arms, and also the man
That first came through his destyne
Fugityfe fro Troy the country
In to Itayle, with full much pyne
Unto the strondes of Lauyne
And tho began the story anon
As I shall tellen you echone
First saw I the destruction
Of Troy, through the greek Synon
with his false untrue forswerynges
And with his chere and his lesynges
Made a horse, brought in to Troy
By which Troyans lost all her joy
And after this was graued alas
How Ilyons castle assailed was
And wone, and king Priamus slain
And Polytes his son certain
Dispytously of dan Pyrrus
And next that saw I how Venus
when that she saw the castle brende
Down from heaven she began discende
And bade her son Eneas to fly
And how he fled, and how that he
Escaped was from all the prees
And took his father, old Anchyses
And bare him on his back away
Cryeng alas and welaway
The which Anchyses in his hand
Bare tho the gods of the land
Thylke that vnbrenned were
Than saw I next all in fere
How Crusa, dan Eneas wife
whom that he loved all his life
And her young son Iulo
And eke Askanyus also
Fledden eke, with drery chere
That it was pity for to here
And in a forest as they went
At a tournyng of a went
How Crusa was yloste, alas
That read not I, how that it was
How he her sought, and how her ghost
Bade him slye the greeks host
And said he must in to Itayle
As was his destyne, sauns fail
That it was pity for to here
when her spyrite began appear
The words that she to him said
And for to keep her son him prayde
There saw I graven eke how he
His father eke, and his meyne
with his ships began to sail
Toward the country of Itayle
As straight as they myghten go
There saw I eke the cruel Juno
That art dan Iupyters wife
That haste yhated all thy life
All the Troyan blood
Ren and cry as thou were wood
On Eolus, the god of wyndes
To blown out of all kinds
So loud, that he should drenche
Lord, lady, grome, and wenche
Of all the Troyans nacyon
without any of her sauacion
There saw I such tempest aryst
That every heart might agryse
To se it painted on the wall
There saw I eke graven with all
Venus, how ye my lady dear
weeping with full woeful chere
Prayenge Iupyter on hye
To save and keep that nauye
Of that Trogian Eneas
Sithe that he her son was
There saw I Jove's Venus kiss
And granted was of the tempest lysse
There saw I how the tempest stente
And how with all pyne he went
And pryuely took a ryuage
In to the country of Cartage
And on the morrow how that he
And a knight that hight Achate
Metten with Venus that day
Going in a queynte array
As she had be an hunteresse
with wind blowyng upon her tresse
And how Eneas began to plain
when he knew her of his pain
And how his ships dreynt were
Or else ylost, he nyst where
How she began him comfort tho
And bade him to Cartage go
And there he should his folk find
That in the sea were left behind
And shortly of this thing to pace
She made Eneas so in grace
Of Dydo, queen of that country
That shortly for to tellen she
Became his love, and let him do
All that weddyng longs to
what should I speak it more quaynte
Or pain me my words to paynte
To speak of love, it well not be
I can not of that faculte
And eke to tellen of the manner
How they first acquaynted were
It were a long process to tell
And over long for you to dwell
There saw I grave how Eneas
Told to Dydo every caas
That him was tide upon the sea
And efte graven was how that she
Made of him shortly at a word
Her life, her love, her lust, her lord
And did to him all reverence
And laid on him all the dispense
That any woman might do
wenyng it had all be so
As he her swore, and hereby demed
That he was good, for he such seemed
Alas what harm does appearance
when it is false in existence
For he to her a traitor was
wherefore she slow her self alas
Lo, how a woman does amys
To love him that unknown is
For by Christ, lo thus it fares
It is not all gold that glareth
For also brouke I well mine heed
There may be under goodlyheed
Covered many a shreude vice
Therefore be no wight so nyce
To take a love only for chere
Or speech or for friendly manner
For this shall every woman find
That some man of his pure kind
wol shown outward the fairest
Till he have caught that what him lest
And than woll he causes find
And swear how she is unkind
Or false or privy, or double was
Al this say I by Eneas
And Dydo, and her nyce lest
That loved al to soon a gest
wherefore I wol say o proverb
That he that fully knows the herb
May safely lay it to his eye
wythoutyn dread this is no lie
But let us speak of Eneas
Now he betrayed her, alas
And left her full unkindly
So when she saw al utterly
That he would her of Troth fail
And wenden from her into Itayle
She began to wrynge her hands two
Alas (quod she) that me is woe
Alas, is every man thus true
That every year wol have a new
If it so long time endure
Or else that parauenture
And thus of one he woll have fame
In magnifyeng of his own name
Another for frenshyp says he
And yet there shall the third be
That is taken for delight
Lo, or else for synguler profit
In such words began complain
Dydo of her great pain
As me met dremyng redyly
None other author allege wol I
Alas (quod she) my sweet heart
Have pity on my sorrows smerte
And slay me not, go not away
O woeful Dydo, welaway
(Quod she) unto her self tho
O Eneas what wol ye do
O that your love ne your bond
That ye swore with your right hand
Ne my cruel death (quod she)
May hold you still here with me
O have ye of my death no pite
Iwys mine own dear heart ye
Know full well that never yet
As far as ever I had wit
Agylte you, in thought ne in deed
O, have ye men such goodlyhede
In speech, and never a dele of troth
Alas that ever had routh
Any woman on a false man
Now I se well, and tell can
we wretched women can no art
For certain, for the more part
Thus we been served euerychone
How sore that ye men can groan
Anon as we have you received
Certainly we been disceyued
For though your love lest a season
wait upon the conclusyon
And eke how ye determyne
And for the more part defyne
O welawaye that I was borne
For through you my name is lorne
And mine acts read and song
Over al this land in every tongue
O wicked fame, for there nys
Nothing so swyfte lo as she is
O soth is, every thing is wist
Though it be couerde with the mist
Eke though I might duren ever
That I have done recover I never
That it ne shall be said, alas
I shamed was through Eneas
And that I shall thus iuged be
Lo right as she has done, now she
wol done eftesones hardely
Thus say the people privily
But that is done nys not to done
But all her complaynt ne her moan
Certain auayled her not a stre
And when she wist sothly, he
was forth into his ship agone
She into chamber went anon
And called on her suster Anue
And began her to complain thanne
And said, that she cause was
That she first loved him, alas
And first counsayled her thereto
But what, when this was said and do
She rofte her seluen to the heart
And dyed through the wounds smerte
But all the manner how she deyde
And all the words how she seyde
who so to know it has purpose
Read Virgyle in Eneydos
Or the pystles of Ouyde
what that she wrote, or that she did
And nere it to long to endyte
By god I would it here write
But welawaye, the harm and routh
That has betydde for such untruth
As men may often in books read
And aldaye seen it yet in deed
That for to thynken it tene is
Lo Demophon, duke of Athenys
How he forswore him falsely
And trayed Phyllis wyckedly
That kings daughter was of Thrace
And falsely began his term pace
And when she wist that he was false
She honge her self right by the half
For he had done her such untruth
Lo, was not this a woe and routh
Eke look how false and recheles
was to Briseyda Achilles
And Paris to Oenone
And Jason to Hipsyphile
And efte Jason to Medea
And Hercules to Dyanira
For he left her for Iolee
That made him take his death parde
How false was eke Theseus
That as the storye tells us
How he betrayed Adriane
The dyuel be his souls bane
For had he laughed or yloured
He must have been al denoured
If Adriane ne had be
And for she had of him pity
She made him fro the death escape
And he made her a full false iape
For after this within a while
He left her slepynge in an isle
Deserte alone right in the sea
And stale away and let her be
And took her suster Phedra tho
with him, and began to ship go
And yet he had sworn to her
On all that ever he could swear
That so she saved him his life
He would taken her to his wife
For she desired nothing else
In certain, as the book us tells
But for to excuse this Eneas
Fullyche of al his great trespass
The book says sauns fail
The gods bade him go to Itayle
And leaven Affriques regioun
And fair Dydo and her town
Tho saw I grave how to Itayle
Dan Eneas began for to fail
And how the tempest al began
And how he lost his steresman
which that the stern, or he to keep
Smote over the board as he sleep
And also saugh I how Sybyle
And Eneas beside an isle
To hell went for to se
His father Anchises the fre
And how he there found Palymurus
And also Dido, and Deiphebus
And eueryche tourment eke in hell
Saw he, which long is for to tell
which pains who so list know
He must read many a row
In Virgyle or in Claudian
Or Daunt, that it tellen can
Tho saw I eke all the aryuayle
That Eneas had made in Itayle
And with king Latin his trete
And all the batayls that he
was at him self, and his knights
Or he had al ywon his ryghtes
And how he Turnus rest his life
And wan Lauyna to his wife
And all the merueylous sygnals
Of the gods celestials
How maugre Juno, Eneas
For all her sleyght and her compass
Atcheued all his adventure
For Jupiter took on him cure
At the prayer of Venus
which I pray always save us
And us aye, of our sorrows light
when I had seen al this sight
In this noble temple thus
Hey lord thought I, that made us
Yet saw I never such noblesse
Of images, nor such richesse
As I se graven in this church
But naught wot I who did hem worche
Ne where I am, ne in what country
But now will I out gone and se
Right at the wyket if I can
Seen ought where steryng any man
That may me tellen where I am
when I out of the door came
I fast about me beheld
Than saw I but a large field
As far as ever I might se
without town, house, or tree
Or bushe, or grass, or eared land
For all the field was but a sand
As small as men may se at eye
In the deserte of Lyby
Ne no manner creature
That is yformed by nature
Ne saw I, me to read or wysse
O Christ thought I, that art in bliss
From fanton and illusyoun
Me save, and with deuocioun
Mine eyes to the heaven I cast
Tho was I ware, lo at the last
That falt by the sun on hye
As kenne might I with mine eye
Me thought I saw an Egle sore
But that it seemed much more
Than I had any Egle yseyne
This is as soth as death certain
It was of gold and shone so bright
That never saw men such a sight
But if the heaven had ywonne
As new of god another sun
So shone the Egles feathers bright
And somewhat downwarde began it light
Explicit liber primus.
Now harken every manner man
That English understand can
And lysteth of my dream to here
For now at erst shall ye lere
So sely and so dredefull a visyon
That I say neither Scipion
Ne king Nabugodonosore
Pharao, Turnus, ne Alcanore
Ne metten such a dream as this
Now fair blysfull, O Cipris
So be my favor at this time
That ye me tendyte, and ryme
Helps, that in Pernaso dwell
Beside Elycon the clear well
O thought, that wrote all that I met
And in the treasorye it set
Of my brain, now shall men se
If any virtue in the be
To tell all my dreme a right
Now kyth thy engyn and thy might
This Egle of which I have you told
That with feathers shone al of gold
which that so hye began to sore
I began behold more and more
To seen her beauty and the wonder
But never was that dynte of thonder
Ne that thing that men call foudre
That smite sometime a tower to poudre
And in his swyfte coming brende
That so swyfte began downwarde discende
As this foul when it beheld
That I a rowme was in the field
And with his grym paws strong
within his sharp nails long
Me flyeng at a swappe he hente
And with his sours again up went
Me caryeng in his claws stark
As lightly as I had been a lark
How hye I can not tellen you
For I came up, I nyst never how
For so astonyed and asweued
was every virtue in me heued
what with his sours and my dreed
That all my feeling began to deed
For why, it was a great affray
Thus I long in his claws lay
Till at last he to me spoke
In man's voice, and said awake
And be not aghast so for shame
And callen me tho by my name
And for I should better abrayde
Me to awake, thus he said
Right in the same voice and steuyn
That uses one that I can neuyn
And with that voice soth to said
My mind came to me again
For it was goodly said to me
So nas it never wont to be
And here withal I began to stere
As he me in his fete bear
Till that he felt that I had heat
And felt eke tho mine heart beat
And tho began he me to disporte
And with gentle words me comfort
And said twyse, saint Mary
Thou art a noyous thing to carry
And nothing needs it perde
For also wise god help me
As thou no harm shalt have of this
And this case that betydde the is
As for thy lore and for thy prowe
Let se, ^arst thou look yet now
Be full ensured boldly
I am thy friend, and therewith I
Began for to wonder in my mind
O god (quod I) that made al kind
Shall I none otherwise dye
Whether Jove will me stellyfye
Or what thing may this signifye
I am neither Enocke ne Helye
Ne Romulus, ne Ganemede
That were bore up as men read
To heaven with dan Jupiter
And made the gods boteler
Lo, this was tho my fantasye
But he that bare began espy
That I so thought, and said this
Thou demest of thy self amys
For Jove is not there about
I dare the put full out of doubt
To make of the yet a sterre
But er I bear the much far
I will the tell what I am
And whyther thou shalt, and why I came
To do this, so that thou take
Good heart, and not for fere quake
Gladly (quod I) now well (quod he)
First, I that in my fete have the
Of whom thou have fear and wonder
I am dwelling with the god of thonder
which men callen Jupiter
That does me styen full often fer
To do al this commandment
And for this cause he has me sent
To the: Herke now by thy troth
Certain he has of the routh
That thou have so truly
Long served ententyfely
His blind neuewe Cupido
And fair Venus also
without guerdon ever yet
And netheles have set thy wit
Although in thy heed full little is
To make books, songs, and ditees
In ryme, or else in cadence
As thou best can in reverence
Of love, and of his servants eke
That have his service sought, and seek
And paynest the to praise his art
Although thou had never part
wherefore also god me bless
Iouis halte it great humblesse
And virtue eke, that thou wylt make
A night full often thine heed to ache
In thy study so thou wrytest
And evermore of love endytest
In honor of him and praysynges
And in his folks furtherynges
And in her matter al deuysest
And not him ne his folk dispisest
Although thou may go in the dance
Of hem, that him list not auaunce
wherefore as I said ywys
Jupiter consydereth well this
And also beausyre, of other things
That is, thou have no tidings
Of loves folk if they be glade
Ne of nothing else that god made
And not only fro far country
That no tidings comen to the
Not of thy very neighbors
That dwellen almoost at thy doors
Thou herest neither that ne this
For when thy labor al done is
And have made all thy rekenynges
Instead of rest and of new things
Thou go home to thine house anon
And also dombe as a stone
Thou syttest at another book
Till fully dased is thy look
And lyuyst thus as an Hermyte
Although thine abstinence is lyte
And therefore Iouis, through his grace
will that I bear the to a place
which that hight the house of Fame
And to do the sport and game
In some recompensatioun
Of thy labor and deuotioun
That thou have had, lo causeles
To god Cupido the recheles
And thus this god through his merit
will with some manner thing the quyte
So that thou will be of good chere
For trust well that thou shall here
when we be comen there as I say
Mo wonder things dare I lay
And of loves folk mo tidings
Both sothsawes and leasynges
And mo loves new begone
And long served till love is won
And mo lovers casuelly
That been betydde, no man wot why
But as a blind man starteth an Hare
And more iolyte and welfare
while they find love of stele
As think men, and over all well
Mo discordes and mo ialousyes
Mo murmures, and mo nouelryes
And also mo dissimulacions
And eke feyned reperations
And mo berdes in two hours
without rasour or sysoures
Ymade, than graynes be of sands
And eke mo holdyng in mo hands
And also mo renouelaunces
Of old forleten acqueyntaunces
Mo louedayes, and mo accordes
Than on instumentes been cords
And eke of love mo exchaunges
Than ever corn were in graunges
Uneath may thou trowen this
(Quod he) no so me help god as wys
(Quod I) No why (quod he) for it
were impossible to my wit
Though fame had all the pyes
In all a realm and al espyes
How that yet he should here al this
Or they espyen, O yes yes
(Quod he) to me, that can I preue
By reason, worthy for to leave
So that thou give thine aduertence
To understand my sentence
First shall thou here where she dwells
Right so as thine own book tells
Her palace stands as I shall say
Right even amyddes of the way
Between heaven, earth, and see
That what so ever in all these three
Is spoken in pryue or apperte
The way thereto is so ouerte
And stante eke in so just a place
That every sown mote to it pace
Or what so comes from any tongue
Be it rowned, read, or song
Or spoken in surete or dread
Certain it mote thither need
Now harken well, for why I will
Tellen the a proper skyl
And a worthy demonstration
In mine ymaginacyon
Geffray, thou wottest well this
That every kyndly thing that is
Has a kyndly stead there he
May best in it conserved be
Unto which place every thing
Through his kyndly enclynynge
Meueth for to come to
when that it is away therfro
As thus. Lo how thou may al day se
Take any thing that heavy be
As stone or leed, or thing of weight
And bear it never so hye on heyght
Let go thine hand, it falls down
Right so say I by fire or sown
Or smoke, or other things light
Always they seek upward on heyght
Light things up, and downwarde charge
while eueryche of hem be at large
And for this cause, thou may well se
That every river unto the sea
Enclyned is to go by kind
And by these skylles as I find
Have fyshes dwelling in flode and see
And trees eke on the earth be
Thus every thing by his reason
Has his own proper mansion
To which he seeks to repeyre
There as it should not appeyre
Lo, this sentence is known couth
Of every philosophers mouth
As Aristotle, and dan Platone
And other clerks many one
And to confirm my reasoun
Thou wost well that speech is sown
Or else no man might it here
Now herke what I will the lere
Sown is not but air ybroken
And every speech that is spoken
Loud or pryue, foul or fair
In his substance is but air
For as flame is but lyghted smoke
Right so is sown air ybroke
But this may be in many wise
Of which I will the deuyse
As sown comes of pype or harp
For when a pype is blown sharp
The air is twyst with violence
And rent: Lo, this is my sentence
Eke, when men harp strings smite
whether it be much or lyte
Lo, with the stroke the air to breketh
And right so breketh it when men speaks
Thus wost thou well what thing is speech
Now hensforth, I will the teache
How every speech, voice or sown
Through his multiplycacyowne
Though it were pyped of a mouse
Mote needs come to Fames house
I prove it thus, take heed now
By experience, for if that thou
Threw in a water now a stone
well wost thou it will make anon
A little roundle as a cercle
Parauenture, as broad as a couercle
And right anon thou shalt se well
That whele cercle will cause another whele
And that the third, and so forth brother
Every cercle causynge other
Brother than him self was
And thus fro roundel to compass
Each about other going
Causes of others sterynge
And multeplyeng euermo
Till it be so far go
That it at both brynkes be
Al though thou may it not se
Above, yet gothe it always under
Though thou think it a great wonder
And who so says of truth I vary
Bydde him prove the contrary
And right thus every word ywys
That loud or pryue yspoken is
Moves first an air about
And of his mouynge out of doubt
Another air anon is moved
As I have of the water proved
That every cercle causes other
Right so of air my leave brother
Eueryche air in other stereth
More and more, and speech up bears
Or voice or noise, word or sown
Aye through multiplicatiowne
Till it be at the house of fame
Take it on ernest or in game
now have I told, if thou have mind
How speech or sown, of pure kind
Enclyned was upward to meue
This may thou feel well by preue
And that some stead ywys
That every thing enclyned to is
Has his kyndlyche stead
That seweth it without dread
That kyndly the mancyoun
Of every speech of every soun
Be it either foul or fair
Has his kind place in air
And sith that every thing ywys
Out of his kind place ywys
Moves thither for to go
If it away be therfro
As I have before proved the
It seweth every soune perde
Moves kyndly to pace
As up into his kind place
And this place of which I tell
There as fame list to dwell
Is set a mids of these three
Heaven, earth, and eke the sea
As most conseruatyfe the soun
Than is this the conclusyoun (:)(:)
That every speech of every man
As I the tell first began
Meueth up on heyght to pace
Kyndly to Fames place
Tell me this now faithfully
Have I not proved thus symply
without any subtylte (:)(:)
Of speech, or great prolixite
Of terms of Philosophy
Of fygures of Poetry
Or colors of rethoryke
Perde it ought the to like
For hard langage, and hard matere
Is encombrous for to here
At ones, wost thou not well this
And I answered and said yes
Ha ha (quod he) lo so I can
Leudly unto a leude man
Speak and show him such skyylles
That he may shake hem by the bylles
So palpable they shulden be
But tell me this now pray I the
How thinks the my conclusyon?
A good persuasyon
(Quod I) it is and like to be
Right so as thou have proved me
By god (quod he) and as I leave
Thou shalt have yet or it be eve
Of every word of this sentence
A proof, by experience
And with thine ears heren well
Top and tail, and every dell
That every word that spoken is
Comes into Fames house ywys
As I have said what will thou more
And with this word upper to sore
He began, and said by saint Iame
Now will we speak all of game
How farest thou now (quod he) to me?
well (quod I) now se (quod he)
By thy troth yonde adowne
where that thou know any town
Or house, or any other thing
And when thou have of aught knowing
Look that thou warn me
And I anon shall tell the
How far that thou art now therfro
And I adowne began to loken tho
And beheld feldes and playns
Now hills, and now mountayns
Now valeys, and now forestes
And now uneath great beestes
Now ryuers, now Citees
Now towns, now great trees
Now ships saylyng in the sea
But thus soon in a while he
was flowen fro the ground so hye
That all the world as to mine eye
No more seemed than a prick
Or else was the air so thycke
That I might it not deserne
with that he spoke to me so yerne
And said: See thou any token
Or aught, that in this world is of spoken
I said nay, no wonder is
(Quod he) For never half so hye as this
Nas Alexander of Macedon
king* Ne of Rome dan Scipion
That saw in dreme at point deuyse
Heaven and earth, hell and paradyse
Ne eke the wretch Dedalus
Ne his child nyce Icharus
That flewe so hye, that the hete
His wings molte, and he fell wete
In mydde the sea, and there he dreynte
For whom was made a great complaynte
Now turn upward (quod he) thy face
And behold this large space
This air, but look that thou ne be
Adrad of hem that thou shall se
For in this region certain
Dwells many a cytezeyne
Of which speaks dan Plato
These ben the eyrysshe beestes lo
And tho saw I all the menye
Both gone and also fly
Lo (quod he) cast up thine eye
Seyonder lo, the Galaxye
The which men clepe the mylky way
For it is white: And some perfay
Callen it watlynge street
That ones was burnt with the hete
when the sons son the read
That hyte Pheton would lead
A gate his fathers carte, and gye
The carte horse began well espy
That he could no governance
And began for to lepe and praunce
And bear him up and now down
Till he saw the Scorpiowne
which that in heaven a sign is yet
And he for fear lost his wit
Of that, and let the reins gone
Of his horse, and they anon
Sone up to mount, and down discende
Till both air and earth brende
Till Jupiter lo, at the last
Him slew, and fro the carte cast
Lo, is it not a great myschaunce
To let a fool have governance
Of things that he can not demayne
And with this word soth for to said
He began always upper to sore
And gladed me than more and more
So faithfully to me spoke he
Tho began I to look under me
And beheld the eyrysh beestes
Clouds, mystes, and tempests
Snowes, hayles, raynes and wyndes
And than gendryng in her kinds
All the way through which I came
O God (quod I) that made Adam
Much is thy might and nobles
And tho thought I upon Boece
That writes, a thought may fly so hye
with feathers of philosophye
To passen eueryche element
And when he has so far ywent
Than may be seen behind his bake
Cloud and earth, and all that of I spoke
Tho began I wexe in a were
And said, I wot well I am here
But whether in body or in ghost
I not ywys, but god thou woost
For more clear entendement
Nas me never yet ysent
And than thought I on Marcyan
And eke of Anteclaudian
That soth was her description
Of all the heavens regyon
As far as that I saw the preue
And therefore I can hem leave
with that the Egle began to cry
Let be (quod he) thy fantasye
wylt thou lere of sterres ought
Nay certainly (quod I) right naught
And why (quod he) for I am old
Or else would I the have told
(Quod he) the stars names lo
And all the heuens signs to
And which they be: No force (quod I)
Yes parde (quod he) wost thou why
For when thou redest poetrye
How the gods can stellyfy
Bird, fysh, or him, or her
As the Rauyn and other
Or Ariones harp fine
Castor, Polexe, or Delphyne
Or Athalantes daughters seven
How all these are set in heaven
For though thou have hem often in hand
Yet nost thou not where they stand
No force (quod I) it is no need
As well I leave so god me speed
Hem that written of this matere
As though I knew her places here
And eke thy seluen here so bright
It should shenden all my sight
To look on hem that may well be
(Quod he) and so forth bare he me
A while, and tho began to cry
That never herd I thing so hye
Hold up thine heed, for all is well
Saynct Iulyan lo, bonne hostel
Se here the house of Fame, lo
May thou not here that I do
what (quod I) the great sown
(Quod he) that rombleth up and down
In Fames house full of tidings
Both of fair speech and chydynges
And of false and soth compowned
Harken well it is not rowned
Hear thou not the great swough
Yes perde (quod I) well enough
And what sown is it like (quod he)
Peter, like the beatyng of the sea
(Quod I) against the roches holowe
when tempests done her ships swalow
And that a man stand out of dout
A mile thence, and here it route
Or else like the humblyng
After the clappe of a thundrynge
when Iouis has the air ybete
But it does me for fear sweet
Nay, dread the not thereof (quod he)
It is nothing that will byten the
Thou shall have no harm truly
And with that word both he and I
As nygh the place aryued were
As men might cast with a spear
I nyst how, but in a street
He set me fair on my fete
And said: walk forth a pace
And tell thine adventure and case
That thou shall find in fames place
Now (quod I) while we have space
To speak, or that I go fro the
For the love of god tell me
In soth, that I will of the lere
If this noise that I here
Be as I have herd the tell
Of folk that down in earth dwell
And comes here in the same wise
As I the herd or this deuyse
And that here lives body nys
In all that house that yonder is
That makes all this loud fare
No (quod he) by saynct Clare
And also wysse god read me
But o thing I will warn the
Of the which thou wylt have wonder
Lo, to the house of Fame yonder
Thou wost how comes every speech
It needs not the efte to teache
But understand now right well this
when any speech ycomen is
Up to the palace anon right
It wexeth like the same wight
which that the word in earth spoke
Be he clothed in red or blake
And has so very his likeness
And spoke the word that thou wylt guess
That it the same body be
Man or womon, he or she
And is not this a wonder thing
Yes (quod I tho) by heaven king
And with this word, farewell (quod he)
And here will I abide the
And god of heaven send the grace
Some good to learn in this place
And I of him took leave anon
And began forth to the palayes gone.
Explicit liber secundus.
GOd of science and of light
Apollo, through thy great might
This little last book now thou gye
Not that I will for maystrye
Here art potentiall be shewde
But for the ryme is light and lewd
Yet make it somewhat agreeable
Though some verse fail in a syllable
And that I do no diligence
To show craft, but sentence
And if deuyne virtue thou
wylt help me to show now
That in my heed ymarked is
Lo, that is for to meanen this
The house of Fame for to discryue
Thou shall se me go as blyue
Unto the next laurer I se
And kiss it, for it is thy tree (?)
Now enter in my breast anon
when I was from the Egle gone
I began behold upon this place
And certain or I forther pace
I woll you all the shappe deuyse
Of house and city, and all the wise
How I began to this place approach
That stood upon so hye a roche
Hyer stands none in Spain
But up I clambe with much pain
And though to clymbe grieved me
Yet I ententyfe was to se
And for to pooren wondre low
If I could anywyse yknowe
what manner stone this roche was
For it was like a lymed glass
But that it shone full more clear
But of what congeled matere
It was, I nyst redely (?)
But at the last espied I
And fond that it was every dele
A roche of yse, and not of stele
Thought I by saint Thomas of kent
This were a feeble foundement
To buylden on a place hye
He ought him little to glorifye
That heron buylte, god so me save
Tho saw I all the hall ygraue
with famous folks names feel
That had been in much well
And her fames wide yblowe
But well uneath might I know
Any letters for to read
Her names by, for out of dread
They weren almoost of thawed so
That of the letters one or two
were molte away of every name
So vnfamous was wexe her fame.
But men say, what may ever last
Tho began I in mine heart cast
That they were molte away for hete
And not away with storms beat
For on that other side I sey
Of this hill, that northwarde ley
How it was written full of names
Of folk that had before great fames
Of old time, and yet they were
As fresh as men had written hem there
The self day, or that hour
That I on hem began to pour
But well I wist what it made
It was conserved with the shade
All the writing that I sye
Of a Castle that so stood on hye
And stood eke in so cold a place
That heat might it not deface
Tho began I on this hill to gone
And found on the coppe a wone
That all the men that been on live
Ne han the connyng to discryue
The beauty of that ylke place
Ne could cast no compace
Such an other for to make
That might of beauty be his make
Ne so wondrely ywrought
That it astonyeth yet my thought
And makes all my wit to swynke
On this castle for to think
So that the great beauty
The cast, craft, and curiosity
Ne can I not to you deuyse
My wit, ne may me not suffyse
But nathelesse all the substance
I have yet in my remembrance
For why, me thought by saynct Gyle
Al was of stone of Beryle
Both the castle and the toure
And eke the hall, and every boure
without pieces or ioynynges
But many subtell compassynges
As babeuries and pynnacles
Ymageries and tabernacles
I saw, and full eke of wyndowes
As flakes fallen in great snowes
And eke in each of the pynacles
weren sondrye habytacles
In which stoden all withouten
Full the castle all abouten
Of all manner of mynstrales
And iestours that tellen tales
Both of weeping and of game
And of all that longs unto fame
There herd I play on an harp
That sowned both well and sharp
Him Orpheus full craftily
And on this side fast by
Satte the harper Orion
And Gacides Chirion
And other harpers many one
And the Briton Glaskyrione
And small harpers with her glees
Sat under them in diverse sees
And gone on hem upward to gape
And countrefayted hem as an ape
Or as a craft countrefayte kind
Tho saw I standen hem behind
Afar from hem, all by hem selue
Many a thousand times twelve
That made loud mynstralsyes
In cormuse and shalmyes
And many an other pype
That craftily began to pype
Both in dou^ed and in read
That been at feestes with the bread
And many a floyte and lytlynge horn
And pypes made of grene corn
As have these little herd gromes
That kepen beestes in the bromes
There saw I than dan Cytherus
And of Athenes dan Proserus
And Mercia that lost her skin
Both in face, body, and chynne
For that she would enuyen so
To pypen bette than Apollo
There saw I eke famous old and young
Pypers of all the dutche tongue
To learn love daunces, sprynges
Keys, and the strange things
Tho saw I in an other place
Standing in a large space
Of hem that maken blody soun
In trumpe, beme, and claryoun
For in fight and blood sheddynges
Is used gladly clarionynges
There herd I trumpe Messenus
Of whom that speaks Virgilius
There herd I Ioab trumpe also
Theodomas and other mo
And all that used clarion
In Casteloygne, and Aragon
That in her times famous were
To lernen saw I trumpen there
There saw I sit in other sees
Playing upon other sundry glees
which that I can not neuen
Mo than stars ben in heaven
Of which I nyl as now not ryme
For ease of you, and loss of time
For time ylost, this know ye
By no way may recovered be
There saw I playing iuggelours
Magyciens and tragitours
And Phetonysses charmeresses
Old wytches, sorceresses
That vsen exorsisacions
And eke subfumigacions
And clerks eke which conne well
All this magyke naturell
That craftily do her ententes
To maken in certain ascendentes
Images lo, through which magyke
To maken a man ben hole or seek
There saw I the queen Medea
And Cyrces eke, and Caliophia
There saw I Hermes Ballenus
Lymote, and eke Simon Magus
There saw I, and knew by name
That by such art done, men have fame
There saw I Coll tragetour
Upon a table of Sycamour
Play an uncouth thing to tell
I saw him carry a wind mell
Under a walnote shale
what should I make longer tale
Of all the people that I sey
I could not tell till domisdey
when I had all this folk behold
And found me lose and not hold
And I amused a long while
Upon this wall of Beryle.
That shone lyghter than a glass
And made well more than it was
As kind thing of fame is
And than anon after this
I began forth comen till I fond
The castle yate on my right hand
which so well coruen was
That never such another nas
And yet it was by adventure
Ywrought by great and subtle cure
It needs not you more to tellen
To make you to long dwellen
Of these yates floryshynges
Ne of compaces, ne of karuynges
Ne how the hackyng in masonryes
As corbettes and ymageryes
But Lord so fair it was to show
For it was all with gold behewe
But in I went, and that anon
There met I crying many one
A larges a larges, hold up well
God save the lady of this pell
Our own gentle lady Fame
And hem that wyllen to have a name
Of us, thus herd I cryen all
And fast comen out of the hall
And shoke nobles and starlynges
And crowned were as kings
with crowns wrought full of losynges
And many rybans, and many frynges
were on her clothes truly
Tho at the last espied I
That purseuauntes and heraudes
That cryen rich folks lauds
It weren, all and every man
Of hem, as I you tell can
Had on him throw a vesture
which men clepe a cote armure
Embroudred wonderly rich
As though they were not ylyche
But naught will I, so mote I thryue
Be about to discryue
All these arms that there weren
That they thus on her cotes weren
For it to me were impossyble
Men might make of hem a bible
Twenty foot thycke as I trow
For certain whosoever could know
Might there all the arms seen
Of famous folk that had been
In Affrike, Europe, and Asye
Sith first began cheualrye
Lo, how should I now tell all this
Ne of the hall eke what need is
To tellen you that every wall
Of^e, and rofe, and flore withal
was plated half a foot thycke
Of gold, and that nas not wycke
But for to prove in all wise
As fine as ducket in Venyse
Of which to lyte all in my pouche is
And they were set as thycke of ouches
Fine, of the fynest stones fair
That men reden in the lapidayre
Or as grasses grown in a mede
But it were all to long to read
The names, and therefore I pace
But in this lustye and rich place
That Fames hall called was
Full much prees of folk there nas
Ne croudyng, for to much prees
But all on hye above a dees
Satte in a see imperial
That made was of a Ruby royal
which that a carbuncle is ycalled
I saw perpetually ystalled
A femynine creature
That never formed by nature
was such an other thing I say
For altherfyrst, soth to say
Me thought that she was so lyte
That the length of a cubyte
was longer than she seemed be
But thus soon a in while she
Her self tho wondderly straight
That with her fete she therth reyght
And with her heed she touched heaven
There as shyneth the sterres seven
And thereto yet, as to my wit
I saw a great wonder yet
Upon her eyes to behold
But certainly I hem never told
For as feel eyes had she
As feathers upon fowls be
Or weren on the beestes four
That gods trone can honor
As writes John in the Apocalypse
Her here that was owndy and cryps
As burned gold it shone to se
And soth to tellen also she
Had also feel up standing ears
And tongues, as on be ben heeres
And on her sete woxen saw I
Partriche wings redely
But lord the perry and the richesse
I saw sitting on the goddess
And the heavenly melody
Of songs full of armony
I herd about her trone ysonge
That all the pallayes wall tongue
So song the mighty Muse she
That cleped is Caliope
And her seven systerne eke
That in her faces semen meke
And evermore eternally
The song of Fame tho herd I
Heryed be thou and thy name
Gods of renoun and of fame
Tho was I ware at the last
As I mine eyes began up cast
That this ylke noble queen
On her shulders began sustene
Both the arms and the name
Of tho that had large fame
Alysandre and Hercules
That with a sherte his life did lose
And this found I syttyng this goddess
In noble honor and richesse
Of which I stynt a while now
Other thing to tellen you
Tho saw I stand on the other side
Straight down to the doors wide
From the dees many a pyllere
Of metal, that shone not full clear
But though they were of no richesse
Yet were they made for great noblesse
And in hem great sentence
And ^olke of hye and digne reverence
Of which to tell will I sonde
Upon a pyller saw I stand
Alderfyrst there I sye
Upon a pyller stand on hye
That was of led and of iron fine
Him of the sect saturnyne
The Ebrayke Josephus the old
That of Jews gestes told
And he bare on his shulders hye
The fame up of the Iurye
And by him stoden other seven
wise and worthy for to neuen
To helpen him bear up the charge
It was so heavy and so large
And for they written of batayles
As well as of other maruayles
Therefore was lo this pyllere
Of which I you tell here
Of leed and iron both ywys
For iron Marces metal is
which that god of battle
And the leed withouten fail
Is lo, the metal of Saturn
That has full large whele to turn
To stand forth on either row
Of hem, which I could know
Though I by order hem not tell
To make you to long to dwell
These of which I began read
There saw I stand out of dread
Upon an iron pyller strong
That painted was al endlonge
with Tygres blood in every place
The Tholason that hight Stace
That bare of Thebes up the name
Upon his shulders, and the fame
Also of Cruel Achylles
And by him stood withouten lees
Full wonder high upon a pyller
Of iron, he the great Omer
And with him Dares and Titus
Before, and eke he Lollius
And Guydo eke de Colempnis
And englysh Galfride eke ywys
And each of these as I have joy
was busy to bear up Troy
So heavy thereof was the fame
That for to bear it was no game
But yet I began full well espy
Between hem was a little envy
One said, that Omer made lies
Feynyng in his poetryes
And was to the greeks favorable
Therefore held he it but fable
Tho saw I stand on a pyllere
That was of tynned iron clear
The latin poet Virgyle
That has bore up a long while
The fame of Pius Eneas
And next him on a pyller was
Of copper, Venus clerk Ouyde*
That has sown wonders wide
The great god of loves fame
And there he bare up well his name
Upon this pyller al so hye
As I might se it with mine eye
For why this hall whereof I read
was woxe on heyght, length, and bread
well more by a thousand de^e
Than it was erst, that saw I well
Tho saw I on a pyller by
Of iron wrought full sternely
The great poet dan Lucan
That on his shulders bare up than
As hye as that I might se
The fame of Iulyus and Pompee
And by him stoden all these clerks
That write of Romes mighty works
That if I would her names tell
All to long must I dwell
And next him on a pyller stood
Of Sulphur, lyche as he were wode
Dan Claudian, sothe for to tell
That bare up all the fame of Hell
Of Pluto, and of Proserpyne
That queen is of the derke pyne
What should I more tell of this
The hall was all full ywis
Of hem that written old iestes
As ben on t^^es tokes nestes
But it a full confuse matere
were all these iestes for to here
That they of write, and hew they hight
But while that I beheld this sight
I herd a noise approchen blyue
That fares as bees done in an hyue
Against her time of out flyenge
Right such a manner murmuring
For all the world it seemed me
Tho began I look about and se
That there come entering in to the hall
A right great company wythall
And that of sundry regyons
Of all kyns condicyons
That dwell in earth under the moon
Poor and rich, and also soon
As they were come in to the hall
They began on knees down to fall
Before this ylke noble queen
And said, grant us lady shene
Each of us of thy grace above
And some of hem she granted soon
And some she warned well and fair
And some she granted the contrayre
Of her asking utterly
But this I say you trewly
what her grace was I nyst
For of these folk full well I wist
They had good fame each deserved
All though they were dyuersly served
Right as her sister dame Fortune
Is wont to serve in commune
Now harken how she began to pay
Hem that began her of grace pray
And yet lo, all this company
Seyden sothe, and not a lie
Madame said they, we be
Folk that here besechen the
That thou grant us now good fame
And let our works have good name
In full recompensacioun
Of good work, give us good renoun
I warn it you (quod she) anon
Ye get of me good fame none
By god, and therefore go your way
Alas (quod they) and welaway
Tell us what your cause may be
For me list it not (quod she)
No wight shall speak of you ywis
Good ne harm, ne that ne this
And with that word she began to call
Her messenger that was in hal
And bad that he should fast gone
Upon pain to be blind anon
For Eolus the god of wind
In Trace there ye shall him find
And bid him bring his clarioun
That is full diverse of his sown
And it is cleped clear Laud
With which he wont is to heraude
Hem that me list ypraysed be
And also bid him how that he
Bring eke his other claryoun
That hight Sclaundre in every town
with which he wont is to diffame
Hem that me list and do hem shame
This messenger began fast to gone
And found where in a cave of stone
In a country that heght Trace
This Eolus with hard grace
Held the wyndes in distress
And began hem under him to press
That they gone as the beres rore
He bound and pressed hem so sore
This messenger began fast cry
Rise up (quod he) and fast the hye
Till thou at my lady be
And take thy clarions eke with the
And speed the fast, and he anon
Took to one that hight Tritone
His clarions to beren tho
And let a certain wind go
That blewe so hydously and hye
That it ne left not a sky
In all the welken long and broad
This Eolus no where abode
Till he was come to Fames fete
And eke the man that Triton hete
And there he stood as still as stone
And here wythall there came anon
Another huge company
Of good folk and began to cry
Lady, grant us now good fame
And let our works have that name
Now in honor of gentylnesse
And also god your soul bless
For we han well deserved it
Therefore is right that we be quyt
As thryue I (quod she) ye shall fail
Good works shall you not avail
To have of me good fame as now
But wot ye what, I grant you
That ye shall have a shrewde name
And wicked loos and worse fame
Though ye good loos have well deserved
Now gothe your way for ye ben served
And thou dan Eolus (quod she)
Take forth thy trumpe anon let se
That is ycleped Sclaundre light
And blow her loos, that every wight
Speak of hem harm and shrewdness
Instead of good and worthynesse
For thou shalt trumpe all the contrayre
Of that they have done, well or fair
Alas thought I what auentures
Have these sorry creatures
That they among all the prees
Should thus be shamed gyltles
But what, it must needs be
what did this Eolus, but he
Took out his black trumpe of bras
That fouler than the devil was
And began this trumpe for to blow
As all the world should overthrow
Throughout every regioun
went this foul trumpes soun
As s^^yfte as a pellet out of a gonne
when fire is in the powder run
And such a smoke began out wend
Out of the foul trumpes end
Black, blo, grenysshe, swartyshe read
As does where that men melte led
Lo, all on hye from tewell
And thereto one thing saw I well
That the ferther that it ran
The greter wexen it began
As does the river from a well
And it stanke as the pyt of hell
Alas, thus was her shame yr^nge
And gyltlesse on every tongue
Tho came the third company
And gone up to the dees to hye
And down on knees they fell anon
And sayden, we ben euerychon
Folk that han full trewly
Deserved fame ryghtfully
And prayde you it might be know
Right as it is, and forth blow
I grant (quod she) for now me list
That your good works shall be wist
And yet ye shall have better loos
Right in dispyte of all your foos
Than worthy is, and that anon
Let now (quod she) thy trumpe gone
Thou Eolus, that is so blake
And out thine other trumpe take
That hight Laud, and blow it so
That through the would her fame go
All easily and not to fast
That it be known at the last
Full gladly lady mine he said
And out his trumpe of gold he brayde
Anon, and set it to his mouth
And blewe it eest, west, and southe
And north, as loud as any thonder
That every wight has of it wonder
So broad it ran or that it stene
And certes all the brethe that went
Out of his trumpes mouth smelde
As men a pot full of baume held
Among a basket full of roses
This favor did he to her loses
And right with this I began espy
There came the fourth company
But certain they were wonder few
And gonne to standen on a rewe
And sayden, certes lady bright
we have done well with all our might
But we ne keep to have fame
Hyde our works and our name
For gods love, for certes we
Have surely done it for bounte
And for no manner other thing
I grant you all your askyng
(quod she) let your works be deed
With that about I turned my heed
And saw anon the fyfte route
That to this lady began loute
And down on knees anon to fall
And to her tho besoughten all
To hyden her good works eke
And said, they give not a leke
For no fame, ne such renoun
For they for contemplacioun
And gods love had it wrought
Ne of fame would they naught
What (quod she) and be ye wood
And wene ye for to do good
And for to have of that no fame
Have ye dispyte to have my name
Nay ye shall lain euerychone
Blow thy trumpe and that anon
(quod she) thou Eolus I hot
And ring these folks works by note
That all the world may of it here
And he began blow her loos so clear
In his golden clartoun
That through the world went the soun
All so kyndly, and eke so soft
That their fame was blow a lofte
Tho came the syxt company
And began fast to Fame cry
Right verily in this manner
They sayden, mercy lady dear
To tell certain as it is
we have done neither that ne this
But ydell all our life has be
But nathelesse yet pray we
That we may have as good a fame
And great renome and known name
As they that have do noble iestes
And acheued all her questes
As well of love as other thing
All was us never broche ne ryng
Ne else what fro women sent
Ne ones in her heart yment
To maken us only friendly chere
But might temen us on bear
Yet let us to the people seem
Such as the world may of us deem
That women louen us for wood
It shall do us as much good
And to our heart as much avail
The counterpeyse, ease, and travail
As we had wone with labor
For that is dear bought honor
At regard of our great ease
And yet ye must us more please
Let us be hold eke thereto
worthy, wise, and good also
And rich, and happy unto love
For gods love that sytteth above
Though we may not the body have
Of women, yet so god me save
Let men glewe on us the name
Suffyseth that we have the fame
I grant (quod she) by my truth
Now Eolus wythouten slouthe
Take out thy trumpe of gold (quod she)
And blow as they have asked me
That every man wene hem at ease
Though they go in full badde lease
This Eolus began it so blow
That through the world it was yknowe
Tho came the seventh route anon
And fill on knees euerychone
And said, lady grant us soon
The same thing, the same boon
That this next folk have done
Fie on you (quod she) euerychone
Ye masty swyne, ye ydel wretches
Full of roten slow tet ches
what false thieves, where ye would
Ben famed good, and nothing nolde
Deserve why, ne never thought
Men rather you to hangen ought
For ye be like the slepy catte
That would have fysh: but wost thou what?
He woll nothing wete his claws
Yuell thrifte come to your jaws
And on mine if I it grant
Or do favor you to auaunt
Thou Eolus, thou king of Trace
Go blow this folk a sorry grace
(quod she) anon, and wost thou how
As I shall tell the right now
Say these ben they that would honor
Have, and do no kyns labor
Ne do no good, and yet have laud
And that men wend that beelle Isaude
Ne could hem not of love werne
And yet she that grynt at querne
Is al to good to ease her heart
This Eolus anon up sterte
And with his black clarion
He began to blasen out a soun
As lounde as belleth wind in hell
And eke therewith sothe to tell
This sown was so full of iapes
As ever mowes were in apes
And that went all the world about
That every wight began on hem shoute
And for to laugh as they were wode
Such game found they in her hode
Tho came another company
That had ydone the treachery
The harm and great wickedness
That any heart couden guess
And prayed her to have good fame
And that she nolde do hem no shame
But give hem loos and good renoun
And do it blow in claryoun
Nay wys (quod she) it were a vice
Al be there in me no justice
Me list not to do it now
Ne this I nyl grant it you
Tho came there leapyng in a route
And began clappen al about
Every man upon the crown
That all the hall began to sown
And said, lady let and dear
we ben such folkys as ye may here
To tell all the tale a right
we ben shrewes every wight
And have delight in wickedness
As good folk have in goodness
And joy to be known shrewes
And full of vice and wicked thewes
wherefore we pray you on a row
That our fame be such yknowe
In all thing right as it is
I grant it you (quod she) ywys
But what art thou that say this tale
That wearest on thy hose a pale
And on thy typpet such a bell
Madame (quod he) sothe to tell
I am that ylke shrewe ywis
That brent the temple of Isydis
In A^henes, lo that cite
And wherefore dyddest thou so (quod she)
By my truth (quod he) madame
I would said have had a name
As other folk had in the town
Although they were of great renown
For her virtue and her thewes
Thought I, as great fame have shrewes
(Though it be naught) for shreudnesse
As good folk have for goodness
And sythen I may not have that one
That other nyll I not forgone
As for to get a fame here
The temple set I all on fire
Now don our loos be blow swythe
As wysly be thou ever blythe
Gladly (quod she) thou Eolus
Herest thou not what they prayen us
Madame yes, full well (quod he)
And I will trumpen it parde
And took his black trumpe fast
And began to puffen and to blaste
Till it was at the worlds end
With that I began about wend
For one that stood right at my bake
Me thought full goodly to me spoke
And said, friend what is thy name
Art thou come hyder to have fame?
Nay for sothe friend (quod I)
I come not hither grant mercy
For no such cause by my heed
Suffyseth me, as I were deed
That no wight have my name in hand
I wot my self best how I stand
For what I dry, or what I think
I woll my self all it drink
Certain for the more part
As ferforthe as I can mine art
what do thou here than (quod he)
(quod I) that woll I tell the
The cause why I stand here
Some new tidings for to lere
Some new thing I not what
Tydinges either this or that
Of love, or such things glade
For certainly he that me made
To come hyder, said to me
I should both here and se
In this place wonder things
But these be no such tidings
As I meant of: No (quod he)
And I answerde, no parde
For well I wot ever yet
Sithe that first I had wit
That some folk han desired fame
Diversely, and loos and name
But certainly I nyst how
Ne where that Fame dwelled or now
Ne eke of her description
Ne also her condycion
Ne the order of her dome
Knew I not till I hyder come
Why than be lo these tidings
That thou now hither brynges
That thou haste herd (quod he) to me
But now no force, for well I se
what thou desyrest for to lere
Come forth and stand no longer here
And I woll the without dread
In to such another place led
There thou shall here many one
Tho began I forth with him gone
Out of the castle sothe to sey
Tho saw I stand in a valey
Under the castle fast by
An house, that domus Dedaly
That Laborintus ycleped is
Nas made so wonderly iwys
Ne half so queyntly ywrought
And euermo, as swyfte as thought
This queynt house about went
That neuermo it still stent
And there came out so great a noise
That had it stand upon Oyse
Men might have herd it easily
To Rome, I trow sikerly
And the noise which that I herd
For all the world right so it ferde
As does the routyng of the stone
That fro thengyn is letyn gone
And all this house of which I read
was made of twigs falowe read
And grene eke, and some were white
Such as men to these cages twhyte
Or maken of these panyers
Or else hutches or dossers
That for the swough and for the twigs
This house was also full of gygges
And also full eke of chyrkynges
And of many other workings
And eke this house has of entrees
As many as leaves ben on trees
In summer when they ben grene ^
And on the rofe yet men may seen
A thousand holes, and well mo
To letten the sown out go
And by day in every tide
Ben all the doors open wide
And by night each one vnshette
Ne port is there none to let
No manner tidings in to pace
Ne never rest is in that place
That it nys filled full of tidings
Either loud or of whysperynges
And ever all the houses angles
Is full of rownynges and of iangles
Of werres, of peace, of maryages
Of restes, and of labor of vyages
Of abode of death, and of life
Of love, of hate, accord, of strife
Of loss, of lore, and of wynnynges
Of heal, of sycknesse, or of lesynges
Of fair wether, and eke of tempests
Of qualme of folk, and of beestes
Of diverse transmutacions
Of estates, and eke of regyons
Of trust, of dred, of ialousy
Of wit, of wennyng, of folly
Of plenty, and of great famyne
Of chepe, of derthe, and of ruin
Of good or misgouernment
Of fire, and of diverse accydent
And lo, this house of which I write
Syker be ye it nas not lyte
For it was sixty mile of length
Al was the tymbre of no strength
Yet it is founded to endure
while that it list to Adventure
That is the mother of tydinges
As the sea of wells and springes
And it was shapen like a cage
Certes (quod I) in all mine age
Ne saw I such an house as this
And as I wondered me ywis
Upon this house, tho ware was I
How mine Egle fast by
was perched hye upon a stone
And I began straight to him gone
And said thus, I pray the
That thou a while abide me
For gods love, and let me seen
what wonders in that place been
For yet peraunter I may lere
Some good therein, or somewhat here
That lefe me were, or that I went
Peter, that is now mine intent
(Quod he to me) therefore I dwell
But certain one thing I the tell
That but I bring the therein
Ne shall thou never conne the gyn
To come in to it, out of doubt
So fast it whyrieth lo about
But sithe that I Jove's of his grace
As I have said, will the solace
Finally with these things
Uncouth syghtes and tidings
To pass with thine heaviness
Such routhe has he of thy distress
That thou suffredest debonairly
And woste thy seluen utterly
Desperate of al bliss
Sithe that fortune has made a mysse
The swote of al thyn hertes rest
Languysshe, and eke in point to breast
But he through his myghtie merit
will do the ease, al be it lyte
^aue in express conmaundement
To which I am obedyent
To forther the with all my might
And wysse and teache the a right
where thou may most tidings here
Thou shalt here many one lere
With this word he right anon
Hent me up between his tone
And at a wyndowe in me brought
That in this house was, as me thought
And there wythall me thought it stent
And nothing it about went
And me set in the floor adoun
But such a great congregacioun
Of folk, as I saw rome about
Some within and some without
Nas never seen, ne shall be efte
That certes in this world nys left
So many formed by nature
Ne deed so many a creature
That well uneath in that place
Had I a foot bread of space
And every wight that I saw there
Rowned eueryche in others cere
A new tydynge pryuely
Or else it told all openly
Right thus, and said: Nost not thou
That is be tydde, lo right now
No (quod he) tell me what
And than he told him this and that
And swore thereto, that it was sothe
Thus has he said, and thus he does
And this shall be, and thus herd I say
That shall be found, that dare I lay
That all the folk that is on live
Ne have the connyng to discryue
Tho things that I herd there
what a loud, and what in eere
But all the wonder most was this
when one had herd a thing ywis
He came straight to another wight
And began him tellen anon right
The same that him was told
Or it a furlonge way was old
And began somewhat for to each
To this tydyng in this speech
More than ever it spoken was
And not so sone departed nas
Tho fro him that he ne met
With the third, and er he let
Any stounde, he told him alse
were the tidings sothe or false
Yet would he tell it natheles
And ever mo with more encrees
Than it was erst: thus north and southe
went every tydyng, fro mouth to mouth
And that encreasyng euermo
As fire is wont to quycken and go
From a sparcle sprongen amys
Till all a cite brent up is
And when that was full up spronge
And waxen more on every tongue
Than ever it was, and went anon
Up to a wydowe out to gone
Or but it might out there pass
It began out crepe at some creuasse
And flewe forth fast for the nones
And sometime I saw there at ones
A leasing, and a sad sothe saw
That gonnen of adventure draw
Out of a wyndowe for to pace
And when they metten in that place
They were a checked both two
And neither of hem might out go
For each other they gonne so croude
Till each of hem began cryen loud
Let me gone first, nay but let me
And here I woll ensuren the
With nones that thou wolte do so
That I shall never fro the go
But be thine own sworn brother
we woll meddle us each in other
That no man be he never so wroth
Shall have one two, but both
At ones, all beside his leave
Come we amorowe or on eve
Be we cryde or still yrowned
Thus saw I false and sothe compowned
Together fly for o tydynge
Thus out at holes gonne wrynge
Every tydynge straight to Fame
And she began give each his name
After her dysposycion
And give hem eke duracion
Some to wexe and wane soon
As does the fair white moon
And let hem gone, there might I seen
Wynged wonders fast flyen
Twenty thousand in a route
As Eolus hem blewe about
And lord this house in all times
was full of shypmen and pilgrims
with scryppes brette full of leasynges
Entremelled with tidings
And eke alone by hem selue
O many thousand times twelve
Saw I eke of these pardoners
Currours, and eke messangers
with boxes crommed full of lies
As ever vessel was with lies
And as I alther fastest went
About, and did all mine intent
Me for to playen and for to lere
And eke a tydynge for to here
That I had herd of some country
That I shall not now be told for me
For it no need is redely
Folk can sing it bet then I
For all mote out late or rathe
All the sheues in the rathe
I herd a great noise wythall
In a corner of the hall
There men of love tidings told
And I began thyderwarde behold
For I saw rennynge every wight
As fast as that they hadden might
And eueryche cryde, what thing is that
And some said I not never what
And when they were all on an hepe
Tho behind gonne up lepe
And clamben up on other fast
And up the noise on hyghen cast
And treden fast on others heles
And stamp as men done after eles
At the last I saw a man
which that I naught ne can
But he seemed for to be
A man of great authorite
And therwythall I abrayde
Out of my sleep half afraid
Remembrynge well what I had seen
And how hye and far I had been
In my ghost, and had great wonder
Of that the god of thonder
Had let me known, and began to write
Like as ye have herd me endyte
wherefore to study and read always
I purpose to do day by day
Thus in dreamynge and in game
Ends this little book of Fame
Here follows the Testament of Love.
The testament of love.
MAny men there been, that with eeres openly sprad, so much swalowen the
deliciousness of iestes and of ryme, by queynte knyttynge colors, that of
the goodness or of the badnesse of the sentence take they little head or else
none. Sothelye dull wit and a thoughtfull soul, so sore have mined and
grassed in my spirits, that such craft of endytynge woll not ben of mine
acquayntaunce. And for rude words and boystous percen the heart of the herer
to the inrest point and planten there the sentence of things, so that with
little help it is able to spring. This book that nothing has of the great
floode of wit, ne of semelych colors, is doluen with rude words and boystous,
and so draw together to maken the catchers hereof ben the more ready to hent
sentence.

Some men there ben that peynten with colors rich, and some with verse, as
with red ynke, and some with coals and chalk: and yet is there good matere to
the leude people of thilke chalky purtreiture, as hem thinks for the time,
and afterward the sight of the better colors yeuen to hem more joy for the
first lewdness. So sothly this leude cloudye occupacion is not to praise, but
by the leude: for comenly leude, lewdness commends. Eke it shall give sight
that other precious things shall be the more in reverence. In latin and french
has many sovereign wits had great delight to endyte, and have many noble
things fulfylde, but certes there ben some yt speken their poysy matter in
french, of which speech the french men have as good a fantasye as we have in
hearing of french men's english. And many terms there ben in english, which
uneath we englyshmen connen declare the knowlegynge: How should then a french
man borne, such terms conne iumpere in his matter, but as the iaye chatereth
english. Right so truly the understanding of englyshmen woll not stretche to
the privy terms in french, what so ever we bosten of strange langage. Let
then clerks endyten in latin, for they have the propertye of science And the
knowing in that facultye: and let frenchmen in their french also endyte^
their queynt terms, for it is kyndly to their mouths, and let us show our
fantasyes in such words as we lerneden of our dames tongue. And although this
book be little thank worthy for the lewdness in travail, yet such wrytynges
exciten men to thylke things yt been necessary: for every man thereby may as
by a perpetual myrrour seen the vices or virtues of other, in which thing
lightly may be conceived to eschew peryls, and necessaries to catch, after as
aue^tures have fallen to other people or persons. Certes ye soueraynst thing of
desire and most creature reasonable, have or else should have full appetyte to
their perfection: unreasonable beestes mowen not, sith reason has in hem no
werkynge. Then reasonable that wol not, is comparysoned to unreasonable, and
made like hem. Forsothe the most sovereign and fynall perfection of man is in
knowing of a soth, wythouten any intent dysceyuable, and in love of one very
god, that is inchaungeable, that is to know and love his creator. Now
principally the mean to bring in knowlegyng and loving his creator, is the
consyderacion of things made by the creator wherthrough be thylke things
that been made understanding here to our wits, arne the unseen priuytees of
god made to us sightful and knowing, in our co^templacion and understanding.
These things then forsooth much bryngen us to ye full knowlegynge sothe, and to
the parfyte love of the maker of heavenly things. Lo David says: thou haste
delyted me in making, as who says, to have delight in ye tune how god has
lent me in co^syderation of thy making. whereof Aristotle in the book de
Animalibus says to naturel philosophers: It is a great liking in love of
knowing their creator and also in knowing of causes in kyndelye things
consydred. Forsothe the forms of kyndly things and ye shap, a great kyndly
love me^ should have to the werkman yt hem made The craft of a werkman is
showed in the work. Herefore truly the philosophers with a lively study many
noble things, right precious and worthy to memory written, and by a great
swet ande travail to us leften of causes the properties in natures of things.
To which therefore Philosophers it was more joy, more liking, more herty lust
in kyndly virtues and matters of reason ye perfection by busy study to know,
the^ to have had all the treasure, all the richesse, al ye vaynglory yt the
passed Emperors, princes, or kings hadden. Therefore ye names of hem in ye
book of perpetual memory in virtue and peace arne written, and in the contrary,
that is to said in stixe ye foul pytte of hell arne thilke pressed that
such goodness hated. And because this book shall be of love, and the pryme
causes of sterynge in that doing with passions and dyseases for wantynge of
desire, I will that this book be cleped ye Testament of love.

But now thou reder, who is thylke ye will not in scorn laughe, to here a
dwerfe or else half a man, say he will rende out the swerd of Hercules hands,
and also he should set Hercules gades a mile yet ferther, and over that he had
power of strength to pull up the spear, that Alisander ye noble might never
wegge.

And that passing al thing to ben master of France by might, there as the
noble gracious Edward the third for all his great prowes in vyctories ne
might al yet co^quere

Certes I wot well, there shall be made more scorn and iape of me, that I so
unworthily clothed altogether in the cloudy cloud of vnco^nynge will putte^ me
in prees to speak of love or else of the causes in that matter, sythen all ye
greatest clerks han had enough to done, and as who says gathered up clean
toforne hem and with their sharp sythes of conning all mowen and made thereof
great rekes and noble, full of all plentyes to feed me and many another. Envy
forsothe commends naught his reason, yt he has in hayne, be it never so
trusty. And although these noble repers, as good workmen and worthy their hyer,
have al draw and bound up in ye sheues, and made many shockes, yet have I
ensample to gather the small cro^mes, and fulle^ my walet of tho that fallen
from the board among^ the small hounds, notwythstandynge the travail of the
almoygner, yt has draw up in the cloth all the remyssayles, as trenchours, and
the relyfe to bear to the alms. Yet also have I leave of ye noble husbonde
Boece, although I be a stranger of conning to come after his doctrine, and
these great workme^, and glene my handfuls of the shedynge after their hands
and if me fail ought of my full, to increase my portion with that I shall draw
by priuytyes out of the shocke, a slye servant in his own help is often
much co^me^ded, knowing of troth in causes of things, was more hardyer in
the first sechers, and so says Aristotle, and lyghter in us yt has followed
after. For their passing study han freshed our wits, and our understanding
han excyted in cosyderacion of troth by sharpness of their reasons. Utterly
these things be no dremes ne iapes, to throw to hogs, it is lyfelyche meat
for children of troth, and as they me betyden when I pylgrimaged out of my
kyth in winter, when the wether out of measure was boystous, and the wild
wind Borias as his kind asks with dryenge coldes, maked the wawes of the
Occian see so to arise unkindly over the common banks that it was in point
to spyl all the earth.

Thus ends the prologue, and here after follows the first book of the
Testament of Love.
ALas Fortune alas, I that sometime in delycious hours was wont to enjoy
blysful stoundes, am now drive by unhappy heaviness to bewail my sundry yuels
in tene. Trewlye I leave, in mine heart is write of perdurable letters all the
entencions of lamentacion that now ben ynempned, for any manner disease outward
in sobbing manner, shows sorrowful yexynge from within. Thus from my comfort
I gynne to spylle, sith she that should me solace, is far fro my presence.
Certes her absence is to me an hell, my sternyng death thus in woe it myneth, yt
endelesse care is through out mine heart cle^ched, bliss of my joy, that
often my murthed is turned into galle, to think on thing that may not at my
will in arms me hent. Mirth is changed into tene, when swynke is there
continually, that rest was wont to soiourne and have dwelling place. Thus
wytlesse thoughtfull, syghtlesse lokinge, I endure my penance in this derke
prysone, caytisned fro frendshyp and acquaintance, and forsaken of all ye any
word dare speak. Strange has by way of intrucyon made his home, there me
should be, if reason were herd as he should. Neuerthelater yet hertely lady
precious Margarit, have mind on thy servant, and think on his disease how
lyghtles he lives, sithe the beams bre^nende in love of thine eyes arne so be
went that worlds and clouds atwene us tweye woll not suffer my thoughts of
hem to be enlumyned. Think that one virtue of a Margarite precious is among
many other the sorrowful to comfort, yet well of that me sorrowful to comfort
is my lust to have naught else at this time, deed ne death, ne no manner
travail has no power mine heart so much to fade, as should to here of a
twynckelynge in your disease. Ah, god forbyde that, but yet let me dey, let
me sterue wythouten any measure of penance, rather then mine hertely thinking
comfort in ought were dyseased. What may my service aueyle in absence of her,
that my service should accept? is this not endless sorrow to think? Yes, yes
god wot, mine heart breaks nygh a sonder how should the ground without
kyndly noriture bryngen forth any fruits? how should a ship withouten a
stern in the great see be governed? How should I withouten my bliss, my
heart, my desire, my joy, my goodness, endure in this contrarious prison,
that think every hour in ye day an hundred winter? Well may now Eve said to
me Adam, in sorrow fallen from wealth, dryue^ art thou out of paradyse, with
sweat thy sustenau^ce to be swynke. Deep in this pynynge pytte with woe I lygge
ystocked, with chains lynked of care and of tene. It is so hye from thens I
lie and ye common earth, there ne is cable in no land maked, that might
stretche to me to draw me in to bliss, ne steyers to stey on is none, so that
without recover endless here to endure I wot well I purueyd. O, where art
thou now fre^dshyp, that sometime with laughande chere, made both face and
countenance to me wards? truly now art thou went out of town, but ever me
thinks he wears his old clothes, and that ye soul in the which the life of
frendshyppe was in, is drawn out from his other spirits. Now then farewell
friendship, and farewell felawes, me thinks ye al han taken your leave: no
force of you all at ones. But lady of love ye wot what I mean, yet think on
thy servant, that for thy love spylleth, all things have I forsake to folowen
thine hestes: reward me with a thought, though ye do naught else. Remembrance of
love lies so sore under my breast, that other thought comes not in my mind
but gladness to think on your goodness and your merye chere, friends and
sorrow to think on your wr^che and your danger, from which Christ me save.
My great joy it is to have in meditacion the bounties, the virtues. The nobley
in yon prynted: sorrow and hell comen at ones, to suppose that I be beyned:
thus with care, sorrow, and tene am I shapte mine end with death to make. Now
good goodlye think on this. O wretched fool that I am fallen into so low,
the heat of my bre^nyng tene has me al defased: how should ye lady set
pryse on so foul fylthe? My conning is thynne, my wit is exiled, like to a
fool naturel am I comparysoned. Trewly lady but your mercy the more were I
wot well al my labor were in ydel: your mercy then passes right. God grant
that proposycyon to be verifyed in me, so that by trust of good hope, I mow
come to the haven of ease, and sithe it is impossyble, the colors of your
qualyties to change: and forsooth I wot well wemme ne spotte may not abide,
there so noble virtue habou^deth, so that the defasynge to you is verily
ymagynable, as countenance of goodness with encreasynge virtue, is so in you
knytte to abide by necessary manner, yet if the ryuers might fall, which is
against kind, I wol well mine heart ne should therefore naught flytte by the least
point of gemetrye, so sadlye is it sonded, that away from your service in love
may he not depart. O love, when shall I ben pleased? O charity, when shall I
ben eased? O good goodly, when shall the dyce turn? O full of virtue do the
chance of comfort upward to fall. O love, when wolt thou think on thy
servant? I can no more but here out cast of al welfare, abide the day of my
death, or else to se the sight that might all my wellyng sorrows void, and of
the floode make an ebb These dyseases mowen well by duresse of sorrow, make my
life to vnbodye, and so for to dye: but certes ye lady in a full perfection of
love ben so knytte with my soul, that death may not thylke knotte unbind ne
depart, so that ye and my soul together is endelesse, in bliss should dwell,
and there shall my soul at the full ben eased, that he may have your presence
to show thente^t of his desires: Ah dear god, that shall be a great joy. Now
erthely goddess take regard of thy servant, though I be feeble, for thou art
wont to praise them better, that would conne serve in love, al be he full mener
then kings or princes, that woll not have that virtue in mind. Now precious
Margaryte, that with thy noble virtue haste drawn me into love first, me
wenyng thereof to have bliss, as galle and aloes are so much spronge, that
savor of swetnesse may I not attaste. Alas that your benign eyes, in which
that mercy seems to have al his noriture, nyll by no way turn the
clerenesse of mercy to me wards. Alas that your brennande virtues, shynynge
among all folk, and enlumynynge all other people by habundau^ce of
increasing, shows to me but smok and no light. These things to think in
mine heart makes every day weping in mine eyes to run. These lyggen on my
back so sore, that importable burden me seems on my back to be charged, it
makes me backwarde to meue, when my steps by comune course even forth
pretend: These things also on ryghtsyde and lift, have me so enuolued with
care, that wa^hope of help is throughout me run, trewly and leave that
graceless is my fortune, which that ever shows it mewardes by a cloudy
disease, already to make storms of tene, and the blysfull side halte still
awayward, and woll it not suffer to mewardes to turn: no force, yet wol I not
ben conquered

O, alas that your nobley so much among all other creatures commended by
following streme by all manner virtues, but there ben wonderful, I not which that
let the flode to come into my soul, wherefore purely mated with sorrow thorough
sought, my self I cry on your goodness to have pity on this caytyfe, that in
the inrest degree of sorrow and disease is left, and without your goodly will
from any help and recovery. These sorrows may I not sustene, but if my sorrow
should be told and to you wards showed, although much space is between us
twain, yet me thinks that by such ioleynynge words, my disease gyuueth
ebb. Trewly me thinks that the sown of my lamentacious weeping, is right now
flow into your presence, and there cries after mercy and grace, to which
thing me seems the list none answer to give, but with a deynous chere ye
co^maunden it to avoid, but god forbid that any word should of you spring to
have so little routh. Parde pity and mercy in every Margarite is closed by kind
among many other virtues, by qualites of comfort, but comfort is to me right
naught worth, wythouten mercy and pity of you alone which things hastily god
me grant for his mercy.

REhersynge these things and many other, without time or moment of rest me
seemed for anguyshe of disease, that altogether I was ravished, I can not tell
how, but holy all my passions and felynges weren lost, as it seemed for the
time, and suddenly a manner of dread light in me all at ones, naught such fear
as folk have of an enemy that were mighty, and would hem grieve or done hem
disease: For I trow this is well know to many persons that otherwhyle if a
man be in his soueraynes presence, a manner of ferdnesse crepeth in his heart,
not for harm, but of goodly subjection namely as men reden that angels ben
aferde of our savior in heaven. And pardy there ne is, ne may no passyo^ of
disease be, but it is to mean that angels ben adrade, not by friends of dread,
sythe^ they ben perfytly blyssed, as affection of wo^derfulnesse and by service
of obedience, such ferde also han these lovers in presence of their loves, and
subjects aforne their soueraynes: Right so with ferdenesse mine heart was
caught. And I suddenly astonyed, there entered into the place there I was lodged
a lady, the semelyest and most goodly to my sight, that ever to forne apered
to any creature, and truly in the blustryng of her look, she yaue gladness and
comfort sodaynlye to all my wits, and right so she does to every wight
that comes in her presence. And for she was so goodlye (as me thought) mine
heart began somdele to be enbolded, and wexte a little hardy to speak, but
yet with a quakynge voice, as I durst, I salued her, and inquired what she
was, and why she so worthy to syghte, dayned to enter in to so foul a
dou^geon, and namelye a prison, without leave of my kepers. For certes
although the virtue of deeds of mercy stretchen to vysyten the poor
prisoners, and hem after that faculties ben had to comfort, me seemed that I was
so far fallen into myserye and wretched hyd caytyfnesse, that me should no
precious thing nyghe: and also that for my sorrow every wight should ben
heavy, and wyshe my recovery. But when this lady had somdele aperceyued, as well
by my words as by my chere, what thought be^yed me within, with a good womanly
countenance she said these words.

O my nory, wenyst thou that my manner be, to foryet my friends or my
servants? nay (quod she) it is my full entente to vysyte and comfort al my
frendshyppes and alyes, as well in time of perturbation, as of most propertye
of bliss, in me shall unkindness never be founden. And also sythen I have so
few especyal true now in these days, wherefore I may well at more leysar
come to hem that me deseruen, and if my coming may in any thing avail, wete
well I woll come often.

Now good lady (quod I) that art so fair on to look, reynynge honny by thy
words, bliss of paradyse arne thy lokynges, joy and comfort are thy
mouynges. What is thy name? how is it that in you is so mokel werkynge virtues
enpyght, as me seems, and in none other creature, that ever saw I with mine
eyes? My dyscyple (quod she) me wo^dreth of thy words and on the, yt for a
little disease haste foryeten my name: woste thou not well that I am Love, that
first the brought to thy service? O good lady (quod I) is this worship to the
or to thine excellence for to come into so foul a place? Parde sometime tho I
was in prosperity, and with foreyne goods enuolued, I had mokel to done to
draw the to mine hostel, and yet many wernynges thou made er thou list
fullye to grant, thine home to make at my dwelling place: and now thou come
goodly by thine own vyse, to comfort me with words, and so there thoroughe I
gynne remember on passed gladness. Trewly lady I ne wotte whether I shall say
welcome or none, sythen thy coming wol as much do me tene and sorrow, as
gladness and myrthe: se why. For that me comfort to think on passed
gladness, that me anoyeth efte to be in doing. Thus thy coming both
gladdeth and teneth, and that is cause of much sorrow: Lo lady, how then I
am comforted by your coming, and with that I began in teeres to dystylle, and
tenderlye weep. Now certes (quod love) I se well (and that me ouerthynketh)
that wit in the fails, and art in point to dote. Trewly (quod I) that
have ye maked, and that ever woll I rue. Wottest thou not well (quod she) that
every shepeherde ought by reason to seek his sperkelande sheep that arne run
in to wilderness, among bushes and peryls, and hem to their pasture again
bring and take on hem privy besy cure of keeping? and tho the uncunning sheep
scattred would ben lost, rennyng to wilderness, and to deserts draw, or else
wolden put hem self to the swalowynge wolf, yet shall the shepherd by
business and travail so put him forth, that he shall not let hem be lost by
no way. A good shepeherd puts rather his life to ben lost for his sheep.
But for thou shalt not wene me being of werse condicyon, truly for euerych of
my folk, and for all tho that to me ward be knyt in any condition, I will
rather dye than suffer hem through error to ben spylt. For me list, and it me
lyketh, of all mine a sheperdesse to be cleped* wottest thou not well I failed
never wight, but he me refused, and would neglygently go with unkindness? and
yet parde hau^ I many such holp and releued, and they have often me begyled, but
ever at the end it discendeth in their own necks. Have thou not radde how
kind I was to Paris, Priamus son of Troy? How Jason me falsed for all his
false behest? how Sesars sonke, I left it for no tene till he was troned in my
bliss, for his service* what (quod she) most of all maked I not a louedaye
between God and mankind, and chese a maid to be nompere, to put the quarrel
at end? Lo, how I have trauayled to have thank on all sides, and yet list me
not to rest, and I might find on who^ I should werche, but truly mine own
dysciple, because I have the found at all assayes in thy will to ben ready,
mye hestes to have followed, and have ben true to that margaryte peerle, that
ones I the showed, and she always ayenwarde has made but dangerous cheer, I
am come in propre person to put the out of errors and make the glad by ways
of reason, so that sorrow ne disease shall no more hereafter the amaystrye.
wherethrough I hope thou shalt lyghtlye come to the grace, that thou long
have desired, of thilke jewel. Have thou not herd many ensamples, how I have
comforted and releued the scholars of my lore? who has worthyed kings in the
field? who has honored ladies in boure by a perpetual myrroure of their
truth in my service? who has caused worthy folk to void vice and shame?
who has hold cities and realms in prosperity? if the list cleape again
thine old remembrance, thou coudest every point of this declare in especyall,
and say that I thy maystresse have be cause, causyng these things and many mo
other. Now ywys madame (quod I) al these things I know well my self, and
that thine excellence passes the understanding of us beestes, and that nomans
wit erthly may comprehend thy virtues, well than (quod she) for I se the in
disease and sorrow, I wot well thou art one of mine nories, I may not suffer
the so to make sorrow thine own self to shende: but I my self come to be thy
fere, thine heavy charge to make to seem the less, for woo is him that is
alone: And to the sorry to be^ moned by a sorrowful wight it is great
gladness. Right so with my sick friends I am sick, and with sorye, I can not
else but sorrow make, till when I have hem releued in such wise that gladness
in a manner of countrepaysyng shall restore as mokel in joy as the passed
heaviness beforne did in tene. And also (quod she) when any of my servants
ben alone in solitary place, I have yet ever busyed me to be with hem, in
comfort of their hertes, and taught hem to make songs of playnte and of
bliss, and to endyten letters of rethorycke in queynt vndersta^dynges, and to
bethynke hem in what wise they mygt best their ladies in good service plese and
also to learn manner in countenance, in words and in bearing, and to ben meke
and lowlye to every wight, his name and fame to increase, and to give great
yeftes and large that his renome may spryngen, but the thereof have I excused
for thy loss and thy great costages, wherthrough thou art nedy, arne nothing
to me unknown, but I hope to god sometime it shall ben amended, as thus as I
said. In nortuoure have I taught al mine, and in courtesy made hem expert
their ladies hertes to win, and if any would endeynous or proud or be envious,
or of wretches acquayntaunce, hasteliche have I such voyded out of my schole:
for all vices truly I hate: virtues and worthynesse in all my power I auaunce.
Ah worthy creature (quod I) and by just cause the name of goddess dignely ye
mow bear: In the lyth ye grace through which any creature in this world has
any goodness, truly all manner of bliss and precyousnesse in virtue out of the
springen and wellen, as brokes and ryuers proceden from their sprynges, and
like as all waters by kind drawn to the sea, so all kyndly things thresten
by full appetyte of desire to draw after thy steps, and to thy presence
approach, as to their kyndely perfection: How dare than beestes in this world
ought forfayte ayenste thy deuyne purueyaunce? Also lady ye known all the
pryuye thoughts, in hertes no counsel may ben hid from your knowing.

wherefore I wot well lady that ye know your self that I in my conscience am,
and have been wyllyng to your service, al could I never do as I should, yet
forsothe feigned I never to love otherwise tha^ was in mine heart: and if I
could have made cheer to one, and ythought an other, as many other done all
day before mine eyes, I trow it would not me have vayled. Certes quod she
had thou so done, I would not now have the here vysited. Ye wete well lady
eke (quod I) that I have not played racket, nettyll in, docke out, and with the
wethercock waued and truly there ye me set, by accord of my conscience, I
would not fly, till ye and reason by aperte strength made mine heart to
turn. In good faith (quod she) I have know the ever of tho conditions, and
sythe^ thou would (in as much as in the was) a made me pryuy of thy
counsel, and judge of thy conscience, though I forsook it in tho days, till I
saw better my time, would never god that I should now fail, but ever I will be
ready wytnessynge thy soth in what place that ever I shall, ayenste all tho
that wol the contrary sustain: And for as much as to me is naught unknown ne
hid of thy pryuy heart, but al have thou tho things made to me open at the
full, that has caused my coming into this prison to void the webbes of
thine eyes, to make the clerly to se the erroures thou have been in, and
because that men been of diverse condicyons, some adradde to say a soth, and
some for a sothe anon ready to fight, and also that I may not my self been
in place to withsaye thylke men that of the speaken, otherwise than the sothe,
I woll and I charge the in virtue of obedyence, that thou to me owe, to
written my words, and set hem in wrytynges that they mow as my wytnessyng ben
noted among the people. For books written neither dreden, ne shame, ne strive
conne, but only shown the intent of the writer, and give remembrance to the
hearer: and if any woll in thy presence say any thing to tho writers, look
boldlye, trust on Mars to answer at the full. For certes I shall him enfourme
of all the truth in thy love, with thy conscience, so that of his help thou
shall not varye at thy need.

I trow the strongeste and the best that may be found, woll not transuers thy
words, whereof than would thou dread?

Greatly was I tho gladed of these words, and as who says wexen somdele
light in heart both for the authority of witness and also for syckernesse of
help of the foresaid be hest, and said. Truly lady now am I well gladded
through comfort of your words: be it now liking unto your nobleye to show
which folk defame your servants, sith your service ought above all other
things to been commended. Yet (quod she) I se well thy soul is not all out of
the amassed cloud, the were better to here thing yt the might light out of
thine heavy charge, and after knowing of thine own heelpe, than to styrr sweet
words and such reasons to here: for in a thoughtfull soul (and namelye such
one as thou art) woll not yet such things synken. Come of therefore and let
me seen thine heuye charge, that I may the lyghtlyer for thy comfort purueye.

Now certes lady (quod I) the most comfort I might have, were utterly to wete
me be sure in heart of that Margaryte, I serve and so I think to done with all
myghtes while my life dureth. Tha^ (quod she) may thou thereafter, in such
wise that myspleasaunce ne enter? In good faith (quod I) there shall no
myspleasaunce be caused through trespass on my side. And I do the to wete^
(quod she) I set never yet person to serve in no place (but if he caused the
contrary in defaultes and trespasses) that he ne spedde of his service. Mine
own earthlye lady (quod I tho) and yet remember to your worthynesse how long
sythen by many reuoluynge of years, in time when Octobre his leave gynneth take,
and Nouembre shows him to sight, wha^ bernes ben full of goods as is the nut
on every halke, and than good land tyllers gynne shape for the earth, with
great travail to bring forth more corn to man's sustenaunce, against the
next years following. In such time of plenty, he that has an home, and is
wise, list not to wander maruayles to seche, but he be constrained or excited:
often the loath thing is done by excitacyon of other men's opinion, which wolden
feign have mine abiding, take in heart of lust, to travail and se the wynding
of the earth in that time of winter, by woods that large streets werne in, by
small paths that swyne and hogs haden made, as lanes with ladles their maste
to seche, I walked thinking aloone a wonder great while, and the great
beestes that the wood haunten and adorneth all manner forestes, and heerdes gone
to wild: than er I was ware I neyghed to a see bank, and for ferde of the
beestes shypcraft I cried: For lady I trow ye wete well your self nothing is
werse than the beestes that shulden be^ tame if they catch her wyldenesse, and
gyn again wax ramage: thus forsothe was I aferde, and to ship me hyed. Than
were there ynowe to latch mine hands and draw me to ship, of which many I
knew well the names. Sight was the first, lust was another, thought was the
third, and will eke was there a master: these broughten me with in boorde of
this ship of travail. So when the sail was sprad, and this ship began to
move, the wind and water began for to rise, and ouerthwartly to turn ye welken
the wawes semeden as they kyst together, but often under color of kyssyng is
mokell old hate privily closed and kept. The storm so straungely and in
deuouryng manner began so fast us assail, that I supposed the date of my death
should have made there his gynnyng, now up now down, now under the wawe and
now abouen, was my ship a great while. And so by mokel duresse of wethers
and of storms, and with great auowynge pylgremages I was driven to an isle,
where utterly I wend first to have be rescowed, but truly at the first
gynnynge, it seemed me so peryllous the haven to catch, that but through grace
I had been comforted, of life I was full dispayred. Truly, lady if ye be
remembered aryght of all manner things, your self came hastily to seen us see
driven, and to weten what we weren but first ye were deynous of cheer, after
which ye goone better alyght, and ever as me thought ye lived in great dread
of disease, it seemed so by your chere.

And when I was certifyed of your name the longer I looked in you, the more I
you goddly dradde, and ever mine heart on you opened the more, and so in a
little time my ship was out of mind. But lady as ye me lad, I was ware both
of beestes and of fysshes a great no^bre throngynge together: among which a
muskell in a blewe shel had enclosed a Margaryte perle, the most precious and
best that ever toforne came in my sight, and ye tolden your self that ylke
jewel in his kind was so good and so virtuous, that her better should I never
find, all sought I thereafter to the worlds end, and with that I held my
peace a great while: and ever sythe^ I have me bethought on the man that
sought the precious Margarytes, and when he had founden one to his lykyng, he
sold all his good to bye that jewel: Ywys thought I, and yet so I think, now
have I founden the iewelle that mine heart desires, whereto should I sech
ferther? truly now woll I stynte, and on this Margaryte I ^et me for ever. Now
than also sythen I will well it was your will that I should to such a service
me take, and so to desire that thing of which I never have bliss, there
lives none, but he has disease your might than that brought me to such
service, that to me is cause of sorrow and of joy, I wondre of your word that
ye said to bryngen men into joy, and parde ye wet well that defaulte ne
trespass may not reasonably been put to mewardes, as far as my conscience
knows. But of my disease me list now a while to speak, and to inform you
in what manner of bliss ye have me thronge. For truly I wene that al gladness,
all joy, and all mirth is beshet under lock, and the keye thrown in such
place yt it may not be found, my brennyng woe has altered all my hew. when I
should sleep, I walowe and I think, and me disporte. Thus co^bred, I seem
that all folk had me mased. Also lady mine, desire has long dured, some
speaking to have, or else at ye leest have been enmoysed with sight: and for
wanting of these things, my mouth would and he durst pleyne right sore, sythen
euyls for my goodness arne manyfolde to me yolden. I wonder lady truly, save
evermore your reverence, how ye mow for shame such things suffer on your
servant to be so multyplyed: wherefore knelyng with a low heart I pray you to
rue on this caytyfe, that of nothing now may serve. Good lady if ye list now
your help to me show, that am of your priuyest servants at al assayes in
this time, and under your wings of protection. No help to mewardes is shapen,
how shall tha^ strangers in any wise after succor look, when I that am so
pryuy, yet of help I do fail? Further may I not, but thus in this prison
abide: what bonds and chains me holden, lady ye se well your self? A renyant
foringed has not half the care. But thus syghyng and sobbing I wayle here
alone, and nere it for comfort of your presence, right here would I stern. And
yet alytle am I gladed, yt so goodly such grace and none hap have I hent,
gracyouslye to find the precious Margarete, that (all other lest) men
should bye, if they should therefore sell all her substance. woe is me that so
many let games and purpose brekers been maked wayters such prisoners as I am,
evermore to ouerloke and to hyndre, and for such lettoures, it is hard any
such jewel to win. Is this lady an honor to thy deytie? me thinks by
right, such people should have no maystry, ne ben ouerlokers over none of thy
servants. Truly were it leful unto you, to all the gods would I plain,
that ye rule your deuyne purueyaunce among your servants nothing as ye
should. Also lady my moeble is insu^^ysaunt to countreuayle the price of this
jewel, or else to make theschaunge: eke no wight is worthy such perles to
wear, but kings or princes, or else their peers: this jewel for virtue would
adorn and make fair al a realm, the no^ley of virtue is so much that her
goodness over all is commended who is it yt would not wayle but he might such
richesse have at his will the virtue thereof out of this prison may me deliver,
and naught else. And if I be not there throw helped, I se my self withouten
recovery: Although I might hence void, yet would I not, I would abide the day
that desteny has me ordained, which I suppose is without amendment, so sore
is mine heart bounden, that I may thynken none other. Thus strayte (lady,) has
sir Danger laced me in stocks, I leave it be not your will: and for I se you
taken so little head, as me thinks, and woll not maken by your might the
virtue in mercy of that Margaret on me for to stretch so as ye mow well, in case
that you list: my bliss and my mirth are field, syknesse and sorrow ben always
ready, ye cope oftene is wound about all my body, that stondyng is me best,
uneath may I lygge for pure myseasy sorrow, and yet all this is little enough to
be the ernest silver, in forward of this bargayne for treble fold, so mockell
must I suffer, er time come of mine ease. For he is worthy no wealth, that may
no woe suffer. And certes I am heuye to think on these things, but who shall
give me water enough to drink, lest mine eyes dry for re^nynge streams of
tears? who shall wayle^ with me mine own happy heaviness* who shall counsel
me now in my lykyng tene, and in my goodly harse? I not. For ever the more I
brenne, the more I couete, the more that I sorrow, the more thrist I in gladness
who shall than give me a contrarious drink to stanch the thyrst of my blysful
bytternes? Lo thus I brenne and I drenche, I shyuer and I swet, to this
reuersed evil was never yet ordained salve, for soth all lyches ben uncunning,
save the Margaryte aloone, any such remedy to purueye

ANd with these words I brast out to weep, that every tere of mine eyes for
greatness seemed they boren out of ye ball of my sight, and that all the water
had been out run. Tha^ thought me, that love began a little to heavy for
miscomfort of my chere, and began sobrely and in easy manner speak, well
aduysynge what she said. Comenly the wise speaken easelye and soft for many
skylles: One is, their words are the better believed, and also in easy
speaking, auysement men may catch, what to put forth, and what to holden in.
And also the authority of easy words is the more, and eke they yeuen the
more understanding to other intention of the matter. Right so this lady easily
and in a soft manner began say these words.

Marvel (quod she) great it is, that by no manner of semblaunt, as far as I
can espy thou list not to have any recoure, but ever thou playnest and
sorowest, and ways of remedy for foolysh wylfulnesse the list not to seche:
but inquire of thy next fre^des that is thine in wit, and me that have been thy
maystresse, and the recoure and fine of thy disease, or of disease is gladness
and Joy, with a full vessel so helded, that it quenches the felyng of the
first tenes. But thou that were wont not only these things remember in thine
heart, but also fools thereof to enfourmen, in adnullynge of their errors,
and distroying of their dark opinions, and in comfort of their sear
thoughts: now can thou not been comfort of thine own soul, in thynkyng of
these things. O where have thou ben so long commensal, that have so mykell
eeten of the pottages of foryetfulnesse: and dronken so of ignorance, that the
old soukyng which thou hadest of me, arne a maystred and lorne fro all manner
of knowing? O this is a worthy parson to help other, that can not counsel
him self. And with these words for pure and strong shame I woxe all reed.

And she than seeing me so astonyed by diverse stoundes, suddenly (which thing
kind hates) began delyciouslye me comfort with sugared words, puttyng me in full
hope that I should the Margarete getten, if I followed her heestes, and began with
a fair cloth to wypen the tears that hyngen on my chekes: and than said I in
this wise. Now well of wisdom and of all wealth, withouten the may nothing be
learned, thou bear the keys of all pryuye things. In vain travail men to
catch any stedshyp, but if ye lady first the lock vnshet, ye lady learn us
the ways and the by paths to heaven: ye lady maken all the heavenly bodies
goodly and benigly to do her course, that gouernen us beestes here on earth. Ye
armen your servants against all debates, with impercyable harneys, ye setten
in her hertes insuperable blood of hardynesse, ye leden hem to the parfyte
good. Yet all thing desires, ye werne no man of help that well done your
lore, grant me now a little of your grace, al my sorrows to cease. Mine own
servant (quod she) truly thou syttest nigh mine heart and thy bad chere began
soryly me grieve: but among thy playnyng words me thought thou allegest
things to be lettyng of thine helpyng, and thy grace to hyndre, wherthorowe me
thinks that wanhoope is crope through thine heart: God forbid that nyse
unthrifty thought should come in thy mind thy wits to trouble, sythen every
thing in coming is contingente, wherefore make no more thy proposition by an
impossyble. But now I pray the rehearse me again tho things, that thy mistrust
causen, and thilke things I think by reason to destroyen, and put full hope
in thine heart. what understand thou there (quod she) by that thou saydest
many let games are thine ouerlokers. And also by that thy moeble is
insuffysaunte, I not what thou thereof meanest

Truly (quod I) by the first, I say that iangelers evermore arne speaking
rather of evil than of good, for every age of man rather enclyneth to
wickedness, than any goodness to auaunce. Also false words spryngen so
wide, by the steryng of false lyinge tongues, that fame als swyftly flies to
her ears, and says many wicked tales, and as soon shall falsenesse ben
leued as truth, for all his great sothnesse. Now by ye other (quod I) me
thinks thylke jewel so precious, that to no such wretch as I am, would virtue
thereof extend, and also I am to feeble in worldly joys, any such jewel to
cou^treuayle. For such people that worldly joys han at her will, ben set at
the highest degree, and most in reverence been accepted, for false wenynge
makes felicity therein to be supposed: but such caytyues as I am evermore
ben hyndred. Certes (quod she) take good head, and I shall by reason to the
shown, that all these things mow not let thy purpose, by the leeste point
that any wight could prycke.

REmembrest not (quod she) ensample is one of the stro^gest manner as for to
preue a man's purpose. Than if I now by ensample enduce the to any proposition,
is it not proved by strength? Yes for soth (quod I) well (quod she) raddest thou
never how Paris of Troy and Heleyne loved together, and yet had they not
entrecomuned of speech? Also Acrisyus shette Dane his daughter in a tour, for
surete that no wight should of her have no mastry in my service, and yet
Jupiter by signs without any spech had all his purpose against her fathers
will. And many such mo have been knytte in troth, and yet spoke they never
together: for that is a thing enclosed under secretnesse of priuitie, why twe
persons entremellen hertes after a sight. The power in knowing of such
things so preuen, shall not all utterly be yeuen to you beestes, for many
things in such precious matters, ben reserved to judgment of divine
purueyaunce, for among living people, by man's consyderation moune they not be
determined. wherefore I say, all the envy, all the jangling, that welny
people upon my servants maken efte, is rather cause of esployte than of any
hyndrynge. why than (quod I) suffer ye such wrong, and moune when ye list,
lyghtlye all such euyls abate, me semyth to you it is a great vnworshyp. O
(quod she) hold now thy peace, I have founden to many that han been to me
unkind, that truly I wol suffer every wight in that wise to have disease, and
who that contynueth to the end well and truly, hem woll I helpen, and as for
one of mine into bliss to wend as Marcial doing in Greece. who was ycrowned,
by God not the strongest, but he that rathest come and longest abode and
continued in the iourneye, and spared not to travail as long as the play lest.

But thylke person that profred him now to my service therein is a while, and
anon voydeth and ready to an other, and so now one he thinks and now an other,
and into water enters and anon respyreth, such one list me not into parfyte
bliss of my service bring A tree often set in diverse places woll not by kind
endure to bring forth fruits. Look now I pray the, how mine old servants
of time passed continued in her service, and follow thou after their steps,
and than might thou not fail, in case thou worch in this wise. Certes (quod I)
it is nothing lich this world to time passed, eke this country has one manner,
and an other country has another. And so may not a man always put to his eye
the salve that he healed with his hele. For this is soth, betwex two things
lyche often dyuersitie is required. Now (quod she) that is soth, diversity of
nation, diversity of law as was maked by many reasons, for that diversity
comes in by the contrarious malice of wicked people yt han enuyous hertes
against other. But truly my law to my servants ever has been in general,
which may not fail, for right as man's laws yt is ordained by many
determinacions, may not be know for good or bad, till assay of the people han
proved it, and to what end it draws, and than it shows the necessity
thereof, or else the impossibility. Right so ye law of my servants so well
has been proved in general, that hitherto has it not failed.

wyste thou not well, that all the law of kind is my law, and by god
ordained and stablysshed to dure by kind reasoun, wherefore all law by man's
wit purueyed, ought to be vnderput to law of kind, which yet has be common
to every kyndly creature, yt my statutes and my laws than ben kyndly are
general to all peoples. Old doings, and by many turnynges of years used, and
with the peoples manner proved, mowen not so lightly ben defased, but new
doings contrariaunces such old, often causen diseases and breaken many
purposes. Yet say I not therefore, that again new myschefe, men should not
ordaynen a new remedy, but always look it contrary not the old, no ferther
than the malice stretches. Than follows it the old doings in love han been
universal, as for most exployte forth used: wherefore I woll not yet, that of
my laws nothing be adnulled.

But than to the purpose, such iangelers and lokers, and wayters of games, if
they think in ought they mow dear, yet love well always, and set hem at
naught, and let thy ports ben low in every wyghtes presence, and ready in
thine heart to maintain that thou have begone, and a little the feign with
meekness in words, and thus with sleyght shall thou surmou^t and dequace the
evil in their hertes. And wisdom yet is to seem fly otherwhyle there a man
wol fight Thus with such things, the tongues or evil shall ben stylled: else
fully to grant thy full meaning, for sothe ever was and ever it shall be,
that mine enemies ben aferde to trust to any fighting, and therefore have thou
no cowardes heart in my service, no more than sometime thou had in the
contrary, for if thou dread such ianglers, thy viage to make: understand well
yt he yt dredeth any rayn to sow his corns, he shall have tha^ thynne bernes.
Also he yt is aferde of his clothes, let him dau^ce naked. who nothing
undertakes, and namely in my service, nothing acheueth. After great storms
the wether is often merry and smoth. After much clatering there is mokyll
rownynge: thus after jangling words comes huyshte, peace, and be still. O
good lady (quod I than) se now how seven year passed and more, have I graffed
and groubed a vine, and with all the ways that I could I sought to a fed me
of the grape, but fruit have I none found. Also have I this seven year served
Laban to a wedded Rachell his daughter, but blereryed Lya is brought to my
bed, which always engenders my tene, and is full of children in tribulacion
and in care: and although the clepinges and kyssynges of Rachell should seem to
me sweet, yet is she so barayn, that gladness ne joy by no way wol spring,
so that I may weep with Rachel, I may not ben counsayled with solace, sythen
issue of mine hertely desire is failed. Now than I pray that to me sone
fredome and grace, in this eight year, this eyghteth mow to me both by kinrest
and masseday after the seven werkedayes of travail, to follow the christen
law: and what ever ye do else, that thylke Margaryte be holden so lady in your
priuye chamber, that she in this case to none other person be committed: Look
than (quod she) thou persevere in my service, in which I have the grounded, that
thylke skorne in thine enemies mow this on thy person be not sothed: lo this
man began to edefye, but for his foundemente is badde, to the end may he
not it bring. For meekness in countenance, with a manly heart in deeds, and
in long countynaunce, is the conysaunce of my lyuerye, to al my retynue
delivered. What wenyst thou that me list auaunce such persons as louen the
first syttynges at feestes, the highest stoles in churches, and in hal,
loutinges of peoples in markettes and fayres, unsteadfast to bide in one place
any while together, wenynge his own wit more excellent than other,
scornynge all manner deuyse but his own: Nay nay God wotte, these shul
nothing pertteyne of my bliss. Truly my manner here toforne has been wyrshyppe
with my bliss, Lions in the field, and lambs in chamber, Egles at assaute and
maidens in halle, foxes in counsel, still in their deeds, and their protection
is granted ready to ben a bridge, and their baner is arered like wolves in the
field. Thus by these ways shull men ben auaunced: ensample of David that from
keeping of sheep, was drawn up into the order of kyngly governance, and
Jupiter from a bole to been Europes fere, and Julius Caesar from the lowest
degree in Rome, to be master of all erthly princes, and Eneas from hell, to be
king of the country there Rome is now stondynge. And so to the I say, thy
grace by bearing thereafter, may set the in such plyghte, that no jangling
may grieve the lest tucke of thy he^mes, that are their ianghes, is naught to
count at a cresse in thy disauauntage.

EVer (quod she) has the people in this world desired to have had great name
in worthynesse, and hated foul to bear any fame, and that is one of ye
objections thou alegest to be again thyn hertely desire. Ye forsothe (quod I)
and that so comenly the people wol lie, and bring about such enfame. Now (quod
she) if men with leasynges put on enfame, wenest thy self thereby ben enpeyred*
that wenyng is wrong, se why: for as much as they lain thy merit increases,
and make the been more worthy to hem that known of the soth, by what thing
thou art apeyred, that in so mokyl thou art increased of thy beloved friends:
and sothly a wound of thy friend to the less harm, ye sir, and better than a
false kyssyng in disceyuable glosynge af thine enemy, above that than to be
well with thy friend makes such enfame. Ergo thou art increased and not
apeyred. Lady (quod I) sometime yet if a man be in disease, thestymacyon of the
enuyouse people ne looks nothing to deserts of men ne to the merits of their
doings, but only to the aue^ture of fortune, and thereafter they yeuen their
sentence: and some loken the voluntarye will in his heart, and thereafter
tells his judgment, not taking head to reason ne to the qualyte of the
doing, as thus. If a man be rich and fulfilled with worldly welefulnesse,
some commenden it, and saine it is so lent by just cause: and he that has
aduersyte, they said he is weaked, and has deserved thylke anoye. The
contrary of these things some men holden also, and said that to the rych,
prosperyte is puruayed into his confusyon, and upon this matter many authorites
of many and great wytted clerks they alegen. And some men said, though all
good estimacyon forsaken folk that han aduersyte, yet it is merit and
increase of his bliss, so that these purposes arne so wonderful in
understanding, that trewlye for mine aduersytie now I not how the sentence
of the indifferent people wylingen my fame. Therefore (quod she) if any wyghte
should give a true sentence on such matters, the cause of the disease may
thou se well, understand thereupon after what end it draws, yt is to said,
good or badde, so ought it to have his fame or by goodness, enfame by
badnesse, for every reasonable person, and namely of a wise man, his wit
ought not without reason toforne herd, suddenly in a matter to judge. After the
sawes of the wise, thou shall not judge ne deem toforne thou know. Lady (quod
I) ye remember well that in most laud and praysynge of certain saints in
holy church, is to rehersen their conuercyon from badde into good, and that is
so rehearsed, as by a perpetual myrroure of remembrance in worshypping of tho
saints, and good ensample to other misdoers in ame^dement. How turned the
romayne zedeoreys fro the Romans, to be with Hanyball against his kind
nacyon? and afterward him semyng the romans to be at the next degree of
co^fusyon, turned to his old alyes by whose wit after was Hanibal
discomfyted. Wherefore to enfourme you Lady the manner why I mean, se now in my
youth I was draw to been assentaunt and in my myghtes helpinge to certain
coniuracions and other great matters of rulynge of citezins, and thylke
things ben my drawers in, and exitours to tho matters werne so painted and
colored, that at the prime face, me seemed them noble and glorious to all the
people: I than wenynge mykel merit have deserved in furtherynge and
mayntenaunce of tho things, besyed and labored with all my diligence, in
werkynge of thylke matters to the end. And trewlye lady to tell you the sothe,
me roughte, little of any hate of the mighty Senators in thylke city, ne of
comunes malice, for two skyllles: One was I had comfort to been in such
plyte, that both profit were to me and to my friends. Another was for common
profit in cominaltye is not but peace and tranquilytie, with just governance
proceden from thylke profit, sythen by counsayl of mine in wit, me thought
the first painted things, malice and evil meaning, wythouten any good
auaylynge to any people, and of tyranny purposed, and so for pure sorrow and of
my medlynge and bad infame that I was in run, tho teeres lashed out of mine
eyes, were thus away wash, than the under hyd malice and the rancoure of
purposynge envy fornecaste and ymagined, in destruction of mokyl people,
showed so openly, that had I been blind, with mine hondes all the
circumstaunce I might well have feled.

Now than tho persons that such things have cast to redress, for wrath of
my first medlynge, shopen me to dwell in this pynande prison, till Lachases my
threde no le^ger would twine. And ever I was sought if me list to have grace of
my life, and frenesse of that prison, I should openly confess how peace might
ben endused to ende^ all the first rancours. It was fully supposed my knowing
to be full in tho matters. Than lady I thought that every man that by any way
of right, ryghtfully done, may help any comune help to ben saved, which thing
to keep above all things I am hold to maintain, and namely in distroyenge of
a wrong, all should I therthroughe enpeche mine own fere, if he were gylty,
and to do mysdede assentaunt, and master ne friend may naught avail to the
soul of him that in falsnesse dies, and also that I nere desired wrath of
the people, ne indignacyon of the worthy, for nothing that ever I wrought or
did, in any doing my self else, but in the mayntenaunce of these foresaid
erroures, and in hydinge of the priuytees thereof. And that all the peoples
hertes holding on the erroures side, weren blind and of elde so ferforthe
begyled, that debate and strife they maynteyned, and in destruction on that
othersyde, by which cause the peace, that most in cominaltie should be
desired, was in point to be broken and adnulled. Also the City of London, that
is to me so dear and sweet, in which I was forth grown, and more kyndly love I
have to that peace tha^ to any other in earth, as every kyndely creature has
full appetyte to that place of his kyndly engendrure, and to wylne rest and
peace in that stead to abide: thylke peace should thus there have been broken,
and of all wise it is commended and desired. For know thing it is, all men
that desyren to comen to the perfyte peace everlasting, must the peace by God
commended, both maintayn and keep. This peace by aungelles voice was confirmed,
our God entering in this world. This as for his Testamente he left to all
his friends, when he returned to the place from whence he came: this his
Apostle amonesteth to holden, without which man perfytely may have none
insyght. Also this God by his coming, made not peace alone between heavenly
and erthly bodies, but also among us on earth, so he peace confirmed, that in
one head of love, one body we should perform. Also I remember me well how
the name of Athenes was rather after the God of peace than of battle, showing
that peace most is necessary to the comunalties and cities, I than so styred
by all these ways to forne nempned, declared certain points in this wise.
First yt thylke persons yt hadden me drawn to their purposes, and me not
wetyng the privy intent of their meaning, drawn also the feable witted people
yt have none insyght of gubernatyfe prudence to clamur and to cry on matters yt
they styred, and under points for comune advantage, they enbolded the passyfe
to take in the actyues doing, and also styred innocents of conning to cry
after things, which (quod they) may not stand but we been executours of tho
matters, and auctorite of excecucion by comen election to us be delivered and
that must enter by strength of your mayntenaunce, for we out of such degree
put, oppression of these old hyndrers shall again surmounten and putten you
in such subjection, that in endelesse woe ye shull complain. The gouernementes
(quod they) of your city left in the hands of torcencious citezins shall
bring in pestilence and destruction to you good men, and therefore let us have
thecomune administration to abate such yuels. Also (quod they) it is worthy the
good to commend, and the gyltye deserts to chastise. There been citezins many
for ferde of execucyon that shall be done, for extorcyons by hem committed,
been ever more against these purposes, and all other good meanynges. Never the
latter Lady, trewelye the meaning under these words, was fullye to have
apeched the mighty senators, which hadden heavy heart for the misgouernaunce
that they seen. And so lady when it fell that free election, by great clamor
of much people, for great disease of mysgouernaunce so fervently stoden in her
election, that they hem submitted to every manner face, rather than have
suffered the manner and the rule of the hated governors, not wythstandinge that
in the contrary helden much comune meyny that have no consideration, but only
to voluntary lusts, withouten reason. But than thylke gouernoure so forsaken,
faynynge to forne his undoing for misrule in his time, shope to have let
thylk election, and have made a new him self to have been chosen, and under
that mokyll rore have arered. These things Lady known among the princes,
and made open to the people, draws in amendment, that every degree shall been
ordained to stand there as he should, and that of errors coming, herafter men
may lightly to forne hand puruaye remedy, in this wise peace and rest to be
furthered and hold. Of the which things lady, thylke persons broughten in
answer to forne their most sovereign judge, not coarted hy paynyng dures,
openly knowlegeden, and asked thereof grace, so that apertly it preueth my
words been sothe, without forgyng of leasynges.

But now it greueth me to remember these diverse sentences, in ianglyng of
these shepy people: certes me thinks they oughten to maken joy that a sothe
may be know. For my troth and my conscience been witness to me both, that
this knowing sothe have I said for no harm ne malice of tho persons, but
only for troth of my sacrament in my leigiaunce, by which I was charged on my
kings behalf. But se ye not now lady how the felonous thoughts of this
people, and couyns of wicked men, conspyren (...) What might thou more have
done than thou dydeste, but if thou woldeste in a false quarrel have been a
stynkynge martyr? I wene thou fleddest as long as thou might, their priuytie
to consayle, which thing thou heleste longer than thou should. And thilke
that ought the money no penny would pay, they wend thy return had been an
impossible. How might thou better have hem proved, but thus in thy nedye
diseases? Now haste thou ensample for whom thou shalt meddle: trewely this
lore is worth many goods.

Often ganne love to stern me these words, think on my speech, for trewly
here after it woll do the lyking, and how so ever thou se fortune shape her
wheel to turn, this meditation by no way reuolue. For certes fortune
shows her fairest, when she thinks to begyle. And as me thought here to
forne thou saydeste thy loos in love, for thy right wesenesse ought to be
raised, should be a lowed in time coming. Thou might in love so the have,
that loos and fame shull so been raised, that to thy friends comfort and
sorrow to thine enemies endelesse shul endure.

But if thou were that one sheep among the hundred were lost in deserte, and
out of the way had erred, and now to the flock art restored, the shepeherde
has in the no joy, and thou again to the forest turn. But that right as the
sorrow and anguysh was great in the time of thine out way going, right so joy
and gladness shall be doubled to seen the converted, and not as Lothes wife
again lokynge, but hoole counsel with the sheep following, and with them grass
and herbs gadre. Never the later (quod she) I say not these thing for no
wantrust that I have in supposing of the otherwise than I should. For trewly I
watte well, that now thou art set in such a purpose, out of which the list
not to part. But I say it, for many men there been, that to knowing of other
men's doings setten all their cure, and lyghtlye desyren the badde to clatter
rather than the good, and have no will their own manner to amend. They also
hate of old ra^coure lightly haven, and there that such thing abides,
suddenly in their mothes proceeds the abundaunce of the heart, and words as
stones, stones out throw. wherefore my counsel is ever more openly and
apertelye, in what place thou sit, countreplete therrours and meaninges, in as
far as thou hem wystyst false, and leave for no wyghte to make hem be know
in every bodies ear, and be always paciente and use Iacobes words, what so
ever men of the clappen, I shall sustain my ladies wrath which I have
deserved, so long as my Margaryte has rightwysed my cause. And certes (quod
she) I witness my self, if thou thus converted soroweste in good meaning in
thine heart, wolte from all vanytie parfytelye depart, in consolatioun of al
good plesaunce of that Margaryte, which that thou desyreste after will thine
heart, in a manner of a mothers pytie, shull fully accept the in to grace. For
right as thou rentest clothes in open sight so openly to sow hem at his
worship wythouten reprofe commended. Also right as thou were ensample of
much fold error, right so thou must be ensample of manyfolde correction,
so good sauoure to forgoynge all error distroyeng causes dilygent love, with
many playted praysinges to follow, and than shall all the first errors make the
following worshyppes to seem hugely increased, black and white set together,
every for other more seems, and so does every things contrary in kind. But
infame that gothe always to fore, and praysynge worship by any cause following
after, makes to rise thylke honor in double of wealth, and that que^cheth the
spotte of the first enfame. why wenist I say these things, in hyndrynge of
thy name? Nay nay god wo^te, but for pure increasing worship thy
ryghtwysnesse to commend, and thy troth to seem the more* wost not well thy
self, that thou in form of making passes not Ada^ that ete of the apple.
Thou passes not the stedstastnesse of Noe, ye eating of the grape become
drunk. Thou passes not the chastyte of Loathe, that lay by his daughter. Eke
the nobley of Abraham, who^ god reproved by his pride. Also Dauides meekness,
which for a woman made Vrye be slawe. What also Hector of Troy, in whom no
defaute might be found, yet is he reproved that he ne had with manhood not
suffered the war begone, ne Paris to have went into Greece, by whom ganne
all the sorrow: for trewly him lacks no venyme of pryue consenting, which
that openly leaves a wrong to wythsaye.

Lo eke an old proverb among many other, he that is still seems as he
granted.

Now by these ensamples, thou might fully understand, that these things ben
write to your learning, and in ryghtwysenesse of tho persons, as thus: To
every wight his defaute committed, made goodness afterward done, be the more
in reverence and in open she wynge, for ensample is it not song in holy
church. Lo how necessary was Ada^s sin Dauyd the king gat Salomo^ the king
of her that was Vries wife. Truly for reprofe is none of these things writ:
Right so tho I reherce thy before deed, I repreue yt never the more, ne for no
vyllany of the are they rehearsed, but for worship, so t^^u continue well here
after, and for profit of thy self, I read thou on hem think.

Then said I right thus. Lady of unity and accord, envy and wrath lurken
there thou come in place, ye wete^ well your selue and so done many other,
that while I adminystred the office of common doing, as in rulynge of the
stablyshmentes among the people, I defouled never my conscience for no manner
deed, but ever by wit and by counsel of the wysest, the matters were drawn
to their right ends. And thus trewlye for you lady I have desired such cure,
and certes in your service was I not ydell, as far as such doing of my
cure stretches. That is a thing (quod she) that may drawn many hertes of
noble, and voice of common in to glory, and fame is not but wretched and
fyckle.

Alas that mankind coueyteth in so leude a wise, to be rewarded of any good
deed, since glory of fame in this world, is not but hyndrynge of glory in
time coming. And certes (quod she) yet at the hardest such fame in to heaven,
is not the earth but a center to the cercle of heaven. And prycke is wonder
little in respect of al ye cercle, and yet in all this prycke may no name be
borne in manner of peersyng for many obstacles, as waters and wilderness, and
strange langages, and not only names of men ben stylled and holden out of
knowlegynge by these obstacles, but also cities and realms of prosperity ben
let to be know, and their reason hyndred, so that they mow not ben parfytly
in men's proper understanding. How should then the name of a synguler
londenoys pass the glorious name of London, which by many it is commended,
and by many it is lacked, and in many mo places in earth not known, then
known: for in many countrees little is London in knowing or in speech, and yet
among one manner of people may not such fame in goodness come, for as many as
praysen comenly as many lacken. Fie then on such manner fame, sleep and suffer
him that knows preuyte of hertes, to dele such fame, in thylke place there
nothing against a sothe shall neither speak ne dare appear, by attorney ne by
other manner. How many great named and many great in worthynesse losed, han be
tofore this time, that now out of memory are slydden and clenely forgetten,
for defaute of wrytynges, and yet scriptures for great elde so ben defased, yt
no perpetualte may in hem ben iuged. But if thou wolte make comparison to
ever, what joy may thou have in erthlye name, it is a fair likeness, a pees
or one grain of wheat, to a thousand ships full of corn charged. What
nombre is between the one and the other, and yet mow both they be nombred, and
end in rekenyng have. But trewly all that may be nombred, is nothing to
reckon, as to thylke that may not be nombred, for often things ended is made
comparyson, as one little, another great, but in things to have an end, and
another no end, such comparyson may not be founden. wherefore in heaven to
ben losed with God has none end, but endless endures, and thou canste
nothing done aryght, but thou desire the rumoure thereof be healed and in
every wyghtes ear, and that dureth but a prycke in respect of the other. And
so thou sekest reward of folks small words, and of vain praysynges. Trewly
therein thou lesest the guerdon of virtue, and lesest the greatest valor of
conscience, and vphap they renome everlasting. Therefore boldly renome of fame
of the earth should be hated, and fame after death should be desired, of works
of virtue asks guerdoning, and the soul causes al virtue: The^ the soul
delivered out of prisone of earth, is most worthy such guerdone among to have
in the everlasting fame, and not the body that causes all man's yuels.

OF tweye things art thou answered as me thinks (quod Love) and if any
thing be in doubt in thy soul, show it forth thine ignorance to clear, and
leave it for no shame. Certes (quod I) there ne is no body in this world,
that ought could say by reason against any of your skylles, as I leave, and by
my wit now feel I well, that evil spekers or bearers of enfame, may little
grieve or let my purpose, but rather by such thing my quarrel to be
forthered. Yea (quod she) and it is proved also, that the ylke jewel in my
keeping shall not there through be steered, of ye lest moment yt might be
ymagined. That is soth (quod I), well (quod she) then leueth there, to declare
yt thy insuffisau^ce is no manner letting as thus, for that she is so worthy
thou should not clymbe so high, for thy moebles and thine estate arne voyded,
thou thynkest fallen in such myserye, that gladness of thy pursuit woll not
on thy dyscende. Certes (quod I) that is sothe: right such thought is in mine
heart, for commonly it is spoken, and for an old proverb it is leged: He that
heweth to hye, with chyppes he may lose his sight. Wherefore I have been about
in all that ever I might, to study ways of remedy by one side or by another.
Now (quod she) god forbede ere thou seek any other doings, but such as I have
learned yt in our restinge whiles, and such herbs as ben planted in our
gardyns. Thou shall well understand, that above man is but one god alone. How
(quod I) hau me^ to forne this time trusted in writtes and chauntementes, and
in helps of spirits that dwelle^ in the air, and thereby they han gette^
their desires, where as first for all his manly power he daunced behind.

O (quod she) fie on such matters, for trewly that is sacrilege, and that shall
have no sort with any of my servants, in mine eyes shall such thing not be
looked after. How often is it commanded by these passed wise, that to one god
shall men serve, and not to gods. And who that list to have mine helps, shall
ask none help of foul spirits. Alas, is not man maked semblable to god?
wost thou not well that al virtue of lyuelych werkynge by gods purueyaunce is
vnderputte to reasonable creature in earth, is not every thing a thishalfe god
made buxome to man's co^templacyon, understanding in heaven and in earth, and
in hell? Has not manne being with stones, soul of wexyng with trees and
herbs? Has he not soul of feeling, with beestes, fyshes, and fowls, and he
has soul of reason and understanding with angels, so that in him is knyt all
manner of lyuynges by a reasonable proporcion. Also man is made of all the four
elements. All vniuersytee is rekened in him alone: he has under god
princypalite above al things. Now is his soul here, now a thousand mile
hence, now far now nygh, now hye now low, as far in a momente, as in
mountenaunce often winter, and al this is in man's governance and
dysposition. Then shows it, yt men ben lych unto gods, and children of
most heyghte. But now sythen al things vnderputte to ye will of reasonable
creatures, god forbede any man to win that lordshyp, and ask help of any
thing lower then him self, and the^ namely of foul things innominable. Now
the^ why should thou wene to love to high? sythen nothing is the above but
god alone. Trewly I wot well, yt thylke jewel is in a manner eue^ in line of
degree there thou art thy self, and naught above, save thus. Angel upon angel,
man upon man, and deuell upon deuell, han a manner of soueraygnitie, and that
shall cease at the day of dome: and so I say, though thou be put to serve
the ylke jewel during thy life, yet is that no seruage of vnderputtynge, but a
manner of trauaylynge pleasaunce, to conquer and get that thou haste not. I
set now the hardest, in my service now thou deidest for sorrow of wa^tynge
in thy desires: trewlye all heavenly bodies with one voice shul come and make
me lody in thy coming, and say welcome our fere, and worthy to enter into
Iupyters joy for thou with might haste overcome death, thou would never
flytte out of thy service, and we all shul now pray to the gods row by row
to make thilk Margarite yt no routh had in this person, but unkindly without
comfort let the deye, shall besette her self in such wise, that in earth for
part of vengeance, shall she no joy have in loves service, and when she is
deed, then shall her soul ben brought up in to thy presence, and whyther thou
will chese, thylke soul shall ben committed. Or else after thy death anon all
the foresaid heavenly bodies by one accord, shall beno^men from thylke perle,
all the virtues that first her were taken, for she has hem forfeyted, by
that on the my servant in thy live she would not suffer to worche all
virtues, withdrawn by might of the high bodies: why then should thou wene so
any more? And if thy list to look upon the law of kind, and with order
which to me was ordained, sothely none age, none ouertournynge time, but
hitherto had no time ne power to change the weddinge, ne ye knotte to unbind
of two hertes through one assent in my presence, together accorden to enduren
till death hem depart. What trowest thou every ydeot w^tte the menyng and the
privy entente of these things? they wene forsothe that such accord may not
be, but the rose of maydenhede be plucked, do way, do way, they know nothing
of this: for consent of two hertes alone, makes the fastenynge of the knotte,
neither law of kind, ne man's law, determyneth neither the age ne ye qualyte
of persons, but only accord between thylke twaye. And trewlye after time
that such accord by their consent in heart, is ensealed and put in my treasory
among my privy things: then gynneth the name of sponsayle, and although
they breaken forward both, yet such matter ensealed is kept in remembrance
for ever. And se now that spouses have the name anon after accord, though
the rose be not take. The angel badde Joseph take Marye his spouse, and to
Egypt wend: Lo she was cleped spouse, and yet to forne ne after neither of
hem both mente no fleshly lust know, wherefore the words of truth
accorden, that my servants shulden forsake both father and mother, and be
adherande to his spouse, and they two in unite of one flesh shulden accord.
And this wise two that werne first in a little manner dysacordaunt, higher that
one and lower that other, been made euenlyche in gree to stand. But now to
enfourme the that ye ben lyche to gods, these clerks said, and in
determynacion shown, that three things haven ye names of gods ben cleped,
that is to saine: man, dyuell, and images, but yet is there but one god, of
whom al goodness, all grace, and al virtue comes, and he is loving and true,
and everlasting, and pryme cause of al being things: but men been gods,
loving and true, but not everlasting, and that is by adopcion of the
everlasting god. Dyuels ben gods styrrynge by a manner of living, but
neither been they true ne everlasting, and their name of godlyheed they han by
usurpation, as the prophet says: Al gods of gentyles, that is to say
paynims, are dyuels But images been gods by nuncupacion, and they ben neither
living ne true ne everlasting: After these words they celape^ gods images
wrought with men's hands. But now reasonable creature, that by adopcion
alone art to the great god everlasting, and thereby thou art god cleaped:
let thy fathers manners so enter thy wits, that thou might follow, in as much
as longs to the thy fathers worship, so that in nothing thy kind from his
will declyne, ne from his nobley peruerte. In this wise if thou werche, thou
art above all other things save god alone, and so say no more thine heart to
serve in to hye a place.

FUlly have I now declared thine estate to be good, so thou follow thereafter,
and that the abiection first be the aleged in worthiness of thy margarite shall
not the let, as it shall forther ye, and increase the, it is now to declare,
ye last abiection in nothing may grieve.

Yes certes (quod I) both grieve and let must it needs, the contrary may not
ben proved, and se now why. While I was glorious in worldly welfunesse, and had
such goods in wealth as maken men rich, tho was I dra^in to companyes that
loos, pryse, and name yeuen: tho loute^den blasours, tho curreyden glosours,
tho welcomede^ flatterers, tho worshypped thilke, that now deynen not to look
Every wight in such erthly well habau^dant is hold noble, precious, benign,
and wise to do what he shall, in any degree that men him set, al be it that the
sothe be in the contrary of all tho things: But he that can, ne never so well
him behave, and has virtue habou^daunt in manyfolde manners, and be not welthed
with such erthly goods, is hold for a fool, and said his wit is but sotted.
Lo how false for aver is hold true. Lo how true is cleaped false for
wantynge of goods. Also lady, dygnities of office maken men mykel commended as
thus: he is so good, were he out his pere should men not find. Truly I trow
of some such that are so praised, were they out ones, another should make him
so be know he should of no wise no more ben looked after: but only fools well
I wotte, desyren such new things. Wherefore I wonder that thilke gouernoure,
out of whom alone the causes proceden, that govern all things, which that
has ordained this world in works of the kyndely bodies so be governed, not
with unsteadfast or happyous thing, but with rules of reason, which shown the
course of certain things: why suffers he such slydyng chaunges, that
mysturnen such noble things as ben we men, that arne a fair parsell of the
earth, and holde^ the vpperest degree under god of benign things, as ye said
right now your self, should never man have been set in so worthy a place, but
if his degree were ordained noble. Alas, thou that knyttest the purueyaunce of
al things, why lokest thou not to amenden these defautes: I se shrewes that
han wicked manners, sytten in chayres of do nes, lambs to punyshen, there
wolves shulden be punyshed. Lo virtue shynende naturallly, for poverty lurketh
and is hid under cloud* but the moon false forsworn, as I know my self,
for aue^ and yeftes has usurped to shine by day light, with peynture of other
men's praysynges: and truly thylke forged lyt foully should fade, were the troth
away of colors feigned. Thus is night turned into day, and day in to night,
winter into summer, and summer into winter, not in deed, but in mysclepyng of
folyshe people.

Now (quod she) what wenest thou of these things? how felest thou in thine
heart, by what governance yt this comes about?

Certes (quod I) that wotte I never, but if it be that fortune has grant from
above, to lead the end of men as her lyketh. Ah now I se (quod she) thentent
of thy meaning: Lo because thy worldly goods ben fullych dyspente, thou
berafte out of dygnite of office, in which thou made the gatheryng of thylke
goods, and yet dyddest in that office by counsel of wise, any thing were
ended: and true were unto hem, whose profit thou should look, and see now
many that in thylke heruest made of the mokel, and now for glosing of other,
deineth the naught to forther, but enhaunsen false shrewes, by wytnessynge of
truth. These things greueth thine heart to seen thy self thus abated, and
then fraylte of mankind ne sets but little by the lesers of such richesse,
have he never so much virtue and so thou wenest of thy jewel to run in
dyspyte, and not ben accepted into grace: All this shall the nothing hinder.
Now (quod she) first thou wost well thou lostest nothing that ever thou
myghtest challenge for thine own: when nature brought the forth, come thou not
naked out of thy mothers womb? thou had no richesse, and when thou shall
enter into the end of every fleshly body, what shall thou have with the then?
So every richesse thou haste in time of thy living, nys but lent, thou might
therein challenge no property. And se now every thing that is a man's own, he
may do therwyth what him lyketh, to give or to keep: but riches thou playnest
from the lost, if thy might had stretched so ferforth, feign thou woldst have
hem kept multiplied with mo other: and so against thy will ben they departed from
the, wherefore they were never thyn. And if thou laudest and ioyest any wight,
for he is stuffed with such manner richesse, you art in yt believe begyled, for
thou wenest thylke joy to be selynesse or else ease, and he that has lost
such happes to ben vnsely Yea forsooth (quod I). Well (quod she) then woll I
prove that vnsely in that wise is to praise, and so ye the other is ye contrary to
be lacked. How so (quod I)? For vnsely (quod she) begyleth not, but shows
thentent of her workyng. Et eco^tra Selynesse begyleth, for in prosperity she
makes a iape in blyndnesse, that is she wyndeth him to make sorrow when she
withdraws wolt thou not (quod she) praise him better that shows to you his
heart, tho it be with byta^de words and dispytous, the^ him ye gloseth and
thinks in their absence to do the many harms Certes (quod I) the one is to
commend, and the other to lack and dyspyce. A ha (quod she) right so ease
while he lasts, gloseth and flatereth, and lightly voydeth when she most
plesau^tly shows, and ever in her absence she is about to do the tene and
sorrow in heart: but vnsely all be it with bytande chere, shows what she is,
and so does not that other, wherefore vnsely does not begyle. Selynesse
dysceyueth: vnsely put away doubt. That one makes men blind, that other
opens their eyes in showing of wretchedness. The one is full of dread to lose
that is not his own: that other is sobre and makes men dyscharged of mokell
heaviness in burden. The one draws a man from very good, ye other haleth him
to virtue by the hooks of thoughts. And wenyst thou not that thy disease has
done the mokel more to win, then ever yet thou lostest? and more then ever
the contrary made the win. Is not a great good to thy thinking, for to
know the hertes of thy sothfast fre^des* Pardy they ben proved to ye full, and
the true have dysceuered from the false. Trewly at the going of the ylke
brotel joy, there yede no more away, then the ylke that was not thine proper:
He was never from that lightly departed, thine own good therefore leaves it
still with the. Now good (quod she) for how much would thou sometime have
boughte this very knowing of thy friends, from the flattering flies that the
glosed, when thou thought thy self sely? But thou that playnest of loss in
richesse, have founden the most dear worthy thing that thou clepest vnsely,
has made the much thing to wynnen. And also for conclusion of all, he is
friend that now leaves not his heart from thine helps. And if that Margarite
denies now not to suffer her virtues shine to the wards, with spreadynge
beams, as far or farther then if thou were sely in worldly joy: trewely I
say not else but she is somdele to blame.

Ah, peace (quod I) and speak no more of this, mine heart breaks, now thou
touchest any such words. A well (quod she) then let us syngen, thou hear
no more of these things at this time.

Thus ends the first book of the Testament of Love, and here after follows
the second.
VEry welthe may not be founden in all this world and that is well seen:

Lo how in my most comfort, as I wend and most supposed to have had full
answer of my contrary thoughts, suddenly it was vanysshed. And all the works
of man faren in the same wise, when folk wenen best her entente for to have,
and wylles to perform, anon chaungynge of the lift side to ye right halue,
tourneth it so clean into another kind that never shall it come to the first
plyte in doing.

O this wrongful sterynge so soon other wysed out of knowing, but for my
purpose was at my beginning, and so dureth yet, if God of his grace time woll
me grant, I think to perform this work, as I have begone in love, after
as my thynne wit, with inspiracion of him that hildeth al grace woll suffer.
Grievously god wotte have I suffered a great throw that the romayne Emperor,
which in unite of love should accord and every with other, in cause of other
to auaunce, and namely sithe this empire to be corrected of so many sects in
heresy, of faith, of service, o rule in loves religion. Trewlye al were it but
to shende errontous opinions, I may it no longer suffer: for many men there
ben that said love to ben in grauel and sand, that with see ebbynge and
flowynge woweth, as riches that suddenly vanysheth And some said that love
should be in wyndy blastes, that stoundmele turns as a phane, and glory of
renome, which after lusts of the varyaunt people is areysed or stylled. Many
also wenen that in the son and the moon, and other sterres, love should ben
fou^den, for among all other planettes most soueraynly they shynen, as
dygnityes in reverence of estates rather then good han and occupyen. Full many
also there ben that in oaks and in huge posts supposen love to be grounded, as
in strength and in might, which mowen not helpen their own wretchedness, when
they gynne to fall. But such dyuersyte of sects against the ryghtfull believe
of love, these errors ben forth spredde, that loves servants in true rule
and steadfast faith, in no place darne apere: Thus irrecuperable joy is went,
and anoy endless is entered, for no man aryght reproves such errors, but
confyrmen their words, and said that bad is noble good, and goodness is badde:
to which folk the prophet byddeth, woe without end.

Also many tongues of great false techinges in gylynge manner, principally in my
times, not only with words, but also with arms loves servants and profess
in his religyo^ of true rule, pursewen to confou^den and to dystroyen. And for
as much as holy fathers that our christen faith aproued and strengthed to
the jews, as to me^ reasonable, and of dyuinite learned, proved thilke faith
with resones, and with authorities of the old testament and of the new, her
pertinacye to distroy But to paynyms, that for beestes and hounds were hold,
to put hem out of their error, was miracles of god showed. These things were
fygured by coming of tha^gel to the shepeherdes, and by the sterre to paynyms
kings, as who says: angel reasonable to reasonable creature, and sterre of
miracle to people bestial not learned, werne sent to inform. But I lovers
clerk in all my connyng and with all my mightes, truly I have no such grace in
virtue of miracles, ne for to dyscomfyte falsheedes, suffyseth not authorites
alone, sythen that such heretykes and mayntenours of falsytes. Wherefore I wot
well sythen that they ben men, and reason is approved in hem, the cloud of
error has her reason bewonde probable resons, which that catchende wit
rightfully may not with sytte. By my trauaylynge study I have ordained hem,
with ye authorite mysglosed by man's reason, to grant shall be enduced.

Now gynneth my pen to quake, to thynken on the sentences of the enuyous
people, which always ben ready, both ryder and goer to skorne and to iape this
leude book, and me for rancoure and hate in their hertes they shullen so
despise, that although my book be leude, yet shall it ben more leude holden,
and by wicked words in many manner apayred. Certes me thinks the sown of
their bad speech, right now is full both mine ears. O good precious
Margarite, mine heart should weep if, I wyste ye token head of such manner
speech, but trewly I wotte well in that your wysedom shall not asterte. For of
god maker of kind witness I took, that for none envy ne yuell have I draw
this matter together, but only for goodness to maintain, and errors in
falsytees to destroy. Wherefore (as I said) with reason I think, thylke
foresaid errors to distroye and dequace.

These reasons and such other, if they enduce men in loves service, true to
believe of parfyte bliss, yet to full faith in credence of deserte, fully mow
they not suffice, sythen faith has no merit of mede, when man's reason
shows experience in doing. For utterly no reason the parfyte bliss of love
by no way may make to be comprehended. Lo what is a parcel of lovers joy,
parfyte science in good service, of their desire to comprehend in bodily
doing the lykyng of the soul, not as by a glass to have contemplacyon of
time coming, but thylke first ymagyned and thought, after face to face in
beholdynge: what heart, what reason, what understanding can make his heaven to
be feled and know without assaye in doing? certes none. Sythen then of love
comes such fruit in bliss, and love in him self is the most among other
virtues, as clerks said: The sede of such spryngynge in all places, in all
countries, in all worlds should ben sow.

But o welawaye thylke sede is forsake, and mowen not ben suffered the land
tyllers to see a work, without medlynge of cockle, badde wedes which sometime
stonken, has caught the name of love among ydiotes and badde meaning people.
Never the later, yet how so it be that men cleape thylke king precyousest in
kind, with many eke names, that other things, that the foul yeuen the ylke
noble name, it shows well that in a manner men have a great liking in
worshyppynge of thilke name, wherefore this work have I wryt, and to the tytled
of loves name, I have it auowed in a manner of sacrifice, that where ever it be
radde, it mow in merit by the excellence of thylke name the more wexe in
authorite and worship of taking in head, and to what entente it was
ordained, the infeeres mowen be moved: Every thing to whom is owande occasyon
done as for his end Aristotle supposes that the acts of every thing ben in
a manner his fynall cause. A fynal cause is noblerer or else even as noble as
thylke thing that is finally to thilke end, wherefore accion of thing
everlasting, is demed to be eternal, and not temporal, sythen it is his fynal
cause: Right so the acts of my book love, and love is noble, wherefore though
my book be leude, the cause with which I am stered, and for whom I ought it done,
noble forsothe ben both. But because that in conning I am young, and can
yet but crepe, this leude A, b, c, have I set in to lernyng, for I can not
passen the tellyng of three as yet: and if god will in short time I shall amend
this lewdness in ioynyng syllables, which thing for dullness of wit I may
not in three letters declare. For trewly I say the goodness of my Margaryte
perle would give matter in endityng to many clerks: certes her mercy is more to
me swetter than any lyuynges, wherefore my lyppes mowen not suffyse in spekyng
of her full laud and worship as they should. But who is that in knowing of
the orders of heaven, and puts his resones in the earth? I for sothe may not
with blere eyes, the shynyng son of virtue in bright whele of this Margaryte
behold, therefore as yet I may her nor discryue in virtue as I would. In time
coming in another tretyse through gods grace, this son in clerenesse of
virtue to be know, and how she enlumyneth all this day, I think to declare.

IN this mean while this comfortable lady ganne sing, a wonder matter of
endityng in latin, but trewly the noble colors in rethorykwyse knytte were so
craftily, yt my connyng wol not stretche to remember, but the sentence I trow
somdele have I in mind. Certes they were wonder sweet of sown, and they were
touched al in lamentacyon wise, and by no werbles of myrthe: Lo thus ganne she
sing in latin, as I may co^strewe it in our english tongue.

Alas that these heavenly bodies their light and course shown, as nature yaue
hem in commandment at the gynnyng of the first age, but these things in free
choice of reason han none understanding: but man that ought to pass all thing
of doing, of right course in kind, over whelmed sothnesse by wrongful title,
and has drawn the sterre of envy to gone by his side, that the clyps of me
that should be his shynande son, so often is seyl, that it wened thilke error
through he^ come in, should ben mine own defaute. Trewely therefore I have me
withdraw, and made my dwelling out of land in an isle by my self, in the
occian closed, and yet sayn there many they have me harberowed but god wot
they faylen. These things me greuen to think, and namely on passed gladness,
that in this world was wont me dysporte of high and low, and now it is
failed: they that wolde^ maystries me have in thylke stoundes. In heaven on
high above Saturnes sphere, in seasonable time were they lodged, but now come
queynte consaylours that in no house woll suffer me soiourne, whereof is pity:
and yet said some that they me have in celler with wine shede, in gernere
there corn is laid, covered with whete, in sack sowed with wolle, in purse
with money fast knytte, among pannes mouled in a wyche, in press among
clothes laid with rich pelure arrayed, in stable among horse and other
beestes, as hogs, sheep, and nete, and in other many wise. But thou maker of
light (in wynkynge of thine eye the son is queynt) wost right well that I in
true name was never thus herberowed. Sometime to forne the son in the seventh
party was smyten, I bare both cross and mytre, to give it where I would.
With me the pope went a foot, and I tho was worshypped of all holy church
Kings baden me their crowns holde^. The law was set as it should: tofore the
judge as well the poor durst show his grefe as the rich, for all his money.
I defended tho taylages, and was ready for the poor to pay. I made great feestes
in my time, and noble so^ges and married damoselles of ge^tyl feture, withouten
gold or other richesse. Poor clerks for wit of schole, I set in
churches, and made such persons to preach: and tho was service in holy
church honest and devout, in pleasaunce both of god and of the people. But
now the leude for symonye is auaunced, and shendeth all holy church. Now is
steward for his achates, now is courtyour for his debates, now is eschetoure
for his wrongs, now is losell for his songs, personer and prouendre alone,
with which many thriftye should increase. And yet is this shrewe behind, free
heart is forsake, and losengeour is take. Lo it accords, for such there ben
that voluntarye lusts haunten in court with rybaudye, that till midnight and
more woll play and wake, but in the church at matyns he is behind, for yuell
disposycion of his stomach: therefore he should eat bean breed, and so did his
sire, his estate therewith to strenghthen. His auter is broke, and low lythe in
point to gone to the earth, but his horse must ben easy and hye to bear him
over great waters. His chalyce poor, but he has rich cups. No towayle but
a shete there god shall ben handled. And on his meat board there shall ben board
clothes and towelles many pair. At mass served but a clergyon: five squiers
in hall. Poor chaunsell, open holes in every side: beds of sylke with
tapytes going all about his chamber. Poor mass book and leude chapelayne,
and broken surplyce with many an hole: good hounds and many, to hounte after
heart and hare, to feed in their feestes. Of poor men have they great care,
for they ever crave, and nothing offren, they wolden have hem doluen. But
among legystres there dare I not come, my doing they said maken hem nedy,
they ne would for nothing have me in town, for than were tort and forth
naught worth an hawe about and pleasen no men but thylke grievous and torcious
ben in might and in doing: these things to forne said mow well if men list
ryme, trewly they acorde nothing. And for as much as al things by me shulden
of right ben governed, I am sorye to se that governance fails, as thus: to
seen small and low govern the hye and bodies above. Certes that polesye is
naught, it is forbode by them that of governance treaten and enformen. And
right as beestly wit should ben subject to reason, so erthly power in it
self, the lower should ben subject to the higher. What is worth thy body, but
it be governed with thy soul? right so little or naught is worth erthely
power, but if reignatyfe prudence in heedes govern the small, to which heedes
the small owen to obey, and suffer in their governance. But soueraynnesse
ayenwarde should think in this wise: I am servant of these creatures to me
delivered, not lord but defendour, not master but enfourmer, not possessoure
but in possessyon, and to hem lyche a tree in which sparowes shullen stelen,
her birds to noryshe and forth bring under suretye against all raueynous
fowls and beestes, and not to be tyrant them self. And than the small in
rest and quyete, by the heedes well disposed owen for their soueraynes health
and prosperyte to pray, and in other doings, in mayntenaunce thereof perform,
wythouten other admynistracion in rule of any manner governance. And they wit
have in hem, and grace to come to such things, yet should they cease till
their heedes them cleped, although profit and pleasaunce should follow. But
trewlye other governance ne other medlynge ought they not to claim, ne the
heedes on hem to put. Trewly among cosynage dare I not come, but if richesse
be my mean, sothly she and other bodily goods makes nygh cosynage, there
never propynquite ne alyau^ce in live was, ne should have be, nere it for her
meddling manners, wherefore kyndly am I not there leged. Pouert of kynred is
behind, richesse suffers him to pass: truly he says he come never of
Iaphetes chyldre. Whereof I am sorry that Iaphetes children for pouert, in no
lineage ben rekened, and Caynes children for riches be maked Iaphetes heirs.
Alas this is a wonder change between tho two Noes children, sythen that of
Iaphetes ofspryng comeden knights, and of Cayn descended ye line of seruage to
his brothers chyldre Lo how gentyllesse and seruage as cosyns, both descended
out of two brethren of one body: wherefore I say in sothnesse, that gentylesse
in kynrede maken not gentle lynage in succession, without deserte of a man's
own self. Where is now the line of Alysanndre the noble, or else of Hector of
Troy? who is descended of right blood of line fro king Artour? Parde sir
Perdicas, whom that king Alisandre made to be^ his heir in Greece, was of no
kings blood, his dame was a tombystere. Of what kynred ben the ge^tyles in
our days: I trow therefore if any good be in gentylesse, it is only that it
seems a manner of necessyte be input to gentylmen, that they shulden not varyen
fro the virtues of their auncestres. Certes al manner lynage of men ben even
liche in birth, for one father maker of al goodness informed hem all, and al
mortal folk of one sede arne greyned, whereto auau^t men of her lynage, in
cosynage or in elde fathers. Look now the gynnyng, and to god maker of man's
person, there is no clerk ne no worthy in gentylesse: and he that norysheth
his corare with vices and unreasonable lusts, and leaves the kind course, to
which end him brought forth his birth, trewly he is ungentle, and among
clerks may ben ne^pned. And therefore he that woll ben gentyl, he mote dau^ten
his flesh fro vices that causen vngentylnesse, and leave also reigns of
wicked lusts, and draw to him virtue, that in all places gentylnesse
gentylmen makes. And so speak I in feminyne gendre in general, of tho
persons at the reverence of one, whom every wight honors, for her bou^tie
and her noblesse ymade her to god so dear that his mother she became, and she me
has had so great in worship, that I nyll for nothing in open declare, that in
any thing against her sect may so wene: for all virtue and al worthynesse of
pleasaunce in hem haboundeth. And although I would any thing speak, trewly I can
not, I may find in yuel of hem no manner matter.

RIght with these words she stynte of that lamentable melodye, and I ganne
with a lively heart to pray, if that it were liking unto her noble grace, she
would her deyne to declare me the matter that first was begone, in which she
left and stynte to speak beforne she began to sing.

O (quod she) this is no new thing to me, to seen you men desyren after
matter, which your self caused to void.

Ah good lady (quod I) in whom victory of strength is proved above al other
thing, after the judgment of Esoram, whose lordshyp all lignes: who is that
right as emperor he^ commands, whether thilke ben not women, in whose
likeness to me ye aperen. For right as man halte the principalte of all thing
under his being, in the masculyne gender, and no mo genders ben there but
masculyne and femenyne, all the remenaunt ben no gendres but of grace, in
faculty of grammar. Right so in the femenyne, the women holden the vpperest
degree of all things under thilke gendre contained. Who brings forth kings,
which that been lords of see and of earth? and al peoples of women ben borne:
they norysshe hem that graffen vynes, they maken men comfort in their glad
cheres. Her sorrow is death to man's heart. without women the being of me^
were impossible. They conne with their swetnesse the crewel heart rauyshe and
make it meke, buxome, and benign, without violence meuynge. In beauty of
their eyes, or else of other manner fetures is all men's desires, yea more tha^ in
gold precious stones, either any richesse. And in this degree lady your self
many hertes of men have so bounden, that parfyte bliss in womankynde to ben,
men wenen, and in nothing else. Also lady the goodness, the virtue of women,
by properte of discrecyon, is so well known, by lytelnesse of malice, that
desire to a good asker by no way conne they warn: and ye thanne that woll not
pass the kind werchynge of your sects by general discrecyon, I wotte well ye
wol so enclyne to my prayere, that grace of my request shall fully ben
granted. Certes (quod she) thus for the more part fares al mankind to
pray, and to cry after woman's grace, and feign many fantasyes to make hertes
enclyne to your desires: and when these sely women for freelte of their kind
beleuen your words, and wenen al be gospel the promise of your behestes, than
grant they to you their hertes, and fulfyllen your lusts, wherthrough their
lyberte in maystreship that they toforn had is thralled, and so maked souerayn
and to be prayed, that first was servant, and voice of prayer used. Anon as
filled is your lust, many of you be so true, that little head take ye of
such kyndenesse, but with traysoun anon ye think hem begyle, and let light of
that thing which first ye maked to you wonders dear, so what thing to women
it is to love any wight er she him well know, and have him proved in many
half, for every glyttryng thing is not gold, and under color of fair
speech many vices may be hid and conseled. Therefore I read no wight to trust on
you to rath, men's chere and her speech right gylefull is full often, wherefore
without good assay, it is not worth on many on you to trust: Trewly it is
right kyndely to every man that thinks women betraye, and shewe^ outward al
goodness, til he have his will performed. Lo the bird is begyled with the merry
voice of the foulers whistel. When a woman is closed in your net, than wol ye
causes fynden, and bear unkindness her vnhande or falsete upon her put,
your own malycious trayson with such thing to excuse. Lo than han women
none other wrech in vengeance, but bloder and weep till hem list stynte, and
sorily her mishap complain, and is put in to wenynge that all men ben so
untrue. How often have men changed her loves in a little while, or else for
faylyng their will in their places hem set: for frenshyp shall be one, and
fame with another him list for to have, and a third for delight, or else were
he lost both in pack and in clothes: Is this fair? nay god wot, I may not
tell by thousand parts, the wrongs in treachery of such false people, for
make they never so good a bond, all set ye at a myte when your heart
tourneth: And they that wenen for sorrow of you dey, the pity of your false
heart is slow out of town. Alas therefore, yt ever any woman would take any
wight in her grace, till she know at the full on whom she might at all
assayes trust. Women cone no more craft in queynte knowing, to understand
the false disceyuable coniectementes of man's begilynges. Lo how it fares,
though ye men gronen and cryen, certes it is but disceyt, and that preueth well
by thendes in your werkynge. How many women have been lorne, and with shame
foul shent by long lastyng time, which through me^nes gyle have been disceyued?
ever their fame shall dure, and their deeds radde and song in many lands, that
they han done recoueren shall they never, but always ben demed lightly, in such
plyte again should they fall, of which slanders and tenes ye false men and
wicked ben the verey causes, on you by right ought these shames and these
reproues all holy discende. Thus arne ye all nyghe untrue, for all your fair
speech your heart is full fyckell. What cause han ye women to dispyse? better
fruit than they ben, ne swetter spyces to your behoue mow ye not find, as
far as worldely bodies stretchen. Look to their formynge at the making of
their persons by god in joy of paradyce, for goodness of man's propre body
were they maked, after the sawes of the Bible, rehersynge gods words in this
wise: It is good to mankind that we make to him an helper. Lo in paradyse for
your help was this tree graffed, out of which all lynage of man discendeth:
if a man be noble fruit, of noble fruit it is sprongen: the bliss of paradyse
to men's sorry hertes, yet in this tree abides. O noble helps ben these
trees, and gentle jewel to ben worshypped of every good creature: He that hem
anoyeth does his own shame, it is a comfortable perle against all tenes.
Every company is myrthed by their present being. Trewely I wyste never
virtue, but a woman were thereof the rote. What is heaven the worse though
sarazins on it lain? Is your faith untrue though rennogates maken thereon
leasynges. If the fire does any wight brenne, blame his own wit that put
him self so far in the heat. Is not fire gentyllest and most element,
comfortable among all other* fire is chief werker in fortherynge sustenaunce
to mankind: shall fire ben blamed for it brende a fool naturelly, by his own
stulty wit in sterynge? Ah wicked folks, for your propre malice, and
shreudnesse of your self: ye blame and dispyse the precioust thing of your
kind, and which things among other most ye desyren. Trewely Nero and his
children ben shrewes, that dispysen so their d^^^es. The wickedness and gylyng
of me, in disclaundryng of thylke that most has hem gladed and pleased, were
impossyble to write or to nempne. Never ye later yet I say he that knows a
way, may it lightly pass: eke an herb proved may safely to smertande sores
ben laid: So I say, in him that is proved is nothing such yuels to guess. But
these things have I rehearsed to warn you women al at ones that to lightly
without good assaye ye assenten not to man's speech. The son in the day
light is to known from the moon that shyneth in the night. Now to the thy
self (quod she) as I have often said, I know well thine heart thou art none of
all the tofore nempned people, for I know well the contynaunce of thy service,
that never sythen I set the a work, might thy Margaryte for plesaunce,
frendshyp, ne fayrehede of none other, be in point moved from thine heart,
wherefore in to mine household hastily I wol that thou enter, and all ye parfyte
priuyte of my werkynge make it be know in thy understanding, as one of my
pryuy famyliers. Thou desyrest (quod she) feign to here of tho things there I
left. Yea forsothe (quod I) that were to me a great bliss. Now (quod she)
for thou shall not wene that woman's condycyons for fair speech such thing
belongs.

THou shall (quod she) understand first among al other things, that all the
cure of my service to me in the parfyte bliss in doing is desired in every
man's heart, be he never so much a wretch, but every man trauayleth by
diverse study, and seek thylke bliss by diverse ways, but all the ends are
knyt in selynesse of desire in the perfyte bliss that is such joy, when men
it have gotten, there lives nothing more to ben coueyted: But how that
desire of such perfectyon in my service be kyndely set in lovers hertes, yet
her erronyous opinyons mysturne it by falsenesse of wenyng. And although men's
understanding be mysturned, to know which should ben the way unto my person,
and whyther it abides: yet wot they there is a love in every wight, weneth by
yt thing that he coueyted most, he should come to thylke love, and that is
parfyte bliss of my servants, but than fulle bliss may not be, and there
lack any thing of that bliss in any side. Eke it follows than, that he
that must have full bliss, lack no bliss in love on no side.

Therefore lady (quod I) tho thylke bliss I have desired, and sothe toforne
this my self by ways of riches, of dignite, of power, and of renome, wenynge
me in tho thrages had been thylke bliss, but against the here it turns. When
I supposed best thylke bliss have get and come to the full purpose of your
service, suddenly was I hyndred, and thrown so fer abacke, that me thinks an
impossyble to come there I left. I woll well (quod she) and therefore have thou
failed, for thou wentest not by the hye way: a little misgoyng in the gynnynge
causes mykyll error in the end, wherefore of thylke bliss thou fayledest
for having of richesse, ne none of the other things thou nempnedest, mowen
not make such parfyte bliss in love as I shall show. Therefore they be not
worthy to thylke bliss, and yet somewhat must ben cause and way to thylke
bliss: Ergo there is some such thing and some way, but it is little in usage
and that is not openly yknowe. But what felest in thine heart of the service,
in which by me thou art entered: wenest aught thy self yet be in the hye way
to my bliss? I shall so show it to the, thou shalt not consaye the contrary.

Good lady (quod I) although I suppose it in my heart, yet would I here thine
words, how ye meanen in this matter. (Quod she) that I shall with my good will.
Thylke bliss desired, some deal ye known, although it be not parfytly, for
kyndely entention ledeth you thereto, but in three manner lyuenges is all such
ways showed. Every wight in this world to have this bliss one of thylke three
ways of lives must proceed, which after opynions of great clerks arn by
names cleaped, bestiallich, resonablich, is virtuous: manliche is worldelich,
bestialliche is lusts and delytable nothing restrained by brydell of reason,
all that ioyeth and yeueth gladness to the heart, and it be against reason, is
lykened to bestyall lyueng, which thing follows lusts and delytes, wherefore
in such thing may not that precious bliss that is master of al virtues
abide. Your fathers to forne you have cleaped such lusty lyuenges after the
flesh passions of desire, which are innominable to fore god and man both.
Than after determination of such wise, we accorden that such passions of
desire shull not be nempned, but holden for absolute from all other lyuenges
and prouynges, and so lives in to lyuenges, manlyche and reasonable to declare
the matters begone. But to make the fullye have understanding in manlich
lyuenges, which is holden worldlich in these things so that ignorance be
made no letter. I woll (quod she) ne^pne these foresaid ways be names and
co^clusions. First riches, dignyte, renome and power, shull in this work be
cleped bodily goods, for in he^ has been a great throw man's trust of
selynesse in love, as in riches, suffysance to have mayntayned that was begone,
by worldly catel in dignite, honor, and reverence of hem that werne vnderput
by maistry thereby to obey. In renome glory of peoples praysyng, after lusts
in their heart, with out head taking to qualite and manner of doing, and in
power, by troth of lordshyps mayntenaunce, thynk to proceed forth in doing.
In all which things a long time man's coueytise in commune has been greatly
grounded, to come to the bliss of my service, but trewely they were begyled,
and for the princypall must needs fail and in helping mow not avail. Se
why for hold him not poor that is nedy? Yes parde (quod I) And him for
dishonored that much folk deyne not to reverence. That is soth (quod I) and
what him that his mightes faylen and mow not helpen? Certes (quod I) me seems
of al men he should be holden a wretch. And wenest not (quod she) that he that
is little in renome, but rather is out of the praysynges of mo men tha^ a few
be not in shame? For soth (quod I) it is shame and villainy to him that
coueyteth renome, that more folk not praise in name tha^ preyse. Sothe (quod
she) thou say soth, but all these things are followed of such manner doing,
and wenden in riches suffysaunce, in power might, in dignyte worship, and in
renome glory, wherefore they disce^ded in to disceyuable wening, and in that
service disceyte is followed. And thus in general, thou and al such other that
so worche^ faylen of my bliss that ye long han desired, wherefore truly in
life of reason is the hye way to this bliss, as I think more openly to
declare herafter. Never the later, yet in a little to comfort thy heart, in
showing of what way thou art entered thy self, and that thy Margaryte may
know the set in the hye way, I wol inform the in this wise. Thou have failed
of thy first purpose, because thou wentest wrong and leftest the hye way and
on thy right side, as thus, thou lokedest on worldly lyueng and that thing ye
begyled, and lightly therefore as a little assay thou songedest, but when I
turned thy purpose, and showed the part of the hye way tho thou abode therein,
and no death ne ferdnesse of none enemy mit ye out of thilke way reave, but ever
one in thyn heart, to come to the ylke bliss when thou were arested and first
time enprisoned, you were loath to change thy way, for in thy heart thou wendest
to have be^ there thou should, and for I had routh to seen the miscarried, and
wist well thine ableness my service to forther and increase, I come my self
without other mean to visyt thy person, in comfort of thy heart: and perdy in
my coming thou were greatly gladed, after which time no disease, no care, no
tene, might move me out of thy heart. And yet am I glad and greatly enpited,
how continually thou had me in mind, with good auysement of thy
conscience, when thy King and his princes by huge words and great, looked after
variaunce in thy speech, and ever thou were redye for my sake in plesaunce of
that Margarite peerle, and many mo other, thy body to oblyge in to Marces
doing, if any contraryed thy sawes, steadfast way makes steadfast heart with
good hope in the end. Trewely I woll that thou it well know, for I se the so
set and not chaungyng heart had in my service, and I made thou had grace
of thy king in foryeuenesse of mykell misdede: to that gracious king art thou
mykell holden, of whose grace and goodness sometime herafter I think the
inform, wha^ I show the ground where as moral virtue grows. Who brout ye
to work? who brout this grace about? who made thy heart hardy? Trewly it was
I, for had thou of me failed, than of this purpose had never taken in this
wise. And therefore I say thou might well trust to come to thy bliss, sythen
thy gynnyng has been hard, but ever graciously after thy hertes desire has
proceeded. Silver fined with many heates men known for true, and safely men
may trust to the alay in werkynge. This diseases has proved what way hence
forward thou thynkest to hold. Now in good faith lady (quod I tho) I am
now in, me seems it is the hye way and the right. Yea forsooth (quod she) and
now I wol dysproue thy first ways, by which many men wenen to get thylke
bliss. But for as much as every heart that has caught full love, is tied
with queynte knyttynges, thou shall understand that love and thylke foresaid
bliss toforne declared in this prouinges, shall hot the knot in the heart

well (quod I) this inpossession I wol well understand. Now also (quod she)
for the knotte in the heart must ben from one to another, and I know thy
desire: I woll thou understand these matters to ben said of thy self in
dysprouing of thy first service, and in strenghthynge of thylke that thou have
undertake to thy Margaryte perle. A gods half (quod I) right well I feel
that al this case is possible and true, and therefore I admitted al together.
Understood well (quod she) these terms, and look no contradiction thou
grant.

If God woll (quod I) of all these things wol I not fail, and if I grant
contradiccyon, I should grant an impossible, and that were a foul
inconvenience, for which things Lady ywys herafter I think me to keep.

WEll (quod she) thou knoweste hat every thing is a cause wherthrough any
thing has being, that is cleped caused, than if richesse causen knotte in
heart, thylke richesse arne cause of thylke precious thing being: but after the
sentence of Aristotle, every cause is more in dignity than his thing caused,
wherthrough it follows richesse to been more in dignity tha^ thilke knot, but
rychesses arne kindly naughty, badde, and nedy, and thylke knotte is thing
kyndely good, most praised and desired: Ergo thing naughtye, badde, and
nedye, in kyndelye understanding is more worthy than thing kyndely good, most
desired and praised: the consequence is false, needs the antecedent mote been
of the same condition. But that rychesses ben badde, naughty, and nedy, yt woll
I prove, wherefore they mow cause no such thing, that is so glorious and good:
The more richesse thou have, the more need haste thou of help hem to keep.
Ergo thou nedeste in richesse, which need thou should not have if thou hem
want. Than must richesse been nedy, that in their having maken the nedy to
helps in surety thy richesse to kepe^, wherthrough follows richesse to been
nedy. Every thing causyng yuels is badde and naughty: but richesse in one
causen misease, in another they mowen not euenly stretche^ al about. whereof
comes plee, debate, theft, begylynges, but richesse to win, which things
been bad, and by richesse arne caused: Ergo thylke riches been badde, which
badnesse and need been knytte in to richesse by a manner of kyndely property,
and every cause and caused accorden, so that it follows thylke richesse to
have the same accordaunce with badnesse and need, that their cause asks. Also
every thing has his being by his cause, tha^ if ye cause be distroyed, the
being of caused is vanyshed: And so if richesse causen love, and richesse weren
distroyed the love should vanyshe, but thylke knot and it be true may not
vanyshe for no going of no richesse: Ergo richesse is no cause of the knotte.
And many men as I said, setten the cause of the knotte in richesse, thilke
knytten the richesse, and nothing the yuell: thylke persons what ever they
ben, wenen that richesse is most worthy to he had, and that make they the
cause: and so wene they thylke richesse be better tha^ the person. Commonly
such aske^ rather after the quantyte than after the qualyte, and such wenen as
well by hem self as by other, that conjunction of his life and of his soul is
no more precious, but in as mykel as he has of riches. Alas how may he
holden such things precious or noble, that neither han life ne soul, ne
ordinance of werchynge lymmes: such richesse been more worthy when they ben in
gatherynge, in departing ginneth his love of other men's praysyng. And auerice
gatheryng makes be hated and nedy to many out helps: and when leueth the
possession of such goods, and they gynne vanysh, than enters sorrow and tene
in their hertes. O badde and strayte ben thylke that at their departing makes
men teneful and sorry, and in the gatheryng of hem make men nedy: Much folk at
ones mowen not together much thereof have. A good gest gladdeth his host and al
his meyny, but he is a badde gest that makes his host nedy and to be aferde of
his gestes going. Certes (quod I) me wondreth therefore that the comune opinion
is thus: He is worth no more than yt he has in catell. O (quod she) look thou
be not of that opinion, for if gold or money, or other manner of richesse shinen
in thy sight, whose is that? not thine: and tho they have a little beautye, they
be no thing in comparison of our kind, and therefore ye should not set your
worthiness in thing lower tha^ your self, for the riches, the fayrenes, the
worthiness of thylke goods if there be any such preciousnesse in hem are not
thine, thou made hem so never, from other they come to the, and to other they
shul from yt: wherefore enbrasest you other wightes goods as tho they were
thine* kind has draw hem by hem self. It is soth the goods of the earth been
ordained in your fode and noryshynge, but if thou wolte hold the apayed with
ye suffyseth to thy kind, thou shalt not be in danger of no such riches, to
kind suffices little thing who that takes head. And if thou wolte algates
with superfluite of richesse be a throted, thou shall hastelych be anoyed, or
else yuell at ease. And fayrnesse of feldes ne of habitations, ne multitude of
meyne, may not be rekened as richesse that are thine own, for if they be bad
it is great sclaunder and vylany to the occupyer, and if they be good or fair,
ye matter of the workman that hem made is to praise. How should otherwise
bounty be co^pted for thine, thilke goodness and fayrnesse be proper to tho
things hem self, tha^ if they be not thine sorrow not wha^ they wend, ne glad
the not in po^pe and in pride when thou hem haste, for their bounty and their
beauties comes out of their own kind, and not of thine own person: as fair
been they in their not having as when thou haste hem, they be not fair for
thou haste hem, but thou have geten hem for the fayrnesse of them self. And
there the vaylance of men is demed in richesse outforthe, wenen men to have no
proper good in them self but seche it in strange things? trewly the
condition of good wenyng is in ye mystourned, to wene your nobleness be not in
your self, but in the goods and beauty of other things. Pardy the beasts
that han but feeling souls, have suffysaunce in their own self: and ye that
been like to God, seken increase of suffysaunce from so excellent a kind of so
low things, ye do great wrong to him that you made lords over all erthly
things, and ye put your worthiness under the nombre of the fete of lower
things and foul, wha^ ye judge thylke richesse to be your worthynesse, than
put ye your self by estimacyon under thylke foul things, and than leave ye the
knowing of yourselfe, so be ye vyler tha^ any dombe be, ye comes of shreude
vice. Right so thylke persons yt louen none yuel for dear worthynesse of the
person, but for strange goods, and says the adornement in the knotte lyth in
such thing, his error is perylous and shreude, and he wrieth much venym with
much wealth, and that knot moy not be good wha^ he has it getten. Certes thus
has riches with flyckeryng sight anoyed many: and often when there is a throw
out shrew, he coyneth all the gold, all the precious stones that mowen be
founde^ to have in his bandon, he weneth no wight be worthy to have such
things but he alone. How many have thou know now in late time, yt in their
riches supposed suffisaunce have followed, and now it is al failed? Ye lady
(quod I) that is for mysse medlynge, and otherwise governed thylke richesse
than they should. Ye (quod she tho) had not the floode greatly areysed, and
throw to hemwarde both grauel and sand, he had made no medlyng. And right as
see yeueth flood, so draws see ebb, and pulls again under wawe all the
first out throw, but if good pyles of noble governance in love, in well
meaning manner, been sadly grounded, to which hold thylke gravel as for a
while, ye again lightly mow not it turn, and if the pyles been true, the
gravel and sand wol abide. And certes full warnyng in love shalt thou never
through hem get ne cover yt lightly with an ebb er thou be ware it wol again
meue. In richesse many me^ have had tenes and diseases, which they should not
have had, if thereof they had failed Through which now declared partly it is
showed, that for richesse should the knotte in heart neither ben caused in one
ne in other: trewly knott may ben knytte, and I trow more steadfast in love
though richesse failed and else in richesse is the knotte and not in heart. And
than such a knotte is false, when the sea ebbeth and withdraws the grauel,
that such richesse voydeth, thilke knotte wol vnknytte wherefore no trust, no
way, no cause, no parfyte being is in richesse of no such knotte, therefore
another way must we have.

Honor in dignity is wened to yeuen a full knot. Ye certes (quod I) and of
that opinion been many, for they same dignity, with honor and reverence,
causen hertes to encheynen, and so abled to be knytte together, for the
excellence in soueraynte of such degrees

Now (quod she) if dignity, honor, and reverence causen thilke knot in
heart, this knot is good and profitable. For every cause of a cause, is cause
of thing caused: Than thus, good things and profitable ben by dignite honor,
and reverence caused. Ergo they accorden, and dignities been good with
reuerences and honor, but contraryes mowen not accorden: wherefore by reason
there should no dignity, no reverence, none honor accord with shrewes, but yt
is false: they have been cause to shrewes in many shreudnesse, for with hem they
accorden. Ergo from beginning to argue ayenwarde till it come to the last
conclusyon, they are not cause of the knot. Lo all day at eye, arne shrewes not
in reverence, in honor, and in dignity? yes forsooth, rather tha^ the good.
Tha^ follows it that shrewes rather tha^ good shull ben cause of this knot.
But of this contrary of al lovers is bileued, and for a soth openly determined
to hold.

Now (quod I) feign would I here how such dignities accorden with shrewes.

O (quod she) that woll I show in manyfolde wise. Ye wene (quod she) that
dignites of office here in your ciite is as ye su^ne, it shyneth bryghte
wythouten any cloud, which thing when they comen in the hands of malycyouse
tyrauntes, there comes much harm, and more greuaunce thereof, than of the
wild fire, though it brende all a street. Certes in dignite of office, the
works of the occupyer shown the malice and the badnes in the person, with
shrewes they maken manyfolde harms, and much people shamen. How often han
rancours for malice of the gouernoure should been maynteyned? Has not than
such dignities caused debate rumors, and yuels? yes God wot, by such things
have been trusted to make men's understanding incline to many queynt things.
Thou woteste well what I mean. Ye (quod I) therefore as dignity such thing in
tene ywrought, so ayenwarde the substance in dignity changed, relied to
bring again good plyte in doing. Doway, doway (quod she) if it so betyde, but
that is selde, that such dignity is betake in a good man's governance. what
thing is to reckon in the dignities goodness? parde the bounty and goodness
is hers, that vse^ it in good governance, and therefore comes it that honor
and reverence should been done to dignity, because of encreasynge virtue in
the occupyer, and not to the ruler, because of souerayntie in dignity. Sythen
dignity may no virtue cause, who is worthy worship for such goodness? no^
dignity, but person yt makes goodness in dignity to shine. This is wonder
thing (quod I) for me thinks, as the person in dignity is worthy honor
for goodness so tho a person for badnesse magre has deserved, yet the dignite
leneth to be commended. Let be (quod she) thou errest right foul dignite with
badnes is helper to perform the felonous doing: pardy were it kyndly good or
any property of kyndly virtue hadden in hem self, shrewes should hem never
have, with hem should they never accord. water and fire that been co^trarious
mowen not together been assembled, kind wol not suff^e such contraryes to
join, and sythen at eye by experience in doing, we seen that shrewes have hem
more often tha^ good men, syker may thou be, ye kyndly good in such
things is not appropred. Pardy were they kyndly good, as well one as other
shulden euenliche in virtue of governance ben worth: but one fails in
goodness another does the contrary, and so it shows kyndly goodness in dignity
not be grounded. And this same reason (quod she) may be made in general on
all the bodily goods, for they comen often to throw out shrewes. After this he
is strong that has might to have great burthyns, and he is light and swyfte
that has souerante in runnynge to pass other right so he is a shrewe on
who^ shreude things and badde han most wyrchyng. And right as philosophy
makes philosophers, and my service makes lovers: Right so if dignities weren
good or virtuous, they should maken shrewes good, and turn her malice and make
hem be virtuous, but that do they not, as it is proved, but cause^ rancour and
debate. Ergo they be not good, but utterly badde. Had Nero never been
Emperor, should never his dame have be slain, to maken open the priuitie of
his engendrure. Herodes for his dignity slew many children. The dignite of
king Pompey would have distroyed al Italy Therefore mokyl wisdom and goodness
both needs in a person, the malice in dignity slyly to bridel, and with a
good bytte of arest to withdraw, in case it would praunce otherwise than it
should: trewly ye give to dignities wrongful names in your cleping. They should
hete not dignity, but moustre of badnes and mayntenour of shrewes. Pardy shine
the su^ne never so bright, and it bring forth no heat, ne sesonably the
herbs bring out of the earth, but suffer frostes and cold, and the earth
baraine to lygge be time of his compass in circute about, ye would wonder and
dispreyse that sun. If the moon be at full and shows no light but derke
and dymme to your syghte appears, and make destruction of ye waters, wol ye
not suppose it be under cloud or in clips? and that some privy thing unknown
to your wits, is cause of such contrarious doing. Tha^ if clerks that han
full insight and knowing of such impedime^tes inform you of the sothe, very
idiotes ye been, but if ye yeuen credence to thylke clerks words, and yet it
does me tene, to seen many wretches reioycen in such manner planets Trewly little
con they on philosophy or else on my lore, that any desire haven such lightyng
planettes in yt wise any more to show. Good Lady (quod I) tell ye me how ye
mean in these things. Lo (quod she) the dignities of your city, sun and
moan, nothing in kind show their shynyng as they should. For the sun made no
bre^nyng hete in love, but fresed envy in men's hertes for feblenesse of
shynynge hete: and the moon was about under an old cloud, the lyuenges by
waters to distroye.

Lady (quod I) it is supposed they had shined as they should. Ye (quod she)
but now it is proved at the full their beauty in kyndly shynynge failed,
wherefore dignitye of him seluen has no beauty in fayrnesse, ne dryueth not
away vices but increases, and so be they no cause of the knot. Now se in good
troth hold ye not such sons worthy of no reverence and dignities, worthy of
no worship, that makes men to do the more harms? I not (quod I) No (quod she)
and thou se a wise good man, for his goodness and wysenesse wolte thou not do
him worship? Thereof he is worthy. That is good skyl (quod I) it is dew to
such, both reverence and worship to have. Than (quod she) a shrewe for his
shreudnesse, all tho he be put forth to forne other for ferd, yet is he worthy
for shreudnes to be vnworshypped: of reverence no part is he worthy to have, to
co^trarious doing belongs and that is good skyl. For right as besmyteth the
dignities, thylke same thing aycuwarde him smyteth, or else should smite And
over this thou wost well (quod she) that fire in every place heateth where it be
and water makes wete: why? for kyndely werking is so yput in hem to do such
things: for every kyndly in werkynge shows his kind. But though a wight had been mayre of your city many winter together, and come in a strange place
there he were not known, he should for his dignite have no reverence. Tha^
neither worship ne reverence is kyndelye propre in no dignity, sythen they
shulde^ don their kind, in such doing if any were. And if reverence ne
worship kyndly be not set in dignities, and they more therein been showed tha^
goodness, for that in dignity is showed but it proves that goodness kyndly
in hem is not grounded. I wys neither worship ne reverence ne goodness in
dignity, done none office of kind, for they have none such property in
nature of doenge, but by false opinion of the people. Lo how sometime thilk that
in your city werne in dignity noble, if thou list hem nempne, they been now
ouerturned, both in worship, in name, and in reverence: wherefore such
dignities have no kyndely werchynge to worship and of reverence, he that
has no worthynesse on it self. Now it ryseth and now it vanysheth after the
varyaunt opinion in false hertes of unstable people. Wherefore if thou desire
the knotte of this jewel, or else if thou would suppose she should set the
knotte on the for such manner dignity than thou weneste beautye or goodness of
thylke somewhat increases the goodness or virtue in the body: But dignitye of
hem self been not good, ne yeuen reverence ne worship by their own kind,
how should they than give to any other a thing, that by no way mow they
have hem self? It is seen in dignity of the Emperor and of many mo other,
that they mow not of hem selue keep their worship ne their reverence, that
that in a little while it is now up and now down, by unsteadfast hertes of the
people. what bou^tie mow they give that with cloud lyghtlye leaves his
shyning? Certes to the occupier is mokyl appeyred, sythen such doing does
vylany to him that may it not maintain, wherefore thylke way to the knotte is
crooked: and if any desire to come to the knotte, he must lean this way on
his left side, or else shall he never come there.

AVayleth ought (quod she) power of might in mayntenaunce of worthy to come to
this knot Parde (quod I) ye, for hertes been rauyshed from such manner things.
Certes (quod she) though a fools heart is with thing ravished yet therefore is
no general cause of the powers, ne of a syker parfyte heart to be looked after.
Was not Nero the most shrewe one of thylke that men read, and yet had he power
to make senators, justices and princes of many lands? was not that great
power? Yes, certes (quod I) well (quod she) yet might he not help him self out
of disease, wha^ he^ began fall. How many ensamples can thou remember of kings
great and noble, and huge power holden, and yet they might not keep hem selue
from wretchedness. How wretched was king Henry Curtmantyll er he deyed? he
had not so much as to cover with his members: and yet was he one of the greatest
kings of all the Normandes of spring, and most possession had. O, a noble
thing and clear is power, that is not founden mighty to keep him self. Now
trewly a great fool is he, that for such thing would set the knotte in thine
heart. Also power of realms is not thylk greatest power among the worldly
powers rekened? And if such powers han wretchedness in hem self, it follows
other powers of febler condition to ben wretched, and than that wretchedness
should be cause of such a knotte. But every wight that has reason wot well
that wretchedness by no way may been cause of none such knotte, wherefore
such power is no cause. That powers have wretchedness in hem self, may right
lightly been preued. If power lack on any side, on that side is no power, but
no power is wretchedness: for all be it so the power of emperors or kings, or
else of their realms (which is the power of the prince) stretchen wide and
broad, yet beside is there mokell folk of which he has no commandment ne
lordshyp, and there as lacks his power, his nonepower enters, where under
spryngeth that makes hem wretches. No power is wretchedness, and nothing
else: but in this manner has kings more portion of wretchedness tha^ of power.
Trewly such powers been vnmighty, for ever they ben in dread how thylke power
from lesinge may be keped of sorrow, so dread sorily pricks ever in their
hertes: little is ye power which cares and ferdeth it self to maintayn.
Vnmyghty is ye wretchedness which is entered by the ferdful wenyng of the wretch
him self: and knotte ymaked by wretchedness is between wretches, and wretches
all thing bewaylen: wherefore the knotte should be bewailed, and there is no such
perfyte bliss that we supposed at the gynning. Ergo power in nothing should
cause such knottes. wretchedness is a kyndly property in such power, as by
way of dread, which they mow not eschew ne by no way line in sikernesse.
For thou wost well (quod she) he is naught mighty that would done yt he may not
done ne perform. Therefore (quod I) these kings and lords that han
suffysaunce at the full of men and other things, mowen well been holden mighty:
their commandments ben done, it is neuermore denied. Fool (quod she) or he
wot him self mighty or wotte it not: for he is naught mighty, that is blind
of his might and wot it not. That is sothe (quod I). Than if he wet it, he
must needs ben a drad to lesen it. He that wot of his might is in dout yt he
mote needs lose, and so leads him dread to ben vnmyghtye. And if he retche
not to lose, little is that worth yt of ye lesyng reason retcheth nothing: and if
it were mighty in power or in strength the lesyng should been wythset, and
when it comes to the lesyng he may it not wyth^yt. Ergo thylke might is leude
and naughty. Such mightes arne ylike to posts and pyllers that upright
stonden, and great might han to bear many charges, and if they croke on any
side, little thing makes hem overthrow. This is a good ensample (quod I) to
pyllers and posts yt I have seneouerthrowed my self, and hadden, they been
vnderput with any helps, they had not so lightly fall. Tha^ holdeste thou him
mighty that has many men armed and many servants, and ever he is adradde of
hem in his heart, and for he gasteth hem, sometime he mote ye more fear have.
Comenly he that other agasteth, other in him ayenwarde werchen the same: and
thus warnyshed mote he be, and of warnish the hour dread: Little is that might
and right leude, who so takes head. Than semethe it (quod I) that such
famulers about kings and great lords, should great might have. Although a
sypher in augrym have no might in signifycation of it self, yet he yeueth
power in significacion to other, and these clepe I the helps to a post to keep
him from falling. Certes (quod she) thylke skylles been leude. why? but if ye
shorers ben well grounded, the helps shullen slyden and suffer the charge to
fall, her might little avails. And so me thinks (quod I) that a post alone
stondynge upright upon a basse, may longer in great burden endure, than croken
pillars for all their helps, and her ground be not syker. That is soth (quod
she) for as the blind in bearing of the lame gynne stomble, both should fall,
right so such pyllers so enuyroned with helps in falling of the ground
fails altogyther, how often than such famulers in their most pride of
prosperyte been suddenly overthrown. Thou haste know many in a moment so
far overthrow, that cover might they never, when the heaviness of such
faylynge comes by case of fortune, they mow it not eschew: and might and
power, if there were any, should of strength such things void and weyue, and
so it is not Lo than which thing is this power, that tho men han it they been
aghast, and in no time of full having be they syker, and if they would weyue
dread, as they mow not, little is in worthynesse. Fie therefore on so naughtye
thing any knot to cause. Lo in adversity, thylke been his foes that glosed
and seemed friends in welthe: thus arne his famylyers his foes and his enemies:
and nothing is werse ne more mighty for to anoy than is a familier enemy, and
these things may they not weyue: so trewelye their might is not worth a
cresse. And over all thing, he yt may not wythdrawe the bridell of his fleshly
lusts and his wretched complayntes (now think on thy self) trewly he is not
mighty. I can se no way you lies to the knot. Thylke people tha^ that setten
their hertes upon such myghtes and powers, often been begyled. Parde he is not
mighty that may do any thing, that another may done him the selue and that
me^ have as great power over him as he over other. A justice that demeth men,
ayenward has been often demed. Buserus slew his gestes, and he was slain of
Hercules his geste, Hugest betrayshed many men, and of Collo was he betrayed.
He that with sword smytteth, with sword shall be smitten. Than began I to
studyen a while on these things, and made a countenance with my hand in
manner to been huyshte. Now let seen (quod she) me thinks somewhat there is
within thy soul, that troubles thy understanding, say on what it is. (Quod
I tho) me thinks that although a man by power have such might over me, as I
have over other, that disproueth no might in my person, but yet may I have
power and might never the later. Se now (quod she) thine own lewdness: He is
mighty that may without wretchedness, and he is vnmyghty that may it not with
sit: but then he that might over the, and he woll put on the wretchedness,
thou might it not wythsytte. Ergo thou see thy self what follows. But now
(quod she) would thou not skorne and thou se a fly han power to done harm
to another fly, and thilk have no might ne ayenturninge him self to defend?
Yes certes (quod I) who is a frayler thing (quod she) than the fleshly body of
a man, over which have oftentyme flies, and yet less thing than a fly, mokel
might in greuaunce and anoyenge withouten any withsytting, for all thylke man's
mightes And sythen thou frest thy fleshlye body in kyndely power fail, how
should tha^ the accident of a thing ben in more surete of being than
substancial? wherefore thylke things yt we clepe power, is but accident to the
fleshly body, and so they may not have that surety in might, which wants in
the substanciall body, why there is no way to the knot, that looks aright
after the hye way as he should

VErily it is proved that richesse, dignite, and power, ben not true way to the
knot, but as rath by such things the knotte to be unbound: wherefore on these
things I read no wight trust, to get any good knotte. But what shul we say
of renome in the peoples mouths, should yt ben any cause: what supposest you in
thine heart? Certes (quod I) yes I trow, for your fly resons I dare not sac^ly
it say. Than (quod she) wol I preue yt shrewes as rath shul ben in ye knot as
the good and you were against kind. Feign (quod I) would I that here, me
thinks wondre how renoume should as well knyt a shrewe as a good person:
renoume in every degree has auaunced, yet wist I never the contrary: should
tha^ renoume accord with a shrewe? it may not synke in my stomach till I
hear more. Now (quod she) have I not said always the shrewes shull not have
the knot. what needs (quod I) to rehearse that any more? I wot well every
wight by kyndely reason, shrewes in knyttyng wol eschew. Than (quod she) the
good ought thylke knotte to have. How else? (quod I) It were great harm (quod
she) that the good were weyued and put out of espoire of the knot, if it be
desired O (quod I) alas, on such thing to think I wene that heaven wepeth to
se such wro^ges here been suffered on earth: the good ought it to have and no
wight else. The goodness (quod she) of a person may not ben know outforth, but
by renome of the knowers, wherefore he must be renoumed of goodness to come to
the knot. So must it be (quod I) or else all lost that we carpen. Sothly (quod
she) that were great harm, but if a good man might have his desires in service
of thylke knot, and a shrewe to be veyned, and they ben not known in general
but by lackyng and pray sing and in renome, and so by the co^seque^ce it
follows, a shrewe to ben praised and knyt, and a good to be forsake and
vnknyt. Ah (quod I tho) have ye lady been here abouten, yet would I se by
grace of our arguments better declared, how good and bad do accorde^ by
lackyng and praysyng, me thinks it against kind. Nay)quod she) and that shall
thou se as yerne: these elements han co^trarious qualities in kind, by which
they mow not accord no more than good and bad, and in qualities they accord,
so that contraryes by quality accorden by quality. Is not earth dry, and
water that is next and between therth is wete: dry and were ben contrary, and
mowen not accord, and yet this discordaunce is bound to accord by clouds,
for both elements ben cold. Right so the air that is next the water is
wete, and eke it is hot. This air by his hete contraryeth water that is
cold, but thylke contraryoustye is oned my moisture, for both be they moist.
Also the fire yt is next the air, and it encloseth al about, is dry:
wherthrough it contraryeth air that is were: and in hete they accord, for
both they ben hot. Thus by these accordau^ces, discordau^tes ben joined, and
in a manner of accordaunce they accorden by connection, that is knyttyng
together: of that accord comes a manner of melody yt is right noble. Right so
good and bad are contrary in doings, by lackyng and praysyng: good is both
lacked and praised of some, and bad is both lacked and praised of some:
wherefore their contrarioustie accord both by lacking and praysyng. Than
follows it, though good be never so mokel praised, owes more to be^ knit than
the bad: or else bad for the renome that he has, must be taken as well as ye
good, and that owes not. No forsooth (quod I) well, quod she than is renome no
way to the knot: Lo fool (quod she) how clerks written of such glory of
renome. O glory, glory, thou art none other thing to thousands of folk,
but a great sweller of ears. Many one has had full great renoume by false
opynion of varyaunt people: And what is fouler tha^ folk wrongfully to ben
praised, or by malice of the people gyltelesse lacked? needs shame follows
thereof to hem yt with wrong prayseth, and also to the deserts praised, and
vilanye and reprofe of him that disclau^dreth.

Good child (quod she) what echeth such renome to the conscience of a wise
man that looks and measures his goodness, not by sleuelesse words of the
people, but by sothe fastness of conscience? by god nothing. And if it be
fair a man's name be eched by much folks praysyng, and fouler thing that mo
folk not praysen. I said to the a little here beforne, that no folk in
strange countries naught praysen, such renoume may not comen to their ears,
because of unknowing and other obstacles, as I said: wherefore more folk not
praysen, and that is right foul to him that renome desires, to wetelesse
folk praysen than renoume enhaunce. I trow the thank of a people is naught
worth in remembrance to take, ne it proceeds of no wise judgment, never is
it steadfast perdurable: it is vein and flying, with wind wastes and
increases.

Truly such glory ought to be hated. If gentyllesse be a clear thing, renome
and glory to enhau^ce, as in rekenyng of thy lynage than is gentyllesse of thy
kynne, for why, it seems that gentylesse of thy kynne, is but praysynge and
renoume that come of thine auncestres deserts: and if so be that praysynge and
renoume of their deserts, make their clear gentylesse, than mote they needs
ben gentyl for their gentil deeds, and not you: for of thy self comes not
such manner gentylesse, praysynge of thy deserts. Than gentylesse of thine
auncesters that forayne is to the, makes the not gentyl, but vnge^tyl and
reproved, and if thou contynuest not their gentyllesse. And therefore a wise man
ones said. Better is it thy kynne to been by the gentyled, than thou to
glorify of thy kynnes gentylesse, and haste no deserte thereof thy self.

How passing is the beauty of fleshly bodies? more flyttyng than mouable
flowers of summer. And if thine eyes were as good as the Lynx, that may seen
through many stone walls, both fair and foul in their entrayles, of no manner
hew should appear to thy sight, that were a foul sight. Than is fayrenesse
by feblesse of eyes, but of no kind, wherefore thylke should be no way to the
knot: when thylke is went the knotte wendeth after.

Lo now at all proves, none of all these things mow perfectlye ben in
understanding, to ben way to the during bliss of the knot. But now to
conclusyon of these matters, herkeneth these words. Very summer is know from
the winter: in shorter course draws the days of Dece^bre, than in the month
of June: The sprynges of May faden and folowen in October. These things ben
not vnbounden from their old kind, they have not lost her work of their
propre estate. Men of volu^tarious will, withsyt ye henens governs. Other
things suffren things pacyently to werche: Man in what estate he be, yet
would he been changed. Thus by queynt things bliss is desired, and the fruit
that comes of these springes, nys but anguysh and bitter, although it be a
while sweet, it may not be withholde, hastily they depart: thus al day
fails things that fools wend. Right thus haste thou failed in thy first
wenynge. He that thinks to sail and draw after the course of the star, de
polo antartico, shall he never come northwarde to the contrary star of polus
articus: of which things if thou take keep, thy first out way goinge, prison
and exyle may be cleped. The ground falsed underneath, and so haste thou
failed. No wight I wene blames him that stynteth in misgoing, and secheth
redye way of his bliss. Now me thinks (quod she) that it suffyseth in my
showing the ways, by dignity, richesse, renoume, and power, if thou look
clearly, arne no ways to the knotte.

EVerye argument lady (quod I tho) that ye han maked in these fore nempned
matters, me thinks hem in my full wit conceived, shall I no more if god will
in the contrary be begyled But feign would I and it we^e your will, bliss of
the knotte to me were declared, I might feel the better how mine heart might
assente to pursue the end in service, as he has be gone. O (quod she) there
is a melody in heaven, which clerks clepen armonye, but that is not in
breaking of voice, but it is a manner sweet thing of kyndly werchynge, that
causes joy out of nombre to reckon, and and that is joined by reason and by
wisdom, in a quantity of proporcyon of knyttyng. God made all thing in
reason and in wit of proporcyon of melodye, we mow not suffyse to show. It
is written by great clerks and wise, that in earthlye things lightly by
study and by travail, the knowing may be getten* but of such heavenly
melodye, mokell travail wol bring out in knowing right little. Swetnesse of
this paradyse has you rauyshed, it seems ye slepten, rested from all other
diseases, so kyndly is your hertes therein ygrounded. Bliss of two hertes in
full love knyt, may not aright ben ymagyned: ever is their contemplacion in
full of thoughty study to pleasaunce, matter in bryngyng, comfort eueryche to
other. And therefore of erthly things mokell matter lightly comes in your
learning. Knowledge of understanding that is nygh after eye, but not so nygh
the couetyse of knyttynge in your hertes: More soueraygne desire has every
wight in little hearing of heavenly connyng, than of mokell materyall purposes
in earth. Right so it is in property of my servants, that they ben more
affyched in sterynge of little thing in his desire, than of mokell other matter,
less in his conscience. This bliss is a manner of sown delicious, in a queynt
voice touched, and no dynne of notes: there is none impressyon of breaking
labor. I can it not otherwise nempne, for wantynge of pryuye words, but
Paradyse terrestrye full of delicyous melodye withouten travail in sown
perpetual service in full joy coueyted to endure.

Only kind makes hertes in understanding, so to sleep, that otherwise may it
not be nempned, ne in other manner names for lykyng swetnesse can I not it
declare, al sugre and honey, all mynstralsye and melodye ben but soote and galle
in comparion by no manner proporcyon to reckon, in respect of this blysfull
joy. This armonye, this melodye, this perdurable joy may not be in doing,
but between heuens and elements, or twey kyndly hertes, full knyt in troth of
natural understanding, withouten wenyng and disceyte, as heuens and planettes,
which things contynually for kyndely accordaunces, foryeteth all contraryous
meanynges: that into passyue diseases may sown, evermore it thyrsteth after
more werkyng. These things in proporcyon be so well joined, that it vndoth all
thing, which into badnesse by any way may be accounted. Certes (quod I) this
is a thing precious and noble. Alas, that falsenesse ever or wantruste should
be mayntayned, this joy to void. Alas that ever any wretch should through
wrath or envy, ^anglyng dare make to shoue this melody so far abacke, that
openly dare it not ben used: truly wretches ben fulfilled with ^auy and wrath,
and no wight else. Flebring and tales in such wretches shall appear openly in
every wyghtes ere, with full mouth so charged, mokell malice moved many
ininnocentes to shende, god would their soul therewith were st^angled. Lo,
troth in this bliss is hyd, and over all under covert him hydeth: He dare not
come a place for waytyng of shrewes.

Commonly badnesse, goodness amastryeth with my self and my soul this joy
would I bye, if I the goodness were as much as the nobley in melody. O (quod
she) what goodness may be accounted more in this materyall world, truly none
that shall thou understand. Is not every thing good that is contrariant and
destroying evil? How else (quod I) Envy, wrath, and falsenesse ben general
(quod she) and that wot every man being in his right mind, the knotte the
which we have in this bliss, is contraryaunt and distroyeth such manner evils:
ergo it is good.

what has caused any wight to don any good deed? Find me any good, but if
this knotte be the chief cause: Needs mote it be good, that causes so many
good deeds.

Every cause is more and worthyer than thing caused, and in that mores
possessyon, all things less ben compted. As the king is more than his
people, and has in possessyon all his realm after: Right so the knot is more
than all other goods, thou might reckon all things less, and that to him
lo^geth, owes into his mores cause of worship and of will do turn, it is
else rebel and out of his mores defending to void. Right so of every
goodness into the knotte and into the cause of his worship owes to turn. And
truly every thing that has being profytably is good, but nothing has to
ben more profytably than this knot: kings it mayntayneth, and hem their powers
to maintain: It makes mysse to ben amended with good governance in doing.
It closes hertes so together, ye rancour is out thresten. who that it lengest
keeps, lengest is gladded. I trow (quod I) heretyckes and mysmeanynge people
hence forward woll maintain this knotte, for there through shall they ben
mayntayned, and utterly wol turn and leave their old evil understanding, and
knytte this goodness, and profer so far in service, that name of servants
might they have.

Their iangles shall cease, me thinks he^ lacks matter now to alege. Certes
(quod love) if they of good will thus turned as thou say wolen truly
perform, yet shul they be abled party of this bliss to have: and they woll
not, yet shull my servants the werre well sustain in mine help of
mayntinau^ce to the end. And they for their good trauayl shullen in reward so
be ben meded, that end less joy body and soul together in this shullen
abyden, there is ever action of bliss withouten possible corruption, there is
action perpetuell in work without travail, there is everlasting passyfe,
withouten any of labor, continuel plyte without ceasing coueted to endure. No
tongue may tell ne heart may think the leest point of this bliss. God bring
me thither (quod I than). Contynueth well (quod she) to the end, and you might
not fail than, for though thou speed not here, yet shall the passion of thy
martred life ben written and rad toforne the great Iupyter that god is of
routh, an high in the holownesse of heaven, there he sit in his trone: and ever
thou shall forward ben holden among all these heuens for a knight, that
myghtest with no penance been discomfyted. He is a very martyr that lyuynglye
goinge is gnawen to the bones. Certes (quod I) these been good words of
comfort, a little mine heart is reioysed in a merry wise. Ye (quod she) and he
that is in heaven feleth more joy, than wha^ he first herd thereof speak. So it
is (quod I) but wist I the sothe, that after disease comfort would follow with
bliss, so as ye have often declared, I would well suffer this passion with the
better chere, but my thoughtfull sorrow is endless, to think how I am cast
out of a welfare, and yet dayneth not this evil none heart none head to
mewarde through, which things would greatly me by ways of comfort disporte,
to weten in my self a little with other ni^ ben ymoued: and my sorrows peysen
not in her balaunce the weight of a peese: Slings of her danger so heuyly
peysen, they draw my causes so high, that in her eyes they semen but light
and right little.

O, for (quod she) heaven with skies that foul clouds maken and dark wethers,
with great tempests and huge, makes the merry days with soft shynynge suns.
Also the year withdraws flowers and beautye of herbs and of earth. The same
years makes sprynges and iolitie in Vere so to renouell with painted colors,
that earth seems as gaye as heaven. Sees that blasteth, and with wawes throws
ships, of which the living creatures for great peril for hem dreden: right
so the same sees maken smothe waters and golden saylynge, and comforts hem with
noble haven that first were so ferde. Have thou not (quod she) learned in thy
youth, ye Iupyter has in his warderobe both garments of joy and of sorrow?
what woste thou how soon he woll turn of the garment of care, and cloth the
in bliss? parde it is not far fro the. Lo an old proverb aleged by many
wise: when bale is greatest, than is bote a nigh bore. whereof will thou
dismaye? hope well and serve well, and that shall the save, with thy good
believe.

Ye, ye (quod I) yet se I not by reason how this bliss is coming, I wot it is
co^tingent it may fall on other. O (quod she) I have mokell to done to clear
thine understanding and void these erroures out of thy mind, I woll prove it
by reason thy woe may not always enduren. Every thing kyndely (quod she) is
governed, and ruled by the heavenly bodies, which haven full werchyng here on
earth: and after course of these bodies, all course of your doings here been
governed and ruled by kind.

Thou wost well by course of planettes all your proceden, and to euerych of
synguler hours be enterchaunged stondmele about, by submytted worchyng
naturally to suff^e, of which chaunges comes these transitory times that
makes reuoluing of your years thus stondmele, every has full might of
worchyng, till al seven han had her course about. Of which worchinges and
possessyon of hours, the days of the weke have take her names, after
denominacyon in these seven planettes. Lo, your sunday gynneth at the first
hour after noone on the saturdaye, in which hour is than the sun in full
might of worchynge, of whom sunday takes his name. Next him follows Venus,
and after Mercurius, and than the Moon, so than Saturnus, after whom Iouis, and
than Mars, and again than the Sun, and so forth, be.xxiiii hours together, in
which hour gynnynge in the second day stant the moon, as master for that time
to rule, of whom mondaye takes his name, and this course follows of all other
days generally in doing. This course of nature of these bodies chaungynge,
stynten at a certain term, lymytted by their first kind, and of hem all
gouernementes in this elemented world proceaden, as in sprynges,
constellacions, engendrures, and all that folowen kind and reason, wherefore
the course that follows sorrow and joy: kyndly moten entrechaungen their
times, so that always on well, as always on woo, may not endure. Thus see thou
apertly thy sorrow into well mote been changed, wherefore in such case to
better side evermore enclyne thou should. Truly next the end of sorrow anon
enters joy, by manner of necessity it wol ne may none other betide and so thy
contigence is disproued: if thou hold this opinyon any more, thy wit is
right leude. wherefore in full conclusyon of all this, thylke Margaryte thou
desyreste, has been to the dear in thy heart, and for her have thou suffered
many thoughtful diseases hereafter shall be cause of mokell mirth and joy, and
look how glad can thou ben, and cease al thy passed heaviness with manifold
joys. And than woll I as blythlye here the speken thy myrthes in joy, as I
now have yherde thy sorrows and thy complayntes. And if I mow in ought thy
joy increase by my troth on my side shall not be leaued, for no manner
travail, that I with all my myghtes right blythly woll help, and ever ben
ready you both to plese. And than thanked I that lady with all goodly manner that
I worthily could, and truly I was greatly reioysed in mine heart, of her fair
behestes, and profred me to be slawe in all that she me would ordain while my
life lested.

ME thinks (quod I) that ye have right well declared that way to ye knot should
not ben in non of these disprouing things, and now order of our purpose this
asks, that ye should me show if any way be thither, and which thylke way
should ben, so that openly may be sey, the very hye way in full confusyoun of
these other things.

Thou shall (quod she) understand, that one of three lives (as I first said)
every creature of mankind is sprongen, and so forth proceeds. These lives
been through names departed in three manner of kinds, as bestyallyche, manlyche,
and resonablyche, of which two been used by fleshlye body, and the third by
his soul. Bestyall among reas^nables is forboden in every law and every
sect, both in christen and other, for every wight dispyseth hem that lives by
lusts, and delyttes, as him that is thrall and bounden servant to things
right foul, such ben counted werse than men, he shall not in their degree ben
rekened, ne for such one allowed. Heretykes said they chosen life bestial, that
voluptuouslye lyuen, so that (as I first said to the) in manly and reasonable
lyuynges, our matter was to declare, but manly life in living after flesh or else
fleshly ways to chese, may not bliss in this knot be conquered, as by reason
it is proved.

wherefore by reasonable life he must needs it have, sith away is to this knotte,
but not by the first tway lives, wherefore neades mote it ben to the third,
and for to live in flesh but not after flesh, is more resonablyeh than manliche
rekened by clerks. Therefore how this way comes in, I wol it blithly declare.

Se now (quod she) that these bodyly goods of manlyche lyuynges, yelden
sorrowful stoundes and smeretande hours, who so well remember him to their
ends, in their worchynges they ben thoughtfull and sorry. Right as a be that
has had his honye, anon at his flight begins to stynge: So thylke bodyly
goods at the last mot away and than stynge they at her goinge, where^ through
enters and clean voydeth al bliss of this knotte.

Forsooth (quod I) me thinks I am well served, in shewi^g of these words,
although I had little in respect among other great and worthy, yet had I a
fair parcel, as me thought for the time, in fortherynge of my sustenaunce,
which while it dured, I thought me having mokell honey to mine estate. I had
richesse suffyciauntly to weyue need, I had dignity to be reverenced in
worship. Power me thought that I had to keep fro mine enemies, and me seemed to
shine in glory of renoume as manhood asks, in mean, for no wight in mine
administration could none euyls ne trecherye by sothe cause on me put. Lady
your self weten well that of tho confedecacyes maked by my soueraynes I nas but
a servant, and yet mokell mean folk woll fullye ayenste reason thilke matters
maintain, in which mayntenaunce glory them self, and as often ye haven
said, thereof ought nothing in evil to be laid to mewardes, sythen as
repentaunt I am turned, and no more I think neither tho things ne none such
other to sustain, but utterly destroy without medlynge manner, in all my
myghtes. How am I now cast out of all swetnesse of bliss, and myscheuously
stongen my passed joy? sorowfullye must I wayle, and live as a wretch.

Every of tho joys is turned into his contrary: For richesse now have I
pouertye, for dignity now am I emprysoned, instead of power, wretchedness I
suffer, and for glory of renoume I am now dispysed, and soulyche hated: thus
has farne Fortune, that suddenly am I overthrown, and out of all wealth
dispoyled.

Truly me thinks this way in enter is right hard, god grant me better
grace er it be al passed, ye other way lady me thought right sweet. Now certes
(quod Love) me list for to chyde. what ayleth thy dark dullness woll it not in
clerenesse ben sharped. Have I not by many reasons to the showed such bodily
goods faylen to give blis, their might so ferforth wol not stretche? Shame
(quod she) it is to say, thou lie in thy words. Thou ne have wist but right
few, that these bodyly goods had al at ones, commenly they dwellen not
together. He that plenty has in richesse, of his kynne is ashamed: another of
lynage right noble and well know, but pouerte him ha^dleth he were lever
unknow An other has these, but renome of peoples praysyng may he not have
over al he is hated and defamed of things right foul.

An other is fair and semely, but dignite him fails: and he that has
dignite is crooked or lame, or else mishappen and foully dispysed: thus pertable
these goods dwellen co^menlye in one household ben they but selde. Lo how
reetched is your trust, on thing yt wol not accord. Me thinks thou clepest
thylke plyte thou were in selynes of fortune and thou say for that ye
selynesse is departed, thou art a wretch. Than follows this upon thy words,
every soul reasonable of man, may not dye, and if death ends selynesse and
makes wretches, as needs of fortune makes it an end. Than souls after death
of ye body in wretchedness should lyuen.

But we know many that han getten the bliss of heaven after their death. How
than may this life maken men blysful, that wha^ it passes it yeueth no
wretchedness, and many times bliss, if in this life he con live as he
should? And wolt thou account with fortune, that now at the first she has done
the tene and sorrow: if thou look to the manner of al glad things and sorrowful,
you may not nay it, that yet, and namely now thou stand in noble plyt in
a good gynnyng, with good forth goinge hereafter. And if thou wene to be a wretch
for such wealth is passed why tha^ art thou not well fortunate for bad things
and anguys wretchedness be^ passed? Art thou now come first into the hostrye
of this life, or else the booth of this world, art thou now a sudden gest into
this wretched exyle? wenest there be any thing in this earth stable? Is not thy
first arest passed ye brout the in mortal sorrow? Ben these not mortal things
agone with ignorance of bestiall wit, and have received reason in knowing of
virtue? what comfort is in thy heart? the knowing sykerly in my service be
grounded. And wost thou not well as I said, yt death makes end of al fortune?
what tha^ sta^dest thou in noble plyte, little head or reckoning to take, if
thou let fortune pass dyng, or else that she fly when her list, now by thy
live. Pardy a man has nothing so lefe as his life and for to hold that he
does al his cure and dyligent travail. Than say I, thou art blisfull and
fortunate selye, if thou know thy goods that thou have yet beloved, which
nothing may dout, that they ne been more worthy than thy life? what is that
(quod I)? Good conte^placion (quod she) of well doing in virtue in time
coming, both in plesaunce of me and of thy Margaryte perle. Haestly thine heart
in full bliss with her shall be eased. Therefore dismay the not, fortune in hate
grievously against thy bodily person, ne yet to great tempest has she not sent to
ye, sithen ye holding cables and ankres of thy life holden by knytting so fast,
that thou discomforte the naught of time yt is now, ne despair the not of
time to come, but yeuen the comfort in hope of well doing, and of gettyng
again the double of thy lesynge, with encreasyng love of thy Margarite perle
thereto. For this hitherto you have had al her full danger, and so thou might
amend all that is mysse, and all defautes that sometime thou dyddest, and that
now in all thy time to that ylke Margaryte in full service of my lore thine
heart has continued, wherefore she ought much the rather enclyne fro h^t
dangerous sete. These things ben yet ^^yt by the holding anchor in thy live,
and holden mote they: To god I pray all these things at full ben performed.
For while this anchor holds I hope thou shalt safely escape, and while thy
true meaning service about bring in dispyte of all false meaners that the of
new haten, for this true service thou art now entered.

Certain (quod I) among things I asked a question, which was ye way to the
knot. Trewly lady how so it be, I te^pt you with questions and answers, in
spekyng of my first service, I am now in full purpose in the prick of the
heart, yt thilke service was an enprisonme^t, and always bad and naughty in no
manner to be desired. Ne yt in gettyng of the knot, may it nothing avail. A
wise gentle heart looks after virtue, and non other bodily joys alone. And
because toforne this, i^ tho ways I was set, I wot well my self I have
erred, and of the bliss failed, and so out of my way hugely have I ron.
Certes (quod she) yt is sothe, and there thou have myswent, eschew that path
from hens forward I read. Wonder I trewly why the mortal folk of this world
seche these ways outforth, and it is preued in your self. Lo how ye ben
confounded with error and folly. The knowing of very cause and way is
goodness and virtue. Is there any thing to the more precious than thy self?
Thou shall have in thy power, yt thou would never lose and that in no way may
be taken fro the, and thilk thing is that is cause of this knot. And if death
mow it not reave more tha^ an erthly creature, thilke thing than abides with
thy self soul, and so our conclusion to make such a knot thus getten,
abides with this thing and with the soul, as long as they last, a soul dies
never, virtue and goodness evermore with ye soul endures, and this knot is
perfect bliss. Tha^ this soul in this bliss endless shall enduren. Thus shul
hertes of a true knot ben eased: thus shul their souls be^ pleased: thus
perpetually in joy shul they sing. In good troth (quod I) here is a good
beginning, give us more of this way. (Quod she) I said to ye not long sythen,
that reasonable life was one of three things, and it was proved to the soul.
every soul of reason has two things of steryng life, one in virtue and
another in the bodily workynge: and when the soul is the master over the
body, than is a man master of him self: and a man to be a master over him
self, lives in virtue and in goodness, and as reason of virtue techeth, so
the soul and the body worchyng virtue togider lyuen reasonable life, which
clerks clepen felycite in lyueng, and theryn is the hye way to this knot,
these old philosophers that hadden no knowing of divine grace of kyndly reason
alone, wenden that of pure nature, wythoute^ any help of grace, me might have
yshoued the other lyuenges, resonablye have I lived: and for I think herafter,
if god woll (and I have space) thylk grace after my leude knowing declare: I
leave it as at this time. But (as I said) he that outforth looks after ye
ways of this knotte, connyng with which he should know the way inforth slepeth
for the time, wherefore he that wol this way know must leave the lokyng after
false ways outforth, and open the eyes of his conscience and unclose his
heart. See not he that has trust in the bodily life is so besy bodily
wou^des to anoint in keeping from smert (for all out may they not be healed)
that of wounds in his true understanding he takes no head, the knowing
euenforth slepeth so hard, but anon as in knowing a wake, than gynneth ye
preuy medicines for healyng of his true intent, inwardes lightly heals
conscience if it be well handled. Than must needs these ways come out of the
soul by ste^yng life of the body, and else may no man come to perfyte bliss
of this knotte: and thus by this way he shall come to the knot, and to the
perfyte selynesse that he wend have had in bodilye goods outforthe? Yea (quod
I) shall he have bot^e knotte, riches, power, dignite, and renome in this manner
way? Ye (quod she) yt shall I show the. Is he not rich that has
suffisaunce, and has the power that no man may amaistrie^? Is not great dignite
to have worship and reverence? and has he not glory of renome whose name
perpetual is during? and out of nombre in comparation? These be things that
men wenen to getten out forth (quod I). Ye (quod she) they that loken after a
thing that nout is thereof in all ne in party, long mow they gapen after: That
is soth (quod I:) therefore (quod she) they that sechen gold in grene trees* and
wene to gader precious stones among vynes, and layne her nets in mountains
to fysh, and thynke^ to hunt in deep sees after heart and hynde, and sechen in
earth thylke things that surmou^teth heaven, what may I of hem say? but folyshe
ignorance mysledeth wandryng wretches by uncouth ways that shulden be
forleten, and makes hem blind fro the right pathe of true way that should ben
used. Therefore in general error in mankind, departs thylke goods by
mysse sechynge, which he should have hole and he sought by reason. Thus gothe
he begyled of that he sought, in his hode men have blow a iape. Now (quod I)
if a man be virtuous and all in virtue lives, how has he all these things?
That shall I prouen (quod she) what power has any man to let another of
lyue^g in virtue? for prisonme^t or any other disese, he takes it patiently,
disco^fyteth he not, the tyrant over his soul no power may have? Than has
that man so tourmented such power, that he nyll be disco^fit, ne overcome may
he not ben, sythen patience in his soul ouercometh, and as not ouercomen.
Such thing that may not be a maistred, he has need to nothing, for he has
suffisaunce ynowe to help him self. And thylke thing that thus has power and
suffysaunce, and no tyrant may it reave, and has dignyte to set at naught all
things, here it is a great dignite that death may a maistry. Wherefore thilk
power suffisaunce so enclosed with dignyte, by all reason renome must have. This
is thylke riches with suffisance ye should look after: this is thilke worshipful
dignite ye should coueyt this is thylke power of might, in which ye should
trust, this is the ilke renome of glory that endless endures, and all nys
but substance in virtuous lyueng. Certes (quod I) all this is sothe, and so I
se well that virtue with full gripe encloseth al these things. Wherefore in
sothe I may say, by my troth, virtue of my Margarite brout me first in to
your service, to have knytting with that jewel, not sodayn longinges ne folks
small words, but only our conversation togider: and tha^ I saying thentent of
her true menyng with florishyng virtue of patience, that she used nothing in
yuel, to quyte the wicked leasynges that false tongues often in her have laid, I
have sey it my self, goodlye foryeuenesse has spronge out of her heart,
unite and accord above all other things she desires in a good meke manner,
and suffers many wicked tales.

TRewly lady t(...) it were a great worship, ^^at such things by due
chastysment were amended. Yea (quod she) I have the excused, al such things
as yet mow not be redressed thy Margarytes virtue I commend well the more
that patiently such anoyes suffers. David king was meke and suffered mokell
hate and many yuell speches: no dispyte ne shame that his enemis him deden,
might not move patience out of his heart, but ever in one plyte mercy he used.
Wherefore god him self took reward to the things, and thero^ such
punyshement let fall. Trewely by reason it ought be ensample of dread to all
manner peoples myrthe. A man vengeable in wrath no governance in punishment
ought to have. Plato had a cause his servant to scour, and yet cleaped he his
neighbor to perform the doing, him self would not, lest wrath had him a
maistred, and so might he have laid on to much: evermore grounded virtue
shows thentent fro within, and trewly I wott well for her goodness and
virtue, thou have desired my service to her pleasance well the more, and thy
self thereto fully haste proffered. Good lady (quod I) is virtue the hye way to
this knot, that long we have yhandled? ye for sothe (quod she) and without
virtue goodlye this knotte may not be gotten. Ah now I se (quod I) how virtue
in me fails, and I as a seer tree without burionyng or fruit always welke, and
so I stand in dyspeyre of this noble knotte, for virtue in me has no manner
workynge. A wide where about have I trauayled. Peace (quod she) of thy first
way thy traueyle is in ydel, and as touching the second way, I se well thy
meaning. Thou would conclude me if thou coudest, because I brought the to
service, and every of my servants I help to come to this bliss, as I said
here beforne: and thou saydest thy self, thou myghtest not be helped as thou
wenyst, because that virtue in the fails, and this bliss perfytly without
virtue may not be gotten, thou wenest of these words contradiction to follow.
Parde at the hardest I have no servant but he be virtuous in deed and though
I brought the in my service, yet art thou not my servant: but I say, thou
might so werche in virtue herafter, that tha^ shall thou be my seruante, and as
for my servant acompted. For habyt makes no monk ne wearynge of gylte
spurs makes no knight. Never the later, in conforte of thine heart, yet wol
I otherwise answer. Certes lady (quod I tho) so ye must needs, or else I had
nyghe caught such a cordiacle for sorrow, I wotte it well I should it never
have recovered. And therefore now I pray to inform me in this, or else I hold
me without recouerye. I may not long endure till this lesson be learned, and
of this myschefe the remedy known. Now (quod she) be not wroth, for there is
no man on live that may come to a precious thing long coueyted, but he
sometime suffer tenefull diseases, and wenyst thy self to ben vnlyche to all
other* that may not ben: And with the more sorrow that a thing is getten, the
more he hath^ joy, the ylke thing afterward to keep, as it fares by
children in schole that for learning arne beaten, when their lesson they
foryetten, comme^ly after a good disciplynyng with a yerde they keep right well
doctrine of their schole.

RIght with these words, on this lady I threw up mine eyes to se her
countenance and her chere, and she aperceyuynge this fantasye in mine heart,
began her semblau^t goodly on me cast, and said in this wise.

It is well know, both to Reason and experience in doing, every actyue
worcheth on his passyue, and when they ben togider, actyue and passyue ben
ycleaped by these philosophers, if fire be in place chafynge thing able to be
chafed or hete, and thylke things ben set in such a distau^ce that the one
may werche, the other shall suffer. Thylke Margarite thou desyrest is full of
virtue, and able to be actyue in goodness: but every herb she weth his virtue
outforthe from within, the son yeueth light that things may be sey. Every
fire heteth thylke thing yt it neyghed and it be able to be hete, virtue of
this Margarite outforth wrethe, and nothing is more able to suffer worching or
work catch of the actyfe, but passyfe of the same actyfe, and no passyfe to
virtues of this Margaryte, but yt in all my donet can I find, so that her
virtue must needs on the werche, in what place ever thou be, within distau^ce
of her worthynesse, as her very passyfe thou art closed: but virtue may the
nothing profit, but thy desire be performed and all thy sorrows ceased. Ergo
through werchynge of her virtue thou shalt easily ben helped and driven out of
all care, and welcome to this ionge by the desired. Lady (quod I) this is a
good lesson in gynnyng of my joy: but wete ye well forsothe, though I suppose
she have much virtue, I would my spousayle were proved, and than may I live
out of doubt, and rejoice me greatly in thynkyng of tho virtues so showed. I
herd the say (quod she) at my beginning when I received the first for to
serve that thy jewel, thylke Margaryte thou desyrest, was closed in a muskle
with a blew (...)* Ye forsothe (quod I) so I said, and so it is (...) (quod
she) every thing kyndely shows (...) this jewel closed in a blewe shel,
excelle^^ of colors shows virtue from wyt^^^ and so every wight should
rather look to (...) propre virtue of things, tha^ to his fora^^^ goods. If a
thing be engendered of g^^^^ matter, comenly and for the more part it ^^^loweth
after the congelement virtue of (...) first matter, and it be not corrupt with
vices, to proceed with increase of good virtues eke right so it fares of
badde. Trewly great excellence in virtue of lynage, for the more part
discendeth by kind to the succession in virtues to follow. Wherefore I say,
the colors of every Margarite shows from within the fynesse in virtue.
Kyndely heaven when merry wether is a lofte, apereth in man's eye of color in
blewe, steadfastness in peace betokenyng within and without: Margaryt is
engendered by heavenly dew, and shows in it self by fynenesse of color,
whether the engendrure were maked on morrow or on eve: thus says kind of this
perle. This precious Margaryte that thou seruest, shows it self dyscended by
nobley of virtue from this heuenlych dew, norished and congeled in meekness,
that mother is of all virtues, and by works that men seen withouten the
signyfication of the colors, ben showed mercy and pytie in the heart with
peace to al other, and all this is yclosed in a muskle, who so redily these
virtues loke^. All thing that has soul is reduced in to good by mean
things, as thus: In to god man is reduced by souls reasonable, and so forth
beestes or bodies that mow not mouen, after place ben reduced in to manne, by
beestes meue that mouyn from place to place: so that thylke bodies that han
feeling souls, and move not from places, holde^ the lowest degree of soulynge
things in feeling, and such ben reduced in to man by means. So it follows,
the muskle as mother of al virtues, halte the place of meekness to his lowest
degree discendeth down of heaven, and there by a manner of virgyne engendrure
arne these Margaretes engendered and afterward congeled. Made not meekness so
low the hye heaven to enclose and catch out thereof so noble a dew, that after
co^gelement a Margaryte with endelesse virtue and and everlasting joy was with
full vessel of grace yeuen to every creature, that goodlye would it receive.
Certes (quod I) these things ben right noble, I have er this herd these same
sawes. Than (quod she) thou woste well these things ben sothe* yea forsothe
(quod I) at the full. Now (quod she) that this Margaryte is full of virtue it
is well proved, wherefore some grace, some mercy among other virtues, I wotte
right well on the shall discende* ye (quod I) yet would I have better declared
virtues in this Margaryte, kyndely to ben grounded. That shall I show the (quod
she) and thou would it learn? Learn (quod I) what needs such words: wete
ye not well lady your self that all my cure, all my dyligence, and all my
might have turned by your counsel, in plesaunce of that perle all my thought
and all my study, with your help desires, in worship thylke jewel to
increase all my travail and al my business in your service, this Margaryte
to glad in somehalue: me were leauer her honor, her pleasaunce, and her
good chere through me for to be mayntayned and kept, and I of such thing in
her liking to be cause, than al ye welthe of bodyly goods ye could recke^ And
would never god, but I put my self in great ieoperdye of all that I would,
that is now no more but my life alone, rather than I should suffer thylke
jewel in any point ben blemyshed, as far as I may suffer, and with my
myghtes stretche. Such thing (quod she) may mokel further thy grace and the
in my service auaunce. But now (quod Love) will thou grant me thylke
Margaryte to ben good? O good good (quod I) why tempte ye me and tene with
such manner speech: I would grant that, though I should anon dye, and by my
truth fight in the quarrel, if any wight would countreplede. It is so much
the lighter (quod Love) to prove our intent.

Ye (quod I) but yet would I here how ye would prove that she were good by
reasonable skyl, that it mow not ben denied, for although I know and so
does many other, manyfolde goodness and virtue in this Margaryte ben prynted,
yet some men there ben that no goodness speke^: and where ever your words ben
herd and your reasons ben showed, such yuell spekers lady by auctorite of
your excellence, shullen ben stopped and ashamed. And more they that han none
acquayntaunce in her person, yet mow they know her virtues, and ben the more
informed in what wise they mow set their hertes, when hem list in to your
service any enter make: for trewly al this to begin, I wot well my self
that thylke jewel is so precious perle, as a womanly woman in her kind, in
whom of goodness, of virtue, and also of answering, shappe of lymmes, and
fetures so well in all points acordyng, nothing fails: I leave that kind her
made with great study, for kind in her person nothing has foryet, and that
is well seen. In every good wyghtes heart she has grace of commending and of
virtuous praysyng. Alas that ever kind made her deedely save only in that I
wot well, that Nature in fourmyng of her in no thing has erred.

CErtes (quod Love) thou have well begone, and I ask the this questyon: Is
not in general every thing good? I not (quod I) No (quod she) saw not god
every thing that he made, and werne right good? Than is wonder (quod I) how
yuell things comen a place, sythen that al things weren right good. Thus
(quod she) I woll declare eueryche qualyte and every action, and every thing
that has any manner of being it is of god, and god it made, of whom is all
goodness and all being, of him is no badnesse: badde to be is naught: good to
be is somewhat, and therefore good and being is one in understanding. How may
this be (quod I) for often han shrewes me assailed, and mokell badnesse therein
have I founden, and so me seems bad to be somewhat in kind? Thou shall (quod
she) understand that such manner badnesse, which is used to purifye wrong
doers is somewhat, and god it made and being has, and that is good: other
badnesse no being has utterly, it is in the negatyue of somewhat, and that is
naught, and no thing being. The parties essenciall of being arne said in
double wise, as that it is, and these parties ben found in every creature,
for all thing a this half the first being is being through partycipacion,
taking party of being, so that every ^eature is dyfference between being and
of him through whom it is and his own being: right as every good is a manner of
being, so is it good through being, for it is naught other to be: and every
thing though it be good it is not of him self good, but it is good by that it
is ordinable to the great goodness. This dualite after clerks determission is
founden in every creature, be it never so syngle of onhed. Ye (quod I) but
there as it is ysayd that god saw every thing of his making, and were right
good, as your self said to me not long time sythen. I ask whether every
creature is ysayd good, through goodness vnfourmed either else fourmed, and
afterward if it be accept utterly good? I shall say the (quod she) these
great passed clerks han divided good in to good being alone, and that is
nothing but good, for nothing is good in that wise but god. Also in good by
partycipacion, and that is ycleped good, for far fette and representatyue of
goodly goodness, and after this manyfolde good is said, that is to say, good
in kind and good in gendre, and good of grace and good of joy. Of good in
kind Austen says, all that been ben good: But peraunter thou would wete
whether of hem self it be good, or else of another goodness, for naturel
goodness of every substance is nothing else than his substanciall being,
which is ycleaped goodness, after comparyson that he has to his first
goodness, so as it is inductatyfe by means in to the first goodness. Boece
shows this thing at the full, that this name good is in general name in
kind as it is comparysoned generally to his princypal end, which is god,
knotte of al goodness. Every creature cries god us made, and so they han full
apered to thylke god by affection, such as to hem longs: and in this wise
all things ben good of the great god, which is good alone. This wonder thing
(quod I) how ye have by many reasons proved my first way to be error and
misgoyng and cause of baddesse and feeble meuynge in the ground ye aleged to be
roted: whence is it that such badnesse has sprynges, sythen all things thus
in general ben good, and badnesse has no being, as ye have declared? I wene
if al things ben good, I might than with the first way in that good have
ended, and so by goodness have comen to bliss in your service desired. All
thing (quod she) is good by being in partycipacion out of the first goodness,
which goodness is corrupt by badnesse, and badde meaning manners: god has
in good things that they ben good by being, and not in yuel, for there is
absence of ryghtfull love, for badnesse is nothing but only yuell will of
the vser, and through gyltes of the doer, wherefore at the gynnyng of the
world, every thing by him self was good, and in universal they werne right
good. An eye or a hand is fayrer and betterer in a body set in his kyndely
place, than from the body disceuered. Every thing in his kyndly place being
kyndly, good does werche, and out of that place voyded, it dissolueth and is
defouled him selue. Our noble god in glytera^de wise by armony this world
ordained, as in purtreytures storyed with colors meddled, in which black and
other derke colors co^menden the golden and the asured paynture, every put
in kyndely place one beside another, more for other glytereth: right so little
fair makes right fair more glorious, and right so of goodness and of other
things in virtue. Wherefore other badde, and not so good perles as this
Margaryte that we han of this matter, yeuen by the air little goodness and
little virtue, right mokell goodness and virtue in thy Margaryte to ben
proved, in shynynge wise to be found and showed. How should ever goodness of
peace have been know, but if vnpeace sometime reygne, and mokell yuell wroth?
How should mercy ben proved and no trespeace were, by due iustifycacion to
bepunysshed? Therefore grace and goodness of a wight is found, the soroufull
hertes in good meaning to endure, ben comforted, unity and accord between
hertes knytte in joy to abide. What wenest thou I rejoice or else account him
among my servants that pleases Pallas, in undoing of Mercurye, all be it
that to Pallas he be knytte by title of law, not according to reasonable
conscience: and Mercurye in doing have grace to ben suffered: or else him that
weneth the moon for fayrenesse of the eve sterre. Lo otherwhyle by nyghtes
light of the moon, greatly comfort in derke thoughts and blind.
Understanding of love yeueth great gladness: who so list not believe when a
sothe tale is showed, adewe and a deblys his name is entered. Wise folk and
worthy in gentyllesse both of virtue and of living yeuen full credence in
sothnesse of love with a good heart, there as good euydence or experyence in
doing shows not the contrary. Thus myghtest thou have full prefe in thy
Margarytes goodness, by commendement of other jewels badnesse, and yuelnesse
in doing. Stoundemele diseases yeueth several hours in joy.

Now by my truth (quod I) this is well declared that my Margaryte is good,
for sythen other ben good, and she passes many other in goodness and virtue,
wherthrough by manner necessary she must be good: and goodness of this
Margaryte is no thing else but virtue, wherefore she is virtuous, and if there
failed any virtue in any side, there were lack of virtue: badde nothing else
is ne may be, but lack and want of good and goodness, and so should she
have that same lack, that is to say badde, and that may not be, for she is
good, and that is good methynketh all good: and so by consequence me seems
virtuous and no lack of virtue to have. But the son is not know but he
shine, ne virtuous herbs but they have het kind werchynge, ne virtue but it
stretche in goodness or profit to another, is no virtue* Than by all ways of
reason, sythen mercy and pytie ben most commended among other virtues, and
they might never ben showed refreshement of help and of comfort, but now at
my most need, and that is the kind werkynge of these virtues: trewely I wene
I shall not varye from these helps. Fire and if he give non heat, for fire
is not demed. The son but he shine for son is not accounted, water but it
wete, the name shall ben changed. Virtue but it werche of goodness does it
fail, and in to his contrary the name shall ben reuersed, and these be^
impossyble: wherefore the contradictorie that is necessary, needs must I leave.

Certes (quod she) in thy person and out of thy mouth these words lain well
to ben said, and in thine understanding to be leued, as in intent of this
Margaryte alone: and here now my speech in co^clusyon of these words.

IN these things (quod she) that me list now to show openly, shall be found
the matter of thy sycknesse, and what shall ben ye medicyn that may be thy
sorrows lysse and comfort, as well the as al other that amysse have erred, and
out of the way walked, so that any drope of good will in amendment ben dwelled
in their hertes. Proverbs of Solomon openly teaches, how sometime an innocent
walked by the way in blyndnesse of a derke night, whom met a woman (if it be
lefely to say) as a strumpet arrayed, redily purueyed in turnynge of thoughts
with vein ianglynges and of rest inpacient by dissymulacion of my terms,
saying in this wise: Come and be we dronken of our sweet pappes, use we
coueytous collynges. And thus drawn was this innocent, as an ox to the
larder. Lady (quod I) to me this is a queynte thing to understand: I pray
you of this parable declare me the intent. This innocent (quod she) is a
scholar learning of my lore, in seckyng of my bliss, in which thing the day
of his thought turnyng enelyneth in to eve, and the son of very light
faylinge, makes derke night in his conning. Thus in derkenesse of many doutes
he walks, and for blyndenesse of understanding, he ne wot in what way he
is in: forsothe such one may lightly ben begyled. To whom came love feigned,
not clothed of my lyuery, but unlawful iustye habyte, with soft spech and
merry, and with fair honyed words heretykes and mysse menynge people skleren
and wymplen their errors. Austen witnesses of an heretyke that in his first
beginning he was a man right expert in resones, and sweet in his words, and
the works myscorden. Thus fares feigned love in her first werchynges: thou
know these things for true, thou haste hem proved by experience. Sometime
in doing to thyn own person, in which thing thou have found matter of mokel
disease, was not feigned love redely purueyed thy wits to catch and turn thy
good thoughts? trewlye she has wounded the conscience of many with
floryshynge of mokel jangling words: and good worth thanked I it for no
gloss, I am glad of my prudence thou haste so manlye her veyned. To me art
thou much holden, that in thy kind course of good meaning I return thy
mind: I trow ne had I showed the thy Margarite, thou had never returned.
Of first in good parfyte joy was ever feigned love impacie^t, as the water of
Siloe which evermore flows with stylnesse and privy noise, till it come
nyghe the brynke, and then gynneth it so out of measure to bolne, with
nouelleries of chau^gynge storms, that in course of every rennynge it is in
point to spyll al his circuit of cankes. Thus feigned love priuelye at the
fullest of his flowynge, new storms debate to arayse. And all be it that
Mercurius often with hole understanding known such peryllous matters, yet
Venetiens so lusty ben and so leude in their wits, that in such things
right little or naught done they feel, and written and cryen to their felawes:
here is bliss, here is joy, and thus into one same error, mokel folk they
drawn. Come they said, and be we dronken of our pappes, that been fallas and
lyenge gloss, of which mow they not souke milk of health, but deedlye venym
and poison corrupcyon of sorrow. Milk of fallas, is venym of dyscryte: Milk
of lyeng gloss is venym of corrupcion. Lo what thing comes out of these
pappes: use we coueyted collynges, desire we and meddle we false words with
sote, and sote with false, trewly this is the sorynesse of feigned love, needs
of these surfettes sycknesse must follow. Thus as an ox to thy langoryng death
were thou draw, the sote of the smoke has ye all defased. Ever the deper thou
sometime wadest ye sooner thou it found: if it had the killed it had be little
wonder. But on that other side my true servant not faynen ne dysceyue conne,
sothly their doing is open, my foundement endures, be the burden never so
great, ever in one it lasts: it yeueth life and blysful goodness in the last
ends, though the gynnynges ben sharp. Thus of two contraryes, contrary ben
the effects. And so thylke Margaryte thou seruest shall seen the by her
service out of peryllous trybulacyon delivered, because of her service into
new disease fallen, by hope of amendment in the last end, with joy to be
gladded, wherefore of kind pure, her mercy with grace of good help shall she
grant, and else I shall her so strain, that with pity shall she ben amaystred.
Remember in thine heart how horrybly sometime to thine Margaryte thou
trespasest, and in a great wise against her thou forfeytest: clepe aye thy
mind, and know thine own gyltes. What goodness, what bountye, with mokell
following pity found thou in that time? were thou not goodlye accepted into
grace? by my pluckynge was she to foryeuenesse enclyned. And after I her styred
to draw the to house and yet wendest thou utterly for ever have been refused.
But well thou wost, sythen that I in such sharp disease might so greatly
avail, what thynkest in thy wit? how far may my wit stretche? And thou
lache not on thy side I wol make the knotte: Certes in thy good beryng I wol
acorde with the psauter. I have found David in my service true and with holy
oil of peace and of rest long by hymdesyred, utterly he shall be anointed.
Trust well to me, and I woll the not fail. The leuynge of ye first way with
good heart of continuance, that I se in the grounded, this purpose to
perform, draws me by manner of co^straining, that needs must I ben thine
helper: although mirth a while be tarried, it shall come at such season, that
thy thought shall ben ioyed. And would never god, sythe^ thine heart to my
reasons arne assented, and openly haste confessed thine amysse going, and
now cryest after mercy, but if mercy followed: thy bliss shall ben ready ywys,
thou ne wost how sone. Now be a good child I read. The kind of virtues in
thy Margarite rehearsed, by strength of me in thy person shul werche. Comfort
the in this for thou may not myscary. And these words said, she straight
her on length and rested a while.

Thus ends the second book, and here after follows the third book.
OF no^bre said these clerks yt it is naturell su^me of discrete things, as
in telling one, two, three and so forth: but among all nombres three is
determined for most certain. Wherefore in nombre certain this work of my
besy lewdness I think to end and parfourme. Ensample by this world in three
times is divided: of which the first is cleped Demacion, that is to say, going
out of true way, and all that tho deyden, in hell were they punyshed for a man's
sin, till grace and mercy fette hem thence, and there ended the first time.
The second time lasts from the coming of merciable grace, until the end
of transytory time, in which is showed ye true way in fordoyng of the badde,
and that is ycleped time of grace: and that thing is not yeuen by deserte of
yeldynge one benefyte for another, but only through goodness of the yeuer of
grace in thilke time. Who so ca^ well understand, is shapen to be saved in
souled bliss. The third time shall gyn when tra^sytory things of worlds han
made their end and that shall ben in joy, glory, and rest, both body and soul,
that well han deserved in the time of grace. And thus in that heaven together
shul they dwell perpetuelly without any ymaginatyfe yuel in any halue. These
times are fygured by tho three days that our god was closed in earth, and in
the third arose, showing our resurrection, to joy and bliss of tho that it
deserue^, by his merciable grace. So this lewd book in three matters accordau^t
to tho times, lightly by a good inseer may ben understand, as in the first
error of mysse going is showed, with sorrowful pyne punyshed is cried after
mercy. In the second is grace in good way proved, which is faylynge without
deserte, thylke first mysse amendynge in correction of tho erroures and even
way to bring, with comfort of welfare into amendment wexynge. And in the
third joy and bliss granted to him that well can deserve it, and has
savor of understanding in the time of grace. Thus in joy of my third book
shall the matter be till it end. But special cause I have in my heart to make
this process of a Margarit peerle, that is so precious a ge^me with clear and
little, of which stones or jewel, ye to^ges of us English people turns ye
right names, and clepeth hem Margery perles: thus varieth our speech from many
other langages. For trewly Latin, French, and many mo other langages cleapeth
hem Margery perles, the name Margarites or Margaryte perles: wherefore in that
denominacion I wol me acorde to other men's tongues, in that name clepyng. These
clerks that treaten of kinds, and studyen out the propertye there of things,
said the Margarit is a little white perle, throughout holowe and round, and
virtuous, and on the sea sides in the more Britayne in muskel shelles of ye
heavenly dew the best ben engendered: in which by experience ben found three
fair virtues. One is, it yeueth comfort to the felyng spirits in bodily
persons of reason. Another is good, it is profitable health against passions of
sorye men's hertes. And the third it is nedeful and noble in staunchyng of
blood, there else to much would out ren. To which perle and virtues me list to
lyken at this time philosophy with her three speces, that is naturel and moral,
and reasonable: of which things hereth what said these great clerks.
Philosophye is knowing of deuynly and manly things joined with study of good
living, and this stante in two things, that is connyng and opinion: conning
is when a thing by certain reason is conceived. But wretches and fools and
leude men, many will conceive a thing and maynteyne it as forsooth, though
reason be in the contrary, wherefore connyng is a stranger. Opinion is while a
thing is in none certain, and hid from men's very knowlegynge, and by no
parfyte reason fully declared, as thus: if the son be so moke^ as men wenen,
or else if it be more then the earth For in sothnesse the certain quantyte of
that planet is unknown to erthly dwellers, and yet by opinion of some men it
is holden for more then mydle earth. The first spece of philosophye is naturel,
which in kyndely things treten, and shows causes of heaven, and strength of
kyndely course: as by arsmetryke, geometry, musyke, and by astronomye, teaches
ways and course of heuens, of planetes, and of sterres about heaven and earth,
and other clemetes. The second spece is moral, which in order of living
manners techeth, and by reason proves virtues of soul most worthy in our
living, which ben prudence, justice, temperaunce, and strength. Prudence is
goodlye wisdom in knowing of things. Strength voydeth al aduersitees alyche
even. Temperaunce destroys beestial living, with easy bearyng. And justice
ryghtfully iugeth, and iugyng departs to every wight that is his own. The
third spece turns into reason of understanding, al things to be said soth
and dyscussed, and that in two things is divided: one is art, another is
rethorike, in which two al laws of man's reason ben grounded or else mayntayned.
And for this book is all of love, and thereafter bears his name, and
phylosophie and law must here to acorden by their clergiall dyscripcio^s: as
philosophy for love of wisdom is declared: Law for maynteynaunce of peace
is holden, and these with love must needs acorde^, therefore of hem in this
place have I touched. Order of homly things and honest manner of living in
virtue, with rightful judgment in causes and profitable administracion in
co^minaltyes of realms and cites, by euenhed profitably to reign, not by
synguler auau^tage ne by prive envy, ne by soleyn purpose in couetise of
worship or of goods, ben dysposed in open rule showed, by love philosophy, and
law, and yet love toforne al other Wherefore as susterne in unite they acorde^
and one end that is peace and rest, they causen noryshynge, and in the joy
maynteynen to endure.

Now then, as I have declared: my book acordeth with discripcio^ of three
things, and the Margarit in virtue is lykned to philosophy with her three
speces. In which matters ever twey ben acordau^t with bodily reason, and the
third with the soul: But in conclusion of my book and of this Margarit peerle
in knyttyng together law by three sundry manners shall be lykened, yt is to say,
law, right, and custom, which I would declare: all yt is law comes of gods
ordinance by kyndly worchyng, and thylke things ordained by man's wits
arne ycleped right, which is ordained by many manners and in constitucion
written: but custom is a thing that is accepted for right or for law, there
as law and right faylen, and there is no dyffere^ce, whether it come of
scripture or of reason. Wherefore it shows that law is kyndly governance:
Right comes out of man's probable reason: and custom is of common usage by
length of time used, and custom not writ is usage, and if it be writ
constitucion it is ywrytten and ycleped: But law of kind is common to every
nation, as conjunction of man and woman in love, succession of children in
heritaunce restitucyon of thing by strength taken or lent and this law among
al other halte the soueraynest gree in worship, which law began at the
beginning of reasonable creature, it varyed yet never for no chaungyng of
time: cause forfothe in ordaynynge of law, was to constrayne men's hardynesse
into peace, and wythdrawyng his evil will, and turnynge malice into goodness,
and that innocence sykerly withouten tenefull anoye among shrewes safely might
inhabyte by protection of safeconducte, so that ye shrewes harm for harm by
bridle of ferdenesse shulden restrain. But forsothe in kyndely law nothing
is commended, but such as gods will has co^fyrmed, ne nothing denied but
co^trarioustye of gods will in heaven: eke then all laws or custom, or else
co^stitucion by usage or writing that co^traryen law of kind, utterly ben
repugnaunt and adversary to our gods will of heaven. Trewly law of kind for
gods own lusty will is verily to maintain, under which law (and unworthy)
both profess and reguler arne obediencer and bounden to this Margarite perle,
as by knotte of loves statutes and stablyshment in kind, which that goodlye
may not ben wythsetten. Lo under this bond am I constrained to abide, and man
under living law ruled: by that law owes after deserts to be rewarded by
pain or by mede, but if mercy weyue the pain: so then be part, reasonfully
may be sey, that mercy both right and law passes, thentent of al these
matters is the lest clear understanding, to wete^ at the end of this third book
full knowing through gods grace, I think to make neuerthelater, yet if these
things have a good and a slight inseer, which that can souke honey of the
hard stone, oil of the dry rock, may lightly feel nobley of matter in my
leude ymaginacion closed. But for my book shall be of joy (as I said) and I so
far set fro thylke place, fro whence gladness should come, my cord is to
short to let my boket ought catch of that water, and few men ben about my
cord to each, and many in full purpose be ready it shorter to make, and to
enclose the^tre, that my boket of joy nothing should catch, but empty return,
my careful sorrows to encrese, and if I dye for pain, yt were gladness at
their hertes. Good lord send me water into ye cop of these mountains, and I
shall drink thereof, my thurstes to sta^ch: and sey these be comfortable wells
into health of goodness of my savior am I helped. And yet I say more, the
house of joy to me is not opened. How dare my sorrowful ghost then in any matter
of gladness thynken to trete? for ever sobbynges and complaints be ready
refrete in his meditacio^s, as werbles in manyfold stou^des coming about I not
then. And therefore what manner of joy coud^ endite, but yet at door shall I
knock, if the key of David would the lock vnshyt, and he bring me in, which
that chyldre^s to^ges both opneth and closes. Whose spirit, where he will
worcheth, departing goodly as hi^ likes

Now to gods laud and reverence, profit of the reders, ame^deme^t of manners
of ye herers, encresyng of worship among loves seruau^ts, releuyng of my heart
into grace of my jewel, and frenshyp plesau^ce of this peerle. I am stered in
this making, and for nothing else: and if any good thing to me^nes liking in
this scripture be found, thanketh the master of grace, which that of that
good and all other is author, and pryncypall doer. And if any thing be
insuffycyent or else myslykynge, with that that the lewdness of mine unable
conning, for body in disease anoyeth the understanding in soul. A dyseasely
habitacyon lets the wits many things, and namely in sorrow. The custom
never the later of love, be long time of service in terms I think to pursue,
which ben lively to give understanding in other things. But now to enform
the of this Margarites goodness I may her not half preyse. Wherefore not she
for my book, but this book for her is worthy to be commended, tho my book be
leude: right as things not for places, but places for things oughten to be
desired and praised.

NOw (quod Love) trewly thy wortes I have well understand. Cettes me thinks
he^ right good, and me wo^dreth why thou so lightlye passest in the law.
Sothly (quod I) my wit is leude and I am right blind and that matter deep, how
should I than have waded, lightly might I have drenched and spylte there my
self. Ye (quod she) I shall help the to swym. For right as law punishes
brekers of precepts, and the contrary doers of the written constitutions:
right so ayenward, law rewards and yeueth mede to hem that law strengthen.
By one law this rebel is punished and this innocent is meded, the shrewe is
enprisoned and this ryghtfull is corowned. The same law that joins by
wedlock without forsaking, the same law yeueth lybel of deperticion by cause
of deuorse both demed and declared. Ye ye (quod I) I find in no law to mede
and reward in goodness, the gyltie of deserts. Fool (quod she) gyltie converted
in your law, mykell merit deserves. Also Paulin of Rome was crowned, that by
him the maynteyners of Pompeus weren known and distroyed: and yet to forn was
this Paulyn chief of Po^peus counsel. This law in Rome has yet his name of
mesuryng in mede, ye bewrayeng of the co^spiracy, ordained by tho senators the
death. Julius Caesar is aco^pted in to Catons right witness, for ever in troth
florisheth his name among the knowers of reason. Perdicas was crowned in ye
heritage of Alexander the great, for telling of a preuy hate that king Porrus
to Alexander had. wherefore every wight by reason of law after his
rightwysenesse apertly his mede maychale^ge: and so thou that maynteynest law
of kind, and therefore disease have suffered in ye law, reward is worthy to be
rewarded and ordained, and apartly thy mede might thou challenge. Certes (quod
I) this have I well learned, and ever he^sforward I shall draw me thereafter in
onehed of will to abyd this law both mayntene and keep, and so hope I best
enter into your grace, well deseruynge in to worship of a wight, without nedful
co^pulsyon, ought medfully to be rewarded. Truly (quod Love) that is sothe, and
tho by constitution good service in to profyt and auau^tage stretch, utterly
many me^ it deme^ to have more desert of mede, the^ good will not compelled. Se
now (quod I) how may men holden of this the contrary. And what is good seruice^
of you would I here this question declared I shall say the (quod she) in a few
words, reasonable workinges in plesaunce and profit of thy sovereign. How
should I this perform (quod I?) Rit well (quod she) and here me now a little. It
is hardely (quod she) to understand ye right as matter by due ouerchau^gynges
follows his perfection and his form: Right so every man by ryghtfull
werkynges ought to follow the leful desires in his heart, and se toforne to
what end he deserves, for many times he that looks not after the^des, but
utterly thereof is unknown, befalls often many yuels to don, where through er
he be ware shamefully he is confounded, the end thereof neden to be before looked
to every desyrer of such forsyght, in good service three things specially
needs to be rulers in his works. First that he do good, next that he do by
election in his own heart, and the third that he do godly wythouten any
surquedry in thoughts. That your works shulden be good in service or in any
other acts, authorites many may be aleged never the later, by reason thus may
it be showed. All your works be cleped second, and mouen in virtue of the
first wercher, which in good works wrought you to proceed, and right so your
works mouen in to virtue of the last end, and right in the first workyng were
not, no man should in the second werche. Right so but ye feled to what end
and seen their goodness closed, ye should no more retche what ye wrought but the
gynnynge began with good, and there shall it cease in the last end, if it be
well consydred. Wherefore the myddle, if other ways it draw then accordaunt to
the ends, there stynteth the course of good, and another manner course enters,
and so it is a party by him selue, and every part be not accordaunt to his
all, is foul and ought to be eschewed. Wherefore every thing yt is wrought^
and be not good, is not accordau^t to the^^es of his all hole, it is foul, and
ought to be withdraw. Thus the persons that neither ^o good ne harm, shamen
foul their making: wherefore without workynge of good acts in good service,
may no man ben accepted. Trewly the ylke that han might to do good and done it
not, the crown of worship shall be take from hem, and with shame shull they be
anulled. And so to make one work accordaunt with his ends, every good
servant by reason of co^seque^ce must do good needs. Certes it suffyseth not
alone to do good, but goodly wythall follow, the thank of goodness else in
naught he deserves: For right as al your being come from the greatest good in
whom all goodness is closed. Right so your ends ben direct to the same good.
Aristotel determines ye end and good ben one, and co^uertible in
understanding, and he that in will does away good, and he that looks not to
the^d looks not to good, but he that does good and does not goodly, draws
away the dyrectio^ of the end not goodly, must needs be bad. Lo badde is nothing
else, but absence or negatyf of good, as derknesse is absence or negatyue of
light. Then he that does goodly, dyrecteth thylke good in to the end of badde:
So must thing not good follow, eke badnesse to such folk often follows. Thus
contrariant workers of the end that is good, ben worthy the contrary of the^de
yt is good to have. How (quod I) may any good deed be done, but if goodly it
help: Yes (quod Love) the deuell does many good deeds, but goodly he leueth
behynd, for even badly and in disceyuable wise he works wherefore the contrary
of the end him follows And do he never so many good deeds, because goodly is
away, his goodness is not rekened. Lo then tho a man do good, but he do goodly
the end in goodness wol not follow, and thus in good service both good deed and
goodly don musten join together, and that it be don with free choice in heart:
and else deserves he not yt merit in goodness, ye woll I prove, for if thou
do any thing good by chance or by hap, in what thing art thou thereof worthy
to be commended* for nothing by reason of ye turns into thy praysyng ne
lackyng. Lo thilke thing done by hap by thy will is not caused, and thereby
should I thank or lack deserve: and sythen that fails, the end which that
well should reward, must needs fail. Clerks sayn, no man but wyllyng is
blessed, a good deed yt he has done is not done of fre choice willing, with
out which blyssednesse may not follow. Ergo neither thank of goodness ne
service in yt is contrary of the good end, so the^ to good service lo^ged good
deed goodly don, through fre choice in heart. Truly (quod I) this have I well
understand. Well (quod she) every thing thus done sufficiently by law, that
is cleped justice after reward claim. For law and justice was ordained in
this wise, such deserts in goodness after quantite in doing, by mede to
reward, and of necessite of such justice, yt is to say ryghtwisenesse was fre
choice in deseruynge of well or of yuel granted to reasonable creatures. Every
man has fre arbitreme^t to chose good or yuel to perform. Now (quod I tho) if
I by my good will deserve this Margarite perle and am not thereto compelled, and
have free choice to do what me lyketh: She is the^ holden as me thinks to
reward thente^t of my good will. Gods forbode else (quod Love) no wit means
otherwise I trow, fre will of good heart after mede deserves. Has every man
(quod I) free choice by necessary manner of will in every of his doings, yt him
lyketh by gods proper purueyance? I would se ye well declared to my leude
understanding, for necessary and necessyte ben words of mokel entencion,
closyng (as to say) so mote it be needs and otherwise may it not betyde. This
shall thou learn (quod she) so thou take heed in my speech. If it were not in
man's own lyberte of fre will to do good or bad, but to the one tied by bond
of gods preordinaunce: The^ do he never so well it were by needful
co^pulcion of thilke bond and not by fre choice, whereby nothing he deserves,
and do he never so yuel it were not man for to wit, but onelyche to him that
such thing ordained him to done. Wherefore he ne ought for bad be punyshed, ne
for no good deed be rewarded, but of necessite of ryghtwysnesse was therefore
free choice of arbitremente put in man's proper disposition: truly if it were
otherwise it co^traryed gods charity, ye badnes and goodness rewards after
deserte of pain or of mede. Me thinks this wonder (quod I) for god by
necessite forwote al things coming, and so mote it needs be: and thylke
things yt been done be our fre choice comen nothing of necessite but only by
will: How may this stand together? and so me thinks truly, that fre
choice fully repugneth gods for wetynge. Truly lady me seems they mow not
stand together.

THen began love nygh me nere, and with a noble cou^tenau^ce of vysage and
lymmes, dressed her nygh my sytting place. Take forth (quod she) thy pen and
redely wryt these words, for if god wol, I shall hem so inform to the, yt thy
lewdness which I have understand in that matter, shall openly be clered, and thy
sight in full loking therein amended. First if thou think that gods prescience
repugne lyberte of arbytrye of arbitrament, it is impossible yt they should
accord in onheed of soth to understanding. Yea (quod I) forsooth so I it
co^ceyue. Well (quod she) if thylke impossible were away, the repugna^ce that
seems to be therein, were utterly removed. Show me ye absence of that
impossibilite (quod I.) So (quod she) I shall. Now I suppose yt they mow
stand together, prescie^ce of god who^ follows necessite of things coming
and lyberte of arbitreme^t, through which thou beleuest many things to be
without necessite Both these proporcions be sothe (quod I) and well mow stand
together, wherefore this case as possible I admyt. Truly (quod she) and this
case is impossible. How so (quod I). For hereof (quod she) follows and wexeth
another i^possible. Prove me that (quod I), that I shall (quod she) for sothyng
is coming without necessite, and god wot that toforne, for althi^g coming he
before wot, and that he beforne wot of necessite is coming: as he beforne wot
be ye case by necessary manner then, or else through necessite is sothyng to be
without necessite, and wetherto every wight yt has good understanding, is seen
these things to be repugnant. Prescie^ce of god, which that follows necessite
and lyberte of arbytrement, fro which is removed necessity, for truly it is
necessary yt god have foreweting of thing withouten any necessity coming. Ye
(quod I) but yet remeue ye not away fro mine under standing, the necessity
following gods beforewetyng, as thus. God beforne wot me in service of love to
be bounden to this Margaryte perle, and therefore by necessity thus to love am
I bound, and if I not had loved, tho row necessity had I been kept from al
love deeds. Certes (quod love) because this matter is good and necessary to
declare, I think herein well to abide, and not lightly to pass. Thou shall not
(quod she) say al only god beforne wot me to be a lover or no lover, but thus:
god be forne wot me to be a lover without necessite And so it follows whether
thou love or not love, every of hem is and shall be. But now thou see the
impossibility of the case, and ye possibility of thylke that thou wendest had been impossyble, wherefore the repugnaunce is adnulled. Ye (quod I) and yet do ye
not away the strength of necessity when it is said: though necessity it is
me in love to abide, or not to love without necessity for god beforn wot it.
This manner of necessity forsothe seems to some men in to coaction, that is to
said, constraynyng or else prohibicion that is defending* wherefore necessitye
is me to love of will. I understand me to be constrained by some privy
strength to the will of loving, and if no love to be defended from the will of
loving, and so through necessity me seems to love, for I love, or else not to
love, if I not love wherthrugh neither tha^k ne maugre in tho things may I
deserve.

Now (quod she) thou shall well understand, that often we said thing through
necessity to be that by no strength to be neither is coacted ne constrained,
and through necessity not to be, that with no defending is removed, for we
said it is through necessite god to be immortal naught deedlyche, and it is
necessity god to be ryghtfull, but not that any strength of vyolente manner
constrayneth him to be immortal, or defends him to be unrightful, for
nothing may make him deedly or vnryghtful. Right so if I say through
necessite is the to be a lover or else none only through will, as god beforne
wete: It is not to understand that any thing defends or forbyt, the thy will
which shall not be, or else co^strayneth it to be which shall be: that same thing
forsooth god before wot which he beforne sees any thing commend of only will,
that will neither is constrained ne defended through any other thing: and so
through liberty of arbytrement it is do, yt is done of will. And truly my
good child, if these things be well understand I wene that none inconvenient
shall thou find between gods forwetyng and liberty of arbytre me^t, wherefore
I wot well they may stand together. Also ferthermore, who yt understanding of
prescie^ce proprelyche co^sydreth through the same wise that any thing be before
wist, is said for to be coming it is pronounced, there is nothing to forn
wist, but thing coming, forewetinge is but of troth doubt may not be wist:
wherefore wha^ I sey yt god toforne wot any thing, through necessity is thilke
thing to be coming, al is one if I sey if it shall be: but this necessity
neither co^strayneth ne defe^deth any thing to be or not to be Therefore sothly
if love is put to be, it is said of necessity to be, or else for it is put not
to be it is affirmed not to be of necessite: not for ye necessite co^straineth
or defe^deth love to be or not to be. For wha^ I say, if love shall be of
necessity it shall be, here follows necessity, the thing toforn put, it is as
much to sey, as if it were thus pronounced, ye thing shall be: none other thing
signifies this necessitye but only thus, yt shall be may not together be and
not be. Euenlyche also it is sothe, love was and is, and shall be, not of
necessity, and need is to have be all that was, and nedeful is to be all that
is, and coming to all that shall be: and it is not the same to say, love to be
passed, and love passed to be passed, or love present to be present, and love
to be present, or else love to be coming, and love coming to be coming:
dyuersitye in setting of words, makes diversity in understanding although in
the same sentence they accorde^ of signification right as it is not all one:
love sweet to be sweet, and love to be sweet: for much love is bitter and
sorrowful er hertes ben eased, and yet it gladeth thilke sorouful heart on such
love to think. Forsothe (quod I) otherwhyle I have had mokell blys in heart of
love, ye stou^mele has me sorily anoyed: and certes lady for I se my self
this knit with this Margarit perle as by bond of your service, and of no
liberty of will my heart will now not accord this service to love. I can demen
in my self none otherwise, but through necessity am I constrained in this
service to abide. But alas than, if I through needful co^pultion magre me be
withholde, little thank for all my great travail have I than deserved. Now
(quod this lady) I say as I said: Me lyketh this matter to declare at the
full, and why? for many men have had diverse fantasyes, and reasons, both on one
side thereof and in the other. Of which right sone I trow if thou wolt
understood, thou shall con give the sentence, to the party more probable by
reason, and in soth knowing, by yt I have of this matter maked an end. Certes
(quod I) of these things long have I had great lust to be learned, for yet I
wene gods will and his prescience accords with my service, in loving of this
precious Margaryte petle. After who^ ever in my heart with thurstyng desire wete
I do brenne: vnwastyng I langour and fade, and yt day of my desteny in death or
in joy I vnbide but yet in the end I am comforted be my supposayle in bliss,
and in joy to determyne after my desires. That thing (quod love) hastily to
the neygh, god grant of his grace and mercy, and this shall be my prayer till
thou be lykende in heart at thine own will. But now to enfourme the in this
matter (quod this lady) thou woste where left, that was love to be sweet, and
love sweet to be sweet, is not all one for to say: for a tree is not always by
necessity white sometime er it were white, it might have be not white: and
after time it is white, it may be not white: But a white tree evermore nedeful
is to be white: for neither toforne ne after it was white, might it be together
white and not white. Also love by necessity is not present as now in ye for
er it were present it might have be, that it should now not have be, and yet it
may be that it shall not be present, but thy love present, which to her
margarite the has bond, needful is to be present. Truly seem doing of action
not by necessity is co^myge far to forne it be, it may be that it shall not
be coming: thing forsooth coming needful is to be coming, for it may not be
that coming shall not be coming: and right as I have said of present and
of future times, ye same sentence in sothnesse is of the preterit, yt is to say
time passed for thing passed, must needs be passed, and yet it were might have
not be, wherefore it should not have passed. Right so wha^ love coming is said
of love yt is to comnedeful is to be yt is said, for thing coming never is not
coming, and so often the same thing we sayn of the same, as wha^ we sayn every
man is a man, or every lover is a lover, so must it be needs, in no way may he
be man and no man together. And if it be not by necessity, that is to say,
nedeful al thing coming to be coming, than some thing coming is not coming,
and that is impossible, right as these terms needful, necessity, and
necessary betoken and signify thing needs to be, and it may not otherwise be.
Right these terms impossyble signifies, that thing is not and by no way may
it be, than through parfyte necessity, al thing coming is coming, but that is
by necessity, follows with nothing to be constrained: lo when that coming is
said of thing, not always thing through necessity is, although it be coming.
For if I say tomorowe love is coming in this Margarites heart, not therefore
through necessity shall thilke love be, yet it may be yt it may not be,
although it were coming. Neuerthelater, sometime it is soth that somethyng be
of necessity, that is said to come: as if I say tomorow by coming the rising
of the sun. If therefore with necessity I pronounce coming of thing to come,
in this manner love to morn coming in thy Margaryte to the ward by
necessity is coming or else the rysyng of the sun to morn coming, through
necessity is coming. Love sothly which may not be of necessity aloone
following, through necessity coming it is made certain. For futur of future
is said, that is to said coming of coming is said as if tomorow coming
is through necessite coming it is. Arysyng of the sun through.ii. necessitis
in coming, it is to understand ye one is to forgoi^g necessite, which makes
thing to be, therefore it shall be, for needful is that it be. Another is
following necessity, which nothing co^strayneth to be, and so by necessite it
is to come, why? for it is to come. Now than, when we said, ye God beforne
wot thing coming, nedeful it is to be coming, yet therefore make we not in
certain, evermore thing to be through necessity coming. Sothly thing
coming may not be not coming by no way, for it is the same sentence of
understanding: as if we say thus. If god beforne wot any thing, needful is
that to be coming. But yet therefore follows not the prescience of God,
thing through necessity to be coming: for all tho god toforne wot all
things coming, yet not therefore he beforne wot every thing coming through
necessetie. Some things he beforne wot coming of frewyll out of reasonable
creature. Certes (quod I) these terms need and necessity, have a queynte
manner of understanding, they would dullen many men's wits. Therefore (quod
she) I woll hem openly declare, and more clearly tha^ I have toforne er I
depart hence.

HEre of this matter quod she, thou shall understand* that right as it is not
needful God to wylne, that he will, no more in many things is not nedeful a
man to wylne that he woll.

And ever right as nedeful is to be what that god woll, right so to be it is
needful, that man woll in tho things, which that god has put into man's
subjection of willing: as if a man woll love, that he love: and if he ne wol
love, that he love not, and of such other things in man's disposition. For why
now than that god woll may not be, wha^ he woll the will of man through no
necessity to be constrained or else defended for to wylne, and he woll
theffecte to follow the will, than is it needful will of man to be free, and
also to be that he woll. In this manner it is soth, that through necessity is
man's work in loving, that he wol do althou he woll it not with necessity.
(Quod I) tha^ how stant it in love of thylke will, sythen me^ loue^ wyllyng of
free choice inhert wherefore if it be through necessity, I pray you lady of an
answer this questyon to assoyle. I will (quod she) answer the blyuely: Right as
men will not through necessity, right so is not love of will through
necessity, ne through necessity wrought thylke same will: for if he would it
not with good will, it should not have been wrought, although yt he does it is
needful to be done.

But if a man do sin, it is nothing else but to will, that he should not:
right so syn of will is not to be manner necessary done, no more than will is
necessary. Neuerthelater this is soth, if a man woll sin, it is necessary him
to sin, but though thylke necessity nothing is constrained ne defended in
the will, right so thylke thing that frewyll woll and may, and not may, not
wylne, and needful is that to wylne he may not wylne but thilke to wylne
needful is, for impossyble to him it is onethyng, and the same to wylne he may
not wilne, but thilke to wilne needful is: for impossyble to him it is one
thing, and the same to wylne and notte to wylne. The work forsooth of will to
whom it is give that it be that he has in will, and that he wol not voluntary
of spontany it is, for by spontany will it is do, that is to say with good
will, not constrained: than by will not constrained, it is constrained to be and
that is it may not together be. If this necessity makes lybertye of will,
which ye aforne they weren they might have been eschewed and shonned: God
than, which that knows al truth, and nothing but truth, al these things as
they are spontany or necessary sight, and as he sees so they ben: and so with
these things well considered, it is open at the full, that without all manner
repugnaunce, god beforne wot all manner things ben done by frewyll, which
aforen they weren might have been never they should be and yet ben they through
a manner necessity from frewyll descended.

Hereby may (quod she) lightly ben know that not all things to be is of
necessytye though God have hem in his prescience, for some things to be is of
lybertye of will: and to make the to have full knowing of gods beforne
wetynge. Hear me (quod she) what I shall I say? Blythlye lady (quod I) me
list this matter entyrely to understand. Thou shall (quod she) understand, that
in heaven is gods being, although he be over al by power, yet there is
abiding of deuyne person, in which heaven is everlasting presence, wthoute^
any mouable time there sole have I not said toforne this, as time hurts,
right so ayenwarde time heals and rewards: and a tree often failed is hold
more deyntye when it fruit forth brings. A merchant that for ones lesyng in
the sea no more to adventure thinks, he shall never with adventure come to
richesse: so often must men on the oak smite, till the happy dente have entered,
which with ye oaks own sway makes it to come all at ones. So often falls the
lethy water on the hard rock, till it have through persed it. The even draught
of the wyre drawer, makes the wyre to ben even and supple werchyng, and if he
stynted in his draught, the wyre breaks a sonder. Every tree well springs
wha^ it is well grounded and not often removed. what shall this fruit be (quod
I) now it gynnethe ripe? Grace (quod she) in parfyte joy to endure and there
with hou begone. Grace (quod I) me thi^keth I should have a reward for my long
travail I shall tell the (quod she) retrybution of thy good wylles to have of
thy Margaryte perle it bears not the name of mede, but only of good grace,
and that comes not of thy deserte, but of thy Margarytes goodness, and virtue
alone. (Quod I) should al my long travail have no reward but through grace and
sometime your seluen said, ryghtwisnesse euenlyche rewards to quyte one
benefit for an other. That is soth (quod love) ever as I said, as to him that
does good, which to done he were neither holde^ ne yet constrained. That is
soth (quod I). Truly, (quod she) all that ever thou do to thy margaryte
peerle, of will, of love, and of reason thou owe to done it, yet is nothing
else but yeldynge of thy det in quytyng of thy grace, which she the lent wha^ ye
first met. I wene (quod I) right little grace to me she delivered. Certes, it
was hard grace, it has nigh me astrangled. That it was good grace I wot well
thou wylt it grant er thou depart hence. If any man give to an other wight to
whom that he ought not, and which that of him self nothing may have, a
garment or a cote, though he wear the cote or else thylke clothing, it is
not to put him yt was naked the cause of his clothyng, but only to him that
was yeuer of the garnement. wherefore I say, thou that were naked of love, and
of thy self none have myghtest, it is not to put thine own person, sythen thy
love came to through thy Margaryte perle. Ergo she was yeuer of the love
although thou it use, and there lent she the grace thy service to begin. She
is worthy the thank of this grace, for she was the yeuer. All the thoughts,
besy doings, and plesau^ce in thy might and in thy words that thou canste
deuyse, ben but right little in quytynge of thy debt: had she not ben, such
thing had not ben studied. So all these matters kyndly drawn homewarde to this
Margaryte peerle, for from thence were they borrowed, all is holy her to wit
the love that thou hauest: and thus quytest thou thy debt, in that thou
steadfastly seruest. And keep well that love I the read, that of her thou have
borrowed, and use it in her service thy debt to quyte, and than art thou able
right sone to have grace, wherefore after mede in none halue may thou look.
Thus thy gynnyng and endyng is but grace alone, and in thy good deseruyng thy
det thou aquytest: without grace is nothing worth what so ever thou werche.
Thank thy Margaryte of her great grace, that hitherto the has gyded, and
pray her of contynuaunce forth in thy works hereafter, and that for no
myshappe thy grace ouerthwartly turn. Grace, glory, and joy, is coming
through good folks deserts, and by getting of grace therein should end. And
what is more glory or more joy than wisdom and love in parfite charity
which god has granted to all tho that well can deserve. And with that this
lady al at ones start into mine heart: here woll I onbyde (quod she) for ever.
And never woll I gone hence, and I woll keep the from medlynge while me list
here onbyde: thine intremetyng manners into steadfastness shullen be changed.

SObrelyche tho threw I up mine eyes, and hugelye tho was I astonyed of this
sudden adventure, and feign would I have learned how virtues shulden ben
known in which things, I hoope to God, hereafter she shall me enfourmen, and
namelye sythen her resting place is now so nyghe at my will, and anon all
these things that this lady said, I remembered me by my self, and reuolued
the lives of mine understanding wits. Tho found I fully all these matters
parfitly there written, how mysse rule by feigned love both realms and cities
has governed a great throw. How lightly me might the fautes espy, how
rules in love should ben used, how sometime with feigned love foul I was
begyled, how I should love have know, and how I shall in love with my
service proceed. Also furthermore, I found of perdurable letters wonderly there
graven, these matters which I shall nempne. Certes, none age ne other thing in
earth may the leest syllable of this in no point deface, but clerelye as the
sun in mine understanding soul they shynen. This may never out of my mind,
how I may not my love keep, but through willing in heart. wylne to love may I
not, but I loving, have. Love have I none but through grace of this Margaryte
peerle. It is no manner dout, that will woll not love but for it is loving, as
will woll not ryghtfully, but for it is ryghtful it selue. Also will is not
loving for he woll love, but he woll love for he is loving. It is all one to
will to be loving, and louynges in possessyon to have. Right so will wol not
love, for of love has he in no party, and yet I deny not loving will wylne
more love to have, which that he has not when he would more than he has: but
I say he may no love wylne, if he no love have, through which thylke love
he should wylne: but to have this loving will may no man of him self, but
only through grace toforne going: Right so may noman it keep, but by grace
following. Consydre now every man aryght, and let seen if that any wight of
him self mow this loving will get, and he thereof first nothing have: for if
it should of him self spring, either it must be wyllyng or not willing*
willing by him self may he it not have, sythen him fails the matter that
should it forth bring, the matter him fails: why* he may thereof have no
knowing, till when grace put it in his heart. Thus wyllyng by him self may he
it not have, and not willing may he it not have. Parde every conceyt of every
reasonable creature otherwise will not grant will in affyrmatyfe with not
willing by no way mow accord. And although this loving woll come in mine
heart by frenesse of arbytrement, as in this book fully is showed, yet owe I not
therefore as much allow my free will, as grace of that Margaryte to me leaned,
for neither might I without grace to fornegoinge, and afterward following,
thylke grace get ne keep, and lose shall I it never but if frewyll it make, as
in wyllyng otherwise than grace has me granted. For right as when any person
takes willing to be sobre, and throws that away, willing to be drunk, or
else takes will of drinking out of measure, which thing anon as it is done,
makes through his own gylte by free will that leseth his grace. In which
thing therefore upon the nobley of grace I mote trusten, and my busye cure set
thylke grace to keep, that my frewyl otherwise than by reason it should werche,
cause not my grace to void: for thus must I both look to frewyll and to grace.
For right as natural usage in engendrynge of children may not been without
father, ne also but with the mother, for neither father ne mother in begettynge
may it lack: right so grace and frewyll accorden, and without hem both may
not loving will in no party ben getten. But yet is not frewyl in getting of
that thing, so mokell thank worthy as is grace, ne in the keeping thereof, so
much thank deserves, and yet in gettyng and keeping both done they accord.

Truly oftentyme grace frewyll helps in foredoinge of contrary things,
that to willing love not accorden, and strength will adversities to
withsytte, wherefore all together to grace owes to been accepted, that my
willing deserves. Frewyll to loving in this wise is accorded.

I remember me well how all this book (who so head takes) consydreth all
things to werchynges of mankind, euenlye accords, as in tournynge of this
word love into troth, or else ryghtwisnesse, whether that it like. For what
thing that falls to man in helping of free arbytreme^t, thylke
ryghtwysnesse to take or else to keep, through which a man shall be saved, of
which thing all this book mencyon has maked, in every point thereof grace
owes to be thanked.

wherefore I say, every wight having this ryghtfulnes ryghtfull is, and yet
therefore I sey not in my concyence, that to all ryghtfull is behoten the bliss
everlasting but to hem that been ryghtfull withouten any vnryghtousnesse. Some
man after some degree may ryghtfully ben accounted: as chaste men in living,
and yet ben they ianglers and full of envy pressed: to hem shall this bliss
never been delivered. For right as very bliss is without all manner need,
right so to noman shall it be yeuen but to the ryghtful, void from all manner
vnryghtfulnesse found, so noman to her bliss shall ben followed, but he be
ryghtfull, and with vnryghtfulnesse not bound, and in that degree fully be
know. This ryghtfulnesse in as much as in him self is, of none evil is it
cause, and of all manner goodness truly it is mother. This helps the spyrite
to withsyt the leude lusts of fleshly lykyng: This stre^gtheth and mayntayneth
the law of kind and if that otherwhyle me weneth harm of this precious thing
to follow, therethorowe is nothing the cause, of somewhat else comes it about
who so takes head. By rightfulnesse forsooth werne many holy saints good
savor in swetnesse to god almightye, but that to some folks they weren savor
of death into deedly end, that come not of the saynctes ryghtwysnesse, but of
other wicked men's badnesse has proceeded. Truly the ilke will which that the
lady of love me learned, affection of will to nempne, which is in wyllyng of
profitable things, euel is it not, but when to fleshly lusts it co^senteth
against reason of soul. But that this thing more clearly be understand, it is
for to know whence and how thylke will is so vycious, and so ready, evil
deeds to perform. Grace at the gynnyng ordained thylke will ingoodnesse ever
to have endured, and never to badnesse to have assented: Men should not believe
that God thylke will made to be vycious. Our first father as Adam and Eve, for
vycyous appetytes and vycious will to such appetytes consentyng, ben not one
thing in kind, other thing is done for the other. And how this will first
into man first assented I hold it profitable to show, but if the first
condicyon of reasonable ceeature wol be consydred and apertly looked lightly the
cause of such will may ben showed. Intention of God was that ryghtfully and
blyssed should reasonable nature ben maked him self for to keep, but neither
blysfull ne ryghtfull might it not be withouten will in them both. will of
ryghtfulnesse is thylke same rightfulnesse as heretoforne is showed but will of
bliss is not thylke bliss, for every man has not thylke bliss, in whom the
will thereof is abiding. In this bliss after every understanding is
suffysaunce of couenable commodityes without any manner need, whether it be
bliss of aungelles or else thylke, that grace first in paradyse suffered Adam
to have. For although aungelles bliss be more than Adams was in Paradyse, yet
may it not be denied, that Adam in Paradyse ne had suffysaunce of bliss, for
right as great heart is without al manner of coldness, and yet may an other
heart more heat have, right so nothing defruded Ada^ in Paradyse to been
blessed, without al manner need. Although angels bliss be much more, forsothe
it follows not less than an other to have therefore him needs, but for to
want a thing which that behooves to ben had, that may need ben cleped, and
that was not in Adam at the first gynnynge. God and the Margaryte, weten what I
mean.

Forsothe where as is need, there is wretchedness, good without cause to
fornegoinge made not reasonable creature wretched, for him to understand and
love had he first maked. God made therefore man blyssed with out al manner
indige^ce, together and at ones took reasonable creature bliss, and will of
blyssednesse and will of rightfulnesse, which is ryghtfulnesse it self, and
lybertye of arbitrament, that is free will, with which thilke ryghtfulnesse may
he keep and lose. So and in that wise ordained thylke two, that will which that
instrument is cleped, and here to forne mencyon is maked, should use thylke
ryghtfulnesse by teaching of his soul to good manner of governance, in
thought and in words, and that it should use the bliss in obedyent manner
withouten any incommoditie. Bliss forsothe into man's profit, and
ryghtwysnesse into his worship god delivered at ones: but ryghtfulnes so was
yeuen, that man might it lose, which if he not lost had not, but
continuallye have it kept, he should have deserved the auauncement into the
fellowship of angels, in which thing if he that lost, never by him self
forward should he it mow ayenward recover: and as well the bliss that he was
in, as angels bliss that to himwardes was coming should be nome at ones, and
he deprived of the both. And thus fyl man unto likeness of unreasonable
beestes, and with hem to corrupcyon and vnlustye appetytes was he under,
thrown, but yet will of bliss dwells, that by indigence of goods which
that he lost through great wretchedness, by right should he been punyshed. And
thus for he weyued, ryghtfulnes, lost has he his bliss: but fail of his
desire in his own comoditie may he not, and were commodities to his reasonable
nature which he has lost may he not have. To false lusts, which ben vestial
appetites he is turned: folly of vnconning has him begyled, in wening that
thylke been the commodities that owen to been desired. This affection of will by
liberty of arbitriment is enduced to wylne this thing that he should not and so
is will not maked yuyll but vnryghtful, by absence of rightfulnesse, which thing
by reason ever should he have. And freeness of arbitriment may he not wylne,
when he it not haueth, for while he it had, thylke halpe it not to keep: so
yt without grace may it not been recovered. Will of commodity, in as much as
vnryghtful it is maked, by willing of yuell lusts, willing of goodness may
he not wylne: for will of instrument to affection of will is thralled, sithen
that other thing may it not wylne, for will of instrument to affection
desires, and yet been both they will cleped: for ye instrument woll, throu
affection it wylneth, and affection desires thylke thing whereto instrumente
him ledeth. And so frewil to unlusty affection full servant is maked, for
vnryghtfulnesse may he not releue, and without ryghtfulnes full fredo^ may it
never have. For kyndly liberty of arbytriment without it, vein and ydell is
for sothe. wherefore yet I say, as often have I said the same, when instrument
of will lost has rightfulnesse, in no manner but by grace may he again return
ryghtfulnesse to wylne For sythen nothing but ryghtfulnesse alone should he
wylne, what yt ever he wylneth with out ryghtfulnesse, vnryghtfullye he it
wylneth. These than unrightful appetites and unthrifty lusts which the flies
desires, in as mokell as they been in kind, been they not bad, but they ben
vnryghtful and badde for they ben in reasonable creature, where as they being in
no way should been suffered. In unreasonable beasts neither been they yuell ne
unrightful, for there is their kind being.

Known may it well been now, of these things to forne declared, that man
has not always thylke ryghtfulnesse, which by duty of right evermore haven
he should, and by no way by him self may he get ne keep, and after he it has
if he it lose, recover shall he it never, without especial grace: wherefore the
comune sentence of the people in opinion, yt every thing after destiny is
ruled, false and wicked is to bileue: For though predestinacyon be as well of
good as of badde, sithen that it is said God hadnest made, which he never ne
wrought, but for he suffers hem to be maked, as that he hardeth wha^ he naught
missayth, or led into temptation when he not delyuereth, wherefore it is none
inco^uenient if in that manner be said, God to forne have destenyed both badde,
and her badde works when hem ne their yuel deeds neither ame^deth, ne thereto
hem grace leueth. But speciallyche predestinacion of goodness alone, is said
by these great clerks, for in him God does that they been, and that in
goodness they werchen. But the negatyfe hereof in badnesse is holde^, as the
lady of love has me learned, who so aryght in this book looks. And utterly it
is to weten, that predestinacyon properly in God may not been demed, no more
than beforne wetinge. For in the chapter of gods beforne wetynge, as love me
rehearsed, al these matters apertly may ben founde^. All things to god ben now
together and in presence during. Trewly presence and predestinacyon in nothing
disacorden, wherefore as I was learned how gods before wetyng and free choice of
will mow stonden together, me thinks the same reason me leads, that
destenye and frewyll accorden, so that neither of hem both to other in nothing
contrarieth And resonablelyche may it not ben demed, as often as any thing
fails frewyl werchyng, as if a man another man wrongfully anoyeth, wherefore
he him sleyth, that it be constrained to that end, as mokel folk cries and
says: Lo, as it was destenyed of God to forne know, so it is through
necessytie fall, and otherwise might it not betyde Trewly neither he yt the
wrong wroughte ne he that him self venged, none of thylke things through
necessity wrought: for if that with freewyll there had it not wylled, neither
had wrought that he performed: and so utterly grace ye frewyll in goodness
brings and keeps, and fro badnesse it turns, in all thing most thank
deserneth. This grace makes se^te^ce in virtue to abide, wherefore in body and
in soul in full plenty of conyng after their good deseruyng in the ever
lastyng joy, after the day of dome shul they endelesse dwell, and they shul
been learned in that kingdom with so mokel affect of love and of grace, that
the least joy shall of the greatest in glory rejoice and been gladded, as i^
he the same joy had. What wonder sith God is the greatest love, and ye ne
ought to look things with resonnynge to prove, and so is instrument o^ will,
will: and yet varyeth he from effect and using both. Affection of will also
for will is cleped, but it varyeth f^o^ instrument in this manner wise, by that
name, lyche when it comes into mind anon right it is in wyllyng desired,
and the negatyfe thereof with wyllyng nyl not acord this is closed in heart,
though usage and instrument sleep. This slepeth wha^ instrument and us waken:
and of such manner affection trewly some man has more and some man less.
Certes true lovers wenen ever thereof to little to have. False lovers in little
wenen have right mokel: Lo instrument of will in false and true both even liche
is proporcianed, but affection is more in some place than in some, because of
the goodness that follows, and that I think herafter to declare. Use of this
instrument is will, but it takes his name when wylned thing is in doing. but
utterly grace to catch in thy bliss, desired to ben rewarded. Thou must have
than affection of will at the full, and use when his time asks wisely to ben
governed. Sothly my disciple without feruente affection of will may no man been
saved: this affection of good service in good love, may not been grounded,
without fervent desire to the thing in will coueyted. But he that never
retcheth to have or not to have, affection of will in yt has no restyng place.
why? for when thing comes to mind, and it be not taken in head to common or
not come, therefore in that place affection fails: and for thylke affection is
so little, throw which in goodness he should come to his grace, the lytelnesse
will not suffer to avail by no way in to his helps: Certes grace and reason
thylke affection follows This affection with reason knytte, dureth in
eueryche true heart, and evermore is encreasyng, no ferdnesse, no strength
may it remove while truth in heart abides. Sothly when falshed gynneth enter
truth draws away, grace and joy both: but than thilke falsheed that troth
has thus voyded, has vnknyt the bond of understanding reason, between will
and the heart. And who so that bond vndoth, and vnknytteth will to be in other
purpose tha^ to ye first accord, knitteth him with contrary of reason, and
that is vnreason. Lo, than will and vnreason brings a man from the bliss of
grace, which thing of pure kind, every man ought to shonne and to eschew, and
to the knot of will and reason confyrme. Me thinks (quod she) by thy stud^ent
lokes, thou wenest in these words me to contraryen, from other sayenges here
to forne in other place, as wha^ thou were sometime in affection of will, to
things yt now han brought the in disease, which I have ye counsayled to
void, and thine heart discover, and there I made thy will to ben changed,
which now thou wenest I arg^e to wythholde and to keep. Shortly I say that
reuers in these words may not ben found: for though drunkenness be
forboden, men shul not always ben drinklesse. I trow right for thou thy will out
of reason should not turn thy will in one reason should not vnbyde, I say thy
will in thy first purpose with vnreason was closed: Constrewe forth of the
remenante what the good lyketh. Trewly that will and reason should be knitte
together was fre will of reason, after time thine heart is assentaunt to them
both, thou might not change, but if thou from rule of reason varye, in which
varyaunce to come to thylke bliss desired, co^trariously thou werchest: and no
thing may know will and reason but love alone. Than if thou void love, than
weuest the bond that knytteth, and so needs or else right lightly, yt other
gone a sondre: wherefore thou see apertly that love holds this knot, and a
maystreth hem to be bound. These things, as a ring in circuit of wrethe ben
knytte in thy soul without departing. A let be, let be (quod I) it needs not
of this no rehersayle to make, my soul is yet in parfyte bliss, in thinking
of that knotte.

NOw trewly lady I have my ground well understand, but what thing is ye thylke
spire that in to a tree should wexe: expowne me ye thing, what ye thereof
mean. That shall I (quod she) blithly, and take good head to the words I the
read. Co^tinuaunce in thy good service, by long process of time in full hope
abiding, without any chaung to wylne in thine heart: this is the spire, which if
it be well kept and governed, shall so hugely spryng, till the fruit of grace
is plentuously out sprongen: for although thy will be good yet may not therefore
thilke bliss desired hastily on the discende^, it must abide his sesonable
time. And so by process of growyng, with thy good traueyle, it shall in to
more and more wexe, till it be found so mighty, that winds of yuel spech, ne
of storms of envy, make not the traueyle overthrow, ne frostes of mystruste,
ne hayles of ielousy right little might have in harmyng of such sprynges. Every
young setlynge lightly with small storms is a peyred, but when it is woxen
somdele in gretnesse, than han great blastes and wethers but little might, any
disauauntage to them for to werch. Mine own sovereign lady (quod I) and wealth
of mine heart, and it were liking unto your noble grace, therthrou not to be
displeased, I suppose ye erren, now ye make^ ielousy envy, and disturbour to
hem that been your servants. I have learned often to forne this time, that in
every loners heart, great plenty of ielousyes greues ben sow, wherefore me
thinks ye ne ought in no manner account, thylke thing among these other
welked wyners and venomous serpents, as envy, mistrust, and yuel speech O
fool (quod she) mistrust with folly with yuel will meddled, engenders that
welked padde. Trewly if they were distroyed, ielousye undone were for ever, and
yet some manner of ielousy I wot well is ever ready in all the hertes of my true
servants, as thus: to be ielous over him self, lest he be cause of his own
disease. This ielousy in full thought ever should be kept for ferdnesse to
lose his love by miskeping, through his own doing in lewdness, or else thus:
Lest she that thou serueste so fervently is beset there her better lyketh, that
of al thy good service she compteth not a cresse. These ielousyes in heart for
acceptable qualities ben demed: these oughten every true lover by kindly,
evermore haven in his mind, till fully the grace and bliss of my service be
on him descended at will. And he that than ielousy catches, or else by wenyng
of his own folysh wylfulnesse mistrusteth, truly with fantasy of venyme, he
is foul begyled. Yuelwyll has grounded thylke matter of sorrow in his leude
soul, and yet not for tha^ to every wight should me not trust, ne every
wyghte fully misbeleue, the mean of these things owen to be used. Sothly
wythouten cause^^ll evidence, mystruste in ielousye should not be wened in no
wise person commonly, such leude wickedness should me not synde. He that is wise
and with yuell will not be acomered, can abide well his time, till grace and
bliss of his service following, have him so mokel eased, as his abiding to
forehande has him diseased. Certes lady (quod I tho) of no thing me wondreth
sythen thylke bliss so precious is and kyndly good, and well is and worthy in
kind, wha^ it is meddled with love and reason, as ye to forne have declared.
Why, anon as hye one is spronge, why springs not the other? and anon as the
one comes, why receives not the other? For every thing that is out of his
kyndly place, by full appetite, ever comes thytherwarde kyndly to draw, and
his kyndly being thereto him co^strayneth. And the kindly stead of this bliss,
is in such will meddled to vnbyde, and needs in that it should have his kyndly
being. wherefore me thinks anon as that will to be showed and kydde him
profreth, thylke bliss should him hye thylke will to receive, or else kind of
goodness worche^ not in hem as they should. Lo, be the sun never so far,
ever it has his kind werching in earth: great weight on hye onloft carried,
stynteth never till it come to this restyng place. waters to the sea ward ever
ben they drawyng, thing that is light blythly will not synke, but ever
ascends and upward draws. Thus kind in every thing his kyndely course,
and his being place shows: wherefore be kind on this good will, anon as it
were spronge, this bliss should thereon descend, her kind would they dwelleden
together, and so have ye said your self. Certes (quod she) thine heart sytteth
wonder sore this bliss for to have, thine heart is sore agreued that it taryeth
so long, and if thou durstest, as me thinks by thine words, this bliss
would thou blame. But yet I say, thylke bliss is kyndly good, and his
kyndly place in that will to vnbyde. Never the later, their coming together
after kinds ordinance not suddenly may betyde, it must abide time as kind
yeueth him leave for if a man, as this will meddled gonne him show, and thylke
bliss in have followed, so lightly coming should lyghtlye cause going, long
time of thurstyng, causes drink to be the more delycious when it is atasted.
How is it (quod I tha^) that so many blysses se I al day at mine eye, in the
first moment of a sight with such will accord. Ye, and yet other while with
will assenteth, syngulerly by him self there reason fails, traueyle was
none, service had no time. This is a queynt manner thing how such doing comes
about. O (quod she) that is thus, the earth kyndely after seasons and times of
the year, brings sorth innumerable herbs and trees both profitable and
other, but such as men might leave, though they were naught in noryshynge to
man's kind seruen, or else such as turnen soon unto men's confusion in ease
that thereof they atast comen forth out of the earth by their own kind,
wythouten any man's cure or any business in traueyle: and thylke herbs that
to men's lyuelode necessaryly seruen, without which goodlye in this life
creatures mowen not enduren, and most been nouryshen to mankind, without
great traueyle, great tylth, and long abydyng time, comen not out of the
earth, and it with seed to forne ordained such herbs to make spri^g and forth
grow. Right so the perfect bliss, that we have in meaning of during time to
abide may not come so lyghtlye, but with great traueyle and right besytylth,
and yet good feed to be sow, for often the croppe fails of bad seed, be it
never so well traueyled. And thylke bliss thou spoke of so lightly in coming,
truly is not necessary nor abiding: and but it the better be stamped, and the
venomous ieuse out wrongen, it is likely to enpoysonen all tho that thereof
tasten. Certes right bitter been the herbs yt shown first the year of her
own kind. well the more is the harvest that yeldeth many graynes, tho long
and sore it has been traueiled. what would thou deme^ if a man would give three
quarters of nobles of gold, that were a precious gift* Ye certes (quod I).
And what (quod she) three quarters full of peerles? Certes (quod I) yt were a
rych gift. And what (quod she) of as mokel azure? (Quod I) a precious gift at
full* were not (quod she) a noble gift of all these at ones? In good faith
(quod I) for wantynge of englysh namynge of so noble a word, I can not for
preciousnesse give it a name. Ryghtfully (quod she) haste thou demed, and yet
love knytte in virtue, passes all the gold in this earth. Good will accordant to
reason, with no manner properte may be countreuayled, all the azure in the
world is not to account in respect of reason, love that with good will and
reason accords, with no earthly rich se may not ben amenden. This yefte have
thou yeuen I know it my self and thy Magaryte thilke gift has received, in the
which thing to reward she has her self bound. But thy gift as I said, by no
manner richesse may be amended, wherefore with thing yt may not be amended,
thou shall of thy margarytes rightwisenesse be rewardede. Right suffered yet
never but every good deed so^time to be yolde. Al would thy Margarite with no
reward the quite. Right that never more dies thy mede in merit woll puruey.
Certes such sudden bliss as thou first ne^pnest, ry^ will hem reward as the
well is worthy, and though at thine eye it seems the reward yt desert to
pass, right can after send such bytternes eue^ly it to reward: so ye sudden
bliss by always of reason in great goodness may not ben accounted, but bliss
long, both long it abides, and endless it wol last. Se why thy will is
endelesse, for if thou louedest ever, thy will is ever there tabyde and never
more to change: euenhed of reward must ben done by right, than must needs
thy grace and this bliss endeles in joy to vnbide. Eue^lich disese asks
eue^lych joy, which hastily thou shall have. A (quod I) it suffiseth not tha^ a
long good will, be it never so well with reason meddled, but if it be in good
service long trauayled. And so throu service shul men come to ye joy and this
me thinks should be the wexing tree of which ye first meued.

VEry troth (quod she) have thou now conceived of these things in thine heart
hastily shall thou be able very joy and parfite bliss to receive. And now I
wot well thou desyrest to know ye manner of branches, that out of the tree
should spring. Thereof lady (quod I) hertely I you pray: for tha^ leave I woll,
that right soon after I shall ataste of the fruit that I so long have
desired. Thou haste herd (quod she) in what wise this tree to forne this have
I declared, as in ground and in stock of wexinge. First the ground should be
thy frewyl full in thine heart and the stock (as I said) should be continuau^ce
in good service, by long time in traueyle, till it were in greatness right well
woxen. And when this tree such greatness has caught, as I have rehearsed: the
branches than that the fruit should forth bring, spech must they be needs in
voice of prayer, in complaining wise used. Out alas (quod I tho) he is
soroufully wounded that hydeth his speech and spares his complayntes to make,
what shall I speak ye care: but pain even like to hell, sore has me assailed,
and so ferforthe in pain me thronge, that I leave my tree is seer, and never
shall it fruit forth bring. Certes he is greatly eased, that dare his pryuy
moan discover to a true fellow, that co^ninge has and myt wherthrough his
playnt in any thing may be amended. And mokel more is he ioyed that with heart
of hardynesse dare complain to his Lady, what cares yt he suffers, by hope of
mercy with grace to be auaunced. Trewly I say for me, sith I came this
Margaryte to serve, durst I never me discover of no manner disease, and well the
later has mine heart hardied such things to done, for ye great bounties and
worthy refreshmentes that she of her grace goodly without any deserte on my
halue often has me rekened, and nere her goodness the more with grace and with
mercy meddled, which passen al deserts, traueyls, and seruinges, that I in any
degree might endyte, I would wene I should be without recover, in getting of
this bliss for ever. Thus have I stylled my disease, thus have I covered my
care, that I brenne in sorrowful anoy, as gledes and coals wasten a fire under
deed ashen. Well the hoter is the fire, that with ashen it is ouerleyn: right
long this woe have I suffered. Lo (quod Love) how thou farest: me thinks ye
palasy yuel has acomered thy wits, as fast as thou highest forward, anon
suddenly backwarde thou mouest: Shall not yet al thy lewdness out of thy
brains? dull been thy skylfull vndersta^dynges, thy will has thy wit so a
maystred* woste thou not well (quod she) but every tree in his sesonable time
of burionynge show his blomes fro wtin, in sign of what fruit should out of
him spring, else the fruit for yt year men halte delivered, be ye ground never
so good. And thou the stock be mighty at the full, and the branches seer and
no burions show, farewell the gadiner he may pipe with an yue leaf his fruit is
failed. wherefore thy branches must burionen in presence of thy Lady, if thou
desire any fruit of thy ladies grace, but beware of thy life, yt thou no
wodelaye use, as in asking of things that stretchen in to shame, for than
might thou not speed by no way that I can espy. Virtue woll not suffer
vyllanye out of him self to spring. Thy words may not be queynt ne of
subtell manner understanding. Free wytted people supposen in such poesyes to
be begyled, in open understanding must every word be used. Voice without
clear understanding of sentence says Aristotle, right naught printeth in
heart. Thy words than to a bide in heart, and clean in full sentence of true
meaning plattly must thou show and ever be obedient, her hestes and her wyls
to perform, and be thou set in such a wit to wete by a look ever more what
she means. And he that list not to speak, but stilly his disease suffer:
what wonder is it tho he come never to his bliss? who yt traueileth vnwyst,
and coueyteth thing unknow, vnwetinge he shall be quyted, and with unknow
thing rewarded. Good Lady (quod I than) it has often ben seen, that wethers and
storms so hugely have fall in burionynge time, and by part duresse han beaten
of the sprynges so clean, wherthroughe the fruit of thylke year has failed.
It is a great grace when burions ha^ good wethers, their fruits forth to
bring. Alas than after such storms how hard is it to avoid, till efte
wedrynge and years han maked her circute course al about, er any fruit be able
to be tasted he is shente for shame, yt foul is rebuked of his speech. He that
is in fire brenning sore smarteth for disease. Him thinks full long er the
water come, that should the fire quench. While men gone after a leche, the
body is buried. Lo how semely this fruit wexeth, me thinks that of tho
fruits may no man ataste, for pure bytternesse in savor. In this wise both
fruit and the tree wasten away together, though mokel besy occupacion have be
spent to bring it so ferforth, that it was able to spring. A lyte speech has
maked that al this labor is in ydel. I not (quod she) whereof it serves thy
question to assoyle, me thinks the now duller in wits, than wha^ I with
the first met, although a man be leude commonly for a fool he is not demen,
but if he no good wol learn, sottes and fools le^ lightly out of mind, yt good
that men teaches hem. I said therefore thy stock must be strong and in
greatness well herted, the tree is full ^eble that at the first dente
falls: and although fruit fails one year or two, yet shall such a seasen
come one time or other, that shall bring out fruit that is nothing preterit
ne passed there is nothing future ne coming, but all things together in that
place been present everlasting without any menyng, wherefore to God al thing is
as now: and though a thing be not in kyndely nature of things as yet, and if
it should be here after, yet evermore we should say God it makes be time
present, and now for no future ne preterit in him may be found. wherefore his
wetynge and his before wetynge, is al one in understanding. Tha^ if wetyng and
before wetyng of God puts in necessite to al things which he wotte or
before wotte ne thing after eternity, or else after any time he woll or does
of liberty but all of necessity, which thing if thou wene it be against reason
not through necessity to be or not to be, all thing that God wot or before
wot, to be or not to be, and yet nothing defends any thing to be wist or to
be before wist of him in our wylles or our doings to be done, or else coming
to be for fre arbitriment. when thou have these declarations well understand,
tha^ shall thou find it reasonable at prove, and that many things be not
through necessity, but through liberty of will, save necessity of fre will,
as I to forne said: and as me thinks al utterly declared. Me thinks lady
(quod I) so I should you not displease, and evermore your reverence to keep,
that these things co^trarien in any understanding, for ye said sometime is
through liberty of will and also through necessity. Of this have I yet no
savor without better declaration. what wonder (quod she) is there in these
things, sythen al day thou shalt se at thine eye, in many things receyuen
in hem self reuers: through diverse reasons, as thus. I pray the (quod she)
which things been more reuers than commen and gone: For if I bydde the come to
me, and thou come, after when I bydde the go and thou go, thou reuersest fro
thy first coming. That is soth (quod I) and yet (quod she) in thy first
alone by diverse reason was full reuersynge to understand. As how (quod I)
That shall I show the (quod she) by ensample of things that have kyndely
mouynge. Is there any thing that meueth more kyndely than does the heuens eye
which I clepe the sun. Sothly (quod I) me seems it most kyndly to move.
Thou say soth (quod she) Tha^ if thou look to the sun, in what part he be
under heaven, evermore he heigheth him in moving fro thylke place, and heygheth
meuynge toward thylke same place, to thylke place from which he goth he
heigheth coming, and without any ceasynge to that place he neigheth from which
he is changed and withdraw. But now in these things after diversity of
reason, reuers in one thing may be sey with out repugnaunce. wherefore in the
same wise without any repugnaunce by my reasons to fore maked, al is one to
believe, somthinge to be through necessity coming, for it is coming, and
yet with no necessity constrained to be coming, but with necessity that
comes out of fre will, as I have said. Tho list me a little to speak, and began
stynt my pen of my writing, and said in this wise. Trewly lady as me
thinks, I can allege authorites great ye contrary your sayenges. Job says
of man's person, thou have put his term, which thou might not pass. Then
say I that no man may short ne length the day ordained of his doing, although
sometime to us it seems some man to do a thing of free will, wherthorow his
death he henteth. Nay forsooth (quod she) it is nothing against my saying for
god is not begyled, ne he sees nothing whether it shall come of lyberte or else
of necessite, yet it is said to be ordained at god immouable, which at man or
it be done may be changed. Such thing also is that Paul the apostel says of
hem that tofore were purpossed to be saints, as thus, which that god before
wist, and has predestined, conformes of images of his son, that he should be
the first begotten, that is to say, here among many brethren, and whom he
has predestyned, hem he has cleped, and who^ he has cleped, hem he has
justified, and whom he has justified, hem he has magnifyed. This purpose
after which they ben cleped saints or holy in ye everlasting present, wheris
neither time passed ne time coming, but ever it is only present, and now as
mokel a moment as seven thousand winter, and so ayenwarde wythouten any meuyng
is nothing lych temporel presence, for thing yt there is ever present. Yet
among you me^ er it be in your presence it is mouable through lyberte of
arbytreme^t. And right as in the everlasting present no manner thing was ne
shall be, but only is, and now here in your te^porel time, somthyng was and is,
and shall be, but mouynge stoundes, and in this is no manner repugnaunce. Right so
in the everlasting presence nothing may be changed: and in your te^porel
time other while it is proved mouable by lyberte of will or it be do, wythoute^
any inconvenience thereof to follow. In your te^porel time is no such presence
as in the the other, for your present is done, when passed and to come gynne^
enter, which times here among you euerych easily follows other, but ye
presence everlasting dureth in onehed, without any ymaginable chau^gyng, and
ever is present and now. Truly the course of the planetes and ouerwhelmynges
of the son in days and nights, with a new gynnyng of his circute after it
is ended, that is to said, one year to follow another. These maken your
tra^sitory times with chau^gyng of lives and mutation of people. But right as
your te^porel presence coueyteth every place, and al things in every of your
times be contained, and as now both sey and wist to gods very knowing. Then
(quod I) me wo^dreth why Paul spoke these words, byvoice of signification in
time passed, that god his sai^tes before wist, has predestined, has cleped,
has justified, and has magnifyed: Me thinks he should have said tho words
in time present, and that had be more accordaunt to the everlasting present,
the^ to have spoke in preterit voice of passed understanding. O (quod Love) by
these words I se well thou have little understanding of ye everlasting
presence, or else of my before spoken words, for never a thing of tho thou have
ne^pned was to fore other or after other, but all at ones euenlych at ye god
be^, and al together in ye everlasting present be now to understanding, the
eternal presence, as I said, has enclose together in one, al times, in which
close and one al things yt ben in diverse times and in diverse place^ te^porel
without posteriorite or priorite be closed therein perpetuel now, and maked to
dwell in present sight. But there thou say yt Paul should have spoke thilke
forsaid sentence by time present, and that most should have been accordaunt to
the everlasting presence, why gabbest thou to thy words: Sothly I say Paul
moved ye words by signification of time passed, to show fully yt thylke
words were not put for te^porel signification, for all thilk time were not
thilk sentence te^porallich borne which that Paul pronounced god have tofore
know, and have cleped then magnifyed, wherthorow it may well be know that Paul
used tho words of passed significacio^, for need and lack of a word in man's
bodily spech betokenyng the everlasting presence. And therefore word is most
semelyche in likeness to everlasting presence, he took his sentence for
things that here beforne ben passed, utterly be immouable, ylyke to ye
everlasting presence. As thylke that been there never mow not be present, so
things of time passed ne mow in no wise not be^ passed: but al things in
your temporal presence that passen in a little while shullen ben not present. So
then in that it is more similitude to the everlasting presence, sygnifycacion
of time passed, then of time temporal present, and so more in accordaunce. In
this manner what thing of these that been don through fre arbytreme^t, or else as
necessary, holy writ pronou^ceth, after eternite he speaks, in which
presence is everlasting soth and nothing but sothe immouable, not after time,
in which naught always ben your wylles and your acts, and right as while they be
not, it is not nedeful hem to be: so often it is not nedfull that sometime they
should be. As how (quod I) for yet must I be learned by some ensample Of love
(quod she) woll I now ensample make, sythen I know the heed knotte in that
yelke. Lo, sometime thou wrytest no art, ne art then in no will to write. And
right as while thou wrytest not, or else wol not write it is not nedeful the to
write, or else wylne to write. And for to make ye know utterly, th^^ things
ben otherwise in ye everlasting presence, the^ in temporal time: se now my
good child, for somthynge is in the everlasting presence, then in temporel
time, it was not in eternite time, in eterne presence shall it not be Then no
reason defe^deth, that somthyng ne may be in time temporal mouynge, that in
eterne is immouable. Forsothe it is no more contrary ne reuers for to be mouable
in time temporal, and mouable in eternite, then not to be in any time, and to
be always in eternite and have to be or else to come in time temporel, and not
have be ne naught coming to be in eternite. Yet never the later, I say not
somthynge to be never in time te^porel, that ever is eternite, but al only in
sometime not to be. For I say not thy love to morn in no time to be, but to
day alone I deny ne it to be, and yet never the later it is always in eternite.

A so (quod I) it seems to me that coming thing or else passed here in your
temporal time to be, in eternite ever now and present owes not to be demed,
and yet follows not thylke thing, that was or else shall be, in no manner thereto
ben passed, or else coming: then utterly shul we deny, for there without
ceasyng, it is in his present manner. O (quod she) mine own disciple, now
gynnest thou able to have the name of my servant. Thy wit is clered, away is
now error of cloud in uncunning, away is blyndnesse of love, away is
thoughtfull study, of medlyng manners hastly shalt thou enter into the joy of
me, that am thine own maystres. Thou haste (quod she) in a few words, well
and clearly concluded mokel of my matter. And right as there is no reuers ne
contrarioustie in tho things, right so wythoute^ any repugnau^ce, it is said
somthyng to be mouable in time temporel, and for it be, that in eternite
dwells immouable not a for^ it be or after that it is, but without cessyng,
for right naught is there after time, that same is there everlasting, that
te^porallyche sometime nys, and toforne it be it may not be, as I have said.
Now sothlye (quod I) this have I well understand, so that now me thinks
that prescience of god and fre arbytreme^t wythouten any repugnau^ce acorden,
and yt makes the strength of eternite, which encloseth by presence during al
times, and al things that been, han ben, and shull ben in any time. I would
now (quod I) a little understand sythen that all thing thus beforne wot,
whether thylke wetynge be of tho things, or else thylke things ben to ben of
gods wetyng and so of god nothing is: and if every thing be through gods
w^tynge, and thereof take his being, then should god be maker and author of
badde works, and so he should not rightfully punyshe yuell doings of mankind.
(Quod Love) I shall tell the this lesson to learn mine own tene servant, the
noble philosophical poet, in English, which evermore him besyeth and
trauayleth right sore my name to encrese, wherefore all that wyllen me good, owe
to do him worship and reverence both, truly his better ne his pete in schole
of my rules conde I never find: He (quod she) in a treatise yt he made of my
servant Troylus, has this matter touched, and at the full this questyon
assoyled. Certainly his noble sayenges can I not amend: In goodness of ge^tyll
manlyche speech, without any manner of nycite of starteres ymaginacion in wit
and in good reason of sentence he passes al other makers. In ye book of
Troylus, the answer to thy questyon may thou learn, never the later yet may
lightly thine understanding somdele ben learned, if thou have knowing of these
to fornsayd thiges, with that thou have understanding of two the last
chapiters of this second book, yt is to say, good to be somthyng, and bad to
want al manner being, for badde is nothing else but absence of good, and that
god in good, makes that good deeds be good, in yuel he makes yt they ben but
naut that they ben bad: for to nothing is badnesse to be. I have (quod I tho)
enough knowi^g theri^, me needs of other things to here, ye is to say how I
shall come to my bliss so long desired

IN this matter toforne declared (quod love) I have well showed, yt every man
has fre arbytreme^t of things in his power to do or undo what him lyketh. Out
of this ground must come the spire, that by process of time shall in
greatness sprede, to have branches and blosmes of warynge fruit in grace, of
which the cast and the sauoure is endless bliss in joy ever to onbyde. Now
lady (quod I) that tree to set same would I learn So thou shall (quod she) er
thou depart hence. The first thing thou must set thy work on ground syker
and good, accordaunte to thy sprynges. For if you desire grapes, thou go not
to the hasell, ne for to fetchen roses, thou sekest not on oaks: and if thou
shall have honey soukles, thou leauest the fruit of the sour docke Wherefore if
thou desire this bliss in parfyte ^oye* thou must set thy purpose there virtue
follows, and not to look after the bodily goods, as I said when thou were
wryt^ng in thy second book. And for thou have set thy self in so noble a
place, and utterly lowed in thine heart the mysgoyng of thy first purpose, this
se^teles is the esyer to spring, and the more lyghter thy soul in grace to be
bl^ssed. And trewly thy desire, that is to say thy will, algates mote ben
steadfast in this matter without any chaungynge, for if it be steadfast, no man
may it void. Yes parde (quod I^ any will may ben turned by friends, and
disease of manace and thretnyng in lesynge of my life and of my lymmes, and in
many other wise, that now comes not to mind. And also it mote often ben out
of thought, for no remembrance may hold one thing continually in heart, be
it never so lusty desired.

Now se (quod she) how thy will shall follow thy frewyl to be grounded
co^tinuelly to abide It is thy fre will that thou love and have loved, and yet
shall loue^ this Margaryte perle, and in thy will thou think to hold it. The^
is thy will knyt in love, not to change for no new lust beside: this will
teaches thine heart from al manner varyeng. But the^ although thou be thretened
in death or else in otherwise yet is it in thine arbitreme^t to chose, thy love
to void or else to hold: And thylke arbytrement is in a manner a judgment
between desire and thy heart. And if thou deem to love thy good will fails,
then art thou worthy no bliss that good will should deserve: and if thou chose
contynuaunce in thy good service then thy good will abides, needs bliss
folowi^g of thy good will must come by strength of thylke judgment: for thy
first will yt taught thyn heart to abide, and halte it from theschau^ge with the
reason is accorded. Trewly this manner of will thus shall abyd, impossible it were
to turn if thy heart be true, and if every man dyligently the menynges of his
will consider, he shall well understand that good will knyt with reason, but in a
false heart never is voyded: for power and might of keeping this good will is
through lyberte of arbytreme^t in heart, but goodwil to keep may not fail. Eke
then if it fail, it shows it self that goodwyl in keeping is not there. And
thus false will that puts out the good, anon constrayneth the heart to
accord in loving of thy goodwyll, and this accordau^ce between false will and
thine heart, in falsyte ben lykened together. Yet a little wol I say the, in
good will thy goodwylles to raise and strength. Take heed to me (quod she) how
thy wylles thou shall understand. Right as ye han in your body diverse members,
and five sondrye wits, euerych apart to his own doing, which things as
instruments ye vsen, as your hands aparte to handle, fete to go, tongue to
speak, eye to se: Right so ye soul has in him certain sterynges and
strengthes which he uses as instruments to his certain doings. Reason is in
the soul, which he uses things to know and to prove, and will, which he uses
to wilne: and yet is neither will ne reason al ye soul, but eueryche of hem is
a thing by him self in ye soul. And right as euerich has thus singular
i^strume^tes by he^ self, they han as well diverse aptes and diverse manner
usynges, and thilke aptes mowe^ in will ben cleped affections. Affection is an
instrument of wyllyng in his apetites. Wherefore mokel folk said, if a
reasonable creatures soul any thing ferue^tly wylneth, affectuously he wylneth,
and thus may will by term of equiuocas in three ways be understand: One is
instrme^t of wyllyng, another is affection of this instrument: and the third is
use, yt sets it a work. Instrument of willing is thilke strength of the
soul, which ye co^straineth to wylne, right as reason is instrument of reasons,
which ye vsen when ye loken. Affection of this instrument is a thing, by which
ye be draw desyrouslye any thing to wylne in coueytous manner, all be it for
the time out of your mind: as if it come in your thought thylke thing to
remember, anon ye be wylling thilke to done or else to have. And thus is
instrument will, and affection is will also, to wylne thing as I said: as for to
wylne health, when will nothing thereon thiketh, for anon as it comes to memory
it is in will, and so is affection to wylne sleep when it is out of mind, but
anon as it is remembered will wylneth sleep, when his time comes of yt doing.
For affection of will never accords to sycknesse, ne always to wake. Right so
in a true lovers affection of willing instrument, is to wylne truth in his
service, and this affection always abides, although he be sleping or thret^ed,
or else not thereon thinkyng, but anon as it comes to mind, anon he is
steadfast in that will to abide. Use of this instrument forsooth is another thing
by him self, and that have ye not but when ye be doing in wylled thing by
affect or instrument of will purposed or desired, and this manner of usage in my
service wisely needs to be ruled from wayters with envy closed, from spekers full
of ia^gelig words, from proud folk and hautayne, that labes and innocents
both scornen and dyspysen. Thus in doing varieth the acts of willing euerich
from other, and yet ben they cleped will, and the name of will utterly owen they
to have as instrument of will is will, when ye turn into purpose of any thing
to don, be it to sit or to stand, or any such thing else. This instrument
may ben had, although affecte and usage be left out of doing, right as ye
have sight and reason, and yet always use ye greatest wisdom in hem shall he
be, and they in god. Now then when all false folk be ashamed, which wenen al
bestialte and erthly thing be swetter and better to the body, then heavenly is
to the soul: this is the grace and the fruit yt I long have desired, it does
me good the sauoure to smell. Christ now to the I cry of mercy and of grace,
and grant of thy goodness to every manner reder full understanding in this
leude pamflet to have, and let no man wene other cause in this work, then is
verily the soth: For envy is ever ready all innoce^tes to shende, wherefore I
would that good speech envy evermore hinder. But no man wene this work be
sufficiently maked, for gods work passes man's, no ma^s wit to perfect work
may by no way puruay the end: How should I the^ so leude, ought wene of
perfection any end to get? Never the later grace glory, and laud I yield and
put with worshypful reuere^ces to yt sothfast god i^ three, with unite closed
which yt the heavy la^gour of my sycknesse has turned into mirth of health
forecouer: for right as I was sorowed through the gloton cloud of manyfolde
syckly sorrow, so mirth again coming health has me gladed and greatly comforted.
I beseech and pray therefore, and I cry on gods great pity and on his mokel
mercy, that this present scorges of my flesh mow make medecyn and lech craft
of my inner man's health, so yt my passed trespass and tenes, through weeping of
mine eyes ben wash, and I boyded from al manner dysese, and no more to weep
herafter, I now be kept through gods grace: so th^^ gods hand which that
mercyably me ha^^ scorged, herafter in good plyte from thens mercyably me keep
and defend. In this book be many preuy things wympled and fold, uneath shul
leude me^ the plytes vnwynde, wherefore I pray to the holy ghost he lene of his
oynt me^tes men's wits to clear, and for gods love no man wonder why or how
this question come to my mind, for my great lustye desire was of this lady to
be enfourmed, my lewdness to amend. Certes I know not other men's wits
what I should ask, or in answer what I should say, I am so leude my self,
that mokel more learning yet me behooves. I have made therefore as I coud, but
not sufficiently as I would, and as matter yaue me sentence, for my dull wit
is hyndered by stepmother of foryetynge, and with cloud of uncunning, that
stops the light of my Margarite perle, wherefore it may not shine on me as
it should. I desire not only a good reder, but also I coueyte and pray a good
book amender, in correction of words and of sentence: and only this mede I
coueyte for my travail, that every inseer and herer of this leude fantasye,
devout orisons and prayers to god the great judge yelden, and prayen for me,
in that wise that in his dome my sins mow ben released and foryeuen: He that
prays for other, for him self trauayleth. Also I pray that every man
parfytly mow know through what intencion of heart this tretyse have I draw.
How was it yt syghtfull Ma^na in deserte to children of Israel was spiritual
meat: bodily also it was, for men's bodies it norisheth. And yet never ye
later Christ it sygnifyed. Right so a jewel betokens a gemme, and that is a
stone virtuous, or else a perle Margarite a woman betokens grace, lernyng or
wysedo^ of god, or else holy church If breed through virtue is made holy flesh,
what is that our god says? It is the spirete that yeueth life, the flesh of
nothing it profyteth. Flesh is fleshly understanding: Flesh without grace and
love naught is worth. The letter sleeth, ye spirit yeueth lyfelich
understanding. Charity is love, and love is charity, god grant us all therein
to be frended. And thus the Testament of Love is ended.

Thus ends the Testament of Love And here after follows The lamentatyon of
Mary Magdaleyne.
PLonged in the wawe of mortal dystresse
Alas for woe, to whom shall I complain
Or who shall deuoyde this great heaviness
Fro me woeful Mary, woeful Magdaleyne
my lord is gone, alas who wrout this treine
This sodeine chance, perseth my heart so deep
That nothing can I do, but wayle and weep
My lord is gone, yt here in grave was laid
After his great passion, and death cruel
who has him thus again betrayde?
Or what man here about can me tell
where he is become, the prince of Israel
Jesus of Nazareth, my gostly socour
My parfyte love, and hope of all honor
what creature has him hence carried?
Or how might this so suddenly befall?
I would I had here with him tarried
And so should I have had my purpose all
I bought oyntmentes full precious and royal
wherwyth I hoped his corpse to anointed
But he thus gone, my mind is dyspoynted
while I therefore aduertyse and behold
This pytous chance, here in my presence
Full little maruayle though my heart be cold
Consydrynge lo, my lords absence
Alas that I so full of negligence
Should be found, because I come so late
All men may faye I am unfortunate
Cause of my sorrow, me^ may understand
(Quia tulerunt dominum meum)
Another is, that I ne may fond
I wotnere, Vbi posuerunt eum
Thus I must bewail, Dolorem meum
with herty weeping, I can no better deserve
Till death approach, my heart for to kerue
My heart oppressed with sodeyne adventure
By fervent anguyshe is be wrapped so
That long this life I may not endure
Such is my pain, such is my mortal woe
Nevertheless, to what party shall I go
In hope to find mine own turtyll true
My lives joy, my sovereign Lord Jesus
Sith all my joy, that I call his presence
Is thus removed, now I am full of moan
Alas the while, I made no providence
For this myshap, wherefore I sygh and groan
Socour to find, to what place might I gone
Feign I would to some man my heart break
I note to whom I may complain or speak
Alone here I stand, full sorry and full sad
which hoped to have seen my lord and king
Small cause have I to be merry or glad
Remembrynge this bytterfull departing
In this world is no creature living
That was to me so good and gracious
His love also then gold more precious
Full sore I sygh, without comfort again
There is no cure to my salvation
His bre^nyng love, my heart so does co^straine
Alas here is a woeful permutacion
whereof I find no joy nor consolacion
Therefore my pain all only to confess
with death I fear woll end my heaviness
This woe and anguyshe is intolerable
If I bide here, life can I not sustain
If I go hence my pains be incurable
where hi^ to find, I know no place certain
And thus I not of these things twain
which I may take, and which I may refuse
My heart is wounded heron to think or muse
A while I shall stand in this mournyng
In hope if any vysyon wol appear
That of my love might tell some good tiding
which into joy, might change my weeping there
I trust in his grace and his mercy dear
But at the leest, though I therwyth me kill
I shall not spare to wayle and weep my fill
And if that I dye in such adventure
I can no more, but welcome as my chance
My bones shall rest here in this sepulture
My life, my death, is at his ordinance
It shall be told in everlasting remembrance
Thus to depart, is to me no shame
And also thereof I am nothing to blame
Hope against me has her course ytake
There is no more, but thus shall I dye
I se right well my lord has me forsake
But in my co^ceyte, cause know I none why
Though he be far hence, and nothing nigh
Yet my woeful heart after him does seek
And causes teeres to ren down by my cheke
Thynkyng alas, I have lost his presence
which in this world was al my sustenau^ce
I cry and call with herty dyligence
But there is no wight gives attendaunce
Me to certifye of mine enquyraunce
wherefore I will to al this world bewraye
How that my lord is slain and borne away
Though I mourn it is no great wonder
Sith he is al my joy in special
And now I think we be so far a sonder
That him to se I fear never I shall
It helps no more after him to call
Ne after him to inquire in any cost
Alas how is he thus gone and lost?
The jews I think full of mysery
Set in malice, by their besy cure
with force and might of gylefull treachery
Has entermyned my lords sepulture
And borne away that precious figure
Leuynge of it nothing, if they have done so
Marred I am, alas what shall I do
with their vengeance insaciable
Now have they him entreated so
That to report it is to lamentable
They beat his body from top to the too
Never man was borne that felt such woe
They wounded him alas with al greuau^ce
The blood down reyled in most habu^dau^ce
The blody rows stremed down over all
They him assailed so malycyously
with their scourges and strokes beestyall
They spared not, but smote incessauntly
To satisfye their malice they were full besy
They spit in his face, they smote here and there
He groned full sore, and swette many a tere
They crowned him with thorns sharp and kene
The veins rent, the blood ran down apace
with blood overcome were both his eyes
And bolne with strokes was his blessed face
They him entreated, as men without grace
They kneled to him, and made many a scorn
Like helhoundes they have him al to corn
Upon a mighty cross in length and bread
These turme^tours showed their cursydnesse
they nailed him without pity or bread
His precious blood brast out in largeness
They strayned him alonge, as me^ mercylesse
The very joints all to mine appearance
Ryued asonder, for their great vyolence
All this I beholding with mine eyes twain
Stood there beside, with rufull attendau^ce
And ever me thought, he being in that pain
Looked on me, with deedly councenaunce
As he had said in his special remembrance
Farewell Magdalen, depart must I needs hens
My heart is, Ta^qua^ cera liquescens
which rufull sight when I began behold
Out of my wit I almost dystraught
Tare my here, my hands wrange and sold
And of ye sight my heart dra^ke such a draught
That many a fall swounyng there I caught
I bruised my body, falling on the ground
whereof I feel many a grievous wound
The^ these wretches, full of al frowardness
Gave him to drink eysell tempred with gal
Alas, that poison full of bytternesse
My loves chere caused than to appall
And yet thereof might he not drink at all
But spoke these words, as him thought best
Father of heaven, Consummatum est
Than kneled I down, in pains outrage
Clipping ye cross within mine arms twayn
His blood distylled down on my vysage
My clothes eke the drops did distayne
To have dyed for him I would full feign
But what should it avail if I did so
Sithe he is, Suspensus in patibulo
Thus my lord full dear was all disgysed
with blood, pain, and wounds many one
His veins brast, his joints all to ryued
Partyng a sonder the flesh fro the bone
But I saw he hynge not there alone
For Cum iniquis deputatus est
Not like a man, but like a leprous be
A blind knight men called Longias
with a spear aproched unto my sovereign
Launsyng his side full pytously alas
That his precious heart he claue in twain
The purple blood eke fro the hertes vain
Down rayled right fast, in most ruful wise
with crystal water brought out of paradyse
when I beheld this woeful passion
I wot not how, by sudden adventure
My heart was peersed with very compassyo^
That in me remained no life of nature
Strokes of death I felt without measure
My dethes wound I caught, with woe oppressed
And brought to point as my heart should breast
The wound, heart, and blood of my darlyng
Shall never slide fro my remoriall
The bitter pains also of tourmentyng
within my soul be graven principal
The spear alas, that was so sharp withal
So thrilled my heart, as to my felyng
That body and soul were at departing
As soon as I might I releued up again
My brethe I could not very well restore
Felyng my self drowned in so great pain
Both body and soul me thought were al to tore
Vyolent falls grieved me right sore
I wept, I bledde, and with my self I fared
As one that for his life nothing had cared
I lokyng up to that rufull Roode
Saw first the vysage pale of that figure
But so pytous a sight spotted with blood
Saw never yet no lyueng creature
So it exceded the bounds of measure
That man's mind, with all his wits five
Is nothing able, that pain for to diseryue
Than began I there mine arms to unbrace
Up lyftyng my hands full mournyngly
I syghed and sore sobbed in that place
Both heaven and earth might have herd me cry
weeping, and said alas incessauntly
Ah my sweet heart, my gostly paramour
Alas I may not thy body socour
O blessed lord, how feirse and how cruel
These cursed wightes now has the slain
Kernyng alas thy body euerydell
wound within wou^d, full bitter is thy pain
Now would that I might to the attain
To nail my body fast unto thy tree
So that of this pain thou might go free
I can not report ne make no rehersayle
Of my demenyng, with the cyrcumstaunce
But well I wot the spear with every nail
Thirled my soul by inward resemblaunce
which never shall out of my remembrance
During my life it woll cause me to wayle
As often as I remember that battle
Ah ye jews, worse than dogs rabyate
what moved you thus cruelly him to array
He never displeased you nor caused debate
Your love and true hertes he coueyted aye
He preched, he teched, he showed ye right way
wherefore ye like tyrants wode and wayward
Now have him thus slain for his reward
Ye ought to have remembered one thing special
His favor, his grace, and his magnifycence
He was your prince borne, and lord over all
How be it ye took him in small reverence
He was full meke in suffryng your offense
Nevertheless ye devoured him with one assent
As hungry wolves does the lamb innocent
where was your pity, o people mercylesse
Armyng your self with falsheed and treason
On my lord ye have showed your woodnesse
Like no men, but beestes without reason
Your malice he suffered all for the season
Your pain wol come, think it not to slack
Man without mercy of mercy shall lack
O ye traitors and mayntayners of madness
Unto your folly I ascribe all my pain
Ye have me deprived of joy and gladness
So dealyng with my lord and sovereign
Nothing should I need thus to complain
If he had lived in peace and tranquillyte
whom ye have slain through your iniquite
Farwell your nobleness yt sometime did rain
Farewell your worship, glory and fame
Here after to live in hate and disdain
Maruayle ye not, for your trespass and blame
Unto shame is turned all your good name
Upon you now woll wonder every nation
As people of most. vile reputacion
These wicked wretches, these hou^des of hell
As I have told plain here in this sentence
were not content my dear love thus to quell
But yet they must embesyle his presence
As I perceive by covert vyolence
They have him conveyed to my displesure
For here is lafte but naked sepulture
Wherefore of truth and rightful judgment
That their malice again may be acquyted
After my verdyte and auysement
Of false murder they shall be endyted
Of theft also, which shall not be respyted
And in all haste they shall be hanged and draw
I woll my self plede this cause in the law
Alas if I with true attendaunce
Had still abydden with my lords corse
And kept it still with true perceueraunce
Than had not befall this woeful deuorse
But as for my pain welcome and no force
This shall be my song where so ever I go
Departing is ground of all my woe
I se right well now in my pains smerte
There is no wound of so grievous dolor
As is the wound of my careful heart
Sithe I have lost thus my paramour
All swetnesse is turned in to sour
Myrthe to my heart nothing may convey
But he that bears thereof both lock and key
The joy excellent of blyssed paradyse
May me alas in no wise recomforte
Song of angel nothing may me suffyse
As in mine heart now to make disporte
All I refuse, but that I might resort
Unto my love, the well of goodlyheed
For whose longyng I trow I shall be deed
Of paynfull labor and tourment corporal
I make thereof none exceptioun
Pains of hell I woll pass over all
My love to find in mine affectioun
So great to him is my dilectatioun
A thousand times martred would I be
His blyssed body ones if I might se
About this world so large in all compace
I shall not spare to run my life during
My fete also shall not rest in one place
Till of my love I may here some tidyng
For whose absence my hands now I wring
To think on him, cease shall never my mind
O gentle Jesus where shall I the find
Jerusalem wol I sertche place fro place
Syon, the vale of Iosophath also
And if I find him not in all this space
By mount Olyuet to Bethany woll I go
These ways woll I wander and many mo
Nazareth, Bethleem, Mountana Jude
No traueyle shall me pain him for to se
His blyssed face if I might se and find
Sertche I would every cost and country
The fardest part of Egypt or hot Inde
Should be to me but a little journey
How is he thus gone or taken away
If I knew the full truth and certente
Yet from this care released might I be
In to wilderness I think best to go
Since I can no more tidings of him here
There may I my life led to and fro
There may I dwell, and to no man appear
To town ne vyllage woll I come nere
Alone in woods, in rocks, and in caves deep
I may at mine own will both wayle and weep
Mine eyes twain withouten varyaunce
Shall never cease, I promise faithfully
There to weep with great abundaunce
Bitter tears rennyng incessauntly
The which tears meddled full pitously
with the very blood ever shall run also
Expressyng in mine heart the grievous woe
worldly fode and sustenaunce I desire none
Such lyueng as I find, such woll I take
Rotes that grown on the craggy stone
Shall me suffyse with water of the lake
Than thus may I say for my lords sake
(Fuerunt mihi lachrime me)
(In deserto panes die ac nocte)
My body to clothe it makes no force
A mournyng mantell shall be suffycient
The grievous wounds of his pytous corse
Shall Be to me a full royal garnement
He departed thus, I am best content
His cross with nails and scourges withal
Shall Be my thought and pain special
Thus woll I live, as I have here told
If I may any long time endure
But I fear death is over me so bold
That of my purpose I can not be sure
My pains increase without measure
For of long life who can lay any reason
All thing is mortal, and has but a season
I syghe full sore, and it is far yfet
Mine heart I feel now bledeth inwardly
The blody tears I may in no wise let
Sithe of my pain I find no remedy
I thank god of all if I now dye
His will performed I hold me content
My soul let him take that has it me lent
For longer to endure it is intolerable
My woeful heart is enflamed so huge
That no sorrow to mine is comparable
Sithe of my mind I find no refuge
Yet I him require as ryghtfull judge
To deuoyde fro me the inward sorrow
Lest I live not to the next morrow
within mine heart is impressed full sore
His royal form, his shappe, his semelynesse
His port, his chere, his goodness evermore
His noble person with all gentylnesse
He is the well of all parfytnesse
The very redemer of all mankind
Him love I best, with heart, soul and mind
In his absence my pains full bitter be
Rightwell I may it feel now inwardly
No wonder is though they hurt or slay me
They cause me to cry so rewefully
Mine heart oppressed is so wonderfully
Only for him, which is so bright of blee
Alas I trow I shall him never se
My joy is traslate full far in exile
My myrthe is changed in to pains cold
My life I think endures but a while
Anguyshe and pain is that I behold
wherefore my hands thus I wrynge and fold
In to this grave I look, I call, I pray
Death remains, and life is borne away
Now must I walk and wander here and there
God wot to what parts I shall me dress
with quakyng heart, weeping many a tere
To seek out my love and all my swetnesse
I would he wist what mortal heaviness
About mine heart renews more and more
Than would he not keep pity long in store
without him I may not long endure
His love so sore works within my breast
And ever I weep before this sepulture
Sighyng full sore, as mine heart should breast
During my life I shall obtain no rest
But mourn and weep, where that ever I go
Making complaynt of all my mortal woe
Fast I cry, but there is no audyence
My coming hider was him for to please
My soul oppressed is here with his absence
Alas he list not to set mine heart in ease
wherefore to pain my self withal disease
I shall not spare till he take me to grace
Or else shall I sterue here in this place
Ones if I might with him speak
It were all my joy, with parfyte plesaunce
So that I might to him mine heart break
I should anon deuoyde all my greuaunce
For he is the bliss of very recreaunce
But now alas, I can nothing do so
For instead of joy naught have I but woe
His noble corse within mine herfes rote
Deep is graued, which shall never slake
Now is he gone, to what place I ne wot
I mourn, I weep, and all is for his sake
Sithe he is paste, here a vow I make
with hertely promise, and thereto I me bind
Never to cease till I may him find
Unto his mother I think for to go
Of her happily some comfort may I take
But one thing yet me fears and no mo
If I any mention of him make
Of my words she would trymble and quake
And who could her blame, she having but one
The son borne away, the mother woll moan
Sorrows many has she suffered trewly
Sith that she first conceived him and bare
And seuyn things there be most specially
That drowneth her heart in sorrow and care
Yet lo, in no wise may they compare
with this one now, the which if she knew
She would her pains euerichone renew
Great was her sorrow by men's saying
When in the temple Symeon Iustus
Showing to her, these words prophesieng
(Cuam anumam pertransidit glaoius)
Also when Herod that tyrant ^urious
Her child pursued in every place
For his life went neither mercy ne grace
She mourned when she knew him gone
Full long she sought or she him found ayene
when he went to death his cross him upon
It was to her sight a rewefull pain
wha^ he hong thereon, between thieves twayn
And the spear unto his heart thrust right
She swouned, and to the ground there pight
When deed and blody in her lap lay
His blessed body, both hands and fete all tore
She cried out and said, now welaway
Thus arayde was never man before
when haste was made his body to be bore
Unto his sepulture here to remain
Uneaths for woe she could her sustain
These sorrows seuyn, like swerds eueryone
His mothers heart wounded fro side to side
But if she knew her son thus gone
Out of this world she should with death ride
For care she could no longer here abide
Having no more joy nor consolatioun
Than I here standing in this statioun
Wherefore her to se I dare not presume
Fro her presence I woll my self refrain
Yet had I lever to dye and consume
Tha^ his mother should have any more pain
Nevertheless her son would I se full feign
His presence was very joy and swetnesse
His absence is but sorrow and heaviness
There is no more, sith I may him not mete
whom I desire above all other thing
Needs I must take the sour with the sweet
For of his noble corse I here no tydyng
Full often I cry, and my hands wring
Mine heart alas, relenteth all in pain
which wol brast both senewe and vain
Alas how unhappy was this woeful hour
wherein is thus myspended my service
For mine entente and eke my true labor
To none effect may come in any wise
Alas I think if he do me dyspise
And list not to take my simple obseruaunce
There is no more, but death is my fynaunce
I have him called, Sed non respondit mihi
wherefore my mirth is turned to mourning
O dear lord, Quid mali feci tibi
That me to comfort I find non erthly thing
Alas, have compassyon of my cryeng
If fro me, Faciem tuam abscondis
There is no more, but Comsumere me vis
within mine heart is grounded thy figure
That all this worlds horrible tourment
May not it aswage, it is so without measure
It is so brennyng, it is so fervent
Remember lord I have been dilygent
Ever the to please only and no mo
Mine heart is with the where soever I go
Therefore my dear darling, Trahe me post te
And let me not stand thus desolate
(Quia non est, qui consoletur me)
Mine heart for the is disconsolate
My pains also nothing me moderate
Now if it list the to speak with me a live
Come in have, for my heart a sonder will ryue
To the I profer lo my poor service
The for to please after mine own intent
I offer here, as in devout sacrifyce
My box replete with precious ointment
Mine eyes twain, weeping suffycient
Mine heart with anguyshe fulfilled is alas
My soul eke ready for love about to pas
Naught else have I the to please or pay
For if mine heart were gold or precious stone
It should be thine without any delay
with hertely chere you should have it anon
why suffrest thou me than to stand alone
Thou have I trow my weeping in disdain
Or else thou know not what is my pain
If thou withdraw thy noble dalyaunce
For ought that ever I displeased the
Thou know ryghtwel it is but ignorance
And of no knowledge for certaynte
If I have offended lord forgive it me
Glad I am for to make full repentance
Of all thing that has been to thy greuaunce
Mine heart alas, swells within my breast
So sore oppressed with anguishe and with pain
That all to pieces forsothe it woll breast
But if I se thy blessed corse again
For life ne death I can not me refrain
If thou make delay thou may be sure
Mine heart wol leap in to this sepulture
Alas my lord, why farest thou thus with me
My tribulation yet have in mind
where is thy mercy? where is thy pity?
which ever I trusted in the to find
Sometime thou were to me both good and kind
Let it please the my prayer to accept
which with tears I have here bewept
On me thou ought to have very routh
Sith for the is all this mournyng
For sithe I to the aplyghted first my troth
I never varyed with discordyng
That know thou best mine own darling
why constraynest thou me thus to wayle?
My woe forsooth can the nothing avail
I have endured without variaunce
Right as thou know, thy lover just and true
with heart and thought aye, at thine ordinance
Like to the sapphire always in one hew
I never changed the for no new
why withdrawest thou my presence
Since all my thought is for thine absence
with heart entier, sweet lord I cry to the
Enclyne thine ears to my petycioun
And come, Velociter exaudi me
Remember mine hertes dispositioun
It may not endure in this conditioun
Therefore out of these pains, Libera me
And where thou art, Pone me iuxta te
Let me behold, O Jesus thy blyssed face
Thy fair glorious angelyke visage
Bow thine ears to my complaynt, alas
For to convey me out of this rage
Alas my lord, take fro me this do^mage
And to my desire for mercy condiscende
For non but thou, may my greuau^ce amend
Now yet good lord, I the beseech and pray
As thou raised my brother Lazarous
From death to life the fourth day
Come again in body and soul precious
As great a thing may thou show unto us
Of thy self, by power of thy goodheed
As thou did of him, lyenge in grave deed
Mine heart is wounded with thy charity
It brenneth, it flameth incessauntly
Come my dear lord, Ad adiuuandum me
Now be not long my pain to mulpiply
Lest in the mean time I depart and dye
In thy grace I put both hope and confidence
To do as it pleases thy hye magnifycence
Floodes of death, and tribulatyon
In to my soul I feel entered full deep
Alas that here is no consolatioun
Ever I wayle, ever I mourn and weep
And sorrow has wounded mine heart full deep
O dear love, no marueyle though I dye
(Sagitte tue infixe sunt mihi)
Wandryng in this place, as in wilderness
No comfort have I, ne yet assurance
Desolate of joy, replete with faintness
No answer receyuyng of mine enquirau^ce
Mine heart also graued with displesaunce
wherefore I may say, O deus deus
(Non est dolor sicut dolor meus)
Mine heart expresses, Quod dilexi multum
I may not endure though I would feign
For now, Solum superest sepulchrum
I know it right well by my huge pain
Thus for love I may not life sustain
But o god, I muse what ayleth the
(Quod sic repent precipitas me)
Alas, I se it will none otherwise be
Now must I take my leave for evermore
This bitter pain has almost disco^fyte me
My loves corse I can in no wise restore
Alas to this woe that ever I was bore
Here at his tomb now must I dye and starve
Death is about my heart for to carue
My testament I would begin to make
To god the father, my soul I commend
To Jesus my love, that dyed for my sake
My heart and all, both I give and send
In whose love my life makes an end
My body also to this monument
I here bequeth, both box and ointment
Of all my wylles, lo now I make the last
Right in this place within this sepulture
I wol be buried when I am deed and past
And upon my grave I woll have this scripture
Here within rests a goostly creature
Christ's true lover, Mary Magdalayne
whose heart for love, brake in pieces twain
Ye virtuous women, tender of nature
Full of pity and of compassyoun
Resort I pray you, unto my sepulture
To sing my di^ige with great deuotioun
Show your charity in this condicioun
Sing with pity, and let your hertes weep
Remembering I am deed and laid to sleep
Than when ye begin to part me fro
And ended have your mournyng obseruau^ce
Remember where so ever that ye go
Always to sertche and make due enqueraunce
After my love, mine hertes sustenaunce
In every town and in every vyllage
If ye may here of this noble image
And if it hap by any grace at last
That ye my treweloue find in any cost
Say that his Magdaleyne is deed and past
For his pure love has yielded up the ghost
Say that of all thing I loved him most
And that I might not this death eschew
My pains so sore did ever renew
And in token of love perpetual
when I am buried in this place present
Take out mine heart, the very rote and all
And close it within this box of ointment
To my dear love make thereof a present
Knelyng down with words lamentable
Do your message, speak fair and tretable
Say that to him my self I commend
A thousand times with heart so free
This poor token say to him I send
Pleases his goodness to take it in gree
It is his own of right, it is his see
which he asked, when he said long before
Give me thy heart, and I desire no more
A due my lord, my love so fair of face
A due my turtel dove so fresh of hue
A due my myrthe, a due al my solace
A due alas, my savior lord Jesus
A due the gentyllest that ever I knew
A due my most excellent paramour
Fayrer than rose, sweter than Lylly flour
A due my hope of all pleasure eternal
My life, my wealth, and my prosperity
Mine heart of gold, my peerle oriental
Mine adamant of parfyte charity
My chief refuge and my felycite
My comfort, and all my recreatioun
Farewell my perpetual saluatioun
Farewell mine Emperor celestyall
Most beautyful prince of al mankind
A due my lord, of heart most lyberall
Farewell my swetest, both soul and mind
So loving a spouse shall I never find
A due my sovereign, and very gentylman
Farewell dear heart, as hertely as I can
Thy words eloquent flowing in swetnesse
Shall no more alas, my mind reconforte
wherefore my life must end in bytternesse
For in this world shall I never resort
To the, which was mine heavenly disporte
I se alas it woll none other be
Now farewell the ground of all dignite
A due the fairest that ever was bore
Alas I may not se your blessed face
Now welaway that I shall se no more
Thy blessed vysage, so replete with grace
wherein is printed my parfyte solace
A due mine hertes root and al for ever
Now farewell, I must from the disceuer
My soul for anguysh is now full thursty
I faint right sore for heaviness
My lord, my spouse: Cur me dereliquisti?
Sith I for the suffer al this distress
what causes the to seem thus mercylesse
Since it the pleases of me to make an end
(In manus tuas) my spirit I commend.
Finis.
The Remedy of Love.
Seeing the manyfolde inconvenience
Falling by unbridled prosperity
which is not tempred with moral prudence
Nothing more welthy tha^ youths frelte
Moved I am, both of right and equity
To youths well, somewhat to write
whereby he may him self safecondyte
First I note, as thing most noyous
Unto youth a grievous malady
Among us called love encombrous
Veryng young people straungely
Often by force causes hem to dye
Age is eke turmented by love
Byneth the gyrdle, and not above
wherefore this work, which is right laborous
For age me need not in hand to take
To youth me owes to be obsequious
Now I begin thus to work for his sake
which may the feruence of love a slake
To the lover, as a mitigatyue
To him that is none a preseruatyue
That mighty lord which me governs
Youth I mean, measure if I pace
In every matter which him concerns
First as is behoueful, I woll ask grace
And forth wythal in this same place
Er I begin, I wol knele and say
These few words, and him of help pray
Flourynge youth, which have advantage
In strength of body in lust and beauty
Also a precellyng haste above age
In many a singular commodite
How be it one thing he has beyond the
To thy most profit and greatest avail
which shlud ye co^duit, I mean sad counsel
And yet good lord, of a presumption
I nyl deprave thy might and deite
I live but under thy protection
I am thy subject, I wear thy lyuerie
For thou art ground of my prosperity
And freshest flower of al my garlonde
My singular aid, as I well understand
But as he that owes his lord best service
And entyre faith, his honor to supporte
Right so I speak, and in none other wise
I knowledge my self one of the least sort
Of thy servants, to our elders comfort
Draw sad counsel to they if thou list
The and thy power, who may than resyst
Fie on age, under words few
And his erconyous opinyon
what spekest of him, which says most untrue
Al youth to be of ill disposition
Dampneth us al without exception
And for a colerable advantage
He says in him rests counsel sage
Well may sad counsel in him rest
But yet his deeds been far therfro
He may say with our paryshe priest
Do as I say, and not as I do
For I my self know one or two
well stryken in age, for neyghbourhedde
wol to their neighbors wives bed
He will in presence of the young man
Her clyppe and kiss, ye and down lay
To bleare his eye, thus he says than
O suffer yet old Morel to play
Now have I done that I can or may
Thus he saeth, her husbonde to queme
That he nor no man should not misdeme
In word nor deed, needs him not be coye
It is impossible that he do amysse
If the young man speak, anon he says boy
To rebuke age, besemeth the not ywys
Thus his old face aye his warant is
Al is in him, sleyght and subtylte
And far from reason I tell the
And shortly age is not above me
Age is impotent, and of no resistance
Age unwieldy may not fight nor fly
what were age without my defense
Sad counsel say gives him assistence
Reason is freshest where that I am
wherefore in thy saying thou art to blame
Sith reason to me is rather acompanyed
Than unto age, which is the opinyon
Of every wise man not to be denied
And sith sad counsel proceeds of reason
Sad counsel in me has his chief mancion
This is no nay, but what is the end
Of this thy suasion what do entende
Age to compare unto thine excellence
I nyl presume him so to dignifye
Ye be not egal, how be it experience
Him auauntageth, for she most certainly
Him teaches what thing to him is contrary
And often to fore se it, and warely eschew
which thou never assaydest yet nor knew
Experience makes a man most certain
Of any thing erthly, and of necessite
Sad counsel requires certaynte plain
So far to move thus whereto need we
But to my purpose, as thou co^maundest me
Shortly mine entente is thus, and none other
Under thy license to counsel my brother
How should give any counsel so young
Lacking experience unto thine own speech
I report me, I wot well as for thy tongue
will serve the right well, but than for to teache
I dout me lest that thy wit wol not reche
Youth and experience thou say be not convert
How should than teach^ well inexpert
Scripture witnesses that god will often shyt
Fro the hye witted man, and show it to ye child
To him I mean that of his own wit
Presumes not, but is debonayre and mylde
By counsel I entende virtue for to bylde
which of mine elders part have I borrowed
and part of experience, which I have sorowed
well than, if it be as thou let fare
Show forth thy doctrine be not aghast
I wol the supporte, look thou not spare
Maugre age, though he frete or gnast
To ask age counsel herin were but wast
Boldly begin, go forth to thy process
Fear not sith thou art of such surenesse
Grant mercy lord sith it the does like
To license me, now I wol and dare boldly
Assail my purpose, with scriptures autentike
My work wol I ground, underset, and fortify
Aspire my beginning, O thou wood fury
Allecto with thy susters, and in espicial
To the mother of ielousye Juno I call
Explicit prologus.
THis work who so shall se or read
Of any incongruite do me not impeche
Ordinatly behooves me first to proceed
In deduction thereof, in manner as the leche
His pacie^tes syckenes owes first for to sech
The which known, medicyne he should aply
And shortly as he can than shape a remedy
Right so by counsel, wyllyng the to exhort
O young man prosperous, which does abou^de
In thy flowers of lust belongs on the sort
Me first to consider what is root and ground
Of thy mischefe, which is plainly found
woman farced with fraud and disceyte
To thy confusyon most allectyue bayte
Fly the miswoman, lest she the disceyue
thus says Salomo^, which taut was fully
the falsheed of women in his days to co^ceyue
The lips of a stru^pet ben sweter tha^ honey
Her throat he says suppled with oil of flatery
How be it the end and effect of al
Byttrer is than any wormwode or gall
Fly the miswoman, loving thy life
ware the strangers blande eloquence
Strange I call her that is not thy wife
Of her beauty have me no concupiscence
Her countenance, pretending benevolence
Beware her signs and eye so amiable
Hold it for ferme, they been disceyuable
Lo an ensample what women be
In their signs and countenance shortly
I wol show the how lovers three
Loved one woman right entierly
Each of them knew others malady
wherefore was al their daily labor
who could appproche next in her favor
At sondrye seasons, as fortune requires
Severally they came to se her welfare
But ones it hapened, love them so fyreth
To se their lady they al would not spare
Of others coming none of them were ware
Till al they met, where as they in place
Of her lady saw the desired face
To supper set, full smally they ete
Full sobre and demure in countenance
For there tarried none of hem for any mete
But on his lady to give attendaunce
And in secret wise some signifyaunce
Of love to have, which parceyuyng she
Fetely executed thus her properte
In due season, as she always espied
Every thing to execute conveniently
Her own lover first friendly she eyed
The second she offered the cup curtesly
The third she gave token secretly
Underneath the board she trade on his foot
Through his entrayles tikled the heart rote
By your leave, might I here ask a question
Of you my maystres that few lovers trace
To you lykely belongs the solucion
which of these three stood now in grace
Clearly to answer ye would ask long space
The matter is doutful and opinable
To acertayne you I woll my self enable
Of the foresaid three my self was one
No man can answer it better than I
Hertely of us beloved was there none
But wattes pack we bare al by and by
which at the last I my self began aspye
And time as me thout, tha^ I left the dau^ce
O thoughtful heart, great is thy greuaunce
Hence fro me hence, that me for to endyte
Halpe aye here before, O ye muses nine
whylo^ ye were wont to be mine aid and light
My pen to direct, my brain to illumyne
No longer alas may I sewe your doctrine
The fresh lusty meters, yt I wont to make
Have been here before, I utterly forsake
Come hither thou Hermes, and ye furies al
which fer ben under us, nigh the nether pole
where Pluto reigns, O king infernal
Send out thine arpies, send anguysh and dole
Misery and woe, leave ye me not sole
Of right be present must pain and eke turme^t
The pale death besemeth not to be absent
To me now I call al this loathsome sort
my pains tencrese, my sorrows to augme^t
For worthy I am to be bare of al comfort
Thus sith I have consumed and misspent
Not only my days, but my fiuefolde talent
yt my lord committed me, I can not recompense
I may not to derely abye my negligence.
By the path of penance yet wol I reuert
To the well of grace, mercy there to fetch
Dispisest not god the meke contrite heart
Of the cock crow, alas yt I would not retch
And yet it is not late in the second wetche
Mercy shall I purchase by incessaunt crieng
The mercyes of our lord ever shall I sing
But well may thou wayle wicked woman
that thou should disceyue thus any innocent
And in recompense of my sin, so as I can
To al me^ wol I make and leave this monument
in showing part of thy falsheed is mine intent
For all were to much, I can not well I wot
The cause shows plainly he yt thus wrote
If all the earth were parchement scribable
Spedy for the hand, and al manner wode
were hewed and proporcioned to pens able
Al water ynke, in damme or in flode
Every man being a perfyte scribe and good
The cursednesse yet and disceyte of women
Could not be showed by the mean of pen
I fly at odyous resemblaunces
The dyuels bronde call women I might
whereby man is encensed to mischaunce
Or a stynkyng rose that fair is in sight
Or deedly empoyson, like the sugar white
which by his swetnesse causes man to taste
and suddenly sleeth and bri^geth him to his last
It is not my manner to use such langage
But this my doctrine, as I may laufully
I wol holy ground with authority sage
willing both wysdom and virtue edify
wine and women in to apostasy
Cause wise men to fall, what is that to say
Of wisdom cause them to forget the way
wherefore the wise man does the advise
In whose words can be found no leasyng
with the stranger to sytte in no wise
which is not thy wife, fall not in clyppyng
with her, but beware eke of her kyssyng
keep with her in wine no altercacion
Lest that thine heart fall by enclination
May a man thynkest hyde and safe lay
Fire in his bosom, without enpayrement
and bre^nynge of his clothes, or wheder he may
walk on hot coals, his fete not brent
As who says nay, and whereby is meant
This foresaid proverb and similitude
But that thou rydde the plainly to denude
From the flatterers forgetting her gyde
The gyde of her youth, I mean sha^fastnes
which should cause her maydenheed to abide
Her gods behest eke she full rechelesse
Not retchyng, commits it to forgetfulness
Neither god ne shame in her having place
Needs must such a woman lack grace
And all that neygh her in way of syn
To turn of grace shall lack the influence
The paths of life no more to come in
wherefore first friend the with sapience
Remembering god, and after with prudence
To thine own well that they the keep
Unto thine heart, lest her words crepe
In his book where I take my most ground
And in his proverbs sage Solomon
Tells a tale, which is plainly found
In the fyfth chapter, wheder in deed don
Or mekely feyned to our instruction
Let clerks determyne, but thus I am sure
Much like thing I have had in ure
At my wyndowe says he I looked out
Fair young people, where I saw many
Among hem all, as I looked about
To a young man fortuned I lent mine eye
Estraunged from his mind it was lykely
By ye street at a corner, nygh his own house
He went about with eye right curyous
wha^ that the day his light began wythdrawe
And the night approached in the twynlyght
How a woman came and met him I saw
Talkyng with him under shade of the night
Now blyssed be god (quod she) of his might
which has fulfilled mine hertes desire
Aslaked my pains, which were hot as fire
And yet mine auctour, as it is skyl
To follow, I must tell her arayment
She was full nyce, souls like to spyl
As nyce in countenance yet as in garment
For ianglyng she was of rest impacient
wandryng still in no place she stood
But restless now and now out she yode
Now in the house, now in the street
Now at a corner she stondeth in awayte
Incessauntly besy her pray for to get
To bring to the lure whom she does layte
Now where I left, unto my matter strayte
I wol turn again, how she him met
Swetely kyssed, and friendly him grette
With words of curtesy many and diverse
Right as in part I have before told
Now as I can I purpose to rehearse
How she flateryng said with vysage bold
I have made vows and offringes manifold
For thy sake, O mine heart, O my love dear
This day I thank god al performed were
Therefore I came out, and made thus astert
Very desirous your welfare to se
Now I have seen you, pleased is mine heart
In faith shall none have my love but ye
As true as I am to you be to me
I pray you hertely dear heart come home
No man should be to me so welcome
And in good faith, the soth for to say
Your coming to me ran in my thought
Hark in your care, my bed fresh and gay
I have behanged with tapettes new bought
From Egypt, and from far countrees brought
Steyned with many a lusty fresh hue
Excedyng gold or Jasper in value
My chamber is strowed with myrre and ensence
with sote savoring aloes, and with synamome
Breathyng an aromatyke redolence
Surmountyng olybane, in any man's dome
Ye shall between my breasts rest if ye come
Let us have our desired halsyng
For we may safe be till in the morning
Mine husbonde is not at home, he is went
Forth in his journey, a far way hence
A bag with money he has with him hent
As him thought nedeful for his expense
Unto my word give faith and credence
Now is the moon young, and of sight dulle
Er he come home it woll be at the fulle
Thus craftily has she him besette
with her lyme rods, panter, and snare
The sely soul caught in her net
Of her sugeed mouth, alas nothing ware
Thus is he left graceless and bare
Of help, comfort, and goostly socour
And furthermore as says mine auctour
As a be led to his death does pant
This young man follows her in ye stou^de
And as a wanton lamb full ignorant
How he is pulled and drawn to be bound
Unto the time he has his dethes wound
And like a bird that hastes to the grynne
Not knowing the peril of his life therein
Now gentle son says Solomon take heed
My words in thy breast keep and make fast
Let her not thy mind in her ways mislede
Be not disceyued, lose not thy taste
Many has she wounded, many down cast
Many strong by her has lost their breath
Her ways, ways of hell leadyng to death
And in this little naration precident
The woman's manyfolde gylt I attend
The young man alas how she has shent
Disceyued her husband, her own next friend
In these both her God she does offend
To break her spousayle, to her is of no weit
furdermore to show woman's craft and slight
A woman at her door sat on a stal
To se folks pass by streets of the cite
with eye and countenance eke she began call
If there be any pretty one, come nere to me
Come hither ye pigs nigh, ye lytlel abe
At last she said to a young man hertel^sse
Of her disceyte unware and defencelesse
Much swetter she says, and more acceptable
Is drink when it is stolen privily
Than wha^ it is taken in form auowable
Breed hyd and gotten ieoperdously
Must needs be sweet, and semblably
Venyson stolen is aye the swetter
The ferther the narower fette the better
And who^ this woman says Solomon festes
The young man woteth not who^ she does feed
Of the derke depenesse of hell been her gestes
Beware young man therefore I the read
And how be it chefely for thy good speed
This work to co^pile, I have take in charge
I must of pity my charity enlarge.
with the sely man which is thus begyled
Her husband I mean, I wol weep and wayle
His payneful infortune, whereby reuyled
Causeless he is, never to conuayle
Every man young and old will him assail
with words of occasyon, with ye loath name
And alas good soul, he nothing to blame
But she that could so ill do and would
Hers be the blame for her demeryte
And leave that opprobrous name cokolde
To apropre to him as in dispyte
Ransake yet we would if we might
Of this word the true ortography
The very descent and ethymology
The well and ground of the first enuention
To know the ortography we must deryue
which is coke and cold, in composicion
By reason, as nyghe as I can contryue
Than how it is written we know belyue
But yet lo, by what reason and ground
was it of these two words compounde
As of one cause to give very judgment
Themylogy let us first behold
Each letter an hole word does represent
As C, put for cold, and O, for old
K, is for knave, thus diverse men hold
The first part of this name we have found
Let us ethymologyse the secounde
As the first fynder mente I am sure
C, for calot, for of, we have O
L, for leude, D, for demeanure
The craft of the inuentour ye may se lo
How one name signifies persons two
A cold old knave, cokolde him self wening
And eke a calot of leude demeanyng
The second cause of thymposycion
Of this forsayde name was ielousye
To be jealous is greatest occasyon
To be cokolde, that men can aspye
And though the passion be very fyrye
And of coutynuel feruence and hete
The pacient aye suffers cold on his fete
And who that is ielous, and aye in a dread
Is full of melancoly and gally ire
His wives nose if she miss trede
He would cut of, ye and conspyre
His death who that wol her desire
which she perceyuyng brasteth his gal
And anon his great wodenesse does fall
As soon as she has knytte him that knot
Now is he tame that was so ramagious
Mekely sytteth he down and takes his lot
Laid been now his lokes so furyous
And he but late as a cock bataylous
Hot in his quarrel, to avenge him bold
Now is he called both coke and cold
This saying, to al curtesy dissonant
which seems that it of malice grew
In this rude treatise I wol not plant
As parcel thereof, but only to show
The opinion of the talcatyfe shrewe
which in ill saying is ever merry
No man as I thereof so weary
But I as parcel of this my book
woll graffe in some sad counsel whereby
The wedded man, if he daigne to look
In it, the better shall mow him gye
And proved for his said infortunye
which as I have said, with him compain
I wol, as partener of his great pain
As most expedient to his well
I would al ielousy were abiecte
If he be ielous, that he it concele
And in his labor be circumspecte
To know her ways, if they seem suspecte
And not for to break, for one word broken
She wol not mysse but she wol be wroken
Forbid her not, that thou noldest have done
For look what thing she is forbood
To that of al things she is most prone
Namely if it be ill and no good
Till it be executed she is nygh wood
Such is woman, and such is her feate
Her craft by craft, labor to defeat
If thou herafter, now a syngle man
Should be ielous if thou had a wife
wedde not but if thou can trust woman
For else should led a careful life
That thou most lothest should be full ryfe
Yet I nyl gaynsay matrimony
But Melius est nubert quam vri.
That is to say, better is in wedlock
A wife to take, as the church does kenne
Than to be under the fleshes yoke
In fleshly lust always for to brenne
But as I said, for all ielous men
So they live chaste, I hold it less ill
That they wedde not, than them self spyll
The syngle man which is yet to wedde
And not the wedded man, thus I read
To warn him now he is to far spedde
It is to late him for to forbede
But let him take as for his own need
Such counsel as is him before told
These words following eke she behold
Thy water to keep the wise man does teache
That thou in no wise let it have issue
At a narowe ryfte, way it wol seche
And semblably the woman untrue
To give her frewalke in all wise eschew
If she at large, not at thine hand walk
she wol the shame, thou shall it not balke
wedded or syngle, thus says the wise man
Her that both day and night evermore
Lyth in thy bosom, wife or yet lemman
Love not to hot, lest thou repent sore
Lest she the bring into some ill lore
Thy wife not to love yet I nyll supporte
But that thou dote not, thus I the exhort.
Lo, if thou love her, love eke thine honesty
Be she not idle, for what woll betyde
If she sit idle, of very necessity
Her mind woll search far and eke wide
Namely if she be not accompanyde
How acco^panyed? not with young men
But with maidens I mean, or women
Maiden servants be right convenient
In house to help to do her service
In whom she may use her commandment
In the season at her own deuyse
To teach hem good, give her thine aduyce
To make them huswyues, thus business
May yet refrain her from idleness.
But bid her not that thou wolt have do
Of thine intent that might be lettyng
But craftily encourage her thereto
By other means, as by co^mendyng
And not to much, but duly mengyng
Both praise and blame, and in thy reason
First praise wisely the place and season
Of faithful will and heart full tender
One thing I call into remembrance
Again, which though my wit be slendre
After my power and suffysaunce
I purpose to make a purueyaunce
Sith women of nature ben chaungeable
Frail, not ware, also disceyuable.
Be it that thy wife be excellently good
That none be better of disposicion
In process of time she might turn her mode
By some myslyuers instigation
Diverse men to thylke occupacion
Applyen daily, mind and eke heart
From her goodness women to peruerte.
If thou espy any suspect person
Draw to thy wife, beware in all wise
To him nor her of thy suspection
Break not one word, thou thy heart agryse
Kyndle no fire, no smoke woll arise
Though he be of a corrupt intent
She paraduenture is not of assent.
Explicit
The complaynt of Mars and Venus.
GLaddeth ye lovers in the morrow graye
Lo venus risse^ among you rows read
And flowers fresh honor ye this day
For when ye sun up rist tha^ will they spread
But ye lovers that ly in any dread
Flies, lest wicked tongues you espy
Lo yonde the sun, the candle of ielousye
with teres blewe, and with a wounded heart
Takes your leave, and with saint John toborow
Apeseth somewhat of your sorrows smert
Time comes eft, yt cessen shall your sorrow
The glad night is worth an heavy morrow
Saint Valentyne a foul thus herd I sing
Upon thy day or sun began up spring.
Yet sange this foul, I read you all awake
And ye that have not chosen in humble wise
without repentyng cheseth your make
Ye at the leest, renoueleth your service
And ye that have full chosen as I deuyse
Confermeth it perpetually to dure
And pacyently takes your adventure.
And for the worship of this hye feast
Yet wol I in my bryddes wise sing
The sentence of the complaynt at the leest
That woeful Mars made at the departing
Fro fresh Venus in a morownyng
when Phoebus with his fyry torches read
Ransaked has every lover in his dread.
whylom the three heuens lord above
As well by heuenlyche revolution
As by desert has won Venus his love
And she has take him in subjection
And as a maystresse taught him his lesson
Co^maundynge him never in her service
He were so bold no lover to dispyse
For she forbade him ielousye at all
And cruelty and boste and tyranny
She made him at her lust so humble and tall
That wha^ she dayned to cast on him her eye
He took in patience to live or dye
And thus she brydleth him in her manner
with nothing, but with scornyng of her chere.
who raygneth now in bliss but Venus
yt has this worthy knight in governance
who sings now but Mars yt serves thus
The fair Venus, causer of pleasaunce
He bynt him to perpetual obeysaunce
And she bynt her to love him for ever
But so be that his trespass it disceuer
Thus be they knyt, and reignen as in heaven
By lokyng most, as it fell on a tide
That by her both assent was set a steven
That Mars shall enter as fast as he may glyde
Into her next paleys to abide
walkyng his course till she had him atake
And he prayed her to haste her for his sake.
Than said he thus, my hertes lady sweet
Ye know well my myschefe in that place
For sykerly till that I with you mete
My life stant there in adventure and grace
But when I se the beautye of your face
There is no dread of death may do me smerte
For all your lust is ease to mine heart
She has so great co^passyon of her knight
That dwells in solytude till she come
For it stood so that thylke time no wight
Counsayled him, ne said to him welcome
That nygh her wit for sorrow was ouerco^
wherefore she sped as fast in her way
Almost in one day as he did in twaye
The great joy that was betwyxt hem woe
when they be met, there may no tongue ^ell
There is no more, but unto bed they go
And thus in joy and bliss I let hem dwell
This worthy Mars yt is of knyghthod well
The flour of fairness happeth in his arms
And venus kysseth Mars ye god of arms
Soiorned has this Mars, of which I read
In chamber amydde the palace privily
A certain time, till him fell a dread
Through Phoebus that was comen hastily
within the palace yates sturdely
with torch in hand, of which ye stremes brit
On venus chamber knockeden full light
The chamber there as lay this fresshe queen
Depaynted was with white boles great
And by ye light she knew that shon so shene
That Phoebus came to bren hem with his hete
This selly Venus me dreynt in tears wete
Embraces Mars, and said alas I dye
The torch is com yt all this world will wrye
Up stert Mars, him list not to sleep
when he his lady herd so complain
But for his nature was not for to weep
Instead of tears from his eyes twain
The fyry sparcles sprongen out for pain
And hent his hauberke yt lay him beside
Fly would he nout, ne might him self hyde.
He throws on his helm of huge weight
And gyrt him with his sword, and in his hond
His mighty spear as he was wo^t to fight
He shakes so, that it almost to wonde
Full heavy was he to walken over loud
He may not hold with Venus company
But bad her flyen lest Phoebus her espy
O woeful Mars alas, what may you said
That in the palace of thy disturbaunce
Art left behind in peril to be slain
And yet thereto is double thy penance
For she yt has thine heart in governance
Is passed half the stremes of thine eyes
That you nere swyft, well may thou wep^ and cr^en
Now flies Venus into Ciclinius tour
with void corse, for fear of Phoebus light
Alas, and there has she no socour
For she ne found ne sey no manner wight
And eke as there she had but little might
wherefore her seluen for to hyde and save
within the gate she fled into a cave.
Dark was this cave, and smoki^g as ye hell
Not but two paas within the yate it stood
A naturel day in dark I let her dwell
Now wol I speak of mars furious and wode
For sorrow he would have seen his heart blod
Sith yt he might have done her no company
He ne rought not a myte for to dye
So feeble he were for hete and for his woe
That nigh he swelt, he might uneath endure
He passes but a ster in days two
But nevertheless, for all his heavy armure
He follows her that is his lives cure
For whose departing he took greater ire
Than for all his brennyng in the fire
After he walks softely apace
Complaynyng, that it pytie was to here
He said, O lady bright Venus alas
That ever so wide a co^pas is my sphere
Alas, when shall I mete you heart dear
This twelve days of Apryll I endure
Through ielous Phoebus this mysaue^ture
Now god help sely Venus alone
But as god would it happed for to be
That whil ye weping venus made her moan
C^elimus rydyng in his chyuauche
Fro Venus Valanus might his paleys se
And venus he salueth, and makes chere
And her receives as his friend full dear.
Mars dwells forth in his adversity
Complaynyng ever in her departing
And what his co^playnt was reme^breth me
And therefore in this lusty morownyng
As I best can, I wol it said and sing
And after that I woll my leave take
And god give every wight joy of his make
The complaynt of Mars.
THe order of complaynt requires skylfully
That if a wight shall plain pytouslye
There mote be cause wherefore yt me^ plain
Or men may deem he playneth folyly
And causeles alas that am not I
wherefore ye ground and cause of al my pain
So as my troubled wit may it attain
I wol rehearse, not for to have redress
But to declare my ground of heaviness
The first time alas, that I was wrought
And for certain effects hyder brought
By him that lordeth each intelligence
I yaue my true service and my thought
For euermo how dear I have it bought
To her that is of so great excellence
That what wight yt shows first her offense
when she is wroth, and takes of him no cure
He may not long in joy of love endure
This is no feigned matter that I tell
My lady is the very sours and well
Of beauty, lust, fredome and gentyllesse
Of rich array how dear men it sell
Of all disport in which men freely dwell
Of love and play, and of benign hu^blesse
Of sown of instruments, and of al swetnesse
And thereto so well fortuned and thewed
yt through ye world her goodness is showed
what wonder is than though that I beset
My service on such one that may me k^et
To well or woe, since it lyth in her might
Therefore mine heart for ever I unto her het
Ne truly for my death, shall I not let
To ben her truest servant and her knight
I flatter not, that may wete every wight
For this day in her service shall I dye
But grace be, I se her never with eye
To whom shall I plain of my distress
who may me help, who may my heart redres
Shall I complain unto my lady free
Nay certes, for she has such heaviness
For fear and eke for woe, that as I guess
In little time it would her bane be
But were she safe, it were no force of me
Alas that ever lovers mote endure
For love so many perylous adventure
For though so be, that lovers be as true
As any metal that is forged new
In many a case hem tydeth often sorrow
Sometime her ladies wol not on hem rue
Sometime if that ielousye it knew
They might lightly lay her heed to borow
Sometime enuyous folk with tanges horow
Deprauen hem alas, whom may they plese
But he be false, no lover has his ease.
But what avails such a long sermoun
Of auentures of love up and down
I woll return, and speken of my pain
The point is this of my destructioun
My right lady, my saluacioun
Is in a fray, and not to whom to plain
O heart sweet, O lady sovereign
For your disese I ought well swoun and swelt
Though I none other harm ne dread felt
To what fine made the god that sit so hye
Beneth him love other company
And strayneth folk to love maugre her heed
And than her joy, for ought I can espy
Ne lasts not the twynklyng of an eye
And some have never joy till they be deed
what means this, what is this mystihed
whereto constrayneth he his folk so fast
Thing to desire, but it should last
And though he made a lover love a thing
And makes it seem steadfast and during
Yet puts he in it such misauenture
That rest nys there in his yeuyng
And that is wondre that so just a king
Does such hardness to his creature
Thus whether love break or else dure
Algates he that has with love to done
Has ofter woe than changed is the moon
It seems he has to lovers enmity
And like a fyssher as men may all day se
Bayteth his angle hoke with some plesau^ce
Till many a fysh is wode to that he be
C^ased therewith, and than at erst has he
Al his desire, and therewith al mischaunce
And though ylyne break he has penance
For with that hoke he wounded is so sore
That he his wages has for evermore
The broche of Thebes was of such kind
So full of rubies and of stones of Inde
That every wight that set on it an eye
He wend anon worth out of his mind
So sore the beauty would his heart bind
Till he it had, him thought he must dye
And when that it was his than should he dry
Such woe for dred ay, while yt he it had
That welnygh for the fear he should mad
And when it was fro his possessyon
Than had he double woe and passion
That he so fair a jewel has forgo
But yet this broche as in conclusyon
was not the cause of his confusyon
But he that wrought it enfortuned it so
That every wight yt had it should have woe
And therefore in the worcher was the vice
And in the coueyture that was so nyce
So fares it by lovers, and by me
For though my lady have so great beauty
That I was made to, I had get her grace
She was not cause of mine aduersitye
But he that wrought her, as mote I the
That put such a beautye in her face
That made me coueyten and purchase
Mine own death him wit I that I dye
And mine vnwyt yt ever I clambe so hye.
But to you hardy knights of renown
Sith that ye be of my deuysyoun
Al be, I not worthy to so great a name
Yet said these clerks I am your patron
Therefore ye ought have some compassioun
Of my disease, and take it not a game
The proudest of you may be made full tame
wherefore I pray you of your gentylesse
That ye complain for mine heaviness
And ye my ladies that been true and stable
By way of kind ye ought to ben able
To have pytye of folk that been in pain
Now have ye cause to cloth you in sable
Sith that your empres the honorable
Is desolate, well ought ye to plain
Now should your holy tears fall and rain
Alas your honor and your empress
Nygh deed for dread, ne can her not cheuyce
Complayneth eke ye lovers al in fere
For her that with unfeigned humble chere
was ever ready to do you socour
Co^playneth her that ever has be you dear
Co^playneth beautye, fredome and, manner
Co^playneth her that ends your labor
Co^playneth thylke ensample of al honor
That never did but gentleness
Kytheth therefore in her some kyndnesse.
The complaynt of Venus.
THere nys so high comfort to my pleasaunce
when that I am in any heaviness
As for to have layser of remembrance
Upon the manhood and the worthynesse
Upon the troth and on the steadfastness
Of him whose I am all while I may dure
There ought to blame me no creature
For every wight prayseth his gentylesse
In him is bounty, wisdom and governance
well more than any man's wit can guess
For grace has would so farforth him auau^ce
That of knyghthode he is parfyt riches
Honor honors him for his noblesse
Thereto so well has fourmed him nature
That I am his for ever I him ensure
For every wight prayseth his gentylesse
And notwithstanding all his suffysaunce
His gentle heart is of so great humblesse
To me in word, in work and in countenance
And me to serve is all his business
That I am set in very sykernesse
Thus ought I bliss well mine adventure
Sith that him list me seruen and honor
For every wight prayseth his gentylesse
Now certes love it is right couenable
That men full dear abye thy noble things
As wake a bed, and fasten at the table
weping to laugh, and sing in complayninges
And down to cast visage and lokynges
Often to change vysage and countenance
Play in slepyng, and dremen at the dance
All the reuers of any glad feeling
Ielousye he hanged by a cable
She would al know through her espyinge
There does no wight nothing so reasonable
That all nys harm in her ymaginyng
Thus dear abought is love in yenyng
which often he yeueth without ordinance
As sorrow enough, and little of plesaunce
All the reuers of any glad feeling
A little time his yefte is agreeable
But full accombrouse is the vsyng
For subtel ielousye the disceyuable
Full often time causes distourbyng
Thus ben we ever in dread and suffryng
In no certain, we languyshen in penance
And have well often many an hard mischau^ce
All the reuers of any glad felyng
But certes, love (I say) not in such wise
That for to escape out of your lace I meant
For I so long have been in your service
That for to let of will I never assent
No force though ielousye me tourment
Suffyseth me to se him when I may
And therefore certes to mine endyng day
To love him best shall me never repent
And certes love, when I me well auyse
Of any estate that men may represent
Than have ye made me through your frau^chyse
Chese the best that ever in earth went
Now love well heart and look thou never ste^t
And let the ielous put it in assaye
That for no pain woll I not say nay
To love him best, shall I never repent
Heart to the it ought enough suffyse
That love so hye a grace to you sent
To chose the worthyest in all wise
And most agreeable unto mine intent
Seek no ferther, neither way ne went
Sith ye have suffisaunce unto my pay
Thus wol I end this co^playninge or this lay
To love him best shall I never repent.
Lenuoye.
Princes receives this complaynyng in gree
Unto your excellent benignite
Dyrecte after my little sustysaunce
For elde, that in my spirit dulleth me
Has of indytyng all the subtlety
welnygh beraft out of my remembrance
And eke to me it is a great penance
Since ryme in englysh has such scarcity
To follow word by word the curiosity
Of Gransonstoure, of hem that make in France.
Explicit.
Hereafter follows the letter of Cupyde.
CUpyde, unto whose commandment
The gentyl kynred of gods on hye
And people infernal been obeddyent
And al mortal folk serue^ busylye
Of the goddess sone Cythera only
To all tho that to our deity
Ben subjects, hertely gretyng send we
In general we would that ye know
That ladies of honor and of reverence
And other gentylwomen haven sow
Such seed of co^playnt in our audyence
Of men that do hem outrage and offense
That it our ears greueth for to here
So pytous is theffect of this matere
Passing al lands on the little isle
That cleped is Albion, they most compain
They say that there is crop and rote of gyle
So con tho men dissymule and feign
with standing dropes in her eyes twain
when that her hertes feleth no distress
To blynden women with her doubleness.
Her words spoken be so syghingly
with so pytous chere and countenance
That every wight that meneth truly
Demeth they in heart have such greuaunce
They say so importable is her penance
That but her lady lust to show hem grace
They right anon must steruen in the place
Ah lady mine they say, I you ensure
As does me grace, and I shall ever be
while that my life may last and endure
To you as humble and low in each degree
As possible is, and keep al things as secre
Right as your self list that I do
And else mine heart mote brast in two
Full hard it is to know a man's heart
For outward may no man the troth deem
when word out of mouth may none sterte
But it by reso^ seemed every wight to queme
So it is said of heart as it would seem
O faithful woman full of innocence
Thou art disceued by false appearance
By process moves often woman's pytie
wenyng all thing were as these men say
They grant hem grace of her benignity
For that men should not for her sake dey
And with good heart set hem in the wey
Of blysful love, keep it if they con
And thus otherwhyle women beth ywon
And when this man ye pan has by the stele
And fully is in his possessyoun
with that woman keeps he no more to dele
After if he may find in the town
Any woman his blind affectioun
Unto bestow, evil mote he preue
A man for all his oaths is hard to believe
And for that every falseman has a make
As unto every wight is light to know
wha^ this traitor this woman has forsake
He fast spedeth him unto his fellow
Till he be there his heart is on a low
His false deserte may him not susfyse
But of his trayson tells all the wise
Is this afayre auaunt? is this honor?
A man him self accuse thus and diffame
Is it good to confess him self a traitor
And bring a woman to sclaundros name
And tell how he her body has do shame
No worship may he thus to him conquer
But great disclaundre unto him and her
To her nay, yet was it no reprefe
For all for virtue was that she wrought
But he that brewed has all this myschefe
yt spoke so fair, and falsely inward thought
His be the sclaundre, as it by reason ought
And unto her thank perpetuel
That in such a need help can so well
Although through men's fleyght and subteltie
I sely simple and innocent woman
Betrayde is, no wondre sith the city
Of Troy, as the story tell can
Betrayde was through the disceyte of man
And set on fire, and al down overthrow
And finally destroyed as men know.
Betray not men cytes great and kings
what wight is it that can shape remedy
Against these falsely purposed things
who can the craft such crafts tespy
But man, whose wit is ever ready taply
To thing that sownyng in to falsehede
women bethe ware of false men I read
And furthermore have these men in usage
That where they not lykely ben to speed
Such as they ben, with a double visage
They procuren for to pursewe her need
He prays him in his cause to proceed
And largely guerdoneth he his travail
Little wot women how men hem assail
Another wretch unto his fellow says
Thou fysshest fair, she that the has fyred
Is false, inconstaunt, and has no faith
She for the rode of folk is so desired
And as an horse fro day to day she is hired
That when thou twynnest fro her company
Comes another, and blered is thine eye
Now prick on fast, and ride thy journey
while thou art there, for she behynd thy back
So lyberall is, she woll nothing withsey
But smartly of another take a smacke
Thus fare these women all the pack
who so hem trusts hanged mote he be
Ever they desire change and nouelte
Whereof proceeds this but of envy?
For he hun self her ne win may
He speaks her reprefe and vyllany
As maunes blabbyng tongue is wont always
Thus diverse men full often make assay
For to distourbe folk in sondrye wise
For they may not eschew her empryse
Many one eke would for no good
That has in love his time spent and used
Men wist yt his lady his askyng withstode
Er that he were of her plainly refused
Or waste and vain all that he had mused
wherefore he can none other remedy
But on his lady shapeth him to lie
Every woman he says is light to get
Can none say nay, if she be well ysought
who so may leyser have with her to trete
Of his purpose shall he fail naught
But he on madness be so deep brought
That he shende all with open homlynesse
That louen women, they doten as I guess
To sclau^der women thus what may profit
To gentyllesse namely that hem arm should
In defense of women, and hem delight
As that the order of gentyllesse would
If that a man list gentle to be hold
He must all eschew that thereto is contrary
A sclaundrous tongue is his great adversary
A foul vice is of tongue to be light
For who so much clappeth gabbeth often
The tongue of man so swyfte is and so wight
That when it is raised up on lofte
Reason is showed so slowly and soft
That it him never overtake may
Lord so these men ben trusty in assay
All be it that men find one woman nyce
Inconstaunt, rechelesse, and varyable
Deignous, proud, fulfilled of malice
without faith or love, and disceyuable
Slye, queynt, false, in all untrust coulpable
wicked, feirse, or full of cruelte
Yet follows it not that such all women be
When the high god angels fourmed had
Among hem all, were there none
That founden was malicious and bad?
Yes all men wot there were many one
That for her pride fill fro heaven anon
Should me for thy give al angels proud name
Nay, he that ye susteyneth is to blame
Of twelve apostels, one a traitor was
The remenante yet good were and true
So if it hap men find percas
O woman false, such good is to eschew
And deem not yt they al therefore be untrue
I se well men's own falsenesse
Hem causes woman to trust the less
O every man ought have an heart tender
Unto a woman, and deem her honorable
where his shape be thycke or slendre
Or he be good or badde, it is no fable
Every wight wot yt wit has reasonable
That of a woman he descended is
Than is it shame of her to speak amysse
A wicked tree good fruit may non forthbring
For such the fruit is as is the tree
Take heed of who^ thou took thy beginning
Let thy mother be myrrour unto the
Honor her, if thou wolte honored be
Dispyse her than not in no manner
Lest that thereby thy wickedness apere
An old proverb said is in english
That bird or foul is full dishonest
what that he be, and hold full churlyshe
That uses to defoule his own nest
Men to say well of women it is the best
And naught to dispyse hem ne deprave
If they woll her honor keep or save
The ladies ever complain hem on clerks
That they have made books of her diffame.
In which they dispyse women and her works
And speak of hem great reprofe and shame
And causeless give hem a wicked name
Thus they dispysed be on every side
Disclaundred and blown on full wide
Tho sorry books maken mention
How women betrayde in especial
Adam, David, Sampson, and Solomon
And many one mo, who may reherce hem all The treyson that they have do and shall
The world her malice may not co^prehende
As clerks said, for it has none end
Ouyde in his book called Remedy
Of love, great reprofe of women writes
wherein I trow he did great folly
And every wight yt in such case him delyteth
A clerks custom is when he endyteth
Of women, be it prose, ryme, or verse
Say they be wicked, all know he the reuers
And ye book scholars learned in her chyldhede
For they of women beware should in age
And to love hem ever be in dread
Sithe to disceyue is set all her courage
They say of perel me^ should cast thauau^tage
Namely of such as men have in bewrapped
For many a man by women has mishapped
No charge is what so these clerks said
Of all her writing I do no cure
All her labor and travail is in vain
For between me and my lady nature
shall not be suffered, while ye world may dure
Thus these clerks by her cruel tyranny
On sely women kythen her maystrye
Whylom for many of he^ were in my cheyne
Tied, and now for unwieldy age
And unlust, may not to love atteyne
And said now that love is but very dotage
Thus for they hem self lacken courage
They folk excyce by her wicked sawes
For to rebel against me and my laws
But maugre hem that blame women most
Such is the force of mine impressyon
That suddenly I can fell her boste
And all her wrong ymaginacion
It shall not be in her election
The foulest slutte in all the town to refuse
If that me lust, for all that they conne mus^
But her in heart as brennyngly desire
As though she were a duchess or a queen
So can I folks hertes set on fire
And as me list send hem joy or tene
They that to women be whet so kene
My sharp persyng strokes how they smite
Shul sele and know how they kerne and by^e
Parde this clerk, this subtle Ouyde
And many an other disceyued have be
Of women, as it is know full wide
what no men more, and that is great deynte
So excellent a clerk as was he
And other mo that couden full well preche
Betrapped were, for aught yt they could tech
And trusts well that it is no marvel
For women known plainly her intent
They wyste how softly they could assail
Hem, and what falsheed they in heart mente
And thus they clerks in her danger hente
with o venym an other is distroyed
And thus these clerks often were anoyed
These ladies, ne these gentyls nevertheless
were none of tho that wrought in this wise
But such as were vertulesse
They quytten thus these old clerks wise
To clerks less ought suffyse
Than to dispraue women generally
For worship shull they none get thereby
If that these men, that lovers hem pretend
To women were faithful, good, and true
And dredde hem to disceyue, or to offend
women to love hem would not eschew
But every day has man an heart new
It on one abide can no while
what force is it such a wight to begyle
Men bear eke women upon hand
That lightly and without any pain
They women be, they can no wight wtstonde
That his disease list to hem complain
They be so freele, they may he^ not refrain
But who so lyketh hem may lightly have
So be her hertes easy in to grave
To master Johan de Moon, as I suppose
Than it was a leude occupacioun
In making of the Romance of the rose
So many a slyghe ymagynacioun
And perils for to rollen up and down
The long process, so many a slyght cautell
For to disceyue a sely damsel
Naught can I say, ne my wit comprehe^de
That art, pain, and subtylte should sail
For to conquer, and sone make an end
when men a feeble place shall assail
And sone also to venquishe a battle
Of which no wight may make resystence
Ne heart has none to make any defense
Than mote follow of necessyte
Sithe art asks so great engyn and pain
A woman to disceyue what so she be
Of co^staunce be they not so barayne
As that some of these clerks said
But they be as women ought to be
Sad, constante, and fulfilled of pity
How friendly was Medea to Jason
In conqueryng of the f^ece of gold
How falsely quyt he her true affection
By whom vyctorie he gate as he would
How may this man for shame be so bold
To falsen her, that fro his death and shame
Him kept, and gate him so great prise and name
Of Troy also the traitor Eneas
The faithless wretch, how he him forswore
To Dydo, that queen of Cartage was
That him releued of his smertes sore
what gentyllesse might she have do more
Than she with heart unfeigned to him kydde
And what mischefe to her thereof after betydde
In my legende of natures may men find
who so lyketh therein for to read
That oath ne behest may man bind
Of reprouable shame have they no dread
In man's heart troth has no stead
The soil is naut, there may no troth grow
To women namely it is not unknow
Clerks said also there is no malice
Unto woman's wicked crabbydnesse
O woman, how shall thou thy self cheuyce
Sithe men of the such harm witness
Beth ware women of her fykelnesse
Keep thine own, what men clappe or crake
And some of hem shall smerte I undertake
Malice of women what is it to dread
They slay no man, distroye no cytees
Ne oppress folk, ne ouerlede
Betray empires, realms, or duchees
Ne byreuen men her lands ne her mees
Enpoyson folk, ne houses set on fire
Ne false contractes make for no hyre
Trust, parfyte love, entyre charity
Fervent will, and entalented courage
All thewes good, as sytteth well to be
Have women ever of custom and usage
And well they conne man's ire aswage
with soft words, discrete and benign
what they be inward they show outward by sign
woman's heart unto no cruelte
Enclyned is, but they be charytable
Pytous, denoute, full of humylite
Shamefaste, debonayre, and amyable
Dredefull, and of words measurable
what women these have not, parauenture
Follows not the way of her nature
Men said our first mother nathelesse
Made all mankind lose his lyberte
And naked it of joy doutlesse
For gods heste disobeyed she
when she presumed to taste of the tree
That god forbade, that she eat thereof should
And ne had the dyuell be, no more she would
The enuyous swellynge, yt the fend our foe
Had unto man in heart for his wealth
Sent a serpent, and made her for to go
To disceyue Eve, and thus was man's welthe
Byrafte him by the fend in a stelthe
The woman not knowing of that disceyte
God wot full far was it from her conceyte
Wherefore I say, this good woman Eve
Our father Adam disceyued naught
There may no man for disceyte it preue
Properly, but that she in heart and thought
Had it compassed first or she it wrought
And for such was not her impressyon
Men may it call no disceyte of her by reason
Ne no wight disceyueth, but he purpose
The fend this disceyte cast, and nothing she
Than is it wrong to deem or suppose
That of his harm she should the cause be
wit the fend, and his be the maugre
And excused have her innocence
Save only that she brake obedyence
And touching this, full few men there be
Uneaths any dare I safely say
Fro day to day, as men may all day se
But that the heste of god they disobay
Have this in mind syrs I you pray
If that ye be discrete and reasonable
Ye woll her hold the more excusable
And where men say in man is steadfastness
And woman is of her courage unstable
who may of Adam bear such a witness
Tells me this, was he not chaungeable
They both weren in o case semblable
Save wyllyng the fend disceyued Eve
And so did she not Adam by your leave
Yet was this sin happy to mankind
The feude disceyued was for all his sleyght
For a^t he could him i^ his sleyghtes wind
For his trespace came fro heaven on heyght
God, to discharge man of his weight
Flesh and blood took of a virgyne
And suffered death, him to deliver of pyne
And god, to who^ there may nothing hyd be
If he in woman known had such malice
As men record of hem in generalte
Of our lady of life reperatryce
Nolde have be borne, but that she of vice
was void, and full of virtue well he wyste
Endawed, of her to be borne him list
Her heaped virtue has such excellence
That all to lean is man's faculte
To declare it, and therefore in suspense
Her dew praysyng put needs must be
But thus I say, verily that she
Next god, best friend is that to man longs
The key of mercy by her gyrdle hongeth
And of mercy has every man such need
That resyng that, farewell the joy of man
And of her power now takes rit good head
She mercy may well, and purchase can
Displeseth her not, honors that woman
And other women all for her sake
And but ye do, your sorrow shall awake
In any book also where can ye find
That of the works of death or of life
Of Jesus, spelleth or makes any mind
That women him forsook for woe or strife
where was there any wight so ententyfe
About him as woman, proved none
The apostels him forsoken euerychone
women forsook him not for all the faith
Of holy church in woman left only
This is no lees, for thus holy writ says
Look and ye shall so find it hardely
And therefore I may well preue thereby
That in woman reigns stable constaunce
And in men is the change of varyaunce
Thou precious ge^me of martyrs Margarete
That of thy blood dredest none effusyon
Thou lover true, thou maiden mansuete
Thou constante woman in thy passion
Overcame the fendes temptacion
And many a wight converted thy doctrine
Unto the faith of holy god thou vyrgyne
But understands this, I only commend her naught
By encheson of her virgynyte
Trusts it came never in thought
For ever werre I against chastyte
And ever shall, but lo this meueth me
Her loving heart, and constante to her lay
Drive out of remembrance I ne may
Now holds this for ferme, and for no lie
That this true and just commendation
Of women tell I for no flatterye
Ne because of pride or elation
But only lo, for this entention
To give hem courage of perseueraunce
In virtue, and her honor to auaunce
The more virtue, the less is the pride
Virtue so digne is and so noble in kind
That vice and he woll not infere abide
He puts vices clean out of his mind
He flies fro hem, he leaves hem behind
O woman that of virtue art hostresse
Great is thy honor and thy worthynesse
Than woll I thus conclude and defyne
we you command our mynistres echone
That ready ye be our hestes to enclyne
That of these false men our rebel fone
Ye do punishment and that anon
Void hem our court, and banysh hem for ever
So that therein more come they never
Fulfilled be it, ceasyng all delay
Look there be none excusacion
written in the lusty monthe of May
In our paleys where many a millyon
Of lovers true have habytacion
The year of grace joyful and ioconde
A thousand four hundred and second.
Explicit.
Thus ends the letter of Cupyde, and here after follows a balade in
commendation of our Lady.
A Thousand stories could I mo reherce
Of old poets, touching this matere
How that Cupyde yt hertes began so perce
Of his servants setting hem in fere
Lo here the fine of therrour and the fere
Lo here of love the guerdon and greuaunce
That ever with woe her servants do auau^ce
wherefore now plainly I wol my style dress
Of one to speak, at need that woll not fail
Alas for dole I ne can ne may express
Her passing prise, and that is no marvel
O wind of grace, now blow unto my sail
O auryate lycour of Cleo for to write
My pen enspyre of that I woll endyte
Alas, unworthy I am and unable
To love such one, all women surmountyng
But she be benign to me and merciable
That is of pity the well and eke the spryng
wherefore of her in laud and in praysyng
So as I can, supported by her grace
Right thus I say, knelyng tofore her face
O sterre of sterres with thy stremes clear
Sterre of the sea, to shypmen light and gyde
O lusty living most plesaunt to apere
whose brit beams ye clouds may not hyde
O way of life to hem that go or ride
Haven after tempest surest up to ryue
On me have mercy for thy joys five
O rightful rule, o bote of holiness
And lyghtsome line of pity for to plain
Original beginning of grace and al goodness
And clenest co^duyt of virtue most sovereign
Mother of mercy, our trouble to restrain
Chamber and closet clennest of chastyte
And named herbrough of the deyte
O closed garden all void of wedes wycke
Crystalline well, of clerenesse clear co^signed
Fructyfyed olyue of foyles fair and thycke
And redole^t cedre most dereworthly digned
Remember on sinners that to yt be assigned
Or wicked fendes her wrath on hem wreche
Lantern of light, thou her lives leche
Paradyse of plesaunce, gladsome to all good
Benign braunchelet of the pyne tree
Vynarie enuermayled, refresher of our bote
Lycour again al langour yt palled may not be
Blysfull blomy blosome, bydyng in bounte
Thy mantell of mercy on our myserie sprede
And er woe awake wrappe us under thy wed
O rody rosyer, flouryng without spyne
Fou^tayne al fylthlesse, as byrel current clear
So^e drop of thy graceful dew to us propyne
O light without nebule, shining i^ thy sphere
Medecyne to mischeues, pucelle without pere
Flambe down the doleful light of thine influence
Remembering thy servants for thy magnifyce^ce
Of al christen protectryce and tutele
Return of exiled put in the prescripcion
To hem that erren in the pathe of her sequel
To weary forwandred tent and pauylion
To faynte and to fresh the pausacion
Unto vnresty, both rest and remedy
Fruitful to all tho that in her allye
To hem that rennen thou art itenerarie
O blysfull brauie to knights of thy werre
To weary werkmen she is diourne denarie
Mede unto maryners that have sailed far
Laureate crown stremyng as a slerre
To hem that put hem in palastre for thy sake
Course of her conquest, thou white as any lake
O myrthe of martyrs, swetter than sytole
Of confessors also rychest donatyfe
Unto virgynes eternal lauriole
Before all women having prerogatyse
Mother and maid, both wydowe and wife
Of all the world is none but thou alone
Now sith thou may, be socour to my moan
O trusty turtle truefastest of all true
O curteyse columbe, replete of all meekness
O nyghtyngale with thy notes new
O popyniay pured with all clennesse
O laueroke of love, syngyng with swetnesse
Phoebus awaytyng till on thy breast he light
Under thy wynge at domesday us dyght
O rubye rubifyed in the passion
Of thy son, us have among in mind
O steadfast dyametre of duracion
That few feres any time might thou find
For none to him was founde^ half so kind
O hardy heart, o loving creature
what was it but love that made yt so endure
Semely saphre, deep loupe and blew ewage
Stable as the loupe ewage of pity
This is to say the freshest of vysage
Thou love unchanged hem that serue^ the
And if offense or varyeng in hem be
Thou art aye ready upon her woe to rewe
And hem receyuest with heart full true
O goodly gladed when that Gabriell
with joy the grette, that may not be nu^bred
Or half the bliss who could write or tell
when the holy ghost to the was obumbred
wherthrough fendes were bytterly encu^bred
O wemlesse maid embelyshed in his birth
That man and aungel thereof hadden mirth
Lo here the blosme and the budde of glory
Of which ye prophet so long spoke beforn
Lo here the same that was in memory
Of Ysaye, so long or she was borne
Lo here of David the delycious corn
Lo here the ground of life in to bylde
Becomyng man our raunsom for to yield
O glorious vyole and vyte inuyolate
O fiery Tytan, persyng with thy bemes
whose virtuous britues was i^ breast vrbrate
That all ye world embelyshed with ye lemes
Co^seruatryce of kings, dukes, and realms
Of Ysayes feed sweet sunamyte
Mesure my mourning mine own margaryte
O soueraignest sought out of Syon
Cockle with gold dew from above berayned
Dew bushe vnbrent, fyrelesse fire set on
Fla^byng with ferue^te, not with hete payned
During daysye that no wether stained
Fleece vndefouled of gentylest Iedeon
And fructifyeng fairest the yerde of Aaron
The mighty arche, probatyfe pis^yne
Laughyng aurore, and of peace olyue
Columpne and base, up bearyng from abyme
why nere I connyng here to discryue
Chosen of Joseph, whom he took to wyue
Unknowing him, chyldyng by miracle
And of our manly figure the tabernacle
I have none English convenient and dygne
Mine hertes heal lady the with to honor
Iuorie clean, therefore I wol resygne
Into thine hand, till thou list socour
To help my making both floryshe and flour
Then should I show in love how I brende
In songs making, thy name to commend
For if I could before thine excellence
Syngen in love I would what I feel
And ever standen lady in thy presence
To show in open how I love you well
And sith although your heart be made of stele
To you wythouten any dysceueraunce
Iay en vous tout ma fiance
where might I love ever better beset
Then in this lylye lykyng to behold
The lace of love, the bond so well thou knyt
That I may se the or mine heart cold
And or I pass out of my days old
Tofore syngyng evermore utterly
Your eyes two woll slay me suddenly
For love I langour, blyssed be such sycknesse
Sith it is for you my hertely suffysaunce
I can not else say in my dystresse
So fair one has mine heart in governance
And after that I begin on esperaunce
with feeble entune, though it thine heart perce
Yet for thy sake this letter I do reherce
God wot on musyke I can not, but I guess
Alas why so, that I might say or sing
So love I you mine own sovereign maistres
And ever shall without departing
Myrrour of beute, for you out should I ryng
In remembrance eke of your eyes clear
Thus far from you my sovereign lady dear
So would god your love would me slo
Sith for your sake I sing day by day
Heart why nylte thou break a two
Sith with my lady dwell I ne may
Thus many a roundel and many a virelay
In fresh english, when I me layser find
I do record, on you to have mind
Now lady mine, sith I you love and dread
And you unchanged ever find in o degree
whose grace ne may fly fro your woma^hede
Dysdayneth not for to remember on me
Mine heart bledeth for I may not you se
And sith ye wotte my meaning desirous
Plures pur moy si vous playst amorous
what maruayle is though I in pain be
I am departed from you my sovereign
Fortune alas, don't vient la destenie
That in no wise I can ne may attain
To se the beauty of your eyes twain
wherefore I say, for trystesse does me grame
Tant me fait male departyr de ma dame
why nere my wyshyng brout to such esploit
That I might say for joy of your presence
Ore a mon cuer ce quil veuilloit
Ore a mon cuer, the highest excellence
That ever had wight, and sith mine aduerte^ce
Is in you, reweth on my pains smerte
I am so sore wounded to the heart
To live well merry two lovers were yfere
So may I say wythouten any blame
If any man to wild were
I could him teache for to be tame
Let him go love and se where it be game
For I am brydled unto soberness
For her that is of women chief princess
But ever when thout my heart should enbrace
Then unto me is best remedy
when I look on your goodly fresh face
So merry a myrrour could I never espy
And if I could I would it magnifye
For never none was so fair yfounde
To reken hem all, and also Rosamounde
And finally with mouth and will present
Of double eye without repentance
Mine heart I give you lady in this intent
That ye shall holy thereof have governance
Taking my leave with hertes obeysaunce
(Salve regina) singing last of al
To be our help when we to the call
All our love is but ydelnesse
Save your love alone, who might thereto attain
who so wol have a name of gentylnesse
I counsel him in love that he not feign
Thou sweet lady, refute in every pain
whose mercy most to me avails
To gye by grace, when that fortune fails
Naught may be told wythouten any fable
Your high renome, your womanly beauty
Your governance to al worship able
Puts every heart in ease in his degree
O violet, o flower desyree
Sith I am for you so amerous
Estreynes moy de cuer joyous
with fervent heart my breast has brost on fire
Lardant espoir que mo^ cuer point est mort
Dauoir lamour de celle que ie desire
I mean you sweet most plesaunt of port
Et ie say bien que ceo nest pas mon tort
That for you sing, so as I may for moan
For your departing, alone I live alone
Though I might I woll none other chese
In your service I would be founden sad
Therefore I love no labor that ye lose
when in longyng sorest ye be stadde
Look up ye lovers and be right glad
Against saint Valentynes day
For I have chese that never forsake I may.
Explicit.
Johan Gower, unto the worthy and noble King Henry the fourth.
O Noble worthy king Henry the ferthe
In whom the glad fortune is befall
The people to govern here upon earth
God has the chosen in comfort of us all
the worship of this land which was down fall
Now stant vpryt through grace of thy goodness
which every man is hold for to bless
The high god of his justice alone
The right which longs to thy regaly
Declared has to stand in thy person
And more then god may no man iustifye
Thy tytel is know upon thine auncestrye
The lands folk has eke thy right affirmed
So stante thy reygne, of god and man co^fyrmed
There is no man may say in otherwise
That god himself ne has ye right declared
whereof the land is bound to thy service
which for defaute of help has long cared
But now there is no man's heart spared
To love and serve, and worth thy plesaunce
And all this is through gods purueyau^ce
In all thing which is of god begone
There follows grace if it be well governed
Thus tellen they which old books conne
whereof my lord I wot well thou art learned
Ask of thy god, so shall thou not be warned
Of no request which is reasonable
For god unto the good is favorable
King Solomon which had at his asking
Of god, what thing him was leuest crave
He chase wysedom unto gouernynge
Of gods folk, the which he would save
And as he chase it fill him for to have
For through his wit while yt his reign last
He gate him peace and rest in to his last
But Alexander as tells his story
Unto the god besought in other wey
Of all the world to win the vyctorie
So that under his sword it might obey
In war he had all that he would prey
The mighty god behight him that behest
The world wanne, and had it of conquest
But though it fill at thylke time so
That Alexander his askyng has atcheued
This sinful world was all paynem tho
was none which has the high god believed
No wonder was though thilk world was grieved
Though a tyra^t his purpose mit win All was vengeance and in fortune of syn
But now the faith of Christ is come a place
Among the princes in this earth here
It sytte hem well to do pity and grace
But yet it must be tempred in manner
For they fynden cause in the matere
Upon the point, what afterward betyde
The law of right shall not be laid a side
So may a king of war the voyage
Ordain and take, as he thereto is hold
To claim and ask his ryghtfull heritage
In all places where it is with hold
But otherwise if god him self would
Affirm love and peace between the kings
Peace is the best above al erthly things
Good is to eschew war, and nathelees
A king may make war upon his right
For of battle the fynall end is pees
Thus stant the law that a worthy knight
Upon his troth may go to the fight
But if so were that he might chese
Better is the peace of which may no man lose
To stere peace ought euerych on live
First for to set his liege lord in rest
And eke these other men that they ne strive
For so this land may stand at best
what king that would be the worthyest
The more he might our deedly war cease
The more he should his worthynesse increase
Peace is the chief of all the worlds wealth
And to the heaven it ledeth eke the way
Peace is of soul and life the man's health
Of pestilence, and does the war away
My liege lord take heed of that I say
If war may be left, take peace on hand
which may not be without gods sand
with peace stante every creature in rest
without peace there may no life be glad
Above all other good peace is the best
Peace has him self when werre is al bestad
The peace is safe, the war is ever adrad
Peace is of al charity the kay
which has the life and soul for to way
My liege lord if that thy list to seche
The soth ensa^ples what ye war has wrout
Thou shall well here of wise me^nes speech
That deedly war tourneth into naught
For if these old books be well ysought
There might you se what thing ye war has do
Both of conquest and conqueror also
For vain honor, or for the worlds good
They that whylom the strong wars made
where be they now, bethink well in thy mood
The day is gone, the night is derke and fade
Her cruelte which made hem then glade
They sorowe^ now, and yet have naut ye more
The blood is shad, which no man may restore
The war is mother of the wrongs all
It sleeth the priest in holy church at mass
Forlyth the maid, and does her flour to fall
The war makes the great cite less
And does the law his rules ouerpasse
There is nothing whereof myschefe may grow
which is not caused of the war I trow
The war brings in pouerte at his heles
whereof the common people is sore grieved
The war has set his cart on thylk wheles
where that fortune may not be believed
For when men wene best to have acheued
Full often it is all new to begin
The war has nothing syker tho he wyn
For thy my worthy prince in Christ's halue
As for aparte whose faith thou have be gyde
Ley to this old sore a new salve
And do the war away what so betyde
Purchase peace and set it by thy side
And suffer not thy people be devoured
So shall thy name ever after stand honored
If any man be now or ever was
Again the peace thy preuy counsaylour
Let god be of thy counsel in this caas
And put away the cruel warryour
For god which is of man the creator
He would not men slough his creature
without cause of deedly forfayture
where needs most, behooves most to lok^
My lord, how so thy wars be without
Of time passed, who that head took
Good were at home to se right well about
For evermore the worst is for to doubt
But if thou myghtest parfyte peace attain
There should be no cause for to plain
About a king good counsel is to preyse
Above al other things most vaylable
But yet a king within him self shall peyse
And seen the things that be reasonable
And thereupon he shall his wits stable
Among the men to set peace in even
For love of him which is the king of heaven
A, well is him that shed never blood
But if it were in cause of ryghtwysenesse
For if a king the peril understood
what is to slay the people, then I guess
The deedly wars and the heaviness
whereof peace dystourbed is full often
Should at some time cesse and wexe soft
O king fulfilled of grace and knyghthode
Remember upon this point for Christ's sake
If peace be proffered unto thy manhood
Thine honor save, let it not be forsake
Though you the wars darste well undertake
After reason yet temper thy courage
For like to peace there is none advantage
My worthy lord, think well how so befall
Of thylke lore, as holy books said
Christ is the heed, and we be members all
As well the subject as the sovereign
So sit it well that charity be plain
which unto god him self most accords
So as the lore of Christ's word records
In tholde law or Christ him self was bore
Among the.x. commandments I read
How that manslaughter should be forbore
Such was the will that time of ye godhede
But afterward when Christ took his ma^hede
Peace was the first thing he let do cry
Against the worlds rancour and envy
And or Christ went out of this earth here
And slyghed to heaven, he made his testament
where he bequath to his dyscyples there
And yaue his peace, which is the fou^deme^t
Of charity, without whose assent
The worlds peace may never well be tried
Ne love kept, ne law justified
The jews with ye paynyms hadden werre
But they among hem self stood ever in peace
why should then our peace stand out of err
which christ has those to his own encrese
For Christ is more then was Moses
And Christ has set the parfyte of the law
The which should in no wise be wythdrawe
To give us peace was cause why christ did
without peace may nothing stand auayled
But now a man may se on every side
How Christ's faith is every day assailed
with the paynems destroyed and so batayled
That for defaute of help and of defense
Uneath has Christ his due reverence
The right faith to keep of holy church
The first point is named of knyghthode
And every man is hold for to wurche
Upon the point that stante to his manhood
But now alas, the fame is spread so broad
That every man this thing complayneth
And yet is there no man that help ordayneth
The worlds cause is waited over all
There be the wars ready to the full
But Christ's own cause in special
There ben the swerdes and the speres dull
And with the sentence of the popes bull
As for to done the folk pain obey
The church is turned all another wey
It is wonder above any man's wit
wout war how Christ's faith was won
And we that be upon this earth yet
Ne keep it not as it was first begone
To every creature under the son
Christ badde him self that we should preche
And to the folk his Euangely teache
More light it is to keep then to make
But that we founden made to fore hand
we keep not, but let it lightly slake
That peace of christ has all to broke his bo^de
we rest our self, and suffren every land
To slay each other, as thing undefended
So stant the war, and peace is not amended
But though the heed of holy church above
Ne do not al his hole business
Among the people to set peace and love
These kings oughten of her rightwysnesse
Her own cause among hem self redress
Tho Peter's ship as now has lost his stere
It lies in hem the barge for to stere
If holy church after the dewte
Of Christ's word ne be not all auysed
To make peace, accord, and unite
Among the kings that be now devised
Yet natheles the law stante assysed
Of man's wit to be so reasonable
without that to stand him self stable
Of holy church we ben children all
And every child is hold for to bow
Unto the mother, how that ever it fall
Or else he must reason dysalowe
And for that cause a knight shall first auowe
The right of holy church to defend
That no man shall the priuylege offend
Thus were it good to set al in even
The worlds princes, and the prelates both
For love of him which is the king of heaven
And if men should algate waxen wroth
The Sarazins, which unto Christ ben loath
Let men be armed against hem to fight
So may the knight his deed of arms right
Upon three points sta^t Christ's peace oppressed
First holy church in her self divided
which ought of reason first to be redressed
But yet so high a cause is not desyded
And thus when humble patience is pryded
The remnaunt which that they should rule
No wonder is though it stand out of rule
Of that the heed is syck the lymmes aken
These reigns that to Christ's peace belo^ge^
For worlds good these deedly wars make^
which helpless, as in balaunce hongen
The heed above hem has not vnderfongen
To set peace, but every man sleeth other
And in this wise has charity no brother
The two defautes bryngen in the third
Of myscreauntes that seen how we debate
Between the two, they fallen in amydde
where now al day they find an open gate
Lo, thus the deedly werre slante algate
But ever I hope of king Henry's grace
That he it is, which shall the peace embrace
My worthy noble prince and king anoint
whom god has of his grace so preserved
Behold and se the world upon this point
As for thy part, that Christ's peace be served
So shall thy high mede be deserved
To him which all shall quyte at last
For this life here may no while last
Se Alexander, Hector, and Julius
Se Machabeus, David, and Iosue
Se Charlemayne, Godfray, and Arthus
Fulfilled of war and of mortalite
Her fame abytte, but all is but vanite
For death, which has the wars under foot
Has made an end, of which there is no bote
So many a man the soth wete and know
That peace is good for every king to have
The fortune of the war is ever unknow
But where peace is, there is the marches save
That now is up, to morrow is under grave
The mighty god has all grace in hand
without him men may not long stand
Of the tennes to win or lose a chase
May no life wete or that the bal be run
Al stant in god what thing me^ shall purchase
The End is in him or that it be begone
Men said the wolle when it is well sponne
Does that the cloth is strong and profitable
And else it may never be durable
The worlds chances upon adventure
Ben ever set, but thylke chance of pees
Is so behouely to the creature
That is above al other peerles
But it may not beget natheles
Among the men to last any while
But where the heart is plain without gyle
The peace is as it were a sacrament
Tofore the god, and shall with words plain
without any double entendement
Be treated, for the troth can not feign
But if the men within hem self ben vain
The substance of the peace may not be ^rew^
But every day it changes upon new
But who that is of charity parfyte
He voydeth al sleyghtes far away
And set his word upon the same plyte
where that his heart has found a syker way
And thus when conscience is trewly way
And that these ben handled with the wy^e
It shall abide, and stand in all wife
The Apostle says, there may no life be good
which is not grounded upon charity
For charity ne shed never blood
So has the war as there no properte
For thylke virtue which is said pity
with charity so ferforth is acquaynted
That in her may no false se^blant be painted
Cassodore, whose writing is authorized
Says: where that pity reygneth is grace
Through which ye peace has al his wealth assysed
So yt of war he dredeth no manace
where pity dwells in the same place
There may no deedly cruelte soiourne
whereof that mercy should his way turn
To se what pity forth with mercy does
The cronique is at Rome in thylke empire
Of Constantyne, which is a tale sothe
when him was liver his own death desire
Then do the young children to martyr
Of cruelty he left the quarele
Pity he wrought, and pity was his hele
For thylke man's pity which he deed
God was pytous, and made him hole at all
Syluester came, and in the same stead
Yaue him baptyme first in special
which did away the sin origynall
And all his lepre it has so purifyed
That his pity for ever is magnifyed
Pity was cause why this Emperor
was hole in body and in soul both
And Rome also was set in thylke honor
Of Christ's faith, so that the leave of loath
which hadden be with Christ tofore wroth
Received were unto Christ's lore
Thus shall pity be praised evermore
My worthy liege lord Henry by name
which England haste to govern and right
Men ought well thy pity to proclaim
which openlyche in all the worlds sight
Is showed, with the help of god almyght
To give us peace which long has be debated
whereof thy pryse shall never be abated
My lord, in whom has ever yet be found
Pity, without spotte of violence
Keep thylke peace always within bound
which god has planted in thy conscience
So shall the cronyque of thy patience
Among the saints be taken into memory
To the legende of perdurable glory
And to thine ert hely pryse, so as I can
which every man is hold to commend
I Gower, which am all thy liege man
This letter unto thine excellence I send
As I which ever unto my lives end
woll pray for the state of thy person
In worship of thy scepter and thy throne
Not only to my king of peace I write
But to these other princes christen all
That each of hem his own heart endyte
And sese the war or more myschefe fall
Set eke the ryghtful puppe upon his stall
Keep charity, and draw pity to hand
Mainteyn law, and so the pence shall stand
Explicit carme^ de pacis co^me^datione quod ad laudem et memoria^ serenissimi
principis domini regis Henrici Quarti, suns humilis orator Johannes Gower
composuit.

Electus Christi, pie rex Henrice fuisti
Qui been venisti, cum propria regna petisti
Tu mala vicistique bonis bona restituisti
Et populo tristi, noua gaudia contribuisti
Est mihi spes lata, quoth adhuc per te renouata
Succedent fata, veteri probitate beata
Est tibi nam grata, gratia sponte data
Henrici quarti, primus regni fuit annus
Quo mihi defecit bisus ad acta mea
Oia te^pus habent finem natura ministrat
Quem virtute sua frangere nemo potest
Vltra posse nihil qua^uis mihi velle remansit
Amplius vt seribam non mihi posse manet
Du potui scripsi, sed nu^c quia curua senectus
Turbauit sensus scripta relinquo scolis
Scribat qui veniet post me discretior alter
Ammodo namque manus er mea penna silent
Hoc tamen in fine verborum queso meorum
Prospera quod statuat regna futura deus.
Explicit.
Of the Cuckoo and the nightyngale.
THe god of love, ah benedicite
How mighty and how great a lord is he
For he can make of low hertes hye
And of hye low, and like for to dye
And hard hertes he can maken free
He can make within a little stounde
Desycke ^^lke hole, fresh and sound
And of hole he can make seek
He can bynd^ and vnbynden eke
That he wo^ have bounden or unbound
To tell his might my wit may not suffyse
For he can make of wise folk full nyce
For he may do all that he wol deuyce
And lythy folk to destroyen vice
And proud hertes he can make agryse
Shortly all that ever he wol he may
Against him dare no wight say nay
For he can glad and grieve whom him lyketh
And who that he wol he loweth or syketh
And most his might he shedeth ever in may
For every true gentle heart free
That with him is or thinks for to be
Again May now shall have some sterynge
Or to joy or else to some mournyng
In no season, so much as thinks me
For when they may here the birds sing
And se the flowers and the leaves spring
That brings into her remembrance
A manner ease meddled with greuaunce
And lusty thoughts full of great longyng
And of that longyng comes heaviness
And thereof grows often great sycknesse
And for lack of that that they desire
And thus in May ben hertes set on fire
So that they brennen forth in great distress
I speak this of felyng trewly
If I be old and unlusty
Yet I have felt of the sickness through May
Both hot and cold, and axes every day
How sore ywys there wot no wight but I
I am so shaken with the fevers white
Of al this May sleep I but a lyte
And also it is not like to me
That any heart should slepy be
In whom that love his fiery dart wol smite
But as I lay this other night wakyng
I thought how lovers had a tokenyng
And among hem it was a comune tale
That it were good to here the nyghtyngale
Rather than the leude cocko we sing
And than I thought anon as it was day
I would go somwhere to assay
If that I might a nyghtyngale here
For yet had I none herd of all that year
And it was tho the third night of May
And anon as I the day aspyde
No longer would I in my bed abide
But unto a wood that was fast by
I went forth alone boldly
And held the way down by a broke side
Till I came to a launde of white and grene
So fair one had I never in been
The ground was grene, ypoudred with dayfye
The flowers and the greues like hye
Al grene and white, was nothing else seen
There sat I down among ye fair flowers
And saw ye birds trippe out of her bowres
There as they rested hem all the night
They were so joyful of the days light
They began of May for to done hours
They could that service al by rote
There was many a lovely note
Some song loud as they had playned
And some in other manner voice yfayned
And some al out with the full throat
They proyned hem, and made hem right gay
And daunseden and lepten on the spray
And evermore two and two in fere
Right so as they had chosen hem to year
In Feuerere upon saynct Valentynes day
And the river that I sat upon
It made such a noise as it ron
Accordaunt with the birds armony
Me thought it was the best melody
That might ben yherde of any mon
And for delight I wot never how
I fell in such a slombre and a swowe
Not all aslepe ne fully wakyng
And in ye swowe me thought I herd sing
The sorry bird the leude cuckowe
And that was on a tree right fast by
But who was than evil apayde but I
Now god (quod I) that dyed on the croys
Give sorrow on the, and on thy leude voys
Full little joy have I now of thy cry
And as I with the cuckowe thus began chyde
I herd in the next bush beside
A nyghtyngale so lustely sing
That with her clear voice she made ring
Through all the grene wood wide
Ah, good nyghtyngale (quod I then)
A little have thou ben to long hen
For here has been the leude cuckowe
And so^gen songs rather than have thou
I pray to god evil fire her bren
But now I wol you tell a wondre thing
As long as I lay in that swownyng
Me thought I wist what the birds meant
And what they said, and what was her intent
And of her speech I had good knowing
There herd I the nyghtyngale say
Now good cuckowe go some where away
And let us that can syngen dwellen here
For every wight eschueth the to here
Thy songs be so elenge in good say
what (quod he) what may the aylen now
It thinks me, I sing as well as thou
For my song is both true and plain
And thaugh I can not crakel so in vain
As thou do in thy throat, I wot never how
And every wight may understand me
But nyghtyngale so may they not done the
For thou have many a nyce queynt cry
I have the herd said, ocy ocy
How might I know what that should be
Ah fool (quod she) wost thou not what it is
when that I say, ocy ocy ywys
Than mean I that I would wondre feign
That all they were shamefully yslayne
That meanen ought again love amys
And also I would that al tho had the deed
That think not in love her life to lead
For who so yt woll not the god of love serve
I dare well say he is worthy to sterue
And for that skyll, ocy ocy I grede
Eye (quod the cuckowe) this is a queynt law
That every wight shall love or be to draw
But I forsake al such company
For mine intent is not for to dye
Ne never while I live on loves yoke to draw
For lovers ben the folk that been on live
That most disease have, and most vnthryue
And most endure sorrow, woe and care
And lest f^len o^ welfare
what needs it against troth to strive
what (quod she) thou art out of thy mind
How might thou in thy churlenesse find
To speak of loves servants in this wise
For in this world is none so good service
To every wight that gentle is of kind
For thereof truly comes all goodness
All honor and al gentleness
worship, ease, and al hertes lust
Parfyte joy, and full assured trust
Iolytie, pleasaunce and freshness
Lowlyhed, largess, and curtesye
Semelyhed, and true company
Dread of shame for to done amys
For he that truly loves servant is
were lother be shamed than to dye
And that this is soth that I sey
In that believe I will live and dey
And cuckoo so I read that thou do ywys
Than (quod he) let me never have bliss
If ever I unto that counsel obey
Nyghtyngale thou spekest wondre fair
But for all that is the soth contrayre
For love is in young folk but rage
And in old folk a great dotage
who most it uses most shall enpayre
For thereof comes disease and heaviness
So sorrow and care and many a great syknesse
Despyte, debate, anger and envy
Deprauyng, shame, untrust and ielousye
Pride, mischefe, poverty and wodnesse
Loving is an office of despair
And one thing is therein that is not fair
For who that gets of love a little bliss
But if he be always therewith ywys
He may full sone of age have his heir
And nyghtyngale therefore hold the nigh
For leave me well, for all thy queynt cry
If thou be far or long fro thy make
Thou shall be as other that been forsake
And than thou shall hoten as do I
Fie (quod she) on thy name and on the
The god of love ne let the never ythe
For you art worse a thousandfolde tha^ wood
For many one is full worthy and full good
That had be naught ne had love ybe
For evermore love his servants ame^deth
And from all yuyl taches hem defends
And makes hem to bren right in a fire
In troth and in worshypful desire
And wha^ hem lyketh, joy enough hem sends
Thou nyghtyngale he said be still
For love has no reason, but it is will
For often time untrue folk he eases
And true folk so bytterly he displeases
That for default of courage he let him spyll
Than took I of the nyghtingale keep
How she cast a sygh out of her deep
And said, alas that ever I was bore
I can for tene not say one word more
And right with that word she brast out to weep
Alas (quod she) my heart woll to break
To heren thus this leude bird speak
Of love, and of his worshypful service
Now god of love thou help me in somwise
That I may on this cuckowe ben awreke
Me thought than he sterte up anon
And glad was I that he was agon
And evermore the cuckowe as he flaye
Said, farewell farewell popyngaye
As though he had scorned me alone
And than came the nyghtyngale to me
And said, friend forsooth I thank the
That thou have lyked me to rescowe
And one auowe to love make I now
That all this May I woll thy synger be
I thanked her, and was right well apayde
Ye (quod she) and be thou not dismayde
Tho thou have herd ye cukowe erst than I
For if I live it shall amended be
The next May, if I be not afraid
And one thing I will read the also
Ne leave thou not the cukow ne his loves so
For all that he has said is strong lesyng
Nay (quod I) thereto shall nothing me bring
For love, and it has do me much woe
Ye use (quod she) this medicyne
Every day this May or thou dyne
Go look upon the fresh daysye
And though thou be for woe in point to dye
That shall full greatly lessen the of thy pyne
And look always that thou be good and true
And I woll sing one of the songs new
For love of the, as loud as I may cry
And than she began this song full hye
I shrewe all hem that been of love untrue
And when she had song it to the end
Now farewell (quod she) for I mote wend
And god of love, yt can right well and may
As much joy send the this day
As any yet lover he ever send
Thus takes ye nyghtingale her leave of me
I pray to god always with her be
And joy of love he send her evermore
And shylde us fro the cuckowe and his lore
For there is not so false a bird as he
Forth she flewe the gentle nyghtyngale
To all the birds in that were that dale
And gate hem all into a place in fere
And besoughten hem that they would here
Her disease, and thus began her tale
The cuckowe, well it is not for to hyde
How the cuckowe and I fast have chyde
Ever sythen it was day light
I pray you all that ye do me right
Of that foul false unkind bride
Than spoke o bird, for all by one assent
This matter asks good auysement
For we ben birds here in fere
And soth it is, the cuckowe is not here
And therefore we wol have a parlyment
And thereat shall the egle be our lord
And other peers that been of record
And the cuckowe shall be after sent
There shall be give the judgment
Or else we shall finally make accord
And this shall be without nay
The morrow after saint Valentynes day
Under a maple that is fair and grene
Before the chamber wyndowe of the queen
At wodstocke upon the grene lay
She thanked hem, and than her leave took
And into an hauthorne by that broke
And there she sat and song upon that tree
Term of life love has withholde me
So loud that I with that song awoke
Explicit.
O Leude book with thy foul rudeness
Sith thou have neither beauty ne eloquence
who has the, caused or give the hardynesse
For to appear in my ladies presence?
I am full syker thou know her beneuole^ce
Full agreeable to al her abeying
For of all good she is the best living
Alas that thou ne had worthynesse
To show to her some pleasant sentence
Sith that she has through her gentylesse
Accepted ye servant to her digne reverence
O, me repents that I ne had science
And leyser als, to make the more florishinge
For of al good she is the best living
Beseech her mekely with all lowlynesse
Though I be far from her in absence
To think on my troth to her and stedfastnes
And to abrege of my sorrows the violence
which caused is, whereof knows your sapience
she like among to notify me her lykinge
For of all good she is the best living.
Lenuoye.
AVrore of gladness, and day of lustynesse
Lucerne, a night with heavenly influence
Illumined, rote of beutie and goodness
Suspyres which I effunde in scilence
Of grace I beseech alege let your writing
Now of all good, sith ye be best living.
Explicit.
Scogan unto the lords and gentlemen of the Kings house.
MY noble sons, and eke my lords dear
I your father, called unworthily
Send unto you this little treatise here
written with mine own hand full rudely
Although it be that I not reverently
Have written to your estates, I you pray
Mine vncounyng takes benignely
For gods sake, and harken what I say
I compain me sore when I remember me
The sudden age that is upon me fall
But more I compain my misspent inue^tute
The which is impossyble again for to call
But certainly the most co^playnt of all
Is to think that I have be so nyce
That I ne would virtues to me call
In all my youth, but vices aye cheryce.
Of which I ask mercy of the lord
That art almighty god in majesty
Besekyng to make so even accord
Betwyxe the and my soul that vanity
worldly lust, ne blind prosperity
Have no lordshyp over my flesh to frele
Thou lord of rest and parfyte unity
Put fro me vice, and keep my soul hele
And give me might while I have life and space
Me to co^fyrme fully to thy pleasau^ce
Show to me abundance of thy grace
and in good works grant me perseuerau^ce
Of all my youth forget the ignorance
Give me good will to serve ye aye to queme
Set all my life after thine ordinance
And able me to mercy or thou deem
My lords dear, why I this complaint write
To you whom I love most enterely
Is for to warn you, as I can endyte
That time lost in youth folyly
Greueth a wight bodily and ghostly
I mean hem that to lust and vice entende
wherefore lords I pray you specially
Your youth in virtue shapeth to dyspende
Plant the rote of youth in such a wise
That in virtue your growing be always
Look always goodness be in your exercise
That shall you mighty make at each assay
The fend to wythstande at each affray
Passes wisely this peryllous pilgrimage
Think on this word, and work it every day
That shall you give a parfyte floured age
Takes also head how yt these noble clerks
written in her books of great sapience
Saying ye faith is deed wythouten works
And right so is estate with negligence
Of virtue, and therefore with diligence
Shapeth of virtue so to plant the rote
That ye thereof have full experience
To worship of your life and souls bote
Takes also head that lordshyp ne estate
without virtue may not long endure
Thinks eke how vices and virtue at debate
Have been and shall while the world may dure
And ever the vycious by adventure
Is overthrow, and thinks evermore
That god is lord of al virtue, and figure
Of all goodness, and therefore follow his lore
My master Chaucer, god his soul save
That in his langage was so curious
He said that ye father which is deed and grave
Byqueth nothing his virtue with his house
Unto his children, and therefore laborouse
Ought ye be, besekynge god of grace
To give you might for to be virtuous
Through which ye might have part of his place
Here may se that virtuous noblesse
Comes not to you by way of auncestrye
But it comes by leful business
Of honest life, and not by slogardrie
wherefore in youth I read you ye edifye
The house of virtue in such a manner
That in your age may you keep and gye
Fro the tempest of worlds wawes here
Thinks how betwyxe virtue and estate
There is a parfyte blessed marriage
Virtue is cause of peace, vice of debate
In man's soul the which be full of courage
Cherysheth than virtue, vices to outrage
Drives he away, let hem have no wo^ning
In your souls leseth not the heritage
which god has give to virtuous living.
Takes head also, how men of pore degree
Through virtue have be set in great honor
And ever have lived in great prosperity
Through cheryshyng of virtuous labor
Thinks also how many a governor
Called to estate, has be set full low
Through misvsyng of right, and of error
And therefore I counsel you virtue to know
thus by your au^cestres ye may nothing claim
As yt my master Chaucer says express
But temporal thing, yt men may hurt or maym
Than is god stock of virtues noblesse
And sith that he is lord of blyssednesse
And made us al, and for us all deyde
Follows him in virtue with full business
And of this thing herk how my master said
The first stock, father of gentylnesse
what man that claymeth gentle for to be
Must follow his trace, and al his wits dres
Virtue to look, and vices for to fly
For unto virtue longs dignity
And not the reuers, safely dare I deem
All wear he mytre, crown or dyademe
The first stock was full of ryghtwysnesse
True of his word, sobre pytous and free
Clean of his ghost, and loved business
Against the vice of sloth in honesty
And but his heir love virtue as did he
He is not gentle though he rich seem
Al wear he mytre, crown or dyademe
Vice may be an heir to old richesse
But there may no man, al men may se
Byqueth his heir his virtuous noblesse
That is appropred unto no degree
But to the first father in majesty
that makes his heirs hem yt ca^ hi^ que^e
Al wear he mytre, crown or dyademe
Lo here this noble poet of Bretayne
How lightly in virtuous sentence
The loss on youth of virtue can compain
And therefore I pray you with your diligence
For your profit and gods reverence
Tempreth fully virtue in your mind
That wha^ ye come to your iuges presence
Ye be not vertulesse than behind.
Many lords have a manner now adays
Though one show hem a virtuous matere
Her fervent youth is of so false alayes
That of that art they have no joy to here
But as a ship that is without a stere
Dryueth up and down without governance
wenyng that calm would last year by year
Right so fare they for very ygnoraunce.
For very shame know they not by reason
yt after an ebb there comes a flood full rage
In ye same wise wha^ youth passes his seso^
Comes crooked and unwieldy palled age
And sone after common ye kalendes of dotage
And if yt her youth have no virtue provided
All men wol say, fie on her vassalage
Thus has her sloth fro worship hem divided
Boethius the clerk, as men may read and se
Says in his book of Consolation
what man desires of vine or tree
Plenteous fruit in reapyng season
Must ever eschew to do oppressyon
Unto the rote while it is young and grene
Thus may ye se well by that inclusyon
That youth vertulesse does much tene
Now sees there against how virtuous noblesse
Roted in youth with good perseuerau^ce
Dryueth away al vices and wretchedness
As slogardrye, ryote, and distaunce
Sees eke how virtue causes su^^saunce
Sees eke how virtue voydeth al vyse
And who so has virtue has al abu^daunce
Of well, as far as reason can deuyse,
Takes head of Tullius Hostylius
That fro pouerte came to high degree
Through virtue, redeth eke of Julius
The conqueror, how poor a man was he
Yet through his virtue and his humility
Of many country had he governance
Thus virtue brings a man to great degree
Each wight that lust to do him ente^daunce
Read here against now of Nero vertulees
Takes head also of proud Baithasare
They hated virtue, equity and pees
And look how Antyochus fyl fro his chare
That he his skyn and bones al to tare
Look what mischau^ce they had for her vices
who so wol not by these signs beware
I dare well say unfortunate and nyce is
I ca^ no more now say, but herby may ye se
Now virtue causes perfyte sykernesse
And vices exilen al prosperity
The best is each man to chose as I guess
Does as you list, I my excuse express
I would be right sorry if that ye mischefe
God confirm you in virtuous noblesse
So that through negligence ye not it lose.
Explicit.
Sometime the world so steadfast was and stable
That man's word was an obligation
And now it is so false and disceyuable
That word and deed as in conclusion
Is nothing like, for turned is up so down
All the world, through mede and fykelnesse
That al is lost for lack of steadfastness
what makes the world to be so variable
But lust that men have in discention
For among us a man is hold unable
But if he can by some collusion
Do his neighbor wrong and oppression
what causes this but wylful wretchedness
That al is lost for lack of steadfastness
Troth is put down, reason is hold fable
Virtue has now no domination
Pite is exiled, no man is merciable
Through couetyse is blente discretion
The world has made a permutation
Fro right to wrong, fro troth to fykelnesse
That al is lost for lack of stedastnesse.
Lenuoye.
Prince desire to be honorable
Cherysh thy folk, and hate extorcion
Suffer nothing that may be reprouable
To thine estate done in thy region
Show forth the yerde of castigation
Dread god, do law, love troth and worthiness
And wedde thy folk again to steadfastness.
Explicit.
Good counsel of Chaucer.
Fly ye fro the prease and dwell with sothfastnesse
Suffice unto thy good if it be small
For horde has hate, and clymbynge tykelnesse
Prease has envy, and well is blent over al
Savor no more than the behoue shall
Read well thy self that other folk shall read
And troth the shall deliver it is no dread
Pain the not each crooked to redress
In trust of her that turns as a balle
Great rest stondeth in little business
Beware also to spurn again a nalle
Strive not as does a Crocke with a wall
Deem thy self that demest others deed
And troth the shall deliver it is no dread
That the is sent receive in buxomnesse
The wrastlyng of this world asks a fall
Here is no home, here is but wilderness
Forth pilgrim, forth be out of thy stal
Look upon heygh and thank god of al
weyue thy lust and let thy ghost the led
And troth the shall deliver it is no dread
Explicit.
Balade of the vyllage without payntynge.
Playntyfe to fortune. This wretched worlds transmutation
As well and woe now pore and now honor
Without order or dew discretion
Governed is by fortunes error
But nathlesse the lack of her favor
Ne may not do me singe though that I dye
Iay tout pardu mon temps et labor
For finally fortune I defye.

Yet is me left the sight of my reasoun
To know friend fro foe in thy myrrour
So much has yet thy turnyng up and down
I taught me to known in an hour
But trewly no force of thy reddour
To him that over him self has maystry
My suffisaunce shall be my socour
For finally fortune I defye
O Socrates thou steadfast champion
She might never be thy turmentour
Thou never dreddest her opression
Ne in her chere found thou no favor
Thou knew the disceyte of her color
And that her most worship is for to lie
I know her eke a false dissimulour
For finally fortune I defye
The answer of fortune. No man is wretched but him self it wene
He that has him self has suffisaunce
why say thou than I am so to the kene
That have thy self out of my governance
say thus, grant mercy of thine abundaunce
That thou have lent or this, you shall not strive
what wost you yet how I will the auaunce
And eke thou have thy best friend on live

I have the taught diuisyon between
Friend of effect, and friend of countenance
The needs not the galle of an hyne
That cures eyes derke for her penance
Now see thou clear yt were in ignorance
Yet holt thine anchor, and yet thou may ariue
there bounte bears the key of my substance
And eke thou have thy best friend alive
How many have I refused to sustene
Sith I have the fostred in thy pleasaunce
wolt thou than make a statute on thy queen
That I shall be aye at thine ordinance
Thou borne art in my reign of varyaunce
About ye whele with other must thou drive
My lore is bette, tha^ which is thy greuau^ce
And eke thou have thy best friend a live
The answer to fortune. Thy lore I dampne, it is aduersite
My friend may you not reave blind goddess
That I thy friends know I thank it the
Take hem again, let hem go lie a press
The nygardes in keeping her richesse
Prouostyke is thou wolt her toure assail
wicke appetyte comes aye before syckenesse
In general this rule may not fail

Fortune. Thou pynchest at my mutabilyte
For I the lent a drop of my richesse
And now me lyketh to wythdrawe me
why should thou my royalte oppress
The sea may ebb and flow more and less
The welke^ has mixed to shine, rain and hayle
Right so must I kyth my brotylnesse
In general this rule may not fail

The playntyfe. Lo, the execution of the majesty
That al purueyeth of his ryghtwysenesse
That same thing fortune clepen ye
Ye blind beestes full of lewdness
The heaven has properte of sykernesse
This world has ever restless travail
The last day is end of mine entresse
In general this rule may not fail

Thenuoye of fortune. Princes I pray you of your gentylnesse
Let not this man on me thus cry and plain
And I shall quyte you this business
And if ye list releue him of his pain
Pray ye his best friend of his noblesse
That to some better estate he may attain

Lenuoye.
TO broken ben the statutes hye in heaven
That create were eternally tendure
Sith yt I se the bright gods seven
Mow weep and wail and passion endure
As may in earth a mortal creature
Alas, fro whence may this thing proceed
Of which error I dye almost for dread
By word eterne whilom was it shape
That fro the fyfth cercle in no manner
Ne might of tears down escape
But now so wepeth Venus in her sphere
that with her tears she wol drench us here
Alas Skogan this is for thine offense
Thou causest this deluge of pestilence
Have you not said in blaspheme of the goddis
through pride, or through thy great rekilnesse
such things as in ye law of love forbode is
That for thy lady saw not thy distress
Therefore thou yaue her up at Myghelinesse
Alas Skogon of old folk ne young
was never erst Skoga^ blamed for his tongue
Thou drew in scorn Cupide eke to record
Of thilke rebel word that thou have spoken
For which he wol no longer be thy lord
And Skogan though his bow be not broken
He wol not with his arowes ben ywroken
On the ne me, ne none of our figure
we shall of him have neither hurt ne cure
Now certes friend I dread of thine unhappy
Lest for thy gylt the wretch of love proceed
On al hem yt been hoar and round of shappe
That been so lykely folk to speed
Than we shall for our labor have our mede
But well I wotte thou wolte answer and say
Lo old grysel list to run and play
Nay Skogan say not so, for I me excuse
God help me so, in no ryme doutles
Ne think I never of sleep wake my muse
That rusteth in my sheth still in pees
while I was young I put her forth in prees
But al shall pass that men prose or ryme
Take every man his turn as for his time
Skogan thou knelest at the stremes heed
Of grace, of al honor, and of worthynesse
In the end of which I am dull as deed
Forgoten in solatary wilderness
Yet Skogan think on Tullius kindness
Mind thy friend there it may fructify
Farewell, and look thou never efte love defye
Explicit.
GO forth king, rule the by sapience
Bishop be able to ministre doctrine
Lord to true counsel give audience
womanheade to chastyte ever enclyne
Knight let thy deeds worship determyne
Be ryghtous judge in saving thy name
rych do alms, lest thou lose bliss with shame
People obey your king and the law
Age be thou ruled by good reugion
true servant be dredeful and keep ye under awe
And thou poor fie on presumption
Inobedience to youth is utter destruction
Remember you how god has set you lo
And do your part as ye be ordained to.
Chaucer unto his empty purse.
To you my purse and to none other wight
Complain I, for ye be my lady dear
I am sorry now that ye be light
For certes ye now make me heavy chere
Me were as lefe be laid upon a bear
For which unto your mercy thus I cry
Be heavy again or else mote I dye
Now vouchsafe this day or it be nygt
That I of you the blysful sown may here
Or se your color like the sun bright
That of yelownesse had never pere
Ye be my life, ye be my hertes stere
Queen of comfort and of good company
Be heavy again, or else mote I dye
Now purse that art to me my lives light
And savior, as down in this world here
Out of this town help me by your might
Sith that ye wol not be my treasourere
For I am shave as nygh as any friar
But I pray unto your curtesye
Be heavy again, or else mote I dye
Explicit.
Chaucer unto the king.
O conqueror of Brutes Albion
Which that by line and free election
Been very king, this to you I send
And ye that may al harms amend
Have mind upon my supplycation.
Explicit.
Consider well every circu^staunce
Of what estate so ever thou be
Rych, strong, or mighty of puissaunce
Prudent or wise discrete or besy
The dome of folk in soth thou may not fly
what ever thou do trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
For in thy port or in thine apparayle
If thou be cladde and honestly be seyne
Anon the people of malice wol not fail
without aduyce or reason for to said
That thyn array is made and wrout in vain
what suffer hem speak, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
Thou would to kings be equiuolent
with great lords even and peregal
And if thou be torn and al to rent
Than wol they say, and iangle over all That thou art a slogarde yt never thrive shall
Yet suffer hem speak, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
If it befall that thou take a wife
They wol falsely say in their intent
That thou art lykely ever to live in strife
Void of al rest, without alegement
wives hem maystren, this is their judgment
Yet suffren their speech, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
If thou be fair and excellent of beauty
Yet wol they say that thou art amerous
If thou be foul and vglye on to se
They woll affirm that thou art vicious
The peoples langage is so dispytous
Suffer al their speech, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
If so be that thou of parfyrenesse
Have auowed to live in chastity
Than wol folk of thy person express
that thou art impote^t tenge^dre in thy degree
And thus whether thou be chaste or delauie
Suffer hem speak, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
If thou be fat or corpulent
Than woll they say thou art a gloton
A denouret, or else vynolent
If thou be megre or lean of fashyon
Call the a nygarde in their opinyon
Yet suffer them speak, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
If thou be rich, some wol give the laud
And say it comes of prudent governance
And some wol say it comes of fraud
Or by sleyght, or by false cheuysaunce
To say the worst, folk have so great plesau^ce
what suffer hem say, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
If thou be sad or sobre of countenance
Men wol say thou thynkest some treason
And if thou be glad of dalyaunce
Men wol deem it dissolution
Calling fair speech adulation
Yet let hem speak, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
And who that is holy by perfection
Men of malice wol call him an ypocrite
And who that is merry of clean entencion
Me^ say in riot he him does delight
some mourn in black, some laue in clothes white
what suffer hem say, and trust well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
who speaks much is holden prudent
And who debateth, me^ say that he is hardy
And who yt says little with great senteme^t
Some men yet wol wit him of folly
Troth is put down, and now goth flattery
and who yt list plainly know ye troth of this
It is a wicked tongue, yt always says amys
For though a man were as pacient
As was David through humility
Or with Solomon in wisdom as prudent
Or in knyghthode egal with Iosue
Or manly proved, as Judas Machabe
Yet for all that, trust right well this
A wicked tongue wol always say amys
And though a man had the high prowess
Of worthy Hector, Troyes champion
The love of Troylus, or the kyndnesse.
Or of Caesar the famous high renoun
with al Alysaunders domination
Yet for all that trust right well this
Some wicked tongue of him wol say amys
Or though a man of high or low degree
Of Tullius had the sugared eloquence
Or of Seneca the great moralite
Or of Caton the ^oresyght and providence
the conquest of Charles Artures magnifice^ce
Yet for all that trust right well this
Some wicked tongue wol say of him amys
The wisely troth of Penelope
Though they it had in her possession
Holiness, beauty, the kyndenesse of Medee
The life unfeigned of Mertia Caton
Or of Alcest the true affection
Yet dare I say, and trust right well this
A wicked tongue wol say of her amys
Than sythen it is so, no man may eschew
The sword of tongue, but it kerue and byte
Full hard it is a man for to remewe
Out of their danger him for to aquyte
woe to the tongues that hem so delight
To hinder or sclaunder, and set their study in this
And their pleasaunce to do and say amys
Most noble princes, cheryshers of virtue
Remembers you of high discrecyon
The first virtue and most pleasyng to Jesus
(By the writing and sentence of Caton)
Is a good tongue in his opinyon
Chastyse the reuerse, and of wisdom do this
withdraw your hering from al ye same amys.
Et sic est finis.
Thus ends the works of Geffray Chaucer, Prynted at London. The year of our
lord. 1542.

Epitaphtu^ Galfridi Chaucer, per poet am lauriatum Stephanum Surigonum
Mediolanensem in decretis licentiatum.
PYerides muse si possint numina fletus
Fundere, diuinas atque riga re genas.
Galfridi vatis Chaucer crudelia fata
Pla^gite: sit lachrymis abstinuisse nephas.
Vos coluit viue^s: at vos celebrate sepul^u^
Reddatur merito gratia digna viro.
Gra^de decus vobis e^ docti musa Maronis,
Qua didicit melius lingua latma loqui.
Gra^de, nouu^que decus Chaucer, fama^que peranit
Hen quantu fuerat prisca Britanna rudis
Reddidit insigne^ maternis uersibus, ^^^am
Aurea splendescat, ferrea facta prius.
Hu^c latuisse viru^ nil, si tot opuscula vertes,
Direris, egregiis que decorata modis,
Socratis ingenium, vel fo^tes philosophy,
Quicquid et archani dogmata sacra (...).
Et quascu^que velis, tenuit dignissimus a^^^s
Hic vates, paruo conditus hoe tumulo.
Ah laudis quamtu^ preclara Britannia perdis.
Dum rapuit tantum mors odiola vi^^.
Crudeles parce, crudelia ^ila sorores,
Non tamen extineta co^^^re, lama p^^^
Viuet meternum, viuent dum scripta po^^^
Viuant eterno rot monumenta die.
Si qua bonos ta^git pietas, si carmie dign
Carmia qui cecinit tot cumulata mo^^^
Hec sibi marmoreo scriba^t verba sepul^h^^
Hec maneat laudis sarcina summa (...)
Galfridus Chaucer vates, et fama poes^^
Materne, hac sacra sum tumulatus hum^.
Post obitum Caxton voluit te viuere cura
willelmi, Chaucer clare poeta tui,
Nam tua no^ solu^ co^pressit opuscula formis
Has quoque sed lauds iussit hic esse tuas.

