The assemble of fowls.

Here follows the assemble of fowls very pleasant and compendyous to read
or here compyled by the preclared and famous clerk Geffray Chaucer.



Roberte Coplande book prynter to new fanglers.
News / news / news / have ye any news
Myneeres ache / to here you call and cry
Ben books made with whystelynge and whewes
Ben there not yet ynow to your fantasye
In faith nay I trow and yet have ye daily
Of matters sad / and eke of apes and oules
But yet for your pleasure / thusmoche do will I
As to let you here the parliament of fowls.
Chaucer is deed the which this pamphlete wrate
So ben his heirs in all such business
And gone is also the famous clerk Lydgate
And so is young Hawes / god their souls adresse
Many were the volumes ye they made more and less
Their books ye lay up / till that the lether moules
But yet for your minds this book I will impresse
That is in tytule the parlyament of fowls
So many learned at leest they say they be
Was never seen / doing so few good works
Where is the time that they do spend trow ye
In prayers? ye / where? in feldes and parkes
Ye but where be bycomen all the clerks?
In slouthe and idleness their time defoules
For lack of writing / containing moral sperkes
I must imprynt the parliament of fowls.
Dytees / and letters them can I make my self
Of such ynowe ben daily to me brought
Old moral books stand still upon the shelfe
I am in fere they will never be bought
Tryfles and toys they ben the things so sought
Their wits tryndle like these flemysshe boules
yet gentle clerks follow him yeought
That did endyte the parlyament of fowls.
finis.
THe life so short the craft so long to learn
The assay so hard so sharp ye co^querynge
The slyder joy y^ always slyd so yerne
All this mean I by love yt my feeling
Astonyeth so with dredefull workynge
So sorey wys that when I on him think
Not wot I well where that I wake or wynke.
For all be that I know not love in deed
Ne wot how he quyteth folk their hyre
Yet happeth me in books often to read
Of his miracles and of his cruel ire
There read I well he will be lord and sire
Dare I not say his strokes ben so sore
But god save such a lord I can no more.
Of usage what for lust what forlore
On books read I often as I you told
But why that I spoke not all this yore
Agon / it happed me for to behold
Upon a book was write with letters old
And there upon a certain thing to learn
The long day I radde full fast and yerne.
For out of old feldes as men says
Comes all this new corn fro year to year
And out of old books in good faith
Comes all this new science that men lere
But now to purpose of my first matere
To read forth began me to delight
That all the day thought me but a lyte.
This book of which I may make mencyon
Entytuled was all there I shall you tell
Tullius of the dreme of the Cypyon
Chapytrees is had.vij. of heaven and hell
And earth and souls that therein dwell
Of which as shortly as I can trete
Of his sentence I will tell the great.
First tells it when Cypyon was come
Into Aufryke how he met Messymysse
That him for joy in arms has ynome
Than tells he her speech and all the bliss
That was between them till the day began mysse
And how his auncestre aufrycan so dear
Began on his sleep that night to him appear.
Than told he him that fro a sterry place
How Aufrycan has him cartage showed
And warned him before all his grace
And said to him what man learned or lewed
That loves comune profit well ythewed
He shall unto a blysfull place wend
There joy is that lasts without end.
Than asked he if the folk that here be deed
Have life and dwelling in an other place
And Aufrycan said ye without dread
And our present worlds lives space
Meneth but a manner death what may we trace
And ryghtfull folk shall go when they dye
To heaven / and showed him the galerye.
Than showed he him the little earth that here is
At regard of heuens quantyte
And showed him the nine sperys
And after that the melodye herd he
That comes of thylke sperys thryes three
That well is of musyke and melodye
In this world and cause of armonye.
Than bade he him se the earth that is so lyte
And was somdell full of hard grace
That he ne should him in the world delight
Than told he him in certain years space
That every sterre should come into his place
There it was first and all shall out of mind
That in this world was done of all mankind.
Than prayed he Cypyon to tell him all
The way to come to heuens bliss
And he said know thyselfe first mortal
And look ay besyly thou work and wysse
To comune profit and thou shalt never mysse
To come swyftly unto that place dear
That full of bliss is and souls clear.
But brekers of ehe law sothe for to said
And lecherous folk after that they ben deed
Shall always whyrle about the earth in pain
Till many a world be passed out of dread
And than forgyuen them all their wicked deed
Than shall they come unto that blysfull place
To the which to come god send yche lover grace.
The day began fail and the derke night
That reueth bestes from their business
Byrefte me my book for lack of light
And to my bed / I began me for to dress
Fulfilled of thought and busy heaviness
For both I had thing which that I nolde
And eke I ne had thing that I would.
But finally my spyryte at the last
For weary of my labor all the day
Took rest that made me to sleep fast
And in my sleep I met as I lay
How Aufrycan right in that self array
That Cypyon him saw before that tide
Was comen and stood right at my beds side.
The weary hunter slepynge in his bed
To wood again his mind gothe anon
The judge dremeth how his pleys be sped
The carter dremeth how his carts gone
The rich of gold the knight fight with his tone
The seek meteth he drynketh of the tonne
The lover meteth he has his lady won.
Can I not say if that the cause were
For I red had of Aufrycan beforne
That me to mete that he stood there
But thus said he thou have the so well borne
In lokynge of mine old book all to torn
Of which Macrobye rought not a lyte
That somdele of thy labor would I the quyte.
ytherea thou blysfull lady sweet
That with thy fyry bronde dauntest whom ye lest
And made me this sweuen for to mete
Be thou my help in this for thou may best
As wysshly as I saw the north north west
When I began my sweuen for to write
So ye give me might to ryme and to endyte.
This foresaid Aufrycan me hente anon
And forth with him unto a gate brought
Right of a park walled with great stone
And over the gate with letters large ywrought
There were verses written as me thought
On either half of full great dyfference
Of which I shall you say the plain sentence.
Thrughe me men go into that blysfull place
Of hertes hele and deedly wounds cure
Thrughe me men go unto the well of grace
There grene and lusty May shall ever endure
This is the way to all good adventure
Be glad thou reder and thy sorrow of cast
All open am I pass in and hye the fast.
Thrughe me men go than spoke that other side
Unto the mortal stroke of the spear
Of which dysdayne and danger is the gyde
There tree shall never leaves bear
This streme you ledeth unto the sorrowful were
There as the fysshe in prison is all dry
The eschewynge is the remedy.
These verses of gold and blackey written were
Of which I began a stounde to behold
For with that one increased ay my fere
And with that other began mine heart to bold
That one me hette that other did me cold
No wit had I for error for to chese
To enter or fle or me to save or lose.
Right as between Adamantes two
Of even might a pyece of iron set
That has no might to meue to ne fro
For what that one may hale that other let
So fared I that I ne wist where that me was bette
To enter or leave till Aufrycan my gyde
Be hente and shofe in at the gates wide.
And said it stands written in thy face
Thine error though thou tell it not to me
But dread the not to come into this place
For this writing is nothing meant by the
He by none but he loves servant be
For thou of love hase lost thy taste I guess
As seek man has of sweet and bytternesse.
But nethles all though thou be dull
That thou can not do yet may thou se
For many a man that may not stand a pull
Yet lyketh him at the wrastlynge for to be
And demeth yet whether he do bette or he
And if thou hau^ conynge for to endyte
I shall the show matter of to write.
And with that my hand in his he took anon
Of which I conforte caught and went in fast
But lord so I was glad and well by gone
For over all where I mine eyes cast
Were trees clad with leaves that aye shall last
Each in his kind with color fresshe and grene
As emerawde that joy was to seen.
The bylder oak and eke the hardy asshe
The pyler elm / the cofer unto carayne
The box pype tree / holme to whyppes lasshe
The sail yerde fyrre / the cypress death to plain
The shorter ewe / the aspe for shaftes plain
The olyue of peace and eke the dronken vine
The victor palm the laurer to deuyne.
A garden saw I full of blosomed bowis
Upon a river in a grene mede
There as swetenes evermore enough is
With flowers white blewe yelowe and read
And cold well stremes nothing deed
And swymmynge full of small fysshes light
With fynnes reed and scales silver bright.
On every bough the birds herd I sing
With voice of angel in their armonye
That busyed them their birds forth to bring
The little conyes to their play began hye
And further about I began espy
The drefull roo the bucke the heart and hynde
Squyrell and beestes small of gentle kind.
On instruments of string in a cord
Herd I so play and rauyshynge sweetness
That god that maker is of all and lord
Ne herd never better as I guess
Therewith a wind uneath it might be less
Made in the leaves grene a noise soft
Acordynge to the fowls song on lofte.
The air of that place so attempred was
That never was greuaunce thereof hot ne cold
There grows every wholesome spyce and gras
No man may there wexe seek ne old
Yet was there more joy a thousand fold
No man can tell never would it night
But ay clear day to any man's sight.
Under a tree beside a well I say
Copide our lord his arowes forge and fyle
And at his fete his bow all ready lay
And Will his daughter tempered all the while
The hedes in the well and with a hard fyle
She couched them after as they should serve
Some to sle and some to wound and kerue.
Tho was I ware of pleasaunce anon right
And of array and lust and curtesye
And of the craft that can and has the might
To go before a wight and to do folly
Dysfygured was she I shall not lie
And by himself under an oak I guess
Saw I Delight that stood with Gentylnesse.
I saw beauty without any atyre
And youghe full of game and iolyte
Fool hardynesse flatery and desire
Massagery mede and other three
Their names shall not be told for me
And upon pylers great of jasper long
I saw a temple of bras founded strong.
About the temple daunced always
Women ynowe of which some were
Fair of themself and some of them gay
In kyrtles all dyssheueled went they there
That was their office always fro year to year
And on the temple saw I white and fair
Of douues white many an hundredth pair.
Before the temple door full sobrelye
Dame peace sat a curtayne in her hand
And her beside wonder dyscretlye
Dame Pacyence sitting there I fond
With face pale upon an hill of sonde
And alder next within and without
Beheste and art and of their folk a route.
Within the temple with syghes hot as fire
I herd a syghe that began about run
Which syghes were engendered with desire
That made every auter for to brenne
Of new flamme and I espied then
That all the cause of sorrows that they dry
Come of the bitter gods Ialosye.
The god Pyrapus saw I as I went
Within the temple in sovereign place stand
In such array as when the ass him shente
With cry by night and with his ceptre in hand
Full besyly men ganne assaye and fond
Upon his heed to set of sundry hew
Garlandes full of fresshe flowers new.
And in a preuy corner in dysporte
Found I Venus and her porter richesse
That was full noble and hauteyne of her port
Derke was that place and afterward lyghtnesse
I saw a lyte uneath it might be less
And on a bed of gold she lay to rest
Till that the hot son began to the west.
Her gylte heers with a gold thread
I bounden were vntressed as she lay
And naked fro the breest unto the heed
Men might hearse and sothly for to say
The remanent covered well to my pay
Right with a subtle keuerchesse of valence
There was no thycker clothe of defense.
The place gave a thousand sauoures swote
And Bacchus god of wine sat her beside
And Ceres next that does of hunger bote
And as I said amyddes lay Cupyde
To whom on knees the young folks cryde
To be their help but thus I let her lie
And serther in the temple I began espy.
That in despyte of Dyane the chaste
Full many a bow ybroke hanged on the wall
Of maidens such as began their times waste
In her service and peynted over all
Of many a story of which I touch shall
A few as of Calyxte and Athalante
And many a maid of which the name I want.
Semiramus Candace and Hercules
Byblys Dido Tesbe and Piramus
Trystram ysoude Paris and Achylles
Heleyne Cleopatre and Troplus
Sylla and eke the mother Romulus
All these were painted on that other side
And all their love and in what plyte they dyed.
When I was come again into that place
That I of spoke that was so sweet and grieve
Forth walked I tho my self to solace
Tho was I ware where there sat a queen
That as of light the somer son shene
Passes the sterre right so over mesure
She fayrer was than any creature.
And in a launde upon an hill of flowers
Was set this noble gods of nature
Of branches were her halles and her bowres
Y wrought after her craft and her mesure
Ne there was foul that comes of engendure
That there ne were priest in her presence
To take her dome and give her audyence.
For this was on saint Valentynes day
When every foul comes there to chose his make
Of every kind that men think may
And that so huge a noise began they make
That earth see and tree and every lake
So full was that uneath was other space
For me to stand so full was every place.
And right as Alayne in the pleynt of kind
Deuyseth nature of such array and face
In such array men might her there find
This noble empress full of grace
Bade every foul to take her own place
As they were wont always fro year to year
On saint Valentynes day to stand there
That is to say the fowls of rauyne
Were highest set and than the fowls small
That eten as nature would enclyne
As worm or thing of which I tell no tale
But water foul sat lowest in the dale
And foul that lives by sede sat on the grene
And that so many that wonder was to seen.
There might men the royal egle find
That with his sharp look perceth the son
And other egles of a lower kind
Of which that clerks well deuysen konne
There was the tyraunte with his feathers done
And grene I mean the goshauke that does pain
To birds for his outragyous rauayne.
The gentle faucon that with his foot dystreyneth
The kings hand / the sperhauke eke
The quayles fo the merlyon that peyneth
Himself full often the lark for to leke
There was the douue with her eyes meke
The jealous swanne against his death that syngeth
The oule eke that of death the bode brings.
The crane the geaunte with his trompes sewne
The thief the choughe and eke ye jangling pie
The scoruynge iaye the egles fo herowne
The false lap wynge full of treachery
The stare that the counseyle began bewrye
The tame ruddcke and the cowarde kytte
The cock that orologe is of thorpes lyte.
The sparowe Venus sone / the nyghtyngale
That clepyth forth the fresshe leaves new
The swalowe mordrer of the fowls small
That maken honey of flowers fresshe of hew
The wedded turtle with his heart true
The pecocke with his angels feathers bright
The fesaunte scorner of the cock by night.
The waker goes the cukkowe ever unkind
The popyniay full of delycasye
The drake scorner of his own kind
The storke wreker of auowtrye
The hot cormeraunte of glotenye
The raven and the crow with her voice of care
The throstle old and the frosty feldfare.
What should I say of fowls every kind
That in this world have feathers and stature
Men might in that place assembled find
Before that noble gods of nature
And yche of them did his besy cure
Benyngly to chose or for to take
By her acorde his formell or his make.
But to the point nature held on her hand
A formal egle of shape the gentyllest
That ever she ymonge her works fond
The most benynge and goodlyest
In her was every virtue at his rest
So ferforthe that nature her self had bliss
To look on her and often her beke to kiss.
Nature the vyker of the almighty lord
That hot cold heavy light moist and dry
Has knytte by even nombre of a cord
In esy voice began to speak and say
Fowls take heed of my sentence I pray
And for your ease in furtherynge of your need
As fast as I may speak I will me speed.
Ye know well how on saint Valentynes day
By my statute and through my governance
Ye come for to chose and fle your way
With your makes as I prycke you with plesaunce
But nethles my ryghtfull governance
May I not let for all this world to win
That he that most is worthy shall begin.
The tercell egle as that ye known well
The foul royal above you all in degree
The wise and worthy the secret true as stele
The which I have fourmed as ye may se
In every part as it best lyketh me
It needs not his shappe you to deuyse
He shall first chose and speak in his gyse.
And after him by order shall ye chese
After your kind eueryche as you lyketh
And as your hap is shall ye win or lose
But which of you that love most entryketh
God send him her that sorest for him syketh
And therwithall the tercell began she call
And said my sone the choys is to you yfalle.
But netheles in this condycyon
Must be the choys of eueryche that is here
That she agree to his eleccyon
Who so he be that should be her fere
This is our usage always fro year to year
And who so may at this time have his grace
In blysfull time he came into this place.
With heed enclyned and with full humble chere
This royal tercell spoke and tarried naught
Unto my souereygne lady and not my fere
I chese and chesse with will and heart and thought
The formell on your hand so well I wrought
Whose I am all and ever will her serve
Do what her lust to do me live or sterue.
The per. of fou.
Besechynge her of mercy and of grace
As she that is my lady sovereign
Or let me dye present in this place
For certes long may I not live in pain
For in mine heart is koruen every vein
Having reward only to my truth
My dear heart have on my woe some ruthe.
And if I be found to her untrue
Dysobeysaunte or wylfull neclygent
Auauntour or in process love a new
I pray to you this be my judgment
That with these fowls I be all to rent
That ylke day that ever she me find
To her untrue or in my gylte unkind.
And sith that none loves her so well as I
All though she never of love behette
Than ought she be mine through her mercy
For other bond can I none on her knette
For never for no woe ne shall I let
To serve her how far so that she wend
Say what thou lest my tale is an end.
Right as the fresshe reed rose new
Against the somer son colored is
Right so for shame all wexen began the hew
Of this formell when she herd all this
Neither she answered well ne said amys
So sore abashed was she till that Nature
Said daughter dread you not I you assure.
Another tercell egle spoke anon
Of lower kind and said that should not be
I love her better than ye do by saint Johan
Or at lest I love her as well as ye
And longer have served her in my degree
And if she should have loved for long loving.
To me alone had be the guardonynge.
I dare eke say if she me find falls
Unkind iangler or rebel any wise
Or ialouse do me hang by the hals
And but I bear me in her seruyse
As well as my wit can me suffyse
Fro point to point her honor for to save
Take she my life and all the good I have.
The third tercell egle answered tho
Now syrs ye se the little layser here
For every foul cries out to be ago
Forth with his make or with his lady dear
And eke herself will naught here
For taryenge her not half that I would say
And but I speak I must for sorrow dey.
Of long service auaunte I me nothing
But as possible is me to dye to day
For woe as he that has be languysshynge
These twenty winter and well happen may
A man may serve better and more to pay
In half a year though it were no more
Than some man does that has served full yore.
I ne say not this by me for I ne can
Do no service that may my lady plese
But I dare say I am her truest man
As to my dome and faynest would her plese
At short words till that death me sese
I will be hers wheder I walk or wynke
And true in all that heart may bethynke.
Of all my life sith that day I was borne
So gentle ple in love or other thing
Ne herd I never no man me beforne
Who that had leyser and conning
For to rehers her chere and her speaking
And from the morrow began this speech last
Till downewarde went the son wonder fast
The noise of fowls for to be delivered
So loud range / have done and let us wend
That well wend I the wood all to shyuered
Come of they cried alas ye will us shende
When shall your cursed pledynge have an end
How should a judge either party leave
For ye or nay without any preue.
The goos the ducke and the cukkowe also
So cried keke keke cukko we queke queke hye
That through mine eeres the noise went tho
The goos said tho all this nys worth a fly
But I can shape hereof a remedy
And will say my verdyte fair and swythe
For water foul who so be sad or blythe.
And I for worm soul said the foul cuckoo
For I will of mine own auctoryte
For comune speed take on me the charge now
For to deliver us is great charity
Ye may abide a while yet parde
Quod the turtle if be your will
A whyght may speak him were as good be still.
I am a sede foul one the vnworthyest
That wot I well and little of conning
But better is that a wyghtes tongue rest
Then entremete him of such doing
Of which he neither read can nor sing
And who so does full foul himself acloyeth
For office vncommytted often anoyeth.
Nature which that always had an ere
To murmr of the lewdness behind
With faconde voice said / hold your tongues there
And I shall soon I hope a counsel find
You for to deliver and from this noise unbind
I judge of every folk men shall one call
To say the verdyte of you fowls all.
Assented were to this conclusyon
The birds all / and fowls of rauyne
Have chosen first by plain eleccyon
The tercelet of the faucon to dyffyne
All her sentence and as him lust to termyne
And to nature him they did present
And she accepts him with glad intent.
The assem. of fou.
The tercelet said then in manner
Full hard were it to preue it by reason
Who loves best this gentle formell here
For eueryche has such replycacyon
That by skylles may none be brought adoune
I can not se that arguments avail
Then seems it there must be battle.
All ready quod this egles tercelles tho
Nay syrs quod he if that I durst it say
Ye do me wrong my tale is not ydo
For syrs takes not a grefe I pray
It may not as ye would in this way
Ours is the voice that have the charge in hand
And to the judges dome ye must stand.
And therefore I say as to my wit
Me would think how that the worthyest
Of knyghthode / and lengest had used it
Most of estate of blood the gentyllest
Were sitting to her if that her lest
And of these three she wot her self I trow
Which that he be / for it is light to know.
The water fowls have their hedes laid
Together / and of short auysement
When eueryche had his large gold said
They said sothely all by one assent
How that the goos with her faconde gent
That so desires to pronounce our need
Shall tell our tale and prayed to god her speed.
And for these water fowls tho began
The goos to speak and in her cakelynge
She said pes now / take keep every man
And harken which a reason I shall forth bring
My wit is sharp I love no taryenge
I say I read him though he were my brother
But she will love him let him love another.
Lo here a perfyte reason of a goos
Quod the sperhauke never mote she the
Lo such it is to have a tongue loos
Now parde fool it were better for the
Have hold thy peace then showed thy nycete
It lies not in his wit nor in his will
But sothe is said a fool cannot be still.
The laughter arose of gentle fowls all
And right anon the sede fowls chosen had
The turtle true / and did her to them call
And prayed her to say the sothe sad
Of this matter / and asked what she rad
And she answered that plainly her intent
She would show / and sothly what she meant.
Now god forbede a lover should change
The turtle said and wexe for shame all reed
Though that his lady evermore be strange
Yet let him serve her always till he be deed
For so the I praise naught the goses reed
For though she dyed I would not other make
I will be hers till that the death me take.
Well bourded quod the ducke by my hat
That men should love always causeless
Who can a reason find or wit in that
Daunceth he merry that is myrthlesse
Who should recke of that is rechelesse
Ye queke quod the ducke full well and fair
There be mosterres god wot than a pair.
Now fie chorle quod the gentle tercelette
Out of the donghyll came that word full right
Thou rauste not se which thing is well bysette
Thou farest by love as owls do by light
The day them blyndeth full well they se by night
Thy kind is of so low a wretchedness
That what love is thou can not se nor guess
Tho began the cuckoo put himself in preas
For foul that eteth worm / and said as blyue
So I quod he may have my make in peace
I recke not how long that ye strive
Let yche of them be soleyne all their live
This is my reed sith they may not acorde
This short lesson needs not record.
Ye have the gloton filled enough his paunche
Than are we well said the emerlyon
Thou murderer of haysoge on the branch
That brought the forth thou rufull gloton
Live thou soleyne worms corrupcyon
For no force is for lack of thy nature
Go lewd be thou while thy life may dure.
Now peace quod nature I command here
For I have herd all your opinion
And in effect yet be we never the nere
But finally this is my conclusyon
That she herself shall have her eleccyon
Of whom her lust who so be wroth or blythe
Him that she cheseth he shall have her as swythe.
For sith it may not here dyscussed be
Who loves her best as said the tercelet
Than will I do this favor to her that she
Shall have right him on whom her heart is set
And he her that his heart has on her knet
This judge I nature for I may not lie
To none estate I have none other eye.
But as for counseyle to chese a make
If I were reason than would I
Counseyle you the royal tercell take
As said the tercelet full skylfully
As for the gentyllest and most worthy
Which I have wrought so well to my pleasaunce
That it ought to be to you a suffysaunce.
With dredefull voice the formell her answerde
My right full lady gods of nature
Sothe is that I am ever under your yerde
As is every other creature
And must be youres while my life may endure
And therefore grant me my first boon
And mine intent I shall you say right soon
I grant it you quod she and right anon
This formell egle spoke in this degree
Almighty queen unto this year be done
I ask respyte for to advise me
And after that to have my choys all fre
This is all and some that I would speak and sey
Ye get no more all though ye do me dey.
I will not serve Venus ne Cupyde
For soche as yet by no manner way
Now sith it may none other ways betyde
Quod nature here is no more to say
Than wolke I that these fowls were away
Yche with his make for taryenge longer here
And said them thus as ye shall after here.
To you speak I ye tercelettes said nature
Be of good heart and serve ye all three
A year is not so long to endure
And yche of you pain him in his degree
For to do well for god wot quyte is she
Fro you this year what after so befall
This entremesse is dressed fro you all.
And when this work all wrought was to an end
To every foul nature gave his make
By even acorde and on their way they wend
A lord the bliss and joy that they make
For yche of them began other in wings take
And with their necks yche began other wind
Thanking always the noble gods of kind
But first were there chosen fowls for to sing
As year by year was always their vsaunce
To sing a roundell at their departing
To do Nature honor and plesaunce
The note I trow ymaked was in France
The words were such as ye may here find
The next verse as I now have in mind.
Que bien aim atard oblye.
And with their shout y^ge when their song was do
That fowls made at their flight away
I woke / and other books took me to
To read upon / and yet I read always
I hope y wys to read so some day
That I shall mete some thing for to fare
The better / and thus to read I will not spare.
Explicit tractatus de congregatione volucrum die sancte Vnlentini.
Thus ends the congregacyon of fowls on saint Valentynes day.
Lenuoy of R. Coplande book prynter.
Laid upon shelfe / in leaves all to torn
With letters dymme / almost defaced clean
Thy hyllynge rotte / with worms all to worn
Thou lay / that pity it was to seen
Bound with old quayres / for aege all hoore and grieve
Thy matter endormed / for lack of thy presence
But now thou art losed / go show forth thy sentence.
And where thou become so order thy language
That in excuse thy prynter look thou have
Which has the kept from ruynous damage
In snow swyte paper / thy matter for to save
With thylke same langage that Chaucer to the gave
In terms old / of sentence clered new
Tha^ methe much sweter / who ca^ his my^de auewe.
And if a lover happen on the to read
Let be the goos with his lewd sentence
Unto the turtle and not to her to take heed
For who so changes / true love does offense
Love as I read is flower of excellence
And love also is rote of wretchedness
Thus be two loves / scryture bears witness.
Finis.
Imprynted in london in fleet street at the sign of the Son against the
condyte / by me Wynkyn de Word. The. xxiiij. day of January / in the year of
our lord. M.CCCCC. and.xxx.


