The Apprehension and confession of three notorious Witches.
Arreigned and by Justice condemned and executed at Chelmes-forde, in the
Countye of Essex, the 5. day of Iulye, last past. 1589.

With the manner of their devilish practices and keeping of their spirits,
whose fourmes are herein truly proportioned.



To the Reader.
IF we would call to remembrance the manifold mercies and innumerable
benefits which the Almighty has and daily bestows upon us, in consideration
thereof, we are bound to withdraw our filthy affections and naughty
dispositions, from the use of such detestable dealinges, as both are detested
of God, whose almighty commandments forbids them, and unto man, whose
laws are constituted to punish them as odious before the sight of God, whereon
our earthly laws groundeth and consists, and therefore used to punish or cut
of such lewd or filthye offenders as by breaking the divine decrees of the
Almighty, by the laws of man descrues to be condemned: But such is the
blindenes of our estate, the naughtines of our affections, and the desire of
our devilish appetites, that neither the commandments of God, the laws of
our Realm, the love of our neighbors, our own welfare, or the fall of others
can or may move us to consider how profitable it were for us to examine our
lives, and to blemish such vices in us as both the laws of God and man
forbids: For what can be more odious or abominable unto God then the
deprivation of his divine power, by yielding our selves seruiles unto satan
for a little worldly wealth, or hatred we have to our neighbors, where we
might rest the servants, nay the Sons of Almighty God, who sent his only
Son to redeem us from the servitude of bondage, and to bring us unto his
bliss and eternal felicity, which shall evermore remain perfect, which if we
would consider, what christian is so blinded with ignorance or overcome with
the illusions of Satan, but he would tremble to think upon the judgments of
the Almighty pronounced against such offenders, or the laws of the Realm,
which by justice decydeth them from their deuilish practices and abominations?
the glory whereof, although it be secretly concealed and used, yet can it not
long continue, because the Almighty will be no partaker of any such dealinges,
nor the heart of any faithful Christian conceal the secrets thereof: which for
example I have here published unto you the discourse of such devilish
practices as have been used by notorious Witches, whose names and actions I
have severally touched in the treatise following: with the manner of their
accusations, taken and approved before both honorable and woorshipfull her
Majesty's Justices, at the last Assizes holden at Chelmesford in the County of
Essex, according to the coppies both of the offenders confession by
examination: and their accusations regestred.

The araignement and execution of Joan Cunny of Stysted in the Countye of Essex
widow, of the age of fourscore years, or ther-abouts, who was brought before
Anthony Mildemay Esquire, the last day of March. 1589.
IN primis, This witch had nine Spirits 1. of them were like unto a black dog,
having the faces of a Toade.
this examinate says and confesses, that she has knowledge and can do the
most detestable Art of Witchecraft, and that she learned this her knowledge in
the same, of one mother Humfrye of Maplested, who told her that she must kneel
down upon her knees, and make a Circle on the ground, and pray unto Satan the
chief of the Devils, the form of which prayer that she then taught her,
These spirits belonging to this witch, did suck commonly upon a sore leg which
this mother Cunny had.
this examinate has now forgotten, and that then the Spirits would come unto
her, the which she put in practice about twenty years since, in the Feelde of
John Wiseman of Stysted Gentleman, called Cowfenne feelde, and there making a
Circle as she was taught, and kneeling on her knees, said the prayer now
forgotten, and inuocating upon Satan: Two Sprites did appear unto her within
the said Circle, in the similitude and likeness of two black Frogs, She had
four principal fpirits. The first was Jack. The second was Iyll. The third
was Nicholas. The fourth was Ned.
and there demanded of her what she would have, being ready to do for her
what she would desire, so yt she would promise to give them her soul for their
travail, for otherwise: they would do nothing for her. Wher-upon she did
promise them her soul, and then they concluded with her so to do for her,
what she would require, and gave themselves several names, that is to say, the
one Jack, and ye other Iyll, by the which names she did always after call
them. And then taking them up, she carried them home in her lap and put them in
a Box and gave them white bread and milk. Jack killed mankind. Iyll killed
womenkinde. Nicholas killed horses. Ned killed Cattle.


And within one month after she sent them to milk Hurrelles Beasts, which
they did, and they would bring milk for their own eating and not for her.

And further, she says that her sprites never changed their color since they
first came unto her, and that they would familiarly talk with her, when she
had any thing to say or do with them in her own language. Note how Gods
spirit confounds the impes of wickedness.


And likewise she confesses that she sent her said spirits to hurt the wife
of John Sparrow the elder, of Stysted, which they did, and also that where
Master John Glascock of Stysted, aforesaid: had a great stack of Logges in
his yard, she by her said Spirits did overthrow them.

And further, faith that she has hurt diverse persons within this sixteen or
twenty years, but how many she now knows not.

Furthermore, she confesses that she sent her sprites unto William Unglee of
Stysted Miller, and because they could not hurt him, she sent them to hurt one
Barnabie Griffyn his man, which they did. Likewise she confesses, that she
sent her said sprites, to hurt Master Kitchen Minister of the said town,
and also unto one George Coe of the said town shoemaker, to hurt him
likewise: but they could not, and the cause why they could not, as the said
sprites told her, was because they had at their coming a strong faith in God,
and had inuocated and called upon him, that they could do them no harm.

And further she says, that Margaret Cunny her Daughter, did fall out with
Father Hurrill, and gave him cucsed speeches, and ther-vpon, she thinks she
sent her spirits to her.

Also she does vtteriye deny that she sent her said spirits to Finches wife,
Deuenishes wife, and Renold Ferror or any of them to hurt them.

And being further examined, she confesses that although her said spirits at
some time can have no power to hurt men, yet they may have power to hurt their
Cattle.

This Ioane Cunny, living very lewdly, having two lewd Daughters, no better
then naughty packs, had two Bastard Children: being both boys, these two
Children were chief witnesses, and gave in great evidence against their
Grandam and Mothers, the eldest being about 10. or 12. years of age.

Against this Mother Cunny the elder Boy gave in this euideoce which she
herself after confessed, that she going to Braintye Market, came to one Harry
Finches house, to demand some drink, his wife being busy and a brewing, told
her she had no leisure to give her any. Then Ioane Cunnye went away
discontented: and at night Finches wife was grievously taken in her head, and
the next day in her side, and so continued in most horrible pain for the space
of a week, and then dyed.

Mother Cunnye confessed that she sent her spirit Iill to torment her.

The same boy confessed that he was commanded by his Grandmother to fetch a
burden of wood, which he gathered, but another boy stole it from him, and he
came home without: and told his Grandam: and she commanded her sprite to
prick the same boy in the foot* which was done* and the same boy came to the
bar lame and gave evidence against her.

Again the same boy confessed that his Grandam when he had lost his wood,
said she would have wood enough: and bad him go into Sir Edward Huddlestones
ground being high Sheriff of the Sheere, and to take with him Jack the
sprite, and so he did, who went unseen to any body but to the boy, and when
they came to a mighty Oke-tree, the spirit went about it, and presentlye the
Tree blew up by the roots: and no wind at all stirring at this time: which
Master high Sheriff acknowledged to be blown down in a great calm.

The confession of Joan Vpney of Dagenham, in the Countye of Essex, who was
brought before Sir Henrye Gray Knight, the third of May. 1589.
THis examinate says, that one Fustian Kirtle, otherwise called White-cote, a
witch of Barking, came to her house about seven or eight years ago, and gave
her a thing like a Moule, and told her if she ought any body any ill will, if
she did bid it, it would go clap them.

She says that Moule tarried not above a year with her, but it consumed away,
and then she gave her another Moule and a Toad, which she kept a great while,
and was never without some Toades since till her last going away from her
house, when she confesses she ran away, because she heard John Harrolde and
Richard Foster say she was a witch, and urch other words.

She says that one day she lest a Toade under the groundsill at Harrolds
house, and it pinched his wife and sucked her til she dyed, but it never ca^e
to her the said Joan Upney again.

She says, that one day another Toade went over her threshold as Richard
Fosters wife was coming that way, and it went and pinched her, and never
returned again.

Other two Toades she left at home, when she ran away, but they consumed away.

She says that her eldest Daughter would never abide to meddle with her
Toades, but her youngest daughter would handle them, and use them as well as
her self.

The examination of Joan Prentice, one of the women of the Alms house of
Hinningham Sibble, within the said County: being taken the 29. of March, in
the 31. year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth.
IN Primis, this said examinate says and confesses, that about six years
last past, between the feasts of all Saints, and the birth of our Lord God,
the devil appeered unto her in the Alms house aforesaid: about ten of the
Clock in the night time, being in the shape and proportion of a dunnish
culloured Ferrit, having fiery eyes, and the said Examinate being alone in
her Chamber, and sitting vpona low stool, preparing her self to bedward: the
Ferrit standing with his hinder legs upon the ground, and his fore legs settled
upon her lap, and settling his fiery eyes upon her eyes, spoke and pronounced
unto her these words following, namelye: Joan Prentice give me thy soul, to
whom this Examinate being greatly amazed, answered and said: In the name of
god what art thou The Ferrit answered, I am satan, fear me not mycomming unto
thee is to do thee no hurt but to obtain thy soul, which I must and will have
before I depart from thee to whom the said examinate answered and said, that
he demanded that of her which is none of hers to give, saying: that her soul
appertained only unto Jesus Christ, by whose precious blood shedding, it was
bought and purchased. To whomethe said Ferret replied and said, I must then
have some of thy blood, which she willingly granting, offered him the
forefinger of her left hand, the which the Ferrit took into his mouth, and
setting his former feet upon that hand, sucked blood therout, in so much that
her finger did smart exceedingye: and the said examinate demanding again of
the Ferrit what his name was: It answered Bidd. and then presently the said
Ferrit vanished out of her sight suddenly.

Item, the said examinate says further, that about one month after, the
said Ferrit came again unto her in the night time as she was sitting upon a
little stool, preparing her self to bed-ward, as is above said: Joan will thou go to bed, to whom she answered yea that I will by Gods grace, then
presently the Ferret leapt up upon her lap, and from thence up to her bosom,
and laying his former feet upon her left shoulder, sucked blood out of her
left cheek, and then he said unto her, Joan if thou will have me do any
thing for thee, I am and will be always ready at thy commandment, and
ther-upon she being a little before fallen out with William Adams his wife of
Hinningham Sibble aforesaid: willed the Ferret to spoil her drink which was
then in brewing, which he did accordingly.

Item, the said examinate furthermore says and confesses, that the said
Ferret diverse times after appeered unto her always at the time when she was
going to bed, and the last time he appeered unto her was about seven weeks
last past, at which time she going to bed, the Ferrit leapt upon her left
shoulder, and sucked blood out of her left cheek, and that done: he
demanded of her what she had for him to do? To who^ she answered, go unto
Master Glascocks house, and nippe one of his Children a little, named Sara,
but hurt it not, and the next night he resorted unto her again, and told her
that he had done as she willed him: namely, that he had nipt Sara Glascock, and
that she should dye thereof, to whom she answered and said, thou villain what
have thou done, I bid thee to nip it but a little and not to hurt it, and have
thou killed the child? which speech being uttered, the Ferrit vanished away
suddenly, and never came to her sithence.

Item, she affirms, that the occasion why she did will her Ferret to nippe
the said child, was for that she being the day before at the house of the
said Master Glascok, to beg his alms, answer was made to her by one of
his maiden servants, that both her Master and Mistres were from home, and
therefore desired her to be contented for that time, and thereupon the examinate
departed greatly discontented, and that night sent her Ferret to nip the
child as is abouesaide.

Item, she says and affirms, that at what time soever she would have her
Ferret do any thing for her, she used these words, Bidd, Bidd, Bidd, come
Bidd, come bidd, come bidd, come suck, come suck, come suck, and that presently
he would appear as is aforesaid: and sucked blood out of her left cheek, and
thenperfourmed any mischief she willed or wished him to do for her unto or
against any of her neighbors.

Lastly the said examinate says, and confesses, that one Elizabeth Whale, the
wife of Michaell Whale of Henningham Sibble aforesaid labourer, and Elizabeth
Mott, the wife of John Mot of the said Town Cobbler, are as well acquainted
with her Bidd as her self is, but knows not what hurt they or any of the^
have done to any of their neighbors.

WHen their inditements were read, and their examinations also, they stood
upon their terms, to prolong life: yet to make the matters more apparent,
sundry witnesses were produced to give evidence against them* and first the
Judge of the circuit very wisely with a great foresight, called in the two
Basterd Children before mentioned, and contended them greatly for telling the
truth of that which he should ask them, concerning their Grandam and their
mothers, which they did, and having said what they could, together with the
depositions of sundry other witnesses, they having confessed sufficient matter
to prove the inditements. The Jury found these bad women guilty and that they
had slain Men, women, and Children, And committed very wicked and horrible
actions, diverse and sundry times, and ther-upon, the Judge proceeded, and
pronounced the sentence of death against them, as worthily they had deserved.

After they had received their judgments, they were conuayed from the Bar
back again to Prison, where they had not stayed above two hours, but the
officers prepared themselves to conduct them to the place of execution: to
which place they led them, and being come thither, one Master Ward a learned
divine, being desired by the Justices, did exhort these wicked women to
repentance, And persuaded them that they would show unto the people the truth
of their wickedness, and to call upon God for mercy with penitent hearts. And to
ask pardon at his hands for the same: some few prayers they said after the
precher, but little else: more then this, that they had deserved to dye, in
committing those wicked sins: and so took their deaths patiently.

Note, that Mother Upney being inwardlye pricked and having some inward feeling
in conscience cried out saying: that she had grievously sinned, that the devil
had deceived her, the devil had deceived her, and that she had twice given her
soul to the Devil, yet by the means of Gods spirit woorking in her, and the
pains which Master ward took with her, she seemed very sorry for ye same,
and died very penitent, asking God and the world forgiveness, even to ye last
gasp, for her wicked and detestable life.

FSNIS.


