

Jack up Land Compyled by the famous Geoffrey Chaucer.

Ezechielis. xiii. Woe be unto you that dishonor me to me people for an handful
of barlye and for a piece of bread Cum priuilegio Regali.

These be^ the lewed questions of Freres rytes and obseruaunces the which they
chargen more than Gods law, and therefore men shulden not give hem what so
they beggen, till they hadden answered and clearly assoyled these questions.
I Jack vplande make my moan to very god and to all true beleuynge in Christ yt
Antichryst and his discyples by color of holiness walkyn and deceauen Christ's
church by many falls figures, where through by Antichrist and his, many virtues
been transposed to vices.

But the fellest folk that ever Antichrist found been last brought in to the
church, and in a wonder wise, for they been of diverse, sects of Antichrist,
sown of diverse contrees, and kynreddes. And all men known well that they be^
not obedient to bysshoppes, ne lege men to kings, nether they tyllen, ne
sown, weden, ne repe^ wood, corn, ne grass, nether nethi^g that man should
help, but only hem selves her lyfes to susteyn. And these men had all manner
power of god as they saye^ in heaven, and in earth, to sell heaven, and hell to
whom, that him lyketh, and these wreches wate never where to been hem selfs.

And therefore friar if thine order and rules ben grounded on gods law, tell
thou me Jack up land that I ask of the, and if thou be or thynkest to be on
christ's side keep thy patience.

Saint Paul teaches, that al our deeds should be done in charity, and else it is
not worth, but dyspleasynge to God, and harm to our own souls. And for
because freres chalengen to greatest clerks of ye church, and next folowinge
Christ in living, men should for charity are hem some que styons, and pray hem
to ground their answers in reason, and in holy write, for else their answer
would not be worth, be it floryshed never so fair, and as me thynk men might
skylfully are thus of a friar.

Friar how many orders be in earth, and which is the perfytest order? of what
order art thou? who ma de thine order? what is thy rule? Is there any perfyter
rule than Christ himself made? If Christ's rule be most perfyte why rulest
thou the not thereafter? without more. why shall a friar be more punyshed if he
break the rule that his patron made than yfhe break the hestes that god
himself made?

Approves Christ any more relygyons than one that saint James speaks of? If
he approves nomor why have thou lef his rule, and taken another? why is a
friar apostata that leaves his order, and takes another sect, sith there is
but one relygyon of Christ.

Why be ye wedded faster to your abytes than a man is to his wife. For a man
may leave his wife for a year or two as many me^ do, and if you leave your
abyte a quarter of a year, ye should be holden apostatas.

Makes your abyte you men of relygion or no? If it do, than ever as it
wears, your relygyon wears, and after that the abbyte is better, is you
relygyon better, and when ye lyggen it beside you, than lyg ye your relygyon
beside you, and ben apostatase, why by ye you so pre cyous clothes, sith no man
seeks such but for vain glory, as. s. Gregory says.

What betokens your great hoode, your scaplerye, your knotted gyrdel, and
your wide coape?

Why use ye al one color more then other Christen men do? what betokens
that ye been clothed all in one manner clothing?

If ye say, it betokens love, and charyce, certes than ye be often ypocrytes,
when any of you hates other, and in that that ye woollen be said holy by your
clotynge.

Why may not a friar wear clothing of an other sect of freres, sith holiness
stondeth not in the clothes.

Why hold ye syle^ce in one house more than in another, sith me^ ought over al
to speak the good and leave the evil?

Why eat you flesh in one house more than in another? if your rule and your
order be perfyt, and the pa tron that made it?

Why get ye you dyspensacyons to have it more easy, certes either it seems
that ye be imperfect, or he, that made it so hard, that ye may not hold it.
And seker if ye hold not the rule of your patrons ye be not than her freres,
and so ye lie upon your selfs.

Why make ye you as dead men when ye be professed, and yet ye be not dead but
more quycke beggars than ye were before, and it seems evil a dead man to go
about and beg.

Why will ye not suffer your nouyces hear your councels in your chapter
house ear that they been professed, if your councels been true, and after
gods law?

Why make ye you so costly hou ses to dwell in? sith Christ did not so, and
dead men should have but graves, as falls to dead men, and yet ye have more
gorgeous buyldiges tha^ many lords of England, for ye may wenden through the
ted gyrdel, and your wide coape?

Why use ye al one color more then other Christen men do? what betokens
that ye been clothed all in one manner clothing?

If ye say, it betokens love, and charity, certes than ye be often ypocrytes,
when any of you hates other, and in that that ye woollen be said holy by your
clotynge.

Why may not a friar wear clothing of an other sect of freres, sith holiness
stondeth not in the clothes.

Why hold ye syle^ce in one house more than in another, sith me^ ought over al
to speak the good and leave the evil?

Why eat you flesh in one house more than in another? if your rule and your
order be perfyt, and the pa tron that made it?

Why get ye you dyspensacyons to have it more easy, certes either it seems
that ye be imperfect, or he, that made it so hard, that ye may not hold it.
And seker if ye hold not the rule of your patrons ye be not than her freres,
and so yelye upon your selfs.

Why make ye you as dead men when ye be professed, and yet ye be not dead but
more quycke beggars than ye were before, and it seems evil a dead man to go
about and beg.

Why will ye not suffer your nouyces hear your councels in your chapter
house ear that they been professed, if your councels been true, and after
gods law?

Why make ye you so costly houses to dwell in? sith Christ did not so, and
dead men should have but graves, as falls to dead men, and yet ye have more
gorgeous buyldi^ges tha^ many lords of England, for ye may wenden through
the the realm, and each night welnygh lygge in your own courts, and so mow
but right few lords do

Why here ye to ferme your lymytors, geuynge therefore each year a certain
rent, and will not suffer one in an others lymytacyon, right as ye were your
selves lords of contreys.

Why be ye not under your bishops visitacions, and lyege men to our king.

Why are ye no letters of brether hedes of other men's prayers, as ye desire
that other men should ask letters of you?

If your letters be good, why grant ye them not generally to al manner men
for the more charity?

Mow ye make any man more per fyte brother for your prayers than god has by
our believe, by our bap time, and his own grant, if ye mow, certes than ye
be above god.

Why make ye men believe yt your golden trentall song of you to take therefore.
r. shyllynges, or at the least. v. shyllinges will bring souls out of hell
or out of purgatory, if this be south, certes ye might bring all souls out
of pain, and that wolle ye naught, and than ye be out of cha ryte,

Why make ye men believe that he that is buried in your abyte shall never come
in hell, and ye wit not of your self whether ye shall to hell or no, and if
this were south, ye should selle your high houses to make ma ny abytes; for to
save many men's souls.

Why steal ye men's children for to make hem of your sect since yt theft is
against gods heste, and sith your sect is not perfect. ye know not wether
the rule that ye bind him to be best for him or worst,

Why undermine ye not your bre thren for their trespass after the law of the
gospel, since that vnderneminge is the best that may be, but ye put them in
presonne often when they do after gods law and by saint Austines rule, if any
did amiss and would not amend him, ye should put him from you.

Why couete ye shryfte and buryenge of other men's paryshens, and none other
sactament that falls to Christen folk.

Why busye ye not to hear shryfte of poor folk as well as of rich lor des
and ladies? sith they mow have more plenty of shryfte fathers tha^ poor
folk may.

why say ye not the gospel in hou ses of bedred men? as ye do in rych men's
that mow go to church and hear the gospel.

why couette you not to burye poor folk among you? since that they be^ most
holy, as ye said that ye ben for your pouertye.

why will ye not ben at her dyryges as ye been at rich men's? since God prayseth
hem more tha^ he does rich men.

what is thy prayer worth? since thou wylt take therefore, for of all chapme^ ye
need to be most wise for dread of symonye.

what cause have thou that thou will not preach the gospel? as God says
that thou should, sith it is the best lore and also our believe?

why be ye evil paid that secular Prestes should preach ye gosgel? since god
him self has boden him.

why hate ye the gospel to be preached, sith ye be so much hold thereto for
ye win more by year with In principio than with all the rules that ever
your patrons made And in this mynstrels been better than ye, for they
contrarye^ not to the myrtes that they maken: but ye co^trayen the gospel
both in word and deed.

Friar, wha^ thou receyuest a penny for to say a mass, whether sellest thou
gods body for yt penny or prayer, orels thy trauail? if thou say thou wolt
not travail for to say ye mass but for ye penny, and certes if this be soth
tha^ thou love to lyttel mede for thy soul, and if thou sellest gods body
other thy prayer, than it is very symony and art become a chap man worse than
Judas that sold it for thyrty pens.

Why wrytest thou her names in thy tables that yeueth the money? Since God
knows all thing, for it semyth by thy writing, that God would not reward
him, but thou write him in thy tables, god would else forgetten it.

Why bear thou God in hand and sclaundrest him that he begged for his
meat? since he was lord over all, for than had he ben unwise to have begged,
and no need thereto?

Friar after what law rulest thou yt? where fyndest thou in gods law that thou
should thus beg?

What manner men needs for to beg?

Of whom owes such men to beg?

Why beggest thou so for thy bre thren?

If thou say, for they have need than thou do it for the more perfec tion
or else for the least, or else for the mean, if it be the most perfeccion of
all, than should al thy brethren do so and than no man neded to beg but for
him self, for so should no man beg but him neded. And if it be ye least
perfeccion, why love thou tha^ other men more than thy self? For so thou
art not well in charytye, sith thou should seek the more per feccion after
thy power, living thy self most after God, and thus leaving that
imperfeccion thou should not so beg for hem. And if it is a good mean thus
to beg as thou docste than should no man do so but they ben in this good
mean, and yet such a mean granted to you may never be grounded in gods
law, for than both learned and lewd that be^ in mean degree of this world,
should go about and beg as ye do, and if all such should do so, certes well
nygh al ye world should go about and beg as ye do, and so should there be ten
beggars against one yeuer.

why procurest thou men to give the here alms, and say it is so me defull,
and thou wylt not thy self win the that mede,

why wylt thou not beg for poor bedred me^ that been poorer tha^ any of your
sect, that liggen and mow not go about to help them selfs, since we be all
brethren in God and that bretherhed passes any other that ye or any man could
make and where most need were there were most perfeccion either else ye hold
him not your pure brethren or worse, but than ye be imperfyte in your
begginge.

why make ye you so many masters among you, sith it is against the teaching
of Christ and his Apostels

whose ben all your rych courts that ye han, and all your rich yewels, sith
ye saye^ that ye han naught improper ne cumune if ye said they ben the popes,
why gether ye then of poor men and of lords so much out of the kings hand
to make your pope rich. And sith ye sayen that it is great perfeccyion to have
naught in proper ne comune? why be ye so fast about to make the pope yt is
your father rych and put on him imperfeccio^? sithen ye said that your goods
ben all his, and he should by reason be the most perfect man, it seems open
lych that ye ben cursed children so to sclaunder your father, and make him
imperfyte, and if ye said that tho goo des be yours, the^ do ye against your
rule, and if it be not against your rule than might ye have both plough and
carte and labor as other good me^ done, and not so to beg by lesyngery and
ydell as ye done, and if ye say that it is more perfeccion to beg than to
trauayll or worch with your hand why preach ye not openly and teach all me^ to
do so? since it is ye best and most perfyte life to help of her souls as ye
make children to beg that might have be rich heirs.

Why make ye not your feasts to poor men, and yeueth hem yeftes, as ye done
to the rych? since poor me^ han more need than the rich.

what be tokeneth yt ye go tweyne and tweyne together? If ye be out of
charity, ye accorden not in soul.

why beg ye, and take salaries there to more than other prestes? since he ye
most takes most charge he has.

why hold ye not saint Fraunces rule and his testament? since Fraunces says yt
God showed him this lyuig and this rule, and certes if it were god des will the
pope might not fordo it orels Fraunces was a liar yt said on this wise, And
but this testament that he made accord with gods will, else erred he as a
liar that were out of charytie, and as the law says he is cursede yt lets
the rightful will of a dead man lack, And this testament is the least will of
Fraunces that is a dead man, it seems that all his freres ben cursed.

why will ye not touch no coined money with the cross ne with ye kyn ges
hedde, as ye done other Jeuels both of gold and silver? Certes if ye despise
the cross or ye kings head than ye be worthy to be despised of God and the
king, and sith ye will receive money in your hearts, and not with your
hands, it seems that ye hold more holiness in your hondes than in your
hearts, and than be ye false to God.

Why have ye exempte you fro our kings laws, and visytinge of our bishops
more than other christen men that lyuen in this realm, if ye be not gyltye of
traytery to our realm, or trespasers to our bishops? But ye will have the
kings laws for trespass done to you, and ye will have power of other bishops
more tha^ other prestes, and also have leave to prison your brethren as lords
in your courts more than other folks han ye ben the kings lege men.

Why shall some sect of you freres pay each year a certain to her ge nerall
prouynciall or minister, or else to her souerayns, but'yf he steal a certain
number of children, as some me^sayne, and certes if this be soth, than be ye
constrained upon certain pain to do theft against gods commandment. Non
furtuin facies.

Why be ye so hardy to grant by letters of fraternity to men and women that
they shall have part and merit of all your good deeds, and ye wyten never
whyther god be paid with your deeds, because of your sin, Also ye weten
never whether that man or woman be in state to be saved or damned, than shall
he have no merit in heaven for hrs own deeds ne for none other man, and all
were it so that he should have part of your good deeds yet should ye ha ue no
more than God would give him after that he were worthy, and so much shall each
man have of gods yefte wtoute your lymytacion. But if ye will say that ye
ben gods folowes, and that he may not do without your assent, than be ye
blasphemers to God.

what tokeneth that ye have ordained that when such one as ye have made your
brother or sister, and has a letter of your seal yt letter might be brought
in your holy Chapter, and there be read, orels ye will not pray for him, but
and ye wyllen not pray specially for all other that weren not made your
brethren or systre^ than were ye not in right charity, for that ought to
beco^mne, and namely in goostely things

Friar what charity is this to over charge the people by myghtie begginge under
color of preaching, or prayeng, or masses synging? Since holy write byddeth
not thus, but eue^ the contrary, for all such goostly deeds should be done freely
as god gives hem freely.

Friar what charity is this to begyle children or they commen to discrecion,
and bind him to your orders that been not grounded in gods law, against
her friends will, sithen by this folly be^ many apostatase both in will and deed
and many ben apostatase in her will, during all her life that would gladly be
dyscharged if they wist how, and so many ben apostatase that shulden in other
states have be^ true men.

Friar what charity is this to make so many freres in every country to ye
charge of the people? since persons and vycares alone, ye secular prestes
alone, ye monks and chanons alone, with bishops above him were enough to the
church to do prestes office, and to add mo than enough, is a foul error and
great charge to the people, and this is openly against gods will that
ordained all things to be done, in, weight, number, and measure and Christ
himself was paid with twelve Apostles and a few disciples to prea che and do
prestes office to all ye hole world, tha^ was it better done than it is now at
this time by a thousand deal, and right so as four fyngers, with a thumb in a
man's hand helps a man to worche and double number of fyngers in one hand
should let him more, and the more number that there were passing the measure of
gods ordinance the more were a man let to work. Right so as yt seems it
is of these new orders that been added to the church without ground of holy
write and gods ordinance.

Friar what charity is this to lie to the people and say that ye follow Christ
in pouertye more than other men done, and yet in curious and costly howsynge
and fine and precious clothing, and delycious and lykinge fedinge and in
treasoure and jewels and rych orname^tes freres passen lords and other rych
wordly me^ and soonest they should bring her cause about, be it never so
costely though gods law be put abake.

Friar what charity is this to gather up ye books of holy write and put hem in
tresory and so emprysonne hem from secular prestes, and curates, and by this
cautel let him to preach ye gospel freely to ye people without wordely mede, and
also to defame good prestes of heresy and lain on he^ openly for to let hem to
show gods law by ye holy gospel to the Christen people.

Friar what charity is this to fayn so much holiness in your bodily clothing yt
ye clepe your abyte? that ma ny blind foles desyren to dye therein more tha^ in
an other. and also yt a friar that leaves his abyte late founde^ of men, may
not be assoyled till he take yt again, but is an apostata as ye said, and
cursed of God and man both, The friar believes treuth and patience, chastyte,
meekness, and sobryete, yet for the more part of his life he may soon be
assoyled of his pryor, and if he bring home to his house much good by year,
be it never so falsely begged and pylled of ye poor and nedy people, in courts
and about, he shall be hold a noble friar, o lord whether this be charity?

Friar what charity is this to prea se upon a rich man, and to entyce him to
be buried among you from his parysh church, and to such rich me^ give letters
of fraternity co^fyrmed by your general seal, and thereby to bear him in
hand that he shall have part of all your masses, matins, preachynges,
fastinges, wakinges, and all other good deeds done by your brethren of your
order both whiles he lives, and after that he is dead, and yet ye wyte^ never
whether your deeds be acceptable to god, ne whether that man that has that
letter be able by good living to receive any part of your deeds, and yet a
poor man that ye wit well or supposen in certain to have no good of, ye ne ge
ue no such letters though he be a bet ter man to god than such a rych man
nevertheless this poor man does not reche thereof. For as men supposen such
letters, and many other yt freres behesten to men be full of false deceytes of
freres out of reason, and gods law, and Christen men's faith.

Friar what charity is this to be confessoures oflordes and laydes, and to
other mighty men, and not amend hem in her living, but ra there as it seems to
be the bolder to pyl her poor tenauntes, and to live in lechery, and there to
dwell in your of fyce of confessor for winni^g of world ly goods, and to be
holde^ great by co loure of such goostly offices, this seems rather pride of
freres than charity of God.

Frcre what charity is this to sayn that who so lives after your order lives
most perfytely, and next follows the state of Aposteles in pouerte and
penance, and yet the wyseste, and greatest clerks of you wend or send, or
procure to ye court of Rome to be made Cardynales, or bysshoppes, or the popes
chappelay nes, and to be assoiled of the vow of pouertye and obedyence to your
my nysters, in the which as ye sayn stan death most perfeccyon, and merit of
your orders, and thus ye fare^ as Pharisees that sayen one and do another to
the contrary.

why name ye more the patron of your order in your Confytcor wha^ ye begin
mass, than other saints as Apostels or marters that hol chur che hold more
glorious than them, and clepe hem your patrons, and your auowrycs.

Friar wheter was saint Fraunces in making of his rule that he set thine order
in, a fool and liar, or else wise and true? If ye said that he was not a fool
but wise, ne a liar, but true, why show ye the contrary by your doing? when by
your suggestyon to ye pope ye said that Frau^ces rule was made so hard, yt ye
might not live to hold it, without declaracyon, and dyspensacyon of the pope,
and so by your deed ye let your patron a fool that made a rule so hard that
no man may well keep, and eke your deed proves him a liar, where he says in
his rule that he took and learned it of the holy gooste.

For how might ye for shame pray the pope to undo that the holy ghost byddeth,
as ye prayed him to dyspense with the hardness of your order.

Friar which of the four orders of freres is best to a man that knows not
which is the best, but would feign enter in to the best, and none other? If
thou say that thine is the best than say thou that none of the other is as
good as thine, and in this each friar in the three other orders wolle say that
thou lie, for in the self manner each other friar woll say yt his order is
best. And thus to each of the. iiii. orders ben the other three contrary in
this point in the which if any say south, that is one alone, for there may but
one be ye best of four, so follows it yt if each of these orders answered to
this que stion as thou do, three were false, and but one true, and yet no man
should wit who that were. And thus it seems yt the most part of freres ben
or should be liars in this point and they should answer thereto. If you say
that an other order of the freres is better than thine or as good, why took ye
not rather thereto as to ye better when thou myghtest have chose^ at the
beginning, and eke why should thou be an apostate to leave thyn or der, and
take ye to yt yt is better, and so why go thou not from thin order into yt?

Friar is there any perfiter rule of religion than Christ gods son gave in
his gospel to his brethren, or than yt religion ye saint James in his epistle
makes mention of? If you say yes, than put thou on Christ yt is wisdom
of god ye father vncunyng, vnpower, or evil will, for either than he could not
make his rule so good as an other did his And so he had be^ vncunnyng, that
he might not make his rule so good as an other man might, and so were he
vnmyghty and not god, or he would not make his rule so perfyte as an other did
his, and so he had been evil willed namely to himself.

For if he might, and could, and would have made a rule perfyte without de
fate, and did not, he was not gods son almighty. For if any other ru le be
perfyter tha^ Christ's, tha^ must Christ's rule lack of that perfeceyon by as
much as the other weren more perfyter, and so were defaute, and Christ had
failed in making of his rule, but to put any defaute or faylynge in god, is
blasphemy. If thou say that Christ's rule, and yt relygyon that saint James
makcth mencyon of is the perfytest? why hol dest thou not than thylke rule
without more. And why clepest thou the rather of saint Frau^ces or saint
Domynyks rule or relygyon or order, than of Christ's rule or Christ's order?

Friar can thou assygne any defaute in Christ's rule of the gospel with the
which he taught al men se kerly to be saved if they kept it to her ending.
If thou say it was to hard, than say thou Christ lied for he said of his
rule, My yoke is soft, and my burden light. If thou say, Christ's rule was
to light, that may be assygned for no defaute, for ye better may it be kept. If
thou sayft that there is no defaute in Christ's rule of the gospel, sith
Christ him self says, it is light and easy, what need was it to patrons of
freres to add mor thereto? and so to make an harder religyon to save freres
than was the relygion that Christ's Apostels and his disciples helde^ and we
ren saved by, but if they wolde^ that her freres saten above the Apostels in
heaven for the harder relygyon yt they kepen here, and so would they sytte in
heaven above Christ himself, for the moo, and strayt obseruaunces: than so
should they be better than Christ himself with myscaunce.

Go now forth and fraye^ your clerks, and ground ye in gods law and give
Jack answer, and when ye han assoiled me that I have said sadly in treuth I
shall soyll the of thine order, and save the to heaven.

If freres cunne not or mow not excuse him of these questions asked of hem, it
seems that they be horrible gylty against god, and her even christen, for
which gyltes and defau tes it were worthy that the order ye they call her
order were fordone.

And it is wonder ye men sustain he^ or suffer he^ live in such manner. For
holy write bids yt thou do well to the meke, and give not to ye wicked but
forbid to give hem bread lest they be made thereby myghtier through you.

Finis.
Prynted for Ihon Gough.

Cum Priuilegio Regali.


