A Brefe declaration of the great / and innumerable myseries / and
wretchednesses used i^ courts ryall, made by a lettre, which master Alayn
Charatre wrote to his brother, which desired to come dwell in the court, for to
advise, and counsel him not to enter into it, lest he after repent, newly
augme^ted, amplified, and inrytched, By Francis Segar.

1549

He that does couyt the courtly life to know
If it will please him, to take a little pain
To read this treatise, which here does follow
Wherein it is discrybed, brefely, and plain.
F.S. to the reader.
Here have thou expressed before thy eyse
The mysery and wretchedness of the life curial
And how that by fortune some daily do rise.
And contrary wise by he agean do fall,
Trust not to fortune which always is variable
For some she does exalt and some she brings low
^he is never true, constant and sta^le
But as tides use their times, to ebb and to flow
Covetousness causes myschefe to rise
Desire of dignite with pompous ambition
Which the wise man, does always dispyse
And is content, with his vocation
When froward fortune, with frownyng face
At your inhauncinge, takes grudge or envy
In short time, she will you displace
And bring you to shame ruen and mysery
Ill you yt ar called, unto any high place
Be true unto your, anointed King
And call unto God, to give you the grace
So to contynu^, to your lives ending,
AMEN.
(...) court, that they that be simple, be dispraysed, ye virtuous enuyed, and
ye proud arrogau^tes, in mortal peril. And if thou be placed under ye other
courchiers, thou shall envy at their power, if you be in mean estate, in ye
which thou have not suffisau^ce, thou shall labor and strive for to mou^te and
rise hyer, and if thou may come to ye hye secrets which be strongly to
doubt, fear, and dread, in the doubtous courteyns of ye most hie princes,
the^ shall you be most unfortunate, for so much as y^ s^i^est to be most
fortunate and happy, so much more shall thou be in great danger and peril to
fall, like to him yt is mounted into ye most his place, for to the^, who^
fortune ye variable has most hyghly lift up, and inhau^sed, rests no more,
but for to fall fro so hye, down, because she owes to them, nothing but
shame, ruin, and destruction if that you have taken of her all that thou
myghteste, and yt she would give, then art thou detter of thy self, to the
end that she render and yield y^ unfortunate, and unhappy, who^ she had
before inhaunced. And yt she mock him of his mischefe who^ she had made blind
of vayn glory of his inhaunsyng for the great wyndes that blow in hye courts,
be of soche nature, and condition, yt they only that be highest inhaunsed, be
after their dispoyntmente / as a spectacle of envy, detractyon or of hate, unto
all people, and find them self, subjects, till they be shamed and put down
among the people, and that they that before siewed to the^ and flattered the^
report of them more greater blames and deuysyons, the^ the other, for the
multitude of people disprayse the^ always yt fortune has most altered, and
thrown down, and also is envious at the^ (...)


