OF WISDOM THREE BOOKS

WRITTEN IN FRENCH by PETER CHARRO^ Doct of Law in Paris.

Translated by Samson Lennard

AT LONDON PRINTED For Edward Blount and Will Aspley

Gulielmus Hole fecit


The subject and order of these three Books.
THe First Book teaches the knowledge of our selves and our humane condition,
which is the foundation of Wisdom, by five great and principal considerations
of man, and contains 62. Chapters.

The Second contains the principal rules of Wisdom, the privileges and
proper qualities of a wise man, and has 12. Chapters.

The Third, in a Discourse of the four Moral virtues, Prudence, Justice,
Fortitude, Temperance, sets down the particular instructions of Wisdom in
43. Chapters.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince, HENRY, Prince of GREAT BRITAIN, Son and
Heir apparent to our Sovereign Lord the King.
DEceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil, but to the Counselors of
peace shall be joy. It is the saying (most excellent Prince) of the wisest
Prince: that ever lived; and it is the unspeakable happiness of us that live
under the gracious government of your renowned Father, that he does not only
approve what he said, but practice it too, and in the whole course of his
government finds it to be true: for peace he counsels, and joy, and peace,
and content he enjoys: nay, it is by his wisdom and provident care that we
are all at peace with the whole world, and the whole world with us: a blessing
that few Kingdoms of the earth do truly enjoy; and the greatness whereof we
know not because we enjoy it. It is an Argument unto my self of that inward
peace that his Highness has with God and his own soul: for, Pax a nobis
incipit, quia dum lex carnis repugnat legimentis, non modo alteri sed nec nobis
possumus esse pacifici: sed postquam intus spiritus imperat vt totus homo
spiritui seruiat, tunc pax ad alios deriuatur, vt pacem cum omnibus habeamus.
And he that never spoke but wisely says, When the ways of a man please the
Lord, he will make all his enemies at peace with him. Ever may all his enemies
be at peace with him, and he with his enemies: and let all that love the peace
of our Jerusalem say, A men. This peace (right excellent Prince) whose nature
it is to turn swords into mattocks, soldiers into husbandmen, (for as much as
my education made me not fit for that) has turned my sword into a pen. Then
my profession was arms, and J fought for peace; which since we now enjoy, J
thought J should dishonor so honorable a profession too much, to be idle, and
abuse so excellent a blessing as peace is, by making it the mother of so
untoward a child. Heerupon J hung up my sword to rust in the scabbard till
good occasion might draw it forth again; and long J had not thought with my
self which way I might serve my King and my Country in these peaceable times,
but this book fell into my hands; which when I had read, I thought worthy the
translation: and though I had no reason to think the translation worthy your
Highness protection, yet the matter fittest for a Prince, and your Princely
clemency to others in the like kind, have emboldened me to become humble
petitioner to your Highness, that you would be pleased to honor the excellency
of the work with your patronage, and protect my infirmities. The subject of
this work is Wisdom: And what fitter for a Prince? If you honor it, it will
honor you as it has done your royal Father, whom it has crowned with honor
as with a garland, made the mirror of Princes, and the wonder of the world.
Long may you live an heir apparent to his virtues and to his Kingdoms, and
when God shall have turned his earthly crown into a crown of glory, long may
you reign a glorious Son of so glorious a Father.

Your HIGHNESS in all humblenes of duty to be commanded, Samson Lennard.

To the Reader.
I Doubt not (gentle Reader) but some there are that will not gently censure
these my labors; for I am not ignorant how hard a thing it is to please all.
Some are curious, whom if I should endeavor to please, I should displease my
self: Some are envious, and those I care not whether I please or no. As for
the judicious Reader, I confess I would willingly content him, because if he
be truly judicious he will judge of my faults as if they were his own, and
rather commend my good endeavors, than condemn my infirmities. This is the man
whom I desire to satisfy, and must give to understand that I have used a
plain English phrase, because the gravity of the matter required it; and I
love not to smell of the inkhorne: and of all others I have avoided the French,
wherein it was written, because I would not have it seem to be a translation.
The Latin I have left untouched; and if that be a fault, I disburden it upon
the Author: He did it; and why not I? And if he thought all French men
understood it; why should not I have as good a conceit of my Countrymen? If he
thought none fit to read his book, but such as understood it, it is no fault
in me if I think so too. Howsoever, or whatsoever my ouersights may be (which
I doubt not but a curious eye may make too many) let it suffice that I
acknowledge mine own weakness, and both in respect of the tongue and weight
of the matter if self, should not have presumed to have undergone so heavy a
burden, had I not been encouraged by my learned, judicious and honest friend M.
Roger Webb, sometime student and fellow of S. John's College in Oxford; from
whose fullness I am not ashamed to confess I have received that little
sufficiency, whatsoever it be, that is in me, and whose learned assistance I
have used both in the cull, and altering of such points as were either
erroneous, or not otherwise fit to pass the press. If any man shall think,
that by this ingenious acknowledgment of his worthiness I detract from mine
own sufficiency, it suffices my turn, if I add unto mine own honesty by
yielding this thankful requital of his love toward me, and his labors
bestowed upon me; which forasmuch as they were not mercenarie, but friendly and
neighbourly, they do bind me the rather with my labors to honor him.
Touching the Author of this Work I can say little, because I knew him not,
let his work commend him; and as for the work, let it commend it self: for I
had rather with silence pass that over which I can not sufficiently commend,
than derogate any thing from the worth thereof by speaking too little. Let me
only say, That if I have any way wronged him in these my labors (by turning him
out of his holy days suit into his worky-dayes apparel) I am sorry for it; it
was not my purpose so to do, but to honor him. And howsoever our English attire
may alter him in the outward appearance, yet my hope is, that he that prieth
into him with a single impartial eye, shall find him no changeling, but one
and the same.

S. L.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS of these three Books of Wisdom.
THe Preface containing a Discourse of the name, subject, purpose and method of
this work, with an advertisement unto the Reader.

The First Book, of the knowledge of our selves and humane condition.
An exhortation to the study and knowledge of our selves. The Preface of the
First Book. The first Consideration of man, which is natural, by all the
parts whereof he is composed. CHAP. 1 OF the frame of man. PAGE. 7 CHAP. 2 The
first and general distinction of man. PAGE. 10 CHAP. 3 Of the body, and first,
of all the parts thereof with their places. PAGE. 12 CHAP. 4 Of the singular
properties of the body of man. PAGE. 15 CHAP. 5 Of the goods of the body,
Health, Beauty, etc. PAGE. 16 CHAP. 6 Of the vestments of the body. PAGE. 20
CHAP. 7 Of the soul in general. PAGE. 22 CHAP. 8 Of the soul in particular,
and first of the vegetative faculty. PAGE. 34 CHAP. 9 Of the sensitine
faculty. PAGE. 35 CHAP. 10 Of the senses of Nature. PAGE. 37 CHAP. 11 Of
Sight, Hearing, and Speech. PAGE. 42 CHAP. 12 Of the other faculties,
imaginatiue, memoratiue, appetitiue. PAGE. 45 CHAP. 13 Of the intellectiue and
truly humane faculty. PAGE. 46 CHAP. 14 Of the humane spirit, the parts,
functions, qualities, reason, invention, verity thereof. PAGE. 54 CHAP. 15 Of
Memory. PAGE. 65 CHAP. 16 Of the imagination and opinion. PAGE. 66 CHAP. 17 Of
the Will. PAGE. 69 Of Passions and Affection, with an Advertisement. PAGE. 70
CHAP. 18 Of Passions in general. PAGE. 71 Of Passions in particular, with an
Advertisement. PAGE. 75
CHAP. 19 Of Love in general. PAGE. 75 CHAP. 20 Of Ambition. PAGE. 76 CHAP. 21
Of Covetousness and her counterpassion. PAGE. 80 CHAP. 22 Of carnal love.
PAGE. 83 CHAP. 23 Desires, Lust, or Concupiscence. PAGE. 85 CHAP. 24 Hope,
Despair. PAGE. 86 CHAP. 25 Of Choler. PAGE. 87 CHAP. 26 Hatred. PAGE. 90 CHAP.
27 Envy. PAGE. 91 CHAP. 28 Jealousy. PAGE. 91 CHAP. 29 Revenge. PAGE. 92 CHAP.
30 Cruelty. PAGE. 94 CHAP. 31 Sadness or heaviness of heart. PAGE. 94 CHAP.
32 Compassion. PAGE. 98 CHAP. 33 Fear. PAGE. 99
CHAP. 34 The second Consideration of man, by comparing him with all other
creatures. PAGE. 101 The third Consideration of man, which is by his life.
PAGE. 113 CHAP. 35 The estimation, brevity, description of the life of man,
and the parts thereof. PAGE. 113
The fourth Consideration of man moral, by his manners, humors, conditions,
very lively and notable. PAGE. 118 The Preface. CHAP. 36 Vanity. PAGE. 119
CHAP. 37 Weakness or infirmity. PAGE. 124 CHAP. 38 Inconstancy. PAGE. 136
CHAP. 39 Misery. PAGE. 137 CHAP. 40 Presumption. PAGE. 152
The fifth and last Consideration of man, by the great varieties and differences
which are in him, and their comparisons. PAGE. 161 CHAP. 41 Of the difference
and inequality of men in general. PAGE. 161 CHAP. 42 The first natural and
essential difference of men, drawn from the diversity of the site or
situation of the world. PAGE. 163 CHAP. 43 The second distinction and more
subtle difference of the spirits and sufficiencies of men. PAGE. 168 CHAP. 44
The third distinction and difference of men accidental, of their degrees,
estates, and charges. PAGE. 171 Of the estates and degrees of men in
particular, with an Advertisement. PAGE. 173
CHAP. 45 Of commanding and obeying. PAGE. 174 CHAP. 46 Of Marriage. PAGE. 175
CHAP. 47 Of Parents and Children. PAGE. 184 CHAP. 48 Of Lords and slaves,
Masters and servants. PAGE. 187 CHAP. 49 Of the State, Souereigntie, and
Sovereigns. PAGE. 189 CHAP. 50 Of Magistrates. PAGE. 196 CHAP. 51 Of Lawyers,
Doctors and Teachers. PAGE. 197 CHAP. 52 Of the people or vulgar sort. PAGE.
198
The fourth distinction and difference of men drawn from their diverse
professions and conditions of life. The Preface. PAGE. 201 CHAP. 53 A
distinction and comparison of the three sorts and degrees of life. PAGE. 202
CHAP. 54 A comparison of the civil and sociable life with the solitary. PAGE.
203 CHAP. 55 A comparison betwixt the life led in common and in private. PAGE.
205 CHAP. 56 A comparison betwixt the country life and the citizens. PAGE. 206
CHAP. 57 Of the military profession. PAGE. 207
The fifth and last distinction and difference of men drawn from the favors and
disfauors of Nature and Fortune. Preface. PAGE. 209 CHAP. 58 Of Liberty and
servitude. PAGE. 209 CHAP. 59 Of Nobility. PAGE. 210 CHAP. 60 Of Honor. PAGE.
213 CHAP. 61 Of Science. PAGE. 215 CHAP. 62 Of Riches and Poverty. PAGE. 217


THe Second Book, containing the instructions and general rules of Wisdom.
The Preface, wherein is contained a general description of Wisdom, and the
sum of this Book. 219 CHAP. 1 AN exemption and freedom from errors and the
vices of the world and of passions. The first disposition to wisdom. PAGE. 223
CHAP. 2 An universal and plain liberty of spirit, both in judgment and
will. The second disposition unto wisdom. PAGE. 230 CHAP. 3 A true and
essential honesty, the first and fundamental part of wisdom. PAGE. 252
CHAP. 4 To have a certain end and form of life, the second foundation of
wisdom. PAGE. 271 CHAP. 5 To study true piety, the first office of wisdom.
PAGE. 274 CHAP. 6 To govern his desires and pleasures, the second office of
wisdom. PAGE. 290 CHAP. 7 To carry himself moderately and equally in
prosperity and adversity, the third office of wisdom. PAGE. 296 CHAP. 8 To
obey and observe the laws, customs and ceremonies of the country, how and in
what sense, the fourth office of wisdom. PAGE. 305 CHAP. 9 To carry himself
well with another, the fifth office of wisdom. PAGE. 316 CHAP. 10 To carry
himself wisely in his affairs, the sixth office of wisdom. PAGE. 320 CHAP. 11
To keep himself always ready for death, a fruit of wisdom. PAGE. 328 CHAP.
12 To maintain himself in true tranquillity of Spirit, the fruit and crown
of wisdom, and conclusion of this Book. PAGE. 346


THe Third Book, wherein are handled the particular documents of wisdom by
the four moral virtues.
The Preface. 349 Of Prudence, the first virtue. CHAP. 1 OF Prudence in
general. PAGE. 350 Of the politic Prudence of a Sovereign to govern a
State. The Preface. PAGE. 353
CHAP. 2 The first part of this politic Prudence and government of a State,
which is Provision. PAGE. 354 CHAP. 3 The second part of this politic Prudence
and government of a State, which concerns the action and government of the
Prince. PAGE. 378 CHAP. 4 Of that Prudence which is required in difficult
affairs and ill accidents, public and private. Preface. PAGE. 403 1 Of the
evils and accidents which threaten us. PAGE. 404 2 Of evils and accidents
present, pressing and extreme. PAGE. 404 3 Doubtful and ambiguous affairs.
PAGE. 406 4 Difficult and dangerous affairs. PAGE. 406 5 Coniurations. PAGE.
407 6 Treason. PAGE. 409 7 Popular commotions. PAGE. 410 8 Faction and
confederacy. PAGE. 411 9 Sedition. PAGE. 412 10 Tyranny and rebellion. PAGE.
414 11 Civil wars. PAGE. 415 12 Aduisements for particular persons touching
the foresaid public divisions. PAGE. 416 13 Of private troubles and divisions.
PAGE. 419

Of Justice the second virtue. CHAP. 5 Of Justice in general. PAGE. 419 CHAP.
6 Of the Justice and duty of a man toward himself. PAGE. 422 Of the Justice
and duty of a man toward man, with an Advertisement. PAGE. 428

The first part, which is of the general and common duties of all toward all,
and first CHAP. 7 Of Love or friendship. PAGE. 429 CHAP. 8 Of Faith, fidelity,
treachery, secrecy. PAGE. 436 CHAP. 9 Verity and free admonition. PAGE. 439
CHAP. 10 Of flattery, lying and dissimulation. PAGE. 441 CHAP. 11 Of benefits,
obligation, and thankfulness. PAGE. 446

The second part, which concerns the special duties of certain men toward
certain men, by certain and special obligation. The Preface. PAGE. 453 CHAP.
12 The duty of married folk. PAGE. 454 CHAP. 13 Householde husbandry. PAGE.
456 CHAP. 14 The duty of Parents and children. PAGE. 457 CHAP. 15 The duty of
Masters and servants: PAGE. 486 CHAP. 16 The duty of Sovereigns and subjects.
PAGE. 488 CHAP. 17 The duty of Magistrates. PAGE. 491 CHAP. 18 The duty of
great and small. PAGE. 497

Of Fortitude, the third virtue. Preface. PAGE. 498 CHAP. 19 Of Fortitude or
valor in general, PAGE. 499 Of Fortitude or valor in particular. PAGE. 503
CHAP. 20 The first part of outward evils. PAGE. 504 CHAP. 21 Of outward evils
considered in their effects and fruits. PAGE. 509 Of outward evils in
themselves and particularly. An Advertisement. PAGE. 510
CHAP. 22 Of Sickness and grief. PAGE. 511 CHAP. 23 Of Captivity and
imprisonment. PAGE. 513 CHAP. 24 Of Banishment and exile. PAGE. 515 CHAP. 25 Of
Poverty, want, loss of goods. PAGE. 516 CHAP. 26 Of Infamy. PAGE. 518 27 Of
the loss of friends. PAGE. 519
CHAP. Of Death. PAGE. 520 The second part of inward evils, etc. The Preface.
PAGE. 520 CHAP. 28 Against Fear. PAGE. 521 CHAP. 29 Against Sorrow. PAGE. 522
CHAP. 30 Against Compassion and mercy. PAGE. 523 CHAP. 31 Against Choler. PAGE.
524 CHAP. 32 Against Hatred. PAGE. 528 CHAP. 33 Against Envy. PAGE. 528 CHAP.
34 Against Revenge. PAGE. 529 CHAP. 35 Against Jealousy. PAGE. 530

Of Temperance the fourth virtue. CHAP. 36 Of Temperance in general. PAGE. 532
CHAP. 37 Of Prosperity, and counsel thereupon. PAGE. 533 CHAP. 38 Of
Pleasure, and advice thereupon. PAGE. 534 CHAP. 39 Of Eating and drinking,
Abstinence and sobriety. PAGE. 539 CHAP. 40 Of Riot and excess in apparel
and ornaments, and of frugalitie. PAGE. 541 CHAP. 41 Carnal pleasure,
chastity, continency. PAGE. 542 CHAP. 42 Of Glory and ambition. PAGE. 545
CHAP. 43 Of Temperancie in speech, and of Eloquence. PAGE. 547



The end of the Table.

OF VVISDOME Three Books.
THE PREFACE: Where the Name, Subject, Purpose, and Method of this Work is
set down, with an Advertisement to the Reader.
IT is required at the first entry into 1 Of ye word Wisdom.
this Work, that we know what this Wisdom is; and since it bears that name
and title, how we purpose to speak thereof. All men in general at the first
view of the simple word it self, do easily conceive and imagine it to be some
quality, sufficiency, or habit, not common or vulgar, but excellent,
singular, and elevated above that which is common and ordinary, be it good or
evil: For it is taken and used (though perhaps improperly) in both kinds:
Sapientes sunt vt faciant mala: and signifies not Hierem. 4. Arist. lib. 5.
Metaphy.
properly a good and laudable quality, but exquisite, singular, excellent in
whatsoever it be. And therefore we do as well say, A wise Tyrant, Pirat,
Thief; as A wise King, Pilot, Captain: that is to say, Sufficient, prudent,
advised; not simply and vulgarly, but excellently: For there is opposite unto
Wisdom not only folly, which is an irregularitie or looseness of life, and
Wisdom a regularitie or moderation, well measured and proportioned: but also
common baseness and vulgar Simplicity: For Wisdom is high, strong, and
excellent; yea, whether it be in good or evil it contains two things:
Sufficiency, that is, Provision or furnture for whatsoever is required and
necessary; and that it be in some high degree of excellency. So that you see
what the simpler sort imagine Wisdom to be at the first view and the simple
sound of the word; whereby they conclude, That there are few wise men, that
they are rare as every excellency is; and that to them by right it
apperteineth to command and govern others; that they are as Oracles: from
whence is that saying, Believe others, and refer thy self to the wise. But
well to define this thing and according to truth, and to distinguish it into
his true parts, all men know not, neither are they of one accord, nor is it
easy; for otherwise do the common people, otherwise the Philosophers,
otherwise the Divines speak thereof. These are the three floores and degrees
of the world. The two latter proceed by order, and rules, and precepts: the
former confusedly and very imperfectly.

Now then we may say, That there are three sorts 2 The division of Wisdom.
and degrees of wisdom, Divine, Humane, Mundane, which correspond unto God;
Nature pure and entire; Nature vitiated and corrupted. Of all these sorts and
every of them do all these three orders of the world, which before we speak
of, write and discourse, every one according to his own manner and fashion;
but properly and formally the common sort, that is to say, the world of worldly
wisdom, the Philosopher of humane, the Divine of divine wisdom.

Worldly wisdom, and of the three the more base, 3 Worldly wisdom.
(which is diverse according to the three great Captains and Leaders of this
inferior world, Opulencie, Pleasure, Glory, or rather Avarice, Luxury,
Ambition: Quicquid est in mundo est concupiscentia oculorum, 1. John 3.
concupiscentia carnis, superbia vitae; for which cause it is called by S.
James, Terrena, Animalis, Diabolica) James 3.
is reproved by Philosophy and Divinity, which pronounces it folly before
God: Stultam fecit 1. Cor. 1.
Deus sapientiam huius mundi. Of this wisdom therefore we speak not in this
Book, except it be to dispraise and condemn it.

Divine wisdom, and of the three the highest, is defined 4 Divine wisdom.
and handled by Philosophers and Divines, but somewhat diversely. As for the
common or worldly wisdom I disdain it, and pass by whatsoever may be spoken
thereof as profane and too unworthy in this Treatise to be read. The
Philosophers make it altogether Speculatiue, saying, That it is the knowledge
of the principles, first causes, and highest power to judge of all things, even
of the most Sovereign, which is God himself: and this wisdom is
Metaphysicall, and resideth wholly in the understanding, as being the chief
good and perfection thereof: it is the first and Thom. 1. 2. quaest. 57. 2. 2.
q. 19.
highest of the five intellectual virtues, which may be without either
honesty, action, or other moral virtue. The Divines make it not altogether so
speculatiue, but that it is likewise in some sort Practique, for they say, That
it is the knowledge of Divine things, from which there arises a judgment and
rule of humane actions; and they make it two-folde, The one acquired by study,
and comes near to that of the Philosophers; which I am to speak of: The other
infused and given by God, De sursum descendens. This is the first of the seven
gifts of the Holy Ghost, Spiritus Domini, spiritus sapientiae, which is not
found but only in those that are just and free from sin, In maleuolam animam
Sap. 1.
non introibit sapientia. Of this Divine wisdom likewise our purpose is not
here to speak, it is after some sort and measure handled in my first Verity,
and in my Discourses of Divinity.

It follows therefore, that it is Humane wisdom 5 Humane.
which in this Book we are to deliver unto you, and whereof it takes the name,
and of which in this place we must give some brief and general view, which
may be as an Argument and Summarie of this whole work. The common descriptions
are diverse and insufficient; Wisdom according to the common sort.
Some and the greatest part think that it is only a wisdom, discretion, and
advised carriage in a man's affairs and conversation. This may well be called
common, as respecting nothing but that which is outward and in action, and
considers not at all any other thing than that which outwardly appears. It
is altogether in the eyes and ears of men, without any respect or very little
of the inward motions of the mind: so that according to their opinion wisdom
may be without essential piety or probitie, that is, a beautiful cunning, a
sweet and modest subtlety. Others think that it is a rude, unreasonable,
rough singularity, a kind of sullen frowning and frampole austeritie in
opinions, manners, words, actions and fashion of life; and therefore they call
them that are wounded and touched with that humor Philosophers, that is to say,
in their counterfeit language, fantastical, diverse, different and declining
from the customs of other men.

Now this kind of wisdom according to the doctrine of our book is rather a
folly and extrauagancie. You must therefore know, that this wisdom whereof we
speak is not that of the common people, but of Philosophers and Divines,
whereof both have written in their moral learnings. The Philosophers more at
According to Philosophers and Divines.
large, and more professedly as being their true and proper dish they feed on,
and formal subject they write of, because they apply themselves to that which
concerns Nature and Action. Divinity mounteth A comparison betwixt Divinity
and Philosophy.
much higher, and is occupied about virtues infused, Contemplative and Divine,
that is to say, about Divine wisdom and Belief. So that Philosophers are more
stayed, dispersed more certain, and more common, ruling and instructing not
only the particular knowledge or actions of men, but the common and public,
teaching that which is good and profitable to Families, Corporations,
Commonweals, Empires. Divinity is more sparing and silent in this point,
looking principally into the eternal good and salvation of every one. Again,
the Philosopher handles this subject more sweetly and pleasingly, the Divine
more austerely and drily. Again, Philosophy which is the elder (for Nature is
more ancient than Grace, and the Natural than the Supernatural) seems to
persuade graciously, as being willing to please in profiting, as the Poet
speaks:

Simul and iucunda and idonea dicere vita Horace.

Lectorem delect ando, pariterque monando.
It is enriched with discourses, reasons, inventions, examples, similitudes,
decked with speeches, Apophthegmes, sententious mots, adorned with Eloquence
and Art. Theology, which came after, altogether austere, it seems to
command and imperiously like a Master to enjoin. And to conclude, the virtue
and honesty of Divines is too anxious, scrupulous, deiect, sad, fearful and
vulgar. Philosophy, such as this Book teaches, is altogether pleasant, free,
bucksom, and if I may so say, wanton too; and yet notwithstanding, puissant,
noble, generous, and rare. Doubtless the Philosophers have heerin been
excellent, not only in writing and teaching, but in the rich and lively
representation thereof in their honorable and heroical lives. I understand
here by Philosophers and Wise men, not only those that have carried the name
of Wise men, such as Thales, Solon, and the rest of that rank, that lived in
the time of Cyrus, Cresus, Pisistrates; nor those that came afterward, and
have publicly taught it, as Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle,
Aristippus, Zenon, Antisthenes, all chief Professors apart, and many other
their Disciples different and divided in sects; but also all those great men
who have made singular and exemplary profession of virtue and wisdom, as
Phocion, Aristides, Pericles, Alexander, whom Plutarch called as well a
Philosopher as a King, Epaminondas, and diverse other Greeks: The Fabricij,
Fabij, Camilli, Catoni, Torquati, Reguli, Lelij, Scipioni, Romans, who for the
most part have been Generals in armies. And these are the reasons why in this
my Book I do more willingly and ordinarily follow the advice and sayings of
Philosophers, not in the mean time omitting or rejecting those of the Divines:
For both in substance they do all agree, and are very sold me different, and
Divinity does nothing disdain to employ, and to make good use of the wise
sayings of Philosophy. If I had undertaken to instruct the cloister, and the
retired life, that is, that profession which attends the secrets
Evangelical, I must necessarily have followed adamussim the advice of the
Divines: but our Book instructs a civil life, forms a man for the world,
that is to say, to humane wisdom, not divine.

We say then naturally and generally both with the 6 A general description of
humane wisdom.
Philosopher and the Divine, that this humane wisdom is a kind of law or
reason, a beautiful and noble composition of the entire man, both in his
inward part and his outward, his thoughts, his words, his actions, and all his
motions. It is the excellency and perfection of man as he is man, that is to
say, according to that which the first fundamental and natural law does
require; as we say, That that work is well wrought and excellent, that is
complete and perfectin all the parts thereof, and wherein all the rules of Art
have been observed; that man is accounted a wise man, that best knows after
the best and most excellent manner to play the man, that is to say, (to give a
more particular picture thereof) that knowing himself and the condition of
man, does keep and preserve himself from all vices, errors, passions and
defects as well inward and proper to himself, as outward and common to other
men, mainteining his spirit pure, free, universal, considering and judging of
all things without band or affection, always ruling and directing himself in
all things according to nature, that is to say, that first reason and
universal law and light inspired by God, and which shines in us, unto which
he does apply and accommodate his own proper and particular light, living in
the outward view of the world, and with all men according to their laws,
customs and ceremonies of the country where he is, without the offense of
any, carrying himself wisely and discreetly in all affairs, walking always
uprightly, constant, comfortable, and content in himself, attending peaceably
whatsoever may happen, and at the last death it self. All these parts or
qualities, which are many, for our better ease and facility may be drawn to
four principal heads; Knowledge of our selves, Liberty of spirit pure and
generous, Imitation of Nature, (this has a very large field, and alone might
almost suffice) True contentment. These can no where be found but in him that
is wise: and he that wants any of these can not be wise. He that has an
erroneous knowledge of himself, that subiecteth his mind to any kind of
servitude, either of passions or popular opinions, makes himself partial; and
by enthralling himself to some particular opinion is deprived of the liberty
and jurisdiction of discerning, judging and examining all things. He that
strives against Nature, under what pretense soever it be, following rather
opinion or passion than reason; he that carries himself troubledly,
disquietly, malcontent, fearing death, is not wise. Behold here in a few
words the picture of Humane wisdom and folly, and the sum of that which I
purpose to handle in this Work, especially in the Second Book, which expressly
contains the rules, treatise, and offices of Wisdom, which is more mine than
the other two, and which I once thought to have published by it self. This
verbal description of Wisdom is represented unto the eye even at the entrance
or threshall of this Book by a woman all naked, in a place void and empty,
resting her self upon nothing, in her pure and simple nature beholding her
self in a glass, her countenance cheerful, merry and manly, upright, her
feet close joined, upon a square pillar, and embracing herself, having under
her feet inchained four other women as slaves unto her, that is to say,
Passion with a changed and hideous countenance; Opinion with wandering eyes,
inconstant, giddy, borne upon the heads of the people; Superstition, astonished
and in a trance, and her hands fastened the one to the other; Virtue or
Honesty and Pedanticall Science with a sullen visage, her eyelids elevated
reading in a Book, where was written, Yea, No. All this needs no other
explication, than that which hereafter follows, but hereof more at large in
the Second Book.

To attain unto this wisdom there are two means, 7 Two ways to attain this
wisdom.
the first is in the original forming and first temper, that is to say, in the
temperature of the seed of the Parents, the milk of the Nurse, and the first
education; whereby a man is said to be either well borne, or ill borne, that is
to say, either well or ill formed and disposed unto wisdom. A man would little
think of what power and importance this beginning is, for if men did know it,
there would be more care taken, and diligence used therein than there is. It is
a strange and lamentable thing, that so reachlesse a carelessness should be in
us of the life and good life of those whom we desire to make our other selves,
when in matters of less importance we take more care, use more diligence, more
counsel than we should, never thinking of our greatest affairs and most
honorable, but by hazard and peradventure. Who is he that takes counsel
with himself, or endeavors to do that which is required for the preserving
and preparing of himself as he ought to the generation of male-children,
healthful of spirit, and apt for wisdom? For that which serves for the one,
serves for the other, and Nature after one manner attends them all. This is
that which men think of least, yea little or not at all (in the act of
generation) does it enter into their thoughts to frame a new creature like
themselves, but only like beasts to satisfy their lustful pleasures. This is
one of the most important faults and of greatest note in a Common weal,
whereof there is not one that thinks or complains, neither is there
concerning it either law, or rule, or public advice. It is most certain, that
if men did herein carry themselves as they ought, we should have other men,
of more excellent spirit and condition than we have amongst us. What is
required herein, and to the first nourishment and education, is briefly set
down in our Third Book, Chap. 14.

The second means to attain wisdom is the study 8 Acquired.
of Philosophy, I mean not of all the parts thereof, but Moral (yet not
forgetting the Natural) which is the light, the guide, the rule of our life,
which explaineth and represents unto us the law of Nature, instructs man
universally in all things, both public and private, alone and in company, in
all domestical and civil conversation, takes away all that savage nature
that is in us, sweetneth and tameth our natural rudeness, cruelty and
wildness, and works and fashioneth it to wisdom. To be brief, it is the
true science of man; all the rest in respect of it is but vanity, or at the
leastwise not necessary or little profitable: for it gives instructions to
live and to die well, which is all in all; it teaches us perfect wisdom, an
apt judicious well advised honesty. But this second mean is almost as little
practiced and as ill employed as the first: for no man cares greatly for this
wisdom, so much are all given to that which is worldly. Thus you see the two
principal means to attain to wisdom, the Natural and Acquired. He that
has been fortunate in the first, that is to say, that has been favorably
formed by Nature, that is, of a good and sweet temperature, which brings
forth a great goodness in nature, and sweetness in manners, has made a fair
march without great pain to the second: But that man with whom it is
otherwise, must with great and painful study of the second beautify and
supply that which is wanting, as Socrates one of the wisest said of himself,
That by the study of Philosophy he had corrected and reformed his natural
infirmities.

There are contrariwise two formal lets or hindrances 9 The lets to Wisdom,
and means to folly are two.
to wisdom, and two counter-meanes or powerful ways unto folly, Natural
and Acquired. The first, which is natural, proceeds from the original
temper and temperature, which makes the brain either too soft, moist, and the
parts thereof gross and 1 Natural.
material, whereby the spirits remain sottish, feeble, less capable, plain
diminished, obscure, such as that is, for the most part, of the common sort of
people; or too hot, ardent, and dry, which makes the spirits foolish,
audacious, vicious. These are the two extremes, Sottishness and Folly, Water
and Fire, Lead and Mercury, altogether improper or unapt to wisdom, which
requires a spirit full of vigor and generous, and yet sweet, pliant, and
modest: but the second is more easily amended by discipline than the former.

The second, which is Acquired, proceeds either 2 Acquired.
from no culture and instruction, or from that which is evil, which amongst
other things consists in an obstinate and sworn preiudicate prevention of
opinions, wherewith the mind is made drunken, and takes so strong a tincture,
that it is made unapt and incapable to see or to find better whereby to raise
and enrich it self. It is said of these kind of men, That they are wounded
and stricken, that they have a hurt or blow in the head: unto which wound if
likewise learning be joined, because that puffs up, it brings with it
presumption and temeritie, and sometimes arms to maintain and defend those
anticipated opinions: it altogether perfecteth the form and frame of folly,
and makes it incurable. So that natural weakness, and acquired prevention
are two great hindrances; but science, if it do not wholly cure them, which
seldom it does, strengthens them and makes them invincible, which turns
not any way to the dishonor of learning (as a man may well think) but to the
greater honor thereof.

Science or Learning is a very good and profitable 10 Of Learning.
staff or waster, but which will not be handled with all hands; and he that
knows not well how to rule it, receives thereby more hurt than profit. It
besotteth and makes foolish (says a great learned writer) the weak See
heerof Li. 3. ca. 14.
and sick spirit, it polisheth and perfecteth the naturally strong and good.
The feeble spirit knows not how to possess science, how to handle it, and how
to make use thereof as he should; but contrariwise is possessed and ruled by
it, whereby he submits himself and remains a slave to it, like a weak
stomach ouercharged with more victuals than it can digest. A weak arm
wanting power and skill well to weld a waster or staff that is somewhat too
heavy for it, wearieth it self and faints. A wise and courageous spirit
ouermastereth his wisdom, enjoys it, uses it, and employeth it to his best
advantage, enformeth his own judgment, rectifieth his will, helps and
fortifieth his natural light, and makes himself more quick and active;
whereas the other is made thereby more sottish, more unapt, and therewithal
more presumptuous: so that the fault or reproach is not in learning, no more
than that wine or other good drugge is faulty which a man knows not how to
apply and accommodate to his own needs: Non est culpa vini, sed culpa
bibentis. Now then against such spirits weak by nature, preoccupated, puffed
up, and hindered by acquired wisdom I make open war in this Book, and that
often times under the word Pedante, not finding any other more Of ye word
Pedante or Schoolmasters.
proper, and which by many good Authors is used in this sense. In it own
Greek Original it was taken in the better sense, but in other later
languages, by reason of the abuse, and bad carriage of such men in the
profession of their learning, it is accounted base, vile, questuous,
contentious, opinatiue, vainglorious and presumptuous, by too many practiced,
and used but by way of injury and derision, and is in the number of those
words that by continuance of time have changed their signification, as Tyrant,
Sophister, and diverse other. Le sieur de Bellay, after the rehearsal of many
notorious vices, concludes as with the greatest, But of all the rest,
Knowledge pedanticall I detest. And in another place:

Said I thou did live but to eat and drink,
Then poor were my revenge, thy faults scantie:
But that which most does make thy name to stink,
Is, to be short, thou art a Pedantie.
It may be some will take offense at this word, thinking An advertisement.
it likewise touches them, and that I thereby have a will to tax or scoff the
Professors and Teachers of learning; but let them be pleased to content
themselves with this free and open declaration which I here make, That it is no
part of my meaning to note by this word any gown-men or learned profession
whatsoever: yea I am so far from it, that Philosophers are in so high esteem
with me, that I should oppose my self against my self, because I account my
self one of them, and profess the same learning: only I touch a certain
degree and quality of spirits, before desciphered, that is, such as have
natural capacity and sufficiency after a common and indifferent manner, but
afterward not well tilled, preoccupated, possessed with certain opinions; and
these are men of all fortunes, all conditions, and go as well in short
garments as in long gowns: Vulgum tam chlamidatos, quam coronam voco. If any
man can furnish me with any other word as significant as this to express these
kind of spirits, I will willingly forgo this. After this my declaration, he
that finds himself agrieued, shall but accuse and show himself too
scrupulous. It is true that a man may find other opposites to a wise man
besides a Pedante, but it is in some particular sense, as the common, profane,
vulgar sort of people; and often times I use these opposits: but this is as the
low is opposite to the high, the weak to the strong, the valley to the hill,
the common to the rare, the servant to the master, the profane to the holy; as
also a fool, which indeed according to the true sound of the word, is his
truest opposite: but this is a moderate man to an immoderate, a glorious
opinatiue man to a modest, the part to the whole, the preiudicate and tainted
to the neat and free, the sick to the sound: but this word Pedante in that
sense we take it, comprehends all these and more too, for it notes and
signifies him that is not only unlike and contrary to a wise man, as those
before mentioned, but such a one as arrogantly and insolently resists it to
the face, and as being armed on all sides raises himself against it, speaking
out of resolution and authority. And forasmuch as after a sort he fears it,
by reason that he sees himself discovered even from the top to the bottom,
and his sport troubled by it, he prosecuteth it with a certain intestine
hatred, he takes upon him to censure it, to defame it, to condemn it,
accounting and carrying himself as the truly wise, though he be a fool
without peer and an ignorant selfe-conceited Gull.

After the purpose and argument of this Work, we 11 The method of this book.
come to the order and method thereof. There are three Books: The First is
wholly in the knowledge of our selves and humane condition, as a preparatiue
unto wisdom, which is handled at large by five maine and principal
considerations, each one including in it diverse others. The Second Book
contains in it the treatises, offices, and general and principal rules of
wisdom. The Third, the particular rules and instructions of wisdom, and that
by the order and discourse of four principal and moral virtues, Prudence,
Justice, Fortitude, Temperance; under which four is comprised the whole
instruction of the life of man, and all the parts of duty and honesty.
Finally, I here handle this matter, not Scholarlike or Pedantically, nor with
enlarged discourse, and furniture of Eloquence or other Art; (For wisdom
(quae si oculis ipsis cerneretur mirabiles excitaret amores sui) needs no such
helps to commend it self, being of it self so noble and glorious) but rudely,
openly, and ingeniously, which perhaps will not please all. The propositions
and verities are compact, but many times dry and sower, like Aphorisms,
ouertures and seeds of discourse.

Some think this Book too foole-hardie and free 12 An Advertisement and
Apology to the Reader.
to contradict and wound the common opinions, and are offended therewith, whom
in four or five words I thus answer: First, that wisdom which is neither
common nor vulgar has properly this liberty and authority, Iure suo
singulari, to judge of all, (it is the privilege spiritualis omnia dijudicat,
and a nemine iudicatur) and in judging to censure and condemn (as for the most
part erroneous) common and vulgar opinions. What then should she do? for the
case standing thus, it can not be, but she must incur the disgrace and envy
of the world. In another place I complain of these kind of men, and reprove
their popular weakness and feminine daintiness of all things seem they never
so strange. All things are agreeing and well befitting the palate of the spirit,
so a man be not wanting unto himself, and neither do any thing, or yield his
consent to whatsoever is not good and truly fair, no though the whole world
persuade him unto it. A wise man shows equally in them both his courage, his
delicates are not capable of the one or the other, there being a weakness in
them both.

Thirdly, in all that I shall propose, my meaning is Pedante. Passion
witnesses that it is not reason so to do, and he that out of passion does any
thing out of reason can not do it. But why are they angry with me? Is it
because I am not altogether of their opinion? Why, I am not angry with them
because they are not of mine. Is it because I speak something which is not
pleasing to their taste, or to the palate of the vulgar sort? Why therefore I
speak it. I speak nothing without reason, if they knew how to understand it,
how to relish it. If they can bring better reason to disprove mine, I will
hearken unto it with delight and thanks to him that shall show it me. But yet
let them not think to beat me down with authorities, multitudes, and
allegations of other men, for these have but small credit in my jurisdiction,
save in matter of Religion, where only authority preuailes without reason.
This is authorities true Empire, reason only bearing sway in all other Arts
without it, as S. Augustine does very well acknowledge. For it is an unjust
tyranny and an enraged folly to subject and in thrall our spirits to believe
and to follow whatsoever our Ancestors have said, and what the vulgar sort
hold to be true, who know neither what they say, nor what they do. There are
none but fools that suffer themselves to be thus led by the noses: and this
Book is not for such, which if it should popularlie be received and accepted
of the common sort of people, it should fail much in it first purpose and
designment. We must hear, consider, make account of our ancient Writers, not
captiuate our selves unto them but with reason. And if a man would follow them,
what should he do? for they agree not among themselves. Aristotle who would
seem to be the most sufficient amongst them, and has adventured to challenge
and to censure all that went before him, has uttered more gross absurdities
than them all, and is at no agreement with himself, neither does he know many
times where he is; witness his Treatises of the Soul of man, of the Eternity
of the world, of the Generation of the winds and waters, and so forth. It is
no cause of wonder or astonishment, that all men are not of one opinion; but it
were rather strange and wonderful, that all men were of one opinion: for
there is nothing more befitting Nature and the spirit of man than variety.
That wise Divine S. Paul gives us this liberty, in that he Romans 14.
wills every man to abound in his own understanding, not judging or
condemning that man that does otherwise, or think otherwise. And he speaks
it in a matter of greater moment and more ticklish, not in that which
consists in outward action and observation, wherein we say we are to conform
our selves to the common sort, and to that which is prescribed and accustomed
to be done, but also in that which concerns Religion, that is, the religious
observance of ^^ands and days: whereas all that liberty and boldness of
speech which I challenge unto my self, is but in thoughts, judgments,
opinions, in which no man is quartermaster but he that has them, every man
about himself.

Not withstanding all this, many things which may

I would willingly advertise the Reader that shall touching my intention in
this work. And if nevertheless after all this, he will neither rest satisfied
and contented, nor approve what I have written, let him boldly and speedily
disprove it (for only to speak ill, to bite, to slander the name of another
man, though it be easy enough, yet it is base and pedanticall) and he shall as
speedily receive either a free confession and assent, (for this Book does
glory and feast it self in the truth and ingenuitie thereof) or an examination
of the impertinencies and follies thereof.

FINIS.
OF WISDOM, THE FIRST BOOK, Which is the knowledge of our selves and our
humane condition. An exhortation to the study and knowledge of our selves.
THE PREFACE TO THE First Book.
THE most excellent and divine counsel, 1 The knowledge of our selves, the
first thing.
the best and most profitable advertisement of all others, but the least
practiced, is to study and learn how to know our selves: This is the
foundation of Wisdom and the high way to whatsoever is good; and there is no
folly comparable to this, To be painful and diligent to know all things else
whatsoever rather than our selves: for the true science and study of man, is
man himself.

God, Nature, the wise, the world, preach man, and exhort 2 Enjoined to all by
all reason.
him both by word and deed to the study and knowledge of himself. God
eternally and without intermission beholds, considers, knows himself.
The world has all the lights thereof contracted and united within it self,
and the eyes open to see and behold it self. It is as necessary for man to
learn how to know himself, as it is natural unto him to think, or to be
near unto himself: Nature has enjoined this work unto all. To meditate and
to entertain our thoughts therein is a thing above all things easy, ordinary,
natural; it is the food, sustentation, life of the spirit, Cuius viuere est
cogitare. Now where can a man begin, or continue his meditations more truly,
more naturally than with himself? Is there any thing that touches him more
nearly? Doubtless, to study other learnings, and to forget our selves, is a
thing both unnatural and unjust. The true and principal vacation of every man
is to employ his thoughts upon himself, and to tie himself to himself; for
so does every thing else, setting bounds and limits to their other business and
desires. And thou man which wilt seem to contain the whole universe, to know
all things, to control, to judge, neither know nor endeuourest the
knowledge of thy self; and so going about to make thy self skillful and a
Judge of Nature, thou proouest the only fool of the world: thou art of all
other the most beggarly, the most vain and miserable; and yet most proud and
arrogant. Look therefore into thy self, know thy self, hold thy self to thy
self; thy spirit and will which is else where employed, reduce it unto thy
self. Thou forgettest thy self, and losest thy self about outward things;
thou betrayest and disrobest thy self; thou look always before thee;
gather thy self unto thy self, and shut up thy self within thy self:
examine, search, know thy self.

Nosce teipsum: nec te quaesiueris extra. Respue quod non es.
Tecum habita and noris quam sit tibi curta supellex. Tu te consule.
Teipsum concute, nunquid vitiorum
Inseuerit olim natura, aut etiam consuetudo mala.
By the knowledge of himself man ariueth sooner and better 3 The ladder to the
knowledge of the divine nature.
to the knowledge of God, than by any other means, both because he finds in
himself better helps, more marks and footsteps of the divine nature, than in
whatsoever besides he can any way know, and because he can better understand
and know that which is in himself than in another thing. Formasti me and
posuisti super me manum tuam, ideo mirabilis Psalm.
facta est scientia tua, id est, tui, ex me: And therefore there was engraven
in letters of gold over the Porch of the Temple of Apollo the god (according to
the Panims) of Knowledge and Light, this sentence, KNOW THY SELF, as a
salutation and advertisement of God unto all; signifying unto them, that he
that would have access unto that Divinity, and entrance into that Temple,
must first know himself, and could not otherwise be admitted. Si te ignoras o
pulcherrima Cantic.
egredere, and abi post hoedos tuos.

To become truly wise, and to lead a life more regular and 4 Disposition unto
wisdom.
pleasant, there needs no other instruction but from our selves: and
doubtless, if we were good scholars, there are no books could better instruct
us, than we teach our selves. He that shall call to mind, and consider the
excess of his passed choler, even how far this fever and frenzy has
carried him, shall better be persuaded of the foul deformity of this passion,
than by all the reason that Aristotle or Plato can allege against it: and so
of all other passions and motions of the soul whatsoever. He that shall call
to mind how often he has miscarried in his judgment, and been deceived by his
memory, shall learn thereby to trust it no more. He that shall note how often
he has held an opinion, and in such sort understood a thing even to the
engaging of his own credit, and the satisfying of himself and any other
therein, and that afterward time has made him see the truth even the
contrary to that he formerly held, may learn to distrust his own judgment,
and to shake off that importunate arrogancy and querulous presumption; a
capital enemy to discipline and truth. He that shall well note and consider
all those evils that he has run into, that have threatened him; the light
occasions that have altered his courses and turned him from one estate to
another; how often repentances and mislikes have come into his head; will
prepare himself against future changes, learn to know his own condition;
will preserve his modesty, contain himself within his own rank, offend no
man, trouble nothing, nor enterprise any thing that may pass his own forces:
And what were this but to see justice and peace in every thing? To be brief,
we have no cleerer looking glass, no better book than our selves, if as we
ought we do study our selves, always keeping our eyes open over us, and
prying more narrowly into our selves.

But this is that which we think least of, Nemo in se tentat 5 Against such as
misknow themselves.
descendere: whereby it comes to pass that we fall many times to the ground,
and tumble headlong into the same fault, neither perceiving it, nor knowing to
what course to betake us: we make our selves fools at our own charges.
Difficulties in every thing are not discerned, but by those that know them: and
some degree of understanding is necessary even in the marking of our own
ignorance. We must knock at the door to know whether the door be shut: for
when men see themselves resolved and satisfied of a thing, and think they
sufficiently understand it, it is a token they understand nothing at all: for
if we know our selves well, we would provide far better for our selves and
our affairs; nay, we should be ashamed of our selves and our estate, and frame
our selves to be others than we are. He that knows not his own infirmities,
takes no care to amend them; he that is ignorant of his own wants, takes as
little care to provide for them; he that feels not his own evils and
miseries, advises not with himself of helps, nor seeks for remedies.
Deprehendas te oportet priusquam emendes: sanitatis initium sentire sibi opus
esse remedio. And here behold our unhappiness: for we think all things goes
well with us, and we are in safety, and we live in content with our selves,
and so double our miseries. Socrates was accounted the wisest man of the world,
not because his knowledge was more complete, or his sufficiency greater than
others, but because his knowledge of himself was better than others; in that
he held himself within his own rank, and knew better how to play the man. He
was the king of men, as it is said, that he that has but one eye is a king in
respect of him that has never an eye; that is to say, doubly deprived of his
sense: for they are by nature weak and miserable, and therewithal proud, and
feel not their misery. Socrates was but purblind, for being a man as others
were, weak and miserable, he knew it, and ingeniously acknowledged his
condition, and lived, and governed himself according unto it. This is that
which the Truth it self spoke unto those which were full of presumption, and
by way of mockery said unto him, Are we blind also? If ye were blind, says he,
that is, if Ioh. 9.
you thought your selves blind, you should see, but because ye think ye see,
therefore you are blind; therefore your sin remains. For they that in their
own opinion see much, are in truth stark blind; and they that are blind in
their own opinion see best. It is a miserable thing in a man, to make himself
a beast by forgetting himself to be a man. Homo enim cum sis, id fac semper
intelligas. Many great personages as a rule or bridle to themselves have
ordained that one or other should ever buz into their ears that they were men.
O what an excellent thing was this, if it entered as well into their hearts, as it
sounded in their ears? That Mot of the Atheniens to Pompey the Great, Thou art
so much a God, as thou acknowledgest thy self to be a man, was no ill saying:
for at the least to be an excellent man, is to confess himself to be a man.

The knowledge of our selves (a thing as difficult and rare 6 False means to
know our selves.
as to misdeeme and deceive our selves easy) is not obtained by any other,
that is to say, by the comparison, rule, or example of another; Plus alijs de
te quam tu tibi credere noli. much less also by our speech and judgment,
which oftentimes comes short to discern, and we disloyal and fearful to
speak: nor by any singular act, which sometimes unawares has escaped a man,
pricked forward by some new, rare, and accidental occasion, and is rather a
trick of Fortune, or an eruption of some extraordinary lunacy than any
production of fruit truly ours. A man judges not of the greatness or depth of
a river, by that water which by reason of some sudden inundation of neighbor
rivers ouerfloweth the banks. One valiant act makes not a valiant man, nor one
just a just man. The circumstances and source of occasions does import much and
alter us, and oftentimes a man is provoked to do good by vice it self: So
hard a thing is it for man to know man. Nor likewise by all those outward
things that are outwardly adjacent unto us, as offices, dignities, riches,
nobility, grace, and applause of the greatest peers and common people. Nor by
the cariages of a man in public places is a man known; for as a king at
chesse so he stands upon his guard, he bridleth and contracteth himself;
fear, and shame, and ambition, and other passions make him play that part that
you see: But truly to know him we must look into his inward part, his privy
chamber, and there not how to day, but every day he carries himself. He is
many times a different man in his house from that he is in the country, in the
palace, in the market place; another man amongst his domestical friends from
that he is amongst strangers: when he goes forth of his house into some
public place, he goes to play a Comedy, and therefore stay not thou there,
for it is not himself that plaieth, but another man, and thou know him not.

The knowledge of a man's self is not acquired by all these 7 True means.
four means, neither must we trust them, but by a true, long, and daily study
of himself, a serious and attentive examination not only of his words, and
actions, but of his most secret thoughts (their birth, progress, continuance,
repetition) and whatsoever is in him, even his nightly dreams, prying narrowly
into him, trying him often and at all hours, pressing and pinching him even to
the quick. For there are many vices hid in us and are not felt for want of
force and means; so that the venomous serpent that is benumbed with cold,
suffers himself to be handled without danger: neither does it suffice
afterward to acknowledge the fault by tale or peecemeale, and so think to
mend it by marring it, but he must in general reacknowledge his weakness, his
misery, and come to a universal amendment and reformation.

Now if we will know man we must take more than ordinary 8 The Proposition and
division of this Book.
pains in this first book, taking him in all senses, beholding him with all
visages, feeling his poulse, sounding him to to the quick, entering into him
with a candle and a snuffer, searching and creeping into every hole, corner,
turning, closet, and secret place, and not without cause. For this is the most
subtle and hypocritical covert and counterfeit of all the rest, and almost
not to be known. Let us then consider him after five manners set down in this
table, which is the sum of the book:

There are five considerations of man and humane condition: The first,
Natural, of all the parts whereof he is composed, and their appurtinances. The
second, Natural and Moral, by comparison of man with beasts. The third, of
his life in declining state. The fourth, Moral, of his manners, humors,
conditions, which are referred to five things: 1 Vanity. 2 Weakness. 3
Inconstancy. 4 Misery. 5 Presumption.
The fifth, Natural and Moral, of the differences that are between men in
their 1 Natures. 2 Spirits and sufficiencies. 3 Charges and degrees of
superiority, inferiority. 4 Professions and conditions of life advantages and
disaduantages Natural. Acquired. Casual.




The first Consideration of Man, which is natural, by all the parts and
members whereof he is composed.
CHAPTER I. Of the frame or formation of Man.
IT is twofold and to be considered after a twofold manner, the first and
original, once immediately by God in his supernatural creation, the second
and ordinary in his natural generation. According to that description which
Moses sets down touching the workmanship and creation of the world (the
boldest 1 Man made last.

Genesis 1. 2. etc.


and richest piece of work that ever man brought unto light, I mean the
history of the nine first chapters of Genesis, which is of the world newly
borne and reborne) man was made of God not only after all other creatures as
the most perfect, the master and superintendent of all, Vt praesit piscibus
maris, volatilibus coeli, be stijs terrae. And in the self same day wherein
the fowre-footed beasts of the earth that come nearest unto him were created
(although those two that resemble him most are for the inward parts the Swine,
for the outward the Ape) but also after all was done and ended, as the closing
up, seal, and sign of his works, he has also there imprinted his arms, and
his pourtrait, Exemplumque Dei quisquis est in imagine parua. Signatum est
super nos lumen vultus tui, As a Summary recapitulation of all things, and an
Epitome of the world, which is all in man, but gathered into a small volume,
whereby he is called the little world, as the whole universe may be called the
great man: as the tie and ligament of Angels and beasts, things heavenly and
earthly spiritual and corporal: and in one word, as the last hand, the
accomplishment, the perfection of the work, the honor and miracle of Nature.
The reason is because God having made him with deliberation, counsel and
preparation, and dixit faciamus hominem ad imaginem and similitudinem nostram,
he rested. And this rest also was made for man, Sabbathum propter hominem, non
contra. And afterward he had nothing to make new, but to make himself man,
and that he did likewise for the love of man, propter nos homines and proter
nostram salutem. Whereby we see that in all things God has aimed at man,
finally in him and by him, breui manu, to accommodate all unto himself, the
beginning and end of all.

Secondly, he was created all naked, because more beautiful 2 Naked.
than the rest, being pure, neat, and delicate, by reason of his thin humors
well tempered and seasoned.

Thirdly upright, but little touching the earth, his head 3 Upright.
directly tending unto heaven, whereon he gazeth, and sees and knows himself
as in a glass, quite opposite unto the plant, which has it head and root
within the earth, so that man is a divine plant that flourishes and grows up
unto heaven: a beast as in the middle betwixt a man and a plant, goes as it
were athwart having his two extremes toward the bounds or extremities of the
Horizon more or less. The cause of this uprightness in man besides the will
of his Masterworkman, is not properly the reasonable soul, as we see in those
that are crookbacked, crupshouldered, lame, nor in the straight line of the
backbone, which is likewise in serpents, nor in the natural or vital heat,
which is equalled or rather greater in diverse beasts, although all these may
perhaps serve to some purpose; but this upright gate is due and belonging to
man, both as he is man the holiest and diuinest creature, Sanctius his animal
mentisque capacius altae: and as king in this lower region. To small and
particular roialties there belong certain marks of Majesty, as we see in the
crowned Dolphin, the Crocadile, the Lion with his collar, the color of his
hair, and his eyes; in the Eagle, the king of the Bees: so man the universal
king of these lower parts walks with an upright countenance as a master in
his house ruling, and by love or force taming every thing.

His body was first framed of virgin earth, and red, from whence he took his
proper name, Adam for the appellatiue 4 How framed. Genesis 2.
was Is: And that being not yet moistened with rain, but with the water of the
fountain

-- Mixtam fluuialibus vndis
Finxit in effigiem.
By reason the body is the first born or elder than the soul, as the matter
than the form; the house must be made and trimmed before it be inhabited, the
shop before the workman can use it. Afterward the Soul was by divine
inspiration infused, and so the body by the soul made a living creature,
inspirauit infaciem eius spiraculum vitae etc.

In that ordinary and natural generation and formation, which is made of the
seed in the womb of the woman, the 5 He is made in the matrix.
self same order is observed: The body is first formed as well by the
elementary force of the Enargie and forming virtue which is in the seed, aiding
in some sort the heat of the matrix, as the celestial, which is the influence
and virtue of the Sun, Sol and homo generant hominem, In such order that the
Conceived of coagulated seed.
seven first days the seed of the father and mother do mingle, unite, and
curdle together like cream, and are made one body, which is the conception,
Nonne sicut lac mulsisti me, and sicut caseum me coagulasti. The next seven
days this seed is concocted, Changed.
thickened, and changed into a mass of flesh and indigested formlesse blood,
which is the proper matter of a humane body. The third seven days following,
of this mass or lump is made and fashioned the body in gross; so that
Formed in gross.
about the twentieth day are brought forth the three noble and heroical
parts, the Liver, Heart, Brain, distant an ouall length, or as the Hebrews
say, holding themselves by thin commisures or joints, which afterward fill
themselves with flesh after the fashion of an ant, where there are three
grosser parts joined by two thin. The fourth seven days which end near
thirty, the whole body is ended, perfected, ioynted, organized; and so it
begins to be no more an Embrion, Iointed, organized. First furnished with fit
instruments for sense.
that is, imperfect in shape, but capable, as a matter prepared to it form, to
receive the soul; which fails not to insinuate and inuest it self into the
body toward the seven and thirtieth or fortieth day after the five weeks
ended. Doubling this term, that is to say, at the third month, this infant
endowed with a soul, has motion and sense, the hair Endowed with soul,
motion. Brought forth.
and nails begin to come. Tripling this term, which is at the ninth month,
he comes forth, and is brought into the light. These terms or times are not
so justly prefixed, but that they may either be hastened or prolonged according
to the force or feebleness of the heat both of the seed and of the matrix; for
being strong it hasteneth, being weak it sloweth: whereby that seed that has
less heat and more moisture, where of women for the most part are conceived,
requires longer time, and is not endowed with a soul until the fortieth day
or after, and moves not till the fourth month, which is near by a quarter
more late than that of the male children.

CHAP. II. The first and general distinction of man.
MAn as a prodigious creature is made of parts quite contrary 1 The division
of man in two parts.
and enemies to themselves. The soul is a little god, the body as a beast, as
a dunghill. Nevertheless, these two parts are in such sort coupled together,
have such need the one of the other to perform their functions, Alterius sic
altera poscit opem res, and coniurat amice, and do so with all their complaints
embrace each other, that they neither can continue together without wars, nor
separate themselves without grief and torment; and as holding the Woolfe by
the ears, each may say to other, I can neither live with thee nor without thee,
Nec tecum nec sine te.

But again, forasmuch as there are in this soul two parts Into three parts.
in man: The Spirit, the Soul, the Flesh: where the Spirit and Flesh hold the
place of the two extremes, as heaven and earth; the Soul the middle region,
where are engendered the Metheors, tumults and tempests. The Spirit the highest
and most heroical part, a diminutiue, a spark, an image, and deaw of the
Divinity, is in man as a King in his Commonweal, it breaths nothing but
good, and heaven to which it tends; the Flesh contrariwise as the dregs of a
people besotted and common sink of man tends always to the matter and to
the earth; the Soul in the middle, as the principal of the people betwixt the
best and the worst, good and evil, is continually solicited by the spirit and
the flesh, and according unto that part toward which it applies it self, it
is either spiritual and good, or carnal and evil. Here are lodged all those
natural affections, which are neither virtuous nor vicious, as the love of our
parents and friends, fear of shame, compassion toward the afflicted, desire
of good reputation.

This distinction will help much to the knowledge of 3 The utility thereof.
man, and to discern his actions, that he mistake not himself as it is the
manner to do, judging by the bark and outward appearance, thinking that to be
of the Spirit which is of the Soul, nay, of the flesh; attributing unto virtue
that which is due unto nature, nay, unto vice. How many good and excellent
actions have been produced by passion, or at least by a natural inclination,
Vt seruiant genio, and suo indulgeant animo?

CHAP. III. Of the body, and first of all the parts thereof and their places.
THe body of man consists of a number of parts inward 1 The division of the
body.
and outward, which are all for the most part round and orbicular, or coming
near unto that figure.

The inward are of two sorts: the one in number and quantity 2 Inward and many.
spread through the whole body, as the bones, which are as the bases and
upholding pillars of the whole building, and within them for their nourishment
the marow; the muscles for motion and strength; the veins issuing from the
liver as channels of the first and natural blood; the arteries coming from the
heart as conduits of the second blood more subtle and vital. These two
mounting higher than the liver and the heart their original sources, are more
strait than those that go downwards, to the end they should help to mount the
blood, for that narrowness more straightened, serves to raise the humors, the
sinews proceeding by couples, as instruments of sense, motion, and strength of
body, and conduits of the animal spirits, whereof some are soft, of which
there are seven paires which serve the senses of the head, Sight, Hearing,
Taste, Speech; the other are hard, whereof there are thirty couples,
proceeding from the reins of the back to the muscles; The Tendrels,
Ligaments, Gristels; The four Humors, Blood, Choler which works, provoke,
penetrateth, hinders obstructions, casts forth the excrements, brings
cheerfulness; Melancholy which provoke an appetite to every thing,
moderateth sudden motions; Fleame which sweetneth the force of the two Cholers,
and all other heats; The Spirits which are as it were the fumigations that
arise from the natural heat and radical humor, and they are in three degrees
of excellency, the Natural, Vital, Animal; The Fat which is the thickest
and grossest part of blood.

The other are singular (save the kidneys and stones, which are double) and
assigned to a certain place. Now there are 3 Singular. Four regions of the
body.
four places or regions, as degrees of the body, shops of nature, where she
exercises her faculties and powers. The first and lowest is for generation, in
which are the privy parts serving thereunto. The second near unto that, in
which are viscera, that is to say, the stomach yielding more to the left side,
round, straiter in the bottom than at top, having two orifices or mouths, the
one above to receive, the other beneath, which answers the bowels, to cast
forth and discharge it self. It receives, gathers together, mingleth,
concocteth the victuals and turns them into Chyle, that is to say, a kind of
white Suc fit for the nourishment of the body, which is likewise wrought
within the Meseraique veins by which it passes unto the Liver. The Liver hot
and moist inclining toward the right side, the storehouse of blood, the
chief or rather fountain of the veins, the seat of the natural nourishing
faculty, or vegetative soul, made and engendered of the blood of that Chyle,
which it draws from the Meseraique veins, and receives into it lap by the
vena porta, which enters into the concauities thereof, and afterward is sent
and distributed through the whole body by the help of the great vena caua,
which arises from the bunch and branches thereof, which are in great number as
the rivers of a fountain. The Spleen toward the left side which receives
the discharge and excrements of the Liver: The Reins, the Entralles which
though they are all in one, yet are distinguished by six differences and names,
equalling seven times the length of a man, as the length of a man is equalled
by seven foot. In these two first parts or degrees which some take to be but
one (although there are two faculties very different, the one generatiue for
the continuance of the kind, the other nutritive for every particular person,
and they make it to answer to the lowest and elementary part of the world, the
place of generation and corruption) is the concupiscible soul.

The third degree compared to the Aetherian region, separated Diaphragma or
Midrife, and from that above by the narrowness of the throat; in which is the
irascible soul, and the pectorall parts Praecordia, that is to say, the Heart,
very hot, placed about the fifth rib, having his point under the left pap or
dug, the original fountain of the Arteries, which are always moved, and
cause the Pulse to beat, by which as by channels it sends and distributeth
through the whole body the vital blood which it has concocted, and by it the
spirit and virtue vital. The Lungs, of substance very soft and spongeous,
supple to draw to and enforce forth like a pair of bellows, instruments both
of respiration whereby the heart is refreshed, drawing unto it the blood, the
spirits, the air, and disburthening it self of those fumes and excrements
which oppress it, and of the voice by mean of the rough Artery.

The fourth and highest, which answers to the celestial region, is the head
which contains the Brain, cold and Dura matter; the other more easy and
thin which includes the Brain, Pia matter: from it do issue and are derived
the Smowes and marow that descends and falls down into the reins of the
back. This Brain is the seat of the reasonable soul, the source of sense and
motion, and of the most noble animal spirits, composed of the vital, which
being raised from the heart by the Arteries unto the brain are concocted and
reconcocted, elaborated and made subtle by the help of the multiplicitie of
small Arteries, as fillets diversely wouen and interlaced by many turnings and
windings, like a labyrinth or double net, Rete mirabile; within which this
vital spirit being retained and soiourning, often times passing and repassing,
is refined and perfected, and becomes a creature, spiritual in an excellent
degree.

The outward and visible parts, if they be single, are in the middle as the
Nose which serves for respiration, smell, 3 Outward parts singular.
and the comfort of the brain, and the disburthening thereof, in such sort
that by it the air enters and issues both down into the lungs and up into
the brains. The Mouth which serves to eat and to speak, and therefore has
many parts seruice-able thereunto; without, the lips; within, the tongue soft
and very subtle which judges of sauors; the Teeth which bruise and grind the
victuals; the Navel, the two sinks or ways to ease and disburden the body.

If they be double and alike, they are collaterals and equal, as the two eyes,
planted in the highest stage as sentinels, composed 4 Double and equal.
of many and diverse parts; three humors, seven tunicles, seven muscles, diverse
colors, of many fashions and much art. These are the first and most noble
outward parts of the body, in beauty, utility, mobilitie, actiuitie, yea in
the action of love (...), they are to the visage that which the visage is to
the body, they are the face of the face: and because they are tender, delicate
and precious, they are fenced and rampaired on all parts with skins, lids,
brows, hair. The ears in the self same height that the eyes are, as the
scouts of the body, Porters of the spirit, the Receivers and Iudgers of sounds
which always ascend; they have their entrance oblique and crooked, to the end
the air and the sound should not enter at once, whereby the sense of hearing
might be hindered and judge the worse. The arms and hands, the worke-masters
of all things and universal instruments. The legs and feet, the props and
pillars of the whole building.

CHAP. IIII. Of the singular properties of the body of man.
THe body of man has many singularities, and some peculiar 1 Peculiar
properties in the body of man.
and proper unto themselves, not common with other creatures. The first and
principal are speech, upright stature, the form or feature, the port or
carriage, whereof the wise, yea the Stoics themselves made such account, that
they were wont to say, That it was better to be a fool in a humane shape, than
wise in the form of a beast. The hand is a miracle (that of the Ape is not to
be termed a hand.) His natural nakedness, laughter, crying. The Sense of
tickling, hair on the lower lid of the eye, a visible navel, the point of the
heart on the left side. The toes of the feet not so long as the fingers of the
hand. Bleeding at nose, a strange thing considering that he carries his head
upright, and a beast downwards. To blush for shame, wax pale for fear. To be
an ambidexter; disposed at all times to the sports of Venus. Not to move the
ears, which bewrays in beasts the inward affections, but man does
sufficiently make them known, by his blushing, palenesse, motion of the eyes
and nose.

The other properties are likewise peculiar unto man, but 2 Peculiar properties
by way of excellency.
not wholly but by way of excellency; for they are also in beasts, but in a
less degree, that is to say, multitude of muscles and hair in the head. The
pliant facility of the body and the parts thereof to all motion and every
sense. The elevation of the breasts. The great abundance of the brain. The
greatness of the bladder. The form of the foot long forward, short backward.
The quantity and pure subtility of the blood. The mobility and agility of the
tongue. The multitude and variety of dreams, insomuch that he seems the only
dreamer. Sneesing. And to be short, the many motions of the eyes, the nose, the
lips.

There are also habits proper and peculiar, but different; some are gestures,
motions, and artificial and affected countenances 3 Diverse habits.
; others are so proper and natural, that they that have them neither feel
them nor know them in themselves, as to go stooping: but all have that which
proceeds not so much from reason, as a pure, natural and ready impulsion,
that is, to put forth a man's hands before him when he falls.

CHAP. V. Of the goods of the body: Health, Beauty, etc:
THe goods of the body are Health, Beauty, Cheerfulnes, 1 The praise of Health.
Srength, Vigor, a prompt readiness and disposition: but of all these Health
is the first, and passes all the rest. Health is the most beautiful and rich
present that Nature can bestow upon us, and above all other things to be
preferred, not only Science, Nobility, Riches, but Wisdom it self, which the
austerest amongst the wise do affirm. It is the only thing that deserves our
whole imploiment, yea our life it self to attain unto it; for without it life
is no life, but a death, virtue and wisdom grow weak and faint. What comfort
can all the wisdom of the world bring to the greatest man that is, if he be
thoroughly stricken with an Apoplexy? Doubtless there is nothing to be
preferred before this bodily health, but Honesty which is the health of the
Soul. Now it is common unto us with beasts, yea many times it is greater and
far more excellent in them than in us: and notwithstanding it be a gift of
Nature, gaudeant been nati, given in the first formation, yet that which
afterward follows, The milk, Good government, which consists in sobriety
and moderate exercises, lightness of heart, and a continual auoidance of all
passions do preserve it much. Grief and sickness are the contraries unto it,
which are the greatest if not the only evils that follow man, whereof we shall
speak hereafter. But in the preservation hereof, beasts likewise simply
following nature which has given them health do far exceed men, they often
times forgetting themselves, though afterward they pay dearly for it.

Next follows Beauty, a good of great account in the society 2 Beauty.
of men. It is the first mean of reconciling or uniting one to another, and it
is very likely that the first distinction that has been of one man from
another, and the first consideration that gives pre-eminence to one above
another, has been the advantage of beauty. It is likewise a powerful
quality, there is none that surmounteth it in credit, or that has so great a
part in the society of men; for there is none so barbarous, none so resolute,
that has not been beaten by it. It presents it self unto the view, it
seduceth and preoccupateth the judgment, it makes deep impressions, and
presses a man with great authority; and therefore Socrates called it a short
tyranny, and Plato the privilege of Nature: for it seems that he that
carries in his countenance the favors of Nature imprinted in a rare and
excellent beauty, has a kind of lawful power over us, and that we turning
our eyes toward him, he likewise turns our affections, and enthrawleth them
in despite of our selves. Aristotle says that it apperteineth to those that
are beautiful to command; that they are venerable next to the gods themselves;
that there are none, but such as are blind, but are touched with it. Cyrus,
Alexander, Caesar, three great Commanders, have made great use thereof in their
greatest affairs, yea Scipio the best of them all. Fair and good are near
neighbors, and are expressed by the self same words both in Greek and in the
Scriptures. Many great Philosophers have attained to their wisdom, by the
assistance of their beauty. It is likewise considerable and much required in
beasts themselves. 3 The distinction of Beauty.


There are in Beauty diverse things to be considered: That of men is properly
the form and feature of the body, as for other beauties they belong unto
women. There are two sorts of beauties, the one settled which moves not at all,
and it consists in the due proportion and color of the members, a body that
is not swollen or puffed up, wherein the sinews and veins appear not from
far, nor the bones press not the skin, but full of blood and spirits, and in
good state, having the muscles elevated, the skin smooth, the color
vermillion: the other moveable, which is called a good grace, and is the true
guiding or carriage of the motion of the members, and above all, the eyes. The
former beauty of it self is as it were dead, this active and full of life.
There are beauties that are rude, fierce, sour, others that are sweet, yea
though they be fading.

Beauty is properly to be considered in the visage. There 4 Of the visage.
is nothing more beautiful in man than his soul; and in the body of man than
his visage, which is as it were the soul abreuiated, that is, the pattern or
image of the soul, that is, her Escuchion with many quarters, representing the
collection of all her titles of honor, planted and placed in the gate and
forefront, to the end that men may know that here is her abode and her palace.
By the countenance it is that we know the person of a man; and therefore art
which imitateth nature, takes no care to represent the person of man, but only
to paint or carue the visage.

There are many special singularities in the visage of man, which are not in
beasts (for to say the truth they have no visage) 5 Seven singularities in the
visage of man.
nor in the rest of the body of man; As the number and diversity of the parts
and forms of them, in beasts there is neither chin, nor cheeks, nor forehead,
much less any form or fashion of them. Variety of colors, as in the eye
only yea necessary for humane society; first to know one another, for infinite
evils, yea the dissipation of humane kind must needs follow, if a man should
mistake himself by the semblance and similitude of diverse visages, yea it
would be a confusion worse than that of Babel. A man would take his daughter
for his sister, for a stranger, his enemy for his friend. If our faces were all
alike, we should not discern a man from a beast; and if they were not all
unlike one another, we could not know how to discern a man from a man.
Besides, it was an excellent art of Nature to place in this part some secret
that might give contentment to one another through the whole world: for by
reason of this variety of faces, there is not a person that in some part is
not beautiful. The dignity and honor of it round figure, form upright and
elevated Soul, and the rauishing of his will, as has been showed before. To
be brief, the visage is the throne of beauty and love; the seat of laughter
and kissing, two things very proper and agreeable unto man, the true and most
significant symboles of amity and good discretion. Finally, it is apt for
Corpus animum tegit and detegit, in facie legitur homo.

The beauty of the face consists in a large, square, well 6 A description of
the beauty of the face.
extended and clear front, eyebrows well ranged, thin and subtle, the eye
well divided, cheerful, sparkling: as for the color I leave it doubtful,
the nose lean, the mouth little, the lips coraline, the chinne short and
dimpled, the cheeks somewhat rising and in the middle the pleasant gelasin,
the ears round and well compact, the whole countenance with a lively tincture
white and vermilion. Nevertheless, this description of Beauty is not generally
received, the opinions of Beauty are different according to the diversity of
nations. With the Indians the greatest Beauty consists in that which we
account the greatest deformity, that is, in a tawny color, thick and swollen
lips, a flat and large nose, teeth spotted with black or red, great ears and
hanging, a little low forehead, dugs great and pendant, to the end they may
give their little ones suck over their shoulders, and to attain to this form
of beauty, they use all manner of art. But not to wander so far, in Spain
the chiefest beauty is lean and neatly count; in Italy fat, corpulent and
solid: the soft, and delicate, and flattering please the one; the strong,
vigorous, fierce, and commanding the other.

The Beauty of the body, especially the visage, should in 7 The beauty of the
soul and body.
all reason demonstrate and witness the beauty of the soul, (which is a
quality and rule of opinions and judgments, with a certain steadfastness and
constancy) for there is nothing that has a truer resemblance, than the
conformity and relation of the body to the spirit: and when this is not, we
must needs think, that there is some accident that has interrupted the
ordinary course, as it comes to pass, and we often times see it: for the
milk of the Nurse, the first institution, conversation bring great alterations
to the original nature of the soul, whether in good or evil. Socrates
confessed that the deformity of his body did justly accuse the natural
deformity of his soul, but that by industry and institution he had corrected
that of the soul. This outward countenance is a weak and dangerous surety,
but they that belie their own physiognomie, are rather to be punished than
others, because they falsify and betray that good promise that Nature has
planted in their front, and deceive the world.

CHAP. VI. Of the vestments of the Body.
THere is great likelihood that the custom or fashion of Nakedness is
natural.
going naked, as yet continued in a great part of the world, was the first and
original amongst men, and that of covering and adorning the body with
garments was artificial, and invented to help and enlarge nature, as they
which by artificial light go about to increase the light of the day: for
Nature having sufficiently provided for all other creatures a covering, it is
not to be believed that she has handled man worse than the rest, and left him
only indigent, and in such a state that he could not help himself without
foreign succors, and therefore those reproaches that are made against Nature as
a stepmother, are unjust. If men from the beginning had been clothed, it is
not likely that they would ever have disrobed themselves and gone naked, both
in regard of their health, which could not but be much offended with that
change, and shame it self: and nevertheless, it is done and observed amongst
many nations. Neither can it be alleged that we clothe our selves either to
cover our nakedness or privy parts, or to defend us against cold (for these
are the two reasons pretended; for against heat there is no appearance of
reason) because Nature has not taught us, that there is any thing in our
nakedness that we should be ashamed of; it is we that by our own fault and
fale have told it our selves: Quis indicauit tibi quod nudus esses, nisi quod
ex ligno quod praeceperam tibi ne comederes comedisti: and Nature has already
sufficiently hid them, put them far from our eyes, and covered them. And
therefore it is less needful to cover those parts only, as some do in those
countries where they go all naked, and ordinarily are not covered: for why
should he that is the lord of all other creatures, not daring to show himself
naked unto the world, hide himself under the spoils of another, nay adorn
himself? As for cold and other particular and local necessities, we know
that under the self same air, the self same heaven, one goes naked, another
apparelled; and we have all the most delicate part uncovered: and therefore a
wandering person being asked, How he could go so naked in Winter, answered, That
our faces are always naked, and he was all face: Yea, many great personages
have ever gone with their heads uncovered, Massinissa, Caesar, Hanibal,
Seuerus, and many nations there are, which go to the wars and fight all
naked: and the counsel that Plato gives for the continuance of health is,
never to cover either head or feet. And Varro says, That when it was first
ordained that men should uncover their heads in the presence of the gods and of
the magistrate, that it was rather for healths sake, and to harden themselves
against the injuries of the times, than for reverence. Lastly, the invention of
couers and houses against the injuries of heaven and men, is more ancient, more
natural, more universal, than of garments, and common with many creatures,
but an industrious search for victual more natural than either. Of the use of
garmens and aliment hereafter. Lib. 3. c. 43.


CHAP. VII. Of the Soul in general.
Behold here a matter of all others most difficult, handled The Preface.
and discoursed by the wisest of all Nations, especially Egyptians, Greeks,
Arabians and Latins, by our latter Writers more shallowly as all other
Philosophy, but with great diversity of opinions, according to the diversity
of Nations, Religions, Professions, without any certain accord or resolution.
The general knowledge and discourse thereof may be referred to these ten
points: The Definition, Essence or Nature, Faculties and Actions, Unity or
Plurality, Source, Entrance into the body, Residence therein, Seat,
Sufficiency to exercise her functions, the End and Separation from the body.

It is first very hard to define, or truly to say what the soul 1 The
Definition very difficult.
is, as generally all other forms because they are things relative which
subsist not of themselves, but are parts of a whole: and this is the reason why
there is such and so great diversity of definitions of them, whereof there is
not any received without contradiction. Aristotle has confuted twelve that
were before him, and could hardly make good his own.

It is easy to say what it is not: That it is not Fire, Air, 2 Easy to say
what it is not.
Water; Nor the temperature of the four Elements, or qualities, or humors,
which is always changeable, without which a creature is and lives; and besides
that, this is an accident, the Soul a substance. Again, Metals and things
inanimate have likewise a temperature of the four Elements and first
qualities. Neither is it blood, (for there are many things animate and living
without blood, and many creatures die without the shedding of a drop of blood.)
Nor the beginning and cause of motion (for diverse things inanimate move, as
the adamant moves the iron, amber or iet straw; medicines and roots of trees
being cut and dried draw and move.) Neither is it the act, or life, or Enargie,
or perfection (for that word Entelechia is diversely taken and interpreted) of a
living body: for all this is but the effect or action of the Soul, and not the
Soul it self, as to live, to see, to understand is the action of the Soul.
And it would likewise follow, that the Soul should be an accident not a
substance, and could not subsist without that body whereof it is the act and
perfection, no more than the cover of an house may be without the house, and a
relative without his correlatiue. To be brief, it is to say what the soul
does and is to another, not what it is in it self.

But to say what the Soul is, is very difficult: A man may 3 Hard to say what
it is.
simply say that it is an essential quickening form, which gives to the plant
the vegetative or growing life; to a beast a sensible life, which comprehends
the vegetative; to a man an intellectual life, which comprehends the other
two, as in numbers the greater conteines the less, and in figures the
Pentagone conteines the Tetragone, and this the Trigone. I call it the
intellectiue soul rather than the reasonable, which is comprehended in the
intellectiue as the less in the great: for the reasonable in some sense and
measure, according to the opinion of the greatest Philosophers and experience
it self, is likewise in beasts, but not the intellectiue as being more high.
Sicut equus and mulus in quibus non est intellectus. The Soul then is not the
beginning or source, that word does properly belong to the sovereign first
author, but an inward cause of life, motion, sense, understanding. It moves
the body, and it self is not moved; as contrarily, the body is moved, and
moves not at al: it moves I say the body, and not it self, for nothing but
God moves it self; and whatsoever moves it self is eternal and Lord of it
self: and in that it moves the body it has it not of it self, but from an
higher cause.

Concerning the nature and essence of the Soul, I mean a humane Soul (for
the Soul of a beast is without all doubt 4 The nature and essence of the soul.
corporal, material, bred and borne with the matter, and with it corruptible)
there is a question of greater importance than it seems: for some affirm it
to be corporal, some incorporall: and this is very agreeable to reason, if a
man be not opinatiue. That it is corporal, see what the grounds are; Spirits
and Devils, good and ill, which are wholly separated from all matter are
corporal, according to the opinion of all Philosophers and our greatest
Divines, Tertulltan, Origin, S. In homil. l. de spir. l 3. de lib. arb. Hom. de
Epith.
Basil, Gregory, Augustine, Damascene; how much more the Soul of man, which
has society and is united to a matter? Their resolution is, that whatsoever
is created, being compared unto God, is gross, corporal, material, and only
God is incorporall; that every spirit is a body and has a bodily nature. Next
unto authority almost universal the reason is irrefragable. Whatsoever is
included in this finite world is finite, limited both in virtue and substance,
bounded with a superficies, enclosed and circumscribed in a place, which are
the true and natural conditions of a body: for there is nothing but a body
which has a superficial part, and is barred and fastened in a place. God only
is wholly infinite, incorporall, the ordinary distinctions, circumscriptiue,
definitive, effectiue, are but verbal, and in nothing either help or hurt the
cause: for it always stands good that spirits are in such sort in a place,
that at the self same time that they are in a place they can not be elsewhere;
and they are not in a place either infinite, or very great, or very little, but
equal to their limited and finited substance and superficies. And if it were
not so, spirits could not change their place, nor ascend or descend, as the
Scripture affirms that they do: and so they should be immooueable,
indivisible, indifferently in all. Now if it appear that they change their
place, the change conuicteth that they are mooueable, diuisible, subject unto
time and to the succession thereof, required in the motion and passage from one
place to another, which are all the qualities of a body. But because many
simple men under this word corporal, do imagine visible, palpable, and think
not that the pure air, or fire without the flame or coal are bodies, have
therefore likewise affirmed, That spirits both separated and humane are not
corporal, as in truth they are not in that sense: for they are of an
invisible substance, whether airie as the greatest part of Philosophers and
Divines affirm, or celestial as some Hebrews and Arabiques teach, calling by
the self same name both the heaven and the spirit an essence proper to
immortality; or whether (if they will have it so) of a substance more subtle
and delicate, yet they are always corporal, since limited by place,
mooueable, subject to motion and to times. Finally, if they were not corporal,
they should not be passible and capable of suffering as they are: the humane
receives from his body pleasure and displeasure, sorrow and delight in his
turn, as the body from the spirit and his passions many good qualities, many
bad, virtues, vices, affections, which are all accidents: and all as well the
spirits separated and Devils, as humane, are subject to punishment and
torments. They are therefore corporal: for there is nothing passible, that is
not corporal, and it is only proper unto bodies to be subject to accidents.

Now the Soul has a great number of virtues and faculties, as many almost as
the body has members: There are 3 The faculties and actions of the Soul.
some in plants, more in beasts, most in man, to know, to live, to feel, to
move, to desire, to allure, to assemble, to retain, to concoct, to digest, to
nourish, to grow, to reject, to see, to hear, to taste, to smell, to speak,
to breath, to engender, to think, to reason, to contemplate, to consent,
dissent, to remember, judge; all which are no parts of the Soul: for so it
should be diuisible, and should consist upon accidents, but they are her
natural qualities. The actions come after and follow the faculties, and so
there are three degrees, according to the doctrine of great S. Denis followed
of all, that is, we must consider in spiritual creatures three things,
Essence, Faculty, Operation: By the latter which is the action we know the
faculty, and by it the essence. The actions may be hindered and wholly cease
without any prejudice at all unto the soul, and her faculties, as the Science
and faculty of Painting remains entire in the Painter, although his hands be
bound, and so be made unable to paint: But if the faculties themselves perish,
the Soul must needs be gone, no otherwise then Fire is no longer fire having
lost the faculty of warming.

The essence and nature of the Soul being after a sort explicated, The unity
of the soul.
one of the busiest questions that belongs unto the Soul offers it self
to our consideration, that is, whether there be in a creature especially in man
one soul or many? Touching which point there are diverse opinions, but may be
reduced into three. Some of the Greeks, and almost all the Arabiques imitating
them, have thought (not only in every particular man, but generally in all
men) that there was but one immortal Soul. The Egyptians for the most part
held an opinion quite contrary, that there was a plurality of souls in every
creature, all diverse and distinct, two in every beast, and three in man, two
mortal, the vegetative and sensible, and the third intellectiue, immortal. The
third opinion as the mean betwixt the two former, and most followed, being
held by many of all nations is, that there is but one Soul in every creature,
not more. In every of these opinions there is some difficulty. I leave the
first as being already sufficiently confuted and rejected. The plurality of
souls in every creature and man, on the one side seems very strange and
absurd in Philosophy, for that were to give many forms to one and the same
thing, and to say that there are many substances and subjects in one, two
beasts in one, three men in one; on the other side it gives credit and helps
much our belief touching the immortality of the intellectual Soul; for
there being three souls, there can follow no inconvenience, that two of them
should die, and the third continue immortal. The unity of the Soul seems
to resist the immortality thereof; for how can one and the same indivisible,
be in a mortal part and an immortal? as nevertheless Aristotle would have
it. Doubtless it seems that of necessity the Soul must be either
altogether mortal, or altogether immortal, which are two very foul
absurdities. The first abolisheth all religion and sound Philosophy: the second
makes beasts likewise immortal. Nevertheless it seems to be more true that
there is but one Soul in every creature, for the plurality and diversity of
faculties, instruments, actions, neither derogateth any thing at all, nor
multiplieth in any thing this unity, no more than the diversity of rivers the
unity of one spring or fountain, nor the diversity of effects in the Sun,
to heat, to enlighten, to melt, to dry, to whiten, to make black, do
dissipate the unity and simplicity of the Sun; for should they, there would
be a great number of souls in one man and Suns in one world. Neither does
this essential unity of the Soul any thing hinder the immortality of the
humane Soul in her essence, notwithstanding the vegetative and sensitive
faculties, which are but accidents, die, that is to say, cannot be exercised
without the body, the Soul not having a subject or instrument whereby to do
it, but the third intellectual Soul is always well, because for it there is
no need of the body, though whilst it is within it, it make use thereof to
exercise it self; insomuch that if it did return unto the body, it were
only again to exercise her vegetative and sensitive faculties, as we see in
those that are raised unto life to live here below, not in those that are
raised to live elsewhere, for such bodies need not to live by the exercise of
such faculties: Even as there is no want or decay in the Sun, but it
continues in it self wholly the same, though during a whole ecclips it
neither shine nor warm, nor perform his other effects in those places that
are subject unto it.

Having showed the unity of the soul in every subject, let The source of the
soul.
us see from whence it comes, and how it enters into the body. The original
beginning of souls is not held to be the same of all, I mean of humane
souls; for the vegetative and sensitive, of Plants and Beasts, is by the
opinion of all, altogether material, and in the seed, for which cause it is
likewise mortal. But concerning the Soul of man there are four celebrated
opinions. According to the first which is of the Stoics, held by Philo Iudeus,
and afterward by the Maniches, Priscilianists, and others, it is transferred
and brought forth as a part or parcel of the substance of God, who inspireth
it into the body, alleging to their best advantage the words of Moses,
Inspirauit in faciem eius spiraculum vitae: The second opinion, held by
Tertullian, Apollinaris, the Luciferians and other Christians, affirms that
the Soul proceeds and is derived from the souls of our parents with the
seed, as the Soul of a beast. The third opinion which is that of the
Pythagorians and Platonists held by many Rabins and Doctors of the Jews, and
afterward by Origin and other Doctors, teaches that the souls of men have
been from the beginning all created of God, made of nothing and reserved in
heaven, afterward to be sent into the lower parts, as need should require, and
that the bodies of men are formed and disposed to receive them; and from hence
did spring the opinion of those that thought that the souls of men here
below, were either well or ill handled, and lodged in bodies either sound or
sick, according to that life which they had led above in heaven, before they
were incorporate. And truly the master of Wisdom himself shows, that the
Soul, of the two, was the elder, and before the body, Eram puer, bonam
indolem sortitus, imo bonus cum essem, corpus incontaminatum reperi. The fourth
opinion received and held through all Christendom is, that they are all
created of God, and infused into bodies prepared, in such manner that the
creation and infusion is done at one and the same instant. These four opinions
are all affirmative, but there is a fifth much retained which determines
nothing, and is content to say, that it is a secret unknown unto men; of which
opinion was S. Austin, Greg. and others, who nevertheless De orig. Epl. 28.
157.
thought the two latter affirmative opinions more like to be true than the
former.

Let us now see when and how the Soul enters into the 6 The entrance of the
soul into the body.
body, whether altogether at one instant, or successively; I mean the humane
Soul: for of that of a beast there is no doubt, since it is natural in the
seed, according to Aristotle (whom most do follow) that is by succession of
times and by degrees, as an artificial form which a man makes by pieces, the
one after the other; the head, afterward the throat, the belly, the legs:
insomuch that the vegetative and sensitive Soul altogether material and
corporal, is in the seed, and with the descent of the parents, which
fashioneth the body in the matrix: and that done, the reasonable Soul
arriueth from without. And therefore there are neither two nor three souls;
neither together nor successively, neither is the vegetative corrupted by the
arrival of the sensitive, nor the sensitive by the arrival of the
intellectual; but it is but one Soul which is made, finished and perfected in
that time which nature has prescribed. Others are of opinion, that the soul
enters with all her faculties at one instant, that is to say then, when all
the body is furnished with organs, formed, and wholly finished, and that
until then there was no Soul, but only a natural virtue and Enargie, an
essential form of the seed, which working by the spirits which are in the
said seed, with the heat of the matrix and material blood, as with
instruments, do form and build up the body, prepare all the members, nourish,
move, and increase them: which being done, this Enargie and seminall form
vanishes, and is quite lost, so that the seed cease to be seed, losing it
form, by the arrival of another more noble, which is the humane Soul, which
causes that which was seed, or an Embryon, that is, a substance without shape,
to be no longer seed but a man.

The Soul being entered into the body, we are likewise to 7 The residence of
the Soul in the Body.
know what kind of existence therein it has, and how it is there resident.
Some Philosophers not knowing what to say, or how to join and unite the Soul
with the body, make it to abide and reside therein, as a Master in his house,
a Pilot in his ship, a Coachman in his coach: but this were to destroy all,
for so the Soul should not be the form, nor inward and essential part of a
creature, or of a man, it should have no need of the members of the body to
abide there, nor any feeling at all of the contagion of the body, but it
should be a substance wholly distinct from the body, of it self subsisting,
which at it pleasure might come and go, and separate it self from the body,
without the distinction, and diminution of all the functions thereof, which are
all absurdities. The Soul is in the body as the form in the matter, extended
and spread thorowout the body, giving life, motion, sense to all the parts
thereof, and both of them together make but one Hypostasis, one entire subject,
which is the creature, and there is no mean or middle that does unite and knit
them together: for betwixt the matter and the form, there is no middle,
according to all Philosophy. The Soul then is all, in all the body; I add
not (though it be commonly said) and all in every part of the body: for that
implies a contradiction, and divides the Soul.

Now notwithstanding the Soul, as it is said, be diffused 8 The seat and
instruments of the soul.
and spread through the whole body, yet nevertheless, to excite and exercise it
faculties, it is more specially and expressly in some parts of the body, than
in others; in which it is said to have place, yet not to be wholly there, lest
the rest should be without Soul without form. And as it has four principal
and chief faculties, so men give it four seats, that is, those four regions,
which we have noted before in the composition of the body, the four first
principal instruments of the soul, the rest refer themselves unto them, as
also all the faculties to these, that is to say, the engendring faculty to the
ingendring parts, the natural to the liver, the vital to the heart, the
animal and intellectual to the brain.

We are now come to speak in general of the exercise of 9 The sufficiency of
the Soul for the exercise of her faculties.
the faculties of the Soul, whereunto the soul of it self is wise and
sufficient, insomuch that it fails not to produce that which it knows, and
to exercise it functions, as it ought, if it be not hindered, and that the
instruments thereof be well disposed. And therefore it was well and truly said
of the wise, that Nature is wise, discreet, industrious, a sufficient mistrisse
which makes a man apt to all things: Insita sunt nobis omnium artium, ac
virtutum semina, magisterque ex occulto Deus producit ingenium: which is easily
showed by induction. The vegetative soul without instruction forms the body
in the matrix with excellent art, afterward it nourishes it, and makes it
grow, drawing the victual unto it, retaining and concocting it, afterward
casting out the excrements, it ingendreth and reformeth the parts that fail;
these are things that are seen in plants, beasts, and men. The sensitive Soul
of it self without instruction, makes both beasts and men to move their feet,
their hands, and other members, to stretch, to rub, to shake, to move the lips,
to press the dug, to cry, to laugh. The reasonable of it self, not according
to the opinion of Plato by the remembrance of that which it knew before it
entered into the body, nor according to Aristotle by reception and acquisition,
coming from without by the senses, being of it self, as a white paper void of
impression, although that serve to good purpose, but of it self without
instruction, imagines, understands, retains, reasons, discourses. But
because this of the reasonable Soul seems to be more difficult than the
other, and wounds in some sort Aristotle himself, it shall be handled again
in his place, in the discourse of the intellectual Soul.

It remains that we speak of the last point, that is, of 10 The separation
of the body twofold.
the separation of the Soul from the body, which is after a diverse sort and
manner; the one, and the ordinary is natural by death, and this not the same
in beasts and men: for by the death of beasts, the Soul dies, and is
annihilated, according unto that rule, by the corruption of the subject the
form perishes, 1. Natural and ordinary.
the matter remains: by the death of man the Soul is separated from the
body, but is not lost, but remains inasmuch as it is immortal.

The immortality of the Soul is a thing universally, religiously, 2. The
immortality of the Soul.
(for it is the principal foundation of all religion) and peaceably received
and concluded upon throughout the world, I mean by an outward and public
profession; seriously and inwardly, not so, witness so many Epicures,
Libertines, and mockers in the world: yea the Saduces, the greatest Lords of
the Jews, did not stick with open mouth to deny it; though a thing
profitable to be believed, and in some sort proved by many natural and humane
reasons, but properly and better established by the authority of religion than
any other way. It seems that there is in a man a kind of inclination and
disposition of nature to believe it, for man desires naturally to continue and
perpetuate his being, from whence likewise proceeds that great, yea furious
care and love of our posterity and succession. Again two things there are that
give strength thereunto, and make it more plausible, the one is the hope of
glory and reputation, and the desire of the immortality of our name, which how
vain soever it be, carries a great credit in the world: the other is an
impression, that vice which robs a man of the view and knowledge of humane
justice, remaining always opposite to the divine justice, must thereby be
chastised, yea after death: so that besides that a man is altogether carried
and disposed by nature to desire it, and consequently to believe it, the
Justice of God does conclude it.

From hence we are to learn that there are three differences 3 The proof.
and degrees of Souls, an order required even to the perfection of the
universe. Two extremes, the one is that which being altogether material, is
plunged, and overwhelmed in the matter, and inseparable from it, and
therewithal corruptible, which is the Soul of a beast: the other quite
contrary, is that which has not any commerce, or society with the matter or
body, as the soul of immortal Angels or Devils. In the middle as the mean
betwixt these two, is the humane soul, which is neither wholly tied to the
matter, nor altogether without it, but is joined with it, and may likewise
subsist and live without it. This order and distinction is an excellent
argument of immortality; for it were a vacuum, a defect, a deformity too
absurd in nature, dishonorable to the author, and a kind of ruin to the
world, that betwixt two extremes, the corruptible and incorruptible, there
should be no middle; that is, partly the one and partly the other: there must
needs be one that ties and ioynes the two ends or extremes together, and that
can be none but man. Below the lowest and wholly material, is that which has
no Soul at all, as stones; above the highest and immortal, is the eternal
only God.

The other separation not natural nor ordinary, and which 4 2. Not natural.
is done by strange impulsions and at times, is very difficult to understand,
and perplex. It is that which is done by ecstasies and rauishments, which is
diverse and done by different means: for there is a separation that is divine,
such as the Scripture reports unto us, of Daniel, Zachary, Esdras, Ezechiel,
S. Paul. There is another that is demoniacall, procured by devils, and good
spirits and bad, as we read of many, as of John D'vns, called Lescot, who
being in his ecstasy a long time held for dead, was carried into the air, and
cast down upon the earth; but so soon as he felt the blow that he received by
the fall, he came to himself: but by reason of the great store of blood which
he lost, his head being broken, he died outright. Cardan tells it of
himself, and of his father, and it continues autentiquely verified in many
and diverse parts of the world, of many, and those for the most part of the
vulgar sort, weak and women possessed, whose bodies remain not only without
motion, and the beating of the heart and arteries, but also without any sense
or feeling of the greatest blows, either with iron or fire, that could be
given them, and afterward their souls being returned they have felt great
pain in their limbs, and recounted that which they have seen and done in
places far distant. Thirdly, there is a humane separation, which proceeds
either from that malady which Hipocrates calls Sacer, commonly called The
falling sickness, Morbus comitialis, the sign whereof is a foming at the mouth,
which is not in those that are possessed; but in stead thereof they have a
stinking savor, or it is occasioned by stiptickes, stupifying and benumming
medicines; or arises from the force of imagination, which enforcing and
bending it self with too deep an attention about a thing, carries away the
whole strength and power of the Soul. Now in these three kinds of ecstasies or
rauishments, Divine, Diabolical, Humane, the question is, Whether the Soul be
truly and really separated from the body; or if remaining in it, it be in such
sort employed and busied about some outward thing which is forth of the body,
that it forgets it own body; whereby follows a kind of intermission and
vacation of the actions and exercise of the functions thereof. Touching the
divine ecstasy, the Apostle speaking of himself and his own act; dares not
define any thing, Si in corpore vel extra corpus nescio, Deusscit. An
instruction that may serve for all others, and for other separations of less
quality. Touching the Demoniacall ecstasy, as not to feel a blow be it never
so great, to report what has been done two or three hundred leagues off, are
two great and violent conjectures of a true separation from the body, but not
altogether necessary: for the devil can so alienate and occupy the soul
within the body, that it shall not seem to have any action or commerce with
the body for some certain time, and in that time so beforteth the soul by
presenting things unto the imagination that have been done afar off, that a
man may speak and discourse thereof: for to affirm that certainly the Soul
does wholly depart and abandon the body, Nature is too bold and foole-hardie:
to say that it does not wholly depart, but that the imaginatiue or
intellectual is carried out, and that the vegetative soul remains, were more
to entangle our selves; for so the Soul in it essence should be divided, or
the accident only should be carried out, and not the substance. Touching the
humane ecstasy, doubtless there is no separation of the Soul, but only a
suspension of the patent and outward actions thereof.

What becomes of the Soul, and what the state thereof is 11 The estate of the
Soul after death.
after the natural separation by death, diverse men think diversely: and this
point belongs not to the subject of this book. The Metempsychose and
transanimation of Pythagoras has in some sort been embraced by the Academicks,
Stoics, Egyptians, and others; but yet not of all in the same sense: for some
do admit it only for the punishment of the wicked, as we read of
Nebuchadnezar, who was changed into a beast by the judgment of God. Others,
and some great, have thought that good souls, being separated, become Angels,
the wicked, Devils. It had been more pleasing to have said Like unto them; Non
nubent, sed erunt sicut Angeli. Some have affirmed, that the souls of the
wicked, at the end of a certain time, were reduced to nothing. But the truth
of all this we must learn from Religion and Divines, who speak hereof more
clearly.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Soul in particular; and first of the vegetative faculty.
AFter this general description of the Soul, in these ten points we must
speak thereof more particularly, according 1 The faculties of the Soul.
to the order of the faculties thereof, beginning at the basest, that is, the
Vegetative, Sensitive, Apprehensible or Imaginatiue, Appetible, Intellectiue,
which is the soueraign Soul and truly humane. Under every one of these there
are diverse others which are subject unto them, and as parts of them, as we
shall see, handling them in their rank.

Of the vegetable and basest Soul, which is even in plants, I will not speak
much; it is the proper subject of Physicians, 2 Of the vegetable and her
subalternals.
of health and sickness. Let me only say, that under this there are contained
other three great faculties, which follow one the other: for the first serves
the second, and the second the third; but the third neither of the former. The
first then is the nourishing faculty, for the conservation of the Indiuiduum
or particular person, which diverse others do serve, as the Attractiue of the
victual, the Concoctiue, the Digestive, separating the good and proper, from
the naught and hurtful; the Retentiue and the Expulsive of superfluities: The
second, the increasing or growing faculty, for the perfection and due
quantity of the Indiuiduum: The third, is the Generatiue, for the conservation
of the kind. Whereby we see, that the two first are for the Indiuiduum, and
work within in the body; the third is for the kind, and has it effect and
operation without in another body, and therefore is more worthy than the
other, and comes nearer to a faculty more high, which is the Sensitive. This
is a great height of perfection, to make another thing like it self.

CHAP. IX. Of the Sensitive faculty.
IN the exercise of this faculty and function of the Senses Six things
required to the exercise of this faculty.
these six things do concur, whereof four are within and two without. That
is to say, the Soul, as the first efficient cause. The faculty of Sense
(which is a quality of the Soul, and not the Soul it self) that is, of
perceiving and apprehending The five Senses (of this number we shall speak
hereafter) that is to say, Hearing, Seeing, Smelling, Tasting, Touching. The
corporal instrument of the Sense, whereof Senses; the Eye, the Ear, the high
concauitie of the Nose, which is the entrance to the first ventricles of the
brain, the Tongue, the whole Skin of the body. The Spirit which arises from
the Soul, by certain sinews in the said instruments, by which spirit and
instrument the soul exercises her faculty. The sensible Species, or object
is infinite: but to speak more truly, the true object is light, which is
never without color, and without which the colors are invisible. Now the
light is a quality which comes forth of a luminous body, which makes both it
self visible and all things else; and if it be terminated and limited by some
solid body, it reboundeth and redoubleth it beams: otherwise if it pass
without any stop or termination, it can not be seen except it be in the root
of that light or luminous body from whence it came, nor make any thing else to
be seen. Of the Ear or Hearing, the object is a sound, which is a noise
proceeding from the encounter of two bodies, and it is diverse: the pleasant and
melodious sweeteneth and appeaseth the spirit, and for it sake the body too,
and drives away maladies from them both: the sharp and penetrant does
contrariwise trouble and wound the spirit. Of Tasting, the object is a favor
or smacke, whereof there are six diverse simple kinds, Sweet, Sour, Sharp,
Tart, Salt, Bitter; but there are many compounds. Of Smell, the object is an
odor or sent, which is a fume rising from an odoriferous object ascending by
the nose to the first ventricles of the brain: the strong and violent hurts
the brain, as an ill sound the ear: the temperate and good does contrariwise
rejoice, delight and comfort. Of the sense of Touching, the object is heat,
cold, drouth, moisture either pleasant and polite, or sharp and smarting,
motion, rest, tickling.

The middle or space betwixt the object and the instrument,

So that sense is made, when the sensible species presents

In former times and before Aristotle, they did make a difference betwixt the
sense of Seeing and the rest of the senses, and they all held, that the sight
was active, and was made by emitting or sending forth of the eye, the beams
thereof unto the outward objects, and that the other senses were passive,
receiving the sensible object: but after Aristotle, they are made all alike,
and all passive, receiving in the organ or instrument, the kinds and images of
things, and the reasons of the Ancients to the contrary are easily answered.
There is more and more excellent matter to be delivered of the senses hereafter.

Now besides these five particular senses which are without,

CHAP. X. Of the senses of Nature.
ALl knowledge is begun in us by the senses; so say our 1 The importance of the
natural senses.
Schoolmen: but it is not altogether true, as we shall see hereafter. They
are our first masters: it begins by them, and ends with them: they are the
beginning and end of all. It is not possible to recoile farther back: every
one of them is a captain and sovereign lord in his order, and has a great
command, carrying with it infinite knowledges. The one depends not, or has
need of the other, so are they equally great, although the one have a far
greater extent, and train, and affairs, than the other, as a little king is
as well a sovereign in his little narrow command, as a great in his great
estate.

It is an opinion amongst us, that there are but five senses of Nature, because
we mark but five in us; but yet there 2 The number.
may very well be more, and it is greatly to be doubted that there are; but it
is impossible for us to know them, to affirm them, or to deny them, because a
man shall never know the want of that sense which he has never had. There are
many beasts which live a full and perfect life, which want some one of our five
senses; and a creature may live without the five senses, save the sense of
Feeling, which is only necessary unto life. We live very commodiously with
five, and yet perhaps we do want one, or two, or three, and yet it can not be
known. One sense can not discover another: and if a man want one by nature,
yet he knows not which way to affirm it. A man borne blind can never
conceive that he sees not, nor desire to see, nor delight in his sight: it may
be he will say that he would see, but that is because he has heard say and
learned of others, that it is to be desired: the reason is because the senses
are the first gates, and entrances to knowledge. So man not being able to
imagine more than the five that he has, he can not know how to judge whether
there be more in Nature; yet he may have more. Who knows whether the
difficulties that we find in many of the works of Nature, and the effects of
creatures, which we can not understand, do proceed from the want of some sense
that we have not? Of the hidden properties which we see in many things, a man
may say that there are sensible faculties in Nature proper to judge and
apprehend them; but yet he must confess that we have them not, and that the
ignorance of such things proceeds from our own default. Who knows whether
it be some particular sense, that discovers in the Cock the hour of
midnight and morning, and that moves him to crow? Who taught some beasts to
choose certain herbs for their cure, and many such like woonders as these are?
No man can affirm or deny, say this it is, or that it is.

Some have assayed to give a reason of this number of the five senses, and to
prove the sufficiency of them, by distinguishing 3 Their sufficiency.
and diversely comparing their outward objects; which are, either all near the
body or distant from it: if near but yet remaining without, it is the sense
of Touching; if they enter, it is Taste; if they be more distant and present by
a right line, it is the Sight; if oblique and by reflection, it is the Hearing.
A man might better have said thus, That these five senses being appointed for
the service of an entire man, some are entirely for the body, that is to say,
Taste and Touching; that, in that it enters; this, in that it remains
without. Others first and principally for the soul, as sight and hearing: the
Sight for invention, the Hearing for acquisition and communication, and one in
the middle, for the middle spirits, and ties of the soul and body, which is
the Smell. Again, they answer to the four Elements, and their qualities: The
sense of Feeling to the earth; of Hearing to the air; of Taste to the water
and moisture; the Smell to the fire. The Sight is a compound, and partakes both
of water and fire, by reason of the bright splendour of the eye. Again they say
that there are so many senses, as there are kinds of sensible things, which are
color, sound, odor, taste or savor, and the fifth which has no proper name,
the object of Feeling, which is heat, cold, rough, plain, and so forth. But
men deceive themselves, for the number of the senses is not to be judged by the
number of sensible things, which are no cause that there are so many. By this
reason there should be many more, and one and the same sense should receive
many diverse heads of objects, and one and the same object be apprehended by
diverse senses: so that the tickling of a feather, and the pleasures of Venus
are distinguished from the five Senses, and by some comprehended in the sense
of Feeling: But the cause is rather, for that the spirit has no power to
attain to the knowledge of things, but by the five Senses, and that Nature
has given it so many, because it was necessary for it end and benefit.

Their comparisons are diverse in dignity and nobility. The 4 Comparison.
Sense of Seeing excels all the rest in five things: It apprehends farther
off, and extends it self even to the fixed stars. It has more variety of
objects, for to all things and generally in all there is light and color the
objects of the eye. It is more exquisit, exact and particular even in the least
and finest things that are. It is more prompt and sudden, apprehending even in
a moment and without motion, even the heavens themselves: in the other senses
there is a motion that requires time. It is more divine, and the marks of
Divinity are many. Liberty incomparable above others, whereby the eye sees, or
sees not, and therefore it has lids ready to open and to shut: power not to
turmoile it self, and not to suffer it self to be seen; Actiuitie and
ability to please or displease, to signify and insinuate our thoughts, wills
and affections: for the eye speaks and strikes, it serves for a tongue and
a hand; the other Senses are purely passive. But that which is most noble in
this Sense is, that the privation of the object thereof, which is darkness,
brings fear, and that naturally; and the reason is, because a man finds
himself robbed of so excellent a guide: and therefore whereas a man desires
company for his solace, the Sight in the light is in place of company. The
sense of Hearing has many excellent singularities, it is more spiritual, and
the service thereof more inward. But the particular comparison of these two,
which are of the rest the more noble, and of speech, shall be spoken in the
Chapter following. As for pleasure or displeasure, though all the Senses are
capable thereof, yet the Sense of Feeling receives greatest grief, and almost
no pleasure; and contrarily the Taste great delight, and almost no grief. In
the organ and instrument, the Touch is universal, spread through the whole
body, to the end the body should feel heat and cold; the organs of the rest
are assigned to a certain place and member.

From the weakness and incertitude of our senses comes ignorance, error and
mistakings: for since that by their 5 The weakness and vncertainnesse of
the Senses.
means and mixture we attain to all knowledge, if they deceive us in their
report, we have no other help to stick unto. But who can say, or accuse them,
that they do deceive us, considering that by them we begin to learn and to
know? Some have assirmed that they do never deceive us, and when they seem to
do it, the fault proceeds from some thing else; and that we must rather
attribute it to any other thing than to the senses. Others have said clean
contrary, that they are all false, and can teach us nothing that is certain.
But the middle opinion is the more true.

Now whether the Senses be false or not, at the least it is 6 The mutual
deceit of the spirit and senses.
certain that they deceive, yea ordinarily enforce the discourse, the reason,
and in exchange are again mocked by it. Do then but consider what kind of
knowledge and certainty a man may have, when that within, and that without is
full of deceit and weakness, and that the principal parts thereof, the
essential instruments of science do deceive one another. That the senses do
deceive and enforce the understanding, it is plain in those senses whereof
some do kindle with fury, others delight and sweeten, others tickle the Soul.
And why do they that cause themselves to be let blood, lanced, cauterised and
burnt, turn away their eyes, but that they do well know that great authority
that the Senses have over their reason? The sight of some bottomless depth, or
precipitate downfall, astonisheth even him that is settled in a firm and sure
place: and to conclude, does not the Sense vanquish and quite overcome all the
beautiful resolutions of virtue, and patience? So on the other side, the
senses are likewise deceived by the understanding, which appears by this,
that the Soul being stirred with Choler, Love, Hatred, or any other passion,
our senses do see, and hear every thing others then they are, yea sometimes
our senses are altogether dulled by the passions of the Soul, and it seems
that the Soul retireth and shuts up the operation of the Senses, and that
the spirit being otherwise employed, the eye discerns not that which is
before it, and which it sees: yea the sight and the reason judge diversely of
the greatness of the Sun, the stars, nay of the figure of a staff any
thing distant.

In the Senses of Nature the beasts have as well part, as we, 7 The senses
common to man and beast, but diversely.
and sometimes excel us: for some have their hearing more quick than man,
some their sight, others their smell, others their taste: and it is held, that
in the sense of Hearing, the Heart excels all others; of Sight, the Eagle; of
Smell, the Dog; of Taste, the Ape; of Feeling, the Tortuis: nevertheless,
the pre-eminence of that sense of Touch is given unto man, which of all the
rest is the most brutish. Now if the Senses are the means to attain unto
knowledge, and that beasts have a part therein, yea sometimes the better part,
why should not they have knowledge?

But the Senses are not the only instruments of knowledge, 8 The judgment of
the Senses hard and dangerous.
neither are our Senses alone to be consulted or believed: for if beasts by
their Senses judge otherwise of things than we by ours, as doubtless they do;
who must be believed? Our spettle cleanses and dries our wounds, it kills
the Serpent; What then is the true quality of our spettle? To dire and to
cleanse, or to kill? To judge well of the operation of the senses, we must be
at some agreement with the beasts, nay with our selves: for the eye pressed
down and shut, sees otherwise than in it ordinary state; the ear stopped,
receives the objects otherwise than when it is open: an infant sees, hears,
tastes, otherwise than a man; a man than an old man; a sound than a sick; a
wise than a fool. In this great diversity and contrariety what shall we
hold for certain? Seeing that one sense belieth another, a picture seems to
be held up to the view, and the hands are folded together.

CHAP. XI. Of Sight, Hearing and Speech.
THese are the three most rich and excellent jewels of all those that are in
this muster, and of whose preheminencie 1 A comparison of the three.
it is disputed. Touching their Organes, that of the Sight in it composition
and form is admirable, and of a lively and shining beauty, by reason of the
great variety and subtlety of so many small parts or pieces; and therefore it
is said that the eye is one of those parts of the body which do first begin
to be formed, and the last that is finished: and for this very cause it is so
delicate, and said to be subject to six score maladies. Afterward comes that
of Speech, which helps the sense of Hearing to many great advantages. For the
service of the body, the Sight is most necessary, and therefore does more
import a beast than Hearing. But for the spirit, the Hearing challenges the
upper place. The Sight serves well for the invention of things, which by it
have almost all been discovered, but it brings nothing to perfection.
Again, the Sight is not capable but of corporal things and particular, and
that only of their crust or superficial part, it is the instrument of ignorant
men and unlearned, qui mouentur ad id quod adest, quodque praesens est.

The Ear is a spiritual Sense, it is the Intermedler, and Agent 2 The
preheminencie of hearing.
of the understanding, the instrument of wise and spiritual men, capable not
only of the secrets and inward parts of particular bodies, whereunto the Sight
arriueth not, but also of the general kinds, and of all spiritual things and
divine, in which the Sight serves rather to disturb than to help: and
therefore we see not only many blind, great and wise, but some also that are
deprived of their sight to become great Philosophers: but of such as are deaf
we never heard of any. This is the way by which a man enters the fortress,
and makes himself master of the place, and imploieth his spirit in good or
ill; witness the wife of King Agamemnon, who was contained in her duty of
chastity by the sound of a Harp: and David by the self same mean chased
away the evil spirit from Saul, and restored him to health: and that skillful
player on the Flute, that sweetened the voice of that great Orator Gracchus. To
be brief, Science, Truth, and Virtue have no other entrance into the Soul,
but by the Ear: Christianity it self teaches that faith and salvation
comes by Hearing, and that the Sight does rather hurt, than help thereunto;
that faith is the belief of those things that are not seen, which belief is
acquired by hearing; and it calls such as are apprentices or nouices therein,
Auditors, (...), catechized. Let me add this one word, that the Hearing gives
succor and comfort in darkness, and to such as are asleep, that by the sound
they may be awaked, and so provide for their preservation. For all these
reasons have the wisest so much commended Hearing, the pure and virgin guardian
from all corruption, for the health of the inward man, as for the safety of a
City, the gates and walls are guarded that the enemy enter not.

Speech is peculiarly given unto man, an excellent present and very necessary,
in regard of him from whom it proceeds 3 The force and authority of Speech.
: it is the interpreter and image of the soul, animi index, and speculum, the
messenger of the heart, the gate by which all that is within issues forth,
and commits itself to the view, all things come forth of darkness and
secret corners into the light, and the spirit itself makes it self visible:
and therefore an ancient Philosopher said once to a child, Speak that I may
see thee, that is to say, the inside of thee. As vessels are known whether
they be broken or whole, full or empty, by the sound, and metals by the
touch; so man by his speech. Of all the visible parts of the body which show
themselves outward, that which is nearest the heart is the tongue by the root
thereof; so that which comes nearest unto our thought, is our speech: for from
the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. In regard of him which receives
it, it is a powerful master, an imperious commander, which enters the
fortress, possesses it self of the possessor, stirs him up, animateth,
exasperateth, appeaseth him, makes him sad, merry, imprinteth in him
whatsoever passion, it handles and feeds the Soul of the hearer, and makes
it pliable to every sense; it makes him blush, waxpale, laugh, cry, tremble
for fear, mad with choler, to leap for joy, and pierces him through with
passion. In regard of all, Speech is the hand of the spirit, wherewith, as the
body by his, it takes and gives, it asks counsel and succor and gives
it. It is the great Intermedler and Huckster: by it we traffic, Merx a
Mercurio peace is handled, affairs are managed, Sciences and the goods of the
spirit are distributed, it is the band and cement of humane society (so that it
be understood: For, says one, a man were better to be in the company of a dog
that he knows, than in the company of a man whose language he knows not,
vt externus alieno, non sit hominis vice.) To be brief, it is the instrument
of whatsoever is good or ill, vita and mors in manibus linguae: there is
nothing better, Of a good and evil tongue.
nothing worse than the tongue. The tongue of a wise man is the door of a
royal Cabinet, which is no sooner opened, but incontinently a thousand
diversities present themselves to the eye, every one more beautiful than
other, come from the Indies, Peru, Arabia; So a wise man produces and rangeth
them in good order, sentences, and Aphorisms of Philosophy, similitudes,
examples, histories, wise sayings drawn from all the mines, and treasuries
old and new, qui profert de thesauro suo noua and vetera, which serve for a
rule of good manners, of policy, and all the parts both of life and of death,
which being applied in their times and to good purpose, bring with it great
delight, great beauty and utility, mala aurea in lectis argenteis, verba in
tempore suo. The mouth of a wicked man is a stinking and contagious pit, a
slanderous Proverb.
tongue murdereth the honor of another, it is a sea and University of evils,
worse than fetters, fire, poison, death, hell, Vniuersitas iniquitatis, malum
inquietum, venenum mortiferum, ignis incendens omnia, mors illius nequissima,
vtilis potius infernus quam illa.

Now these two, Hearing and Speech answer and are accommodated the one to the
other, there is a great alliance betwixt 4 The correspondency of Hearing and
Speech.
them, the one is nothing without the other, as also by nature in one and the
same subject, the one is not without the other. They are the two great gates,
by which the soul does traffic, and has her intelligence: By these two, the
souls are powered the one into the other, as vessels when the mouth of the one
is applied to the enterie of the other: So that if these two gates be shut, as
in those that are deaf and dumb, the spirit remains solitary and miserable:
Hearing is the gate to enter, by it the spirit receives all things from
without, and conceiueth as the female: Speech is the gate to go forth, by it
the spirit acts and brings forth as the male. From the communication of
these two, as from the stroke of two flints or irons together, there comes
forth the sacred fire of truth, for they rubbing and polishing the one the
other, they shake off their rust, and purify and cleanse themselves, and all
manner of knowledge comes to perfection. But Hearing is the first, for there can
nothing come forth of the soul, but that which first entered, and therefore
he that by nature is altogether deaf, is likewise dumb. It is necessary that
first the spirit be furnished with moueables and vtinseles, by the sense of
Hearing, to the end it may by speech distribute them, so that the good and ill
of the tongue and almost of the whole man, depends upon the ear: He that
hears well, speaks well, and he that hears ill speaks ill. Of the use and
government of the tongue hereafter. Lib. 3. Chap. 43.

CHAP. XII. Of the other faculties, Imaginatiue, Memoratiue, Appetitiue.
THE fantastic or imaginatiue faculty, having recollected, and withdrawn
the kinds and images apprehended by the senses, retains and reserueth them;
in such sort that the objects being absent and far distant, yea a man sleeping,
and his senses being bound and shut up, it presents them to the spirit and
thought, Phantasmata idola, seu imagines dicuntur, and does almost work that
within in the understanding, which the object does without in the sense.

The memoratiue faculty is the Guardian and Register of all

The Appetitiue faculty seeks and pursues those things, which seem good and
convenient.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Intellectiue faculty and truly human.
TWO things are to be known, before we enter into this discourse, the seat or
instrument of this intellectiue faculty, vbi sedet pro tribunali, is the brain
and not the heart, as before Plato and Hippocrates it was commonly thought, for
the heart The seat and instrument of the reasonable Soul.
having feeling and motion, is not capable of wisdom.

Now the brain which is far greater in man then in all other creatures, if
it be well and in such manner made and disposed, that the reasonable, soul may
work and exercise it powers, it must come near unto the form of a ship, and
must not be round, nor too great nor too little, although the greater be less
vicious. It must be composed of a substance and parts subtle, delicate and
delicious, well joined and united without separation, having four little
chambers or ventricles, whereof three are in the middle, ranged in front, and
collaterals between and behind them, drawing toward the hinder part of the
head; the fourth is alone, wherein is framed the preparation and conjunction of
the vital spirits, afterward to be made animal and carried to the three
ventricles before, wherein the reasonable soul does exercise it faculties,
which are three, Understanding, Memory, Imagination, which do not exercise
their powers apart and distinctly, each one in each ventricle, as some have
commonly thought, but in common all three together in all three, and in every
of them, according to the manner of the outward senses, which are double and
have two ventricles, in each of which the senses do wholly work; whereby it
comes to pass that he that is wounded in one or two of these ventricles (as
he that has the palsy) cease not nevertheless to exercise all the three;
though more weakly, which he could not do, if every faculty had his chamber
or ventricle apart.

Some have thought that the reasonable Soul was not organicall, 2 The
reasonable Soul is organicall.
that is, had no need of any corporal instrument to exercise it functions,
thinking thereby the better to prove the immortality of the Soul: But not to
enter into a labyrinth of discourse, ocular and ordinary experience disproueth
this opinion, and conuinceth the contrary; For it is well known that all men
understand not, nor reason not alike and after one manner, but with great
diversity; yea one and the same man, may be so changed, that at one time he
may reason better than at another; in one age, one estate and disposition
better than in another; such a one better in health than in sickness, and
another better in sickness than in health; one and the same man, at one and
the same time, may be strong in judgment and weak in imagination. From
whence can these diversities and alterations proceed, but from the change and
alteration of the state of the organ or instrument? From whence comes it that
drunkenness, the bite of a mad dog, a burning fever, a blow on the head, a fume
rising from the stomach, and other accidents pervert and turn topsie turuy
the judgment, intellectual spirit, and all the wisdom of Greece, yea
constrain the Soul to dislodge from the body? These accidents being purely
corporal cannot touch nor ariue to this high spiritual faculty of the
reasonable soul, but only to the organs or instruments, which being corrupted,
the Soul cannot well and regularly act and exercise it functions, and being
violently enforced, is constraind either to absent it self, or depart from the
body. Again, that the reasonable soul should have need of the service of the
instruments, does no way prejudice the immortality thereof: for God makes use
thereof, and accommodates his actions; and as according to the diversity of the
air, region and climate, God brings forth men very diverse in spirit and
natural sufficiency, as in Greece and Italy men more ingenious, than in
Muscouy and Tartarie: So the spirit according to the diversity of the
organicall dispositions, and corporal instruments, discourses better or
worse. Now the instrument of the reasonable Soul, is the brain, and the
temperature thereof, whereof we are to speak.

Temperature is the mixture and proportion of the four first qualities, Hot,
Cold, Dry, Moist, and it may be a fifth besides, 3 Of the Temperature of the
brain, and the faculties thereof.
which is the Harmony of these four. Now from the Temperature of the brain
proceeds all the state and action of the reasonable Soul, but that which is
the cause of great misery unto man, is, that the three faculties of the
reasonable Soul, Understanding, Memory, Imagination, do require and exercise
themselves by contrary temperatures. The temperature which serves, and is
proper to the understanding is dry, whereby it comes to pass that they that
The understanding dry. Old age.
are stricken in years, do excel those in their understanding that are young,
because in the brain as years increase, so moisture decreaseth. So likewise
melancholicke men, such as are afflicted with want, and fast much (for
heaviness and fasting are driers) are wise and ingenious, Splendour ficcus,
animus saptentissimus, vexatio dat intellectum: And beasts that are of a dry
temperature, as Ants, Bees, Elephants, are wise and ingenious, as they that are
of a moist temperature are stupid and without spirit, as Swine: And the
Southern people Southernes.
of the world are dry, and moderate in the inward heat of the brain, by
reason of their violent outward heat.

The temperature of the memory is moist, whereof it is 2 The Memory moist.
Infancy. Septentrionals.
that infants have better memory than old men, and the morning after that
humidity that is gotten by sleep in the night, is more apt for memory, which
is likewise more vigorous in Northern people. I here understand a moisture
that is not waterish or distilling, wherein no impression may be made, but
airie, viscous, fat, and oilly, which easily receives, and strongly retains,
as it is seen in pictures wrought in oil.

The temperature of the imagination is hot, from whence it comes that
frantic men, and such as are sick of burning 3 The imagination hot Youth.
maladies, are excellent in that that belongs to imagination, as Poetry,
Divination, and that it has greatest force in young men, and of middle years
(Poets and Prophets have flourished in this age) and in the middle parts
betwixt North The middle region.
and South.

By this diversity of temperatures it comes to pass, 4 A comparison of the
temperatures.
that a man may be indifferent in all the three faculties, but not excellent;
and that he that is excellent in any one of the three, is but weak in the
rest: that the temperatures of the memory and understanding are very different
and contrary, it is clear, as dry and moist; as for the imagination, it
seemth not to be so contrary from the others, because heat is not incompatible
with drouth and moisture: and yet notwithstanding experience shows, that they
that excel in imagination, are sick in understanding and memory, and held
for fools and mad men: but the reason thereof is, because the great heat
that serves the imagination, consumes both the moisture which serves the
memory, and the subtilitie of the spirits and figures which should be in that
dryness which serves the understanding, and so it is contrary, and destroys
the other two.

By that which has been spoken it appears, that there 5 Three only
temperatures.
are but three principal temperatures, which serve and cause the reasonable
Soul to work, and distinguish the spirits, that is to say, Heat, Dryness,
Moisture: Cold is not active, nor serves to any purpose, but to hinder all
the motions and functions of the Soul: and when we find in some authors, that
Cold serves the understanding, and that they that have cold brains, as
Melancholic men and the Southern, are wise and ingenious; there Cold is
taken not simply, but for a great moderation of heat: for there is nothing more
contrary to the understanding and to wisdom, than great heat, which
contrariwise serves the imagination. According to the three temperatures,
there are three faculties of the reasonable Soul; but as the temperatures, so
the faculties receive diverse degrees, subdiuisions and distinctions.

There are three principal offices and differences of understanding, 6
Subdiuision of the faculties.
to Infer, to Distinguish, to Chase: these Sciences which appertain to the
understanding, are Schoole-Diuinitie, the Theorike of Physic, Logic,
Philosophy natural and moral. There are three kinds of differences of
memory, easily to receive and lose the figures, easily to receive and hardly
to lose, hardly to receive and easily to lose. The Sciences of the memory are
Grammar, the Theorike of the Law, Positive Divinity, Cosmographie,
Arithmeticke. Of the imagination there are many differences, and a far
greater number than either of the memory or understanding: to it do properly
appertain, Inventions, Merry-conceits and Jests, Tricks of subtilty, Fictions
and Lies, Figures and comparisons, Neatness, Elegancie, Gentilitie: because to
it appertain, Poetry, Eloquence, Music, and generally whatsoever consists
in Figure, Correspondencie, Harmony and Proportion.

Hereby it appears that the viuacitie, subtlety, promptitude, and that which
the common sort call wit, belongs to a 7 The propriety of the faculties and
their order.
hot imagination; soliditie, maturitie, verity, to a dry understanding. The
imagination is active and stirring, it is it that undertakes all, and sets all
the rest a work: the understanding is dull and cloudie: the memory is purely
passive, and see how: The imagination first gathers the kinds and figures of
things both present, by the service of the five senses, and absent by the
benefit of the common sense: afterward it presents them, if it will, to the
understanding, which considers of them, examineth, ruminateth, and judges;
afterward it puts them to the safe custody of the memory, as a Scriuener to
his book, to the end he may again, if need shall require, draw them forth
(which men commonly call Reminiscentia, Remembrance) or else, if it will, it
commits them to the memory before it presents them to the understanding: for
to recollect, represent to the understanding, commit unto memory, and to draw
them forth again, are all works of the imagination; so that to it are
referred, the common Sense, the Fantasy, the Remembrance, and they are not
powers separated from it, as some would have it, to the end they may make more
than three faculties of the reasonable Soul.

The common sort of people, who never judge aright, do 8 Their comparison in
dignity.
more esteem of memory, and delight more in it, than in the other two,
because they have much use of counting, and it makes greater show and stir in
the world; and they think, that to have a good memory is to be wise,
esteeming more of Science than of Wisdom; but yet of the three it is the
least, being such as may be even in fools themselves: for very seldom is an
excellent memory joined with understanding and wisdom, because their
temperatures are contrary. From this error of the common people comes that ill
course, which every where we see, in the instruction of our youth, who are
always taught to learn by heart (so they term it) that which they read in
their books, to the end they may afterward See of this lib. 3. c. 14.
be able to repeat it; and so they fill and charge the memory with the good of
another, and take no care to awaken and direct the understanding, and to form
the judgment, whereby he may be made able to make use of his own proper good,
and his natural faculties, which may make him wise and apt to all things: so
that we see that the greatest scholars, that have all Aristotle and Cicero in
their heads, are the veriest sots, and most unskillful in public affairs, and
the world is governed by those that know nothing. It is the opinion of all the
wisest, that the understanding is the first, the most excellent and principal
piece of harness: if that speed well, all goes well, and a man is wise; and
contrariwise, if that miscarrie, all goes acrosse. In the second place is the
imagination: the memory is the last.

All these differences, it may be, will be better understood 9 An image of the
three faculties of the Soul.
by this similitude, which is a picture or imitation of the reasonable Soul.
In every Court of justice there are three orders or degrees; the highest are
the Judges, with whom there is little stir but great action, for without the
moving or stirring of themselves, they judge, decide, order, determine of all
things: this is the image of judgment the highest part of the Soul. The
second are the Advocates and Procters, in whom there is great stir and much
ado, without action, for it lies not in their power to dispatch or order any
thing, only they hatch and prepare the business: this is the picture of the
imagination, an undertaking, unquiet faculty, which never rests, no not in
the profoundest sleep; and it makes a noise in the brain, like a pot that
seetheth, but never setleth. The third and last degree is the Scribe or
Register of the Court, with whom there is no stir nor action, but pure
passion, as the Guardian or Custos of all things: and this represents the
memory.

The action of the reasonable Soul is the knowledge and 10 The action of the
reasonable Soul.
understanding of all things: The Spirit of man is capable of understanding all
things, visible, muisible, universal, particular, sensible, insensible,
intellectus est omnia: but it self either it understands not at all, as some
are of opinion (witness so great and almost infinite diversity of opinions
thereof, as we have seen before by those doubts and objections that have
always crossed it) or very darkly, imperfectly, and indirectly, by reflection
of the knowledge of things upon themselves, by which it perceives and knows
that it understands, and has power and faculty to understand: this is the
manner whereby the spirit knows it self. The first sovereign Spirit, GOD,
does first know himself, and afterward in himself all things; the latter
Spirit, Man, quite contrary, all other things rather than himself, and is in
them as the eye in a glass: how then should it act or work in it self
without mean, and by a strait line?

But the question is concerning the mean whereby it 11 The mean whereby it
works.
knows and understands things. The common received opinion that came from
Aristotle himself is, that the Spirit knows and understands by the help
and service of the Senses; that it is of it self as a white empty paper, that
nothing comes to the understanding, which does not first pass the Senses,
Nil est in intellectu, quod non fuerit prius in sensu. But this opinion is
false: first because (as all the wisest have affirmed, and has been before
touched) the seeds of all sciences and virtues are naturally dispersed and
insinuated into our spirits, so that they may be rich and merry with their
own: and though they want that tillage that is fit, yet then they sufficiently
abound. Besides it is injurious both to God and Nature: for this were to make
the state of the reasonable Soul worse than that of other things, than that of
the vegetative and sensitive, which of themselves are wise enough to exercise
their functions, as has been said; for beasts without the discipline of the
senses know many things, the universals by the particulars, by the fight of one
man they know all men, and are taught to avoid the danger of things hurtful,
and to seek and to follow after that which is fit for them and their little
ones. And it were a thing shameful and absurd, that this so high and so divine
a faculty should beg it good of things so vile and corruptible as the
senses, which do apprehend only the simple accidents, and not the forms,
natures, essence of things, much less things universal, the secrets of
Nature, and all things insensible. Again, if the Soul were made wise, by the
aid of the senses, it would follow, that they that have their senses most
perfect and quick, should be most witty, most wise; whereas many times we see
the clean contrary, that their spirits are more dull, and more unapt, and that
many have of purpose deprived themselves of the use of some of them, to the end
the soul might better, and more freely execute it own affairs. And if any
man shall object, that the soul being wise by nature, and without the help of
the senses, all men must necessarily be wise, and always understand and
reason alike: which being so, how comes it about that there are so many dull
pates in the world, and that they that understand, exercise their functions
more weakly at one time than at another, the vegetative soul far more
strongly in youth, the reasonable soul more weakly than in old age, and in a
certain state of health or sickness than at another time? I may answer, that
the argument is not good: for as touching the first, that is, That all men must
be wise: I say that the faculty and virtue of understanding is not given alike
unto all, but with great inequality, and therefore it is a saying as ancient
as honorable, even of the wisest, that the acting understanding was given but
to few; and this inequality proves that Science comes not of sense: for as it
has been said, they that excel others in their senses, come short of others
in their understanding and Science. Touching the second, The reason why a man
does not exercise his functions always after one manner, is because the
instruments whereby the Soul must necessarily work, can not always be
disposed as they should; and if they be for some special kind of faculties or
functions, yet not for others. The temperature of the brain, by which the
Soul works, is diverse and changeable; being hot and moist, in youth it is
good for the vegetative, naught for the reasonable; and contrarily, being cold
and dry, in old age it is good for the reasonable, ill for the vegetative.
The brain by a hot and burning malady being heated and purified, is more fit
for invention and divination, unfit for maturitie and soundness of judgment
and wisdom. By that which has been spoken let no man think, that I affirm
that the spirit has no service from the senses, which I confess to be great
especially in the beginning, in the discovery and invention of things: but I
say in the defense of the honor of the spirit, that it is false that it
depends upon the senses, and that we can not know any thing, understand,
reason, discourse without the sense: for contrariwise all knowledge comes from
it, and the senses can do nothing without it.

The Spirit in this understanding faculty proceeds diversely,

CHAP. XIIII. Of the humane Spirit, the parts, functions, qualities, reason,
invention, verity thereof.
THis humane Spirit, and Oeconomie of this great and high intellectual part of
the soul, is a depth of obscurity, full of creeks and hidden corners, a
confused and inuolued labyrinth, and bottomless pit, consisting of many parts,
faculties, actions, diverse motions, having many names, doubts and difficulties.

The first office thereof, is simply to receive and apprehend the images and
kinds of things, which is a kind of passion

The force and power thereof, to feed, to handle, to stir, to concoct, to
digest the things received by the imagination, this is reason, (...).

The action and office, or exercise of this force and power,

The subtle facility, and cheerful readiness to do all Ingenium; and
therefore to be ingenious, sharp, subtle, piercing, is all one.

The repetition and action of ruminating, reconcocting,

The effect in the end of the understanding: this is knowledge,

The action that follows this knowledge and resolution, Intellectus extensus
and promotus.

Wherefore all these things, Understanding, Imagination, Reason, Discourse,
Spirit, Judgment, Intelligence, Will, are one and the same Essence, but all
diverse in force, virtue and action: for a man may be excellent in one of them,
and weak in another: and many times he that excels in Spirit and subtlety,
may be weak in judgment and soliditie.

I let no man to sing, and set forth the praises and greatness 2 The general
description and commendation of the Spirit.
of the Spirit of man, the capacity, viuacitie, quickenesse thereof: let it be
called the image of the living God, a taste of the immortal substance, a
stream of the Divinity, a celestial ray, whereunto God has given reason, as
an animated stern to move it by rule and measure, and that it is an instrument
of a complete harmony; that by it there is a kind of kindred betwixt God and
man, and that he might often remember him, he has turned the root toward the
heavens, to the end he should always look toward the place of his nativity:
to be brief, that there is nothing great upon the earth but man, nothing great
in man but his spirit: if a man ascend to it, he ascends above the heavens.
These are all pleasing and plausible words whereof the Schools do ring.

But I desire that after all this we come to sound and to study 3 The dispraise.
how to know this spirit, for we shall find after all this, that it is both
to it self and to another a dangerous instrument, a ferret that is to be
feared, a little trouble-feast, a tedious and importune parasite, and which as
a Iugler and plaier at fast and loose, under the shadow of some gentle motion,
subtle and smiling, forgeth, inuenteth, and causes all the mischiefs of the
world: and the truth is, without it there are none.

There is far greater diversity of spirits than of bodies, 4 Diversity of
distinctions of the spirit. See hereof more Chap. 39.
so is there likewise a larger field to enter into, more parts and more forms
or fashions to be spoken of: we may make three classes or forms, whereof each
one has many degrees: The first which is the lowest are those weak, base, and
almost brutish spirits, near neighbors to beasts themselves, whether by
reason of the first temper, that is to say, of the seed and temperature of the
brain, either too cold or too moist, as amongst other creatures fishes are the
lowest, or by reason that they have not been in some sort removed and reviewed,
but suffered to rust, and grow dull and stupid. Of these we make no great
account, as being unfit to be ordered and settled into any certain and constant
society; because both for their own particular they cannot possibly endure
it, and it were necessary they should always be under the tuition of another,
this is the common and base people, qui vigilans stertit; mortua cui vita est;
prope iam viuo atque videnti; which understands not, judges not it self. The
second which is the highest, are those great and rare spirits, rather devils
than ordinary men, spirits well borne, strong and vigorous. Of these kind of
people, there was never age yet could tell how to build a commonweal. The
third which is the middle, are all those indifferent spirits, whereof there are
infinite degrees: of these almost is the whole world composed. Of this
distinction and others, hereafter more at large. But we are to touch more
particularly the conditions and nature of this spirit, as hard to be known, as
a countenance 5 The particular description.

Agent perpetual.


to be counterfeited to the life, which is always in motion.

First therefore it is a perpetual agent, for the spirit cannot be without
action, but rather then it will, it forgeth false and fantastical subjects,
in earnest deceiving it self, even to it own discredit. As idle and
vnmannured grounds, if they be fat and fertile, abound with a thousand kinds of
wild and un. profitable herbs, until they be sowed with other seeds; and
women alone without the company of men, bring forth sometimes great abundance
of unformed, indigested lumps of flesh: so the Spirit, if it be not busied
about some certain object, it runs riot into a world of imaginations, and
there is no folly nor vanity that it produces not; and if it have not a settled
limit, it wandreth and loses it self. For to be every where is to be no
where. Motion and agitation is the true life and grace of the Spirit, but yet
it must proceed from elsewhere, than from it self. If it be solitary, and
wants a subject to work on, it creeps along and languisheth; but yet it
must not be enforced. For too great a contention and intention of the Spirit
over bent, and strained, deceives and troubles the Spirit.

It is likewise universal, it medleth and mingleth it self with all, it has
no limited subject or jurisdiction. There is 6 Universal.
not any thing wherewith it plaieth not his part, as well to vain subjects and
of no account, as high and weighty, as well to those we can understand, as
those we understand not: For to know that we cannot understand, or pierce into
the marrow or pith of a thing, but that we must stick in the bone and bark
thereof, is an excellent sign of judgment; for science, yea truth it self,
may lodge nere us without judgment, and judgment without them, yea to know
our own ignorance, is a fair testimony of judgment.

Thirdly, it is prompt and speedy running in a moment 7 prompt and sudden.
from the one end of the world to the other, without stay or rest, stirring it
self and penetrating through every thing, Nobilis and inquieta men's homini
data est, nunquam se tenet; spargitur vaga, quiet is impatiens, nouitate rerum
laetissima. Non mirum ex illo caelesti spiritu descendit, caelestium autem
naturasemper in motuest. This great speed and quickness, this agility, this
twinkling of the eye, as it is admirable, and one of the greatest wonders that
are in the spirit, so it is a thing very dangerous, a great disposition and
propension unto folly and madness, as presently you shall hear.

By reason of these three conditions of the spirit, that is, a perpetual agent
without repose, universal, prompt and sudden, it has been accounted
immortal, and to have in it self some mark, and sparkle of divinity.

The action of the Spirit is always to search, ferret, contriue 8 The action
of the Spirit.
without intermission; like one famished for want of knowledge, to enquire and
seek, and therefore Homer calls men (...). There is no end of our
inquisitions: the pursuites of the spirit of man are without limits, without
form: the food thereof is double ambiguitie; it is a perpetual motion without
rest, without bound. The world is a school of inquisition; agitation and
hunting is it proper dish: to take, or to fail of the pray, is another thing.

But it works and pursues it enterprices, rashly, and irregularly, without
order, and without measure, it is a wandering 9 It works rashly.
instrument, mooueable, diversely turning; it is an instrument of lead and of
wax, it boweth and straitneth, applies it self to all, more supple and facill
than the water, the air, flexibilis omni humore obsequentior, and vt spiritus
qui omni materia facilior vt tenuior; it is the shoo of Theramenes, fit for
all. The cunning is to find where it is, for it goes always athwart, and
cross, as well with a lie, as with a truth: it sporteth it self and finds a
seeming reason for every thing; for it makes that 10 Reason has diverse faces.
which is impious, unjust, abominable in one place, piety, justice and honor
in another: neither can we name any law or custom, or condition, that is
either generally received of all, or rejected; the marriage of those that are
near of blood, the murder of infants, parents, is condemned in one place,
lawful in another. Plato refused an embrodered and perfumed robe offered him
by Dionysius, saying that he was a man, and therefore would not adorn himself
like a woman. Aristippus accepted of that robe, saying the outward acoutrement
can not corrupt a chaste mind. Diogenes washing his colewarts and seeing
Aristippus pass by, said unto him, If thou knew how to live with colewarts,
thou would never follow the Court of a Tyrant. Aristippus answered him, If
thou knew how to live with Kings, thou would never wash colewarts. One
persuaded Solon to cease from the bewailing the death of his sons, because
his tears did neither profit nor help him. Yea therefore, says he, are my
tears just, and I have reason to weep. The wife of Socrates redoubled her
grief, because the Judges put her husband to death unjustly: What, says he,
would thou rather I were justly condemned? There is no good, says a wise
man, but that, to the loss whereof a man is always prepared, In aequo enim
est dolor amissae rei, and timor amittendae. Quite contrary, faith another, we
embrace and lock up that good a great deal the more carefully, which we see
less sure, and always fear will be taken from us. A Cynique Philosopher
demanded of Antigonus the King, a dram of silver. That, says he, is no gift
fit for a King. Why then give me a talent, says the Philosopher. And that,
says the King, is no gift fit for a Cynique. One said of a King of Sparta that
was gentle and debonaire, He is a good man even to the wicked. How should he
be good unto the wicked, says another, if he be not wicked with the wicked. So
that we see that the reason of man has many visages: it is a two-edged sword,
a staff with two pikes, Ogni medaglia ha il suo riuerso. There is no reason
but has a contrary reason, says the soundest and surest Philosopher.

Now this volubilitie and flexibilitie proceeds from many Tales sunt hominum
mentes quali pater ipse
Iuppiter auctiferas lustrauit lampide terras,
and all outward things: inwardly from those shakings and tremblings which the
Soul gives unto it self by the agitation, and stirs up by the passions
thereof: insomuch that it beholds things with diverse countenances; for
whatsoever is in the world has diverse lustures, diverse considerations.
Epictetus said it was a pot with two hands. He might better have said with many.

The reason hereof is, because it entangleth it self in it 12 The reason of
this intanglement.
own work like the Silke-worme: for as it thinks to note from far, I know
not what appearance of light, and imaginary truth, and flies unto it: there
are many difficulties that cross the way, new sents that inebriate and bring
it forth of the way.

The end at which it aims is twofold, the one more common and natural, which
is Truth, which it searches and 13 The end is verity which it can neither
attain nor find.
pursues; for there is no desire more natural than to know the truth: we
assay all the means we can to attain unto it, but in the end all our
endeavors come short; for Truth is not an ordinary booty, or thing that will
suffer it self to be gotten and handled, much less to be possessed by any
humane Spirit. It lodges within the bosom of God, that is her chamber, Read
before Chap. 9.
her retiring place. Man knows not, understands not any thing aright, in
purity and in truth as he ought: appearances do always compass him on
every side, which are as well in those things that are false as true. We are
borne to search the truth, but to possess it, belongs to a higher and
greater power. Truth is not his that thrusts himself into it, but his that
runs the fairest course toward the mark. When it falls out that he hits
upon a truth, it is by chance and hazard, he knows not how to hold it, to
possess it, to distinguish it from a lie. Errors are received into our soul,
by the self same way and conduit that the truth is; the spirit has no means
either to distinguish or to choose: and as well may he play the sot, that tells
a truth as a lie. The means that it uses for the discovery of the truth,
are reason and experience, both of them very weak, uncertain, diverse,
wavering. The greatest argument of truth, is the general consent of the world:
now the number of fools does far exceed the number of the wise, and
therefore how should that general consent be agreed upon, but by corruption
and an applause given without judgment and knowledge of the cause, and by the
imitation of some one that first began the dance.

The other end less natural, but more ambitious, is Invention, 14 The second
end Invention.
unto which it tends as to the highest point of honor, to the end it may
raise it self and prevail the more: this is that which is in so high account,
that it seems to be an image of the Divinity. From the sufficiency of this
invention, have proceeded all those works, which have ravished the whole world
with admiration; which if they be such as are for the public benefit, they
have deified their Authors. Those works that show rather finenesse of wit than
bring profit with them, are painting, caruing, Architecture, the art
Perspectiue, as the vine of Zeuxis, the Venus of Apelles, the image of Memnon,
the horse of A^^ain, the wooden pigeon of Architas, the cow of Myron, the fly
and the eagle of Montroyall, the sphere of Sapor King of the Persians, and
that of Archimides with his other engines. Now art and invention The praise of
invention.
seem not only to imitate Nature, but to excel it, and that not only in the
indiuiduum or particular (for there is not any body either of man or beast, so
universally well made, as by art may be showed) but also many things are done
by art, which are not done by nature: I mean besides those compositions and
mixtures, which are the true diet, and proper subject of art, those
distillations of waters and oiles, made of simples, which Nature frames not.
But in all this there is no such cause of admiration as we think; and to
speak properly and truly, there is no invention but that which God reuealeth:
for such as we account and call so, are but observations of natural things,
arguments and conclusions drawn from them, as Painting and the art Opticke
from shadows, Sundials from the shadows of trees, the grauing of seals from
precious stones.

By all this that has before been spoken, it is easy to see 15 The Spirit
very dangerous.
how rash and dangerous the spirit of man is, especially if it be quick and
vigorous: for being so industrious, so free and universal, making it motions
so irregularly, using it liberty so boldly in all things, not tying it self
to any thing; it easily shakes the common opinions, and all those rules
whereby it should be bridled and restrained as an unjust tyranny: it will
undertake to examine all things, to judge the greatest part of things plausibly
received in the world, to be ridiculous and absurd; and finding for all an
appearance of reason, will defend it self against all, whereby it is to be
feared that it wandreth out of the way and loses it self: and we can not but
see that they that have any extraordinary viuacity and rare excellency (as they
that are in the highest roof of that middle Classis before spoken of) are for
the most part lawless both in opinions and manners. There are very few of whose
guide and conduct a man may trust, and in the liberty of whose judgments a
man may wade without temeritie, beyond the common opinion. It is a miracle to
find a great and lively spirit, well ruled and governed: it is a dangerous
sword which a man knows not well how to guide; for from whence come all those
disorders, reuolts, heresies and troubles in the world, but for this? Magni
errores non nisi ex magnis ingenijs: nihil sapientiae o diosius acumine nimio.
Doubtless that man lives a better time, and a longer life, is more happy and
far more fit for the government of a Commonwealth, says Thucydides, that
has an indifferent spirit, or somewhat beneath a mediocritie, than he that
has a spirit so elevated and transcendent, that it serves not for any thing
but the torment of himself and others. From the firmest friendships do spring
the greatest enmities, and from the soundest health the deadliest maladies: and
even so, from the rarest and quickest agitation of our souls the most
desperate resolutions and disorderly frensies. Wisdom and folly are near
neighbors; there is but a half turn betwixt the one and the other; which we
may easily see in the actions of mad men. Philosophy teaches, that
Melancholy is proper to them both. Whereof is framed the finest folly, but of
the finest wit? And therefore, says Aristotle, there is no great spirit
without some mixture of folly. And Plato tells us, that in vain a temperate
and sound spirit knocks at the door of Poetry. And in this sense it is,
that the wisest and best Poets do love sometimes to play the fool, and to
leap out of the hindges. Insanire iucundum est, dulce desipere in loco: non
potest grande and sublime quidquam nisi mota men's, and quamdiu apud se est.

And this is the cause why man has good reason to keep it within narrow
bounds, to bridle and bind it with Religions, 16 It must be bridled, and why.
, Laws, Customs, Sciences, Precepts, Threatenings, Promises mortal and
immortal, which notwithstanding yet we see, that by a lawless kind of
liberty it freeth it self, and escapes all these; so unruly is it by nature,
so fierce, so opinatiue: and therefore it is to be led by art, since by force
it can not. Natura contumax est animus humanus, in contrarium atque arduum
nitens, sequiturque facilius quam ducitur, vt generosi Seneca.
and nobiles equi melius facili fraeno reguntur. It is a surer way gently to
tutor it, and to lay it asleep, than to suffer it to wander at it own
pleasure: for if it be not well and orderly governed, (as they of the highest
classis which before we spoke of) or weak, and soft and pliant (as those of
the lower rank) it will lose it self in the liberty of it own judgment:
and therefore it is necessary that it be by some means or other held back, as
having more need of lead than wings, of a bridle than of a spur; which the
great Lawyers and Founders of States did especially regard, as well knowing,
that people of an indifferent spirit, lived in more quiet and content, than the
ouer-quicke and ingenious. There have been more troubles and seditions in ten
years in the only city of Florence, than in five hundred years in the
countries of the Heluetians and the Retians. And to say the truth, men of a
common sufficiency are more honest, better citizens, more pliant, and willing
to submit themselves to the yoke of the laws, their superiors, reason it
self, than those quick and clear sighted men, that can not keep themselves
within their own skins. The finest wits are not the wisest men.

The Spirit has it maladies, defects, tares or refuse as well 17 The defect of
the spirit.
as the body and much more, more dangerous and more incurable: but that we may
the better know them, we must distinguish them: Some are accidental, and which
come from Accidental proceeding from three causes.
elsewhere, and those arise from three causes; the disposition of the body,
for it is manifest that the bodily malady which alter the temperature thereof,
do likewise alter the spirit and judgment; or from the ill composition of the
substance of 1. The body.
the brain, and organs of the reasonable Soul, whether it be by reason of
their first formation, as in those that have their heads ill made, either too
round, or too long, or too little, or by accident of some blow or wound. The
second is the universal contagion of vulgar and erroneous opinions in the 2.
The world.
world, wherewith the Spirit being preoccupated, tainted, and overcome, or
which is worse, made drunken, and manacled with certain fantastical opinions,
it ever afterward follows and judges according to them, without regard
either of farther enquiry, or recoiling back: from which dangerous deluge all
spirits have not force and strength to defend themselves.

The third much more near, is the malady and corruption 3. The passions.
of the will, and the force of the passions, this is a world turned topsie
turuy: the will is made to follow the understanding as a guide and lamp unto
it; but being corrupted and seized on by the force of the passions (or rather
by the fall of our first father Adam) does likewise perhaps corrupt the
understanding, and so from hence come the greatest part of our erroneous
judgments: Envy, Malice, Hatred, Love, Fear, make us to respect, to judge,
to take things others than they are, and quite otherwise than we ought, from
whence comes that common cry, Judge without passion. From hence it is that
the beautiful and generous actions of another man are obscured by vile and
base misconstructions, that vain and wicked causes and occasions are feined.
This is a great vice and a proof of a malignant nature and sick judgment, in
which there is neither great subtlety nor sufficiency, but malice enough.
This proceeds either from the envy they bear to the glory of another man,
or because they judge of others according to themselves, or because they have
their taste altered and their sight so troubled, that they cannot discern the
clear splendor of virtue in it native purity. From this self same cause and
source it comes, that we make the virtues and vices of another man to
prevail so much, and extend them farther than we ought, that from
particularities we draw consequents and general conclusions: if he be a
friend, all sits well about him, his vices shall be virtues: if he be an enemy
or of a contrary faction, there is nothing good in him: insomuch that we shame
our own judgment, to smooth up our own passions. But this rests not here,
but goes yet farther; for the greatest part of those impieties, heresies,
errors in our faith and religion, if we look well into it, is sprung from our
wicked and corrupt wills, from a violent and voluptuous Exodus 31. 2. Paral.
15. 3. Reg. 15. August. lib. 2. De ciuitate Dei.
passion, which afterward draws unto it the understanding it self, Sedit
populus manducare and bibere etc. quod vult non quod est credit, qui cupit
errare: in such sort that what was done in the beginning with some scruple and
doubt, has been afterward held and maintained for a verity and revelation
from heaven: that which was only in the sensuality, has taken place in the
highest part of the understanding: that which was nothing else but a passion and
a pleasure, has been made a religious matter and an article of faith: so
strong and dangerous is the contagion of the faculties of the Soul amongst
themselves. These are the three outward causes of the faults and miscariages of
the Spirit, judgment and understanding of man, The body, especially the head,
sick, or wounded, or ill fashioned; The world with the anticipated opinions
and suppositions thereof; The ill estate of the other faculties of the
reasonable Soul, which are all inferior unto it. The first are pitiful, and
some of them to be cured, some not: the second are excusable and pardonable:
the third are accusable and punishable for suffering such a disorder so near
them as this is; those that should obey the law, to take upon them to give the
law.

There are other defects of the Spirit, which are more natural unto it, and in
it. The greatest and the root of all the rest 18 Natural.
is pride and presumption (the first and original fault of all the world, the
plague of all spirits, and the cause of all evils) by which a man is only
content with himself, will not give place to another, disdaineth his counsels,
reposeth himself in his own opinions, takes upon him to judge and condemn
others, yea even that which he understands not. It is truly said, that the best
and happiest distribution that God ever made, is of judgment, because every
man is content with his own, and thinks he has enough. Now this malady
proceeds from the ignorance of our selves. We never understand sufficiently
and truly the weakness of our spirit: but the greatest disease of the spirit
is ignorance, not of Arts and Sciences, and what is included in the writings of
others, but of it self, for which cause this first book has been written.

CHAP. XV. Of Memory.
MEmory is many times taken by the vulgar sort for the sense and understanding,
but not so truly and properly: for both by reason (as has been said) and by
experience, the excellency of the one is ordinarily accompanied with the
weakness of the other, and to say the truth it is a faculty very profitable
for the world, but yet comes far short of the understanding and of all the
parts of the Soul is the more delicate, and most frail. The excellency
thereof is not very requisite, but to three sorts of people: Merchants or men
of Trade, great talkers, (for the storehouse of the memory is more full and
furnished, than that of invention, for he that wants it comes short, and must
be feign to frame his speech out of the forge of his own invention) and liars,
mendacem oportet esse memorem. From the want of memory proceed these
commodities: to lie seldom, to talk little, to forget offenses. An
indifferent memory suffices for all.

CHAP. XVI. Of the imagination and opinion.
THe imagination is a thing very strong and powerful, it The effects of the
imagination marvelous.
faculty of the Soul). The effects thereof are marvelous and strange: it
works not only in it own proper body and Soul, but in that of another man,
yea it produces contrary effects: it makes a man blush, wax pale, tremble,
dote, to waver; these are the least and the best: it takes away the power and
use of the ingendring parts, yea when there is most need of them, and is the
cause why men are more sharp and austere, not only toward themselves but
others, witness those ties and bands whereof the world is full, which are for
the most part impressions of the apprehension and of fear. And contrariwise,
without endeavor, without object, and even in sleep it satisfies the amorous
desires, yea changes the sex, witness Lucius Cossitius, whom Pliny affirms
to have seen to be changed from a woman to a man, the day of his mariag; and
diverse the like: it marketh sometimes ignominiously, yea it kills and makes
abortiue the fruit within the womb; it takes away a man's speech, and gives it
to him that never had it, as to the son of Croesus: it takes away motion,
sense, respiration. Thus we see how it works in the body. Touching the
Soul: it makes a man to lose his understanding, his knowledge, judgment; it
turns him fool and madman, witness Gallus Vibius, who having ouer-bent his
spirits in comprehending the essence and motions offollie, so dislodged and
disiointed his own judgment, that he could never settle it again: it
inspireth a man with the foreknowledge of things secret and to come, and
causes those inspirations, praedictions, and marvelous inventions, yea it
rauisheth with ecstasies: it kills not seemingly but in good earnest, witness
that man whose eyes being covered to receive his death, and uncovered again to
the end he might read his pardon, was found stark dead upon the scaffold. To
be brief, from hence spring the greatest part of those things which the common
sort of people call miracles, visions, enchantments. It is not always the
devil, or a familiar spirit, as now adays the ignorant people think, when
they can not find the reason of that they see; nor always the spirit of God
(for these supernatural motions we speak not of here) but for the most part
it is the effect of the imagination, or long of the agent who says and does
such things; or of the patient and spectator, who thinks he sees that he sees
not. It is an excellent thing and necessary in such a case, to know wisely how
to discern the reason thereof, whether it be natural or supernatural, false
or true, Discretio spirituum, and not to precipitate our judgments, as the
most part of the common people do by the want thereof.

In this part and faculty of the soul does opinion lodge, which is a vain,
light, crude and imperfect judgment of things drawn from the outward senses,
and common report, settling and holding it self to be good in the imagination,
and never arriving to the understanding, there to be examined, sifted, and
labored; and to be made reason, which is a true, perfect and solid judgment
of things: and therefore it is uncertain, inconstant, fleeting, deceitful, a
very ill and dangerous guide, which makes head against reason, whereof it is a
shadow and image, though vain and untrue. It is the mother of all mischiefs,
confusions, disorders: from it spring all passions, all troubles. It is the
guide of fools, sots, the vulgar sort, as reason of the wise and dexterious.

It is not the truth and nature of things which does thus 3 The world is lead
by opinion.
stir and molest our souls, it is opinion, according to that ancient saying;
Men are tormented by the opinions that they have of things, not by the things
themselves. Opinione saepius, quam re laboramus: plura sunt quae nos tenent,
quam quae premunt. The verity and Essence of things enters not into us, nor
lodges near us of it self, by it own proper strength and authority: for
were it so, all things should be received of all, all alike, and after the same
fashion; all should be of like credit, and truth it self, which is never but
one and uniform, should be embraced thorowout the whole world. Now forasmuch
as there is so great a variety, yea contrariety of opinions in the world, and
there is not any thing concerning which all do generally accord, no not the
wisest and best borne and bred; it gives us to understand, that things enter
into us by composition, yielding themselves to our mercy and devotion, and
lodging themselves near unto us, according to our pleasure, and humor and
temper of our souls. That which I believe, I can not make my companion
believe; but, which is more, what I do firmly believe to day, I can not assure
my self that I shall believe to morrow: yea it is certain that at another
time I shall judge quite otherwise. Doubtless every thing takes in us such
place, such a taste, such a color, as we think best to give unto it, and
such as the inward constitution of the soul is, omnia munda mundis, immunda
immundis. As our apparel and accoutrements do as well warm us, not by reason
of their heat, but our own, which they preserve, as likewise nourish the
coldness of the ice and snow; we do first warm them with our heat, and they
in recompense thereof preserve our heat.

Almost all the opinions that we have, we have not but from authority: we
believe, we judge, we work, we live, we die and all upon credit, even as the
public use and custom teaches us; and we do well therein: for we are too
weak to judge and choose of our selves; no the wise do it not, Lib. 1. chap. 1.
and 2.
as shall be spoken.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Will.
THe Will is a great part of the reasonable soul, of very The pre-eminence
and importance of the will.
great importance, and it stands us upon above all things to study how to
rule it, because upon it depends almost our whole estate and good.

It only is truly ours, and in our power; all the rest, understanding, The
comparison thereof with the understanding. Doubtful, if not erroneous.
memory, imagination may be taken from us, altered, troubled with a thousand
accidents: not the will.

Secondly, this is that, that keeps a man entire, and imports him much: for
he that has given his will, is no more his own man, neither has he any thing
of his own.

Thirdly, this is it whereby we are made and called good or wicked, which
gives us the temper and the tincture.

As of all the goods that are in man, virtue or honesty is the first and
principal, and which does far excel knowledge, dexterity; so we can not
but confess, that the will where virtue and goodness lodges, is of all
others the most excellent: and to say the truth, a man is neither good nor
wicked, honest nor dishonest, because he understands and knows those things
that are good, and fair, and honest, or wicked and dishonest; but because he
loves them, and has desire and will toward them. The understanding has
other preheminences: for it is unto the will as the husband to the wife, the
guide and light unto the traveler, but in this it gives place unto the will.

The true difference betwixt these faculties is, in that by the understanding
things enter into the soul, and it receives Mediterrane sea, but according to
the proportion of the mouth of the Strait of Gibraltar. By the will, on the
other side, the soul goes forth of it self, and lodges and lives elsewhere
in the thing beloved, into which it transformeth it self; and therefore
bears the name, the title, the liuerie, being called virtuous, vicious,
spiritual, carnal: whereby it follows, that the will is enobled by loving
those things that are high and worthy of love; is vilified, by giving it self
to those things that are base and unworthy; as a wife honors or
dishonors her self by that husband that she has taken.

Experience teaches us, that three things do sharpen our will, Difficulty,
Raritie, and Absence, or fear to lose the thing; as the three contrary dull
it, Facility, Abundance, or Satietie, and daily presence or assured fruition.
The three former give price and credit to things, the three latter engender
contempt. Our will is sharpened by opposition, it opposes it self against
denial. On the other side, our appetite contemns and lets pass that
which it has in possession, and runs after that which it has not, permissum
fit vile nefas: quod licet ingratum est, quod non licet acrius vrit: yea it is
seen in all sorts of pleasures, omnium rerum voluptas ipso quo debet fugare
periculo cresit: insomuch that the two extremes, the defect and the abundance,
the desire and the fruition do put us to like pain. And this is the cause why
things are not truly esteemed as they ought, and that there is no Prophet in
his own country.

How we are to direct and rule our wills, shall be said hereafter.

PASSIONS and AFFECTIONS. An advertisement.
THe matter of the passions of the mind is very great and Lib. 2. cap. 6. and
7. lib. 3. in the virtues of fortitude and temperance.
plentiful, and takes up a great room in this doctrine of Wisdom. To learn
how to know them, and to distinguish them, is the subject of this book. The
general remedies to bridle, rule, and govern them, the subject of the second
book. The particular remedies of every one of them, of the third book,
following that method of this book, set down in the Preface. Now that in this
first book we may attain the knowledge of them, we will first speak of them
in general in this first Chapter, afterward in the Chapters following
particularly of every one of them. I have not seen any that painteth them out
more richly, and to the life, than Le Sieur du Vair in his little moral books,
whereof I have made good use in this passionate subject.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the passions in general.
PAssion is a violent motion of the Soul in the sensitive 1 The description of
passions.
part thereof, which is made either to follow that which the Soul thinks to
be good for it, or to fly that which it takes to be evil.

But it is necessary that we know how these motions are 1. Their agitation.
is but one in the body has many and diverse powers, according to the diverse
vessels wherein it is retained, the instruments whereof it makes use, and the
objects which are presented unto it. Now when the parts wherein it is enclosed,
do not retain and occupy it, but according to the proportion of their
capacity, and as far forth as it is necessary for their true use; the
effects thereof are sweet, benign, and well governed: but when contrariwise
the parts thereof have more motion and heat than is needful for them, they
change and become hurtful; no otherwise than the beams of the Sun, which
wandering according to their natural liberty, do sweetly and pleasingly
warm; if they be recollected and gathered into the concauities of a burning
glass, they burn and consume that they were wont to nourish and quicken.
Again, they have diverse degrees in their force of agitation; and as they have
more or less, so they are distinguished; the indifferent suffer themselves to
be tasted and digested, expressing themselves by words and tears; the greater
and more violent astonish the soul, oppress it, and hinder the liberty of it
actions. Curae leaves loquuntur, ingentes stupent.

Secondly, in regard of the vice, disorder, and injustice that is in these
passions, we may compare man to a Commonweal, 3 2. Of their vice and
irregularitie.
and the state of the soul to a state royal, wherein the Sovereign for the
government of so many people has vnder-magistrates, unto whom for the exercise
of their charges he gives laws and ordinances, reserving unto himself the
censuring of the greatest and most important occurrents. Upon this order
depends the peace and prosperity of the state: and contrariwise, if the
magistrates, which are as the middle sort betwixt the Prince and the people,
shall suffer themselves either to be deceived by facility, or corrupted by
favor; and without respect either of their Sovereign, or the laws by him
established, shall use their own authority in the execution of their
affairs, they fill all with disorder and confusion. Even so in man, the
understanding is the Sovereign, which has under it a power estimatiue, and
imaginatiue, as a magistrate, both to take knowledge, and to judge by the
report of the senses of all things that shall be presented, and to move our
affections, for the better execution of the judgments thereof: for the conduct
and direction whereof in the exercise of it charge, the law and light of Nature
was given unto it: and moreover, as a help in all doubts, it may have recourse
unto the counsel of the superior and sovereign, the understanding. And thus
you see the order of the happy state hereof: but the unhappy is when this
power which is under the understanding, and above the senses, whereunto the
first judgment of things appertains, suffers it self for the most part to
be corrupted and deceived, whereby it judges wrongfully and rashly, and
afterward manageth and moves our affections to ill purpose, and fills us
with much trouble and unquietness. That which molesteth and corrupts this
power, are first the senses, which comprehend not the true and inward nature of
things, but only the face and outward form, carrying unto the soul the image
of things, with some favorable commendation, and as it were a fore-iudgement
and preiudicate opinion of their qualities, according as they find them
pleasing and agreeable to their particular, and not profitable and necessary
for the universal good of man: and secondly, the mixture of the false and
indifferent judgment of the vulgar sort. From these two false aduisements and
reports of the Opinion.
Senses, and vulgar sort, is formed in the soul an inconsiderate opinion,
which we conceive of things, whether good or ill, profitable or hurtful, to be
followed or eschewed; which doubtless is a very dangerous guide, and rash
mistress: for it is no sooner conceived, but presently without the committing
of any thing to discourse and understanding, it possesses it self of our
imagination, and as within a Citidell, holds the fort against right and
reason, afterward it descends into our hearts, and remooueth our affections,
with violent motives of hope, fear, heaviness, pleasure. To be brief, it
makes all the fools, and the seditions of the soul, which are the passions,
to arise.

I will likewise declare the same thing, by another similitude of military
policy. The Senses are the Sentinels of the Soul, watching for the
preservation thereof, and messengers or scouts to serve as ministers and
instruments to the understanding the sovereign part of the Soul. And for the
better performance hereof, they have received power to apprehend the things,
to draw the forms, and to embrace or reject them, according as they shall
seem agreeable or odious unto their nature. Now in exercising their charge,
they must be content to know, and to give knowledge to others of what does
pass, not enterprising to remove greater forces, lest by that means they put
all into an alarm and confusion. As in an army, the Sentinels many times by
want of the watch word, and knowledge of the desseigne and purpose of the
Captain that commands, may be deceived, and take for their succor their
enemies disguised which come unto them, or for enemies those that come to
succor: So the Senses by not apprehending whatsoever is reason, are many times
deceived by an appearance, and take that for a friend which is our enemy. And
when upon this thought and resolution, not attending the commandment of
reason, they go about to remove the power concupiscible and irascible, they
raise a sedition and tumult in our souls, during which time, reason is not
heard, nor the understanding obeyed. 4 The distinction of the Passions
according to their object and subject.


By this time we see their regiments, their ranks, their general kinds and
special. Every passion is moved by the appearance and opinion, either of what
is good, or what is ill. If by that which is good, and that the soul do simply
so consider of it, this motion is called Love. If it be present and such
whereof the Soul in it self takes comfort, it is called pleasure Of the
concupiscible six.
and joy: if it be to come, it is called desire: if by that which is evil, it
is hate: if it be present in our selves, it is sorrow and grief: if in
another, it is pity: if it be to come, it is fear. And these which arise in
us by the object of an apparent evil, which we abhor and fly from, descend
more deeply into our hearts, and arise with greater difficulty. And this is the
first band of that seditious rowt, which trouble the rest and quiet of our
souls, that is, in the concupiscible part, the effects whereof notwithstanding
they are very dangerous, yet they are not so violent as those that follow them:
for these first motions formed in this part, by the object which presents it
self, do pass incontinently into the irascible part, that is to say, into
that compass where the soul seeks the means to obtain or avoid that which
seems unto it either good or ill. And then even as a wheel that is already
in motion, receiving another motion by a new force, turns with far greater
speed; so the Soul being already moved by the first apprehension, ioining a
second endeavor to the first, carries it self with far more violence than
before, and is stirred up by passions more puisant and difficult to be tamed;
inasmuch as they are doubled, and now coupled to the former, uniting
themselves, and backing the one the other by a In the irascible five.
mutual consent: for the first passions, which are formed upon an object of an
appearing good, entering into consideration of means whereby to obtain it,
stir up in us either hope or despair. They that are formed upon an object of
an evil to come, stir up in us either fear, or the contrary, which is
audacitie; of a present evil, choler and courage: which passions are strangely
violent, and wholly pervert the reason which they find already shaken. Thus
you see the principal winds from whence arise the tempests of our Soul, and
the pit whereout they rise is nothing else but the opinion (which commonly is
false, wandering, uncertain, contrary to nature, verity, reason, certainty)
that a man has, that the things that present themselves unto us, are either
good or ill: for having conceived them to be such, we either follow them, or
with violence fly from them. And these are our passions.

OF PASSIONS IN PARTICVLAR. An Advertisement.
WE will entreat of their natures, that we may thereby see their follies,
vanity, misery, injustice, and that foulness that is in them, to the end we
may know and learn how justly to hate them. The counsel that is given for the
auoidance of them is in the books following. These are the two parts of Lib.
3. in the virtue of Fortitude and Temperance.
physic, to show the malady, and to give the remedy. It remains therefore
that here we first speak of all those that respect the appearing good, which
are love and the kinds thereof, desire, hope, despair, joy; and afterward
all those that respect the ill, which are many, choler, hatred, envy,
jealousy, revenge, cruelty, fear, sadness, compassion.

CHAP. XIX. Of Love in general.
THe first and chief mistress of all the passions is Love, The distinction of
love and comparison.
which consists of diverse subjects, and whereof there are diverse sorts and
degrees. There are three principal kinds unto which all the rest are referred
(we speak of the vicious and passionate love, for of the virtuous, which is
Amity, Charity, Dilection, we will speak in the virtue of Justice) Lib. 3.
that is to say, Ambition or Pride, which is the love of greatness and honor;
Covetousness, the love of riches; and voluptuous or carnal love. Behold
here the three gulfes, and precipitate steepes, from which, few there are that
can defend themselves: the three plagues and infections of all that we have in
hand, the mind, body and goods: the armories of those three captain enemies
of the health and quiet of mankind, the Devil, the flesh, the world. These
are in truth three powers, the most common and universal passions: and
therefore the Apostle has divided into these three, whatsoever is in the
world, Quicquid est in mundo, est concupiscentia oculorum, aut carnis, aut
superbia vitae. Ambition, as more spiritual, so it is more high and noble than
the others. Voluptuous love, as more natural and universal (for it is even in
beasts themselves, where the rest are not) so it is more violent, and less
vicious: I say simply violent, for sometimes Ambition excelles it: but this is
some particular malady. Covetousness of all the rest is the sickest and most
sottish.

CHAP. XX. Of Ambition.
AMbition (which is a thirst after honor and glory, a 1 The description.
gluttonous and excessive desire of greatness) is a sweet and pleasing
passion, which distilleth easily into generous spirits, but is not without
pain got forth again. We think it is our duties to embrace what is good,
and amongst those good things, we account of honor more than them all. See
here the reason, why with all our strength we run unto it. An ambitious man
will always be the first, he never looks backward, but still forward to those
that are before him: and it is a greater grief unto him to suffer one to go
beyond him, than it is pleasure unto him, to leave a thousand behind him. Habet
hoc vitium omnis ambitio, non respicit. It is twofolde: Seneca.
the one of glory and honor, the other of greatness and command: that is
profitable to the world, and in some sense permitted, as shall be proved: this
pernicious.

The seed and root of ambition is natural in us. There is a 2 It is natural.
proverb that says, That Nature is content with a little: and another quite
contrary, That Nature is never satisfied, never content: but it still
desires, has a will to mount higher, and to enrich it self, and it goes not
a slow pace neither, but with a loose bridle it runs headlong to greatness
and glory. Natura nostra imperij est auida, and ad implendum cupiditatem
praeceps. And with such force and violence do some men run, that they break
their own necks, as many great men have done, even at the dawning as it were,
and upon the point of entrance and full fruition of that greatness which has
cost them so dear. It is a natural and very powerful passion, and in the end
is the last that leaves us: and therefore one calls it, The shirt of the
soul: because it is the last vice it puts off. Etiam sapientibus cupido
gloriae nouissima Tacitus.
exuitur.

Ambition, as it is the strongest and most powerful passion that is, so is it
the most noble and haughty; the force and puissance The force and primacy
thereof.
thereof is showed, in that it mastereth and surmounteth all other things, even
the strongest of the world, yea all other passions and affections, even love it
self, which seems nevertheless to contend with it for the Primacy. As we
may see in all the great men of the world, Alexander, Scipio, Pompey, and many
other, who have courageously refused to touch the most beautiful damsels,
that were in their power, burning nevertheless with ambition; yea that victory
they had over love, served their ambition, especially in Caesar: For never was
there a man more given to amorous delights, even of all sexes, and all sorts of
people, witness so many exploits both at Rome and in strange countries, nor
more careful and curious in adorning his person; yet ambition did always so
carry him, that for his amorous pleasures he never lost an hour of time which
he might employ to the enlargement of his greatness, for ambition had the
sovereign place in him, and did fully possess him. We see on the other side
that in Marcus Antonius and others, the force of love has made them to forget
the care and conduct of their affairs. But yet both of them being weighed in
equal balance, ambition carries away the price. They that hold that love is
the stronger, say that both the soul and the body, the whole man, is possessed
by it, yea that health it self depends thereupon. But contrariwise it
seems that ambition is the stronger, because it is altogether spiritual. And
in as much as love possesses the body, it is therefore the more weak, because
it is subject to saciety, and therefore capable of remedies, both corporal,
natural and strange, as experience shows of many, who by diverse means have
alaied, yea quite extinguished the force and fury of this passion; but ambition
is not capable of saciety, yea it is sharpened by the fruition of that it
desires, and there is no way to extinguish it, being altogether in the soul
it self and in the reason.

It does likewise vanquish love and robs it, not only of it health and
tranquillity (for glory and tranquillity are things 4 The care of life.
that cannot lodge together) but also of it own proper life, as Agrippina the
mother of Nero does plainly prove, who desiring and consulting with others to
make her son Emperor, and understanding that it could not be done, but with
the loss of her own life, she answered, as if ambition it self had spoken
it, Occidar modo imperet.

Thirdly, Ambition enforces all the laws, and conscience it self; the
learned have said of ambition, that it is the part 5 The laws.
of every honest man always to obey the laws, except it be in a case of
sovereignty for a kingdom which only deserves a dispensation, being so dainty
a morsel, that it cannot but break a man's fast, Si violandum est ius,
regnandi caussa violandum est, in caeteris pietatem colas.

It likewise trampleth under foot and contemns the reverence 6 Religion.
and respect of religion, witness Jeroboam, Mahumet, who never took thought
for religion, but tolerated all religions so he might reign: and all those
arch-hereticks who have liked better to be chief leaders in errors and lies
with a thousand disorders, than to be disciples of the truth: and therefore
says the Apostle, that they that suffer themselves to 1. Tim. 6.
be puffed up with this passion and affection, make shipwreck, and wander
from the faith, piercing themselves through with many sorrows.

To be short, it offers violence even to the laws of Nature it self. This
has been the cause of so many murders 7 It enforces Nature.
of parents, infants, brothers; witness Absalon, Abimelech, Athalias, Romulus,
Sei King of the Persians, who killed both his father and brother, Soliman the
Great Turk his two brothers. So that nothing is able to resist the force of
ambition, it beats all to the ground, so high and haughty is it. It lodges
only in great minds, even in the Angels themselves.

Ambition is not the vice or passion of base companions, 8 It is a lofty
passion.
nor of common or small attempts, and daily enterprises: Renown and glory
does not prostitute it self to so base a price; it pursues not those things
that are simply and solely good and profitable, but those that are rare, high,
difficult, strange and unusual. That great thirst after honor and reputation,
that casts down a man, and makes him a beggar, and to ducke and stoop to all
sorts of people, and by all means, yea the most abject, at what base price
soever, is vile and dishonorable: it is a shame and dishonor so to be
honored. A man must not be greedy of greater glory than he is capable of;
and to swell and to be puffed up for every good and profitable action, is to
show his tail while he lifts up his head.

Ambition has many and diverse ways, and is practiced by diverse means: there
is one way strait and open, such as 9 It has diverse ways.
Alexander, Caesar, Themistocles took; there is another oblique and hidden,
which many philosophers and professors of piety have taken, who go forwards
by going backward, go before others by going behind them, not unlike to
wierdrawers, who draw and go backward; they would feign be glorious by
contemning glory. And to say the truth, there is greater glory in refusing and
trampling glory under foot, than in the desire and fruition thereof, as Plato
told Diogenes. And ambition is never better carried, better guided, than by
wandering, and unusual ways.

Ambition is a folly and a vanity, for it is as much as if a 10 It is a folly.
man should run to catch the smoke in stead of the light, the shadow in stead
of the body, to fasten the contentment of his mind upon the opinion of the
vulgar sort, voluntarily to renounce his own liberty, to follow the passions
of others, to enforce himself to displease himself; for the pleasure of the
beholders, to let his own affections depend upon the eyes of another; so far
forth to love virtue as may be to the liking of the common sort; to do good
not for the love of good, but reputation. This is to be like unto vessels when
they are pierced, a man can draw nothing forth before he give thm a vent.

Ambition has no limits, it is a gulf that has neither 11 It is insatiable.
brinke nor bottom; it is that vacuitie which the Philosophers could never
find in Nature; a fire which increases by that nourishment that is given unto
it. Wherein it truly paieth his master: for ambition is only just in this, that
it suffices for his own punishment, and is executioner to it self. The
wheel of Ixion is the motion of his desires, which turn and return up and
down, never giving rest unto his mind.

They that will flatter ambition, say it is a servant or help unto virtue, and
a spur to beautiful actions; for it quitteth 12 The excuses of ambition
vain.
a man of all other sins, and in the end, of himself too; and all for
virtue: but it is so far from this, that it hides sometimes our vices, but
it takes them not away, but it covers or rather hatcheth them for a time
under the deceitful cinders of a malicious hypocrisy, with hope to set them
on fire altogether, when they have gotten authority sufficient to reign
publicly and with impiety. Serpents lose not their venim, though they be
frozen with cold, nor an ambitious man his vices though with a cold
dissimulation he cover them: for when he is arrived to that pitch of height
that he desired, he then makes them feel what he is. And though ambition quit
a man of all other vices, yet it never takes away it self. An ambitious man
puts himself forth to great and honorable actions, the profit whereof
returns to the public good, but yet he is never the better man that
performs them, because they are not the actions of virtue but of passion, no
though that saying be often in his mouth, We are not borne for our selves but
the weal public. The means men use to mount themselves to high estate, and
their carriages in their states and charges, when they are arrived thereunto,
do sufficiently show what men they are, and their own consciences tells the
most that follow that dance, that howsoever the public good be their outward
color, yet their own particular is that they intend.

Particular aduisements and remedies against this evil you shall find Lib. 3.
cap. 42.

CHAP. XXI. Of Covetousness and her counter-passion.
TO love and affect riches is covetousness; not only the 1 What it is.
love and affection, but also every ouer-curious care and industry about
riches; yea their dispensations themselves and liberty, with art and too much
attention procured, have a sent of covetousness: for they are not worthy an
earnest care and attention.

The desire of goods and the pleasure we take in possessing 2 The force thereof.
of them is grounded only upon opinion. The immoderate desire to get riches is
a gangreene in our soul, which with a venomous heat consumes our natural
affections, to the end it might fill us with virulent humors. So soon as it
is lodged in our hearts, all honest and natural affection which we owe either
to our parents or friends, or our selves, vanishes away. All the rest in
respect of our profit seems nothing, yea we forget in the end, and contemn
our selves, our bodies, our minds, for this transitory trash, and as the
Proverb is, We sell our horse to get us hay.

Covetousness is the vile and base passion of vulgar fools, 3 The folly and
misery of covetousness in fine points
who account riches the principal good of man, and fear poverty as the
greatest evil; and not contenting themselves with necessary means, which are
forbidden no man, weigh that is good in a Goldsmiths balance, when nature has
taught us to measure it by the ell of necessity. For what greater folly can
there be, than to adore that which Nature it self has put under our feet, and
hidden in the bowels of the earth as unworthy to be seen, yea rather to be
contemned, and trampled under foot? This is that that the only sin of man
has torn out of the intrailes of the earth, and brought unto light, to kill
himself. In lucem propter quae pugnaremus excutimus: nonerube scimus summa
apud nos haberi, quae fuerunt ima terrarum. Nature seems even in the first
birth of gold, and womb from whence it proceeds, after a sort to have
presaged the misery of those that are in love with it: for it has so ordered
the matter, that in those countries where it grows, there grows with it
neither grass, nor plant, nor other thing that is worth any thing, as giving
us to understand thereby, that in those minds where the desire of this metal
grows, there can not remain so much as a spark of true honor and virtue:
for what thing can be more base, than for a man to disgrade, and to make
himself a servant and a slave to that, which should be subject unto him? Apud
sapientem diuitiae sunt in seruitute, apud stultum in imperio. For a covetous
man serves his riches, not they him, and he is said to have goods as he has a
fever, which holds and tyranniseth over a man, not he over it. What thing
more vile than to love that which is not good, neither can make a good man, yea
is common, and in the possession of the most wicked of the world, which many
times pervert good manners, but never amend them? Without which so many wise men
have made themselves happy, and by which many wicked men have come to a
miserable end. To be brief, what thing more miserable than to bind the living
unto the dead, as Mezentius did, to the end their death might be languishing
and the more cruel; to tie the spirit to the excrement and scumme of the
earth; to pierce throw his own soul with a thousand torments, which this
amourous passion of riches brings with it; and to entangle himself with the
ties and cords of this malignant thing, as the Scripture calls them, which
does likewise term them thorns, and thieves which steal away the heart of
man, snares of the Devil, idolatry, and the root of all evil. And truly he
that shall see the Catalogue of those enuies and molestations which riches
engender within the heart of man, as their proper thunderbolt and lightning,
they would be more hated than they are now loved. Desunt inopiae multa,
auaritiae omnia: in nullum auarus bonus est, in se pessimus.

There is another contrary passion to this, and vicious, to hate riches, and to
spend them prodigally; this is to refuse 4 The counterpassion to covetousness.
the means to do well, to put in practice many virtues, and to fly that
labor which is far greater in the true command and use of riches, than in
not having them at all; to govern himself better in abundance than in
poverty. In this there is but one kind of virtue, which is, not to faint in
courage, but to continue firm and constant. In abundance there are many,
Temperance, Moderation, Liberality, Diligence, Prudence, and so forth. There,
more is not expressed, but that he look to himself: here, that he attend
first himself, and then the good of others. He that is spoiled of his goods
has the more liberty to attend the more weighty affairs of the spirit: and
for this cause many, both Philosophers and Christians, out of the greatness of
their courage, have put it in practice. He does likewise discharge himself of
many duties and difficulties that are required in the good and honest
government of our riches, in their acquisition, conservation, distribution, use
and emploiment: but he that quitteth himself of his riches for this reason,
slieth the labor and business that belongs unto them; and quite contrary does
it not out of courage, but cowardice: and a man may tell him, that he shakes
off his riches, not because they are not profitable, but because he knows not
how to make use of them, how to use them. And not to be able to endure riches,
is rather weakness ofminde, than wisdom, says Seneca.

CHAP. XXII. Of carnal Love.
Carnal Love is a fever and furious passion, and very dangerous 1 It is
strong, natural and common.
unto him that suffers himself to be carried by it: For what becomes of him?
He is no more himself; his body endures a thousand labors in the search of
his pleasure; his mind a thousand helles to satisfy his desires, and desire
it self increasing, grows into fury. As it is natural, so is it violent and
common to all, and therefore in the action thereof it equalleth and coupleth
fools and wise men, men and beasts together. It makes all the wisdom,
resolution, contemplation and operation of the soul beastly and brutish.
Hereby, as likewise by sleep, Alexander knew himself to be a mortal man,
because both these suppress the faculties of the soul.

Philosophy speaks freely of all things, that it may the better find out
their causes, govern and judge of them; so 2 Why ignominious.
does Divinity, which is yet more chaste and more strait. And why not, since
that all things belong unto the jurisdiction and knowledge thereof? The Sun
shines on the dunghill, and is neither infected, nor annoyed therewith. To be
offended with words is a token either of great weakness, or some touch or
guilt of the same malady. Thus much be spoken for that which follows, or the
like if it shall happen. Nature on the one side with violence thrusts us
forward unto this action; all the motion of the world resolves and yields to
this copulation of the male and female: on the other side it causes us to
accuse, to hide our selves, to blush for shame, as if it were a thing
ignominious and dishonest. We call it a shameful act, and the parts that serve
thereunto our shameful parts. But why shameful, since natural, and (keeping
it self within it own bounds) just, lawful, and necessary? Yea, why are
beasts exempted from this shame? Is it because the countenance seems foul and
deformed? Why foul, since natural? In crying, laughing, champing, gaping, the
visage is more distorted: Is it to the end it may serve as a bridle and a stay
to such a kind of violence? Why then does Nature cause such a violence? Or
contrariwise: Is it because shame serves as a spur, and as sulfure; or that
the instruments thereof move without our consent, yea against our wills? By
this reason beasts likewise should be bashful: and many other things move of
themselves in us without our consent, which are neither vicious nor shameful;
not only inward and hidden (as the pulse and motion of the heart, arteries,
lungs, the instruments and parts that serve the appetite, of eating, drinking,
discharging the brain, the belly, and their shuttings and openings, are
besides, nay many times, against our wills, (witness those sneesings,
yawnings, tears, hoquets and fluxions, that are not in our own power, and
this of the body: the spirit forgets, remembers, believes, misbeleeueth,
and the will it self, which many times wills that which we would it willed
not) but outward and apparent: the visage blusheth, waxes pale, wanne, the
body grows fat, lean, the hair turns gray, black, white, grows, stands
on end, without and against our consent. Is it that hereby the poverty and
weakness of man may be the more truly showed? That is as well seen in our
eating and drinking, our griefs, weariness, the disburdening of our bodies,
death, whereof a man is not ashamed. Whatsoever the reason be, the action in it
self and by nature is no way shameful, it is truly natural; so is not
shame: witness the beasts. Why say I beasts? The nature of man, says
Divinity, mainteining it self in it first original state, had never known
what shame was, as now it does; for from whence comes shame but from
weakness, and weakness but from sin, there being nothing in nature of it
self shameful? The cause then of this shame not being in nature, we must
seek it elsewhere. It is therefore artificial. It is an invention forged in
the closet of Venus to give the greater prise to the business, and to inkindle
the desire thereof the more. This is with a little water to make the fire burn
the cleerer, as Smithes use to do, to inflame the desire to see what it is
that is hidden; to hear and know what it is that is muttered and whispered.
For to handle things darkly as if they were mysteries, and with respect and
shame, gives taste and estimation unto them. Contrariwise, a loose, free and
open permission and commodity, derogateth from the worth, and takes away the
true relish and delight thereof.

This action then in it self, and simply taken, is neither 3 In what sense
vicious.
shameful nor vicious, since it is natural and corporal, no more than other
the like actions are: yea, if it be well ordered, it is just, profitable,
necessary, at the least, as it is to eat and drink. But that which does so
much discredit it, is, that moderation is seldom kept therein; and that to
attain thereunto, we make great stirs; and many times use bad means,
whereby it draws after it, if it go not before, many evils all worse than the
action it self. The charge rises above the principal, and this is to fish
(as it is said) with threeds of gold and purple. And all this is purely
humane. Beasts that follow simple nature, are quit from all these troubles. But
the art of man on the one side sets a strait guard about it, planteth at the
gate shame to give it a relish: on the other side (o the cousinage of men!) it
inflameth and sharpneth the desire, it deuiseth, remoueth, troubles, turns
all topsie turuie to attain unto it, (witness Poetry, which sportteh not it
self in any thing so much as in this subject) and finds every entrance unto
it to be better, than by the gate, and the lawful way, and follows every
wandering way, rather than the common way of marriage.

CHAP. XXIII. Desires, Concupiscence.
THere arise not so many billows and waves in the sea, as 1 The bottomless
depth of desire.
desires in the heart of man: it is a bottomless depth, it is infinite,
diverse, inconstant, confused, and irresolute, yea many times horrible and
detestable, but ordinarily vain, and ridiculous in it own desires.

But first it shall not be amiss to distinguish them. Some 2 Their
distinction. Natural necessary. lib. 2. cap. 6.
are natural, and they are just and lawful: they are likewise in beasts, they
have their limits and bounds, a man may see the end of them; and living
according to those, there is no man a beggar. Of these shall be spoken
hereafter more at large: for (to say the truth) these are not passions.
Others Not natural.
are besides nature proceeding from our opinion and fantasy, artificial,
superfluous, which we may, for distinctions sake, call Concupiscences or Lusts.
These are purely humane, beasts know not what they are, only man is immoderate
in his appetites: these are without limits, without end, and are naught else but
confusion. Desideria naturalia finita sunt, ex falsa opinione nascentia, vbi
desinant non habent. Nullus enim Seneca.
terminus falso est: via eunti aliquid extremum est error immensus est. And
therefore living according to these, there is no man can be rch and contented.
Of these it is properly that we have spoken in the beginning of this Chapter,
and that we farther intend in this matter of the passions. It is for these that
a man sweats, and travels, ad superuacua sudatur, that a man iourneyeth by sea
and by land, goes to war, killes himself, drownes, betrays, loses
himself: and therefore it was well said, That concupiscence is the root of all
evil. Now it falls out many times (a just punishment) that when a man
seeks how to satisfy his desires, and to glut himself with the goods and
pleasures of Fortune, he loses and is deprived of those of Nature: and
therefore Diogenes having refused that money that Alexander offered him,
desired him to give him that he had taken from him, to go out of the Sun.

CHAP. XXIIII. Hope, Despair.
Our desires and concupiscences gather heat and redouble their force by hope,
which inflameth with the soft and gentle air thereof our foolish desires,
kindles in our minds a fire, from whence arises a thick smoke, which
blinds our understanding; carries with it our thoughts, holds them hanging
in the clouds, makes us dream waking. So long as our hopes endure, or desires
endure with them: it is a play-game wherewith Nature busieth our minds.
Contrariwise, when despair is once lodged near us, it tormenteth our souls
in such sort, with an opinion of never obteining that we desire, that all
business besides must yield unto it. And for the love of that which we think
never to obtain, we lose even the rest of whatsoever we possess. This
passion is like unto little children, who to be revenged of him that has taken
one of their play-games from them, cast the rest into the fire. It is angry
with it self, and requires of it self the punishment of it own folly and
infelicitie. After those passions that respect the apparent good, come we to
those that respect the evil.

CHAP. XXV. Of Choler.
CHoler is a foolish passion which puts us wholly out 1 The description.
of our selves, and with seeking the means to withstand and beat back the
evil which it threatens us, or has already procured us, makes the blood to
boil in our hearts, and stirs up furious vapors in our spirits, which
blind us and cast us headlong to whatsoever may satisfy the desire which we
have of revenge. It is a short fury, a way to madness: by the prompt and
ready impetuositie and violence thereof, it carries and furmounteth all
passions. Repentina and vis vniuersa eius est.

The causes that dispose and move unto choler are first 2 The causes thereof.
weakness of spirit, as we see by experience in women, old men, infants, scke
men, who are commonly more choleric than others. Inualidum omne, natura
quaerulum est. A man Nusquam sine quaerela aegra tanguntur. The loss of a
penie, or the omission of a gain, puts into choler a covetous man; a laughter
or glance of his wife stirs this passion in a jealous man. Thirdly, lust,
vain niceness, self-love, which makes a man anxious and angry, puts him into
choler for the least cause that may be. Nulla res magis iracundiam alit quam
luxuria. This love of trisles, of a glass, a dog, a bird, is a kind of
folly that troubles us much, and stirs up this choleric passion in us.
Fourthly, too much curiosity, qui nimis inquirit, seipsum inquietat. This
Saepe ad nos ira venit, saepius nos ad illam. Fifthly, lightness in believing
what comes first to the ear. But the principal and formal

The signs and symptoms are very manifest, and more than of any other
passion; and so strange, that they alter and 3 The signs.
change the whole estate of man, they transform and disfigure him, vt sit
difficile vtrum magis detestabile vitium, aut deforme. Some of them are
outward, the face red and deformed, the eyes fiery, the looks furious, the ear
deaf, the mouth foaming, the heart panting, the pulse beating, the veins
swollen, the tongue stammering, the teeth gnashing, the voice loud and hoarse,
the speech imperfect, and to be brief, it puts the whole body into a fire and
a fever. Some have broken their veins, suppressed their urine, whereby present
death has ensued. What then can the estate of the spirit be within, when it
causes so great a disorder without. Choler at the first blow drives away and
banisheth reason and judgment, to the end it may wholly possess the place;
afterward it filles all with fire, and smoke, and darkness, and noise, like
unto him that puts the master out of the house, and then sets fire and burns
himself alive within; or like unto a ship, that has neither stern, nor
Pilot, nor sails, nor oars, which commits it fortune to the mercy of the
waves, winds, and tempest in the midst of a furious sea.

The effects thereof are great, many times miserable and lamentable. Choler
first enforces us to injustice, for it is kindled 4 The effects.
and sharpened by a just opposition, and by the knowledge that a man has of the
little reason he has to be angry. He that is moved to anger upon a false
occasion, if a man yield him any good reason why he should not be angry, he is
presently more incensed even against the truth and innocence it self,
Pertinaciores nos facit iniquitas irae, quasi argumentu^ sit just
irascendigrauiter irasci. The example of Piso is very notable and proves this
true, who excelling otherwise in virtue (the history is very well known) being
moved to choler, did unjustly put three to death, and by a subtle accusation
caused them to be found guilty, only because they acquitted one as unguilty whom
he by his former sentence had condemned. It is likewise sharpened by silence
and cold reply, as gathering thereby that it proceeds out of a contempt both
of him and his choler; which is proper unto women, who many times are angry to
the end they may stir up that passion in another, and increase their choler
even to fury, when they see that a man vouchsafes not to nourish that humor
in them, by chiding with them. So that Choler shows it self to be more
savage than a beast, since neither by defense or excuse, nor by silence and
patience without defense, it will not be won nor pacified. The injustice
thereof is likewise in this, that it will be both a judge and a party, that it
will that all take part with it, and grows to defiance with as many as will
seem to contradict it. Secondly, forasmuch as it is inconsiderate and heady,
it casts us headlong into great mischiefs, and sometimes even into those
which most fly, and do wish and would willingly procure another man, dat
poenas dum exigit, or far worse. This passion is fitly compared to great
ruins, which burst themselves in pieces upon that which they fall, it pursues
with such violence the ill of another, that it heeds not the avoiding of it
own. It intrappeth and intangleth us, makes us to speak and to do things,
shameful, uncomely, unworthy our selves. Lastly, it carries us so beyond our
selves, that it makes us to do things scandalous, dangerous, and irreuocable,
murders, poisonings, treasons, whereby follow great and too late repentances:
witness Alexander the great after he had slain Clytus, and therefore
Pythagoras was wont to say, that the end of Choler was the beginning of
repentance.

This passion feeds upon it self, flattereth and tickleth it but the
injustice of another cannot make that just; nor the loss that we receive by
another make that profitable unto us: it is too rash and inconsiderat to do any
thing that is good: it would cure an evil with an evil; for to yield the
correction of an offense to Choler, is to correct a vice by it self. Reason
which should have the command over us, needs no such officers as of their own
heads execute laws, not attending her ordinance; she would have all things
done according to nature by measure, and therefore violence does no way befit
it. But what, shall virtue see the insolency of vice and not be angry with it?
shall the liberty thereof be so bridled as not to dare to be moved against the
wicked? virtue desires no indecent liberty, it needs not turn it own
strength against it self, nor that the wickedness of another should trouble
it: a wise man must as well bear the vices of a wicked man without choler, as
his prosperity without envy. He must endure the indiscretions of rash and
inconsiderate men, with the self same patience that Physicians do the injuries
of mad men. There is no greater wisdom, nor more profitable in the world,
than to endure the folly of another, for otherwise by not suffering it with
patience, we make it our own. That which has heretofore been spoken
touching Choler, may likewise be spoken of these passions following, hatred,
envy, revenge, which are made or formed Cholers.

Particular aduisements and remedies against this evil are Lib. 3. cap. 31.

CHAP. XXVI. Hatred.
HAtred is a strange passion, which strangely and without reason troubles us:
and to say the truth, what is there in the world that tormenteth us more? By
this passion we put our selves into the power of him that we hate, to afflict
and vex us; the sight of him moves our senses, the remembrance stirs our
spirits both waking and sleeping; yea we never present him to our memories but
with despite and gnashing of teeth, which puts us besides our selves, and
tears our own hearts; whereby we suffer in our selves, the punishment of that
evil we wish unto another. He which hates is the patient, he that is hated,
the agent: contrary to the sound of the words, the hater is in torment, the
hated in ease. But what do we hate? Men, or their matters and affairs?
Doubtless we hate nothing that we should; for if there be any thing to be
hated in this world, it is hate it self, and such like passions, contrary to
that which should command in us.

Particular considerations and remedies against this evil, are Lib. 3. cap. 32.

CHAP. XXVII. Envy.
Envy is cousen-germaine to Hatred; a miserable passion and outrageous beast,
which in torment excels hell it self. It is a desire of that good that
another possesses, which gnaweth our heart, and turns the good of another
man to our own hurt. But how should it torment us, since it is as well against
that which is ill, as that which is good? Whilst an envious man looks
obliquely upon the goods of another man, he loses what is good in himself, or
at leastwise takes no delight in it.

Particular aduisements and remedies against this evil, are Lib. 3. cap. 33.

CHAP. XXVIII. Jealousy.
Jealousy is a passion like almost, both in nature and effect, 1 What it is.
unto Envy, but that it seems that Envy considers not what is good, but
in as much as it is in the possession of another man, and that we desire it for
our selves; and Jealousy concerns our own proper good, whereof we fear
another does partake.

Jealousy is a weak malady of the soul, absurd, vain, 2 The weakness
thereof.
terrible and tyrannical, it insinuates it self under the title of amity;
but after it has gotten possession, upon the selfsame foundation of love and
good will, it builds an everlasting hate. Virtue, health, merit, reputation,
are the incendiaries of this rage, or rather the fuel unto this fury.

It is likewise the Gaul that corrupts all the Honey of 3 The venim thereof.
our life: it is commonly mingled with the sweetest and pleasantst actions,
which it makes so sharp and sower as nothing more: it changes love into
hate, respect into disdain, assurance into diffidence: it ingendreth a
pernicious curiosity and desire in a man to clear himself of that evil,
which being past remedy, by too much stirring stinketh the more: For what does
he but publish, put out of all doubt, bring into the light, sound with a
trumpet his own shame and misery, and the dishonor of his own children?

Particular considerations and remedies against this evil, are Lib. 3. cap. 35.

CHAP. XXIX. Revenge.
THe desire of Revenge is first a cowardly and effeminate 1 A cowardly passion.
passion, proceeding from a base, weak and abject mind, which experience
tells us to be true: for we commonly see the weakest minds the most
malicious and reuengefull, as women and children. The valiant and generous mind
does little feel this passion, but contemns and disdaineth it, either
because the injury touches him not, or because he that offers the injury
is not worthy his revenge, as not daining so far to debase himself: indignus
Caesaris ira. The hail, thunder, and tempests, and those fearful motions
that are in the air, do neither trouble nor touch the superior celestial
bodies, but only the weak and inferior: and even so the indiscretions and
childish brawles of fools wound not great and high minds. All the great men of
the world, Alexander, Caesar, Epaminondas, Scipio, have been so far from
revenge, that quite contrary, they have done good unto their enemies.

Secondly, it is a boiling and biting passion, and like a 2 Biting.
worm it gnaweth the hearts of those that are infected with it; it molesteth
them by day, and by night keeps them awaked.

It is likewise full of injustice, for it tormenteth the innocent, 3 Unjust.
and adds affliction. It is to make the party offending, to feel that evil
and punishment, which the desire of revenge gives to a man's heart; and the
party offended goes to lay on the burden, as if he had not already hurt
enough by the injury received; in such sort, that many times and ordinarily,
whilst he tormenteth himself to seek means of revenge, he that has
committed the offense laughs and makes himself merry with it. But it is also
far more unjust in the means of the execution, which many times is wrought
by treasons and villainous practices.

Lastly, the execution is not only painful but dangerous 4 Dangerous.
too; for experience tells us, that he that seeks to be revenged, does not
that which he would, and what his blow intends, but commonly that which he
would not comes to pass, and thinking to put out the eye of his enemy, he
puts out both his own. The fear of justice tormenteth him, and the care to
hide him those that love him.

Again, to kill and to make an end of his enemy, is not revenge, but mere
cruelty, which proceeds from cowardlinesse 5 To kill is not to revenge.
and fear. To be revenged is to beat his enemy, to make him stoop; not to
kill him: for by killing he feels not the power of his wrath, which is the
end of revenge. And this is the reason why a man cares not to be revenged upon
a dog or a beast, because he can no way taste or conceit his revenge. In true
revenge there must be a kind of pleasure and delight in the revenger; and he
upon whom he is revenged must feel the weight of his displeasure, suffer
pain, and repent him of the cause, which being killed he cannot do: yea he is
rather freed thereby from all misery, and contrariwise he that is the revenger
endures many times that torment and fear which he wished to his enemy. To
kill then is a token of cowardlinesse and fear, lest his enemy feeling the
force of his revenge should live to requite him with the like; which though it
make an end of the quarrel, yet it wounds his reputation, it is a trick of
precaution and not of courage, and is the way to proceed safely but not
honorably. Qui occidit long non vlciscitur, nec gloriam assequitur.

Particular aduisements and remedies against this evil, are Lib. 3. cap. 34.

CHAP. XXX. Cruelty.
Cruelty is a villainous and detestable vice, and against nature, and therefore
it is likewise called Inhumanitie. It proceeds from weakness, omnis ex
infirmitate feritas est, and it is the daughter of cowardlinesse: for a
valourous man does always exercise his strength against a resisting enemy,
whom he has no sooner at his mercy, but he is satisfied: Romana virtus,
parcere subiectis, debellare superbos. Forasmuch therefore as cowardly
weakness can not be of this rank, to the end it may yet get the name of
valor, it makes blood and massacres the proof thereof. Murders in victories
are commonly executed by common people, and the officers of the baggage.
Tyrants are bloody, because they fear, not knowing how to secure themselves,
but by rooting out those that may offend them; and therefore they exercise
their cruelty against all, even women too, because they fear all, cuncta
ferit, dum cuncta timet. Cowardly dogs bite and tear with their teeth,
within the house, the skins of those wild beasts, which in the open field
they durst not look upon. What makes civil wars so cruel, but that tie
wherewith the common people are led and linked, who like dogs that are backed by
their master back one another? The Emperor Mauritius being told that one
Phocas a soldier should kill him, enquired what he was, and of what nature and
condition; and being told by his son in law Philip that he was a base
cowward: Why then, says he, no marvel if he be a murderer and cruel. It
proceeds likewise from the inward malignitie of the soul, which feeds and
delights it self with the hurt of another. Monsters, like Caligula.

CHAP. XXXI. Sadness, or Heaviness of heart.
Sadness is a languishing feebleness of the spirit, and a 1 The description.
kind of discouragement ingendered by the opinion that we have of the
greatness of those evils that afflict us. It is a dangerous enemy to our
rest, which presently weakeneth and quelleth our souls, if we take not good
heed; and takes from us the use of reason and discourse, and the means whereby
to provide for our affairs, and with time it rusteth and fenoweth the soul,
it corrupts the whole man, brings his virtues asleep, even then when he has
most need to keep them awaked, to withstand that evil which oppresses them:
but we must discover the foulness and folly, the pernicious effects, yea the
injustice that is in this cowardly, base, and feeble passion, to the end we
may learn with all our might to fly and avoid it, as most unworthy the wisest
men, according to the doctrine of the Stoics; which is not so easy to be done,
because it excuses and covers it self with many beautiful colors of
nature, piety, goodness, yea the greatest part of the world it draws to
honor and favor it, making it an ornament to wisdom, virtue, conscience.

First then it is so far from being natural (as it would 2 Not natural.
Public mournings,
make men believe) that it is formal, and an enemy to nature, as may easily
be proved. Touching ceremonious sorrows and public mournings, so much
affected and practiced in former times, and likewise at this present (my
meaning is not to touch the honesty and moderation of obsequies and funerals,
nor that sorrow that belongs to piety and religion) what greater imposture or
deceitful cousenage can there be in any thing besides? How many fained and
artificial counterfeit cousenages are there with no small cost and charges,
both in those whom it concerns, the authors of the sport, and those whose
offices they make use of in that business? For to give the better credit to
their iugling tricks they hire people to lament, and to send up their shreeking
cries and lamentations, which all men know to be fained and extorted for money,
tears that are not shed but to be seen, and so soon as they are out of
sight are dried up; where is it that nature has taught us this? Nay what is
there that nature does more abhor and condemn? It is a tyrannical, false
and vulgar opinion (the worst, as has been said, almost of all the passions)
that teaches us to weep and lament in such a case. And if a man cannot find
occasion of tears and a heavy countenance in him self, he must buy it at a
dear price in another, in such sort that to satisfy this opinion, he must
enter into a great charge whereof nature if we would credit it, would willingly
discharge us. Is not this willingly and publicly to betray reason, to enforce
and to corrupt nature, to prostitute his own manhood, to mock both the world
and himself, to satisfy the vulgar sort, which produce nothing but error,
and account of nothing that is not counterfeit and disguised? Neither are those
more particular sorrows natural, as it seems to many; for if they did
proceed from nature, they should Particular.
be common to all men, and almost touch all men alike. Now we see that the
self same things that are causes of sorrow to some, give occasion of joy unto
others, that one Province, one person laugheth at that whereat another weepeth;
that they that are conversant with those that lament, exhort them to
resolution, and to quit themselves of their tears. Yea the greatest part of
those that thus torment themselves, when you have talked with them, or that
themselves have had the leisure but to discourse upon their own passions, they
confess that it is but a folly thus to afflict themselves, and praise those
who in the like adversities, have made head against fortune, and with a manly
and generous courage have withstood their afflictions. And it is certain that
men do not accommodate their mourning to their cause of sorrow, but the opinion
of those with whom they live. And if a man mark them well, he shall find that
it is opinion, which the more to annoy us presents the things unto us which
torment us either more than they should, or by anticipation, fear, and
prevention of that which is to come, sooner than they should.

But it is against nature, inasmuch as it polluteth and defaceth 3 Against
nature.
whatsoever nature has made beautiful and amiable in us, which is drowned by
the force of this passion, as the beauty of a pearl is dissolved in vinegar.
We make our selves heerby spectacles of pity, we go with our heads hanging,
our eyes fastened on the earth, our mouths tonguelesse, our members
immooueable, our eyes serve for no other use than to weep, that you may say
we are nothing but sweating statues, turned (as the Poets feign) like Niobe
into a stone by the power of this passion.

Now it is not only contrary and an enemy unto nature, but 4 Iniust and impious.
God himself: for what other thing is it, but a rash and outrageous complaint
against the Lord and common law of the whole world, which has made all things
under the Moon changeable and corruptible? If we know this law, why do we
torment our selves? If we know it not, whereof do we complain, but of our
own ignorance, in that we know not that which Nature has written in all the
corners and creatures of the world? We are here not to give a law, but to
receive it, and to follow that which we find established: for to torment our
selves by contradicting it, does but double our pain.

Besides all this, it is pernicious and hurtful unto man, and by so much the
more dangerous, because it kills when we 5 Pernitican.
think it comforts, hurts under the color of doing good; under a false
pretense of plucking the iron out of the wound, it drives it to the heart: and
the blows thereof are so much the more hardly avoided, and the enterprises
broken, because it is a domestical enemy brought up with us, which we have
engendered for our own punishment.

Outwardly, by a deformed and new countenance wholly 6 Outwardly.
altered and counterfeited; it dishonoreth and defameth man. Do but consider
when it enters into us, it fills us with shame, in such sort, that we dare
not to show our selves in public place, no not privately to our dearest
friends; and after we are once possessed of this passion, we do nothing but
seek corners to hide our selves from the sight of men. What is this to say,
but that it condemns it self, and acknowledges how indecent it is? For it
is for a woman that is taken in her wantonness to hide herself, and to fear
to be known. Again, do but consider the vestments and habits of sorrow, how
strange and effeminate they are; which shows, that it takes away whatsoever
is manly and generous in us, and puts upon us the countenances and infirmities
of women: and therefore the Thratians adorned those men that mourned, like
women. And some say, that sorrow makes men eunuchs. The first and more manly
and generous laws of the Romans forbad these effeminate lamentations, finding
it an horrible thing, that men should so degenerate from their own natures,
and do things contrary to manhood; allowing only of those first tears, which
proceed from the first encounter of a fresh and new grief, which may fall even
from the eyes of Philosophers themselves, who keep with their humanity their
dignity: and may fall from the eyes, virtue not falling from the heart.

Now it does not only alter the visage, change, and dishonestly 7 Inwardly.
disguise a man outwardly, but piercing even to the marrow of the bone,
Tristitia exsiecat ossa, it weakeneth likewise the soul, troubles the peace
thereof, makes a man unapt to good and honorable enterprises, taking away the
taste, the desire, and the disposition to do any thing that is profitable
either to himself or to another, and not only to do good but to receive it:
For even those good fortunes that light upon him displease him; every thing is
tart unto his soul, as victuals to a corrupted stomach: and lastly, it makes
bitter our whole life, and poisoneth all our actions.

It is twofolde, great and extreme, or at leastwise, though 8 The distinction.
not great in it self, yet great when by reason of a sudden surprise, and
furious unexpected alarm it seiseth upon the heart of a man, pierces it
through, depriueth him of motion and sense, like a stone, and not unlike that
miserable mother Niobe,

Diriguit visu in medio, calor ossa reliquit,
Labitur, and longo vix tandem tempore fatur.
And therefore the Painter diversely and by degrees presenting unto us the sorrow
and miserable estate of the parents and friends of Iphygenia when she was
sacrificed, when he came to her father, he painted him with his face covered,
as confessing his art not sufficient to express in the visage a grief of that
degree. Yea, sometimes a sorrow may be such, that it kills outright. The
second degree is the indifferent sorrow, which though perhaps it may be greater
than the former, yet in time it is lessened and eased, and is expressed by
tears, sobs, sighs and lamentations: Curae leaves loquuntur, ingentes stupent.

Particular aduisements and remedies against this evil, are Lib. 3. cap. 29.

CHAP. XXXII. Compassion.
WE sigh with those that are afflicted, and with a fellowlike feeling pity
their miseries, either because by a secret consent we participate one the
others evils, or because we fear that in our selves, which has happened to
others. But this is done two ways, whereby there is likewise a twofolde
compassion; the one good, when a man with a good will, not troubling or
afflicting himself, not effeminating his own nature, and without impeachment
of equity or honor, does freely and effectually succor those that are
afflicted. This is that virtue so much commended in religion, found in the
holiest and wisest in the world: the other is a passion of a feeble mind, a
sottish and feminine pity, which proceeds from a delicate tenderness, a
troubled spirit, proper to women, infants, and to cruel and malicious minds
(which are consequently base and cowardly, as has been proved in the Chapter
of Cruelty) who pity the punishments of offenders, which produces unjust
effects, not respecting the depth and merit of the cause, but the present
fortune, state and condition.

Aduisements and remedies against this evil, you shall find Lib. 3. cap. 30.

CHAP. XXXIII. Fear.
Fear is the apprehension of an evil to come, which holds 1 The description.
us in a continual care, and runs before those evils that fortune threatens
us.

We speak not here of that fear of God so much commended in Scripture, nor
of that fear which proceeds from love, and is a sweet respect toward the
thing beloved, commendable in subjects and all inferiors toward their
superiors; but of that vicious fear that troubles and afflicts, which is
the seed of sin, the twinne of shame, both of one womb, sprung from that
close and cursed marriage of the spirit of man with a diabolical persuasion.
Timeo, eo quod nudus essem, and abscondi me.

It is a deceitful and malicious passion, and has no other power over us, but
to mock and seduce us: it serves it turn 2 The malice and tyranny thereof.
with that which is to come, where though we seem to foresee much, we see
nothing at all; and in that doubtful darkness it holds us, as in a dark
place, as thieves do by night, to the end they may rob a man and not be
known, and give a great and sudden affright with a small number. And therefore
it tormenteth us with masks and shows of evils, as men fear children with
bug-beares; evils that have nothing but a simple appearance, and have naught in
themselves whereby to hurt us, yea, are not evils, but that we think them so.
It is the only apprehension which we have, which makes that evil to us which
is not so, and draws evil even from our own good to afflict us withal. How
many do we see every day, that with fear to become miserable, become that they
fear, and turn their vain fear into certain miseries? How many have lost
their friends, by distrusting their friends; have got diseases, by fearing
them? One has in such sort conceived an opinion that his wife has played
false play with him, that for grief he languisheth; another has in such sort
apprehended such a conceit of poverty, that he falls sick: and to be
brief, some have died for fear to die. And even so may a man say almost of
whatsoever we fear: for fear seems not to other end, than to make us find
that which we fly from. Doubtless, fear is of all other evils the greatest
and most tedious: for other evils are no longer evils than they continue, and
the pain endures no longer than the cause; but fear is of that which is, and
that which is not, and that perhaps which never shall be, yea sometimes of that
which can not possible be. Behold then a passion truly malicious and
tyrannical, which draws from an imaginary evil true and bitter sorrows,
and is ouer-greedie by thought and opinion to overtake, nay outrun them.

Fear does not only fill us with evils, and many times by false appearances,
but it likewise spoileth all the good that

It is also a strange passion, indiscreet and inconsiderate, and It arises
from dangers, and many times casts us into dangers; for it ingendreth in us
such an inconsiderate desire to get out, that it astonisheth, troubles, and
hinders us from taking that order that is fit to get out. It brings a
violent kind of trouble, whereby the soul being affrighted, withdraws it
self into it self, and debateth with it self how to avoid that danger that
is presented. Besides that great discouragement that it brings, it seizes on
us with such an astonishment, that we lose our judgment, and there is no
longer reason or discourse in us: it makes us to fly when no man pursues,
yea many times our own friends and succors: adeo pauor etiam auxilia
formidat. Many have run mad heerewith, yea the senses themselves have hereby
lost their use: we have our eyes open, and see not; one speaks to us, and we
hearken not unto him; we would fly, and we can not go.

An indifferent fear puts wings to our heels; a great nails fast our feet,
and intangles them. Fear peruerteth and corrupts the entire man, both the
spirit, Pauor sapientiam omnem mihi ex animo expectorat, and the body,
Obstupui steteruntque comae, vox hausibus haesit. Sometimes it makes us
desperate, and therefore resolute, like that Roman Legion under the conduct of
the Cousull Sempronius against Hannibal, Audacem fecerat ipse timor. There are
fears and affrightments without any apparent cause, and as it were by some
celestial impulsion, which they call Panique terrors, Terrores de coelo, Luc.
21.
arescentibus hominibus prae timore, such as once happened in the city of
Carthage, and wherewith whole people and armies have been confounded.

Particular aduisements and remedies against this evil, are Lib. 3. cap. 28.

The second Consideration of Man, by comparing him with all other creatures.
CHAP. XXXIIII.
We have considered man wholly and simply in 1 A profitable and difficult
comparison, wherein man is suspected.
himself: now let us consider him by comparing him with other creatures, which
is an excellent means to know him. This comparison has a large extent, and
many parts that bring much knowledge of importance, and very profitable, if it
be well done. But who shall do it? Shall man? He is a party and to be
suspected; and to say the truth, deals partially therein: which may easily be
proved, because he keeps neither measure nor mediocritie. Sometimes he places
himself far above all, he terms himself a Master, and disdaineth the
rest; diuides unto them their morsels, distributeth such a portion of faculties
and powers unto them as shall seem good unto him. Sometimes as it were in
despite, he debaseth himself beneath all; he murmureth, complains, wrongeth
Nature as a cruel stepmother, makes himself the outcast and most miserable of
the world. Now both these extremes are equally against reason, verity,
modesty. But how would you have him to walk uprightly and euenly with all
other creatures, when he does it not with man his companion, nor with God
himself, as shall be showed? This comparison is also difficult to do; for how
In the chap. of presumption.
can a man know the inward and secret carriages of creatures, that which moves
within them? But yet let us do our endeavor to do it without passion.

First, the policy of the world is not so unequal, so deformed Ecclesiast.
runs the same fortune.

Let us first speak of those things that are common to all, and almost alike,
which are to engender, nourish, to do, move, 3 Things common.
live, die: Idem interitus hominis and iumentorum, and aequa vtriusque
conditio. And this is against those that find themselves agrieued, saying,
that man is the most contemptible creature of Nature, abandoned, left naked
upon the naked earth, Eccles. 4.
without covert, without armor, bound, swadled, without instruction of what is
fit for him: whereas all other creatures are clothed and covered with shells,
husks, hair, wool, feathers, scales: armed with teeth, horns, tallants, both
to assail and to defend: taught to swim, to run, to fly, to sing, to seek
their relief, and man knows neither how to go, nor to speak, nor to eat, nor
any thing but cry, without an apprentiship and much labor. All these
complaints to him that considers the first composition and natural
condition, are unjust and false: our skin is as sufficiently provided against
1. Nakedness. cap. 5.
the injuries of times and seasons as theirs, witness many nations (as has
been said) that never knew what garments meant: yea those parts that we think
good we keep uncovered, yea the most tender and sensible, as the face, the
hands, the stomach, and the delicatest damsels their breasts. Bands and
swaddling clothes are not necessary, witness the 2. Swaddling clothes.
Lacedaemonians, and in these days the Switzers, Almaines, which dwell in cold
countries, the Bisques and vagabonds that are called Egyptians. Crying is
likewise common unto beasts: all creatures almost complain, and groan for a
time after they 3. Crying.
come into the world. As for armor, we want not that which 4. Arms.
is natural, and have more motion of our members, use their service more
naturally and without instruction. If some beasts excel us in this, we in the
same excel diverse others. The use of eating is both in them and in us natural
and without 5. Eating.
instruction. Who doubts that an infant, being once able to feed himself,
knows how to seek his sustenance? And the earth likewise brings forth and
offers enough unto him for his necessity, without other culture or Art,
witness so many nations, which without labor, industry and care live
plenteously. As for speech, a man may well say that 6. Speech.
if it be not natural, it is not necessary: but it is common to man with
other creatures. What else but speech is that faculty we see in them of
complaining, reioicing, of calling others to their succor, of making love? And
as we speak by gestures and motion of the eyes, the head, the shoulders, the
hands (wherein deaf men are very cunning) so beasts, as we see in those which
have no voice, who nevertheless do enterchange their mutual offices; and as
in some kind of measure beasts understand us, so we them. They flatter us,
threaten us, entreat us and we them, we speak to them, and they to us, and if
we perfectly understand not one another, where is the fault? in us or in them?
That is to be determined. They may as well account us beasts by that reason, as
we them, yea they reproach us for that we our selves understand not one another.
We understand not the Bisques, the Britons, and they all understand the one the
other, not only of the same, but which is more of a diverse kind. By a
certain barking of the dog, the horse knows that he is in choler, and by
another voice he knows he is not.

Again they have their intelligence with us. In the wars 7. Mutual
intelligence.
in the midst of the fight, Elephants, Dogs, Horses understand with us, they
frame their motions according to the occasion, they pursue, they make their
stand, they retire, nay they have their pay, and divide the booty with us, as
it has been practiced in the new conquests of the Indies. And these are those
things that are common to all, and alike.

Let us now come to those differences and advantages that 4 Differences and
advantages.
the one has over the other. Man is singular and excellent in some things
above other creatures, and in others, beasts have the superiority, to the end
that all things might thereby be knit and enchained together in this general
policy of the world and of nature. The certain advantages or excellencies of
man, are those great faculties of the soul; the subtilitie, viuacitie, Of man.
and sufficiency of the spirit to invent, to judge, to choose, speech to demand
and to offer aid and succor, the hand to execute that the spirit has invented
either of it self, or learned from another. The form also of the body, the
great diversity of the motions of the members, whereby his body does him better
service.

The certain advantages that beasts have over men, and 5 Of Beasts general.
such as are past all doubt, are either general or particular. The general are
health, and strength of body far more perfect, constant, and strong in them,
among whom there are no blind, deaf, lame, mute, diseased, defective, and ill
born, as amongst men. The Sereno hurts them nor, they are not subject to
rheumes from whence proceed almost all other diseases; from which man though he
cover his head with a hat and a house too, can hardly defend himself.
Moderation in diet and other actions, innocence, safety, peace and tranquillity
of life, a plain and entire liberty without shame, fear, or ceremony in
things natural and lawful (for it is only man that has cause to hide
himself in his actions, and whose faults and imperfections offend others).
Exemption from so many vices and disorders, superstition, ambition, avarice,
envy, yea mighty dreams trouble not them as they do men, nor so many
thoughts and fantasies. The particular advantages are the pure, high,
healthful, pleasant habitation, and abode of Particular.
birds in the air. Their sufficiency in some arts, as the swallow Remora to
stay the greatest vessels of the sea, as we read of the chief galley of
Marcus Antonius, and the self same of Caligula; of the Torpedo or Crampe-fish,
to benum and dead the members of another, though far distant, and not
touching him; of the Hedgehog, to foresee the winds; of the Chameleon, to
change his colors. Prognostications, as of birds in their passages from
country to country, according to the diversity of the seasons; of all beasts
that are dammes, in knowing which of their young is the best; for some hap
falling out of defending them from danger, or conueying them to their nests,
they always begin with that they know and foresee to be the best. In all these
things man is far their inferior, and in some of them he has no skill at
all. A man may add unto this, if he will, the length of their lives, which in
some beasts does seven or eight times exceed the longest term of the life of
man.

Those advantages that man pretends to have above beasts, but are yet
disputable, and perhaps as well in beasts 6 Disputable advantages.
as men, are many: First, the reasonable faculties, discourse, reasoning,
discipline, judgment, prudence. There are here 1 Reason.
two things to be spoken, the one of the verity of the thing it self. It is a
great question, whether beasts be deprived of all these spiritual faculties.
The opinion that they are not deprived but have them, is the more true and the
more authentike. It is defended by many great Philosophers, especially by
Democritus, Anaxagoras, the Stoics, Galen, Porphyry, Plutarch, and maintained
by this reason. The composition of the brain, which is that part which the
soul makes use of, and whereby it reasons, is all alike as the same in
beasts and men, confirmed by experience. Beasts from particulars conclude
generals, by the sight of one only man they know all men, they know how to
join, and divide, and distinguish the good from the ill, for the safeguard of
their lives, liberty, and little ones. Yea, we read and see, if we would but
mark and consider it, many things done by beasts, that do far excel the
sufficiency, subtlety, and all the wit and cunning of the common sort of men:
some of those that are best worth the noting, I will note unto you. The Fox
being to pass over a river that is frozen with ice, applies his ear unto the
ice, to find whether he can hear any noise, and that the water do run
under it, that thereby he may resolve either to go forward, or to retire back;
of whom the Thrasians have learned the same cunning, being to pass their
frozen rivers. A Dog, to the end he may know which way of three either his
master or that beast he hunteth is gone, having assured himself by senting
them, that he has not passed by two of them, because he finds not the trace,
without the setting of his nose to the ground or farther traversing, he runs
mainly into the third. The Mule of the Philosopher Thales crossing a river with
a sack of salt on his back, and being plunged into the deep with his
burden, his salt dissolved in the water, and made his burden the lighter;
which the Mule (falling into the deep by chance) having found, being
afterward laden with wool, used the same remedy, and sunk the more.
Plutarch reports, that he saw a Dog in a ship casting stones into a pipe of
oil, to make the oil to mount, that he might the better come at it. As much
is reported of the Crows of Barbary, who by that means raise the water when
it is too low, that they may drink. So likewise Elephants gather stones and
sticks, and cast them into that ditch whereinto their companion is fallen, to
help him to get out. The Oxen of the Kings gardens of Suze being taught to go
in a wheel a just hundred turns, to draw water to water the gardens, they
would never exceed that just number, and were never deceived in their account.
All these thnigs, how can they be done, without discourse and reason, addition
and division? To say they know not this, were to deny that we see they do.
What should we think of that dexterity that is in the Elephant in plucking
those darts and iauelins forth of his body with little or no pain at all? of
the Dog that Plutarch speaks of, which in a public play upon a scaffold
counterfeited death, drawing toward his end, trembling, afterward growing
stiff, and suffering himself to be carried forth, by little and little
coming to himself, and lifting up his head counterfeited a new resurrection?
of so many apish imitations and strange tricks that the dogs of Players and
Iuglers do? of the policies and inventions wherewith beasts defend themselves
against the assaults we make upon them? of the husbandry and great providence
of the Ant in laying abroad his grain to dry, lest it take moisture and so
corrupt, in nipping the ends thereof that it grow not? of the policy of the
Be, where there is such diversity of offices and charges so firmly
established?

To beat down all this, some do maliciously attribute these things to a
natural, servile and forced inclination; as if 7 An opposition of the natural
instinct.
beasts did perform their actions by a natural necessity, like things
inanimate, as the stone falls downward, the fire mounteth upward. But besides
that, that can not be, nor enter into our imagination; for there must be a
numbering of the parts, comparison, discourse by addition and division, and
consequents; they likewise know not what this natural inclination and instinct
is; they be words which they abuse to small purpose, that they may not be deaf
and mute altogether. Again, this saying is retorted against them: for it is
beyond all comparison more noble, honorable, and resembles more the Divinity
to work by nature than by art and apprentiship; to be led and directed by the
hand of God, than by our own; regularly to act by a natural and inevitable
condition, than regularly by a rash and casual liberty.

By this objection of the natural instinct, they would likewise deprive them
of instruction and discipline both active and passive, but experience gives
them the lie; for they do both receive it: witness the Pie, the Parret, the
Blackbird, the Dog, the Horse, as has been said, and they give it,
witness the Nightingale, and above all other the Elephant, which excels all
other beasts in docilitie, and all kind of discipline and sufficiency.

As for this faculty of the spirit whereof man does so much glory, which is
to spiritualize things corporal and absent, nam intellectum est in
intelligente ad modum intelligentis; beasts themselves do the like. The Horse
accustomed to the wars sleeping in his stable, trembles and groaneth as if
he were in the midst of the fight; conceiueth the sound of the drum, the
trumpet, yea an army it self. The Hare in her sleep panting, lifts up her
scut, shaking her legs, conceiueth a spiritual Hare. Dogs that are kept for
guard, in their sleep do snarre, and sometimes bark outright, imagining a
stranger to be come. To conclude this first point, we must confess that beasts
do reason, have the use of discourse and judgment, but more weakly and
imperfectly than man; they are inferior unto men in this, not because they
have no part therein at all; they are inferior unto men, as amongst men some
are inferior unto others; and even so amongst beasts there is such a
difference: but yet there is a greater difference between men; for (as shall
be said hereafter) there is a greater distance between a man and a man, than
a man and a beast. But for all this we must not hereby infer, a kind of
equality or paritie betwixt a beast and a man (though as Aristotle says,
there are some men so weak and blockish, that they differ from a beast only in
figure) and that the soul of a beast is immortal as that of a man, or the
soul of a man mortal as that of a beast: for these are but malicious
illations. For besides that in this reasoning faculty, man has a very great
advantage above beasts, so has the other faculties more high and wholly
spiritual, whereby he is said to be like unto God himself, and is capable of
immortality, wherein beasts have no part, and are signified by that
understanding, which is more than a simple discourse. Nolite fieri sicut equus
and mulus in quibus non est intellectus.

The other point which we are to speak of in this matter is, that this
pre-eminence and advantage of understanding, and other spiritual faculties
that man pretends, is sold him at a dear rate, and brings with it more hurt
than good: for it is the principal source of all those evils that oppress
him; of vices, passions, maladies, irresolution, trouble, despair, which
beasts want, by the want of this great advantage: witness the Hog of Pyrrho,
which did eat his meat peaceably in the ship in the midst of a great
tempest, when all the men were almost dead for fear. It seems that these
great parts of the soul have been denied unto beasts, or at leastwise
lessened, and given them more feeble, for their great good and quiet, and
bestowed upon man for his torment: for it is long of them that he toileth and
trauelleth, tormenteth himself with what is past, and that which is to come;
yea he imagines, apprehends, and fears those evils that are not, nor ever
shall be. Beasts apprehend nothing that is ill until they feel it; and being
escaped, they are presently in security and at peace. So that we see that man
is most miserable even in that wherein he thought himself most happy: whereby
it seems that it had been better for man, not to have been endued and
adorned with all those beautiful and celestial arms, since he turns them
against himself, even to his own destruction. And to say the truth, we see
those that are most stupid and feeble of spirit, live at best content, and
feel not their evil accidents in so high a degree, as those that are more
spiritual.

Another advantage that man pretends above beasts is a signorie and power of
commanding, which he thinks he 10 2. Signorie and command.
has over beasts: but besides, that it is an advantage that men themselves
have and exercise the one over the other, this is not true. For where is this
command of man, this obedience of the beasts? It is a monster that was never
seen, yea men do more fear beasts, than beasts them. It is true that man has
a great pre-eminence over beasts, vt praesit piscibus maris, volatilibus coeli,
bestijs terrae. And this by reason of his beautiful Genesis 1.
and upright form, of his wisdom and the prerogative of his spirit: but not
that he should either command, or they obey.

There is likewise another advantage, near neighbor to 11. 3. Liberty.
this, pretended by man, which is a plain liberty, reproching beasts with
their servitude, captivity, subjection: but this is to small purpose. There is
far greater reason why man should reproach man; witness those slaves, not
only made by force, and such as descend from them, but also those that are
voluntary, who either sell for money their liberty or give it, out of the
lightness of their hearts, or for some commodity, as the ancient fensers
sold outright women to their mistresses, soldiers to their captains. Now
there is none of all this in beasts, they never serve one another, nor yield
themselves to any servitude either active or passive, either to serve or to be
served, and are in every thing more free than men. And as man goes to the
chase, takes, kills, eats the beasts; so is he taken, killed, eaten by
them in his turn, and more honorably too, by maine strength, not by wit and
art, as man does: and not only by them is he killed, but by his companion, by
another man, a thing base and dishonorable. Beasts assemble not themselves in
troops to go to kill, to destroy, to ransacke, to inthrall another troop of
their kind, as men do.

The fourth and greatest advantage pretended by man, is in virtue; but of
moral it is disputable (I mean moral materially 12 4. Virtue.
by the outward action): for formallie the morality good or evil, virtue and
vice, can not be in a beast. Kind acknowledgement, officious amity,
fidelity, magnanimity, and many other virtues, which consist in society and
conversation, are more lively, more express and constant, than can be in the
common sort of people. Hircanus the dog of Lysimachus continued upon the bed
of his dead master, refusing all kind of sustenance, and afterward cast
himself into that fire wherein his master was burnt, and there died with him.
The self same did another belonging to one Pyrrhus. That dog of wise
Hesiodus discovered the murder of his master. Another in like sort in the
presence of King Pyrrhus, and his whole army. Another which never ceased, as
Plutarch affirms, going from city to city, until that sacrilegious Robber
of the Temple of Athens was apprehended and brought to judgments That history
is famous, of the lion that was host and nurse to Androdus the slave and his
Physician, which would not touch him being cast out unto him: which Appion
affirms to have seen at Rome. An Elephant having in choler killed his
governor, repenting himself of it, refused any longer to eat, drink, or
live. Contrariwise, there is not a creature in the world, more unjust,
unthankful, traitorous, perfidious, lying and deceitful, than man. Again,
forasmuch as virtue consists in the moderation of our appetites, and the
bridling of our pleasures, beasts are much more moderate therein than we, and
do better contain themselves within the limits of nature. For they are not
only not touched with unnatural, superfluous and artificial passions and
desires, which are all vicious and infinite, as men who for the most part are
plunged in them; but also in the natural, as eating and drinking, the
acquaintance betwixt the male and the female, they are far more moderate and
stayed. But that we may see which is the more virtuous or vicious a man or a
beast, and in good earnest to shame a man more than a beast, let us take the
virtue most proper and agreeable unto man, that is, as the word it self
imports, humanity: as the most strange and contrary vice is cruelty. Now
heerin beasts Humanity. Cruelty.
have advantage enough even to make men blush for shame. They never assail,
and seldom offend those of their kind, mayor serpentum ferarumque concordia
quam hominum: They never fight but for great and just causes, as the defense
and preservation of their lives, liberty, and their little ones: and that they
do with their natural and open arms, by their only force and valor, and
that one to one, as in single combats, and not in troops, nor by
designements. Their combats are short and soon ended, until one of them be
either wounded or yields, and the combat ended, the quarrel, hatred, and
choler is likewise at an end. But man has no quarrel but against man, for not
only light, vain and frivolous causes, but many times unjust, with artificial
and traitorous arms, by deceits and wicked means, in troop and assembly
gathered by assignement; and lastly his wars are long and never ended but with
death, and when he is able no longer to hurt, yet the hatred and choler
endures.

The conclusion of this comparison is, that untruly and 12 The conclusion of
this second consideration.
vainly does man glorify himself above beasts. For if man have in him
something more than they, as especially the viuacity of the spirit and
understanding, and those great faculties of the soul; so likewise in exchange
is he subject to a thousand evils from which the beasts are freed,
inconstancy, irresolution, superstition, a painful care of things to come,
ambition, avarice, envy, curiosity, detraction, lying, and a world of
disordered appetites, discontentments, emulations. This spirit wherewith man
makes himself so merry, brings him a thousand inconveniences, and then most,
when it is most stirred and enforced. For it does not only hurt the body,
trouble, break and weaken the bodily forces and functions, but also it hurts
and hinders it self. What casts man into folly and madness, but the
sharpness, agility, and proper force of the spirit? The most subtle follies
and excellent lunacies proceed from the rarest and quickest agitations of the
spirit, as from greatest amities spring greatest enmities, and from soundest
healths mortal maladies. Melancholy men, says Plato, as they are more
capeable of knowledge and wisdom, so likewise of folly. And he that well
marketh it, shall find, that in those eleuations and salies of a free soul,
there is some mixture of folly; for to say the truth, these things are near
neighbors.

Touching a simple life and such as is according to nature, beasts do far
exceed men; they live more freely, securely, 13 An exhortation.
moderately, contentedly. And that man is wise that considers hereof, and
benefiteth himself by making them an instruction unto himself, which doing,
he frames himself to innocence, simplicity, liberty, and that natural
sweetness which shines in beasts, and is wholly altered and corrupts in us
by our artificial inventions, and unbridled licentiousness, abusing that
wherein we say we excel them, which is the spirit and judgment. And therefore
God does many times send us to school, to birds, beasts themselves, to the
kite, the grasshopper, the swallow, the turtle, the ant, the ox, the ass, and
diverse others. Lastly, we must remember that there is a kind of commerce
betwixt beasts and us, a certain relation and mutual obligation, whereof there
is no other reason, but that they belong to one and the same master, and are of
the same family that we are. It is an unworthy thing to tyrannise over them, we
owe justice unto men, and pity and gentleness to such other creatures as are
capeable thereof.

The third Consideration of Man, which is by his life.
CHAP. XXXV. The estimation, brevity, description, of the life of man, and the
parts thereof.
IT is a great and principal point of wisdom, truly to know 1 Of the
estimation and worth of life.
how to esteem of life, to hold and preserve it, to lose or to take it away,
to keep and direct it, as much as after such a manner as is fit; there is not
perhaps any thing wherein a man fails more, or is more hindered. The vulgar
unlearned sot accounts it a sovereign good, and prefers it above all
things; yea he will not stick to redeem and prolong it by all the delays
that may be, upon what conditions soever, thinking it can never be bought too
dear: for it is all in all with him, his motte is Vita nihil carius. He
esteems and loves his life for the love of it self: he lives not but to
live. It is no marvel if he fail in all the rest, if he be wholly
compounded of errors, since from his very entrance, and in this fundamental
point he mistakes himself so grossly. It may be likewise with some less
esteemed, and more basely accounted of than it should, either by reason of some
insufficiency in judgment, or a proud misknowledge thereof: for falling into
the hands of those that are good and wise, it may be a profitable instrument
both to themselves and others. And I can not be of their opinion (as it is
simply taken) that say it is best of all, not to be at all; and that the best
is the shortest life: optimum non nasci aut quam citissime aboleri. And it is
neither well nor wisely said, What hurt or what matter had it been if I had
never been? A man may answer him with the like question: Where had that good
been which is come, and being not come, had it not been evil not to have
been? It is a kind of evil that wants good, whatsoever it be, yea though
not necessary. These extremities are too extreme and vicious, though not
equally: but that seems true that a wise man spoke, That life is such a good
as a man would not take, if he knew well what it were before he took it: Vitam
Seneca.
nemo acciperet, si daretur scientibus. It is well that men are within before
they see the entrance, and that they are carried hudwinckt into it. Now when
they are within, some do so cocker and flatter themselves therein, that upon
what condition soever they will not go forth again; others do nothing but
murmr and vex themselves: but the wiser sort seeing it to be a market that is
made without themselves (for a man neither lives nor dies when and how he will)
and that though the way be rough and hard, yet nevertheless it is not always
so, without winsing, or striving and troubling any thing, they accomodate
themselves unto it as they may, and so pass their life in quietness, making
of necessity a virtue; which is a token of wisdom and industry: and so
doing, they live as long as they should, and not like fools, as long as they
can. For there is a time to live, and a time to die: and a good death is far
better than an ill life. A wise man lives no longer, than See hereof lib. 2.
ca. 11.
that his life may be worth more than his death: for the longest life is not
always the better.

All men do much complain of the brevity of the life of 2 Of the length and
brevity of life.
man; not only the simple vulgar sort, who wish it would never have end, but
also (which is more strange) the greatest and wisest make it the principal
ground of their complaints. To say the truth, the greatest part thereof being
diuerted and otherwise employed, there remains little or nothing for it self:
for the time of our infancy, old age, sleep, maladies of mind and body,
and many other times, both unprofitable and unfit for any good, being taken
away, that which remains is little or nothing at all. Nevertheless, without
opposing the contrary opinion to them that hold a short life to be a great
good and gift of Nature, their complaint seems to have little equity and
reason, and rather to proceed from malice. For to what end serves a long life?
Simply to live, to breathe, to eat, to drink, to see this world: for all this
what needs so long time? We have seen, known, tasted all in a short space;
and knowing it, to desire so long a time to practice it, and still to reiterate
the same thing, to what end is it? Who will not be satisfied, nay wearied, to
do always one and the same thing? If it be not tedious and irksome, at the
least it is superfluous: it is a turning wheel where the same things come and
go: it is always to begin where we end, and to respinne the same web. But
perhaps they will say they desire a long life to learn and to profit the more,
and to proceed to a greater perfection of knowledge and virtue. Alas good
souls that we are, what should we know, or who should teach us? We employ
but badly that little which is given us, not only in vanities and those things
that yield us no profit, but in malice and sin; and then we cry out and
complain, that we have not enough given unto us. And to say the truth, to what
end serves so great store of knowledge and experience, since in the end we
must leave it and dislodge it; and having dislodged it altogether, forget and
lose it all, or know it better and otherwise? But you will say, that there are
beasts that do triple and quadruple the life of man. To omit those fables that
are told hereof; Be it so: but yet there are a number that live not a quarter
of that time that man does, and few neither, that live out their time. By what
right or reason, or privilege, can man challenge a longer life than other
creatures? Is it because he does better employ it in matters more high and more
worthy life? By this reason he should live less time than all other
creatures; for there is none comparable to man in the ill emploiment of his
life, in wickedness, ingratitude, intemperance, and all manner of disorder and
immodestie in manners, as has been showed before in the comparison of man with
beasts: so that as I asked even now, to what end a long life served; now I
ask, what evils there would be in the world, if the life of man were long?
What would he not enterprise, since the shortness of life, which cuts off his
way, and (as they say) interrupts his cast, and the uncertainty thereof, which
takes away all heart and courage, can not stay him, living as if he should live
ever? On the one side he fears perceiving himself to be mortal, but
notwithstanding that, he can not bridle himself from not coveting, hoping,
enterprising, as if he were immortal. Tanquam semper victuri viuitis, nunquam
vobis fragilitas vestra Seneca.
succurrit: omnia tanquam mortales timetis, tanquam immortales concupiscitis.
And to say the truth, what need has Nature of all these great and godly
enterprises and imploiments, whereby man challenges a longer life than other
creatures? Man therefore has no subject whereof to complain, but to be angry
with himself. We have life enough, but we are not good husbands, we manage it
not well; life is not short, but we make it so; we are not in want, but
prodigal; non inopes vitae, sed prodigi: we lose it, we dissipate it, we
vilify it, as if it were naught worth, as if we had more than enough: we all
fall into one of these three faults, either we employ it ill, or about nothing,
or in vain. Magna vitae pars elabitur male Seneca. Look lib. 3. cap. 6.
agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus. One man studieth not
to live, but rather busieth himself in any other thing; he shall never know
how to do a thing well by acquitting himself of labor, but by care and
attention. Others reserve their lives until they can live no longer, then take
comfort in life when there is nothing left but the lees and dregs thereof. Oh
what folly, what misery is this! Yea there are some that have sooner ended
than begun to live, and life is past before they thought of it. Quidam viuere
incipiunt, cum desinendum; quidam ante desierunt, quam inciperent. Inter
caetera mala, hoc quoque habet stultitia, semper incipit viuere.

Our present life is but the entrance and end of a Tragedy, 3 A description of
the life of man.
a perpetual issue of errors, a web of unhappy adventures, a pursuit of
diverse miseries inchained together on all sides; there is nothing but evil
that it distilleth, that it prepares; one evil drives forward another evil,
as one wave another; torment is ever present, and the shadow of what is good
deceives us; blindness and want of sense possesses the beginning of our
life, the middle is ever in pain and travel, the end in sorrow; and
beginning, middle, and end in error.

The life of man has many discommodities and miseries common, ordinary and
perpetual; it has likewise some

The greatest part of the world speak more honorably and 5 A comparison
betwixt youth and old age.
favorably of old age, as the more wise, ripe, moderat, accusing and shaming
youth as vicious, foolish, licentious, but very unjustly: for in truth the
infirmities and vices of old age are more in number, more great and troublesome
than those of youth, it filles the mind more with wrinckles, then the visage;
and there is not a soul growing old, grows not sower and rotten. With the
body the spirit is used, and the worse for the use; and at the last returns to
infancy again: bis pueri senes. Old age is a necessary and puissant malady,
which loadeth us insensibly with many imperfections. It were absurd to term
wisdom a difficulty of humors, an anxietie and distaste of things present,
an impotencie to do as in former times: wisdom is too noble to be served with
such officers. To wax old is not to wax wise, nor to take away vices; but to
change them into worse. Old age condemns pleasure, but it is because it can
not taste or relish it aright, like Esops dog, it says it will none of it,
but it is because it can not joy in it: for old age leaves not pleasure
properly, but pleasure disdaines old age; for it is always wanton and
sporting: and it is no reason that impotencie should corrupt judgment, which
should in youth know vice in pleasure, and in old age pleasure in vice. The
vices of youth are temeritie, indiscreet forwardness, and unbridled liberty
and ouergreedie desire of pleasure; which are natural things proceeding from
the heat of the blood and natural vigor, and therefore the more excusable;
but the vices of old age are far otherwise. The lighter are a vain and
frail proteruitie, an enurous prattling, insociable humors, superstition, care
to get riches, even then when the use of them is lost, a sottish avarice, and
fear of death, which proceeds properly, not from the want of spirit and
courage, as they say, but because old men are long acquainted and as it were
cockered in this world, whereby their affections are knit unto it; which is not
in young men: but besides these they are envious, froward, unjust: but that
which is most sottish and ridiculous in them, is that they would not only be
reverenced but feared, and therefore they put upon them an austere look and
disdainful, thinking thereby to extort fear and obedience: but they are
therein much deceived, for this stately and furious gesture is received of
youth with mockery and laughter, being practiced only to blind their eyes,
and of purpose to hide and disguise the truth of things. There are in old age
so many faults on the one side, and so many impotencies on the other, and
therefore so fit for contempt, that the best way to compass their desires is
love and affection: for command and fear are no longer fit arms for them. It
ill befits them to make themselves to be feared: and though they could do it,
yet love and honor is a fairer purchase.

The fourth Consideration of Man, moral by his manners, humors, conditions,
very lively and notable. THE PREFACE.
ALl the descriptions the wise, and such as have taken Vanity, Weakness,
Inconstancy, Misery; calling him the spoil of times, the play-game of
Fortune, the image of inconstancy, the example and spectacle of infirmity,
the balance of envy and misery, a dream, a fantasy, ashes, a vapor, a
morning deaw, a flower that presently fades and withers, a wind, grass, a
bladder or bubble, a shadow, leaves of trees carried with the wind, unclean
seed in his beginning, a sponge of ordures, a sack of miseries in his middle
age, a stench and meat for worms in his end; and to conclude, the most
miserable and wretched thing in the world. Job, one of the most sufficient in
this matter, as well in the practice as contemplation thereof, has well and at
large described him, and after him, Solomon, in their Books. To be short,
Pliny seems very properly to have desciphered him, in calling him the most
miserable, and yet the most arrogant creature of the world, Solum vt certum sit
nihil esse certi, nec miserius quicquam homine aut superbius. By the first word
(miserable) he comprehends all those former descriptions, and as much as all
the rest have said; but by the other (the most proud) he touches another
chief point very important: and he seems in these two words to have uttered
whatsoever can be said. These are those two things that seem to hurt and
hinder one the other, Misery and Pride, Vanity and Presumption. See then how
strange and monstrous a patch-coat man is.

Forasmuch as man is composed of two diverse parts, the Democritus calls it a
world of hidden miseries, and Plutarch proves it in a book written of that
subject. Now let us consider man more according to the life, than heretofore
we have done, and pinch him where it itcheth not, referring all to these five
points, vanity, weakness, inconstancy, misery, and presumption, which are his
more natural and universal qualities, but the two latter touch him more
nearly. Again there are some things common to many of these five, which a man
knows not to which to attribute it, and especially, imbecility and misery.

CHAP. XXXVI. 1. Vanity.
VAnity is the most essential and proper quality of humane nature. There is
nothing so much in man, be it Democritus met better with it, with a kind of
disdain of humane condition, mocking and laughing at it, than Heraclitus that
wept and tormented himself, whereby he gave some testimony, that he made some
account thereof; and Diogenes who scorned it, than Timon that hater and flier
of the company of men. Pindarus has expressed it more to the life than any
other, by the two vainest things in the world, calling it the dream of
ashadow, (...).

This is that, that has wrought in the wisest so great a contempt of man, that
hearing of some great designment and honorable enterprise, and judging it
such, were wont nevertheless to say that the world was not worthy a man's
labor and pains, (so answered Statilius to Brutus, talking with him about the
conspiracy against Caesar) and that a wise man should do nothing but for
himself, for it is not reason that wise men, and wisdom should put
themselves in danger for fools.

This vanity is showed and expressed many ways, and after 2 Thoughts.
a diverse manner, first in our thoughts and private imaginations, which are many
times more than vain, frivolous, and ridiculous, wherein nevertheless we
spend much time, and yet perceive it not. We enter into them, we dwell in
them, and we come forth again insensibly, which is a double vanity, and a
great forgetfulness of our selves. One walking in a hall considers how he
may frame his paces after a certain fashion upon the boords of the flower:
another discourses in his mind, with much time, and great attention, how he
should carry himself if he were a king, a Pope, or some other thing that he is
assured can never come to pass; and so he feeds himself with wind, yea
less than wind, that, that neither is, nor ever shall be. Another dreameth
how he shall compose his body, his countenances, his gestures, his speech after
an affected fashion, and pleases himself therein, as with a thing that
wonderfully becomes him, and that every man should take delight in. But what a
vanity and sottish weakness in our desires is this, that brings forth
beliefs and hopes far more vain? And all this falls out not only when we
have nothing to do, when we are swallowed up with idleness, but many times in
the midst of our most necessary affairs: so natural and powerful is
vanity, that it robs and plucketh out of our hands, the truth, soliditie,
and substance of things, and fills us with wind, yea with nothing.

Another more sottish vanity is a troublesome care of what shall here fall
out when we are dead. We extend our desires 3 Care for times to come.
and affections beyond our selves, and our being; we would provide that some
thing should be done unto us, when we know not what is done unto us; owe
desire to be praised after our death, what greater vanity? It is not ambition,
as it seems and a man may think it, for that is the desire of a sensible and
perceptible honor: if this praise of our selves when we are gone, might any way
profit either our children, our parents, or our friends that survive us, it
were well, there were some benefit, though not to our selves; but to desire
that as a good, which shall no way touch us, nor benefit others, is a mere
vanity, like that of those who fear their wives will marry after their
departure: and therefore they desire them with great passion to continue
unmarried, and bind them by their wills so to do, leaving unto them a great
part of their goods upon that condition. This is vanity and many times
injustice. It was contrariwise a commendable thing in those great men in times
past, which dying exhorted their wives to marry speedily for the better
increase of the Commonwealth. Others ordeine, that for the love of them and for
their sakes a friend keep such and such a thing, or that he do this or that
unto their dead bodies; which rather shows their vanity, than does any good
to soul or body.

See here another vanity, we live not but by relation unto another; we take
not so much care what we are in our selves

Our vanity is not only in our simple thoughts, desires, and discourses, but it
likewise troubles, shakes and tormenteth 5 Agitations of the spirit.
both soul and body. Many times men trouble and torment themselves more for
light occasions and matters of no moment, than for the greatest and most
important affairs that are. Our soul is many times troubled with small
fantasies, dreams, shadows, fooleries, without body, without subject; it is
entangled and molested with choler, hatred, sorrow, joy, building castles in
Spain. The remembrance of a farewell of some particular grace or action
afflicts us more than a whole discourse of a matter of greater importance.
The sound of names and certain words pronounced with a pitiful voice, yea
with sighs and exclamations pierces even to the quick, as Orators and
Players, and other that sell wind and smoke do well know and practice. And
this wind catches and carries away many times men that are most constant and
settled, if they stand not upon their guard: so puissant is vanity over men. And
not only light and little things do shake and trouble us, but also lies and
impostures, even those we know to be such (a strange thing) in such sort, that
we take pleasure to deceive our selves in good earnest, to feed our fantasies
with tales, with nothing (ad fallendum nosmetipsos ingeniosissimi sumus):
witness they that weep and afflict themselves hearing a relation, or seeing a
Tragedy, which they know to be an invention made for delight, even of those
things that never were. I could tell you of one that was so besotted, that he
died for one whom he knew to be foul, old, deformed, not because he loved
her, but because she was well painted, and plastered or colored with other
impostures, though he always knew them to be such.

Let us come from the particular vanity of every particular 6 Visitations and
offices of courtesy.
man in his common life, to see how much this vanity is tied to the nature of
man, not only as a private and personal vice. What vanity and loss of time
is there in those visitations, salutations, congies and mutual enterteinments,
those offices of courtesy, orations, ceremonies, offers, praises, promises!
How many hyperbolicall speeches, hypocrisies and impostures are there in the
sight and knowledge of all, both of those that give them, that receive them,
that hear of them! insomuch that it seems to be a match and market made
together, to mock, lie, and deceive one another. And that which is worth all
the rest, he that knows that a man does impudently lie unto him, must yet give
him thanks; and he that knows that when he lies he is not believed, sets a
bold face upon the matter, attending and observing one the other, who shall
first begin or end; when they could both be content they were both asunder.
What inconveniences does man endure? He faineth, counterfeiteth, disguiseth
himself; he endures heat, cold, troubles his rest, afflicts his life for
those courtly vanities, and leaves his weighty affairs for the wind. We are
vain at the charge of our own ease, yea of our health and of our life. The
accidents and the lighter things trample under foot the substance, and the
wind carries the body, so much is man a slave to vanity: and he that will
do otherwise shall be held for a fool and a man that understands not the
world. It is dexterity well to play this Comedy, and folly not to be vain.
Being entered into speech and familiar discourse, how many vain and
unprofitable, false, fabulous tales are there (not to say wicked and
pernicious, which are not of this count) how many vaunts and vain boastings!
Man desires and delights to speak of himself and that which is his, and if
he think he have either done or said, or possess any thing that is worthy
estimation, he is not at ease until he has uttered it, and made it known to
others: when a commodity first comes he enters into an account thereof, he
valueth it, he raises the price, nay he will not seem to attend his
commodity, though he seek it with industry; and then to hear what the
speech of the people is abroad, he thrusts himself into company, and it
tickleth him at the heart to hear his happy success spoken of, and that men
esteem of him the more, and of what he esteems.

But better to make known what credit and command this vanity has over the
nature of man, let us call to mind that 7 Public and universal agitations.
the greatest alterations of the world, the most general and fearful
agitations of States and Empires, armies, battles, murders, have risen from
light, ridiculous and vain causes: witness the wars of Troy and Greece, of
Sylla and Marius, Caesar and Pompey, Augustus and Antonie. The Poets signify
as much, when they set all Greece and Asia on fire for an apple. The first
occasions and motives arise of nothing, afterward they grow and increase: a
testimony of the vanity and folly of man. Many times the accident does more
than the principal, the lesser circumstances touch more to the quick than the
greatest, nay the causes and subjects themselves. The robe of Caesar troubled
Rome more than his death did, or those 22 stabs with a poignard that were given
him.

Lastly, the crown and perfection of the vanity of man is 8 Felicity and
contentment.
showed in that which he most affects and seeks after; he pleases himself
and places his whole felicity in those vain and frivolous goods, without
which he may well and commodiously live, and takes not that care that he
should for the true and essential: his chance is wind, his whole good nothing
but opinion and dreams, wherein he is matchless. God has all good things in
essence, all evil in understanding; man quite contrary possesses his good
things by fantasy, his evil in essence. Beasts content not, nor feed
themselves with opinions and fantasies, but with that which is present,
palpable and in verity. Vanity has been given unto man as his proper part
or condition; he runs, he stirs, he hunts up and down, he catches a
shadow, he adoreth the wind, he flies, he dies, and a mote at the last is the
heir of his days work. Vanitati creatura subiecta est etiam nolens, vniuersa
vanitas omnis homo viuens.

CHAP. XXXVII. Debillitie or Infirmity.
Behold here the second head of this Consideration and humane knowledge: for
how should vanity be other

First, touching desire, a man can not settle his contentment in any thing, no
not his own desire and imagination. It is 2 In desiring and choosing.
not in our power to choose that we should: and whatsoever we have desired or
obtained, it satisfies us not: but we go bleating after things unknown and to
come, because things present content us not, and we more esteem of things
absent. If one should put a man to his own choice, make him his own caruer,
it is not in his power so to choose, as that he repent not his choice, or which
he will not add unto, or take from, or alter some way or other; for he desires
that which he knows not how to express: and at the last nothing can content
him, but he is angry and falls out with himself.

The weakness of man does more appear, and is greater 3 In possessing and
using.
in the possession and use of things, and that diverse ways: first, in that he
can not make use of any thing in it own purity and simple nature; but he must
disguise, alter and corrupt them before he can accommodate them to his use: the
elements, metals, and all things else in their own nature are not fit for use.
Good things, delights and pleasures can not be enjoyed without some mixture of
evil and discommoditie: Medio de font leporum surgit amari aliquid, quod in
ipsis floribus angat. The highest pleasure that is has a sigh and a complaint
to accompany it; and being come to perfection is but debilitie, a deiection of
the mind, languishment. An extreme and full contentment has more moderate
severity than wanton delight: Ipsa foelicitas, se nisi temperat, premit: and
therefore it was well said of him, That God selles unto us whatsoever good
thing he sends us: that is to say, That he gives nothing unto us purely good,
but that we buy it at the scales with an addition of some evil to make up
weight. So likewise, sorrow is never pure without the alliance of some
pleasure: Labor voluptasque dissimillima natura, societate quadam naturali
inter se sunt iuncta; est quaedam flere voluptas. So all things in this world
are mingled and compounded with their contraries: those motions and wrinckles
in the visage that serve to laugh, serve to weep, as Painters teach us: and we
see that the extreamitie of laughter is mingled with tears. There is no good
thing in us that has not some vicious tincture with it, omnes iustitiae
nostrae sunt tanquam pannus menstruatae, as anon shall be showed in his due
place; nor no evil without some good: nullum sine authoramento malum est.
Misery it self always serves to some end: for there is no evil without
good, no good in man without evil: all is mingled, and there is nothing pure
in our hands. Secondly, whatsoever happens unto us, we take and enjoy with an
ill hand; our taste is unresolved and uncertain, it knows not how to hold and
possess any thing after a good manner: and from thence sprang that undetermined
question of the sovereign good. The better things many times in our hands, by
our infirmities, vice, insufficiency, are made worse, are corrupted, become
nothing, are unprofitable unto us, yea sometimes hurtful and contrary.

But humane imbecillitie is more richly displaied in good and evil, in virtue
and vice: hence it is, that man can not be, 4 In good and evil.
when it seems good unto himself, either wholly good or wholly wicked, but he
has his weakness, his impotencies in them both. Touching virtue, three
points are to be considered: the first is, That it is not in the power of man
to do all good, to put in practice all virtues; insomuch that many virtues are
incompatible, and can not be together, at least in one and the same subject, as
filial or maidenly continency and viduall, which are wholly different; the
married and unmarried state; the two second of widowhood and marriage, being
more painful and busy, and having more difficulty and virtue than the two
first of virginity and the unmarried estate, which have more purity, grace
and ease: Virgo felicior, vidua laboriosior, in illa gratia, in ista virtus
coronatur: that Tertull.
constancy which is in poverty, want, adversity, and that which is in
abundance and prosperity: patience in beggerie and liberality. And this is
more true in vices, which are opposite one against the other.

The second point is, That many times a man can not perform that which belongs
to one virtue, without the scandal friend in the wars, on the enemies part,
in justice I ought to kill him, but in charity I should spare and save him. If
a man be wounded to the death and past all remedy, and that there remains
nothing but a grievous languishment, it were a deed of charity to make an end
of him, as he did that killed Saul at his earnest entreaty; but this charity
is punished by justice, as he was by David, and that justly, David being the
minister of public justice, not private charity: yea, to be found near unto
a man in such a case, in a suspicious place, and where there is doubt of the
murderer, although he be there to perform some office of humanity, is very
dangerous; and the best thing that can happen unto him, is to be called into
question, and put to answer to that accident whereof he is innocent. So that we
see that justice does not only offend charity, but it hampereth and hinders
it self: and therefore it was very well said and truly, Summum ius, summa
iniuria.

The third point and the most notable is, that a man is constrained Policy,
Justice, Verity, Religion.

In Policy, how many evils are there permitted and publikly acted, not only by
conniuence or permission, but also by 7 Policy.
the approbation of the laws themselves? as shall hereafter be said in his
due place; ex senatusconsultis and plebescitis scelera exercentur. To
disburthen a State or Commonweal either of too great a number of people, or
of such as are inflamed with a desire of wars, which the state, like a body
repleat with bad or abundant humors, cannot bear, it is the manner to send
them elsewhere, and to ease themselves at the charge or disease of another. As
the French, Lombards, Goths, Vandales, Tartarians, Turks have been accustomed
to do. To avoid a civil war, it is the manner to entertain a strange war. To
instruct others in the virtue of Temperance, Lycurgus caused the Ilotes their
servants to be made drunk, that by the ugly deformity of their superfluous
inundation, others might grow into a horror and detestation of that sin. The
Romans to prepare their people to valor, and a contempt of the dangers of
death, ordained of purpose those furious spectacles of the fencers, which at
the first they ordained for offenders, afterward for slaves or servants, but
innocents, and lastly for freemen that gave themselves thereunto. Brothell
houses in great Cities, vsuries, divorces, under the law of Moses, and in
diverse other nations, and religions, have been permitted for the better
avoiding of greater mischiefs, ad duritiem cordis eorum.

In Justice, which cannot subsist, cannot be executed, without 8 Justice.
the mixture of some wrong, not only Justice commutatiue, for that is not
strange: it is after a sort necessary, and men could not live and traffic
together, without mutual damage, without offense, and the laws allow of the
loss which is under the moiety of the just price. But also Justice
distributive, as it self confesses: Summum ius, summa iniuria: and omne
magnum exemplum habet aliquid ex iniquo, quod contra singulos, vtilitate
publica rependitur. Plato allows, and it is not against the law, by deceits
and false hopes of favor and pardon, to draw the offender to confess his
fault. This is by injustice, deceit and impudency to do justice. And what
should we say of the invention of tortures, which is rather Of tortures.
a proof of patience, than verity? For both he that can suffer them, and
cannot, will conceal the truth. For why should grief cause a man rather to
speak that which is, than that which is not? If a man think that an innocent
is patient enough to endure torments, why should not he that is guilty, being a
means to save his life? Illa tormenta gubernat dolor, moderatur natura,
cuiusque tum animi, tum corporis regit quaesitor, flectit libido, corrumpit
spes, infirmat metus, vt in tot rerum angustijs nil veritati loci relinquatur.
In defense hereof it is said, that tortures do astonish and quell the
guilty, and extort from him a truth; and contrariwise strengthen the innocent:
but we do so often see the contrary, that this may be doubted; and to say the
truth, it is a poor means full of uncertainty, full of doubt. What will not
a man say, what will he not do, to avoid such torment? etenim innocents
mentiri cogit dolor, in such sort that it falls out that the judge which
gives the torture, to the end an innocent should not die, causes him to die
an innocent and tortured too. A thousand and a thousand have falsely accused
their own heads, either to shorten their torments or their lives. But in the
foot of this account is it not a great injustice and cruelty to torment and to
rack a man in pieces for that offense which is yet doubted of? To the end they
may not kill a man without just cause, they do worse than kill him: if he be
innocent and bear the punishment, what amends is made him for his unjust
torture? He shall be quit, a goodly recompense, and much reason he has to
thank you. But it is the lesser evil that the weakness of man could invent.

If man be weak in virtue, much more is he in verity, whether it be
eternal and divine, or temporal and humane. 9 Verity.
That astonisheth him with the lightning, and beats him down with the thunder
thereof, as the bright beams of the sun, the weak eye of the owl: if he
presume to behold it, being oppressed, he presently faints, qui scrutator est
maiestatis, opprimetur a gloria: in such sort that to give himself some
breath, some taste, he must disguise, temper, and cover it with some shadow or
other. This, that is, humane verity, offends and wounds him, and he that
speaks it, is many times holden for an enemy, Veritas odium parit. It is a
strange thing, man desires naturally to know the truth, and to attain
thereunto he remooueth all lets whatsoever, and yet he can not attain it: if
it be present, he can not apprehend it; if he apprehend it, he is offended with
it. The fault is not in the truth, for that is always amiable, beautiful,
worthy the knowledge; but it is humane imbecillitie that can not endure the
splendor thereof. Man is strong enough to desire, but too weak to receive and
hold what he desires. The two principal means which he uses to attain to
the knowledge of truth, are Reason and Experience. Now both of them are so
feeble and uncertain (though Experience the more weak) that nothing certain
can be drawn from them. Reason has so many forms, is so pliable, so
wavering, as has been said, Cap. 14.
and Experience much more, the occurrents are always unlike; there is nothing
so universal in Nature as diversity, nothing so rare and difficult, and
almost impossible, as the likenesle and similitude of things: and if a man can
not note this dissimilitude, it is ignorance and weakness; I mean this
perfect, pure, and entire similitude and dissimilitude: for to say the truth,
they are both whole and entire, there is no one thing that is wholly like or
dislike to another. This is an ingenious and marvelous mixture of Nature.

But after all this, what does better discover this humane imbecillitie than
Religion? yea the very intention thereof is 10 Religion.
to make man feel his own evil, his infirmity, his nothing, and to make him
to receive from God his good, his strength, his all things. First it preaches
it unto him, it beats it into our memory, it reprocheth man, calling him dust,
ashes, earth, flesh, blood, grass. Afterward it infinuateth it into him, and
makes him feel it after an excellent and goodly fashion; bringing in God
himself, humbled, weakened, debased for the love of him, speaking, promising,
swearing, chiding, threatening; and to be brief, conuersing and working with
man after a base, feeble humane manner, like a father that counterfeits his
speech, and plays the child with his children. The weakness of man being
such, so great, so invincible, that to give it some access and commerce with
the Divinity, and to unite it unto God, it was necessary that God should
debase himself to the bafest: Deus quia in altitudine sua a nobis paruulis
apprehendi non poterat, ideo se strauit hominibus. Again, it makes him see his
own weakness by ordinary effects; for all the principal and holiest
exercises, the most solemn actions of religion, are they not the true
symptoms and arguments of humane imbecillitie and sickness? Those sacrifices
that in former times have been used thorowout Sacrifices.
the world, and yet in some countries continue, not only of beasts, but also of
living men, yea of innocents, were they not shameful marks of humane
infirmity and misery? First, because they were signs and symboles of his
condemnation and malediction (for they were as public protestations, that he
had deserved death, and to be sacrificed as those beasts were) without which
there had never been any bloody offerings or propitiatory and expiatorie
sacrifices. Secondly, because of the baseness of the purpose and intent, which
was to think to appease, flatter and gratify God by the massacre and blood of
beasts and of men: Sanguine non colendus Deus, quae enim ex trucidatione
immerentium voluptas est? It is true, that God in those first ages, yet the
feeble infancy of the world and nature remaining simple, did well accept of
them at the hands of religious men, even for their devotion, or rather Christ
his sake: Respexit Dominus ad Abel, and ad munera eius, taking in good part
that which was done with an intent to honor and serve him: and also
afterward, the world being as yet in it apprentiship, sub paedagogo, was
wholly seasoned in this opinion so universal, that it was almost thought
natural. I touch not here that particular mystery of the religion of the
Jews, who used them for figures (that is a point that belongs to religion) and
with whom it was common to convert that which was humane or natural and
corporal to a holy and sacred use, and to gather from thence a spiritual
fruit. But this was not because God took pleasure in them, nor because it was
by any reason in it self good: witness the Prophets, and the cleerest sighted
amongst them, who have always freely said, Sivoluisses sacrificium dedissem,
vtique holocaustis non delectaberis, sacrificium and oblationem noluisti,
holocaustum pro peccato non postulasti, non accipiam de domo tua vitulos etc.
and have called back and invited the world to another sacrifice more high,
spiritual and worthy the Divinity, Sacrificium Deo spiritus: aures autem
perforasti mihi vt facerem voluntatem tuam, and legem tuam in medio cordis mei:
Immola Deo sacrificium laudis: misericordiam volo non sacrificium. At the last,
the son of God, the Doctor of Truth, being come to secure and free-denize the
world, did abolish them wholly: which he had not done, if it had been a thing
in it self and essentially good, and that it had pleased his father: for
contrarily, Pater non tales quaerit, sed tales qui adorent in spiritu and
veritate. And to say the truth, it is one of the goodliest effects and fruits
of Christianity after the abolition of Idols. And therefore Julian the
Emperor, his capital enemy, as in despite of him, offered more sacrifices
than ever any other did in the world, attempting to set them up again with
idolatry. Wherefore let us here leave them, and let us see those other
principal parts of religion.

The Sacraments in a matter base and common, bread and Sacraments.
wine, and an outward action as base, are they not testimonies of our poverty
and baseness? Repentance, the universal remendie Repentance
of our maladies, is a thing in it self shameful, feeble, yea evil: for to
repent, to be sorry, to afflict the spirit, is evil, though by consequent it be
good. An oath, what is it, but a An oath.
symptom and shameful mark of distrust, infidelity, ignorance, humane
infirmity, both in him that requires it, that gives it, that ordaines it? Quod
amplius est a malo est. See then how religion heals our evils by means not
only small and feeble, our weakness so requiring, stulta and infirma mundi
eligit Deus; but such as by no means are of any value, nor are good in
themselves, but good in that they serve and are employed against evil, as
medicines are: they sprang from an ill cause, yet they drive away ill: they are
good, as gibbets and wheels are in a Commonwealth, as vomits and other
discharges proceeding from ill causes are to the body: to be brief, they are
such good things, as that it had been far better we had never had them; and
never had we had them, if man had been wise, and preserved himself in that
estate wherein God had placed him; neither shall he have them any more, so
soon as he is delivered from this captivity, and arrived to his perfection.

All this shows how great this humane weakness is to any 11 In evil.
thing that is good, in Policy, Justice, Verity, Religion toward God, but
that which is more strange is, that this weakness is as great in what is
evil: for man though he be willing to be wicked, yet he can not be wholly
such, but when he has done his woorst there will be more to do. There is
always some remorse and fearful consideration, that mollifieth the will and
makes it relent, and still reserueth something to be done; which has been
the cause of the ruin of many, although perhaps they made it a project for
their safety. This is imbecillitie and sottishness, and from hence did arise
that Proverb at their cost, That a man must not play the fool by halfes. A
speech uttered with judgment, but that may have both a good and an ill sense.
To say that a man, when he is once in, must still proceed to worse and
worse, without any reservation or respect, it is a very pernicious doctrine:
and the Proverb says well against it: The shorter follies are the better. But
yet in some certain cases the middle way is very dangerous, as when a man
has a strong enemy by the throat, like one that holds a woolfe by the
ears, he must either win him altogether by courtesy or utterly undo him and
extinguish him; which was always the practice of the Romans, and that very
wisely: among others, concerning the Latins or Italians, at the exhortation of
Camillus, Pacem in perpetuum parere vel seruiendo vel ignoscendo: for in such a
case to do things by halfes, is to lose all, as the Samnites did, who for want
of putting in practice that counsel given them by an old weather-beaten
soldier, concerning the Romans, whom they had then enclosed and shut up, paid
dearly for it; aut conciltandus aut tollendus hostis. The former course of
courtesy is the more noble, honorable, and rather to be chosen; and we ought
not come to the second but in extremities, and then when the enemy is not
capable of the first. By this that has been said, is showed the extreme
imbecillitie of man in good and evil, and that good or evil which he either
does or flies, is not purely and entirely good or evil: so that it is not in
his power to be wholly deprived of all good, nor altogether wicked.

Let us likewise note many other effects and testimonies of 12 Reprehensions
and repulses.
humane weakness. It is imbecillitie and pusillanimitie not to dare or not to
be able to reprehend another, or to be reprehended: he that is feeble or
courageous in the one, is so in the other. Now it is a strange kind of
delicateness, to deprive either himself or another of so great a fruit, for
so light and verbal a wound, that does only touch and pierce the ear. Near
neighbor unto this it is, not to be able to give a denial with reason, nor to
receive and suffer a repulse with patience.

In false accusations and wicked suspicions, which are done 13 False suspicions
and accusations.
in place of justice and judgment, there is double imbecillitie; the one in
those that are accused and suspected, and that is in justifying and excusing
themselves too carefully, and as it were ambitiously. Mendax infamia terret
quem nisi mendacem? This is to betray their own innocence, to put their
conscience and their right to comprimise and arbitrament; for by such plea
perspicuitas argumentatione eleuatur. Socrates in judgment it self would not
do it, neither by himself nor by another, refusing to use the learned plea of
great Lysias, and chose rather to die. The other is in a contrary case, that
is, when the accused is so courageous that he takes no care to excuse or
justify himself, because he scorneth the accusation and accuser, as unworthy
his answer and justification; and he will not do himself that wrong to enter
the lists. This course has been practiced by generous men, by Scipio above all
others, many times out of the marvelous constancy of his mind. Now others
are offended heerewith, thinking it too great a confidence and pride, and it
stingeth them, that he has too sensible a feeling of his innocence, and will
not yield himself; or imputing this silence and contempt to the want of heart,
distrust of the law, and inabilitie to justify himself. O feeble humanity!
the accused or suspected, whether he defend or defend not himself, it is
imbecillitie and cowardnesse. We wish a man courage to defend himself, and
when he has done it, we show our own weakness by being offended with it.

Another argument of imbecillitie is, when a man shall subject and addict
himself to a certain particular form of life; 14 Tenderness and delicacie.
this is a base kind of tenderness, and effeminate delicacie, unworthy an
honest man, and makes us unprofitable, different in conversation, and may be
hurtful too in a case where change of manners and carriage is necessary. It is
likewise a shame, either not to dare or not to be able to do that which he
sees every man to do besides himself. It were fittest that such people
should live and hide themselves in the chimney corner in their private houses.
The fairest form of living is to be pliable to all, even to excess it self,
if need be; to be able, to dare, to know how to do all things, and yet to do
nothing but what is good. It is good to know all, not to use all.

It is likewise imbecility, and a great and vulgar sottishnes, to run after
strange and scholasticall examples, after allegations, 15 Search of books.
never to settle an opinion without testimonies in print, nor to believe men
but such as are in books, nor truth it self but such as is ancient. By this
reason fooleries and toys if they once pass the press, they have credit and
dignity enough. Now there are every day many things done before our eyes, which
if we had but the spirit and sufficiency well to collect, to search with
dexterity to judge of, and to apply to their times, we should frame and find
miracles and marvelous examples, which yield not in any thing to those of
times past, which we so much admire, and therefore we admire because they are
ancient and in print.

Again another testimony of weakness is, that man is not 16 Extremities.
capable but of indifferent things, and cannot endure extremities; for if they
be small and in outward show base, he contemns and disdaineth them as
unworthy, and it is offensive unto him to consider of them: if they be very
great and ouersplendent, he fears them, he admires them, and is offended with
them. The first does principally concern great and high minds: the second as
common with those that are weak.

This weakness does likewise appear in our hearing, 17 Sudden occurrents.
sight, and in the sudden stroke of a new unexpected occurrent, which
surpriseth and seaseth upon us unawares. For they do in such sort astonish us,
that they take from us both our sense and speech, Diriguit visu in medio, calor
ossa reliquit,
Labitur and longo vix tandem tempore fatur,
yea, sometimes life it self: whether they be good, witness that Roman dame,
who died for joy seeing her son return safe from the wars; Sophocles and
Dionysius the tyrant: or whether they be evil, witness Diodorus, who died in
the field for shame, because he was not able to resolve a doubt, nor answer an
argument.

Yet there is another imbecility, and it is twofold, and after 18 Braueries
and submissions.
two contrary manners. Some yield and are overcome by the tears and humble
supplcations of another, and their courage and gallantry is wounded with their
words: others quite contrary are not moved by all the submissions and
complaints that may be, but are rather more obdurate and confirmed in their
constancy and resolution. There is no doubt but the former proceeds of
weakness, and it is commonly found in effeminate and vulgar minds; but the
second is not without difficulty, and is found in all sorts of people. It
should seem that to yield unto virtue, and to manly and generous strength and
vigor, is the part of a valorous and generous mind. It is true if it be done
in a reverent esteem of virtue, as Scanderbeg did receiving into grace a
soldier whom he had seen to carry himself valorously in fight even
against himself; or as Pompey did, pardoning the city of the Mammertines, for
the virtue of Zenon a citizen thereof; or as the Emperor Conradus did,
forgiving the Duke of Bauiers, and others besieged with him, for the
magnanimity of their women, who privily conuaied them away, and took the
danger upon their own heads. But if it be done with a kind of astonishment
and affright of the power of virtue, as the people of Thebes, who lost their
hearts hearing Epaminondas then accused, recount unto them his honorable acts,
and severely reproaching them with their ingratitude, it is debility and
cowardice. The fact of Alexander containing the brave resolution of Betis taken
with the city of Gaza where he commanded, was neither weakness nor courage, but
choler, which in him had neither bridle, nor moderation.

CHAP. XXXVIII. 3. Inconstancy.
MAn is a subject wonderfully diverse, and wavering, upon ipsi nobis furto
subducimur. We go after the inclinations of our appetite, and as the wind of
occasions carries us, not according to reason; at nil potest esse aequabile,
quod non a certa ratione proficiscatur. Our spirits also and our humors are
changed with the change of time. Life is an unequal motion, irregular, of many
fashions. In the end we stir and trouble our selves by the instabilitie of
our behavior. Nemo non quotidie consilium mutat and votum: modo vxorem vult,
modo amicam; modo regnare vult, modo non est eo officiosior seruus; nunc
pecuniam spargit, nunc rapit; modo frugi videtur and grauis, modo prodigus and
vanus; mutamus subinde personam.

Quod petijt, spernit, repetit quod nuper omisit,
Aestuat, and vitae disconuenit ordine toto.
Man is a creature of all others the most hard to be sounded and known, for he
is the most double and artificial covert and counterfeit, and there are in him
so many cabinets and blind corners, from whence he comes forth sometimes a man,
sometimes a satyr; so many breathing holes, from whence he breathes sometimes
heat, sometimes cold, and from whence comes forth so much smoke: all his
carriage and motion is a perpetual race of errors; in the morning to be
borne, in the evening to die; sometimes in the rack, sometimes at liberty;
sometimes a god, sometimes a fly; he laughs and weeps for one and the same
thing; he is content and discontent; he will, and he will not; and in the end
he knows not what he will: now he is filled with joy and gladness, that he
can not stay within his own skin, and presently he falls out with
himself, nay dares not trust himself, modo amore nostri, modo taedio
laboramus.

CHAP. XXXIX. 4. Misery.
BEhold here the maine and principal line and liniament of the picture of
man, he is (as has been said) vain, 1 Misery proper unto man.
feeble, frail, inconstant in good, in felicity, in pleasure, but strong,
constant and hardened in misery: he is misery it self quick and incarnate;
and this is in a word to express humanity, for in man is all misery, and
without him there is not any in the world. It is the property of man to be
miserable, only man and all man is always miserable, Homo natus de muliere
breui viuens tempore repletur multis miserijs. He that will take upon him to
represent unto us all the parts of humane misery, had need to discover his
whole life, his substance, his entrance, his continuance, his end. I do not
therefore undertake this business, it were a work without end; and besides,
it is a common subject handled by all: but I will here only quote certain
points which are not common nor taken for miseries, either because they are not
felt, or sufficiently considered of, although they be such as press man most,
if he knew how to judge of them.

The first point and proof of the misery of man is his 2 In his beginning and
his end.
birth; his entrance into the world is shameful, vile, base, contemptible; his
departure, his death, ruin, glorious and honorable: whereby it seems that he
is a monster and against nature, since there is shame in making him, honor in
destroying him. Nostri nosmet poenitet and pudet. Heerof a word or two. The
action of planting and making man is shameful, and all the parts thereof, the
congredients, the preparations, the instruments, Alexander and Caesar, have
unmade, have slain, each of them (as Pliny reports) more than a million of
men, but they made none, left none behind them. And in ancient times, for
pleasure only and pastime, to delight the eyes of the people, there were
public slaughters and massacres of men made. Homo sacra res per iocum and
lusum Seneca. Tertull. de Spectac.
occiditur: satis spectaculi in homine mors est: innocents in ludum veniunt,
vt publicae voluptatis hostiae fiant. There are some nations that curse their
birth, bless their death. How monstrous a creature is this, that is made a
horror unto himself! None of all this is in any other creature, no not in the
whole world besides.

The second point and testimony of the misery of man is the diminishing of
his pleasures, even those small and slight

O miseri quorum gaudia crimen habent! We are not ingenious but to our own
hurt, it is the true diet of the force of the spirit.

But there is yet that which is worse, the spirit of man is not only a
diminisher of his joy, a trouble-feast, an enemy to his 4 Forging of evils.
small, natural and just pleasures, as I mean to prove, but also a forger of
those that are evil; it faineth, fears, flies, abhors as great
mischiefs, things that are not any way evil in themselves; and in truth,
which beasts themselves fear not, but that by his own proper discourse and
imagination they are fained to be such, as not to be advanced in honor,
greatness, riches, as cuckoldship, sterility, death: for to say the truth, there
is nothing but grief it self that is evil and which is felt. And though some
wise men seem to fear these things, yet it is not for their own sakes, but
because of that grief which sometimes does accompany them afterward: for many
times it is a forerunner of death, and sometimes follows the loss of goods,
of credit, of honor. But take from these things grief, the rest is nothing but
fantasy, which has no other lodging but in the head of man, which quits it
self of other business to be miserable; and imagines within it own bounds,
false evils besides the true, employing and extending his misery in stead of
lessening and contracting it. Beasts feel not these evils, but are exempted
from them, because nature judges them not to be such.

As for sorrow, which is the only true evil, man is wholly borne thereunto,
and it is his natural property. The Mexicanes 5 He is borne to sorrow.
thus salute their infants coming forth of the womb of their mother: Infant
thou art come into the world to suffer: endure, suffer, and hold thy peace.
That sorrow is natural unto man, and contrariwise, pleasure but a stranger, it
appears by these three reasons. All the parts of man are capable of sorrow;
very few of delight. The parts capable of pleasure

To these three a man may add other three: Sorrow and grief is more frequent,
and falls out often; Pleasure is rare. not so near, as the lightest griefs.
Segnius homines bona, quam mala sentiunt, we feel not so much our soundest
health, as the least malady that is, pung it in cute vix summa violatum
plagula corpus, quando valere, nil quenquam monet.

It is not enough that man be indeed and by nature miserable, 6 By memory and
anticipation.
and besides true and substantial evils he feign and forge false and
fantastical, as has been said; but he must likewise extend and lengthen
them, and cause both the true and false to endure and to live longer than they
can, so amarous is he of iniserie; which he does diverse ways. First by the
remembrance of what is past, and the anticipation of what is to come, so that
we cannot fail to be miserable, since that those things which are principally
good in us, and whereof we glory most, are instruments of misery: futuro
torquemur and praeterito, mult a bona nostra nobis nocent, timoris tormentum
memoria reducit, prouidentia anticipat, nemo praesentibus tantum miser est. It
is not enough to be miserable, but we must increase it by a continual
expectation before it come, nay seek it and provoke it to come, like those
that kill themselves with the fear of death, that is to say, either by
curiosity or imbecillitie, and vain apprehension, to preoccupate evils and
inconveniences, and to attend them with so much pain and ado, even those which
peradventure will never come near us? These kind of people will be miserable
before their time, and double miserable, both by a real sense or feeling of
their misery, and by a long premeditation thereof, which many times is a
hundred times worse than the evils themselves, Minus afficit sensus fatigatio
quam cogitatio. The essence or being of misery endures not long, but the
mind of man must lengthen and extend it, and entertain it before hand. Plus
dolet quam necesse est qui ante dolet quam necesse est. Quaedam magis, quaedam
antequam debeant, quaedam cum omnino non debeant, nos torquent. Aut augemus
dolorem, aut fugimus, aut praecipimus. Beasts do well defend themselves from
this folly and misery, and are much bound to thank nature that they want
that spirit, that memory, that providence that man has. Caesar said well that
the best death was that which was least premeditated. And to say the truth, the
preparation before death has been to many a greater torment, than the
execution it self. My meaning is not here to speak of that virtuous and
philosophical premeditation, which is that temper, whereby the soul is made
invincible, and is fortified to the proof against all assaults and accidents,
whereof we shall speak hereafter: but Lib. 2. ca 7.
of that fearful and sometimes false, and vain apprehension of evils that
may come, which afflicts and darkeneth, as it were with smoke, all the beauty
and serenity of the soul, troubles all the rest and joy thereof, insomuch
that it were better to suffer it self to be wholly surprised. It is more easy
and more natural not to think thereof at all. But let us leave this
anticipation of evil, for simply every care and painful thought bleating
after things to come by hope, desire, fear, is a very great misery. For
besides that we have not any power over that which is to come, much less over
what is past; (and so it is vanity, as it has been said) there does still
remain unto us that evil and damage, Calamitosus est animus, futuri anxius,
which robs our understanding, and takes from us the peaceable comfort of
our present good, and will not suffer us to settle and content our selves
therein.

But this is not yet enough. For to the end man may never want matter of
misery, yea that he may always have his 7 By unquiet search.
full, he never cease searching and seeking with great study, the causes and
aliments of misery. He thrusts himself into business even with joy of
heart, even such as when they are offered unto him, he should turn his back
toward them; and either out of a miserable disquiet of mind, or to the end he
may show himself to be industrious, a man of employment and understanding,
that is a fool and miserable too, he enterpriseth, moves, and remooueth new
business, or else he puts himself into that of other men's. To be short, he
is so strongly and incessantly molested with care, and thoughts not only
unprofitable and superfluous, but painful and hurtful, tormented with what is
present, annoied with what is past, vexed with that which is to come, that he
seems to fear nothing more, than that he shall not be sufficiently
miserable. So that a man may justly cry out, O poor and wretched creatures
that you are, how many evils do you willingly endure, besides those necessary
evils that nature has bestowed upon you? But what? Man contenteth himself in
misery, he is obstinate to ruminate and continually to recall to mind his
passed evils. Complaints are common with him, and his own evils and sorrows
seem many times dear unto him, yea it is a happy thing for small and light
occasions to be termed the most miserable of all others: est quaedam dolendi
voluptas. Now this is a far greater misery to be ambitiously miserable, than
not to know it, not to feel it at all. Homo animal querulum, cupide suis
incumbens miserijs.

We will not account it a humane misery, since it is an evil 8 By
incompatibilitie.
common to all men, and not to beasts, that men can not accommodate themselves,
and make profit of one another, without the loss and hurt, the sickness,
folly, sin, death of one another. We hinder, wound, oppress one the other in
such manner, that the better sort even without thought or will thereunto, out of
an insensible desire and innocentlie thirst after the death, the evil, the
pain and punishment of another.

So that we see man miserable both naturally and voluntarily, 9 In the remedies
of misery.
in truth and by imagination, by obligation and willingness of heart. He is
too miserable, and yet he fears he is not miserable enough, and labors to
make himself more miserable. Let us now see how. When he feels any evil, and
is annoyed with some certain misery (for he is never without many miseries
that he feels not) he endeavors to quit himself thereof; but what are his
remedies? Truly such as importune him more than the evil it self which he
would cure; in such sort, that being willing to get forth of one misery, he
does but change it into another, and perhaps into a worse. But what of that,
the change it self perhaps delights him, or at least yields him some solace:
he thinks to heal one evil with another evil, which proceeds from an
opinion which the bewitched and miserable world holds; that is, That there is
nothing profitable, if it be not painful. That is worth naught that costs
nothing, yea ease it self is much suspected. This does likewise proceed from
an higher cause. It is a strange thing, but true, and which conuicteth man to
be miserable, That no evil can be taken away, but by another evil, whether it
be in body or in soul. Spiritual maladies and corporal are not cured and
chased away, but by torment, sorrow, pain. The spiritual by repentance, It
was erroneous, but corrected.
watchings, fastings, imprisonments, which are truly afflictions, and such as
gaul us too, notwithstanding the resolution and devotion willingly to endure
them: for if we use them either for pleasure or profit, they can work no
effect, but are rather exercises of pleasure, of covetousness, of household
government, than of repentance and contrition of heart. The corporal in like
sort be medicines, incisions, cauteries, diets, as they well feel that are
bound to medicinal rules, who are troubled on the one side with the disease
that afflicts them, on the other with that rule, the thought whereof
continually annoyes them. So likewise other evils, as ignorance is cured by
great, long and painful study: Qui addit scientiam, addit and laborem: want
and poverty, by great care, watchings, travel, sweatings: In sudore vultus
tui. So that both for the soul and for the body, labor and travel is as
proper unto man, as it is for a bird to fly.

All these miseries above mentioned are corporal, or common 10 Spiritual
miseries.
both to the spirit and to the body, and mount little higher than the
imagination and fantasy. Let us consider of the more subtle and spiritual,
which are rather to be called miseries, as being erroneous and malignant, more
active and more our own, but less felt and confessed, which makes a man more,
yea doubly miserable, because he only feels those evils that are
indifferent, and not the greater; yea a man dares not touch them, or speak of
them, so much is he confirmed, and so desperate in his miseries. We must
therefore by the way as it were, and gently say something, at least with the
finger point afar off, to give him occasion to consider and think thereof,
since of himself he hides it not. First, in regard of the understanding, is it
not a strange and a lamentable misery of humane nature, that it should wholly
be composed of error and blindness? The greater part of common and vulgar
opinions, yea the more plausible, and such as are received with reverence, are
false and erroneous; and which is worse, the greater part unprofitable for
humane society. And although some of the wisest, which are but few in number,
understand better than the common sort, and judge of these opinions as they
should, nevertheless sometimes they suffer themselves to be carried, if not in
all and always, yet in some and sometimes. A man had need be firm and
constant, that he suffer not himself to be carried with the stream, yea sound
and prepared to keep himself clear from so universal a contagion. The
general opinions received with the applause of all, and without contradiction,
are as a swift river which carries all with it: Proh superi quantum mortalia
pectora caecae noctis habent! O miseras hominum mentes and pectora caeca,
qualibus in tenebris vita, quantisque periclis degitur hoc aeui quodcunque est!
Now it were too long and too tedious a thing to run over all those foolish
opinions by name, wherewith the whole world is made drunken: yet let us take a
view of some few of them, which in their due place shall be handled more at
large.

1 To judge of advice and counsel by the events, which See lib. 3. cap. 1.
are no way in our own hands, and which depend upon the heavens.

2 To condemn and reject all things, manners, opinions, Lib. 2. ca. 8.
laws, customs, observations as barbarous and evil, not knowing what they
are, or seeing any inconvenience in them, but only because they are unusual,
and different from such as are ordinary and common.

3 To esteem and commend things, because of their novelty, Lib. 2. ca. 3.
or raritie, or strangeness, or difficulty, four messengers which have great
credit in vulgar spirits: and many times such things are vain, and not to be
esteemed, if they bring not with them goodness and commodity. And therefore
that Prince did justly contemn him that glorified himself because he could
from far cast a grain of millet through the eye of a needle.

4 Generally all those superstitious opinions wherewith children, women, and
weak minds are infected.

5 To esteem of men for their riches, dignities, honors, and to contemn those
that want them, as if a man should judge of a horse by the saddle and bridle.

6 To account of things not according to their true, natural and essential
worth, which is many times inward and hidden, but according to the outward show
or common report.

7 To think to be revenged of an enemy by killing him: for that is to put him
in safety, and to quit him from all ill, and to bring a vengeance upon
himself: it is to take from his enemy all sense of revenge, which is the
principal effect thereof. This does likewise belong unto weakness.

8 To account it a great injury, or to think a man miserable because he is a
cuckold: for what greater folly in judgment can there be, than to esteem of a
man the less for the vice of another, which he never allowed? As much may be
said of a bastard.

9 To account less of things present, and that are our own, and which we
peaceably enjoy; and to esteem of them most, when a man has them not, or
because they are another man's, as if the presence and possession of them did
lessen their worth, and the want of them increase it.

Virtutem incolumem odimus,
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus inuidi.
And this is the cause why a Prophet is not esteemed in his own country. So
likewise, mastership and authority ingendreth contempt of those that are
subject to that authority: husbands have a careless respect of their wives,
and many fathers of their children. Will thou (says the good fellow) love her
no more, then marry her? We esteem more the horse, the house, the servant of
another, because he is another and not ours. It is a thing very strange to
account more of things in imagination, than in substance, as a man does all
things absent and that are not his, whether it be before he have them, or
after he has had them. The cause hereof in both cases may be, because before a
man possess them, he esteems not according to that they are worth, but
according to that which he imagines them to be, or they have by another been
reported to be; and possessing them, he esteems them according to that good
and benefit he gets by them; and after they are taken from him, he
considers and desires them wholly in their perfection and declination,
whereas before he enjoyed them and used them, but by peecemeale successively:
for a man thinks he shall always have time enough to enjoy them, and by that
means they are gone before he was aware that he had them. And this is the
reason why the grief is greater in having them not, than the pleasure in
possessing them. But herein there is as much imbecillitie as misery. We have
not the sufficiency to enjoy, but only to desire. There is another vice clean
contrary to this, and that is, when a man setleth himself in himself, and in
such sort conceits himself and whatsoever he has, that he preferres it before
all, and thinks nothing comparable to his own. Though these kind of people be
no wiser than the other, yet they are at least more happy.

10 To be ouer-zealous in every question that is proposed, to bite all, to take
to the heart, and to show himself importunate and opinatiue in every thing, so
he have some fair pretext of justice, religion, the weal public, the love of
the people.

11 To play the mourner, the afflicted person, to weep See cap. 27.
for the death, or unhappy accident of another, to think that not to be moved
at all, or very little, is for want of love and affection. There is also
vanity in this.

12 To esteem and make account of actions that are done Lib. 2. ca. 10.
with rumor, clatter, and clamor, and to contemn those that are done
otherwise, and to think that they that proceed after so sweet and calm a
manner, do nothing, are as in a dream without action; and to be briese, to
esteem Art more than Nature. That which is puffed up, swollen, and elevated by
study, fame, report, and strikes the sense (that is to say, artificial) is
more regarded and esteemed, than that which is sweet, simple, plain,
ordinary, that is to say, Natural: that awaketh, this brings us asleep.

13 To give an ill and wrong interpretation of the honorable actions of
another man, and to attribute them to base and vain, or vicious causes or
occasions; as they that attributed the death of young Cato to the fear he had
of Caesar, wherewith Plutarch seems to be offended, and others more foolishly,
to ambition. This is a great malady of the judgment, which proceeds either
from malice, and corruption of the will and manners, or envy against those that
are more worthy than themselves, or from that vice of bringing their own
credit to their own door* and measuring another by their own foot; or rather
than all this, from imbecillitie and weakness, as not having their sight so
strong and so certain to conceive the brightness of virtue in it own native
purity. There are some that think they show great wit and subtlety in
deprauing and obscuring the glory of beautiful and honorable actions, wherein
they show much more malice than sufficiency. It is a thing easy enough to do,
but base and villainous.

14 To defame and to chastise ouer-rigorously, and shamefully, certain vices
as crimes in the highest degree villainous and contagious, which are
nevertheless but indifferent, and have their root and excuse in nature: and
not so much to detest, and to chastise with so greedy adoo those vices that are
truly great, and against nature, as pretended and plotted murders, treasons,
and treachery, cruelty, and so forth.

15 Behold also after all this a true testimony of spiritual misery, but
which is wily and subtle, and that is, that the spirit of man in it best
temper, and peaceable, settled, and soundest estate, is not capable but of
common, ordinary, natural, and indifferent things. To be capable of divine and
supernatural, as of divination, prophecy, reuclation, invention, and as a man
may say, to enter into the cabinet of the gods, he must be sick, displaced
from his natural seat, and as it were corrupted, correptus, either by
extrauagancie, ecstasy, inspiration, or by dreaming; insomuch that the two
natural ways to atteine thereunto are either fury, or dead sleep. So that
the spirit is never so wise, as when it is a fool, nor more awaked, than when
it sleeps: it never meets better, than when it goes on one side, or
crosses the way; it never mounts or flies so high, as when it is most
dejected. So that it must needs be miserable, because to be happy, it must be,
as it were lost, and without it self. This touches not in any sort the divine
disposition, for God can to whom, and when it pleases him, reveal himself,
man in the mean time continuing settled in his sense and understanding, as the
scripture makes mention of Moses and diverse others.

16 To conclude, can there be a greater fault in judgment, than not to esteem
of judgment, not to exercise it, and to prefer the memory, and imagination,
or fantasy before it? We see those great, goodly and learned orations,
discourses, lectures, sermons, books, which are so much esteemed and admired,
written by men of greatest learning in this age (I except some few) what are
they all, but a heap and collection of allegations, and the labors of other
men (a work of memory and reading, and a thing very easy, being all culled
and disposed to their hands, and hereof are so many books composed) with some
few points handled, with a good instruction or two (a work of imagination) and
here is all? This is many times a vanity, and there appears not in it any
spark of judgment, or excellent virtue: so likewise the authors themselves
are many times weak and common in judgment, and in will corrupted: how much
better is it, to hear a country swain, or a merchant talking in his
counting house, discoursing of many goodly propositions and verities, plainly
and truly without art or form and giving good and wholesome counsel, out of
a sound, strong, and solid judgment?

In the will there are as many, or rather more miseries, and 11 Of the Will.
more miserable; they are without number, among which these following are some
few of them.

1 To be willing rather to seem an honest man, than to be, and rather to be
such to another, than to himself.

2 To be far more ready and willing to revenge an offense, than to
acknowledge a good turn, in such sort, that it is a corsiue to his heart to
acknowledge, pleasure and gain to revenge, a proof of a malignant nature,
gratia oneri est, vltio in quaestu habetur.

3 To be more apt to hate, than to love, to slander, than to commend; to feed
more willingly and with greater pleasure upon the evil, than the good of
another, to enlarge it more, to display it more in his discourse, and the
exercise of his style; witness Lawyers, Orators, and Poets, who in reciting
the good of any man, are idle, eloquent in evil. The words, inventions,
figures, to speak ill, to scoff, are far otherwise, more rich, more
emphaticall and significant, than to praise, or speak well.

4 To fly from evil, to do what is good, not properly for the good effect by
natural reason, and for the love of virtue, but for some other strange
consideration, sometimes base and idle, of gain and profit, vainglory, hope,
fear, of custom, company; and to be brief, not simply for himself and his
duty, but for some other outward occasion and circumstance: all are honest men
by occasion and accident. And this is the reason why they are such unequally,
diversely, not perpetually, constantly, uniformly.

5 To love him the less whom we have offended, and that because we have
offended him; a strange thing, and which proceeds not always from fear that
he will take occasion to be revenged, for it may be he wishes us never the
worse; but it is because his presence does accuse us, and brings to memory our
fault and indiscretion. And if the offendour love not the offended the worse,
it is because the offense he committed was against his will; for commonly he
that has a will to offend, loves him the less whom he has offended, Chi
offend, may non perdona, He that offends, never forgiues.

6 As much may be said of him to whom we are much bound for courtesies
received, his presence is a burden unto us, he puts us in mind of our band
and duty, he reprocheth unto us our ingratitude and inabilities, and we wish he
were not, so we were discharged of that duty. Villains by nature, Quidam quo
plus debent, magis oderunt: leave aes alienum debitorem facit, grave inimicum.

7 To take pleasure in the evil, hurt, and danger of another, to grieve and
repine at his good, advancement, prosperity (I mean when it is without cause
of hatred, or private quarrel, for it is another thing when it proceeds from
the ill desert of a man) I speak here of that common and natural condition,
whereby without any particular malice, men of indifferent honesty, take
pleasure to see others adventure their fortunes at sea, and are vexed to see
them thrive better than themselves, or that fortune should smile more upon
others than them, and make themselves merry with the sorrow of another: this is
a token of a malicious seed in us.

To conclude, that I may yet show you how great our 12 The conclusion of these
spiritual miseries.
misery is, let me tell you that the world is replenished with three sorts of
people, who take up much room therein, and carry a great sway both in number
and reputation: the superstitious, formalists, Pedanties, who notwithstanding
they are in diverse subjects, jurisdictions, and theaters (the three principal,
religion, life or conversation, and doctrine) yet they are all of one stamp,
weak spirits, ill borne, or very ill instructed, a very dangerous kind of
people in judgment, and touched with a disease incurable. It is lost labor to
speak to these kind of people, or to persuade them to change their minds, for
they account themselves the best and wisest in the world, opinatiue obstinacy
is there in his proper seat; he that is once stricken and touched to the quick
with any of these evils, there is little hope of his recovery: Who is there
more sottish, and withal more braine-sick and heady than these kind of people?
Two things there are that do much hinder them (as has been spoken) natural
imbecillitie, and incapacitie, and afterward an anticipated opinion to do as
well and better than others. I do here but name them, and point them with the
finger, for afterward in their places here quoted their faults shall be
showed more at large.

The Superstitious, injurious to God, and enemies to true religion, cover
themselves with the cloak of piety, zeal and 1 Superstitious See Lib. 2. Cap.
5.
love toward God, even to the punishing and tormenting of themselves more than
is needful, thinking thereby to merit much, and that God is not only pleased
therewith, but indebted unto them for the rest. What would you do to these kind
of people? If you tell them that they do more than they need, and that they
receive things with the left hand, in not understanding them aright, they will
not believe you, but tell you, that their intent is good (whereby they think
to save themselves) and that they do it for devotion. Howsoever, they will not
quit themselves of their gain, nor the satisfaction which they receive, which
is to bind God unto them.

The Formalists do wholly tie themselves to an outward form and fashion of
life, thinking to be quit of blame in the 2 Formalists.
pursuit of their passions and desires, so they do nothing against the tenor
of the laws, and omit none of their formalities. See here a miserable churl
which has overthrown and brought to a desperate state many poor families;
but this has fallen out by demanding that which he thought to be his own,
and that by way ofiustice. Who then can affirm that he has done ill? O how
many good works have been omitted, how many evils committed, under this cloak
of forms, which a man sees not! And therefore it is very truly said, That the
extremity of law is the extremity of wrong: and as well said, God shield us
from Formalists.

The Pedantie or household schoolmasters having with great study and pains
filched from other men's writings their 3 Pedanties. Lib. 3. cap. 13.
learning, they set it out to the view and to sale, and with a questuous and
mercinary ostentation they disgorge it, and let it fly with the wind. Are
there any people in the world so sottish in their affairs, more unapt to every
thing, and yet more presumptuous and obstinate? In every tongue and nation,
Pedante, Clerk, Master, are words of reproach. To do any thing sottishly, is
to do it like a Clerk. These are a kind of people that have their memories
stuffed with the wisdom of other men, and have none of their own: their
judgments, wills, consciences are never the better, they are unapt, simple,
unwise, in such sort, that it seems that learning serves them for no other use
than to make them more fools, yea more arrogant pratlers: they diminish or
rather swallow up their own spirits, and bastardize their understanding, but
puff up their memory. Here is that misery seated which we now come to
speak of, and is the last of those of the understanding.

CHAP. XL. 5. Presumption.
Behold here the last and leawdest line or liniament of this picture; it is
the other part of that description given by Pliny; the plague of man, and the
nurse of false and erroneous opinions, both public and particular: and yet a
vice both natural and original in man. Now this presumption must be
considered diversely, and in all senses, high, low, collateral, inward and
outward, in respect of God, things high and celestial; in regard of things
base, as of beasts, man his companion, of himself, and all may be reduced to
these two, To esteem too much of himself, and not to esteem sufficiently of
another: Qui in se considebant, and aspernabantur alios. A word or two of
either. Lue. 18.


First in respect of God (and it is a horrible thing) all superstition 1
Presumption in regard of God.
and want in religion, or false service of God, proceeds from this, That we
esteem not enough of God, we understand him not; and our opinions, conceits
and beliefs of the Divinity are not high and pure enough. I mean not by this
enough, proportion answerable to the greatness of God, which being infinite
receives not any proportion; for it is impossible in this respect to conceit
or believe enough: but I mean enough in respect of what we can and ought to
do. We soar not high enough, we do not eleuate and sharpen sufficiently the
point of our spirit, when we enter into an imagination of the Divinity: we
ouer-basely conceit him, our services are unworthy his majesty: we deal with
him after a baser manner than with other creatures; we speak not only of his
works, but of his majesty, will, judgments, with more confidence and
boldness than we dare to do of an earthly Prince or man of honor. Many men
there are that would scorn such kind of service and acknowledgement, and would
hold themselves to be abused, and their honors in some sort violated, if a
man should speak of them, or abuse their names in so base and abject a manner.
We enterprise to lead God, to flatter him, to bend him, to compound or
condition with him; that I may not say, to brave, threaten, despite, murmr
against him. Caesar willed his Pilot not to fear to hoise up sails, and
commit himself to the fury of the seas even against destiny and the will of
the heavens, with this only confidence, That it was Caesar whom he carried.
Augustus See lib. 2. cap. 10.
having been beaten with a tempest at sea, defied god Neptune, and in the
chiefest pomp of the Circean sports caused his image to be taken down, from
where it was placed amongst the rest of the gods, to be revenged of him. The
Thracians when it thundereth and lighteneth, shoot against heaven, to bring God
himself into order. Xerxes scourged the sea, and writ a bill of defiance
against the hill Athos. And one tells of a Christian King a near neighbor
of ours See lib. 2. cap. 18.
, who having received a blow from God, swore he would be revenged: and gave
commandment, that for ten years no See lib. 3. cap. 1.
man should pray unto him, or speak of him.

Audax Iapeti genus
Nil mortalibus arduum.
Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia, neque
Per nostrum patimur scelus
Iracunda Iouem ponere fulmina.
But to leave these strange extrauagancies, all the common sort of people do
they not plainly verify that saying of Pliny, That there is nothing more
miserable, and therewithal more glorious than man? For on the one side he
faineth lofty and rich opinions of the love, care and affection of God toward
him, as his minion and only beloved, and in the mean time he returns him no
duty or service worthy so great and loving a God. How can a life so
miserable, and a service so negligent on the one side, agree with an opinion
and belief so glorious and so haughty on the other? This is at one and the
same time, to be an angel and a swine: and this is that wherewith a great
Philosopher reproched the Christians, that there were no people more fierce and
glorious in their speech, and in effect more dissolute, effeminate and
villainous. It was an enemy that spoke it perhaps to wrong and abuse us, but
yet he spoke but that which does justly touch all hypocrites.

It likewise seems unto us, that we burden and importune God, the world, and
nature, that they labor and travel 2 In respect of Nature.
in our affairs, they watch not but for us, and therefore we wonder and are
astonished with those accidents that happen unto us, and especially at our
deaths. Few there are that resolve and believe, that it is their last hour,
and almost all do even then suffer themselves to be mocked with vain hopes.
This proceeds from presumption, we make too much of our selves, and we think
that the whole world has great interest in our death, that things fail us
according to that measure that we fail them, or that they fail themselves,
according to that measure that they fail us; that they go the selfsame
dance with us, not unlike those that row upon the water, think the heavens,
the earth, yea cities themselves to move, when they move; we think to draw
all with us, and there is no man amongst us that sufficiently thinks he is but
one.

Besides all this, man believes that the heaven, the stars, 3 Of Heaven.
all this great celestial motion of the world, is only made for him, Tot circa
vnum caput tumultuantes Deos. And the poor miserable wretch is in the mean
time ridiculous: he is here beneath lodged in the last and worst stage of the
world, most distant from the celestial vaut, in the sincke of the world,
amongst the filth and lees thereof; with creatures of baser condition, made to
receive all those excrements and ordures, which rain down and fall from above
upon his head; nay he lives not but by them, and to endure all those accidents
that on all sides happen unto him; and yet he makes himself believe that he is
the master and commander of all, that all creatures, yea those great luminous
incorruptible bodies, whereof he knows not the least virtue, and which he is
constrained with astonishment to admire, move not but for him, and to do him
service. And because he beggeth (wretch that he is) his living, his
maintenance, his commodities, from the beams, light and heat of the Sun,
from the rain and other distillations of heaven, and the air, he sticks not
to say, that he enjoys the heavens and the elements, as if all had been made,
and still move only for him. In this sense a gosling may say as much, and
perhaps more justly and peremptorily. For man who many times receives many
discommodities from above, and of all that he receives has nothing in his
own power or understanding, nor can divine of them, is in continual doubt and
fear, lest those superior bodies should not move aright, and to that end and
purpose which he has proposed, and that they procure unto him sterilitie,
sickness, and whatsoever is contrary to his designement, and so he trembles
under this burden; whereas beasts receive whatsoever comes from above,
without stir or apprehension of what shall happen unto them, and without
complaint of that which is happened, which man cannot do. Non Senec.
nos causa mundo sumus hiemem aestatemque referendi: suas ista leges habent,
quibus diuina exercentur: minus nos suspicimus si digni nobis videmur, propter
quos tanta moueantur. non tanta coelo nobiscum societas est, vt nostro fato sit
ille quoque siderum fulgor.

In respect of things base and earthly, that is to say, all other creatures, he
disdaineth and contemns them, as if they did 4 Of Creatures.
not appertain to the same master-workeman, and came not of the same mother,
did not belong to the same family with him, as if they did not any way concern
him, or had any part or relation unto him. And from hence proceeds that
common abuse and cruelty that is practiced against them; a thing that
reboundeth against that common and universal master which has made them,
which has care of them, and has ordained laws for their good and
preservation, has given them pre-eminence in certain things, and sent man
unto them as to a school. But this belongs to the subject of the chapter
following.

Now this derogateth not any thing at all from that common doctrine, that the
world is made for man, and man for Anaxagoras, that man was created to
contemplate the heaven and the sun, and as truly by other Philosophers was he
called (...), from base and inferior things, he draws help, service,
commodity; but for a man to persuade himself that in the framing of all these
things no other thing was thought upon but man, and that he is the only end and
butt of all these luminous and incorruptible bodies, it is a greatfolly and an
ouer-bold presumption.

Finally but especially, this presumption is to be considered in man himself,
that is to say, in regard of himself, and of 6 Of man himself.
man his companion, both within, in the progress of his judgment and opinions;
and without in his communication and conversation with another. Concerning
which, we are to consider three things, as three heads which follow one the
other, Three degrees of humane presumption.
where humanity bewrays in a sottish imbecillitie the foolish presumption
thereof. The first in believing or misbeleeuing (here is no question of
religion, nor of faith and belief theological, and therefore we must still
call to mind the advertisement given in the Preface) where we are to note two
contrary vices, which are common in humane condition; 1 To believe mis-beleeue.
the one and the other more ordinary, is a kind of lightness, qui cito credit,
leuis est cord, and too great a facility to believe and to entertain
whatsoever is proposed, with any kind of appearance of truth or authority.
This belongs to the folly, simplicity, tenderness and imbecillitie of the
weaker sort of people, of spirits effeminate, sick, superstitious, astonished,
indiscretly zealous, who like wax do easily receive all impressions, suffer
themselves to be taken and lead by the ears. And this is rather an error and
weakness, than malice, and does willingly lodge in minds gentle and
debonaire. Credulitas error est magis quam culpa, and quidem in optimi cuiusque
mentem facile irrepit. We see almost the whole world led and carried with
opinions and beliefes, not out of choice and judgment, yea many times before
they have either years or discretion to judge, but out of the custom of the
country, or instruction in youth received, or by some sudden encounter as
with a tempest, whereby they are in such sort fastened, subjected and
enthralled, that it is a matter of great difficulty ever to unlearn them
again. Veluti tempestate delati ad quamcunque disciplinam tanquam ad saxum
adhaerescunt. Thus is the world lead, we trust our selves too much, and then
persuade others to believe us. Vnusquisque mauult credere quam iudicare; versat
nos and praecipitat traditus per manus error, ipsa consuetudo assentiendi
periculosa and lubrica. Now this popular facility, though it be in truth
weakness and imbecillitie, yet it is not without presumption. For so lightly
to believe and hold for truth and certainty that which we know not, or to
enquire of the causes, reasons, consequents, and not of the truth it self, is
to enterprise to presume too much. For from what other cause proceeds this? If
you shall answer, from a supposition that it is true; why this is nothing: a
man handles and stirs the foundations and effects of a thousand things
which never were, whereby both pro and contra are false. How many fables, false
and supposed miracles, visions, revelations, are there received in the world
that never were? And why should a man believe a miracle, a thing neither humane
nor natural, when he is able by natural and humane means to confute, and
confound the truth thereof? Truth and lying have like visages, like carriage,
relish, gate, and we behold them with one and the same eye, it a sunt finitima
falsa veris, vt in praecipitem locum non debeat se sapiens committere. A man
ought not to believe that of a man which is not humane, except he be warranted
by supernatural and superhumane approbation, which is only God, who is only to
be believed in that he says, only because he says it.

The other contrary vice is an audacious temeritie to condemn Sophists,
Pedanties: for they finding in themselves some special point of the spirit,
and that they see a little more clearly than the common sort, they assume unto
themselves law and authority to decide and determine all things. This vice is
far greater and more base than the former: for it is an enraged folly to
think to know as much as possibly is to be known, the jurisdiction and
limits of nature, the capacity of the power and will of God, to frame unto
himself and his sufficiency the truth and falsehood of things, which must
needs be in so certain and assured resolution and definition of them: for see
their ordinary language, that is false, impossible, absurd: and how many
things are there which at one time we have rejected with laughter as
impossible, which we have been constrained afterward to confess and approve,
yea and others too, more strange than they? And on the other side how many
things have we received as articles of our faith, that have afterward proved
vanities and lies?

The second degree of presumption, which follows and commonly proceeds from
the former, is certainly and obstinately 2 To affirm and condemn.
to affirm or disprooue that which he has lightly believed or misbeleeued. So
that it adds unto the first obstinacy in opinion, and so the presumption
increases. This facility to believe with time is confirmed, and degenerateth
into an obstinacy invincible and incapable of amendment, yea a man proceeds so
far in this obstinacy, that he defends those things that he knows and
understands least: Maiorem fidem homines adhibent ijs quae non intelligunt:
cupiditate humani ingenij lubentius obscura creduntur: he speaks of all things
with resolution. Now affirmation and opinatiue obstinacy are signs of
negligence and ignorance accompanied with folly and arrogancy.

The third degree which follows these two, and which 8 3. To persuade.
is the height of presumption, is to persuade others to receive as canonical
whatsoever he believes, yea imperiously to impose a belief as it were by
obligation, and inhibition to doubt. What tyranny is this? Whosoever believes
a thing, thinks it a work of charity to persuade another to believe the same;
and that he may the better do it, he fears not to add of his own invention
so much as he sees necessary for his purpose to supply that want, and
unwillingness which he thinks to be in the conceit of another of that he tells.
There is nothing unto which men are commonly more prone, than to give way to
their own opinions: Nemo sibi tantum errat, sed alijs erroris causa and author
est. Where the ordinary mean wants, there a man adds commandment, force,
fire, sword. This vice is proper unto dogmatists, and such as will govern, and
give laws unto the world. Now to attain to the end hereof, and to captiuate
the beliefs of men unto themselves they use two means: First they bring in
certain general and fundamental propositions, which they call principles and
presuppositions, whereof they say we must neither doubt nor dispute; upon which
they afterward build whatsoever they please; and lead the world at their
pleasure: which is a mockery whereby the world is replenished with errors and
lies. And to say the truth, if a man should examine these principles, he
should find as great or greater untruths and weaknesses in them, than in all
that which they would have to depend upon them, and as great an appearance of
truth in propositions quite contrary. There have Copernicus. Paracelsus.
been some in our time that have changed and quite altered the principles and
rules of our Ancients and best Professors in Astronomy, Physic, Geometry,
in nature, and the motion of the winds. Every humane proposition has as much
authority as another, if reason make not the difference. Truth depends not
upon the authority and testimony of man: there are no principles in man if
Divinity have not revealed them; all the rest is but a dream and smoke. Now
these great masters will that whatsoever they say should be believed and
received, and that every man should trust them, without judging or examining
what they teach: which is a tyrannical justice. God only (as has been said)
is to be believed in all that he says, because he says it: Qui a semetipso
loquitur mendax est.

The other mean is by supposition of some miraculous thing done, new and
celestial revelation and apparition, which has been cunningly practiced by
Lawmakers, Generals in the field, or private Captains. The persuasion taken
from the subject it self possesses the simpler sort, but at the first it is
so tender and frail, that the least offense, mistaking or imprudencie that
shall happen, undoes all: for it is a great marvel how from so vain
beginnings and frivolous causes there should arise the most famous impressions.
Now this first impression being once gotten, does woonderfully grow and
increase, in such sort that it fasteneth even upon the most expert and
skillful, by reason of the multitude of believers, witnesses, years, wherewith
a man suffers himself to be carried, if he see not well into it, and be not
well prepared against it: for then it is to small purpose to spurn against it,
or to enquire farther into it, but simply to believe it. The greatest and most
powerful mean to persuade, and the best touchstone of truth, is multitude
of years and believers: now fools do win the game, sanitatis patrocinium est
insanientium turba. It is a very difficult thing for a man to resolve and
settle his judgment against the common opinion. All this may easily appear by
those many impostures and fooleries which we have seen to go for miracles, and
ravish the whole world with admiration, but instantly extinguished by some
accident, or by the exact inquiry of such as are quick sighted, who have
cleared and discovered the cousenage; which if they had had but time to ripen,
and to have fortified in nature, they had continued for ever, been generally
received and adored. And even such are diverse others, which by the favor of
Fortune have passed for current, and gained public belief, whereunto men
afterward accommodate themselves, without any farther desire to know the thing
in it first form and original, nusquam ad liquidum fama perducitur. And this
is the reason why there are so many kinds of religions in the world, so many
superstitious customs of the Pagans, which are yet remaining even in
Christendom, and concerning which we can not wholly assure the people. By this
whole discourse we see what we are, and to what we tend, since we are lead by
such guides.

The fifth and last Consideration of Man, by those varieties and great
differences that are in him, and their comparisons.
CHAP. XLI. Of the difference and inequality of men in general.
THere is nothing in this lower world wherein there is found so great
difference as amongst men, and where the differences are so distant and diverse
in one and the same subject and kind. If a man should believe Pliny,
Herodotus, Plutarch, there are shapes of men in some countries, that have very
little resemblance with ours, and some that are of a mixed and doubtful kind
betwixt men and beasts. There are some countries where men are without heads,
carrying their eyes and mouths in their breasts, where they are Hermaphrodites,
where they go with four feet, where they have one eye in the forehead, and a
head liker to a dogs head than a man's, where they are fish from the navel
downwards, and live in the water; where their women bear children at five
years of age, and live but eight; where they have their head and forhead so
hard, that iron can not pierce them; where they do naturally change into
wolves and other beasts, and afterward into men again; where they are without
a mouth, nourishing themselves with the smell of certain odours; where they
yield a seed that is black; where they are very little and dwarfs; where they
are very great and giants; where they go always naked; where they are all
hairie; where they speak not, but live in woods like beasts, hidden in caves
and hollow trees. And in our times we have discovered, seen with the eye, and
touched with our fingers, where the men are without beards, without use of
fire, corn, wine; where that is held to be the greatest beauty, which we
account the greatest deformity, as has been said before. Touching the
diversity of manners we shall speak elsewhere. And to omit many of these
strange wonderments, we know that as touching the visage, it is impossible to
find two in all things alike; it may fall out that we may mistake, and take the
one for the other, because of the great resemblance that may be between two;
but this must be in the absence of the one, for in the presence of them both it
is easy to note a difference, though a man know not how to express it. In the
souls of men there is a far greater difference, for it is not only greater
without comparison betwixt a man and a man, than betwixt a beast and a beast:
but there is greater difference betwixt a man and a man, than a man and a
beast; for an excellent beast comes nearer to a man of the basest sort and
degree, than that man to another great and excellent personage. This great
difference of men proceeds from the inward qualities, and from the spirit,
where there are so many parts, so many jurisdictions, so many degrees beyond
number, that it is an infinite thing to consider. We must now at the last learn
to know man by those distinctions and differences that are in him, which are
diverse, according to the many parts in man, many reasons, and means to compare
and consider of him. We will here set down five principal, unto which all
the rest may be referred, and generally all that is in man, Spirit, body
natural, acquired, public, private, apparent, secret: and so this fifth and
last consideration of man shall have five parts, which are five great and
capital distinctions of men, that is to say:

The first natural, essential, and universal of all men, soul and body.

The second natural and essential principally, and in some sort acquired, of
the force and sufficiency of the spirit.

The third accidental of the estate, condition and duty of man, drawn from
superiority and inferioritie.

The fourth accidental of the condition and profession of life.

The fifth and last of the favors and disfavors of Nature and of Fortune.

CHAP. XLII. The first distinction and difference of men natural and
essential, drawn from the diverse situation of the world.
THe first most notable and universal distinction of men, 1 The diversity of
men proceeds from the diverse situatio^ of the world.
which concerns the soul and body, and whole essence of man, is taken and
drawn from the diverse site of the world, according to which the aspect and
influence of heaven, and the sun, the air, the climate, the country, are
diverse. So likewise not only the color, the feature, the complexion, the
countenance, the manners, are diverse, but also the faculties of the soul,
plaga coeli non solum ad robur corporum, sed and animorum facit. Athenis tenue
caelum, ex quo etiam acutiores Attici; crassum Thebis, ideo pingues Thebani and
valentes. And therefore Plato thanked God that he was an Athenian, and not a
Theban. As fruits and beasts are diverse, according to the diverse countries
wherein they are: so men are borne more and less warlike, just, temperate,
docible, religious, chaste, ingenious, good, obedient, beautiful, sound,
strong. And this is the reason why Cyrus would not agree to the Persians to
abandon their sharp and hilly country, to go to another more plain and
pleasant, saying, that fat countries and delicate, made men soft and
effeminate, and fertile grounds barren and infertile spirits.

Following this foundation, we may in gross divide the world into three parts,
and all men into three kinds of nature: 2 The division of the world into three
parts.
we will make three general situations of the world, which are, the two
extremities South, and North, and the middle betwixt them both; every part and
situation shall have sixty degrees. The Southern part which is under the
Equator, has thirty degrees on this side the line, thirty on that, that is
to say, all that part which is betwixt the two tropicks or somewhat more, where
are the hot and Southern countries, Afric and Aethiope, in the middle
betwixt the East and the West; Arabia, Calicut, the Moluques, Ianes, Taprobana
toward the Orient; Peru and the great Seas toward the Occident. The other
middle part has thirty degrees beyond the Tropicks both on this side the line
and on that, toward the Poles, where are the middle and temperate regions, all
Europe with the Mediterrane Sea in the middle betwixt the East and West; all
Asia both the less and the greater which is toward the East, with China,
Iapan, and America, toward the West. The third which is the thirty degrees
which are next to the two Poles on both sides, which are the cold and Icie
countries, the Septentrionall people, Tartary, Muscony, Estotilan, Magelan,
which is not yet thoroughly discovered.

Following this general partition of the world, the natures of men are
likewise different in every thing, body, soul, religion, 3 Their natures.
manners, as we may see in this little Table: For the

Northern people are Middle are Southern are 1 In their Bodies. High and
great, phlegmatic, sanguin, white, and yellow, sociable, the voice strong,
the skin soft and hairie, great eaters and drinkers, puissant. Indifferent and
temperate in all those things as neuters, or partakers a little of those two
extremities, and participating most of that region to which they are nearest
neighbors. Little, melancholicke, cold, and dry, black. Solitary, the voice
shrill, the skin hard, with little hair, and curled, abstinent, feeble. 2
Spirit. Heavy, obtuse, stupid, sottish, facill, light, inconstant. Ingenious,
wise, subtle, opinatiue. 3 Religion. Little religious and devout.
Superstitious, contemplative. 4 Manners. Warriers, valiant, painful, chaste,
free from jealousy, cruel and inhumane. No warriers, idle, unchaste, jealous,
cruel, and inhumane.

All these differences are easily proved. As for those of the body, they are
known by the eye, and if there be any exceptions, 4 The proofs of these
differences of the Body.
they are rare, and proceed from the mixture of the people, or from the winds,
the waters, and particular situation of the place, whereby a mountain is a
notable difference in the selfsame degree, yea the selfsame country and
city. They of the higher part of the city of Athens, were of a quite contrary
humor, as Plutarke affirms, to those that dwelt about the gate of Pyreus: and
they that dwell in the North side of a mountain differ as much from those that
dwell on the South side, as they do both differ from those in the valley.

As for the differences of the spirit, we know that mechanical 2 The spirit.
and manual arts belong to the North, where men are made for labor;
Speculatiue sciences came from the South. Caesar and other ancients of those
times called the Egyptians ingenious, and subtle: Moses is said to be
instructed in their wisdom: and Philosophy came from thence into Greece.
Greatness began rather with them, because of their spirit and subtlety. The
gards of Princes (yea in the Southern parts) are Northern men, as having
more strength, and less subtlety and malice. So likewise the Southern people
are endued with great virtues, and subject to great vices, as it is said of
Hannibal: The Northern have goodness and simplicity. The lesser and middle
sciences, as policies, laws, and eloquence, are in the middle nations, wherein
the greatest Empires and policies have flourished.

As touching the third point, religions have come from the South, Egypt,
Arabia, Chaldea; more superstition in 3 Religion.
Afric than the whole world besides, witness their vows so frequent, their
temples so magnificent. The Northern people, says Caesar, have little care of
religion, being wholly given to the wars and to hunting.

As for manners, and first touching wars, it is certain that the greatest
armies, arts, military instruments and inventions 4 Manners.
have come from the North. The Scythians, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Tartarians,
Turks, Germans, have beaten and conquered all other nations, and ransaked the
whole world; and therefore it is a common saying, that all evil comes from the
North. Single combats came from them. The Northern people adore a sword
fastened in the earth, says Solinus. To other nations they are invincible, yea
to the Romans, who having conquered the rest of the world, were utterly
destroyed by them. They grow weak and languish with the Southern winds, and
going toward the South; as the Southern men coming into the North redouble
their forces. By reason of their warlike fiercenes, they will not endure to be
commanded by authority, they love their liberty, at leastwise elective
commanders. Touching chastity and jealousy in the North, says Tacitus, one
woman to one man; yea, one woman suffices many men, says Caesar. There is no
jealousy, says Munster, where men and women bathe themselves together with
strangers. In the South Polygamie is altogether received. All Afric adoreth
Venus, says Solinus. The Southerns die with jealousy, and therefore they
keep Eunuchs as gardians to their wives, which their great Lords have in
great number, as they have stables of horses. Touching cruelty, the two
extremes are alike cruel, but the causes are diverse, as we shall see anon,
when we come to speak of the causes. Those tortures of the wheel, and staking
of men alive, came from the North: The inhumanities of the Moscouites and
Tartars, are too well known. The Almanes, says Tacitus, punish not their
offenders by law, but cruelly murder them as enemies. The Southerns flea
their offenders alive, and their desire of revenge is so great, that they
become furious if they be not glutted therewith. In the middle regions they are
merciful and humane: The Romans punished their greatest offenders with
banishment. The Greeks used to put their offenders to death with a sweet drugge
made of a kind of Hemlocke which they gave them to drink: And Cicero says,
that humanity and courtesy were the conditions of Asia minor, and from thence
derived to the rest of the world.

The cause of all these corporal and spiritual differences, is the
inequality and difference of the inward natural heat, 5 The cause of the
aforesaid differences.
which is in those countries and peoples, that is to say, strong and vehement
in the Northerns, by reason of the great outward cold which incloseth and
drives the heat into the inward parts, as caves and deep places are hot in
winter, so men's stomachs, ventres hieme culidiores. Weak and feeble is the
Southerns, the inward heat being dispersed and drawn into the outward parts,
by the vehemency of the outward heat, as in Summer vaults and places under
the earth are cold. Mean and temperate in the middle regions. From this
diversity, I say, and inequality of natural heat; proceed these differences
not only corporal, which are easy to note, but also spiritual; for the
Southerns by reason of their cold temperature, are melancholic, and therefore
stayed, constant, contemplative, ingenious, religious, wise; for wisdom is in
cold creatures, as Elephants, who as they are of all other beasts the most
melancholicke, so are they more wise, docile, religious, by reason of their
cold blood. From this melancholy temperature it likewise comes, that the
Southerns are unchaste, by reason of that frothie, freating, tickling
melancholy, as we commonly see in Hares; and cruel, because this freating
sharp melancholy does violently press the passions and revenge. The
Northernes are of a phlegmatic and sanguine temperature, quite contrary to
the Southern; and therefore have contrary qualities, save that they agree in
this one, that they are likewise cruel and inhumane, but by another reason,
that is, for want of judgment, whereby like beasts, they know not how to
contain and govern themselves. They of the middle regions are sanguin and
choleric, tempered with a sweet, pleasant, kindly disposed humor; they are
active. We could likewise more exquisitely represent the diverse natures of
these three sorts of people, by the application and comparison of all things,
as you may see in this little Table, where it appears that there does
properly belong, and may be referred to the

Northern, Midlers, Southern. The common sense, Discourse and reasoning,
Understanding Qualities of the soul.
Force as of Bears and other beasts. Reason and justice of men. Subtilty of
foxes, and religion of divines. Mars war The moon hu^ting Jupiter emperors.
Mercury orators. Saturn co^templation. Venus love. Planets.
Art and handicrafts. Prudence, knowledge of good and evil. Knowledge of
truth and falsehood. Actions and parts of the Commonweal.
Laborers, artificers, soldiers, to execute and obey. Magistrates, provident,
to judge, command. Prelates, Philosophers, to contemplate. Young men unapt.
Perfect men, managers of affairs. Grave old men, wise, pensive.

The other distinction more particular may be referred to this general of
North and South: for we may refer to the conditions of the Northern those
of the West, and that live in mountains, warriors, fierce people, desirous of
liberty, by reason of the cold which is in mountains. So likewise, they that
are far distant from the sea are more simple and innocent. And contrarily to
the conditions of the Southernes, we may refer the Easterlings, such as live
in valleys, effeminate and delicate persons, by reason of the fertillitie of
the place, which naturally yields pleasure. So likewise they that live upon
the sea coasts are subtle, deceivers by reason of their commerce and traffike
with diverse sorts of people and nations. By all this discourse we may see that
generally those of the North do excel in body, have strength for their part;
and they of the South in spirit, and have for their part subtlety; they of the
middle Regions partake of both, and are temperate in all. So likewise we may
see that their manners, to say the truth, are neither vices nor virtues, but
works of nature, which to amend or renounce altogether is more than difficult;
but to sweeten, temper and reduce the extremities to a mediocritie, is a work
of virtue.

CHAP. XLIII. The second distinction, and more subtle difference of the
spirits and sufficiences of men.
THis second distinction which respects the spirit and ^ Three sorts and
degrees of people in the world.
sufficiency, is not so plain, and perceptible as the other, and comes as
well from nature as atchieuement; according unto which there are three sorts of
people in the world, as three conditions and degrees of spirits. In the one and
the lowest are the weak and plain spirits, of base and slender yea, they are
barbarous. They subject themselves to opinions, and the municipall laws of the
place where they live, even from the time they were first hatched, not only by
observance and custom, which all ought to do, but even from the very heart and
soul, with a persuasion that that which is believed in their village is the
true touchstone of truth (here is nothing spoken of divine revealed truth, or
religion) the only, or at least the best rule to live well. These sorts of
people are of the school and jurisdiction of Aristotle, affirmers, positive
men, dogmatists, who respect more utility than verity, according to the use
and custom of the world, than that which is good and true in it self. Of this
condition there are a very great number, and diverse degrees, the principal and
most active amongst them govern the world, and have the command in their
hand. In the third and highest stage are men endued with a quick and clear
spirit, a strong, firm, and Socrates and Plato, modest, sober, stayed,
considering more the verity and realitie of things than the utility; who if
they be well borne, having with that above mentioned probitie and government in
manners, they are truly wise, and such as here we seek after. But because
they agree not with the common sort, as touching opinions, see more clearly,
pierce more deeply, are not so facill and easily drawn to believe, they are
suspected and little esteemed of others, who are far more in number, and held
for fantasticks and philosophers; a word which they use in a wrong sense, to
wrong others. In the first of these three degrees or orders there is a far
greater number than in the second, and in the second, than in the third. They
of the first and last, the lowest and highest trouble not the world, make no
stir, the one for insufficiency and weakness, the other by reason of too
great sufficie^cie, stabilitie, and wisdom. They of the middle make all the
stir, the disputations that are in the world, a presumptuous kind of people,
always stirred, and always stirring. They of the lower range, as the bottom,
the leese, the sink, resemble the earth, which does nothing but receive and
suffer that which comes from above. They of the middle resemble the region of
the air, wherein are formed all the meteors, thunderings, and alterations are
made, which afterward fall upon the earth. They of the higher stage resemble
the firmament it self, or at least the highest region next unto heaven, pure,
clear, neat, and peaceable. This difference of men proceeds partly from the
nature of the first composition and temperature of the brain, which is
different, moist, hot, dry, and that in many degrees, whereby the spirits and
judgments are either very solid, courageous, or feeble, fearful, plain: and
partly from instruction and discipline; as also from the experience and
practice of the world, which serves to put off simplicity, and to become more
advised. Lastly, all these three sorts of people are found under every robe;
form and condition both of good and evil men, but diversely.

There is another distinction of spirits and sufficiencies, for some there are
that make way themselves, and are their own 2 Another distinction.
guides and governors. These are happy, of the higher sort, and very rare;
others have need of help, and these are of two sorts. For some need only a
little light, it is enough if they have a guide and a torch to go before them,
they will willingly and easily follow. Others there are that must be drawn,
they need a spur, and must be led by the hand. I speak not of those that
either by reason of their great weakness cannot, as they of the lower range,
or the malignitie of their nature will not, as they of the middle, who are
neither good to follow, nor will suffer themselves to be drawn and directed,
for these are a people past all hope.

CHAP. XLIIII.
The third distinction and difference of men accidental, of their degrees,
estates and charges.
THis accidental distinction, which respects the estates and charges, is
grounded upon two principles and foundations of humane society, which are, to
command and obey, power and subjection, superiority and inferioritie; imperio
and obsequio omnia constant. This distinction we shall better see, first in
gross in this Table.

All power and subjection is either Private, which is either in Families and
household government, and it is fourfold: Marriage, of the husband and The first
general division.
the wife. This is the source of humane society. Paternall of parents over
their children. This is truly natural. Herile, which is twofold, of Lords,
over their slaves. Masters, over their servants.
Patronall, of patrons over their pupils: the use whereof is less frequent.
Corporations and Colleges, Civil communities over the particular members of
that community.
Public, which is either Souereign, which is threefolde, and they are three
sorts of estates, cunctas nationes and vrbes, populus aut primores, aut singuli
regunt. i. Monarchy, of one. Aristocratie, of a few. Democritie, of all.
Subaltern, which is in those who are superiors and inferiors, for diverse
reasons, places, persons, as Particular lords in many degrees. Officers of the
souereignty, whereof there are diverse sorts.




This public power whether it be sovereign, or subalterne, The subdiuision
of the sovereign power.
has other subdiuisions necessary to be known. The sovereign, which, as
has been said, is threefold, in regard of the manner of government is likewise
threefold; that is to say, every one of these three is governed after a
threefold manner, and is therefore called Royal, or Signoriall, or
Tyrannical. Royal, wherein the sovereign (be it one, or many, or all)
obeying the laws of nature, preserves the natural liberty and propriety of
the goods of his subjects. Adreges potestas omnis pertinet, ad singulos
proprietas: omnia Rex imperio possidet, singuli dominio. Seignoriall or lordly,
where the sovereign is lord both of men and goods, by the right of arms,
governing his subjects as slaves. Tyrannical where the sovereign contemning
all laws of Nature, does abuse both the persons and goods of his subjects,
differing from a lord, as a thief from an enemy in war. Of the three
sovereign states, the Monarchy, and of the three governments, the Lordly, are
the more ancient, great, durable and maiesticall, as in former times Assyria,
Persia, Egypt, and now Ethiopia the most ancient that is, Moscouie, Tartarie,
Turkey, Peru. But the better and more natural state and government is the
Monarchy Royal. The most famous Aristocraties has sometimes been that of
the Lacedaemonians, and now the Venetians. The Democrities, Rome, Athens,
Carthage, Royal in their government.

The public subaltern power, which is in particular lords, is of many kinds
and degrees, principally five, that is to say, 3 Of particular lords.
Lords Tributaries, who pay only tribute.

Feudetaries, simple Vassals, who owe faith and homage for the tenure of their
land. These three may be souereignes.

Vassals bound to do service, who besides faith and homage owe likewise
personal service, whereby they cannot truly be souereignes.

Natural subjects, whether they be Vassals or Censors, or otherwise, who owe
subjection and obedience, and can not be exempted from the power of their
sovereign: and these are Lords.

The public subaltern power which is in the officers of the souereigntie, is
of diverse kinds, and both in regard of the 4 Of offices.
honor and the power may be reduced to five degrees.

The first and basest are those ignominious persons, which

The second, they that have neither honor nor infamy,

The third, such as have honor without knowledge and

The fourth, they that have with honor, power and knowledge,

The fifth, they that have with the rest jurisdiction; and

1 Majors, Senators. Minors, Judges.
2 Politiques. Militaries.
3 Civil. Criminal.
4 Titularies in offices of form, who have it by inheritance. Commissaries.
5 Perpetual, as the lesser both in number and otherwise should be. Temporal
and moveable, as the greater should be.



OF THE ESTATES AND DEGREES OF MEN in particular following this precedent
Table. An Advertisement.
Here we are to speak in particular of the parts of this Table, and the
distinctions of powers and subiections (beginning with the private and
domestical) that is to say, of every estate and profession of men, to the end
we may know them; and therefore this may be called The Book of the Knowledge
of man: for the duties of every one shall be set down in the Third Book, in
the virtue of justice; where in like manner and order, all these estates and
chapters shall be resumed and examined. Now before we begin, it shall be
necessary summarily to speak of commanding and obeying, two foundations and
principal causes of these diversities of estates and charges.

CHAP. XLV. Of commanding and obeying.
THese, as has been said, are the two foundations of all humane society, and
the diversity of estates and professions. They are Relatiues, they do mutually
respect, engender and conserve one the other, and are alike required in all
assemblies and communities; but are yet subject to a natural kind of envy,
and an everlasting contestation, complaint and obtrectation. The popular estate
make the Sovereign of worse condition than a Carter. The Monarchy places
him above God himself. In commanding is the honor, the difficulty (these two
commonly go together) the goodness, the sufficiency, all qualities of
greatness. Command, that is to say, sufficiency, courage, authority, is from
heaven and of God, imperium non nisi diuino fato datur: omnis potestas a Deo
est: And therefore Plato was wont to say, That God did not appoint and
establish men, that is to say, men of a common sort and sufficiency, and
purely humane, to rule others, but such as by some divine touch, singular
virtue, and gift of heaven, do excel others: and therefore they are called
Heroes. In obeying is utility, procliuitie, necessity, in such sort, that for
the preservation of the weal public it is more necessary than well to
command; and the denial of obedience, or not to obey as men should, is far
more dangerous than for a Prince not to command as he should. Even as in
marriage, though the husband and the wife be equally obliged to loialtie and
fidelity, and have both bound themselves by promise in the same words, the
same ceremonies and solemnities, yet notwithstanding the inconveniences are
incomparably far greater, in the fact of adultery, in the wife than the
husband: even so, though command and obedience are equally required in every
state and company, yet the inconveniences of disobedience in subjects are
far more dangerous than of ill government in a Commander. Many States have a
long time continued and prospered too under the command of wicked Princes and
Magistrates, the subjects obeying and accommodating themselves to their
government: and therefore a wise man being once asked why the Commonwealth of
Sparta was so flourishing, and whether it were because their Kings commanded
well? Nay rather, says he, because the Citizens obey well. For if the subjects
once refuse to obey, and shake off their yoke, the state must necessarily fall
to the ground.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Marriage.
NOtwithstanding the state of marriage be the first, more Prima societas in
coniugio est, quod principium vrbis, seminarium Reipublicae; yet it has been
contemned and defamed by many great personages, who have judged it unworthy
men of heart and spirit, and have framed many objections against it.

First, they account the band and obligation thereof unjust, 2 Objections
against marriage.
a hard and ouerstreight captivity, insomuch, that by marriage a man is bound
and enthralled to the cares and humors of another. And if it fall out, that
he have mistaken in his choice, and have met with a hard bargain, more bone
than flesh, his life is ever afterward most miserable. What iniquity and
injustice can there be greater than for one hours folly, a fault committed
without malice, and by mere oversight, yea many times to obey the advice of
another, a man should be bound to an everlasting torment? It were better for
him to put the halter about his neck, and to cast himself into the sea, his
head downward, to end his miserable life, than to live always in the pains of
hell, and to suffer without intermission on his side, the tempest of jealousy,
of malice, of rage, of madness, of brutish obstinacy, and other miserable
conditions: and therefore one sticks not to say, That he that invented this
knot and tie of marriage, had found a goodly and beautiful means to be
revenged of man, a trap or gin to entangle beasts, and afterward to make them
languish at a little fire. Another says, That to marry a wise man to a fool,
or a fool to a wise man, is to bind the living to the dead, which was the
cruellest death invented by Tyrants, to make the living to languish and die by
the company of the dead. Secondly, they say that marriage is a corruption and
adulterating of good and rare spirits; insomuch that the flatteries and smooth
speeches of the party beloved, the affection toward children, the care of
household affairs, and advancement of their famelies, do lessen, dissolve, and
mollify the vigor and strength of the most lively and generous spirit that
is, witness Samson, Solomon, Marc. Antony. And therefore howsoever the matter
go, we had not need to marry. But those that have more flesh than spirit,
strong in body, and weak in mind, tie them to the flesh, and give them the
charge of small and base matters, such as they are capable of. But such as are
weak of body, have their spirits great, strong, and puistant, is it not then a
pity to bind them to the flesh, and to marriage, as men do beasts in a
stable? We see that beasts the more noble they are, the stronger and fitter for
service, as horses and dogs, the more are they kept asunder from the company
and acquaintance of the other sex, and it is the manner to put beasts of least
esteem at randon together. So likewise such men and women as are ordained to
the most venerable and holiest vocation, and which ought to be as the cream
and marrow of Christianity, Churchmen and religigious, are (though not by any
warrant from the word of God) excluded from marriage. And the reason is, because
marriage hinders and auerteth those beautiful and great eleuations of the
soul, the contemplation of things, high, celestial, and divine, which is
incompatible with the troubles and molestations of domestical affairs; for
which cause the Apostle prefers the solitary continent life before marriage.
Utility may well hold with marriage, but honesty is on the other side.

Again, it troubles beautiful and holy enterprises: as Saint Austin
reports, that having determined with some other his friends, among whom there
were some married, to retire themselves from the city, and the company of men,
the better to attend to the study of wisdom and virtue, their purpose was
quickly broken and altered by the wives of those that were married. And another
wiseman did not doubt to say, that if men could live without women, they should
be visited and accompaned by Angels. Moreover, marriage is a hindrance to such
as delight in travel and to see strange countries, whether to learn to make
themselves wise, or to teach others to be wise, and to publish that to others
which they know. To conclude, marriage does not only corrupt and deiect good and
great spirits, but it robs the weale-publicke of many beautiful and great
things, which cannot manifest themselves remaining in the bosom and lap of a
woman, or being spent about young children. But is it not a goodly sight, nay a
great loss, that he that is able for his wisdom and policy to govern the
whole world, should spend his time in the government of a woman and a few
children? And therefore it was well answered by a great personage being
solicited to marry, That he was borne to command men, not a woman, to counsel
Kings and Princes, not little children.

To all this a man may answer, that the nature of man is 3 The answer to the
aforesaid objections, Cap. 4.
not capable of perfection, or of any thing against which nothing may be
objected, as has elsewhere been spoken. The best and most expedient remedies
that it has, are in some degree or other but sickly, mingled with
discommodities: They are all but necessary evils. And this is the best that
man could devise for his preservation and multiplication. Some (as Plato, and
others) would more subtillie have invented means to have avoided these thornie
inconveniences; but besides that they built castles in the air, that could not
long continue in use, their inventions likewise if they could have been put in
practice, would not have been without many discommodities and difficulties. Man
has been the cause of them, and has himself brought them forth by his vice,
intemperancie, and contrary passions; and we are not to accuse the state, nor
any other but man, who knows not well how to use any thing. Moreover a man may
say, that by reason of these thorns and difficulties, it is a school of
virtue, an apprentiship, and a familiar and domestical exercise: and Socrates
a doctor of wisdom did once say to such as hit him in the teeth with his wives
pettish frowardnes, That he did thereby learn even within his own doors, to
be constant and patient every where else, and to think the crosses of fortune
to be sweet and pleasant unto him. It is not to be denied but that he that can
live unmarried, does best: but yet for the honor of marriage, a man may say,
that it was first instituted by God himself in Paradise before any other
thing, and that in the state of innocence and perfection. See here four
commendations of marriage, but the fourth passes all the rest, and is without
reply. Afterward the Son of God approved it, and honored it with his
presence at the first miracle that he wrought, and that miracle done in the
favor of that state of marriage and married men; yea he has honored it with
this privilege, that it serves for a figure of that great union of his with
the Church, and for that cause it is called a mystery and great.

Without all doubt, marriage is not a thing indifferent: It is either wholly a
great good, or a great evil, a great content, or 4 Wholly good, or wholly ill.
a great trouble, a paradise or a hell: It is either a sweet and pleasant way,
if the choice be good, or a rough and dangerous march, and a gauling
burdensome tie, if it be ill: It is a bargain where truly that is verified
which is said, Homo homini deus, aut lupus.

Marriage is a work that consists of many parts; there must be a meeting of
many qualities, many considerations 5 A good marriage, a rare good.
besides the parties married. For whatsoever a man say, he marieth not only for
himself; his posterity, family, alliance, and other means, are of great
importance, and a grievous burden. See here the cause why so few good are
found; and because there are so few good found, it is a token of the price and
value thereof: it is the condition of all great charges: Royalty is full of
difficulty, and few there are that exercise it well and happily. And whereas
we see many times that it falls not out so luckely, the reason thereof is the
licentious liberty, and unbridled desire of the persons themselves, and not in
the state and institution of marriage: and therefore it is commonly more
commodious, and better fitted in good, simple, and vulgar spirits, where
delicacie, curiosity, and idleness are less troublesome: unbridled humors
and turbulent wavering minds are not fit for this state or degree.

Marriage is a step to wisdom, a holy and inviolable band, an honorable match.
If the choice be good and well ordered 6 A simple description and summary of
marriage.
there is nothing in the world more beautiful: It is a sweet society of life,
full of constancy, trust, and an infinite number of profitable offices and
mutual obligations: It is a fellowship not of love, but amity. For love and
amity are as different, as the burning sick heat of a fever, from the
natural heat of a sound body. Marriage has in it self amity, utility,
justice, honor, constancy, a plain pleasure, but sound, firm, and more
universal. Love is grounded upon pleasure only, and it is more quick,
piercing, ardent. Few marriages succeed well that have their beginnings and
progress from beauty and amorous desires. Marriage has need of foundations
more solid and constant; and we must walk more warily; this boiling affection
is worth nothing: yea marriage has a better conduct by a third hand.

Thus much is said summarily and simply; but more exactly to describe it, we
know that in Marriage there are two 7 A description more exact.
things essential unto it, and seem contraries, though indeed they be not;
that is to say, an equality sociable, and such as is between Peers: and an
inequality, that is to say, superiority and inferioritie. The equality
consists in an entire and perfect communication and community of all things,
souls, wills, bodies, goods, the fundamental law of Marriage, which in some
places is extended even to life and death, in such sort, that the husband being
dead, the wife must incontinently follow. This is practiced in some places by
the public laws of the countries, and many times with so ardent affection,
that many wives belonging to one husband, they contend, and publicly plead
for the honor to go first to sleep with their spouse (that is their word)
alleging for themselves the better to obtain their suite, and preferment
herein, their good service, that they were best beloved, had the last kiss of
their deceased husband, and have had children by him.

Et certamen habent lethi, quae viua sequatur coniugium; pudor est non licuisse
mori.
Ardent victrices, and flammae pectora praebent, Imponuntque suis ora perusta
viris.
In other places it was observed, not by public laws, but private compacts
and agreements of marriage, as betwixt Marc. Antony, and Cleopatra. This
equality does likewise consist in that power which they have in commune over
their family, whereby the wife is called the companion of her husband, the
mistress of the house and family, as the husband the master and lord: And their
joint authority over their family is compared to an Aristocracie.

The distinction of superiority and inferioritie consists in this, that the
husband has power over the wife, and the 8 Inequality.
wife is subject to the husband. This agrees with all laws and policies; but
yet more or less according to the diversity of them. In all things the wife,
though she be far more noble, and more rich, yet is subject to the husband.
This superiority and inferioritie is natural, founded upon the strength and
sufficiency of the one, the weakness and insufficiency of the other. The
Divines ground it upon other reasons drawn from the Bible: Man was first made
by God alone and immediately, expressly for God his head, and according to his
image, and perfect, for nature does always begin with things perfect. The woman
was made in the second place, after man, of the substance of man, by occasion
and for another thing, mulier est vir occasionatus, to serve as an aid and as
a second to man, who is her head, and therefore imperfect. And this is the
difference by order of generation. That of corruption and sin proves the
same, for the woman was the first in preuarication, and by her own weakness and
will did sin, man the second, and by occasion of the woman; the woman then
the last in good and in generation, and by occasion, the first in evil and the
occasion thereof, is justly subject unto man, the first in good, and last in
evil.

This superiority and power of the husband has been in some places such as
that of the father, over life and death, as 9 The power of the husband. Dion.
Halicar. l. 2. Lib. 2. Lib. 6. bell. Gal.
with the Romans by the law of Romulus: and the husband had power to kill his
wife in four cases, Adultery, Suborning of children, counterfeiting of false
keys, and drinking of wine. So likewise with the Greeks, as Polybius, and the
ancient French, as Caesar affirms, the power of the husband was over the life
and death of his wife. Elsewhere, and there too, afterward this power was
moderated; but almost in all places the power of the husband and the subjection
of the wife does infer thus much, That the husband is master of the actions
and vows of his wife, and may with words correct her and hold her to the
stocks (as for blows, they are unworthy a woman of honor or honesty, says
the Law) and the wife is bound to hold the condition, follow the quality,
country, family, habitation and rank of her husband, she must accompany
and follow him in all things, in his iourneys if need be, his banishment, his
imprisonment, yea a wandering person, a vagabond, a fugitive. The examples
hereof are many and excellent, of Sulpitia, who followed her husband Lentulus
being banished into Cicilie; Erithrea her husband Phalaris; Ipsicrates the wife
of King Mithridate vanquished by Pompey, who wandered through the world. Some
add unto this, That wives are to follow their husbands even in the wars, and
into those provinces whither the husband is sent with public charge. Neither
can the wife bring any thing into question of law, whether she be plaintiff or
defendant, without Corn. Tacit.
the authority of her husband, or of the Judge, if he refuse; neither can she
call her husband into judgment, without the permission of the Magistrate.

Marriage is not carried after one and the same fashion, neither 10 The diverse
rules of marriage.
has it in every place the same laws and rules, but according to the
diversity of religions and countries, it has rules either more easy or more
straight: according to the rules of Christianity of all others the
streightest, marriage is more subject, and held more short. There is nothing
but the entrance left free, the continuance is by constraint, depending of some
thing else than our own wills. Other nations and religions, to make marriage
more easy, free, and fertile, have received and practiced Polygamie and
repudiation, liberty to take and leave wives: they accuse Christianity for
taking away these two, by which means amity and multiplication, the principal
ends of marriage, are much prejudiced, inasmuch as amity is an enemy to all
constraint, and they do better maintain themselves in an honest liberty; and
multiplication is made by the woman, as Nature does richly make known unto us
in wolves, of whom the race is so fertile in the production of their young,
even to the number of twelve or thirteen, that they far excel all other
profitable creatures: of these there are great numbers killed every day, by
which means there are but few, and they though of all others the most fertile,
yet by accident the most barren: the reason is because of so great a number as
they bring, there is one only female, which for the most part bears not by
reason of the multitude of males that concur in the generation, of which the
greatest part die without fruit, by the want of females. So likewise we may see
how much Polygamy helps to multiplication in those nations that receive it,
Jews, Turks and other Barbarians, who are able to raise forces of three or
four thousand fighting men fit for wars. Contrariwise, in Christendom there
are many linked together in matrimony, the one of which, if not both, are
barren, which being placed with others, both the one and the other may happily
leave great posterity behind them. But to speak more truly, all his
fertility consists in the fertility of one only woman. Finally, they
object, That this Christianlike restraint is the cause of many lascivious
pranks and adulteries. To all which we may answer, That Christianity
considers not of marriage by reasons purely humane, natural, temporal; but
it beholds it with another visage, and weighs it with reasons more high and
noble, as has been said. Add unto this, That experience shows in the
greatest part of marriages, that constraint increases amity, especially in
simple and debonaire minds, who do easily accommodate themselves where they
find themselves in such sort linked. And as for lascivious and wicked persons,
it is the immodestie of their manners that makes them such, which no liberty
can amend. And to say the truth, Adulteries are as common where Polygamie and
repudiation are in force; witness the Jews and David, who for all the wives
that he had could not defend himself from it: and contrariwise, they have
been a long time unknown in policies well governed, where there was neither
Polygamie nor repudiation; witness Sparta and Rome a long time after the
foundation. And therefore it is absurd to attribute it unto religion, which
teaches nothing but purity and continency.

The liberty of Polygamie which seems in some sort natural, 11 Polygamie
diverse.
is carried diversely according to the diversity of nations and policies. In
some, all the wives that belong to one husband live in common, and are equal
in degree; and so are their children. In others, there is one who is the
principal and as the mistress, whose children inherit the goods, honors, and
titles of the husband: the rest of the wives are kept apart, and carry in some
places the titles of lawful wives, in others of concubines, and their children
are only pensioners.

The use of repudiation in like sort is different: for with 12 Repudiation
diverse.
some, as the Hebrews, Greeks, Armenians, the cause of the separation is not
expressed, and it is not permitted to retake the wife once repudiated, but yet
lawful to marry another. But by the law of Mahumet, the separation is made by
the Judge, with knowledge taken of the cause (except it be by mutual consent)
which must be adultery, sterilitie, incompatibilitie of humors, an enterprise
on his, or her part against the life of each other, things directly and
especially contrary to the state and institution of marriage: and it is
lawful to retake one another as often as they shall think good. The former
seems to be the better, because it bridleth proud women, and ouer-sharp and
bitter husbands: The second, which is to express the cause, dishonors the
parties, and discovers many things which should be hid. And if it fall out
that the cause be not sufficiently verified, and that they must continue
together, poysonings and murders do commonly ensue, many times unknown unto
men: as it was discovered at Rome before the use of repudiation, where a woman
being apprehended for poisoning of her husband, accused others, and they others
too to the number of threescore and ten, which were all executed for the same
offense. But the worst law of all others has been, that the adulterer
escapes almost every where without punishment of death, and all that is laid
upon him is divorce and separation of company, brought in by Justinian, a man
wholly possessed by his wife, who caused whatsoever laws to pass that might
make for the advantage of women. From hence does arise a danger of perpetual
adultery, desire of the death of the one party, the offender is not punished,
the innocent injured remains without amends.

The duty of married folk, See Lib. 3. Cap. 12.

CHAP. XLVII. Of Parents and Children.
THere are many sorts and degrees of authority and humane power, Public, and
Private; but there is none 1 Fatherly power.
more natural, nor greater, than that of the father over his children, (I say
father, because the mother who is subject unto her husband, cannot properly
have her children in her power and subjection) but it has not been always,
and in all places alike. In former times almost every where it was absolute and
universal over the life and death, the liberty, the goods, the honor, the
actions and cariages of their children, as to plead, to marie, to get goods: as
namely with the Romans by the express law of Romulus, parentum in liberos omne
ius esto, relegendi, vendendi, occidendi; except only children under Dion.
Halic. li 2. antiq. Rom l. in ^uis ff. de lib. and post. Aul. Gell. lib. 20.
Lib. 8. Eth. cap. 20. Lib 6. Bell. Gal. Prosper. Aquitan. in Epist. Sigism.
the age of three years, who as yet could not offend either in word or deed;
which law was afterward renewed by the law of the twelve tables, by which the
father was allowed to sell his children to the third time: with the Persians
according to Aristotle; the ancient French as Caesar and Prosper affirm; with
the Muscouits and Tartars, who might sell their children to the fourth time.
And it should seem by that fact of Abraham going about to kill his son, that
this power was likewise under the law of nature: for if it had been against his
duty, and without the power of the father, he had never consented thereunto,
neither had he ever thought that it was God that commanded him to do it, if it
had been against nature. And therefore we see that Isaac made no resistance,
nor alleged his innocence, knowing that it was in the power of his father:
which derogateth not in any sort from the greatness of the faith of Abraham,
because he would not sacrifice his son by virtue of his right or power, nor
for any demerit of Isaac, but only to obey the commandment of God. So likewise
it was in force by the law of Moses, though somewhat Deuteronomy. 21.
moderated. So that we see what this power has been in ancient times in the
greatest part of the world, and which endured unto the time of the Roman
Emperors. With the Greeks it was not so great and absolute, nor with the
Egyptians: nevertheless, if it fell out, that the father had killed his sons
wrongfully and without cause, he had no other punishment, but to be shut up
three days together with the dead body.

Now the reasons and fruits of so great and absolute a power 2 The reasons and
fruits thereof.
of fathers over their children, necessary for the culture of good manners, the
chasing away of vice, and the public good, were first to hold the children in
awe and duty: and secondly, because there are many great faults in children,
that would escape unpunished, to the great prejudice of the weal public, if
the knowledge and punishment of them were but in the hand of public
authority, whether it be because they are domestical and secret, or because
there is no man that will prosecute against them: for the parents who know them
and are interessed in them will not discredit them; besides that, there are
many vices and insolences that are never punished by justice. Add heereunto,
that there are many things to be tried, and many differences betwixt parents
and children, brothers and sisters, touching their goods or other matters,
which are not fit to be published, which are extinct and buried by this
fatherly authority. And the law did always suppose, that the father would
never abuse this authority, because of that great love which he naturally
carries to his children, incompatible with cruelty; which is the cause that
in stead of punishing them with rigor, they rather become intercessours for
them, when they are in danger of the law: and there can be no greater torment
to them, than to see their children in pain. And it falls out very seldom
or never, that this power is put in practice without very great occasion; so
that it was rather a scarcrow to children and very profitable, than a rigor in
good earnest.

Now this fatherly power (as ouer-sharpe and dangerous) is almost of it self
lost and abolished (for it has rather happened 3 The declination.
by a kind of discontinuance than any express law) and it began to decline
at the coming of the Roman Emperors: for from the time of Augustus, or
shortly after, it was no more in force, whereby children became so desperate
and insolent against their parents, that Seneca, speaking to Nero, Lib. 1. de
Clem.
said, That he had seen more paricides punished in five years past, than had
been in seven hundred years before; that is to say, since the foundation of
Rome. In former times, if it fell out that the father killed his children, he
was not punished, Salust. in bell. Catil. Valor. Maxim.
as we may see by the example of Fuluius the Senator, who killed his son
because he was a partner in the conspiracy of Catiline: and of diverse other
Senators, who have made criminal process against their children in their
own houses, and have condemned them to death, as Cassius Tratius; or to
perpetual exile, as Manlius Torquatus his son Sillanus. There were
afterward laws ordained, that enjoined the father to present unto the Judge
his children offending, that they might be punished, and that the Judge should
pronounce such a sentence as the father thought fit; which is still a kind of
footstep of antiquity: and going about to take away the power of the father,
they durst not do it but by halfes, and not altogether and openly. These
latter laws come somewhat near the law of Moses, which would, That at the
only complaint of the father made before the Judge, without any other knowledge
taken of the cause, the rebellious and contumacious child should be stoned to
death; requiring the presence of the Judge, to the end the punishment should
not be done in secret or in choler, but exemplarilie. So that according to
Moses this fatherly power was more free and greater, than it has been after
the time of the Emperors; but afterward under Constantine the Great, and
Theodosius, and finally under Justinian, it was almost altogether extinct. From
whence it is, that children have learned to deny their obedience to their
parents, their goods, their aid, yea to wage law against them; a shameful
thing to see our Courts full of these cases. Yea, they have been dispensed
heerewith under pretext of devotion and offerings, as with the Jews before
Christ, wherewith he reprocheth them: Matt. 15.
and afterward in Christianity; according to the opinion of some: yea, it
has been lawful to kill them either in their own defense, or if they were
enemies to the Commonweal: although, to say the truth, there should never
because just enough for a son to kill his father. Nullum tantum scelus
admitti potest a patre, quod sit parricidio vindicandum, and nullum scelus
rationem habet.

Now we feel not what mischief and prejudice has happened to the world, by the
abolishing and extinction of this fatherly power. The Commonweals wherein it
has been in force have always flourished. If there were any danger or evil
in it, it might in some sort be ruled and moderated; but utterly to abolish it,
as now it is, is neither honest nor expedient, but hurtful and inconvenient,
as has been said.

Of the reciprocal duty of parents and children, See Lib. 3. Cap. 14.

CHAP. XLVIII. Lords and slaves, Masters and servants.
THe use of slaves, and the full and absolute power of Lords and Masters over
them, although it be a thing common 1 The use of slaves universal and against
nature.
thorowout the world and at all times (except within these four hundred
years, in which time it has somewhat decayed, though of late it revive
again) yet it is a thing both monstrous and ignominious in the nature of man,
and such as is not found in beasts themselves, who consent not to the
captivity of their like neither actiuely nor passiuely. The law of Moses has
permitted this as other things, ad duritiam cordis eorum, but not such as has
been elsewhere: for it was neither so great, nor so absolute, nor perpetual,
but moderated within the compass of seven years at the most. Christianity
has left it, finding it universal in all places, as likewise to obey
idolatrous Princes and Masters, and such like matters as could not at the first
attempt and altogether be extinguished, they have abolished.

There are four sorts, Natural, that is, slaves borne; Enforced, 2
Distinction.
and made by right of war; Just termed slaves by punishment by reason of some
offense, or debt, whereby they are slaves to their Creditors, at the most for
seven years, according to the law of the Jews, but always until payment and
restitution be made, in other places; Voluntaries, whereof there are many
sorts, as they that cast the dice for it, or sell Tacit. de mort German.
their liberty for money, as long sithence it was the custom in Almaigne, and
now likewise in some parts of Christendom, where they do give and vow
themselves to another for ever, as the Jews were wont to practice, who at the
gate bored a hole in their ear in token of perpetual servitude. And this kind
of voluntary captivity, is the strangest of all the rest, and almost against
nature.

It is covetousness that is the cause of slaves enforced; and lewdness the
cause of voluntaries. They that are Lords and 3 The cause of Slaves.
Masters have hoped for more gain and profit by keeping, than by killing them:
and indeed the fairest possessions and the richest commodities, were in former
times slaves. By this means Crassus became the richest among the Romans, who
had besides those that served him five hundred slaves, who every day brought
gain and commodity by their gainefull arts and mysteries, and afterward
when he had made what profit by them he could, he got much by the sale of them.

It is a strange thing to read of those cruelties practiced by Lords upon
their slaves, even by the approbation and permission 4 The cruelties of Lords
against their slaves.
of the laws themselves: They have made them to till the earth being chained
together, as the manner is in Barbary at this day; they lodge them in holes and
ditches; and being old, or impotent, and so unprofitable, they sell them, or
drown them, and cast them into lakes to feed their fish withal: They kill
them not only for the least fault that is, as the breaking of a glass, but for
the least suspicion, yea, for their own pleasure and pastime, as Flaminius
did, one of the honestest men of his time: And to give delight unto the people,
they were constrained in their public Theaters to kill one another. If a
Master happened to be killed in his house by whomsoever, the innocent slaves were
all put to death, insomuch that Pedonius the Roman being slain, although the
murderer were known, yet by the order of the Senate, four hundred of his
slaves were put to death.

On the other side, it is a thing as strange, to hear of the rebellions,
insurrections, and cruelties of slaves against their 5 The cruelties of Slaves
against their Lords.
Lords, when they have been able to work their revenge, not only in
particular by surprise and treason, as it fell out one night in the City of
Tire, but in set battle both by sea and land; from whence the proverb is, So
many slaves, so many enemies.

Now as Christian religion, and afterward Mahumetisme 6 Diminution of Slaves.
did increase, the number of slaves did decrease, and servitude did cease,
insomuch that the Christians, and afterward the Turks, like apes imitating
them, gave freedom and liberty to all those that were of their religion; in
such sort, that about the twelve hundred year, there were almost no slaves in
the world, but where these two religions had no authority.

But as the number of slaves diminished, the number of beggars and vagabonds
increased: for so many slaves being 7 The increase of poor people and
vagabonds.
set at liberty, come from the houses and subjection of their Lords, not
having wherewithal to live, and perhaps having children too, filled the world
with poor people.

This poverty made them return to servitude, and to become 8 Return to
servitude.
voluntary slaves, paying, changing, selling their liberty, to the end they
might have their maintenance and life assured, and be quit of the burden of
their children. Besides this cause and this voluntary servitude, the world is
returned to the use of slaves, because the Christians and Turks always
mainteining wars one against the other, as likewise against the Gentiles both
oriental and occidentall, although by the example of the Jews they have no
slaves of their own nation, yet they have of others, whom, though they turn
to their religion, they hold slaves by force.

The power and authority of masters over their servants,

The duty of Masters and Servants, See lib. 3. cap. 15.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the State, Sovereignty, Sovereigns.
Having spoken of private power, we come to the public, 1 The description and
necessity of the state.
that of the state. The state, that is to say, Rule, dominion, or a certain
order in commanding and obeying, is the prop, the cement, and the soul of
humane things: It is the bond of society, which cannot otherwise subsist; It
is the vital spirit, whereby so many millions of men do breath, and the whole
nature of things.

Now notwithstanding it be the pillar and prop of all, yet it is a thing not so
sure, very difficult, subject to changes, arduuin 2 The nature of the state.
Tacit.
and subiectum fortunae cuncta regendi onus, which declineth and sometimes
falls by hidden and unknown causes, and that altogether at an instant, from
the highest step to the lowest, and not by degrees, as it uses to be long
arising. It is likewise exposed to the hatred both of great and small, whereby
it is gauled, subject to ambushments, underminings, and dangers, which happens
likewise many times by the corrupt and wicked manners of the sovereigns, and
the nature of the sovereignty, which we are about to describe.

Sovereignty is a perpetual and absolute power, without constraint either of
time or condition. It consists in a power 3 The description of sovereignty.
to give laws to all in general, and to every one in particular, without the
consent of any other, or the gift of any person. And as another says (to
derogate from the common law) Sovereignty is so called, and absolute, because
it is not subject to any humane laws, no not his own. For it is against
nature to give laws unto all, and to command himself in a thing that
depends upon his will, Nulla obligatio consistere potest, quae a voluntate
promittent is statum capit; nor of another, whether living, or of his
predecessors, or the country. Sovereign power is compared to fire, to the
sea, to a wild beast; it is a hard matter to tame it, to handle it, it will
not be crossed, nor offended, but being is very dangerous, potestas res est quae
moneri, docerique non vult, and castigationem aegre ferat.

The marks and properties thereof, are, to judge the last appeals, to ordain
laws in time of peace and war, to create 4 The properties.
and appoint magistrates and officers, to give graces and dispensations against
the law, to impose tributes, to appoint money, to receive homages, ambassages,
oaths. But all this is comprehended under the absolute power to give and make
laws according to their pleasure. Other marks there are of less weight, as
the law of the sea and shipwreck, confiscation for treason, power to change
the tongue, title of Majesty.

Greatness and Sovereignty is so much desired of all, because all the good that
is in it appears outwardly, and all the ill is altogether inward: As also
because to command others, is a thing as beautiful and divine, as great and
difficult; and for this cause they are esteemed and reverenced for more than
men. Which belief in the people, and credit of theirs is very necessary and
commodious to extort from the people due respect and obedience, the nource of
peace and quietness. But in the end they prove to be men cast in the same mould
that other men are, and many times worse borne, and worse qualified in nature
than many of the common sort of people. It seems that their actions because
they are weighty and important, do proceed from weighty and important
causes: but they are nothing, and of the same condition that other men's are.
The same occasion that breeds a brawle betwixt us and our neighbor, is ground
enough of a war betwixt Princes: and that offense for which a Lackey deserves
a whipping, lighting upon a King, is the ruin of a whole province. They will
as lightly as we, and we as they, but they can do more than we: the selfsame
appetites move a fly and an elephant. Finally, besides these passions,
defects, and natural conditions which they have common with the meanest of
those that do adore them, they have likewise vices and discommodities which
their greatness and sovereignty bears them out in, peculiar unto themselves.

The ordinary manners of great personages are, untamed 6 The manners of
Sovereigns.
pride, durus est very insolens, ad recta flecti regius non vult tumor;
violence too licentious, id esse regni maximum pignus putant, si quicquid alijs
non licet, solis licet: quod non potest, vult posse, qui nimium potest: Their
mott that best pleases them is, Senec.
Tacit.
quod libet, licet: suspicion, icalousie, suapte natura, potentiae anxij, yea
even of their own infants, suspectus semper, inuisusque dominantibus quisquis
proximus destinatur, adeo vt displiceant etiam ciuilia filiorum ingenia:
whereby it falls out that they are many times in alarm and fear, ingenia
regum prona ad formidinem.

The advantages of Kings and sovereign Princes above 7 The miseries and
discommodities.
their people, which seem so great and glittering, are indeed but light, and
almost imaginary; but they are repayed with great, true, and solid
disaduantages and inconveniences. The name and title of a sovereign, the show
and outside is beautiful, pleasant, and ambitious; but the burden and the
inside is hard, difficult, and yrksome. There is honor enough, but little rest
and joy, or rather none at all: It is a public and honorable servitude, a
noble misery, a rich captivity, Aureae and fulgidae compides, clara miseria;
witness that which Augustus, Marcus Aurelius, Pertinax, Diocletian, have said
and done, and the end that almost all the first twelve Cesars made, and many
others after them. But because few there are that believe this, but suffer
themselves to be deceived by the beautiful show, I will more particularly
quote the inconveniences and miseries that accompany great Princes.

First, the great difficulty to play their part, and to quit themselves of
their charge: for can it be but a great burden 8 1 In their charge.
to govern so many people, since in the ruling of himself there are so many
difficulties? It is an easier matter and more pleasant to follow, than to
guide; to travel in a way that is already traced, than to find the way; to
obey, than to command; to answer for himself only, than for others too; vt
satius multo iam sit parere quietum, quam regere imperio res velle. Add
heereunto that it is required that he that commands must be a better man,
than he that is commanded: so said Cyrus a great Commander. How difficult a
thing this is, we may see by the paucitie of those that are such as they ought
to be. Vespasian, says Tacitus, was the only Prince that in goodness excelled
his predecessors: and another sticks not to say, that all the good Princes may
be graven in a ring.

Secondly in their delights and pleasures, wherein it is thought they have a
greater part than other men. But they 9 2 In the pleasures and actions of their
life.
are doubtless of a worse condition than the pleasures of private men: for
besides that the luster of their greatness makes them unfit to take joy in their
pleasures, by reason that they are too clear and apparent, and made as a butt
and subject to censure, they are likewise crossed and peered into even to their
very thoughts, which men take upon them to divine and judge of. Again, the
great ease and facility that they have to do what pleases them, because all
men apply themselves unto them, takes away the taste, and sowreth that sweet
which should be in their pleasures; which delight no man but those that taste
them, with some scarcity and difficulty. He that gives no time to be
thirsty, knows not what a pleasure it is to have drink: Sacietie is noisome,
and goes against the stomach.

Pinguis amor nimiumque potens in taedia nobis
Vertitur: and stomacho dulcis vt esca nocet.
There is nothing more tedious and loathsome than abundance, yea they are
deprived of all true and lively action, which can not be without some
difficulty and resistance. It is not going, living, acting in them, but
sleeping and an insensible sliding away.

The third inconvenience that follows Princes, is in their 10 3 In their
marriages.
marriages. The marriages of the vulgar sort are more free and voluntary, made
with more affection, liberty and contentment. One reason hereof may be, that
the common sort of men find more of their degree to choose, whereas Kings and
Princes, who are not of the rout, as we know, have no plentiful choice. But
the other reason is better, which is, that the common sort in their marriages
look but into their own affairs, and how they may accommodate it best unto
themselves; but the marriages of Princes are many times enforced for public
necessity: they are great parts of the State, and instruments serving for the
general good and quiet of the world. Great personages and Souereignes marry
not for themselves, but for the good of the State, whereof they must be more
amourous and jealous, than of their wives and children: for which cause they
many times hearken unto marriages where there is neither love nor delight; and
matches are made between persons, who neither know nor have seen one another,
much less affect: yea, such a great man takes such a great lady, whom if he
were not so great, he would not take: but this is to serve the weale-publike,
to assure the States, and to settle peace amongst their people.

The fourth is, That they have no true part in the attempts that men make one
against the other in emulation of honor 11 4 Attempt of honor.
and valor, in the exercises of the mind and of the body, which is one of
the most delightful things in the commerce and conversation of men. The reason
hereof is, because all the world gives place unto them, all men spare them,
and love rather to hide their own valor, to betray their own glory, than to
hurt or hinder that of their Sovereign, especially where they know he affects
the victory. This, to say the truth, is by force of respect to handle men
disdainfully and injuriously, and therefore one said, that the children of
Princes learned nothing by order and rule, but to manage a horse, because in
all other exercises every one bows unto them, and gives them the prise: but
the horse who is neither flatterer nor Courtier, casts as well the Prince to
the ground as the Esquire. Many great personages have refused the praises and
approbations offered them, saying, I would accept and esteem of them, and
rejoice in them, if they came from free men, that durst say the contrary, and
tax me if there were cause.

The fifth is, that they are deprived of the liberty to travel in the world,
being as it were emprisoned within their own 12 5 Liberty of travel.
countries, yea within their own palaces, being always enclosed with people,
suitors, gazers, and lookers on, and that wheresoever they be, and in all
actions whatsoever, prying even through the holes of their chair: whereupon
Alphonsus the King said, that in this respect the estate of an ass was better
than the condition of a King.

The sixth misery is, that they are deprived of all amity and mutual
society, which is the sweetest and perfectest fruit of 13 6 Mutual and hearty
amity.
humane life, and cannot be but betwixt equals, or those betwixt whom the
difference is but small. This great disparitie puts them without the commerce
and society of men; all humble services, and base offices, are done unto them
by those that cannot refuse them, and proceed not from love, but from
subjection, or to increase their own greatness, or of custom and countenance;
which is plain, because wicked Kings are as well served and reverenced as the
good; they that are hated, as they that are beloved, there is no difference,
the selfsame apparel, the selfsame ceremony: Whereupon Julian the
Emperor answered his Courtiers, that commended him for his justice, Perhaps I
should be proud of these praises, if they were spoken by such as durst to
accuse me, and to dispraise my actions when they shall deserve it.

The seventh misery, worse perhaps than all the rest, and 14 7 Ignorance of
things.
more dangerous to the weale-publicke, is, that they are not free in the choice
of men, nor in the true knowledge of things. They are not suffered truly to
know the state of their affairs, and consequently not to call and employ such
as they would, and as were most fit and necessary. They are shut up, and beset
with a certain kind of people, that are either of their own blood, or by the
greatness of their houses and offices, or by prescription, are so far in
authority, power, and managing of affairs before others, that it is not
lawful, without putting all to hazard, to discontent, or in any sort to
suspect them. Now these kind of people that cover, and hold as it were hidden
the Prince, do provide that all the truth of things shall not appear unto him,
and that better men, and more profitable to the state come not near him, lest
they be known what they are. It is a pitiful thing not to see but by the
eyes, not to understand, but by the ears of another, as Princes do. And that
which perfecteth in all points this misery, is, that commonly, and as it were
by destiny, Princes and great personages are possessed by three sorts of
people, the plagues of humane kind, Flatterers, Inuenters of imposts or
tributes, Informers, who under a fair and false pretext of zeal and amity
toward the Prince, as the two first, or of loyalty and reformation as the
latter, spoil and ruinate both Prince and State.

The eight misery is, that they are less free, and masters of their own
wills than all other, for they are enforced in their 15 8 Not maesters of their
wills.
proceedings by a thousand considerations and respects, whereby many times they
must captiuate their designments, desires, and wills; in maxima fortuna, minima
licentia. And in the mean time in stead of being plaintiffes, they are more
rudely handled and judged than any other: For men will not stick to divine of
their designs, penetrate into their hearts and inventions, which they cannot
do, Abditos principis sensus, and si quid occultius parat exquirere: illicitum
anceps nec ideo assequare: and looking into things with another visage, where
they understand not sufficiently the affairs of the state, they require of
their Princes what they think should be done, blame their actions, and
refusing to submit themselves to what is necessary, they commonly proceed in
their business rudely enough.

Finally, it falls out many times, that they make a miserable end, not only
tyrants and usurpers, for it belongs to 16 9 A miserable end.
them, but such as have a true title to their Crown; witness so many Roman
Emperors after Pompey the Great, and Caesar, and in our time Mary Queen of
Scotland, who lost her life by the hand of an executioner; and Henry the third,
wilfully murdered in the middle of forty thousand armed men, by a little
Monk, and a thousand the like examples. It seems that as lightning and
tempests oppose themselves against the pride and height of our buildings, so
there are likewise spirits that envy and emulate greatness below upon earth.

Vsque adeo res humanas vis abdita quaedam
Obterit, and pulchros fasces, saeuasque secures
Proculcare, ac ludibrio sibi habere videtur.
To conclude, the condition of Sovereigns is hard and dangerous: Their life if
it be innocent, is infinitely painful; 17 The conclusion of their miseries.
if it be wicked, it is subject to the hate and slander of the world, and in
both cases exposed to a thousand dangers: for the greater a Prince is, the
less may he trust others, and the more must he trust himself. So that we see,
that it is a thing as it were annexed to sovereignty, to be betrayed.

Of their duty, See the third book, Chap. 16.

CHAP. L. Magistrates.
THere are diverse degrees of Magistrates as well in honor as power, which are
the two things to be considered in 1 The distinction.
the distinction of them, and which have nothing common the one with the other:
and many times they that are more honorable have less power, as Counselors of
the privy Counsel, the Secretaries of the state. Some have but one of the
two; others have both, and that of diverse degrees, but they are properly called
Magistrates that have both.

The Magistrates that are in the middle betwixt the Sovereign

All Magistrates judge, condemn and command either according

Magistrates can not change nor correct their judgments,

Of the duty of Magistrates, See lib. 3.

CHAP. LI. Lawyers, Doctors, Teachers.
IT is one of the vanities and follies of man, to prescribe laws and rules
that exceed the use and capacity of men, as some Philosophers and Doctors have
done. They propose strange and elevated forms or images of life, or at
leastwise so difficult and austere, that the practice of them is impossible at
least for a long time, yea the attempt is dangerous to many. These are castles
in the air, as the Commonwealth of Plato, and More, the Orator of Cicero,
the Poet of Horace, beautiful and excellent imaginations; but he was yet never
found that put them in use. The sovereign and perfect Lawgiuer and Doctor
took heed of this, who both in himself, his life and his doctrine, has not
sought these extrauagancies and forms divided from the common capacity of
men; and therefore he calls his yoke easy, and his burden light. Iugum meum
suaue, and onus meum leave. And they that have instituted and ordered their
company under his name, have very wisely considered of the matter, that though
they make special profession of virtue, devotion, and to serve the
wealepublike above all others, nevertheless they differ very little from the
common and civil life. Wherein there is first great justice: for there must
always be kept a proportion betwixt the commandment and the obedience, the
duty and the power, the rule and the workmaster: and these bind themselves
and others to be necessarily in want, cutting out more work than they know
how to finish: and many times these goodly Lawmakers are the first
Law-breakers: for they do nothing, and many times do quite contrary to that
they enjoin others, like the Pharisees, Imponunt onera grauia, and nolunt ea
digito mouere. So do some Physicians and Divines: so lives the world; rules and
precepts are enioined, and men not only by an irregularitie of life and manners,
but also by contrary opinion and judgment follow others.

There is likewise another fault full of injustice, they are far more
scrupulous, exact, and rigorous in things free and accidental than in
necessary and substantial, in positive and humane than in natural and
divine; like them that are content to lend, but not to pay their debts: and all
like the Pharisees, as the great and heavenly Doctor tells them to their
reproach. All this is but hypocrisy and deceit.

CHAP. LII.
People or vulgar sort.
THe people (we understand here the vulgar sort, the popular rout, a kind of
people under what covert soever, that there is from the one to the other:
confusion makes them desire order, and when they have it, they like it not:
they run always one contrary to another, and there is no time pleases but
what is to come: hi vulgi mores, odisse praesentia, ventura cupere, praeterita
celebrare.

They are light to believe, to gather together news, especially

Without judgment, reason, discretion. Their judgment Plebi non iudicium, non
veritas: ex opinione multa, Tacit. Cic.
ex veritate paucae iudicat.

Envious and malicious, enemies to good men, contemners

Treacherous and untrue, amplifying reports, smothering of truths, and always
making things greater than they are,

Mutinous, desiring nothing but novelties and changes, seditious, ingenio
mobili, seditiosum, discordiosum, cupidum rerum nouarum, quieti and otio
aduersum, Salust.
especially when they meet with a leader: for then even as the calm sea, of
nature tumbleth, and foameth, and rages, being stirred with the fury of the
winds; so do the people swell, and grow proud, wild, and outrageous: but
take from them their leader, they become deiect, grow wild, are confounded with
astonishment, sine rectore praeceps, pauidus, socors: nil ausura plebs
principibus amotis.

Procurers and favorers of broiles and alterations in householde affairs, they
account modesty simplicity, wisdom

They care neither for the public good nor common honesty, Priuata cuique
stimulatio, vile decus publicum.

Always muttering and murmuring against the State, always belching out
slanders and insolent speeches against

They have nothing but a mouth, they have tongues that procacia plebis ingenia,
impigrae linguae, Tacit.
ignaui animi. Salust.


They never know how to hold a measure, nor to keep Nil in vulgo modicum
terrere ni paueant, vbi pertimuerint impune contemni: audacia turbidum nisi vbi
metuat aut seruit humiliter, aut superbe dominatur: libertatem, quae media, nec
spernere nec habere.

Very unthankful toward their benefactors. The recompense Moses and all the
Prophets, Socrates, Aristides, Phocion, Lycurgus, Demosthenes, Themistocles.
And the Truth it self has said, That he being one that procured the good and
health of the people escaped not: and contrariwise, they that oppress them,
are dearest unto them. They fear all, they admire all.

To conclude, the people are a savage beast, all that they Non tam been cum
rebus humanis geritur vt Seneca.
meliora pluribus placeant: argumentum pessimi turba est. The vulgar multitude
is the mother of ignorance, injustice, inconstancy, idolatry, vanity, which
never yet could be pleased: their mot is, Vox populi, vox Dei; but we may say,
Vox populi, vox stultorum. Now the beginning of wisdom, is for a man to keep
himself clear and free, and not to suffer himself to be carried with popular
opinions. This belongs to the second Lib. 2. ca. 1.
book, which is now near at hand.

The fourth distinction and difference of men, drawn from their diverse
professions and conditions of life. THE PREFACE.
Behold here another difference of men, drawn from the diversity of their
professions, conditions and kinds of life. Some follow the civil and sociable
life, others fly it, thinking to save themselves in the solitary wilderness;
some love arms, others hate them; some live in common, others in private; it
pleases some best to have charge, and to lead a public life, others to hide
and keep themselves private; some are Courtiers, attending wholly upon others,
others court none but themselves; some delight to live in the city, others in
the fields affecting a country life; whose choice is the better, and which
life is to be preferred, It is a difficult thing simply to determine, and it
may be impertinent. They have all their advantages and disaduantages, their
good and their ill. That which is most to be looked into and considered
herein, as shall be said, is, That every man know how to choose that which best
befits his own nature, that he might live the more easily and the more
happily. But yet a word or two of them all, by comparing them together: but
this shall be after we have spoken of that life that is common to all, which
has three degrees.

CHAP. LIII. The distinction and comparison of the three sorts of degrees of
life.
THere are three sorts of life, and as it were three degrees, one private of
every particular man within himself, and in the closet of his own heart,
where all is hid, all is lawful: the second, in his house and family, in his
private and ordinary actions, where there is neither study nor art, and
whereof he is not bound to give any reason: the third is public in the eyes of
the world. Now to keep order and rule in this first low and obscure stage, it
is very difficult, and more rare than in the other two; and in the second, than
in the third: the reason is, because where there is neither Judge nor
Controler, nor Regarder, and where we have no imagination either of punishment
or recompense, we carry our selves more loosely and carelessly, as in private
lives, where conscience and reason only is our guide, than in public; where we
are still in check and as a mark to the eyes and judgment of all; where
glory, fear of reproach, base reputation, or some other passion does lead us
(for passion commands with greater power than reason) whereby we keep our
selves ready, standing upon our guard: for which cause it falls out, that
many are accounted holy, great, and admirable in public, who in their own
private have nothing commendable. That which is done in public is but a fable,
a fiction, the truth is secret and in private; and he that will well judge of a
man, must converse every day with him, and pry into his ordinary and natural
carriage; the rest is all counterset; Vniuersus mundus exercet histrioniam: and
therefore said a wise man, That he is an excellent man, who is such within and
in himself which he is outwardly for fear of the laws, and speech of the
world. Public actions thunder in the ears of men, to which a man is
attentive, when he does them; as exploits in war, sound judgment in
counsel, to rule a people, to perform an Embassage. Private and domestical
actions are quick and sure, to chide, to laugh, to sell, to pay, to converse
with his own, a man considers not of them, he does them not thinking of them:
secret and inward actions much more, to love, to hate, to desire.

Again, there is here another consideration, and that is, that that is done
by the natural hypocrisy of men, which we

Now of these three lives, inward, domestical, public, he that is to lead
but one of them, as Hermits, does guide and

CHAP. LIIII. A comparison of the eiuill and sociable life with the solitary.
THey that esteem and commend so much the solitary and retired life, as a
great stay and sure retraite from the molestations and troubles of the world,
and a fit means to preserve and maintain themselves pure and free from many
vices, in as much as the worse part is the greater, of a thousand there is not
one good, the number of fools is infinite, contagion in a prease is dangerous,
they seem to have reason on their side: for the company of the wicked is a
dangerous thing, and therefore they that adventure themselves upon the sea, are
to take heed that no blasphemer, or dissolute and wicked person enter their
ship; one only Jonas with whom God was angry had almost lost all; Bias to
those that were in the ship with him crying out in a great danger for help unto
their gods, pleasantly said, Hold you your peace, for the gods perceive not
that you are here with me. Albuquerque the Viceroy of the Indies for Emmanuel
king of Portingall, in a great danger at sea, took upon his shoulders a little
child, to the end that his innocence might serve as a surety to God for his
sins. But to think that a solitary life is better, more excellent and
perfect, more fit for the exercise of virtue, more difficult, sharp, laborious
and painful, as some would make us believe, they grossly deceive themselves:
for contrarily it is a great discharge and ease of life, and it is but an
indifferent profession, yea a simple apprentiship and disposition to virtue.
This is not to enter into business, troubles, and difficulties, but it is to
fly them, and to hide themselves from them, to practice the counsel of the
Epicures (Hide thy self) it is to run to death, to fly a good life. It is
out of all doubt, that a King, a Prelat, a Pastor, is a far more noble
calling, more perfect, more difficult, than that of a Monk, or a Hermit. And
to say the truth, in times past the companies of Monks were but seminaries and
apprentiships, from whence they drew those that were fit for Ecclesiastical
charge, and their preparatiues to a greater perfection. And he that lives
ciuillie having a wife, children, servants, neighbors, friends, goods,
business, and so many diverse parts which he must satisfy, and truly and loyally
answer for, has without comparison far more business, than he that has none
of all these, has to do with none but himself: Multitude and abundance is
far more troublesome, than solitariness and want. In abstinencie there is
but one thing, in the conduct and use of many, diverse things, there are many
considerations, diverse duties. It is an easier thing to part from goods,
honors, dignities, charges, than to govern them well, and well to discharge
them. It is easier for a man to live altogether without a wife, than in all
points duly to live, and to maintain himself with his wife, children, and all
the rest that depend upon him: so is the single life more easy than the married
state.

So likewise to think that solitariness is a sanctuary and an assured haven
against all vices, temptations, and impediments, Iuit in desertum vt tentaretur
a diabolo. To imprudent and unadvised young men, solitariness is a dangerous
staff, and it is to be feared, that whilst he walks alone he entertaines
worse company than himself, as Crates said to a young man who walked all
alone far from company. It is there where fools contriue their wicked
designements, begin their own overthrows, sharpen their passions and wicked
desires. Many times to avoid the gulf of Charybdis, they fall into Scylla; to
fly is not to escape, it is many times to increase the danger, and to lose
himself, non vitat, sed fugit: magis autem periculis patemus auersi. A man had
need be wife and strong, and well assured of himself when he falls into his
own hands, for it falls out many times that there are none more dangerous than
his own, Guarda me, dios de mi, says the Spanish proverb very excellently;
nemo est ex imprudentibus qui sibi relinqui debeat; solitudo omnia mala
persuadet. But for some private and particular consideration, though good in it
self (for many times it is for idleness, weakness of spirit, hatred, or
some other passion) to fly and to hide himself, having means to profit
another, or to do good to the weale-publick, is to be a fugitive, to bury his
talent, to hide his light, a fault subject to the rigor of judgment.

CHAP. LV. A comparison betwixt the life lead in common, and in private.
SOme have thought that the life led in common, wherein nothing is proper to
any man, whereby he may say, this is mine, or that is thine, but where all
things are common, tends most to perfection, and has most charity and
concord. This may take place in the company of a certain number of people,
lead and directed by some certain rule, but not in a state and commonweal;
and therefore Plato having once allowed it, thinking thereby to take away all
avarice and dissension, did quickly alter his opinion, and was otherwise
advised: for as the practice shows, there is not only not any hearty
affection toward that that is common to all, and as the proverb is, The common
ass is always ill sadled, but also the community draws unto it self
contentions, murmurings, hatreds, as it is always seen, yea even in the
primitive Church: Crescente numero discipulorum, factum est murmur Luc. Acts 6.
Graecorum aduersus Hebraeos. The nature of love is such as that of great
rivers, which being ouer-charged with abundance of waters, being divided, are
quit of that charge; so love being divided to all men, and all things, loses
it force and vigor. But there are degrees of community; to live, that is to
say, to eat and drink together is very good, as the manner was in the better
and most ancient commonweals of Lacedemon and Creete; for besides that
modesty and discipline is better retained amongst them, there is also a very
profitable communication; but to think to have all things common, as Plato for
a while would, though he were afterward otherwise advised, is to pervert all.

CHAP. LVI. The comparison of the countrie-life with the Citizens.
THis comparison to him that loves wisdom is not hard to make, for almost all
the commodities and advantages are on one side, both spiritual and corporal,
liberty, wisdom, innocence, health, pleasure. In the fields the spirit is
more free and to it self: in Cities, the persons, the affairs, both their
own and other men's, the contentions, visitations, discourses, entertainements,
how much time do they steal from us? amici fures temporis. How many troubles
bring they with them, auocations, allurements to wickednesses? Cities are
prisons to the spirits of men, no otherwise than cages to birds and beasts.
This celestial fire that is in us, will not be shut up, it loves the air,
the fields; and therefore Columella says, that the country life is the cosen
of wisdom, consanguinea, which can not be without beautiful and free thoughts
and meditations; which are hardly had and nourished among the troubles and
molestations of the city. Again, the country life is more neat, innocent and
simple. In cities vices are hid in the rout, and are not perceived, they pass
and insinuate themselves pell-mell, the use, the aspect, the encounter so
frequent and contagious is the cause. As for pleasure and health, the whole
heavens lie open to the view, the sun, the air, the waters, and all the
elements are free, exposed and open in all parts, always sustaining us, the
earth discovers it self, the fruits thereof are before our eyes; and none of
all this is in cities in the throng of houses: so that to live in cities is to
be banished in the world and shut from the world. Again, the country life is
wholly in exercise, in action, which sharpeneth the appetite, mainteineth
health, hardens and fortifieth the body. That which is to be commended in
cities, is commodity either private, as of merchants and artificers; or
public, to the managing whereof few are called, and in ancient times
heretofore they were chosen from the country life, who returned having
performed their charge.

CHAP. LVII.
Of the military profession.
THe military profession is noble in the cause thereof, for there is no
commodity more just, nor more universal 1 The praise thereof.
than the protection of the peace and greatness of his country; noble in the
execution, for valor is the greatest, the most generous and heroical virtue
of all others; honorable, for of all humane actions, the greatest and most
glorious is the warriers, and by which all other honors are judged and
discerned; pleasant, the company of so many noble men, young, active, the
ordinary view of so many accidents and spectacles, liberty and conversation
without art, a manly fashion of life without ceremony, the variety of diverse
actions, a courageous harmony of warlike music, which entertaines us and
stirs our blood, our ears, our soul; those warlike commotions which ravish
us with their horror and fear, that confused tempest of sounds and cries, that
fearful ordering of so many thousands of men, with so much fury, ardour and
courage.

But on the other side, a man may say, that the art and experience of undoing
one another, of killing, ruinating, destroying 2 The dispraise.
our own proper kind, seems to be unnatural and to proceed from an
alienation of our sense and understanding; it is a great testimony of our
weakness and imperfection, and it is not found in beasts themselves, in whom
the image of nature continues far more entire. What folly, what rage is it,
to make such commotions, to torment so many people, to run through so many
dangers and hazzards both by sea and land, for a thing so uncertain and
doubtful as the issue of war, to run with such greediness and fierceness
after death, which is easily found every where, and without hope of sepulture,
to kill those he hates not, nor ever saw? But whence proceeds this great
fury and ardor, for it is not for any offense committed? What frenzy and
madness is this for a man to abandon his own body, his time, his rest, his
life, his liberty, and to leave it to the mercy of another? to expose
himself to the loss of his own members, and to that which is a thousand
times worse than death, fire and sword, to be trodden, to be pinched with hot
iron, to be cut, to be torn in pieces, broken, and put to the galleys for
ever? And all this, to serve the passion of another, for a cause which a man
knows not to be just, and which is commonly unjust: for wars are commonly
unjust, and for him whom a man knows not, who takes so little care for him
that fights for him, that he will be content to mount upon his dead body to
help his own stature, that he may see the farther. I speak not here of the
duty of subjects toward their Prince and country, but of voluntaries and
mercenarie soldiers.

The fifth and last distinction and difference of men, drawn from the favors
and disfauors of Nature and Fortune. THE PREFACE.
THis last distinction and difference is apparent enough and sufficiently
known, and has many members and considerations, but may all be reduced to two
heads, which a man may call with the vulgar sort, Felicity or good fortune,
and Infelicitie or ill fortune, Greatness or littleness. To Felicity and
greatness belong health, beauty, and the other goods of the body, liberty,
nobility, honor, dignity, science, riches, credit, friends. To Infelicitie or
littleness belong all the contraries, which are priuations of the other good
things. From these things does arise a very great difference, because a man is
happy in one of these, or in two, or in three, and not in the rest, and that
more or less by infinite degrees: few or none at all are happy or unhappy in
them all. He that has the greatest part of these goods, and especially three,
Nobility, Dignity, or Authority and riches, is accounted great; he that has
not any of these three, little. But many have but one or two, and are accounted
midlings betwixt the great and the little. We must speak a little of them all.

Of Health, beauty, and other natural goods of the body Chap. 11.
has been spoken before; as likewise of their contraries, Chap. 6.
Sickness, Grief.

CHAP. LVIII. Of Liberty and Servitude.
Liberty is accounted by some a sovereign good, and Servitude an extreme
evil, insomuch that many have chosen rather to die a cruel death, than to be
made slaves, or to see either the public good or their own private
endangered. But of this there may be too much, and of these too many, as of
all other things. There is a twofolde liberty: the true, which is of the mind
or spirit, and is in the power of every one, and can not be taken away, nor
indamaged by another, nor by Fortune it self: contrariwise, the servitude of
the spirit is the most miserable of all others, to serve our own affections,
to suffer our selves to be devoured by our own passions, to be led by
opinions. o pitiful captivity! The corporal liberty is a good greatly to be
esteemed, but subject to Fortune: and it is neither just nor reasonable (if it
be not by reason of some other circumstance) that it should be preferred before
life it self, as some of the ancients have done, who have rather made choice
of death, than to lose it; and it was accounted a great virtue in them: so
great an evil was servitude thought to be: Seruitus obedientia est fracti
animi and abiecti arbitrio carentis suo. Many great and wise men have served,
Regulus, Valerianus, Plato, Diogenes, even those that were wicked, and yet
dishonored not their own condition, but continued in effect and truth more
free than their masters.

CHAP. LIX. Nobility.
Nobility is a quality every where not common, but honorable, brought in and
established with great reason

It is diverse, diversely taken and understood, and according to diverse nations
and judgments it has diverse kinds. According The description of nobility.
to the general and common opinion and custom it is a quality of a race or
stock. Aristotle says, that it is the antiquity of a race and of riches.
Plutarch calls it the virtue of a race, (...), meaning thereby a certain
habit and quality continued in the lineage. What this quality or virtue is,
all are not wholly of one accord, saving in this, that it is profitable to the
weale-publike. For to some and the greater part this quality is military, to
others it is politic, literarie of those that are wise, palatine of the
officers of the Prince. But the military has the advantage above the rest:
for besides the service which it yields to the weale-publike as the rest do,
it is painful, laborious, dangerous; whereby it is accounted more worthy and
commendable. So has it carried with us by excellency the honorable title of
Valor. There must then according to this opinion be two things in true and
perfect nobility, profession of this virtue, and quality profitable to the
commonweal, which is as the form; and the race as the subject and matter,
that is to say, a long continuance of this quality by many degrees and races,
and time out of mind, whereby they are called in our language Gentlemen, that
is to say, of a race, house, family, carrying of long time the same name, and
the same profession. For he is truly and entirely noble, who makes a singular
profession of public virtue, serving his Prince and Country, and being
descended of parents and ancestors that have done the same.

There are some that separate these two, and think that one of them suffices
to true nobility, that is, either only virtue 3 the distinction.
and quality, without any consideration of race or ancestors. This is a
personal and acquired nobility, and considered with rigor it is rude, that
one come from the house of a Butcher or Vintner should be held for noble,
whatsoever service he has done for the Commonweal. Nevertheless, this
opinion has place in many nations, namely with the Turks, contemners of
ancient nobility, and esteeming of no other but personal, and actual
military valor; or only antiquity of race without profession of the
quality; this is in the blood and purely natural.

If a man should compare these two simple and imperfect nobilities together,
that which is purely natural (to judge aright) 4 Natural nobility.
it is the less, though many, out of their vanity have thought otherwise. The
natural is another man's quality, and not his own, genus and proauos and quae
non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra puto: nemo vixit in gloriam nostram; nec quod
ante nos fuit nostrum est. And what greater folly can there be, than to glory
in that which is not his own? This honor may light upon a vicious man, a
knave, and one in himself a true villain. It is also unprofitable to another,
for it communicates not with any man, neither is any man bettered by it, as
science, justice, goodness, beauty, riches do. They that have nothing else
commendable in them but this nobility of flesh and blood, make much of it,
they have it always in their mouths, it makes their cheeks swell and their
hearts too (they will be sure to manage that little good that they have) it is
the mark by which they are known, and a token that they have nothing else in
them, because they rest themselves wholly upon that. But this is vanity, for
all their glory springs from frail instruments, ab vtero, conceptu, partu,
and is buried under the toombe of their ancestors. As offenders being pursued
have recourse to altars and the sepulchers of the dead, and in former times to
the statues of Emperors; so these men being destitute of all merit and subject
of true honor, have recourse to the memory and armories of their ancestors.
What good is it to a blind man, that his parents have been well sighted, or to
him that stammereth, that his Grandfather was eloquent? and yet these kind of
people are commonly glorious, high minded, contemners of others; Contemptor
animus and superbia commune nobilitatis malum. Salust.


The personal and acquired honor has conditions altogether contrary and very
good. It is proper to the possessor 5 Acquired and personal honor.
thereof, it is always a worthy subject, and profitable to others. Again, a
man may say that it is more ancient and more rare, than the natural, for by it
the natural began; and in a word, that is true honor which consists in good
and profitable effects, not in dreams and imagination, vain and unprofitable,
and proceeds from the spirit, not the blood, which is the same in noble men
that is in others. Quis generosus? ad virtutem a natura been compositus animus
facit nobilem, cui ex quacunque condition supra fortunam licet surgere. Senec.


But they are both oftentimes, and very willingly together, and so they make
a perfect honor: The natural is a way 6 Natural and acquired.
and occasion to the personal; for things do easily return to their first
nature and beginning. As the natural has taken his beginning and essence from
the personal, so it leads and conducteth his to it, fortes creantur
fortibus: hoc vnum in nobilitate bonum, vt nobilibus imposita necessitudo
videatur, ne a maiorum virtute degenerent; To know that a man is sprung from
honorable ancestors, and such as have deserved well of the Commonweal, is a
strong obligation and spur to the honorable exploits of virtue. It is a foul
thing to degenerate, and to belie a man's own race. The nobility that is given
by the bounty and letters patent of the Prince, if it have no other reason, it
is shameful, and rather dishonorable than honorable. It is an nobility in
parchment, bought with silver or favor, and not by blood as it ought: If it be
given for merit, and notable services, it is personal and acquired as has
been said.

CHAP. LX. Of Honor.
SOme say (but not so well) that honor is the prise and recompense of virtue,
or not so ill, an acknowledgement of 1 The description of honor.
virtue, or a prerogative of a good opinion, and afterward of an outward duty
toward virtue; It is a privilege that draws his principal essence from
virtue. Others have called it the shadow of virtue, which sometimes follows,
sometimes goes before it, as the shadow the body. But to speak truly, it is
the rumor of a beautiful and virtuous action, which reboundeth from our souls
to the view of the world, and by reflection into our selves, brings unto us a
testimony of that which others believe of us, which turns to a great
contentment of mind.

Honor is so much esteemed and sought for by all, that to attain thereunto a
man enterpriseth, endures, contemns Caesar is carried by his name. Now the
name is nothing of the nature and substance of the thing, it is only the image
which presents it, the mark which distinguishes it from others, a summarie
which contains it in a small volume, mounteth it, and carries it whole and
entire, the mean to enjoy it and to use it (for without the names there would
be nothing but confusion, the use of things would be lost, the world would
decay, as the history of the tower of Babell does richly teach us) to be
brief, the stickler and middle of the essence of the thing, and the honor or
dishonor thereof, for it is that that touches the thing it self, and
receives all the good or ill that is spoken Now honor before it ariue to the
name of the thing, it goes a course almost circular, like the Sun, performed
and perfected in three principal sites or places, the action or work, the
heart, the tongue: for it begins and is conceived, as in the matrix and root,
in that beauty, goodness, profit of the thing honored which comes to light and
is produced, this is (as has been said) the rumor of a beautiful or
honorable action. Coeli enarrant gloriam dei: pleni sunt coeli and terra gloria
tua (for whatsoever valor worth and perfection the thing have in it self and
inwardly, if it produce nothing that is excellent, it is altogether incapable
of honor, and is as if it were not at all) from thence it enters into the
spirit and understanding, where it takes life, and is formed into a good,
hautie, and great opinion: finally sallying forth from thence, and being
carried by the word verbal or written, it returns by reflection, and as it
were, dissolueth and ends in the name of the author of this beautiful
work, where it had the beginning, as the Sun in the place from whence it
departed, and then it bears the name of honor, praise, glory, and renown.

But the question is, what those actions are to which honor is due. Some think
that it is generally due to those that perform reason why it is properly due
to those that administer, and well acquit themselves of great charges; that be
the actions as privately and generally good and profitable as they will, they
shall have approbation and sufficient renown which those that know them, and
the safety and protection of the laws; but not honor, which is public, and
has more dignity, fame, and splendour. Some add unto these a third, and that
is, that it be not an action of obligation, but of supererogation.

The desire of honor and glory, and the approbation of 4 Desire of honor,
chap. 20.
another, is a vicious, violent, powerful passion, whereof we have spoken in
the passion of ambition; but very profitable to the weale-publike, to contain
men in their duty, to awaken and inflame them to honorable actions, a
testimony of weakness and humane insufficiency, which for want of good money
uses light and false coin. Now in what, and how Lib. 3. in the virtue of
Temperancie.
far-foorth is it excusable, and when not commendable, and that honor is not
the recompense of virtue, shall be said hereafter.

The marks of honor are very diverse, but the better and more beautiful are
they that are without profit and gain, 5 Marks of honor.
and are such as a man may not strain, and apply to the vicious, and such as
by some base office have served the wealepublike. These are the better and more
esteemed: they are in themselves more vain, that have nothing of worth in
them but the simple mark of men of honor and virtue, as almost in all
policies, crowns, laurel garlands, oak, a certain form of accoutrements,
the prerogative of some surname, precedencie in assemblies, orders of
Knighthood. And it falls out sometimes, that it is a greater honor not to
have these marks of honor, having deserved them, than to have them. It is more
honorable unto me, said Cato, that every man should ask me, why I have not a
statue erected in the Marketplace, than they should ask why I have it.

CHAP. LXI. Science.
SCience, to say the truth, is a beautiful ornament, a very profitable
instrument to him that knows well how to use it; but in what rank to place
it, or how to prise it, all are not of one opinion: and therein they commit two
contrary faults, some by esteeming it too much, some too little. Some make that
account of it, that they prefer it before all other things, and think that
it is a sovereign good, some kind and ray of Divinity, seeking it with
greediness, charge and great labor; others contemn it, and despise those
that profess it: the mediocritie betwixt both is the more just and most
assured. For my part I place it far beneath honesty, sanctity, See lib. 3.
cap. 14.
wisdom, virtue, yea beneath dexterity in affairs: and yet I dare to range
it with dignity, natural nobility, military valor, and I think they may
very well dispute of the precedencie: and if I were called to speak my
opinion, I should make it to march either side by side with them, or
incontinently after. As sciences are different in their subjects and matters,
in the apprentiship and acquisition, so are they in their utility, honesty,
necessity, as also in their gain and glory: some are Theoricks and in
speculation only, others are practike and in action: again, some are Reals,
occupied in the knowledge of things that are without us, whether they be
natural or supernatural; other are particular, which teach the tongues to
speak, and to reason. Now without all doubt, those sciences that have most
honesty, utility, necessity, and least glory, vanity, mercenarie gain,
are far to be preferred before others. And therefore the practike are
absolutely the better, which respect the good of man, teaching him to live
well, to die well, to command well, to obey well; and therefore they are
diligently to be studied by him that endeavors to be wise: whereof this work
is a brief and summarie, that is to say, Moral Science, Oeconomicall,
Political. After these is Natural, which serves to the knowledge of
whatsoever is in the world fit for our use, as likewise to admire the
greatness, goodness, wisdom, power of the chief workmaster. All other
knowledges are vain, and are to be studied cursorily, as appendents unto
these, because they are no ways beneficial to the life of man, and help not
to make us honest men. And therefore it is a loss and a folly to employ
therein so much time, so much cost, so much labor as we do. It is true that
they serve to heap up crowns, and to win reputation with the people, but it
is in policies that are not wholly sound goods.

CHAP. LXII. Of riches and poverty.
THese are the two sources and elements of all discords, 1 The causes of
troubles.
troubles, and commotions that are in the world: for the excessive riches of
some do stir them up to pride, to delicacies, pleasures, disdain of the
poor; to enterprise and attempt: the extreme poverty of others, prouokes
them to envy, extreme jealousy, fury, despair, and to attempt fortunes.
Plato calls them the plagues of a Commonwealth. But which of the two is the
more dangerous, is not thoroughly resolved amongst all. According to Aristotle it
is abundance, for a State needs not doubt of those that desire but to live, but
of such as are ambitious and rich. According to Plato it is poverty, for
desperate poor men are terrible and furious creatures; for wanting either
bread or work to exercise their arts and occupation,s or too excessiuely
charged with imposts, they learn that of the mistress of the school
Necessity, which of themselves they never durst to have learned, and they dare
because their number is great. But yet there is a better remedy for these than
for the rich, and it is an easy matter to hinder this evil; for so long as
they have bread and emploiment to exercise their mysteries, and live, they will
never stir. And therefore the rich are to be feared for their own sakes, their
vice and condition: the poor by reason of the imprudencie of governors.

Now many Lawmakers and great Statesmen have gone 2 Against the equality and
inequality of riches.
about to take away these two extreamities, and this great inequality of goods
and fortunes, and to bring in a mediocritie and equality, which they called
the noursing-mother of peace and amity; and others likewise have attempted to
make all things common, which could never be but by imagination. But besides
that, it is impossible to establish an equality, by reason of the number of
children which increase in one family, and not in another; and that it can
hardly be put in practice, although a man be enforced, and it cost much to
attain thereunto; it were also inexpedient, and to small purpose, and by
another way to fall into the same mischief: for there is no hatred more
capital than betwixt equals; the envy and jealousy of equals is the
seminary of troubles, seditions, and cruel wars. Inequality is good, so it
be moderate. Harmony consists not of like sounds, but different and well
according.

Nihil est aequalitate inaequalius. This great and deformed inequality of
goods proceeds from many causes, especially two: the one is from unjust
lones, as vsuries and interests, whereby the one eat the other, and grow fat
with the substance of another: qui deuorant plebem sicut escam panis. The other
from dispositions, whether amongst the living, as alienations, donations,
endowments in marriages; or testamentaries by reason of death. By both which
means some do excessiuely increase above others, who continue poor. The
heirs of rich men marry with those that are rich, whereby some houses are
dismembered and brought to nothing; and others made rich and exalted. All which
inconveniences must be ruled and moderated by avoiding excessive extremities,
and in some sort approaching to some mediocritie and reasonable equality: for to
have either entire, is neither possible, nor good nor expedient, as has been
said. And this shall be handled in the virtue of Justice.

FINIS.
OF WISDOM, THE SECOND BOOK, Containing the general instructions and rules
of Wisdom.
THE PREFACE. Wherein is contained a general portrait of Wisdom, and the
sum of this Book.
Having in the First Book laid open unto man

But it is a strange thing, that the world should take so little Man would only
live, but he ears not to know how to live well. That which a man should
especially, and only know, is that which he knows least, and cares least to
know.

Our inclinations, designments, studies, are (as we see) from our youth diverse,
according to the diversity of natures, companies, instructions, occasions, but
there is not any that casts his eyes to the other side, that indeuoreth to
make himself wise, not any that ruminateth hereupon, or that does so much as
think thereon. And if perhaps sometimes he do, it is but by chance, and as it
were passing by, and he attends it, as news that is told, which concerns
him not at all. The word pleases some well, but that is all, the thing it
self is neither accounted of, nor sought for in this world of so universal
corruption and contagion. To understand the merit and worth of wisdom, some
kind of air or tincture of nature is necessary; for men are willing to use
study and endeavor, rather for those things that have their effects and fruits
glorious, outward, and sensible, such as ambition, avarice, passion have, than
for wisdom whose effects are sweet, dark, inward, and less visible.

O how much does the world err in this account, it loves better the wind with
noise, than the body it self, the essence without it, opinion and reputation
than verity! Man (as has been said in the first book) is nothing but vanity
and misery, incapable of wisdom. Every man has a taste of that air which he
breaths, and where he lives, follows the train and custom of living
followed by all, how then should he advise himself of any other? We follow the
steps of another, yea we press and inflame one another, we inuest our vices
and passions one into another; no man stays us, or cries hola unto it, so much
do we fail and mistake our selves. We have need of some special favor from
heaven, and withal a great and generous force and constancy of nature to note
that common error which no man finds, in aduising and consulting of that
which no man considers, and resolving our selves quite contrary to the
course of other men.

There are some though rare, I see them, I understand them, I smell them with
pleasure and admiration; but what, they Democrites or Heraclites; the one sort
do nothing but mock and gibe, thinking they show truth and wisdom enough in
laughing at error and folly. They laugh at the world, for it is ridiculous,
they are pleasant, but not good and charitable. The other are weak and poor,
they speak with a low voice, their mouths half open, they disguise their
language, they mingle and stuff their propositions, to make them pass more
currantlie, with so many other things, and with such art, that they are hardly
discerned. They speak not distinctly, clearly, assuredly, but doubtfully like
oracles. I come after them and under them, but I speak in good sooth that
which I think and believe clearly and perspicuously.

I give here a picture, with certain lessons of wisdom, which perhaps may
seem to some new and strange, and such as no man in former time has given in
such a fashion; and I doubt not but malicious people, who have neither
patience, nor power to judge truly and wisely of things, maliciously condemn
whatsoever agrees not with their palate, and with that which they have already
received. But that is all one, for who is he that can assure himself of the
good opinion of all? But my hope is that the simple and debonairie, the
Aetherian and sublime spirits will judge indifferently. These are the two
extremities and stages of peace and serenitie; In the middle are the troubles,
tempests, and meteors, as has been Lib. 1.
said.

To the end we may have some rude and general knowledge The division of this
Book into 4. parts.
of that which is handled in this book, and the whole doctrine of wisdom, we
may divide this matter into four points or considerations. The first are
preparatiues to wisdom, which are two, the one an exemption and freedom from
all that may hinder the attainment thereof, which are 1 Preparatiues.
either the external errors and vices of the world, or inward, as passions:
the other is a plain, entire, and universal liberty of the mind. These two
first, and the more difficult make a man capable and apt for wisdom, because
they empty and cleanse the place, to the end it may be more ample and capable
to receive a thing of so great importance as wisdom is, magna and spatiosares
est sapie^tia, vacuo illi loco opus est, superuacua ex animo tollenda sunt. And
this is the first. Afterward they make him open, free, and always ready to
receive it. This is the second.

The second are foundations of wisdom, which are likewise two, true and
essential probitie, and to have a certain 2 Foundations.
end and course of life. These two respect nature, they rule and accommodate us
thereunto; the first to the universal nature, which is reason; for probitie or
honesty, as shall be said, is no other thing: the second to the particular of
every one of us; for it is the choice of the kind of life proper and fit for
the nature of every one.

The third belongs to the raising of this building, that is to say, offices and
functions of wisdom, which are six, whereof 3 Offices.
the three first are principally for every one in himself, which are piety,
inward government of our desires and thoughts, and a sweet carriage in all
accidents of prosperity and adversity: the other three respect another, which
are such an observation as is necessary of laws, customs, and ceremonies, a
sweet conversation with another, and prudence in all affairs. These six do
correspond and comprehend the four moral virtues, the first, fourth, and fifth
do properly appertain to Justice, and to that which we owe to God and our
neighbor; the second and third to Fortitude and Temperance, the sixth to
Prudence. And therefore these six, are the matter and subject of the third
book, which handles at large the four moral virtues, and in particular the
offices and duties of a wise man, but in this book they are handled in
general.

The fourth are the effects and fruits of wisdom, which are two, to be always
ready for death, and to maintain a 4 Fruits.
man's self in true tranquillity of spirit, the crown of wisdom, and the
sovereign good.

These are in all twelve rules and lessons of wisdom, divided into so many
Chapters, which are the proper and peculiar footsteps and offices of a wise
man, which are not found elsewhere. I mean in that sense wherein we take them,
and now describe them: For although some of them, as honesty, the observation
of the laws, seem to be found in others of the common and profane sort, yet
not such as we here require and decipher them to be. He then is wise, who
mainteining himself truly free and noble, is directed in all things according
to nature, accommodating his own proper and particular to the universal,
which is God; living and carrying himself before God, with all, and in all
affairs, upright, constant, cheerful, content, and assured, attending with
one and the same foot, all things that may happen, and lastly, death it self.

CHAP. I. Exemption and freedom from errors and the vices of the world, and
from passions. The first disposition to Wisdom.
IT is here necessary for the first lesson and instruction unto wisdom to
not the knowledge of our selves and our humane condition; for the first in
every thing is well to know the subject, wherewith a man has to do, and which
he handles and manageth to bring to perfection. But we hold that to be
already done, for it is the subject of our first book: We can only say here,
as a summary repetition of all that has been spoken, that a man aspiring unto
wisdom, should above all things, and before all other works, sufficiently
know himself, and all men besides. This is the true science of man, very
profitable, a matter of great study, fruit, and efficacy, for man is all in
all: It is proper to a wise man, for only he that is wise knows himself, and
he that knows himself well is wise: It is very difficult, for man is
extremely counterfeited and disguised, not only man with man, but every man
with himself. Every one takes a delight to deceive himself; to hide, to rob,
to betray himself, Ipsi nobis furto subducimur; flattering and tickling
himself to make himself laugh, extenuating his defects, setting a high price
of whatsoever is good in himself, winking of purpose lest he should too
clearly see himself: It is very rare and sought for by a few, and therefore no
marvel if wisdom be so rare, for they are very few that do well know this
first lesson, or that do study it; there is not a man that is master to
himself, much less to another. In things not necessary and strange, there
are many masters, many disciples. In this point we are never with, nor within
our selves, we always muse of outward things, and man better knows all
things than himself. O misery, O madness! To be wise in this point, it is
necessary that we know all sorts of men, of all aires, climats, natures, ages,
estates, professions, (to this end serves the traveler and the history) their
motions, inclinations, actions; not only public, (they are least to be
regarded, being all fained and artificial) but private, and especially the
more simple and peculiar, such as arise from their proper and natural
jurisdiction; as likewise all those that concern them particularly, for in
these two their nature is discovered: afterward that we confer them all
together to make an entire body and universal judgment; but especially that
we enter into our selves, taste and attentively sound our selves, examine every
thought, word, action. Doubtless we shall in the end learn that man is in
truth on the one side a poor, weak, pitiful, and miserable thing, and we
cannot but pity him; and on the other, we shall find him swollen and puffed up
with wind, presumption, pride, desires, and we cannot but disdain and detest
him. Now he has been sufficiently deciphered and presented unto us even to
the life, in the first book, by diverse means, in all senses, and according to
all his visages: and this is the reason why we speak no more of this knowledge
of man, and of our selves in this place, but we set down here for the first
rule of wisdom the fruit of this knowledge, to the end, that the end and fruit
of the first book might be the beginning and entrance of the second. This
fruit is to defend and preserve men from the contagion of the world and of
themselves; these are the two evils and formal hindrances of wisdom, the one
outward, as popular opinions and vices, the general corruption of the world;
the other inward, that is, our passions. Now we are to see how difficult this
is, and how a man may defend himself against these two. Wisdom is difficult
and rare, and the greatest, yea almost the only endeavor that we have to attain
unto it, is to set at liberty, and to free our selves from that miserable
double captivity, public and domestical, of another and of our selves: this
being attained, the rest will be easy. Let us speak of these two evils
distinctlie and apart.

As concerning the outward, we have before sufficiently diplayed the vulgar
nature, the strange humors of the world, 2 Exemption of vulgar errors.
and the common sort of people, whereby it is easy enough to know what can
proceed from them; for since they are worshippers of vanity; envious,
malicious, unjust; without judgment, discretion, mediocritie; what can they
deliberat, think, judge, resolve, speak, do well and justly? We have
likewise as it were by example reported and quoted (in presenting the misery
of mankind) many great faults, which the world does generally commit in
judgment and will, whereby it is easy to know, that it is wholly composed of
error and vice; whereunto all the sayings of the wisest of the world do accord,
affirming, that the worser part is the greater: of a thousand there is not one
good; the number of fools are infinite, and contagion is most dangerous in a
prease.

And therefore they counsel us not only to preserve our selves neat and
clear from popular opinions, designments,

But what? it is very rare and difficult so to do. It is a plausible thing, and
that has great appearance of goodness and lata est via ad mortem, and multi per
eam; mundus in maligno positus: we go one after another like beasts for
company; we never diue into the reason, the merit, the equity of the cause;
we follow examples and customs, and as it were of envy and emulation, we
stumble, and fall one upon another; we throng one another, and draw every one
to a headlong downe-fall. We borrow our own overthrow, and perish upon
credit, alienis perimus exemplis. Now he that would be wise, must always
suspect whatsoever pleases, and is approved by the people by the greater
number, and must look into that that is true and good in it self, and not
into that which seems to them, and that is most used and frequented, and not
suffer himself to be cunny-catcht and carried by the multitude, which should
not be accounted but for one, vnus mihi pro populo, and populus pro vno. And
when to stop his mouth, and to beat him down at a blow it shall be said, that
the whole world says it, believes it, does it, he must say in his heart, it is
so much the worse, it is but a simple and a wicked caution; I esteem it the
less, because the world esteems it so much; like wise Phocion, who seeing the
people highly to applaud something which he had spoken, turned to his friends
that stood by him, and said unto them, Has any folly unwitting to my self
escaped my mouth, or any loose or wicked word, that all this people do so
approve me? Quis placere potest populo, cui placet virtus? malis artibus
quaeritur popularis favor. We must then as much as is possible fly the haunt
and company of the sottish, illiterate, ill-composed people, but above all
preserve our selves from their judgments, opinions, vicious behavior, and
without any stir keep always our own thoughts apart by themselves: Quod
scio non probat populus, quod probat populus ego nescio: Sapiens non respicit
quid homines iudicent; non it qua populus sed vt sidera mundi contrarium iter
intendunt, it a hic aduersus opiniones omnium vadit: remaining in the world,
without being of the world, like the kidneies covered with fat, but have none
themselves: non estis de mundo, ideo odit vos mundus: odi prophanum vulgus and
arceo. This is that solitariness so much commended by the wise, which is to
disburthen the soul of all vices and popular opinions, and to free it from
this confusion and captivity, to draw it to it self, and to set it at
liberty.

The other evil and hinderance to wisdom, which a man must carefully avoid,
and which is inward, and therefore the 5 The second part, exemption of passions.
more dangerous, is the confusion and captivity of his passions, and turbulent
affections; whereof he must disfurnish and free himself, to the end he may be
empty and neat, like a white paper, and be made a subject more fit to receive
the tincture and impressions of wisdom, against which the passions do
formallie oppose themselves: and therefore the wisest were wont to say, that it
was impossible even for Jupiter himself to love, to be in choler, to be
touched with any passion, and to be wise at one time. Wisdom is a regular
managing of our soul with measure and proportion: It is an equabilitie, and
sweet harmony of our judgments, wills, manners, a constant health of our
mind; whereas the passions are contrariwise but the furious reboundings,
accessions and recessions of folly, violent and rash sallies and motions.

We have sufficiently deciphered the passions in the first 6 General remedies
against the passions.
book, and said enough to bring us into horror and detestation of them: the
general means and remedies to overcome them (for the particular in every one
are in the third book, in the virtue of fortitude and temperancie) are many
and different, good and evil. And not to speak of that goodness and felicity
of nature, so well tempered and seasoned, that it makes us calm and clear,
exempt and quit from strong passions and violent motions, and keeps us in
good case, equal, united, firm, and as strong as steel against the assault
of our passions, a thing very rare; for this is not a remedy against this
evil, but an exemption of evil, and health it self: but of the remedies
against them we may note four.

The first improper and by no means commendable, is a kind of stupiditie and
insensiblenes in not perceiving and 7 Stupiditie.
apprehending of things; a brutish pampering food of base minds, or such as
have their apprehension wholly dulled; a spiritual leprosy, which seems to
have some show of health, but has it not; for it is not possible there should
be wisdom and constancy, where there is not knowledge and understanding, and
employment in affairs; so that it is only a complexion, and not a virtue. This
is not to feel the disease, and therefore not to cure it: nevertheless this
estate is nothing so bad, as to know, and feel, and understand, and yet to
suffer himself to be gulled and overcome:

-- Praetulerim delirus inersque videri,
Dum mea delectent mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere and ringi. --
The second remedy is little better than the evil it self, but yet more in
use, that is, when a man conquereth and extinguisheth 8 Counterpassion.
one passion by a stronger than it: for passions are never of equal force, but
there is always one or other (as in the humors of the body) which is the
predominant, which rules and deuoureth the rest; and we attribute many times
very untruly that unto virtue and wisdom which arises from passion: but yet
it is enough in these men, when those passions that bear sway in them are not
of the worst.

The third remedy and good (though it be not the best) is wise and
artificial, whereby a man auoideth, flies, and hides 9 Precaution.
himself from all such accidents whatsoever, as may stir, awaken, or kindle
his passions. This is a kind of study and art, whereby a man prepares
himself before the occasions, in diuerting of evils, and providing that he
feel them not; like that King who brake a beautiful and rich cup that one
gave him, to take away in a good hour all matter of brawle and anger that
might happen about it. The prayer of these kind of people is, ne nos inducas in
tentationem. By this remedy, he that sets himself forward to the sport,
sports not himself; men of honor, prompt and choleric, fly contentions,
altercations, and stay themselves at the first onset and occasion of passion.
For when a man is once entered, it is no easy matter to carry himself wisely
and discretly: We guide our affairs in the beginning, and hold them at our
mercy, but after they are once afoote and thoroughly heated, they guide and
carry us. Passions are far more easily avoided than moderated, excinduntur
animo facilius quam temperantur, because all things are in their first birth
feeble and tender. In their weakness we discover not the danger, and in their
full growth and strength we know not how to withstand them; as we may see in
diverse, who easily and lightly enter into quarrels, and law, and contentions,
but are afterward enforced to get out as they can with shame enough, and to
come to any agreement, be it never so base and dishonorable, yea, to seek
false interpretations, to belie themselves, to betray their own hearts, to
plaster and cover the fact, which are all remedies a hundred times worse than
the evil they go about to heal; melius non incipient, quam desinent; from the
want of wisdom, they fall into want of heart: This is contrary to that saying
of Bias, Enterprise coldly, pursue ardentlie. It is like fools, who out of a
vicious shame are easily persuaded to agree to whatsoever a man demands, and as
easily fly from their words and revoke that they have spoken. We must
therefore in all our affairs and commerce with men, from the beginning be
prudent and advised.

The fourth and best remedy of all, is a lively virtue, resolution, and
constancy of the mind, whereby a man sees and 10 Virtue.
confronteth all accidents without trouble, he wrestleth and enters into
combat with them. It is a valiant, noble, and glorious impassibilitie, quite
contrary to the first which we have spoken of, base stupiditie. Now to form
it, and to attain unto it, there is nothing more necessary than a precedent
discourse. Discourse is the master of our passions, premeditation is that which
gives the temper to the soul, and makes it hard and steely and impenetrable
against whatsoever would wound, or hurt it. The proper means to appease and
sweeten these passions, is to know them well, to examine, to judge what power
they have over us, and we over them. But above all, the sovereign remedy is
to believe, and not to suffer himself to be carried with opinion, which is that
which cherishes and kindles our passions, and is (as has bin said) false,
foolish, inconstant, and uncertain, the guide of fools and the vulgar sort;
but to suffer himself to be sweetly led by reason and nature, which is the
guide of the wiser sort, ripe, solid, and settled. But hereof, hereafter more
at large.

But above all other passions, it is necessary that we do carefully 11
Presumption.
guard and defend our selves from that selfeloue presumption, and foolish dotage
of our selves, the plague of mankind, the capital enemy of wisdom, the true
gangreene and corruption of the soul, whereby we adore our selves, and rest
contented with our selves, we harken to none other, and believe none other but
our selves. Now we should know that we are not in greater danger in the hands
of any, than of our selves. It is an excellent mott originallie come from the
Spanish tongue, O God keep my self, from my self. This presumption and
foolish love of our selves proceeds from the ignorance we have of our selves,
of our weakness, and that little that is in us, not only in general of the
infirmity and misery of mankind, but also of our own proper and personal
imperfections: but whosoever he be that has the least grain or touch of this
folly, shall never attain unto wisdom. Faith, modesty, a hearty and serious
acknowledgment of that little that we have, is a great testimony of a good and
sound judgment, of a right will, and is an excellent disposition unto wisdom.

CHAP. II. A universal and plain liberty of spirit both in judgment and
will, the second disposition to Wisdom.
THe other disposition unto Wisdom, which follows the first (which does quit
us from this outward and inward

The first, of judgment, consists in the consideration, judgment,
examination of all things, and in not tying himself 1 The first part, liberty
of judgment.
to any one, but remaining free in himself, universal, ready, and open for
all. And this is the highest point, the proper law and true privilege of a
wise and active man. But few they are that will understand it, and acknowledge
it, fewer that practice it as they should: and this is the reason why we must
here establish it, against such as are incapable of wisdom. And first, to
avoid all miscountings, we explain the words, and give the sense. There are
here three things which maintain, cause, and conserve one the other, that is,
to judge of all things, not to be married or bound to any, to continue open and
ready for all. When I say to judge, my meaning is not to resolve, affirm,
determine: this were contrary to the second, which is, not to bind our selves
to any thing: but it is to examine, and weigh the reasons and counter-reasons
on all parts, the weight and merit of them, and thereby work out the truth. So
likewise not to bind our selves to any thing, is not to settle our selves, and
to remain short of that we should, bleating in the air, and to cease our
endeavors, and to proceed in our necessary actions and deliberations: For I
will that in all outward and common actions of our life, and in whatsoever is
ordinarily used, a man should agree and accommodate himself to the common
sort; for our rule extends not it self to that which is outward, and to the
action, but to that which is within, the thought, and secret, and inward
judgment: yea and therein likewise I consent, that a man settle and apply
himself to that which seems most agreeable to the truth, most honest and
profitable; but yet that it be without determination, resolution, affirmation,
or condemnation of contrary or diverse judgments, old, or new; but always to
hold himself ready to entertain better if it appear; yea not to be offended
if another shall contest with him against that which he thinks better, but
rather desire to hear what may be said; for this is the mean, to exercise the
first, which is to judge, and always to enter into the search of the truth.
These three I say, do maintain and conserve one the other; for he that
judges well, and without passion of all things, finds in every thing
appearances of reason, which hinder his resolution, whereby he fears to
settle his judgment, and so remains undetermined, indifferent, and
universal: whereas contrariwise, he that resolves, judges no more, but
setleth and rests himself upon that which he holds, and so makes himself
a partaker and a particular. To the former, fools, simple and weak people are
contrary: to the second, obstinate opinatiue affirmers: to the third, both of
them, which are particulars: but all three are practiced by the wise, modest,
discreet, and temperate searcher of the truth and true Philosophy. It
remains for the explication of this our proposition, that I let you know,
that by all things, and some thing (for it is said, to judge of all things, not
to be assured of any) we understand not those divine verities which have bin
revealed unto us, which we are to receive simply with all humility and
submission, and without all controversy and discussion, submit our selves, and
captiuate our minds thereunto, captiuantes intellectum ad obsequium fidei, but
we understand hereby all other things without exception. This simple
explication would be sufficient perhaps to persuade an indifferent spirit to
receive this rule of wisdom; but I see and perceive a sort of people,
glorious, resolute, affirmative, which would rule the world, and command it as
it were with a rod, and as others in former times have sworn to certain
principles, and married themselves to certain opinions, so they would that all
others should do the like, whereby they oppose themselves to this noble
liberty of the spirit. It shall be necessary therefore to establish it more
amply, and by order to confirm and handle these three points and members
thereof.

The first is to judge of all. It is the property of a wise and 2 The first,
to judge of all.
spiritual man; says one of the first and wisest of the world, Spiritualis
omnia dijudicat, and a nemine iudicatur: The true office of man, his most
proper and natural exercise, his worthiest profession is to judge. Why is he a
man discoursing, reasoning, understanding? Why has he a spirit, to build (as
they say) castles in the air, and to feed himself with fooleries and
vanities, as the greatest part of the world does? Quis vnquam oculos tenebrarum
causa habuit? No doubtless, but to understand, to judge of all things, and
therefore he is called the governor, the superintendent, the keeper of nature,
of the world, of the works of God. To go about to deprive him of this right, is
to make him no more a man, but a beast; to do it singularly, excellently, is
the part of a wise man: If not to judge, hurts the simple and proper nature of
man, what shall it do in a wise man, who is as far above the common sort of
men, as a common man is above beasts? It is then strange that so many men (I
speak not of idiots, and the weaker sort, who have not the faculty and mean
to exercise it) who either are, or make show of understanding and sufficiency,
deprive themselves willingly of this right and authority so natural, so
just, and excellent, who without the examining or judging of any thing, receive
and approve whatsoever is presented, either because it has a fair semblance
and appearance, or because it is in authority, credit, and practice; yea, they
think that it is not lawful to examine or doubt of any thing, in such sort do
they debase and degrade themselves: they are forward and glorious in other
things, but in this, they are fearful and submisse, though it do justly
appertain unto them, and with so much reason. Since there are a thousand lies
for one truth, a thousand opinions of one and the same thing, and but one that
is true, why should not I examine with the instrument of reason which is the
better, the truer, the more reasonable, honest, and profitable? Is it possible
that amongst so many laws, customs, opinions, different manners, and contrary
to ours, as there are in the world, there are none good but ours? Has all the
world besides been mistaken? Who dares to say so, and who doubts but others
say as much of ours, and that he that thus condemns others, if he had been
there borne and brought up, would think them better, and prefer them before
those he now accounts the only good, and all because he has been accustomed
unto them? To conclude, to him that shall be so foole-hardy to say it, I do
answer, that this rule shall at the least be good for all others, to the end
that they judging and examining all, may find ours to be the better. Go to
then, the wise man shall judge of all, nothing shall escape him which he
brings not to the bar, and to the balance. It is to play the part of
profane men and beasts, to suffer themselves to be lead like oxen. I will that
men live, and speak, and do, as others, and the common sort do; but not that
they judge like the common sort, but judge them. What can a wise man, or a
holy man have above a profane, if he must have his spirit, his mind, his
principal and heroical part a slave to the vulgar sort? The public and
common should content it self, if a man conform himself thereunto in all
apparent things; what has it to do with our inside, our thoughts, and
judgments? They shall govern as long as they will my hand, my tongue, but not
my spirit, for that, by their leave, has another master. It is a hard thing to
bridle the liberty of the spirit, and if a man would do it, it is the greatest
tyranny that may be: a wise man will take heed thereof actiuely and passiuely,
will maintain himself in his liberty, and not trouble that of other men.

Now a wise man enjoying this his right to judge and examine all things, it many
times comes to pass, that the judgment 3 The effect of this first treatise. A
wise man one within, another without.
and the hand, the mind and the body, contradict one another, and that he will
carry himself outwardly after one manner, and judge inwardly after another,
will play one part before the world, and another in his mind, which he must do
to preserve equity and justice in all. That general saying, vniuersus mundus
exercet histrioniam, should properly and truly be understood of a wise man, who
is another man within than he outwardly shows. If he were without such as he
is within, he should not be accounted of, but in all things offend the world:
If he were within such as without, he should be no more a wise man, he should
judge amiss, be corrupted in his mind. He must do, and carry himself
outwardly, for public reverence, and so as he offend no man, according to the
law, custom, and ceremony of the country; and inwardly judge of the truth as
it is, according to the universal reason, whereby it many times comes to pass
that he condemns that which outwardly he does. Sapiens faciet quae non
probabit, vt ad maiora transitum inueniat, nec relinquet bonos mores, sed
tempori aptabit omnia quae imperiti faciunt, and luxuriosi, faciet: sed non
eodem modo, nec eodem proposito, multa sapientes faciunt qua homines sunt, non
qua sapientes. He will carry himself in things and actions, as Cicero in
words, who said, I leave the use or custom of speech to the people, and
observe the true science and knowledge of words, Loquendum and extra viuendum
vt multi, sapiendum vt pauci. Some few examples hereof, and first of things of
less moment. In all humility I take off my hat, and keep my head uncovered
before my superior, for so does the custom of my country require; but yet I
will not leave to judge, that the custom of the East is far better, to
salute and do reverence, by laying the hand upon the breast, without uncovering
the head, to the prejudice of our health, and other inconveniences.
Contrariwise, if I were in the East, I would take my repast, sitting upon the
earth, or leaning on the elbow, or half lying looking upon the table
side-wayes as they do there, and as our Savior with his Apostles did use to
do, recumbentibus, discumbentibus: and yet I would not cease to judge, that the
manner of sitting upright at table, our faces toward it, as the custom is
here, is more honest, more fit, and commodious. These examples are of small
weight, and there are a thousand the like: let us take another of better
importance. I will and I yield my consent that the dead be interred and left to
the mercy of the worms, of rottenness and stench, because it is now the
common custom almost euery-where; but yet I will not cease to judge, that the
ancient manner of burning them, and gathering their ashes together, is more
noble and more neat, to commit and commend them to the fire, the excellentest
element, enemy to putrefaction and stench, neighbor to heaven it self, a
sign of immortality, a shadow of the divinity, and whereof the use is proper
and peculiar unto man, rather than to the earth, which is the ordure, lees,
dregs of the elements, the sink of the world, the mother of corruption, and to
the worms which is the extremest ignominy and horror, and so to couple and
handle alike a man and a beast. Religion it self teaches and commands to
dispose after this manner of all things, as of the Paschall lamb which might not
be eaten, and (where popery bears sway) the consecrated host, and diverse the
like; why then should not the like respect be had of our bodies? What can a man
do that is more dishonorable to the body, than to cast it into the earth there
to corrupt? It seems to me to be the uttermost punishment that can be
inflicted upon infamous persons and heinous offenders, and that the carcasies
of honest and honorable men should be handled with better respect. Doubtless
of all the manners in disposing of dead bodies, which may be reduced to five,
that is, to commit them to the four elements, and the bowels of wild beasts,
the vilest, and basest, and most shameful is to interre them, the most noble
and honorable to burn them. Again, I will and consent, that this my Wise man
in things natural be modest, that he hide and cover those parts and actions
that are called shameful, dishonorable; and he that should do otherwise, I
would detest, and think hardly of him, because it is almost the custom of
the whole world; but yet I will nevertheless that he judge that simply in
themselves, and according to nature, they are no more shameful than the nose
or the mouth, to drink and to eat: Nature, that is, God, having made nothing
shameful, but it is for another cause, not from nature, that is to say, from
the enemy of nature, which is sin. Divinity also more chaste than
Philosophy tells us, that in entire nature, not yet altered by the sin of
man, these parts and actions were not shameful, for then shame was not, it is
the enemy of nature, the fruit of sin. I consent to apparel my self like
those of my country and profession, and if I had been borne in those
countries where they go naked, I would have gone so too: but yet I cease not to
judge, that neither of the two fashions is very good; and if I were to choose,
and ordain, I would choose a fashion indifferent betwixt both, out of those
countries where they cover themselves with one only and simple covering, light
and easy enough, without fashion, or cost; for our manner of attiring is not
good, yea worse than to go naked, to be so fast wrapped and bound, with such a
multitude and variety of couerings of diverse stuffes, even to the number of
four, five, six, one upon another, and whereof some are double, that they hold
us pressed and packt up with so many ties, binding, butnings (not to speak of
that dissolute and abominable excess condemned by all good laws) that we can
hardly stir our selves in them. I will content my self with these examples.
The selfsame a man may say of all laws, customs, manners, and of that which
is de facto, and much more of opinions, and that which is de iure.

If any man shall say that I have judged amiss in these examples; and that
generally, if liberty be given to judge of all 4 An objection.
things, the spirit will wander and lose it self, filling and furnishing it
self with follies and false opinions; I answer to the first, which touches
me in particular, that it is very easy to err in finding the truth in all
these instances, and yet it is ouer-boldnes to accuse any man; for it is as
much as if he should say, that a man knows where and what the truth is in
things, which who can perfectly know or judge of? Now not to find the truth,
is not to judge amiss; to judge amiss, is to wey, and balance, and compare
amiss, that is to say, not to examine the reasons, and to ponder them according
to the first and universal nature, (both which though a man do, yet it
follows not that he must needs find out the truth.) Now I believe nothing
that is but simply affirmed, if it be not likewise proved; but if any man by
contrary reasons more strong and forcible shall make good what he says, of
all others he is the welcomest man unto me, and the man I look for; for
oppositions and contradictions well urged, and with reason, are the true means
to exercise this judging office. I had never set down these opinions, but that
I looked that some one or other should abrogate them, and help me to better,
and to answer more effectually; and to that general objection of the danger
that there is in this liberty, besides that which has been spoken, and shall
more expressly be said in the third lesson of Wisdom and Chapter following,
that the rule which we ought to hold in judging, and in all things is nature,
natural and universal reason, following which a man can never err. See here
the other member of this judicious liberty which we are about to handle, which
will furnish us with a remedy against this pretended danger.

The other point of this lord-like liberty of spirit, is an indifferency of
taste, and a differring of a settled resolution, 5 2 Not to bind our selves to
any thing.
whereby a wise man considering coldly and without passion all things, as is
said, is not obstinate, does not swear, tie, bind himself to any opinion;
keeping himself always ready to receive the truth, or that which seems to
him to have best semblance of truth; and saying in his inward and secret
judgment, that which our ancients were wont to say in their outward and
public, it a videtur, it seems so; there is great appeerance of truth on
this side; and if any man do contradict and oppose himself, with patience he
is ready to understand the contrary reasons and to receive them, finding them
more strong and better; and when he has heard what he can hear, he still
thinks that either there is, or may be better, though as yet it appears
not. This dilation and putting off of a man's judgment is founded first upon
those propositions so much celebrated among the wise, That there is nothing
certain; that we know nothing; that there is nothing in nature but doubt;
nothing certain but incertaintie, Solum certum, nihil esse certi; hoc vnum
scio, quod nihilscio; That of all things a man may dispute alike; that we do
nothing but search, enquire, and grope after appearances, scimus nihil,
opinamur verisimilia; That verity is not a thing of our own invention and
purchase, and when it yields it self into our hands, we have nothing in our
selves whereby we may challenge it, possess it, or assure our selves of it;
That truth and falsehood enter into us by one and the same gate, and there hold
the same place and credit, and maintain themselves by the same means; That
there is no opinion held by all, or current in all places, none that is not
debated and disputed, that has not another held and maintained quite contrary
unto it; That all things have two handles and two visages, and there is reason
for all, and there is not any that has not his contrary, it is of lead, it
turns and accommodateth it self to whatsoever a man will have it: To be
short, it is the doctrine and practice of all the wisest, greatest, and most
noble Philosophers, who have made profession of ignorance, doubting, enquiring,
searching. Others notwithstanding they have been dogmatists, and affirmers,
yet it has been of gestures and words only, and that to show how far they
could wade in the purchase and search of the truth, quam docti fingunt magis
quam norunt; giving unto all things no other nor stronger title, than
probability and true likelihood, and handling them diversely, sometimes with
one visage and in one sense, sometimes in another, by problematicall questions,
rather enquiring than instructing; and many times showing that they speak not
in earnest, but in sport and for exercise; non tam id sensisse quod dicerent,
quam exercere ingenia materiae difficultate voluisse videntur. And who will
believe that it was the purpose of Plato to tie men to his Commonwealth and
his Idees, of Pythagoras to his numbers, of Epicurus to his Atoms, or to give
them for current coin? They took pleasure to solace their spirits with
pleasant and subtle inventions, quae ex ingenio finguntur, non ex scientiae
vi. Sometimes likewise they have studied after difficulty, to cover the
vanity of their subject, and to employ the curiosity of their spirits. And
Aristotle the most resolute of all the rest, the prince of dogmatists, and
peremptory affirmers, the god of pedanties, how often has he been crossed in
his opinions, not knowing what to resolve in that point of the soul, wherein
he is almost always unlike to himself, and in many other things more base
which he knew not how to find or understand, ingeniously confessing sometimes
the great weakness of man in finding and knowing the truth.

They that have come after, of a pedanticall and presumptuous spirit, who make
Aristotle and others say what they 6 Objects.
please, and are more obstinate in their opinions than ever they were,
disauowing those for disciples that faint in their opinions, hate and
arrogantlie condemn this rule of wisdom, this modesty, and academicall
stayednes, glorying in their obstinate opinions, whether they be right or
wrong; loving better a headie froward affirmer against their own opinions, and
against whom they may exercise their wit and skill, than a modest peaceable
man, who doubts and makes stay of his judgment, against whom their wits are
dulled, that is to say, a fool than a wise man; like to women, who love better
to be contradicted, even with injury, than that a man either out of the
coldness of his nature, or contempt should say nothing to them, whereby they
imagine they are either scorned or condemned, wherein they show their iniquity.
For why should it not be as lawful to doubt, and consider of things as
doubtful, not determining of any thing, as it is to them to affirm? Why
should it not be lawful ingenuously to confess that which a man knows not,
since in verity he knows it not, and to hold in suspense that which he is
not assured of, and against which there are many reasons and oppositions? It is
certain according to the opinion of the wisest, that we are ignorant of much
more than we know, that all our knowledge is the lesser part, and almost
nothing, in regard of that we know not: the causes of our ignorances are
infinite, and both in respect of the things themselves either too far from us,
or too near, too great, or too little, too durable, or not durable enough,
perpetually changing, and in respect of our selves, and the manner of knowing
them, which as yet is not sufficiently learned. And that which we think we
know, we know not, neither can we hold it well, for with violence it is got
from us, and if it may not be gotten because our obstinacy in opinion is
strong, yet we are contended with, and much troubled. Now how should we be
capable to know more or less, if we grow resolute in our opinions, settle and
repose our selves in certain things, and in such manner, that we seek no
farther, nor examine any more that which we think to hold? They think this
suspension a shame and a weakness, because they know not what it is, and they
perceive not that the greatest men that are have made profession thereof; they
blush, and have not the heart freely to say, I know not, so much are they
possessed with the opinion and presumption of science; and they know not that
there is a kind of ignorance and doubt, more learned, and more certain, more
noble and generous, than all their science and certainty. This is that that
has made Socrates so renoumed and held for the wisest man: It is the science
of sciences, and the fruit of all our studies: It is a modest, mild, innocent,
and hearty acknowledgement of the mystical height of truth, and of the
poverty of our humane condition full of darkness, weakness, uncertainty;
cogitationes mortalium timidae, incertae adinuentiones nostrae: Deus nouit
cogitationes hominum quoniam vanae sunt. Here I would tell you, that I caused
to be graven over the gate of my little house which I built at Condom in the
year 1600, this word, I know not.

But they will needs that we submit our selves in all duty to certain
principles, which is an unjust tyranny. I yield my Theses, as in the
Hypotheses, whereby there are so many sects among them, that if I yield my
self to the one, I offend all the rest. They say likewise, that it is a great
affliction not to be resolved, to remain always in doubt, yea, that it is a
matter of difficulty for a man to continue long in that state. They have
reason to say it, for they find it so in themselves, being the property of
fools, and weak minds, of presumptuous fools, passionate and obstinate in
certain opinions, who condemn all others, and although they be overcome,
never yield themselves, vexing and putting themselves into choler, never
acknowledging any reason. If they be constrained to change their opinions,
being altered, they are as resolute and obstinate in their new, as they were
before in their first opinion, not knowing how to hold any thing without
passion, and never disputing to learn and find the truth, but to maintain
that which they have sworn and bound themselves unto. These kind of people
know nothing, neither know they what it is to know, because they think to know
and to hold the truth in their sleeue: Because thou think thou see, thou
see nothing, says the Doctor of truth to the Ioh. 9.
glorious and presumptuous man; Si quis existimet se scire aliquid, nondum
cognouit quemadmodum oporteat cum scire. It is fit 2. Cor. 8.
that weak men that have not strength, to keep themselves upright upon their
feet, be kept up with props, they cannot live but in bonds, nor maintain
themselves free, a people borne to servitude, they fear Bug-beares, or that
the Wolf will eat them if they be alone. But in wise, modest, and stayed men
it is quite contrary, the surest stay and most happy estate of the spirit,
which by this means keeps it self firm, upright, constant, inflexible,
always free and to it self: hoc liberiores and solutiores sumus, quia integra
nobis iudicandi potestas manet. It is a very sweet, peaceable, and pleasant
soiorne or delay, where a man fears not to fail or miscount himself, where
a man is in the clame, under covert, and out of danger of participating so many
errors produced by the fantasy of man, and whereof the world is full of
entangling himself in complaints, divisions, disputes, of offending diverse
parts, of belying and gainsaying his own belief, of changing, repenting, and
readuising himself. For how often has time made us see that we have been
deceived in our thoughts, and has enforced us to change our opinions? To be
brief, it is to keep the mind in peace and tranquillity, far from
agitations and vices, which proceed from that opinion of science which we
think to have in things; for from thence do spring pride, ambition, immoderate
defires, obstinacy in opinion, presumption, love of novelties, rebellion,
disobedience: from whence come troubles, sects, heresies, seditions, but from
men fierce, obstinate, and resolute in opinion? not from Academiques, neuters,
modest, indifferent, stayed, that is to say, wisemen. Moreover let me tell
them, that it is a thing that does more service to piety, religion, and divine
operation, than any thing whatsoever. I say service as well in the generation
and propagation, as the conservation thereof. Divinity, yea the mystical part
thereof, teaches us, that well to prepare our souls for God and the receiving
of his holy spirit, we must empty, cleanse, purify them, and leave them naked
of all opinion, belief, affection; make them like a white paper, dead to it
self and to the world, that God might live and work in it, drive away the old
master, to establish the new, expurgate vetus fermentum, exuite veterem
hominem: So that it seems, that to plant and establish Christianity among
infidels, or mis-beleeuing people, as in these days in China, it were a very
excellent method to begin with these propositions and persuasions: That all the
wisdom of the world is but vanity and leasing: That the world is wholly
composed, torn, and vilefied with the forged fantastical opinions of every
private man's brain: That God has created man to know the truth, but that he
cannot know it of himself, nor by any humane means: And That it is necessary
that God himself, in whose bosom it resideth, and who has wrought a desire
thereof in man, should reveal it as he does. But That the better to prepare
himself for this revelation, man must first renounce and chase away all
opinions and beleefs, wherewith the spirit is already anticipated and besotted,
and present himself white, naked, and ready to receive it. Having well beaten
and gained this point, and made men as it were Academicks and Pyrrhonians, it
is necessary that we propose the principles of Christianity as sent from
heaven, brought by the Ambassador and perfect messenger of the divinity,
authorized and confirmed in his time by so many marvelous proofs and
authentical testimonies. So that we see that this innocent and modest delay
from resolution, is a great means to true piety, not only to receive it, as
has been said, but to preserve it, for with it there never are heresies, and
selected particular extrauagant opinions. An Academicke or Pyrrhonian was never
heretic, they are things opposite. It may be some man will say that he will
never be either good Christian or Catholic, because he will as well be a
neuter and irresolute in the one, as the other. This is to understand amiss
that which has been spoken, because there is no delay to be made, nor place
to judge, nor liberty in that which concerns God, but we must suffer him to
put and engraue that which pleases him, and none other. I have made here a
digression for the honor of this our rule against such as contradict it. Let
us now return to the matter.

After these two, to judge of all, to be slow in determining, there comes in
the third place, the universality of spirit, 7 3. The third part, universality
of spirit.
whereby a wise man takes a view and enters into consideration of the whole
Universe, he is a citizen of the world like Socrates, he contains in his
affection all humanekind, he walks through all, as if they were near unto
him; he sees like the sun, with an equal, settled, and indifferent regard,
as from a high watchtower all the changes and interchangeable courses of
things, not changing himself; but always continuing one and the same, which
is a livery of the divinity, and a high privilege of a wise man, who is the
image of God upon earth. Magna and generosares animus humanus, nullos sibi poni
nisi communes and cum Deo terminos patitur. Non idem sapientem qui caeteros
terminos includit, omnia illi secula vt Deo serviunt. Nullum seculum magnis
ingenijs clausum, nullum non cogitationi peruium tempus. Quam natural in
immensum mentem suam extendere, in hoc a natura formatus homo vt paria dijs
velit. ac se in spatium suum extendat. The most beautiful and greatest spirits
are the more universal, as the more base and blunt are the more particular. It
is a sottish weakness to think that a man must believe, do, live in all
respects as at home in his own village and country, or that the accidents that
fall out here, concern and are common with the rest of the world. A fool, if
a man tell him that there are diverse manners, customs, laws, opinions,
contrary to those which he sees in use, either he will not believe them, and
says they are fables; or he presently refuses and condemns them as
barbarous, so partial is he, and so much enthralled with those his municipall
manners, which he accounts the only true, natural, universal. Every man
calls that barbarous that agrees not with his palate and custom, and it
seems that we have no other touch of truth and reason, than the example and
the idea of the opinions and customs of that country where we live. These
kind of people judge of nothing, neither can they, they are flaues to that they
hold, a strong prevention and anticipation of opinions does wholly possess
them, they are so besorted, that they can neither say, nor do otherwise. Now
partiality is an enemy to liberty, and ouerlulleth the mind already tainted
and preoccupated with a particular custom, that it cannot judge aright of
others; an indifferent man judges all things. He that is fastened to one place,
is banished and deprived from all others. The paper that is blurred with
another color, is no more capable of any other, whereas the white is fit to
receive any. A judge that hears a cause! with a preiudicate opinion, and
inclines to one part more than to another, cannot be a just, upright, and true
judge. Now a wise man must free himself from this brutish blockishnes, and
present unto himself as in a table this great image of our mother Nature in
her entire majesty, mark and consider her in a Realm, an Empire, yea in this
whole visible world, as in the figure of a small point, and there read that
general and constant variety in all things, so many humors, judgments,
beleefes, customs, laws; so many alterations of states, changes of fortune;
so many victories and conquests buried and forgotten, so many pomps and
greatnesses vanished, as if they had never been. Hereby a man may learn to
know himself, to admire nothing, to think nothing new, or strange, to settle
and resolve himself in all things. For the better attaining of this universal
spirit, this general indifferency, we are to consider these four or five
points.

The great inequality and difference of men in their nature,

The great diversity of laws, customs, manners, religions, opinions, whereof
we will speak hereafter.

The diverse opinions, reasons, sayings of Philosophers, touching the unity and
plurality, the eternity and temporalitie, Herodotus that since their first
King (which was above eleven thousand years before, the picture and statue of
whom, and of all that succeeded him, they showed him drawn to the life) the
Sun had changed his course four times. The Chaldeans in the time of Diodorus
(as he says) and Cicero, had a register of seven hundred thousand years.
Plato says they of the city of Sais, had memorials in writing of eight
thousand years; and that the city of Athens was built a thousand years
before the said city of Sais. Zoroaster, Pliny, and others have affirmed,
that Socrates lived six thousand years before the time of Plato. Some have
said, that the world has been from all eternity, mortal, and growing and
being again by interchangeable courses. Others and the more noble
Philosophers, have held the world for a god, made by another god greater than
it, or as Plato auerreth; and others argue from the motions thereof, that it is
a creature composed of a body and of a soul, which soul lodging in the
center thereof, disperseth and spreads it self by musical numbers into the
circumference, and parts thereof, the heaven, the stars, composed of bodies
and of a soul, mortal by reason of their composition, immortal by the decree
and determination of the Creator. Plato says, that the world changes
countenance in all respects: that the heaven, the stars, the sun change and
quite alter by turns their motions, in such sort, that that which was first is
last, the East is made the West; and according to the ancient and most
authentical opinion, and of the more famous spirits, worthy the greatness of
God, and founded upon reason, there are many worlds, in so much that there is
nothing one and only in this world, all kinds are multiplied in number, whereby
it seems not to have semblance of truth, that God has made this only work,
without companion, and that all is concluded in this one indiuiduum; at the
least divinity says that God could make many, and infinite worlds, for if he
could make no more but this one visible, his power should be finite, because
the world is such.

By that which we have learned of the discovery of the the whole Cosmographie,
except some scattered Islands, doubting of the Antipodes: for now behold another
world, almost such as ours is, and that all upon firm land, inhabited,
peopled, politiquely governed, distinguished by realms, and Empires,
beautified with cities, that excel in beauty, greatness, opulencie, all
those of Asia, Africa, Europe, many thousand years ago: And who doubts but
that in time hereafter there will be discovered diverse others? If Ptolemy and
other our ancient Writers have been heretofore deceived, why should not he be
likewise deceived that affirms, that all is already found and discovered?
Say it he that will, I will believe him as I list.

Secondly, we see that the Zones which were thought inhabitable by reason of
their excessive heat and cold, are habitable.

Thirdly, that in these new countries, almost all things which we so much
esteem of here, and hold that they were Mahumet: And in the matter of
policy, as that the elder son should succeed in the inheritance, that he
that is exalted to a dignity, loses his own name and takes a new;
tyrannical subsidies, armories, tumblers, musical instruments; all sorts of
sports, Artillery, Printing. From all these discourses we may easily draw
these conclusions: That this great body which we call the world, is not that
which we think and judge it to be; That neither in the whole, nor parts
thereof, it is always the same, but in perpetual flux and reflux; That there
is nothing said, held, believed at one time and in one place, which is not
likewise said, held, believed in another, yea and contradicted, reproved,
condemned elsewhere; the spirit of man being capable of all things, the world
always tumbling, sometime the same, sometimes diverse; That all things are
settled and comprehended in this course and revolution of nature, subject to
increase, changing, ending, to the mutation of times, places, climats, heavens,
aires, countries. And from these conclusions we learn, to marie our selves, to
swear to nothing, to admire, to trouble our selves at nothing; but whatsoever
shall happen, whatsoever men talk of and trouble themselves about, to resolve
upon this point, that it is the course of the world, that it is nature that
works these things; but yet wisely to provide that nothing hurt us by our own
weakness and deiection of mind. Enough is said of this perfect liberty of
judgment, established by these three parts, to judge of all, to judge nothing,
to be universal, wherein I have the rather insisted, because I know that it
pleases not the palate of the world, it is an enemy to pedanterie as well as
wisdom, but yet it is a fair flower or ornament of wisdom, which preserves
us from two contrary rocks, whereon the vulgar sort do commonly lose
themselves, that is to say, from being headie, opinatiue, shameful gainsayers,
repenters, mutable; and a man maintains himself in a sweet, peaceable, and
assured modesty and great liberty of spirit, noble and magnificall
universality. This is that great quality and sufficiency of Socrates, the
Coricaeus of the wise, by the confession of all, of whom it is said as Plutarch
discourses, That he never brought forth, but serving as a Midwife, he made
others to bring forth. This is very near and in some sense the disorder of
the Pyrhonians, the neutralitie and indifferency of the Academicks, from
whence proceeds, not to be astonished at any thing, not to admire any thing,
the sovereign good of Pythagoras, the magnanimity of Aristotle.

Nil admirari, prope res est, vna Numici
Solaque quae possit facere, and seruare beatum.
It is a strange thing that man will not so much as taste it, yea is offended
to hear speech thereof, loves better to continue a slave to run from one
part to another, than to be to himself, to live of his own, to be above all,
and to pass equally through all. 5. Has he not reason to cry with Tiberius,
and O homines ad seruitutem nati? What monster is this, to desire to have all
things free, his body, his members, his goods, and not his spirit, which
nevertheless is only borne unto liberty? A man will willingly make benefit
of whatsoever is in the world, that comes from the East or the West, for the
good and service of his body, nourishment, health, ornament, and accommodate
it all unto his use, but not for the culture of his spirit, benefit and
enriching, giving his body the liberty of the fields, and holding his spirit
in close prison.

The other liberty which is of the will, must likewise be in high esteem with
a wise man. We speak not here of the 7 2 The second part, liberty of will.
free will of man, according to the manner of Divines: we say, that a wise man
to maintain himself in rest and liberty, must manage his will and his
affections, in giving himself and affecting but few things, and those just
(for the just are but few in number if a man judge well) and that without
violence and asperitie. There enter here into combat (or to speak more
mildly, there are to be explicated and understood) two popular and plausible
opinions in the world; the one teaches to be ready and willing in the service
of another, to forget our selves for our neighbor, and principally for the
weale-publike, in respect whereof the particular is not to be respected: the
other to carry our selves courageously with actiuitie, zeal, affection. He that
does not the first, is accused not to have any charity; He that does not the
second, suspected to be cold, not to be a friend, and not to have that zeal or
sufficiency that he ought. Some would have these two opinions to prevail
beyond reason and measure, and there is not any thing which has not been
spoken heerof: for the heads or Cheeftaines many times preach things according
to that use for which they serve, not according as they are: And many times the
truest opinions are not the more profitable. And afterward seeing we hold our
selves too much to our selves, and with a tie too natural, they would distract
us and draw us along, as they that go about to streighten a crooked staff,
bend it as much more the contrary way.

But these opinions ill understood and ill taken, as they are by diverse, bring
with them injustice, trouble, pain, and much 8 The description of others.
evil, as a man may see in those who backbite and detract from all, giving
themselves to hire, and the service of another: They do not only suffer
themselves to be carried, and feased upon, but they likewise thrust themselves
into all matters, as well into those that concern them not, as those that do,
as well into small as great, and many times for no other cause, but to employ
and busy themselves, in negotijs sunt negotij causa; and because they cannot
hold and stay themselves, asif they had nothing to do, with and within
themselves, and that for want of inward, essential, proper and domestical
affairs, they seek and undergo those that are strange unto them. They are
good husbands and frugall enough of their purse, but prodigal of their souls,
their lives, their time, affection, and wills, the good husbandry whereof is
only profitable and commendable. And if they give themselves to any thing, it
is with such passion and violence, that they are no more their own men, so
wholly do they engage and insinuate themselves thereinto. Great men seek
after such people, that will grow into passion and kill themselves for them,
and they allure them with fair promises and much Art, to win them unto them;
and they always find fools enough that believe them, but thev that are wise
will take heed of them.

This is first unjust, it wholly troubles the state, drives away the rest, and
liberty of the spirit. It is, not to know that

Secondly, this sharp intention and passionate affection, troubles all, and
hinders the conduct of those affairs to Ipsa se volocitas implicat, vnde
festinatio tarda est. Qui nimium properat serius absoluit. So likewise a man
being drunken with this violent intention, he entangleth and fettereth
himself, commits many indiscretions and wrongs, grows into hard conceits and
suspicions of others, becomes impatient in cross or slow occurrents that fall
not out according to his own desire: male cuncta ministrat impetus. This is
seen not only in serious affairs, but also vain and frivolous, as in play,
where he that is carried with an ardent thirst of gaining, troubles himself,
and the more he troubles himself, the more he loses. He that walks
moderately, is always with himself, directs his business with better
advantage, and more suredly and cheerfully: he dissembleth, applies, deferreth
all to his own leisure, and as his occasions shall fall out: if he chance to
be convicted in a matter, it is without torment and affliction, being always
ready for a new charge: he always marches with the bridle in his hand,
festinat lent.

Thirdly, this violent affection infecteth and corrupts even the judgment it
self: for following one part and desiring

But for a rule herein, we must remember, that the principle 12 An aduisement.
and most lawful charge that we have, is in every man the conduct and guide of
himself. The reason why we are here, is, that we should maintain our selves
in tranquillity and liberty. And to do this, the best remedy is, to lend our
selves to others, and to give our selves to none but to our selves; to take our
affairs into our hands, not to place them in our hearts; to take business
upon us, but not incorporate them into us; to be diligent, not passionate, not
to tie our selves but to a few, but rather always to reserve our selves unto
our selves. This counsel condemns not those offices due to the
weale-publike, to our friends, our neighbor, yea it is so far from it, that
a wise man must be officious and charitable, apply unto himself the customs
of other men and the world, and the rather to do it, he must contribute to
public society those offices and duties which concern him. Qui sibi amicus
est, hunc omnibus scito esse amicum. But I require a double moderation and
discretion herein; the one, that a man apply not himself to all that is
presented unto him, but to that which is just and necessary; and that is not
hard to be done: the other, that it be without violence and trouble. He must
desire little, and that little moderately; busy himself little, and that
peaceably: and in those charges that he undertakes, employ his pase, his
speech, his attentions, his sweatings, his means, and if need be, his blood,
his life; but yet without vexation and passion, keeping himself always to
himself in health and tranquillity. A man may perform his duty sufficiently
without this ardencie, and this so great contention of will. And they deceive
themselves very much, that think that a business is not well done, and there
is no manner of affection, if it be not done with tempest, clamor and clatter:
for contrariwise, it is that that hinders and troubles the good guide and
conduct thereof, as has been said. O how many men hazard their lives every
day in those wars which no way concern them, and thrust themselves into the
danger of that bartell, the loss whereof does no way trouble their sleep: and
all to the end they may not fail in their duty! whilst there is another in
his own house, that dares not enter the danger, or look the enemy in the
face, is more affected with the issue of that war, and has his mind more
troubled than the soldier that aduentureth his blood and life in the field.

Finally, we must know how to distinguish and separate

CHAP. III. True and essential honesty, the first and fundamental part of
wisdom.
Having prepared and disposed our scholar to wisdom by these precedent
aduisements, that is to say, having purified and freed him from all evils, and
placed him in a good estate, of a full and universal liberty, to the end he
may have a perfect view, knowledge and power over all things (which is the
privilege of a wise and spiritual man, spiritualis omnia dijudicat) it is now
time to give him instructions and general rules of wisdom. The two first
shall be as preambles and foundations, whereof the first and principal is
honesty or probitie.

It will not be, perhaps, any matter of difficulty, to make good this
proposition, That honesty is the first principal show and persuade, which is
that true and essential probitie we here require. For that which is in
authority and credit, wherewith the whole world contenteth it self, that
which is only known, sought for, and possessed (I always except some few of
the wiser) is bastardly, artificial, false, and counterfeit.

First we know that many times we are lead and pricked forward 2 Masks of
honesty.
to virtue and honorable actions, by wicked and condemned means, by default
and natural impotencie, by passion, and vice it self; chastity, sobriety,
temperancie may be in us by reason of our corporal imbecillitie; the contempt
of the world, patience in adversity, constancy in danger, proceed many times
from want of apprehension and judgment: valor, liberality, justice it self,
from ambition: discretion, prudence, from fear, from avarice. And how many
beautiful actions has presumption and temeritie brought forth? So that the
actions of virtue are many times no other but masks, they carry the outward
countenance, but they have not the essence; they may very well be termed
virtuous in consideration of another, and of the visage they carry outwardly and
in public, but in truth and with the actor himself they are nothing so; for
it will appear at the last, that profit, glory, custom, and other the like
strange causes have induced him to do them.

Sometimes they arise from stupiditie and brutish sottishnes, and therefore it
is said, that wisdom and sottish simplicity do meet in one and the same
point, touching the bearing and suffering of humane actions. It is then very
dangerous to judge of the probitie or improbitie of a man by his actions: we
must sound him within, from what foundation these motions do arise: wicked men
perform many times many good and excellent actions, and both good and evil
preserve themselves alike from doing evil, oderunt peccare boni and mali. To
discover therefore and to know which is the true Honesty, we must not stay in
the outward action, that is but the sign, the simplest token, and many times a
cloak and mask to cover villainy: we must penetrate into the inward part, and
know the motive which causes the strings to play, which is the soul and the
life that gives motion to all. It is that whereby we must judge, it is that
wherein every man should provide to be good and entire, and that which we seek.

That honesty which is commonly accounted true, and so much preached and
commended of the world, whereof they 3 Vulgar honesty, and according to the
style of the world.
make express profession, who have the title and public reputation to be men
of honesty and settled constancy, is scholasticall, and pedanticall, servant
to the laws, enforced by hope, and fear, acquired, learned and practiced out
of a submission too, and a consideration of the religion, laws, customs,
commands of superiors, other men's examples, subject to prescript forms,
effeminate, fearful, and troubled with scruples and doubts; sunt quibus
innocentia nisi metu non placet: which is not only in respect of the world
diverse and variable, according to the diversity of religions, laws, examples,
forms, (for the jurisdictions changing, the motions must likewise alter) but
also in it self unequal, wavering, deambulatorie, according to the access,
recesse, and success of the affairs, the occasions which are presented, the
persons with whom a man has to do, as a ship driven with the winds and the
oars, is carried away with an unequal tottering pase, with many blows,
blasts, and billows. To be brief, these are honest men by accident and
occasion, by outward and strange events, and not in verity and essence; they
understand it not, and therefore it is easy to discover them, and to convince
them, by shaking of a little their bridle, and sounding them somewhat nearer,
but above all, by that inequality and diversity which is found in them: for
in one and the same action they will give diverse judgments, and carry
themselves altogether after a diverse fashion, going sometimes a slow pase,
sometimes running a maine gallop. This unequal diversity proceeds from
this, that the outward occasions which move and stir them, do either puff
them up, multiply and increase them, or make them lukewarm and deiect them,
more or less like accidents, quae recipient magis and minus.

Now that true honesty, which I require in him that will be wise, is free,
manly, and generous, pleasant, and cheerful, equal 4 The description of true
honesty.
, uniform, and constant, which marches with a stayed pase, stately and
hawtie, going always his own way, neither looking on this side, or behind
him, without staying or altering his pase, or gate for the wind, the times, the
occasions, which are changed, but that is not, I mean in judgment and will,
that is in the soul, where honesty resideth and has it seat. For outward
actions, especially the public have another jurisdiction, as shall be said in
his place: This honesty I will describe in this place, giving you first to
understand, that following the designment of this book declared in the
Preface, I speak of humane honesty and wisdom, as it is humane, whereby a
man is called an honest man and a wise, and not of Christian, though in the end
I may chance to speak a word or two thereof.

The jurisdiction of this honesty is Nature, which binds 5 Nature enioyneth
honesty.
every man to be, and to make himself such as he ought, that is to say, to
conform and rule himself according unto it. Nature is together both a mistress
which enioyneth and commands honesty, and a law and instruction which
teaches it unto us. As touching the first, there is a natural obligation
inward and universal in every man to be honest, just, upright, following the
intention of his author and maker. A man ought not to attend or seek any other
cause, obligation, instinct, or motive of this honesty; and he can never know
how to have a more just and lawful, more powerful, more ancient, it is
altogether as soon as himself, borne with himself. Every man should be, or
should desire to be an honest man, because he is a man, and he that takes no
care to be such is a monster, renounceth himself, belieth, destroys
himself, by right he is no more a man, and in effect should desist to be a
man. It is necessary that honesty grow in him by himself, that is to say, by
that inward instinct which God has put in him, and not from any other outward
and strange cause, any occasion, or induction. A man will not, out of a just
and regular will, any thing that is depraved, or corrupt, or other than it own
nature requires, it implies a contradiction to desire or accept a thing, and
nothing to care whether it be worth the caring for; a man would have all his
parts good and sound, his body, his head, his eyes, his judgment, his
memory, yea his hose and shoes; and why will he not like wise have his will,
and his conscience good, that is to say, be wholly good and sound? I will
therefore that he be good, and have his will firm and resolved to equity and
honesty, for the love of himself, and because he is a man, knowing that he can
be no other, without the renouncing and destruction of himself, and so his
honesty shall be proper, inward, essential, even as his own essence is unto
him, and he unto himself. It must not then be for any outward consideration,
and proceeding from without, whatsoever it be, for such a cause being
accidental and outward, may happen to fail, grow weak, and alter, and
consequently all that honesty that is grounded thereupon, must do the like. If
he be an honest man, for honor, or reputation, or other recompense, being in a
solitary place, where he has no hope to be known, he either cease to be
honest, or puts it in practice very coldly and negligently. If for fear of
the laws, magistrates, punishments, if he can deceive the laws, circumuent
the judges, avoid or disprooue the proofs, and hide himself from the
knowledge of another, there is an end of his honesty. And this honesty is but
frail, occasioned, accidental and miserable; and yet it is that which is in
authority and use, no man knows of any other, there is not an honest man, but
such as is enforced or invited by some cause, or occasion, nemo gratis bonus
est. Now I would have in this my wise man an essential and invincible
honesty, which depends of it self, and arises from it own root, and may
as hardly be separated, and rooted out, as humanity from a man. I will that
he never consent unto evil, and though his honesty be not made known to any,
yet if he know it himself, what needs any more? If all the world besides
should know it, it is not so much, quid tibi prodest non habere con^^ium,
habenti conscient iam? And what though he receive no great recompense for it?
For what may it be that concerns him so near, as his own proper essence?
This were not to care how bad the horse is, so the saddle be fair. I will
then that those things be inseparable, to be, and to consent to live a man, to
be, and to be willing to be an honest man. This first has been sufficiently
pressed. Let us come to the second.

Now the pattern and rule to be honest, is this nature it 6 Nature teaches
honesty.
self, which absolutely requires that we be such, it is, I say, this equity
and universal reason which shines in every one of us. He which works
according to it, works truly according to God, for it is God, or at least,
his first fundamental and universal law, which has brought it into the
world, and which came first from God; for God and nature are in the world, as
in a state, the king, the author and founder, and the fundamental law which he
has made for the preservation and government of the said estate. This is a
lightning and ray of the divinity, a stream and dependence of the eternal
law, which is God himself and his will: quid natura nisi Deus, and diuina
ratio toti mundo, and partibus eius inserta? He works also according to
himself, for he works according to the stern, and animated instinct, which
he has within himself moving and stirring him: and so he is an honest man
essentially, and not by accident and occasion; for this law and light is
essential and natural in us, and therefore it is called Nature, and the law
of nature. He is also by consequent an honest man, always and perpetually,
uniformly and equally at all times and in all places: for this law of equity,
and natural reason is perpetual in us, edictum perpetuum, inviolable, which
can never be extinct nor defaced, quam nec ipsa delet iniquitas; vermis eorum
non morietur, universal and constant in all things, and always the same,
equal uniform, which neither time nor place can alter nor disguise, receives
neither access nor recesse, more nor less, substantia non recipit magis and
minus. What seckest thou elsewhere, either law or rule in the world? What may a
man say or allege which thou have not about thee and within, if thou will but
feel and hearken to thy self? A man may say to thee, as to a bad debtor, who
asked for what the debt is, and will see the bill which he has about him, Quod
petis intus habes; Thou demandest that which thou have in thy own bosom.
Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui. Gentes naturaliter Psalm. 4. Romans 1.
August.
quae legis sunt faciunt: ostendunt opus legis scriptum in cordibus suis; lex
scripta in cordibus nostris. The law of Moses in his decalogue, is an outward
and public copy, the law of the twelve tables, and the Roman law, the moral
instructions of divines and Philosophers, the aduisements and counsels of
Lawyers, the edicts and ordinances of Princes are no other but petie and
particular pourtraies thereof: so that if there be any law, that straveth the
least that may be from this first and original mistress, it is a monster,
falsehood, and error. To be brief, all the laws of the world, are no other but
copies and abstracts brought forth into judgment, against thee that hold
hidden the original, and make as if thou knew it not, extinguishing as
much as in thee lies this light, which enlightneth thee within, qui veritatem
dei detinent in iniustitia, for these laws had never been published abroad,
but because that law which was inward, wholly celestial and divine, has been
too much contemned and forgotten. These are all rivers, but such as neither
have so much water, nor so pure as the source and invisible fountain, which is
within thee, if thou suffer it not to perish, and to be lost: I say not so much
water, Quam multa pietas, humanitas, liberalitas, fides exigunt, quae extra
tabulas sunt. O the miserable honesty of formalists, who hold themselves to
the words of the law, and so think themselves discharged! How many duties are
there required besides? Quam angusta innocentia ad legem bonum esse: latius
officiorum patet quam iuris regula. The rule of our duty is far larger than
that of the law, which is neither so strong, nor so lively, witness this one
thing, that well to understand and know their intention to quit our selves of
ambiguitie, difficulty, contrariety, we must bring them to the source, and
reentring into the inward part, put them to the touch and rule of nature, Anima
leg is ratio. Behold then an essential, radical, and fundamental honesty,
sprung in us from it own proper roots by the seed of that universal reason
which is in the soul, as the spring and balance in a clock, as the natural
heat in the body, maintaining it self of it self strong and invincible,
whereby a man works according to God, according to himself, nature, the
universal order and policy of the world, quietly, sweetly, and as silently
without noise, as a Ship that is not driven but by the natural and ordinary
course of the water: All other is ingrafted by art and by accidental
discipline, as the heat and cold offeuers, acquired and conducted by strange
occasions and considerations, working with clamor and clatter ambitiously.

This is the reason why the doctrine of all the Sages does 7 We must follow
nature.
teach, that to live well, is to live according to nature, that the chiefest
good in this world is to consent to nature, that in following nature as our
guide and mistress, we can never err, Naturam si sequaris ducem nusquam
aberrabis: bonum est quod secundum naturam, omnia vitia contra naturam sunt:
Idem beat viuere and secundum naturam: understanding by nature that equity
and universal reason which shines in us, which contains and hatcheth in it
the seeds of all virtues, probitie, justice, and is the matrix from whence all
good and excellent laws do spring and arise, yea those true and just
judgments that are sometimes pronounced by the mouth of an idiot. Nature has
disposed all things in the best state that they could be, and has given them
the first motion to good, and the end which they should seek, in such sort,
that he that will follow her, need not obtain and possess his own good and
his own end, Sapientia est in naturam conuerti, and eo restitui vnde publicus
error expulerit; Ab illa non deerr are, ad illius legem exemplumque formari
sapientia est. Men are naturally good, and follow not evil, but for profit or
pleasure, and therefore lawmakers to induce them to follow their natural and
good inclination, and not to enforce their wills, have proposed two contrary
things, punishment and reward.

Doubtless, Nature in every one of us is sufficient, and a sweet Mistress and
rule to all things, if we will hearken unto 8 As a good and sufficient mistress.
her, employ and awaken her; and we need not seek elsewhere, nor beg of
Art and the Sciences, the means, the remedies, and the rules which we have
need of: Every one of us if he will, may live at his pleasure of his own. To
live content and happy, a man need not be wise, a courtier, nor so active;
all this sufficiency that is beyond the common and natural is vain and
superfluous, yea it brings more evil with it than good. We see ignorant
people, idiots, and simple men, lead their lives more sweetly and cheerfully,
resist the assaults of death, of want, of sorrow, more constantly and
contentedly, than the wisest men and most active. And if a man mark it well,
he shall find among persants and other poor people examples of patience,
constancy, equanimitie, more pure than all those that are taught in Schools;
they follow simply the reason and conduct of nature, they travel quietly and
contentedly in their affairs, not enflaming or eleuating themselves, and
consequently more soundly: Others mount themselves upon their great horses,
play the light horsemen, bandie themselves one against the other, keep their
brains always in work and agitation. A great master and admirable doctor in
nature was Socrates, as Aristotle in art and science. Socrates by simple and
natural discourses, by vulgar similitudes and inductions, speaking like a
country swain, did furnish us with precepts and rules of good life, and
remedies against all evils, so substantial and strong, that all the art and
science of the world could not devise better or the like.

But we do not only not hearken unto it, believe and follow 9 We alter it
wholly. By violence.
it according to the counsel of the wise, but also (not to speak of those
monsters who by the violence of their vices, inordinate and perverse delights
and pleasures suffocate and extinguish, as much as in them lies, the light,
mortify the seed thereof) we endeavor to avoid it, we suffer it to sleep and
to cease, loving better to beg elsewhere our first rudiments, to run to
study and art, than to content our selves By art.
with that which is bred within us. We have a busy troublesome spirit, which
offers it self to rule and govern in all things, and which carries it
self after our own wills, disguiseth, changes, and troubles all, will
add, invent, alter, and can not stay it self in home-borne simplicity, it
thinks nothing good wherein there is not craft and subtlety, simplex illa
and aperta virtus in obscuram and solertem scientiam versa est. And it is a
vice common amongst us, not to account of any thing that is in us, we esteem
only of that which is bought, which is costly, and is brought from far: we
prefer art before nature, we shut the windows at highnoone, and light
candles. This fault and folly proceeds from another, that is, that we
esteem not of things according to their true and essential value, but
according to the show and report. How many are there more scrupulous and exact
in those things that belong to the positive and municipall law, than the
natural? Truly almost all, yea even in the ceremonial, and law of civility,
which we have framed to our selves, in respect By ceremonis.
whereof we disdain and are ashamed of nature. We speak little, we make a
fair show, and carefully keep a decorum or decency, and make no difficulty
to go directly against nature, duty, conscience. So that the shadow is more
unto us than the body, the root, the countenance more than the substance and
sound verity. That we may not offend a ceremony, we cover and hide things
natural; we dare not name, and we blush at the sound of things, which we do
in no sort fear to do, both lawful and unlawful. We dare not speak that
which is permitted to do, we dare not directly to name our own proper
members, and yet we fear not to employ them in all manner of wickedness: we
pronounce, speak, and do, without fear and without shame, wicked things, and
such as are against nature and reason, forswear, betray, assail, kill,
deceive; and we blush to speak of things good, natural, necessary, just and
lawful. There is not a husband, which is not more ashamed to embrace his wife
in the open view of the world, than to kill, lie, assail; nor a woman that
will not rather utter any wickedness in the world, than name that wherein she
takes most delight, and may lawfully do. Even to treasons and murders, they
tie themselves to the laws of a ceremony, and there fasten their deuoires. A
strange thing, that injustice should complain of inciuility, malice of
indiscretion! The act of a ceremony, does it not prevail against nature? The
ceremony forbids us to express natural things and lawful, and we give
credit thereunto: Nature and reason forbids us things unlawful, and no man
believes it: A man sends his conscience to the brothell-house, and keeps his
outward countenance in order. All this is monstrous, and the like is not found
amongst beasts. I will not for all this say (as I perceive malice does already
mutter) that ceremony and decency ought not carefully be kept, which is the
salt and seasoning of our actions and conuersations. Amo verecundiam, in ea
ornatus vitae, and Cicer.
vis decori. But I say to them as our Savior to men of the like spirit: O
hypocritae excelantes culicem, camelum deglutientes, Matthew. 23.
qui minima curatis, grauiora spernitis: Haec oportet primum facere, tum illa
non omittere.

From this general and universal alteration and corruption 10 In such sort,
that it is no more known in man.
it is come to pass, that there is nothing of Nature known in us. If we must
say what the laws thereof are, and how many they are, we are much hindered. The
ensign and mark of a natural law is the university of approbation: for that
which Nature shall have truly ordemed for us, we with a common consent shall
follow without doubting; and not only every nation, but every particular person.

Now there is not any thing in the world which is not denied and contradicted,
not by one nation, but by diverse: and there is not any thing so strange and
unnatural in the opinion of diverse, which is not approved and authorized in
many places by common use. The little care of having children, the murder of
parents, of children, of himself, marriage of the nearest in blood, theft,
public merchandise of their liberty and bodies, as well of males as females,
are received by public use in many nations.

Doubtless there remains no more any image or trace of nature in us, we must
go seek it in beasts, where this troublesome 11 And we must seek it elsewhere.
and unquiet spirit, this quicksilver, neither art, nor beautiful ceremony
has power to alter it; they have it pure and entire, if it be not corrupted by
our usage and contagion, as sometimes it is. All the world follows nature,
the first and universal rule which the author thereof has given and
established, except man only who troubles the policy and state of the world
with his gentle spirit, and his free will to wickedness; he is the only
irregular creature, and enemy of nature.

So then the true honesty (the foundation and pillar of wisdom) is to follow
nature, that is to say, reason. The good and 12 True honesty.
the end of man, in whom consists his rest, his liberty, his contentment,
and in a word, his perfection in this world, is, to live and do according to
nature, when that which is the most excellent thing in him commands, that is
to say, reason. True honesty is a right and firm disposition of the will to
follow the counsel of reason: And as the heedle touched with the adamant never
rests it self until he see the north point, and thereby orders and
directs the navigations; so a man is never well, yea, he is as it were undone,
and dislocated, until he see this law, and directs the course of his life,
his manners, his judgments and wills, according to the first, divine, natural
law, which is an inward domestical light, whereof all the rest are but beams.

But to effect it, and to come to the practice, it is far more easy to some,
than to others. There are some that have their 13 The distinction of true
honesty.
particular nature, that is to say, their temper and temperature so good and
pleasing (which especially proceeds from the first formation in the womb of
the mother, and afterward from the milk of the nurse, and this first and
tender education) that they find themselves without endeavor, and without art
or discipline, wholly carried and disposed to goodness and honesty, that is
to say, to follow and conform themselves to the universal nature, whereby
they are termed well-borne; gaudeant been nati.

This kind of natural and easy honesty, and as it were Natural goodness.
borne with us, is properly called goodness, a quality of a soul well borne
and well governed, it is a sweetness, facility, and debonairie mildness of
nature: and not (lest any body should be deceived) a softness, a feminine,
sottish calmness and vicious facility, whereby a man delights to please
all, and not to displease or offend any, although he have a just and a lawful
cause, and it be for the service of reason and justice; whereby it comes to
pass, that they will not employ themselves in lawful actions, when it is
against those that take offense thereat; nor altogether refuse the unlawful,
when they please thereby those that consent thereunto. Of these kind of people
it is said (and this commendation is injurious) He is good, since he is good
even to the wicked; and this accusation true, How should he be good, since he
is not evil, to those that are evil? We should rather call this kind of
goodness innocence, as men call little children sheep, and the like,
innocent creatures. But an active, valiant, manly, and effectual goodness is
that I require, which is a ready, easy, and constant affection unto that
which is good, right, just, according to reason and nature.

There are others so ill borne and bred, that it seems (that like monsters)
their particular natures are made, as it were in despite of the universal
nature, so cross and contrary are they thereunto. In this case the remedy to
correct, reform, sweeten, make tame, and amend this evil, rough, savage, and
crooked nature, to bend it and apply it to the rule of this general and great
mistress the universal nature, is to have recourse to the study of philosophy
(as Socrates did) and unto Acquired virtue.
virtue, which is a combat and painful endeavor against vice, a labourious
study, which requires time, labor, and discipline. Virtus in arduo and circa
difficile: ad ianuam virtutis excubant labor and sudor. Dij mortalibus virtutem
laboris pretio vendiderunt. This is not to bring in a new, strange, or
artificial honesty, and so accidental, and such, as I have said before, is
not the true; but it is by taking away the lets and hindrances, to stir up
and enlighten this light almost extinct and languishing, and to revive those
seeds almost choked by the particular vice, and ill temperature of the
particular person; as by taking away the moat from the eye, the sight is
recovered, and the dust from off the glass, a man sees the clearer.

By all this that has been said, it appears that there are 14 Three degrees
of perfection.
two sorts of true honesty; the one natural, sweet, easy, just, called
goodness; the other acquired, difficult, painful, and laborious, called
virtue. But to say the truth, there is also a third, which is, as it were,
composed of the two, and so there should be three degrees of perfection. The
lowest of the three is a facill and debonairie nature, distasted by it self by
reason of vice; we have named it goodness, innocence. The second more high,
which we have named virtue, is with a lively force to hinder the progress of
vice, and having suffered himself to be surprised, with the first motions of
the passions, to arm and bend himself to stay their course, and to overcome
them. The third and chiefest, is out of a high resolution, and a perfect habit,
to be so well framed, that temptations cannot so much as grow in him, and the
seeds of vice are wholly rooted out, in so much that his virtue is turned
into a complexion, and into nature. This last may be called perfection. That
and the first, which is called goodness, do resemble one the other, and differ
from the second, in that they are without stir, pain, or endeavor. This is
the true tincture of the soul, her natural and ordinary course, which costeth
nothing. The second is always in care and in awe. The last and perfect is
acquired by the long study and serious exercise of the rules of philosophy,
joined to a beautiful and rich nature. For both are necessary, the natural
and the acquired. This is that those two sects did so much study, the Stoickes
and much more the Epicures (which would have seemed strange if Seneca and other
ancient Philosophers did not testify it, who are rather to be credited, than
all the other more modern) who made asport and play game of shame, want,
sickness, griefs, tortures, death: They did not only contemn, patiently
endure and vanquish all asperities and difficulties, but they fought them, they
took pleasure and delight in them, and all to keep their virtue in breath,
and in action, which made them not only firm, constant, grave and severe, as
Cato and the Stoickes, but cheerful, merry, wanton, and if a man may so say,
foole-hardy too.

By the comparison of these three together, it seems to some (who understand
not the height and value of the third) Metellus said, to do evil is an idle
and a base thing; to do good where there is neither pain nor danger, is a
common thing and too easy; but to do good where there is danger and pain, is
the part of an honest man, and of virtue: it is the mot of that divine
Philosopher (...). But to speak in truth that which it is, besides that
difficulty (as elsewhere has been said) is no true, not just and lawful
cause, why a thing should be the more esteemed, it is certain that in the like
thing the natural is more worth than the acquired, that it is far more noble,
more excellent and divine to work by nature than by Art, easily, equally,
vniformedly, than painfully, unequally, with doubt and danger. God is good
after the first manner, that is, the natural and essential goodness, we dare
not call him virtuous, nor the Angels and spirits fortunate they are called
good. But because virtue makes a greater clamor and stir, and works with
greater vehemency than goodness, it is more admired and esteemed of the
vulgar sort (who are but foolish judges) but wrongfully. For these great
exalters and extravagant productions; which seem to be all zeal and fire, are
no part of the play, and do not in any sore appertain to true honesty; they
are rather maladies and furious entrances, fair distant from that wisdom we
here require, which is sweet, equal, and uniform.

Thus much be spoken in gross of honesty; for the parts thereof and the
duties shall be handled in the third booken Art. 14.
honesty (as has been said in the Preface, whither (that I may not iterate
it) I resend the reader) the matter being well prepared, is the fitter for the
(...), the grace, it is not contrary, neither does it enforce or destroy
nature, but sweetly it releeueth and perfecteth it, so that it must not oppose
it self thereunto as to it contrary, but put it on as a crown. They are both
of God, they must not therefore be confounded; every one has his jurisdiction,
his action apart: The organist and he that works at the bellows are two, so
are honesty and grace, the action good in it self naturally, rhorhlly,
humainly, and that by grace made acceptable. That may well be without this, and
has his worth, as in those philosophers and great men in times past, admirable
in nature, and in all kind of moral virtue, and is likewise found in
misbeleeuers or Infidels; but this cannot be without that, no more than the
covering, the crown and perfection can be without the entire body. The player
or organist may in every point exercise his art, without the bellowes-blower,
and so likewise honesty without grace. It is true that this cannot be but aes
sonans, and cymbulum tinniens, but this requires that ^ wherein I see many to
promotiper saltum, Masters without apprentiship, Doctors and nobles in
parchment. Now I see many of these kind of people in the would, but very few
such as Aristides, Bhocion, Cato, Regulus, Socrates; Scipio, Epaminondas, that
is to say, professors of an exact, true, and solid moral virtue, and
philosophical probitie. That complaint and reproach so frequent of the
sovereign Doctor of the truth, against hypocritical Pharifies, will always
have place, for such people will never be wanting, no not amongst the Censors
and refourcers of the world. Now having spoken much of honesty, we must
likewise in a word or two touch the contrary the reunto.

Wickedness i^s against nature, it is foul; deformed, and unprofitable, it
offends every good judgment, fit breeds a 17 The description of wickedness.
hatred of it self being well known, whereupon some have said, that it was
bred and brought forth by idleness and ignorance. Again, wickedness ingendreth
offense and repentance in the soul, which like an ulcer in the flesh, eats
and fretteth it, malice and mischief builds up torments against it self:
malitia ipsa maximam partem veneni sui bibit: malum consilium consultori
possimum: like the waspe, which with his sting offends another but much more
himself, for he leaves behind him, and that for ever, both his sting and his
strength: vice hoth pleasure in it, otherwise it would not be received, nor
find place in the world, nemo enim animi causu malus est; but it does withal
engender displeasure and offense, pain follows firm, says Plato, yea it
grows with it, says Hesiodus, which is quite contrary to the will and to
virtue, which rejoices and contenteth. There is a congratulation, a pleasing
contentment and satisfaction in well doing; it is the true and essential
reward of a good soul, which can never fail him, and wherewith he must
content himself in this world.

There is no man makes a doubt, whether vice be to be avoided, and hated above
all things; but it is a question, whether 18 Whether it be never permitted to
sin.
there may be any such profit or pleasure, as may carry with it a sufficient
excuse for the committing of such or such a finne. It seems to diverse, that
there may. Touching prosin, if it be public, there is no doubt (but yet with
limitation, as shall be said in the virtue of politic prudence) but some will
say as much of particular profit and pleasure. A man ^ Lib. 3. cap. 2.
might speak and judge hereof more certainly, if some certain fact on
example were proposed: but to speak simply, we are firmly to hold the
negative.

That sin can not inwardly furnish us with such pleasure and content, as
honesty does, there is no doubt; but that it 19 Whether all sin engender
repentance. The distinction of vice or wickedness.
tormendth (as has been said) it is not universally and in all senses true: we
must therefore distinguish it. There are three sorts of wickedness and wicked
people some are incorporated into evil, by discourse and resolution, or by
long habit, in such sort, that their understanding it self approves it and
consents there unto. This falls out, when sin having met with a strong
and vigorous heart, is in such sort rooted therein, that it is there formed and
as it were naturalized, and the soul infected and wholly tainted therewith.
Others contrariwise do ill by impulsions, according as the violent wind of
temptation troubles, stirs and precipitateth the soul unto sin, and as
they are surprised and carried by the force of passion. The third, as midlings
betwixt these two, account their vice such as it is, they accuse and condemn
it, contrary to the first, and they are not carried by passion or temptation
as the second; but in cold blood, having well thought thereof, they enter into
the market, they balance it with some great pleasure or profit, and in the end
at a certain price and measure they yield thereunto, and they think they have
some excuse to do it. Of this sort of sins are vsuries, obscenities or
venereous pleasures, and other sins many times resumed, consulted,
deliberated, as also the sins of complexion.

Of these three, the first do never repent, without some extraordinary 20
Their comparison.
touch from heaven: for being settled and hardened in wickedness, they feel not
the prick and sting thereof: for since the understanding approves it, and the
soul is wholly tainted therewith, the will has no will to gainsay it. The
third repent, or seem in a certain fashion, that is to say, simply
considering the dishonest action in it self, but afterward weighing it with
profit or pleasure, they repent not at all: and to say the truth, and to speak
properly, they do not repent, since both their reason and conscience wills
and consents to the fault. The second are they that repent and readuise
themselves, and of whom properly it is called repentance; whereof I will here
take occasion to speak a word or two.

Repentance is a disauowing or denial, and a retractation 21 Of repentance.
of the will, that is, a sorrow or grief engendered in us by reason, which
drives away all other sorrows and griefs which proceed from outward causes.
Repentance is inward, inwardly engendered, and therefore more strong than any
other, as the heat and cold of a fever is more violent than that which is
outward. Repentance is the medicine of the soul, the death of sin, the cure
of our wills and consciences: but it is necessary that we well know it.
First, it is not of every sin, as has been said, not of that which is
inueterate, habituated, authorized by the judgment it self, but of the
accidental, and that which happens either by surprise or by force; nor of
things that are not in our power, whereof we are sorry we cannot repent;
neither can it be in us, by reason of bad issues, and contrary to our counsels
and designments. If a matter fall out besides a man's thought, conceit, and
advice; for that he must not repent him of his counsel and advice, if he
therein carry himself as he ought, for a man cannot divine of events; and if
a man did know them, yet he has no place to consult of them; and we never are
to judge of counsels by their issues; neither must it grow in him by the age,
impotencie, and distaste of things, this were to suffer his judgment to be
corrupted: for the things are not changed, because we are changed, by age,
sickness, or other accidents. The growing wise, or amendment, which comes by
anxietie, distaste, or feeblenes, is not true and religious, but idle and
languishing. The weakness of the body is no fit post to carry us to God, and
to our duty and repentance, but true repentance is the gift of God, which
touches our heart, and must grow in us not by the weakness of the body, but
by the force of the soul and of reason.

Now from true repentance there arises a true, free, and religious confession
of our faults. As in the maladies of the body 22 Of confession and excuse.
we see two kinds of remedies, the one which heals, taking away the cause and
root of the malady, the other which does only cover it and bring it asleep,
and therefore the former is more forcible and more wholesome. So likewise in the
maladies of the soul, the true remedy which cleanses and heals, is a
serious and modest confession of our faults; the other false which does only
disguise and cover, is excuse, a remedy invented by the author of evil it
self, whereof the proverb is, That sin sows itself a garment, that is,
excuse, the garment made of fig leaves by the first offenders, who covered
themselves both with words and deeds, but it was a garment without warmth. We
should therefore learn to accuse our selves, boldly to confess all our
actions and thoughts; for besides that it were a fair and generous liberty,
it were likewise a mean not to do or think any thing, which were not honest
and fit to be published: for he that will be content to be bound to tell all,
will be likewise content to bind himself to do nothing that a man is
constrained to hide; but contrarily, every man is discret and secret in
confession, but not in action. Boldness to sin, is in some sort bridled by
boldness to confess. If it be indecent to do a thing, it is far more indecent
not to dare to avouch it. Many great and holy men, as Saint Austin, Origin,
Hippocrates, have published the errors of their opinions, and we should do
the like of our manners. By going about to hide them, a man falls many times
into greater evils, as he that solemnly denies that he has abused his body
with another, by thinking to mend the matter marres it, at leastwise multiplies
his sin. This is not to excuse vice, but to add thereunto.

CHAP. IIII. To have a certain end and form of life, the second foundation of
Wisdom.
AFter this first foundation of true and inward honesty, there comes as it
were by way of preamble, a second foundation, necessary for the government of
our life, which is to prepare and frame our selves to a certain and assured
course of life, to make choice of that calling which does best befit us, and is
proper unto us; that is to say, which our particular nature (following always
the universal, our great and general mistress and governor) does willingly
accommodate and apply it self unto. Wisdom is a sweet and regular conduct
and carriage of our soul, guiding it with measure and proportion, and
consists in an equality of life and manners.

This choice then is a matter of great difficulty, wherein a 2 This choice a
difficult thing, wherein a man carries himself diuersty.
man carries himself very diversely, and wherein he finds himself hindered
by diverse considerations, which draw him into diverse parts, and many times hurt
and hinder one another. Some are happy therein, who by a great goodness and
felicity of nature, have known both speedily and easily how to choose, and
either by a certain good hap, without any great deliberation, are, as it were,
wholly carried into that course of life, which does best befit them, in such
sort that fortune has been their chooser, and led them unto it, or by the
friendly and provident hand of another, they have been guided and directed.
Others contrarily are unhappy, who having failed even from the entrance, and
wanting the spirit or industry to know themselves, and in a good hour to be
readuifed how they might cunningly withdraw their stake in the midst of the
game, are in such sort engaged, that they can no more recall themselves, and so
constrained to lead a life full of inconvenience and repentance.

But it likewise proceeds many times from the great default of him that
deliberateth, either in not knowing himself well, and presuming too much of
himself, whereby it falls out that he must either shamefully desist from
that which he has undertaken, or endure much pain and torment in persisting
therein. He must remember that to carry a burden, it is necessary there be
more strength than burden, otherwise a man is constrained either to leave it,
or to sink under it. A wise man does never charge himself with more
business, than he knows how to go through: or in not settling himself in any
thing, but changing from day to day, as they do that are never pleased nor
satisfied with any thing, but that which they have not, every thing
discontenteth them, as well ease, as business, to command as to obey. These
kind of people live miserably, and without rest, as men constrained. The other
likewise cannot hold themselves quiet, they cease not to go and come to no
purpose, they seem to do much and do nothing; the actions of a wise man do
always tend to some certain end, Magnam rem puta vnum hominem agere, praeter
sapientem nemo vnum agit, multiformes sumus. But the most part do not
deliberate, and consult of any thing, they suffer themselves to be led like
oxen, or carried according to the times, company, occasion, and they know not
how to give a reason, why they are rather of this calling than another, except
it be because their father professed the same, or that they were unawares carried
into it, and so have continued therein, in such sort, that as they did never
well consider of their entrance, so they know not which way to get out, Pauci
sunt qui consilio se suaque disponant, caeteri eorum more qui fluminibus
innatant, non eunt sed feruntur.

Now that a man may carry himself well herein, choose well, and well acquit
himself, he must know two things and 3 Counsel in chose afairs.
two natures; his own, that is, his complexion, his port and capacity, his
temperature, in what a man excels, in what he is feeble, what he is fit for,
for what he is unfit: For to go against his own nature, is to tempt God, to
spit against the heavens, to leave the business undone, because he cannot do
it, nec quidquam sequi quod assequinequeas, and to expose himself to laughter
and mockery. Afterward he must know that which belongs to his affires, that
is to say, the estate, profession, and kind of life that is proposed. There
are some wherein the affairs are great and weighty, others where they are
dangerous, others where they are not so great, but are mingled, and full of
entaglements, and that draw after them many other businesses; these charges do
much afflict the spirit. Every profession requires more specially one certain
faculty of the soul, one the understanding, another the imagination, another
the memory. Now to know these two natures, his own, and that of the
profession and course of life, that which has been said of the diverse
temperatures of the inward parts and faculties, will help much. Knowing these
two natures, we must compare them together, to see whether they can well join
and endure together, for it is necessary that they agree; if a man be to
contest with his own nature, and to enforce it for the service and performance
of a function and charge which he undertakes; or contrarily, if to follow his
nature, whether willingly, or that by force and insensibly it draw him, a man
happen to fail or err in his duty, what disorder is there? Where is equity?
Where is decency? Si quicquam decorum, nihil profecto magis quam aequabilitas
vitae vniuersae, and singularum actionum, quam conseruare non possis: si
aliorum imiteris naturam, omittas tuam. This is the account we must make, when
we think to do any thing that has worth or grace in it, if nature it self
be wanting,

Tu nihil inuita dices faciesue Minerua: Id quemque decet quod est suum maxim:
sic est faciendum, vt contra naturam vniuersam nil contendamus, ea seruata
propriam sequamur. And if it fall out, that by mishap, imprudency or otherwise
a man find himself engaged in a vocation and course of life painful and
unprofitable, and that a man cannot fly back; it is the part of wisdom, to
resolve to bear it, to sweeten it, to accommodate it unto himself as much as
he can; doing as in a game at hazard, according to the counsel of Plato,
wherein if the die or card fall not out to be good, a man takes it patiently,
and indeuoreth to mend his ill chance by his good play; and like Bees, who
from Time, a sharp and dry herb, gather sweet honey, and as the proverb is,
make a virtue of necessity.

CHAP. V. To study true piety, the first office of Wisdom.
THe preparatiues made, and the two foundations laid, it is time to build, and
to set down the rules of wisdom, whereof the first and most noble concerns
the religion and worship of God. Piety holds the first place in the rank of
our duties, and it is a thing of great importance, wherein it is dangerous and
very easy to err and be mistaken. It is necessary therefore to be advised,
and to know how he that studieth wisdom should govern himself; which we
purpose to do having a little discoursed of the state and success of religions
in the world, referring the rest unto that which I have said in my three
Verities.

It is first a very fearful thing, to consider the great diversity of
religions which have been and are in the world, and 1 Diversity of religions.
much more of the strangenes of some of them, so fantastical and exorbitant,
that it is a wonder that the understanding of man should be so much besotted
and made drunken with impostures; for it seems, that there is nothing in the
world high or low, which has not been deified in some place or other, and that
has not found a place wherein to be worshipped.

They all agree in many things, and have likewise taken their beginning in the
same climat. Palestina and Arabia 2 That all agree in many principles.
which join together (I mean the more renowned and famous mistress of the
rest) have their principles and foundations almost alike; The belief of one
God the author of all things, of his providence and love toward mankind, the
immortality of the soul, reward for the good, chastisement for the wicked
after this life, a certain outward profession of praying, inuocating, honoring
and serving God. To win them credit, and that they may be received, they
allege and furnish themselves, whether indeed and in verity, as the true, or
by imposture and fair semblance, with revelations, apparitions, prophets,
miracles, prodigies, holy mysteries, Saints. All have their fountain and
beginning small, feeble, humble, but by little and little by the imitation and
contagious acclamation of the people, with some fictions as forerunners, they
have taken footing, and been authorized, in so much that they all are held with
affirmation and devotion, yea the absurdest amongst them. All hold and teach
that God is appeased and won by prayers, presents, vows, and promises, and
the like: All believe that the principal and most pleasant service of God, and
the powerfullest mean to appease him, and to obtain his grace, is to punish,
to cut themselves, to impose upon themselves some painful and difficult
labor; witness throughout the world, and almost in all religions, and rather in
the false than in the true, in Mahumetisme, than Christianity, so many orders,
companies, hermitages and frieries destinated to certain and diverse exercises
very painful and of a strict profession, even to the lancing and cutting of
their bodies, thinking thereby to merit much more than the common sort, who
purify not themselves with afflictions and torments as they do, and every day
they provide new: and the nature of man does never cease to invent means of
pain and torment, which proceeds from the opinion that God takes pleasure,
and is pleased with the torment and ruin of his creatures; which opinion is
founded upon the sacrifices, which were universal throughout the world before
the birth of Christianity, and exercised not only upon innocent beasts, which
were masacred, with the effusion of their blood, for a precious present unto
God, but (a strange thing that man should be so sottish) upon infants,
innocents, and men, as well good and honest as offenders, a custom practiced
with great religion almost in all nations: As the Getae a people of Scythia,
who among other ceremonies and sacrifices dispatched unto their god Zamolxis,
from five years to five, a man amongst them to demand things necessary for
them. And because it was thought necessary that one should die suddenly, at
an instant, and that they did expose themselves unto death after a doubtful
manner, by running themselves upon the points of three iauelins, whereby it fell
out, that many were dispatched in their order, until there came one that
lighted upon a mortal wound, and died suddenly, accounting him the fittest
messenger, and in greatest favor with their god, and not the rest: as the
Persians, witness that fact of Amestris the mother of Xerxes, who at one
instant buried alive fourteen young men of the best houses, according to the
religion of the country: as the ancient Gawles, the Carthaginians, who
sacrificed to Saturn their children, their fathers and mothers being present:
the Lacedaemonians, who flattered their goddess Diana, by whipping their youths
in favor of her, many times even to death: the Greeks, witness the sacrifice
of Iphigenia: the Romans, witness the two Decij; quae fuit tanta iniquitas
deorum vt placari pop. Romans non possent, nisi tales viri occidissent: Turks,
who so massacre their visage, their breasts, their members, to gratify their
Prophet: the new East and West Indies; and in Themistitan, where they cement
their idols with the blood of children. What madness was this, to think to
flatter the Divinity with inhumanitie; to content the Divine Goodness with our
affliction, and to satisfy the justice of God with cruelty! Justice then
thirsting after humane blood, innocent blood, drawn and shed with so much
pain and torment, Vt sic dij placentur quemadmodum ne homines quidem saeuiunt.
From Seneca.
whence can this opinion and belief spring, that God takes pleasure in
torment, and in the ruin of his works, and humane nature? Following this
opinion, of what nature should God be? But all this has been abolished
thorowout Christendom, as before has been said.

They have also their differences, their particular articles, whereby they are
distinguished amongst themselves, and 3 They differ.
every one preferres it self above the rest, assuring himself it is the
better, and more true than the rest, reproching the one the other with some
things, and so condemn and reject one another.

But no man doubts, neither is it a matter of labor to know which is the
truest, the Christian religion having so 4 Christian religion above all.
many advantages and privileges, so high and so authentical above others, and
especially these. It is the subject of my second verity, where is showed how
far all others are inferior unto it.

Now as they spring up one after another, the younger does always build upon
the more ancient and next precedent, 5 The latter are built upon the former.
which from the top to the bottom it does not wholly disprove and condemn;
for then it could not be heard or take footing: but it only accuses it either
of imperfection, or of the end, and that therefore it comes to succeed it and
to perfect it; and so by little and little overthrows it, and inricheth it
self with the spoils thereof: as the Judicial, which has retained many
things of the Gentile Egyptian religion the elder, the Hebrews not being
easily purified of their customs: the Christian built upon the verities and
promises of the Judicial; the Turkish upon them both, retaining almost all the
verities of Christ Jesus, except the first and principal, which is his
Divinity: so that if a man will leap from Iudaisme to Mahumatisme, he must
pass by Christianity: and such there have been among the Mahumatists as have
exposed themselves to torments, to maintain the truth of Christian religion,
as a Christian would do to maintain the truth of the Old Testament. But yet
the elder and more ancient do wholly condemn the younger, and hold them for
capital enemies.

All religions have this in them, that they are strange and 6 All are strange
to nature.
horrible to the common sense; for they propose and are built and composed of
parts, whereof some seem to the judgment of man base, unworthy and
unbefitting, wherewith the spirit of man somewhat strong and vigorous, iesteth
and sporteth it self; others too high, bright, wonderful, and mystical,
where he can know nothing, wherewith it is offended. Now the spirit of man is
not capable but of indifferent things, it contemns and disdaineth the small,
it is astonished and confounded with the great; and therefore it is no marvel
if it be hardly persuaded at the first onset to receive all religion, where
there is nothing indifferent and common, and therefore must be drawn thereunto
by some occasion: for if it be strong, it disdaineth and laugheth at it; if it
be feeble and superstitious, it is astonished and scandalized: praedicamus
Iesum crucifixum, Iudaeis scandalum, gentib us stultitiam. Whereof it comes to
pass, that there are so many mis-beleeuers and irreligious persons, because
they consult and hearken too much to their own judgments, thinking to examine
and judge of the affairs of religion according to their own capacity, and to
handle it with their own proper and natural instruments. We must be simple,
obedient, and debonaire, if we will be fit to receive religion, to believe and
live under the law, by reverence and obedience to subject our judgment, and to
suffer our selves to be led and conducted by public authority, Captiuantes
intellectum ad obsequium fidei.

But it was required so to proceed, otherwise religion should not be respected
and had in admiration as it ought; now it is necessary that it be received and
sworn to, as well authenticallie and reverently, as difficultlie: If it were
such as were wholly pleasing to the palate and nature of man without
strangenes, it would be thought more easily, yet less reverently received.

Now the religions and beliefs being such as has been said, strange unto the
common sense, very far exceeding all the 7 Why they are not to be gotten by
humane means.
reach and understanding of man, they must not, nor cannot be gotten nor settled
in us by natural and humane means (for then among so many great minds as
there have been rare and excellent, some had attained thereunto) but it must
needs be, that they be given us by extraordinary and heavenly revelation,
gotten and received by divine inspiration, and as sent from heaven. In this
manner likewise all do affirm, that they hold their religion and believe it,
not from men, or any other creature, but from God.

But to say the truth and not to flatter or disguise, this is 8 And yet they
are gotten by humane means.
nothing; they are, whatsoever some say, held by humane hands and means, which
is true in every respect, in false religions, being nothing but prayers, and
humane or diabolical inventions: the true, as they have another jurisdiction,
so are they both received and held by another hand; nevertheless we must
distinguish. As touching the receiving of them, the first and general
publication and installation of them has been domino cooperante, sermonem
confirmante sequentes signis, divine and wonderful, the particular is done by
humane hands and means; the nation, country, place, gives the religion, and
that a man professes which is in force in that place and among those persons
where he is borne, and where he lives; He is circumcised, baptized, a Jew, a
Christian, before he knows that he is a man; for religion is not of our choice
or election, but man without his knowledge is made a Jew or a Christian,
because he is borne in Iudaisme or Christianity; and if he had been borne
elsewhere among the Gentiles, or Mahumetans, he had been likewise a Gentile or
a Mahumetan. As touching the observation, the true and good professors thereof,
besides the outward profession, which is common to all, yea to misbeleeuers,
they attribute to the gift of God, the testimony of the Holy Ghost within; but
this is a thing not common nor ordinary, what fair color soever they give
it, witness the lives and manners of men, so ill agreeing with their belief, who
for humane occasions and those very light, go against the tenor of their
religion. If they were held and planted with a divine hand, nothing in the
world could shake us, such a tie would not be so easily broken: If it had any
touch or ray of divinity, it would appear in all, it would produce wonderful
effects that could not be hid, as Truth it self has said, If you have but as
much faith as a mustard seed, you should remove mountains. But what proportion
or agreement is there betwixt the persuasion of the immortality of the soul,
and a future reward so glorious and blessed, or so inglorious and accursed, and
the life that a man leads? The only apprehension of those things that a man
says he does firmly believe, will take his senses from him: The only
apprehension and fear to die by justice, and in public place, or by some
other shameful and dishonorable action, has made many to lose their senses,
and cast them into strange trances: and what is that in respect of the worth of
that which religion teaches us is to come? But is it possible in truth to
believe, to hope for that immortality so happy, and yet to fear death a
necessary passage thereunto? to fear and apprehend that infernal punishment,
and live as we do? These are things as incompatible as fire and water. They say
they believe it, they make themselves believe they believe it, and they will
make others believe it too; but it is nothing, neither do they know what it is
to believe. For a belief, I mean such as the scripture calls historical,
is diabolical, dead, informed, unprofitable, and which many times does more
hurt than good: Such believers (says an ancient Writer) are mockers and
impostors; and another says, that they are in one respect, the most fierce and
glorious, in another the most loose, dissolute, and villainous of the world;
more than men in the articles of their belief, and worse than swine in their
lives. Doubtless if we hold our selves unto God, and our religion, I say not
by a divine grace as we should, but only after a simple and common manner, as we
believe a history, or a friend or companion, we should place them far above
all other things for that infinite goodness that shines in them, at the least
they should be put in the same rank or degree with honor, riches, friends.
Now there are very few that do not fear less to commit an offense against
God, and any point of his religion, than against his father, his master, his
friend, his equals. All this hurts not the dignity, purity, and height of
Christianity, no more than the dunghill infecteth the beams of the Sun,
which shines upon it; for as one says, Fides non a personis, sed contra: But a
man cannot pronounce so great a Vae against those false hypocrites, whom Matthew.
23.
Verity it self so much condemns, as they belch out of their own mouths
against themselves.

The better to know true piety, it is necessary first to separate it from the
false, fained and counterfeite, to the end we 9 A distinction betwixt the true
and false religion.
may not equivocate as the most part of the world does. There is nothing that
makes a fairer show, and that takes greater pains to resemble true piety
and religion, and yet that is more contrary and enemy thereunto, than
superstition: like the Woulfe, which does not a little resemble the dog, but
yet has a spirit and humor quite contrary: and the flatterer who
counterfetteth a zealous friend, and is nothing less; or like false coin
which makes a more glittering show than the true. Gens superstitioni obnoxia,
religionibus aduersae. It is likewise envious and jealous like an amorous
adulteress, Tacit.
who with her smooth speeches makes show of greater affection, and care of the
husband, than the true and lawful wife, whom she endeavors to make odious
unto him. Now the notable differences of these two are, that religion loves
and honors God, setleth a man in peace and rest, and lodges in a liberal,
free and generous soul: Superstition troubles a man, and makes him wild, and
iniureth God himself, teaching to fear with horror and astonishment, to hide
himself, and to fly from him, if it were possible; it is a weak, poor, and
base malady of the soul; Superstitio error insanus, August.
amandos timet, quos colit violat: morbus pusilli animi, qui superstitione
imbutus est, quietus esse nusquam potest. Varro ait Deum a religioso vereri, a
superstitioso timeri. Let us speak of them both apart.

A superstitious man suffers neither God nor man to live 10 Superstition
described.
in peace. He apprehends God as one anxious, spiteful, hardly contented,
easily moved, with difficulty appeased, examining our actions after the humane
fashion of a severe Judge, that watches our steps; which he proves true by
his manner of serving him, which is all after one fashion. He trembles for
fear, he is never secure, fearing he never does well enough, and that he has
left something undone, by the omission whereof all is worth nothing that he
has done; he doubts whether God be well content, and labors to flatter
him, to the end he may appease and win him; he importuneth him with prayers,
vows, offerings; he faineth to himself miracles, easily believes and
receives such as are counterfetted by others, and interprets all things
though purely natural, as expreslie sent and done by God; and runs after
whatsoever a man says with all the care that may be, duo superstitionis
propria, nimius timor, nimius cultus. What is all this but by punishing
himself, vilely, basely, and unworthily to deal with God, and more
mechanicallie, than a man would do with a man of honor? Generally al
superstion and fault in religion, proceeds from this, that we make not that
account of God that we should, we revoke him, and compel him into order, we
judge of him according to our selves, we put upon him our humors. O what
blasphemy is this!

Now this vice and malady is almost natural unto us, and 11 It is natural.
we have all a kind of inclination thereunto. Plutarch deploreth the infirmity
of man, who never knows how to keep a measure, or to settle himself upon
his feet: for it leans and degenerateth either into superstition and vanity,
or into a contempt and carelessness of divine things. We are like to an ill
advised husband, besotted and cousened with the coining subtilties of a light
woman, with whom he conuerseth more by reason of her artificial flatteries,
than with his honest spouse, who honoreth and serves him with a simple and
natural shamefastnes: and even so superstition pleases us more than true
religion.

It is likewise vulgar, it proceeds from a weakness of the soul, an
ignorance or mis-knowledge of God, and that very 12 Popular.
gross, and therefore it is most commonly found in children, women, old men,
sick and such as have been assaulted with some violent accident. To be brief,
it is in barbarous natures, Inclinant natura ad superstitionem barbari. Of this
then it is Plutarch. in sectorio.
said, and not of true religion, that it is true that Plato affirms, that the
weakness and idleness of men has brought in religion, and made it prevail,
whereby children, women, and old men should be most capable of religion, more
scrupulous and devout: this were to wrong true religion to give it so poor and
frail a foundation.

Besides these seeds and natural inclinations to superstition, there are many
that shake hands with it, and favor it 13 Nourished and maintained by humane
reason.
greatly for the great gain and profit they receive by it. Great men likewise
and mighty, though they know what it is, will not trouble nor hinder it,
because they know it is a very fit instrument to lead a people withal, and
therefore they do not only inflame and nourish that which is already grafted
in nature, but when need requires they forge and invent new, as Scipio,
Sertorius, Sylla, and others, qui faciunt animos humiles formidine diuum,
depressosque premunt ad terram. Nulla res multitudinem efficacius regit, quam
superstitio Curtius.
.

Now quitting our selves of this foul and base superstition (which I would
have him to abhor, whom I desire to instruct 14 An entrance to the discourse
of true religion.
unto wisdom) let us learn to guide our selves to true religion and piety,
whereof I will give some grounds and pourtraites as lesser lights thereunto.
But before we enter thereinto, let me here say in general, and by way of
preface, that of so many diverse religions, and manners of serving God, which
are, or may be in the world, they seem to be the most noble, and to have
greatest appearance of truth, which without great external and corporal
service, draw the soul into itself, and raise it by pure contemplation to
admire and adore the greatness and infinite majesty of the first cause of all
things, and the essence of essences, without any great declaration or
determination thereof, or prescription of his service; but acknowledging it
indefinitly, to be goodness, perfection, and infinitnes, wholly
incomprehensible and not to be known, as the Pythagoreans, and most famous
Philosophers do teach. This is to approach unto the religion of the angels, and
to put in practice that word of the son of God, to adore in spirit and truth,
for God accounts such worshippers the best. There are others on the other
side, and in another extremity, who will have a visible Deity, capable by the
senses, which base and gross error has mocked almost all the world, even
Israel in the desert, in framing to themselves a molten calfe. And of these
they that have chosen the sun for their god, seem to have more reason than
the rest, because of the greatness, beauty, and resplendent and unknown virtue
thereof, even such as enforce the whole world to the admiration and reverence
of itself. The eye sees nothing that is like unto it, or that approaches
near unto it in the whole universe, it is one sun, and without companion.
Christianity, as in the middle, tempereth the sensible and outward with the
insensible and inward, serving God with spirit and body, and accommodating
itself to great and little, whereby it is better established, and more
durable. But even in that too, as there is a diversity, and degrees of souls,
of sufficiency and capacity of divine grace; so is there a difference in the
manner of serving of God; the more high and perfect incline more to the first
manner more spiritual and contemplative, and less external, the less and
imperfect quasi sub paedagogo remain in the other, and do participate of the
outward and vulgar deformities.

Religion consists in the knowledge of God, and of our selves: (for it is a
relative action between both) the office 15 Diverse descriptions of religion.
thereof is to extol God to the uttermost of our power, and to beat down man
as low as low may be, as if he were utterly lost, and afterward to furnish
himself with means to rise again, to make him feel his misery and his
nothing, to the end he may put his whole confidence in God alone.

The office of religion is to join us to the author and principal

The end and effect of religion is faithfully to yield all the Gloria in
excelsis Deo, and in terra pax hominibus.

Thus much being first known, our instruction to piety is 18 An instruction
to piety.

1. To know God.


first to learn to know God: for from the knowledge of things proceeds that
honor we do unto them. First then we must believe that he is, that he has
created the world by his power, goodness, wisdom, and that by it he governs
it; that his providence watches over all things, yea the least that are; that
whatsoever he sends us is for our good, and that whatsoever is evil
proceeds from our selves. If we account those fortunes evil that he sends
us, we blaspheme his holy name, because naturally we honor those that do us
good, and hate those that hurt us. We must then resolve to obey him, and to
take all in good part which comes from his hand, to commit and submit our
selves unto him:

Secondly, we must honor him: and the most excellent 19 2. To honor him.
and deuoutest way to do it, is first, to mount up our spirits from all
carnal, earthly, and corruptible imagination, and by the chastest, highest and
holiest conceits exercise our selves in the contemplation of the Divinity; and
after that we have adorned it, with all the most magnificall and excellent
names and praises that our spirit can imagine, that we acknowledge that we have
presented nothing unto it worthy it self: but that the fault is in our
weaknesle and imbecillitie, which can conceive nothing more high. God is the
last endeavor and highest pitch of our imagination, every man amplifying the
Ideaa according to his own capacity: and to speak better, God is infinitely
above all our last and highest endeavors and imaginations of perfection.

Again, we must serve him with our heart and spirit, it is 20 3. To serve him
in spirit.
the service answerable to his nature: Deus spiritus est* si Deus est animus,
sit tibi pura mente colendus. It is that which he requires, that which
pleases him: Pater tales quaer is adoratores. The most acceptable sacrifice
unto his Majesty, is a pure, free, and humble heart: Sacrificium Deo spiritus.
An innocent soul, an innocent life: Optimus animus, pulcherrimus Seneca.
Lactan. Merc. Trism.
Dei cultus: religiosissimus cultus imitari: vnicus Dei cultus, non esse malum.
A wise man is a true sacrifice of the great God, his spirit is his temple, his
soul is his image, his affections are his offerings, his greatest and most
solemn sacrifice, is to imitate him, to serve and implore him: for it is the
part of those that are great, to give; of those that are poor, to ask:
Beatius dare quam accipere.

Nevertheless, we are not to contemn and disdain the 21 4. To serve him with
our bodies.
outward and public service, which must be as an assistant to the other, by
observing the ceremonies, or chnances and customs with moderation without
vanity, without ambition, or hypocrisy, without avarice, and always with this
thought, That God will be served in spirit: and That that which is outwardly
done, is rather for our selves than for God; for humane unity and edification
than for divine verity: quae potius ad moremquam ad rempertinent.

Our vows and prayers unto God should be all subject 22 5. To pray unto him.
unto his will: we should neither desire nor ask any thing, but as he has
ordained, having always for our bridle, Fiat voluntas tua. To ask any thing
against his providence, is to corrupt the Judge and Governor of the world; to
think to flatter him, and to win him by presents and promises, is to wrong
him. God does not desire our goods: neither, to say the truth, have we any: all
is his: non accipiam de domo tua vitulos, etc. meus est enim orbis terrae, and
plenitudo eius: but his will is, that we only make our selves fit to receive
from him, never expecting that we should give unto him, but ask and receive:
for it is his office to give as being great, and it belongs to man as being
poor and needy to beg and to receive; to prescribe unto him that which we
want, and we will, is to expose our selves to the inconveniences of Midas, but
that is always best, which pleases him best. To be brief, we must think,
speak, and deal with God, as if all the world did behold us; we must live and
converse with the world, as if God saw us.

It is not with respect to honor the name of God as we ought, but rather to
violate it, lightly and promiscuously to 23 Well to use his name.
mingle it in all our actions and speeches, as it were by acclamation or by
custom, either not thinking thereof, or cursorily to pass him over; we must
speak of God and his works soberly, but yet seriously with shamefastnes,
fear, and reverence, and never presume to judge of him.

And thus much summarily of piety, which should be in 24 The conclusion.
high esteem, contemplating always God, with a free, cheerful, and filial
soul, not wild, nor troubled, as the superstitious are. Touching the
particularities as well of the belief as observation, it is necessary that we
tie our selves to the Christian, as to the true, more rich, high, and honorable
to God, commodious and comfortable to man, as we have showed in our second
Verity; and therein remaining, we must with a sweet submission submit and
settle our selves to that which the Catholic Church in all times has
universally held, and holds, and not intangling our selves with novelties, or
selected and particular opinions, for the reasons set down in my third
Verity, and especially in the first and last Chapters, which may suffice unto
him, that cannot, or will not read the whole book.

Let me only give this one advice necessary for him that intends to be wise,
and that is, not to separate piety from true 25 An aduiseme^t to join piety
and probitie together.
honesty, whereof we have spoken before, and so content himself with one of
them, much less to confound and mingle them together. These are two things
very different, and which have diverse jurisdictions, piety and probitie,
religion and honesty, devotion and conscience; I will that both of them be
jointly in him whom I here instruct, because the one cannot be without the
other entire and perfect, but confused. Behold here two rocks whereof we must
take heed, and few there be that know them, to separate them and to rest
contented with the one, to confound and mingle them, in such sort, that the one
be the jurisdiction of the other.

The first that separate them, and that have but one of them, 26 Of those which
have piety without probitie.
are of two sorts, for some do wholly give themselves to the worship and
service of God, taking no care at all of true virtue and honesty, whereof they
have no taste, a vice noted as natural to the Jews especially (a race above
all others superstitious, and for that cause odious to all) and much displayed
by their prophets, and afterward by the Messiah, who reproched them, that of
their temple they had made a den of thieves, a cloak and excuse for many
wickednesses, which Matthew. 15. and 22.
they perceived not; so were they besotted with this outward devotion, wherein
putting their whole confidence, they thought themselves discharged of all
duty, yea they were made more hardy to do any wickedness. Many are touched
with this feminine and popular spirit, wholly attentive to those small
exercises of outward devotion, whereby they are made never the better; from
whence came that proverb, An angel in the Church, a devil in the house; they
lend the show and outward part unto God, like the Pharisees, they are
sepulchers, white walls, populus hic labijs me honor at, cor eorum long a me;
yea they make piety a cover for impiety, they make it (as they say) an
occupation or a merchandise, and allege their offices of devotion, to
extenuate and recompense their sin and iniquity. Others quite contrary make
no account but of virtue and honesty, little caring for any thing that belongs
to religion, a fault of many Philosophers, and which is likewise too common
amongst our Atheists. These are two vicious extremities, but which is the more
or the less extreme, 27 A comparison.
or which of the two is the more worthy, religion, or honesty, it is not my
purpose to determine; I will only say (to compare them in three points) that the
first is far more easy, of greater show, of simple and vulgar spirits: the
second is far more difficult and laborious in the performance, of less show,
of spirits valiant and generous. 28 Against those that confound piety and
probitis.


I come to others, who differ not much from the first, who take no care but of
religion. They pervert all order, and trouble all, confounding honesty,
religion, the grace of God (as has been said before) whereby it comes to
pass that they have neither true honesty, nor true religion, nor consequently
the grace of God; as they think, a people only content with themselves, and
ready to censure and condemn others, qui confidunt in se, and asperndnt abios.
They think that religion is a generality of all good and of all virtue, that
all virtues are contained in it, and necessarily follow it, whereby they
acknowledge no other virtue nor honesty but that which is opened with the key
of religion. Now it is quite contrary; for religion which is the later, is a
special and particular virtue, distinguished from all other virtues, which may
be without them and without probitie, as has been said of the Pharisees,
religious and wicked; and they without religion, as in many Philosophers good
and virtuous, but yet irreligious. It is likewise, as all divinity teaches, a
moral humane virtue, appertaining to justice, one of the four cardinal
virtues, which teaches us in general to give unto every Thom. p. 2. 2. q. 81.
one that which belongs unto him, reserving to every one his place. Now God
being above all, the universal author and master; we must give unto him all
sovereign honor, service, obedience, and this subalcerne religion, and the
Hypothesis of justice, which is the general Thesis, more ancient and natural.
They on the other side, will that a man be religious before he be honest, and
that religion (which is acquired and gotten by an outward cause, ex auditu;
Quomodo credent sine praedicante?) engenders honesty, which we have showed
should proceed from nature, from that law and light which God has put into us,
from our first beginning. This is an inuerted order. These men will that a man
be an honest man, because there is a Paradise and a hell: so that if they did
not fear God, or fear to be damned (for that is often their language) they
would make a goodly piece of work. O miserable honesty! What thanks
deseruest thou, for that thou do? o cowardly and idle innocence, quae nisi
metu non placet! Thou keep thy self from wickedness, because thou dare
not be wicked, and thou fear to be beaten, and even therein art thou wicked,
Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae. Now I will that thou dare, but yet that
thou will not though thou be never chidden; I will that thou be an honest man,
not because thou would go to paradise, but because nature, reason, God
wills it, because the law and the general policy of the world, whereof thou
art a part, requires it; so as that thou can not consent to be any other,
except thou go against thy self, thy essence, thy end. Doubtless such
honesty occasioned by the spirit of religion, besides that it is not true and
essential, but accidental, it is likewise very dangerous, producing many
times very base and scandalous effects (as experience in all times has taught
us) under the fair and glorious pretext of piety. What execrable wickednesses
has the zeal of religion brought forth? Is there any other subject or
occasion that has yielded the like? It belongs to so great and noble a
subject, to work great and wonderful effects:

Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum
Quae peperit saepe scelerosa atque impia facta.
Not to love him, yea to look upon him with a wicked eye, as a man should look
upon a monster, that believes not as he believes. To think to be polluted by
speaking, or conuersing with him, is one of the sweetest and most pleasing
actions of these kind of people. He that is an honest man by scruple, and a
religious bridle, take heed of him, and account of him as he is. And he that
has religion without honesty, I will not say he is more wicked, but far
more dangerous than he that has neither the one, nor the other, Omnis qui
interficiet vos, putabit se obsequium praestare Deo; not because religion
teaches, or any way favors wickedness, as some very foolishly and
malitiouslie from this place do object, for the most absurd and falsest
religion that is, does it not; but the reason is, that having no taste, nor
image, nor conceit of honesty, but by imitation, and for the service of
religion, and thinking that to be an honest man is no other thing, than to be
careful to advance religion, they believe all things whatsoever, be it
treason, treachery, sedition, rebellion, or any other offense to be not only
lawful and sufferable, being colored with zeal and the care of religion, but
also commendable, meritorious, yea worthy canonization, if it serve for the
progress and advancement of religion, and the overthrow of their adversaries.
The Jews were wicked and cruel to their parents, unjust toward their
neighbors, neither lending, nor paying their debts, and all because they gave
unto the temple, thinking to be quit of all, duties, and rejecting the whole
world, by saying Corban. Math. 15. 5. Marc. 7. 11. 6. Hierom.


I will then (to conclude this discourse) that there be in this my wise man a
true honesty, and a true piety, joined and married together, and both of them
complete and crowned with the grace of God, which he denies none that shall
ask it of him, Deus dat spiritum bonum omnibus potentibus eum, as has been
said in the preface, article the 14.

CHAP. VI. To govern his desires and pleasures.
IT is a principal duty of a wise man, to know well how to moderate and rule
his desires and pleasures; for wholly to renounce them, I am so far from
requiring it in this my wise man, that I hold this opinion to be not only
fantastical, but vicious and unnatural. First then we must confute this
opinion, which banisheth and wholly condemns all pleasures, and afterward
learn how to govern them.

It is a plausible opinion, and studied by those that would seem to be men of
understanding, and professors of singular 1 The first part.
sanctity, generally to contemn and tread underfoot all sorts of pleasures,
and all care of the body, retiring the spirit unto it self, not having any
commerce with the body, but eleuating An opinion of the contempt of the world.
it self to high things, and so to pass this life as it were insensibly
neither tasting it, nor attending it. With these kind of people that ordinary
phrase of passing the time, does very well agree; for it seems to them, that
well to use and employ this life, is silently to pass it over, and as it were
to escape it, and rob themselves of it, as if it were a miserable, burdensome,
and tedious thing, being desirous so to slide through the world, as that not
only recreations and pastimes are suspected, yea odious unto them, but also
natural necessities, which God has seasoned with some pleasure. They come not
where any delight is, but unwillingly, and being where it is, they hold their
breath till they be gone, as if they were in a place of infection: and to be
brief, their life is offensive unto them, and death a solace, pleasing
themselves with that saying, which may be as well ill taken and understood, as
well, vitam habere in patientia, mortem in desiderio.

But the iniquity of this opinion, may many ways be showed. First, there is
nothing so fair and lawful, as well and 2 Rejected.
duly to play the man, well to know how to lead this life. It is a divine
knowledge and very difficult, for a man to know how he should lawfully enjoy
his own essence, lead his life according to the common and natural model,
to his proper conditions, not seeking those that are strange; for all those
extrauagancies, all those artificial and studied endeavors, those wandering
ways from the natural and common, proceed from folly and passion: these are
maladies, without which whilst these men would live, not by playing the men,
but the divines, they play the fools; they would transform themselves into
angels, and they turn themselves into beasts: aut deus aut bestia: homo sum,
humani a me nihil alienum puto: Man is a body and a soul, and it is not well
done to dismember this building, to divide and separate this brotherly and
natural conjunction; but contrariwise, we should renew it by mutual offices,
the spirit must awaken and revive the heavy body, the body must stay the
lightness of the spirit, which many times proves but a trouble-feast; the
spirit must assist and favor the body, as the husband the wife, and not reject
it, not hate it. It must not refuse to participate the natural pleasures
thereof, which are just, and such as befit that marriage that is betwixt them,
always holding therein, as the more wise, a true moderation. A man must
study, know, and meditate on this life, to the end he may return condign
thanks unto him who has lent it. There is nothing which God has made for us
in this present life unworthy our care, and we are accountable for them, even
to the very hairs of our head; for it is no frivolous warrant or commission
for a man to direct himself and his life according to his natural condition,
but God has given it him seriously and expressly.

But what greater folly is there, and more against nature, than to account our
actions vicious, because they are natural 3 Lib. 3. cap. 38.
; unworthy because they are necessary? Now this necessity and pleasure is an
excellent marriage made by God himself. Nature wills very wisely, that those
actions which it has enjoined us for our necessity, be also delightful,
inuiting us thereunto not only by reason, but also by appetite; and these rules
these kind of men go about to break. It is an equal fault and injustice, to
loath and condemn all pleasures, and to abuse them, by loving them overmuch,
we must neither run to them, nor flre from them, but receive them, and use them
discreetly and moderatly, as shall presently be said in the rule. Temperance
which is the rule of our pleasures, condemns as well the insensibilitie and
privation of all pleasure, stuporem naturae, which is the failing extremity,
as intemperancie, libidinem, which is the exceeding extremity. Contra naturam
est torquere corpus suum, faciles odisse munditias and squallorem appetere:
delicat as res cupere luxuriae est, vsitatas and non magno parabiles fugere
dementiae est.

He that desires to discard his soul, let him boldly do it if he can, when
his body is not in health, but endures some

To contemn the world, is a brave proposition, and many but artificial. To
preserve thy self from them as wisdom and the rule following teaches, is not
to contemn the world, which remains wholly entire without it; but it is well
to use the world, well to govern thy self in the world, and as divinity
teaches, to make use and benefit of the world, and not to enjoy it, vti, non
frui. Now these kind of people think to practice the contempt of the world, by
certain outward particular manners and fashions, separated from the common
course of the world: but this is but mockery. There is nothing in the world so
exquisite; the world laugheth not, and is not so wanton within it self, as
without, in those places where men make profession of flying it, and trampling
it under foot, which is spoken against hypocrites, who have so much degenerated
from their beginning, that there remains nothing but the habit, and is also
very much changed, if not in form, at the least in matter, which serves them
for no other use, than to puff them up, to make them more bold and impudent,
which is quite contrary to their institution, vae vobis qui circuit is mare
and aridam, vt faciatis vnum proselytum, and cum factus Mat. 23.
fuerit, facitis filium gehennae: and not against the good, much less against
the estate in it self which is the school of true and holy Philosophy. It is
then a fantastical and unnatural opinion, generally to reject and condemn
all desires and pleasures. God is the creator and author of pleasure,
Plantauit dominus paradisum voluptatis, posuit hominem in paradiso voluptatis,
protulit omne lignum pulchrum, suaue, delectabile, as shall be said. But we must
first learn how to carry our selves therein.

This instruction may be reduced to four points (which if 6 The second part
the rule in our pleasures and desires.
these mortified men, and great contemners of the world did know how to put in
practice, they would work wonders) to know little, naturally, moderately, and
by a short relation to himself. These four go almost always together, and
make an entire and perfect rule, and he that will may gather and comprehend all
these four in this word, Naturally, for nature is the fundamental and
sufficient rule for all. But yet to make the matter more clear and easy, we
will distinguish these four points. The first point of this rule, is to desire
little: A Little.
short good, but an assured means to brave fortune, taking from it all
accidents, and all power over us to hinder the happy content of our life: and
in a word, to be wise, is to shorten our desires, to desire either little, or
nothing at all. He that desires nothing, although he have nothing, is as rich
as he that possesses the whole world, for both come to one end: Nihil interest
an habeas, an non concupiscas: and therefore it was well said, That it is not
multitude and abundance that contenteth and inricheth, but want, yea nothing.
It is the want of desire, for he that is poor in desires is rich in
contentment, summae opes inopia cupiditatum. To be brief, he that desires
nothing is in some sort like unto God, and those that are already blessed, who
are happy and blessed, not because they have and possess all, but because they
desire nothing: qui desiderium suum clausit, cum Jove de foelicitate contendit.
Contrarily, if we let loose the bridle to our appetite to follow abundance and
delicacie, we shall continue in perpetual pain and labor; superfluous things
will become necessary, our souls will be made slaves to our bodies, and we
can live no longer, than that we live in pleasure and delight. If we moderate
not our pleasures and desires, and measure them not by the compass of reason,
opinion will carry us into a headlong downfall, where there is neither bottom
nor brinke: as for example, we will make our shoes of velvet, afterward of
cloth of gold, and lastly of embroderie with pearls and diamonds; we will
build our houses of marble, afterward of jasper and porpherie. Now this mean
for a man to enrich himself, and to make him content, is very just, and in the
power of every man: he need not to seek this contentment elsewhere and without
himself, let him but ask it, and he presently obteineth it of himself. Let
him stay the course of his desires; it is injustice to importune God, Nature,
the world by vows and prayers, to give him any thing, since he has so
excellent a mean in his own power to attain thereunto. Why should I rather
desire another to give unto me, than my self not to desire? Quare potius a
fortuna impetrem vt det, quam a me ne petam? quare autem petam oblitus
fragilitatis humanae? If I can not or will not obtain of my self not to
desire, how and with what face can I press another to give, over whom I have
no right nor power? The first rule then touching our desires and pleasures is,
that this (little) or at least a mediocritie and sufficiency is that which
does best content a wise man and keeps him in peace. And this is the reason
why I have chosen for my device, Peace and poverty. With a fool nothing
suffices, nothing has certeintie or content: he is like the Moon, who asked
a garment that Plutarch.
might fit it; but it was answered, That that was not possible, because it was
sometimes great, sometimes little, and always changeable.

The other point cousen-germane to this, is (naturally): for 7 Naturally.
we know that there are two sorts of desires and pleasures, the one natural,
and these are just and lawful, and are likewise in beasts limited and short,
whose end a man may see: according to these, no man is indigent, for every
thing yields something to content. Nature is contented with little, and has so
provided, that in all things, that which suffices is at hand and in our own
power, parabile est quod natura desiderat and Seneca.
expositum: ad manum est quod sat est. It is this which nature demands for
the preservation of it own essence, it is a favor for which we are to thank
Nature, that those things that are necessary for this life, it has made easy
to find, and such as are hardly obtained are not so necessary; and that
seeking without passion that which nature desires, fortune can no way deprive
us of it. To these kind of desires a man may add (though they be not truly
natural, yet they come very near) those that respect the use and condition of
every one of us, which are somewhat beyond, and more at large than those that
are exactly natural, and so are just and lawful in the second place. The
other desires are beyond nature, proceeding from an opinion and fantasy,
artificial, superfluous, and truly passions, which we may to distinguish them
by name from others, call cupidities or lusts, whereof we have spoken before at
large in the passions: from which a wise man must wholly and absolutely defend
himself.

The third, which is moderately and without excess, has 8 Moderately. See
lib. 3. cap. 38.
a large field and diverse parts, but which may be drawn to two heads; that is
to say, to desire without the hurt of another, of himself; of another without
his scandal, offense, loss, prejudice; of himself, without the loss of his
health, his leisure, his functions and affairs, his honor, his duty.

The fourth is a short and essential relation to himself; 9 By relation.
besides that the carriere of our desires and pleasures must be circumscribed,
limited, and short, their course likewise must be managed, not in a right line,
which makes an end elsewhere and without it self; but in a circle, the two
points whereof do meet and end in our selves. Those actions that are directed
without this reflection, and this short and essential turning, as of covetous
and ambitious men, and diverse others, who run point blanke, and are always
without them, are vain and unsound.

CHAP. VII. To carry himself moderatly and equally in prosperity and
adversity.
THere is a twofolde fortune, wherewith we are to enter the

The vulgar ignorant sort do acknowledge but one: they 2 The opinion of the
vulgar.
do not believe that we have any thing to do, that there is any difficulty,
any fight or contradiction with prosperity and good fortune; wherein they are
so transported with joy, that they know not what they do, there is no rule with
them: and in affliction they are as much astonished and beaten down as they
that are dangerously sick, and are in continual anguish, not being able to
endure either heat or cold.

The wise men of the world acknowledge both, and impute it to one and the same
vice and folly, not to know how 3 Which of the two is more difficult to bear,
prosperity, or adversity. Arist. Senec.
to command in prosperity, and how to carry our selves in adversity: but
which is the more difficult and dangerous, they are not wholly of one accord,
some saying it is adversity, by reason of the horror and bitterness thereof,
difficilius est tristitiam sustinere quam a delect abilibus abstinere: maius
est difficilia perstringere quam laeta moderari. Some affirming it to be
prosperity, which by her sweet and pleasing flatteries does abate and mollify
the spirit, and insensibly robs it of it due temperature, force and vigor,
as Dalila did Samson, in such sort that many that are obdurate, obstinate, and
invincible in adversity, have suffered themselves to be taken by the
flattering allurements of prosperity, magni laboris est far prosperitatem:
segetem nimia sternit vbertas, sic immoderata felicitas rumpit. And again,
affliction moves even our enemies to pity, prosperity our friends to envy.
In adversity a man seeing himself abandoned by all, and that all his hopes
are reduced unto himself, he takes heart at grass, he rowzeth himself,
calls his wits about him, and with all his power adds his own endeavors to
his own help: in prosperity seeing himself assisted by all that laugh at
him, and applaud all that he does, he grows lazy and careless, trusting in
others, without any apprehension of danger or difficulty, and persuading
himself that all is in safety, when he is many times therein much deceived.
It may be that according to the diversity of natures and complexions both
opinions are true: but touching the utility of either, it is certain, that
adversity has this pre-eminence, it is the seed, the occasion, the matter of
well-doing, the field of heroical virtues, virescit vulnere virtus, aegrae
fortunae sana consilia melius in malis sapimus, secunda rectum auferunt.

Now wisdom teaches us to hold our selves indifferent and upright in all our
life, and to keep always one and the 4 The advice of the wise upon both.
same countenance, pleasant and constant. A wise man is a skillful artificer,
who makes profit of all; of every matter he works and forms virtue, as
that excellent Painter Phidias, all manner of images; whatsoever lights into
his hands he makes it a fit subject to do good, and with one and the same
countenance he beholds the two different faces of Fortune. Ad vtrosque casus
sapiens aptus est, bonorum rector, malorum victor: In secundis non confidit, in
aduersis non deficit, nec auidus periculi, nec fugax, prosperitatem non
expectans, ad vtrumque paratus; aduersus vtrumque intrepidus, nec illius
tumultu, nec huius fulgore percussus. Contra calamitates fortis and contumax,
luxuriae non aduersus tantum, sed and infestus: hoc praecipuum in humanis rebus
erigere animum supra minas and promissa fortunae. Wisdom furnishes us with
arms and discipline for both combats; against adversity with a spur,
teaching us to raise, to strengthen and incite our courage; and this is the
virtue of fortitude: against prosperity, it furnishes us with a bridle, and
teaches us to keep and clap down our wings, and to keep our selves within
the bounds of modesty; and this is the virtue of temperancie: these are the
two moral virtues, against the two fortunes, which that great Philosopher
Epictetus did very well signify, containing in two words all moral
Philosophy, sustine and abstine, bear the evil, that is, adversity;
abstain from the good, that is, from pleasure and prosperity. The particular
aduisements against the particular prosperities and adversities shall be in the
third book following, in the virtue of fortitude and temperancie. Here we
will only set down the general instructions and remedies against all
prosperity and adversity, because in this book we teach the way in general
unto wisdom, as has been said in the preface thereof.

Against all prosperity, the common doctrine and counsel consists in three
points: The first, that honors, riches, and 5 Of Prosperity.
the favors of fortune, are ill and wrongfullie accounted and called goods,
since they neither make a man good, nor reform a wicked man, and are common
both to good and wicked. He that calls them goods, and in them has placed
the good of man, has fastened our felicity to a rotten cable, and ancred it in
the quicksands. For what is there more uncertain and inconstant, than the
possession of such goods, which come and go, pass and run on like a river?
like a river they make a noise at their coming in, they are full of violence,
they are troubled; their entrance is full of vexation, and they vanish in a
moment; and when they are quite dried up, there remains nothing in the
bottom but the mud.

The second point is to remember, that prosperity is like a honnied poison,
sweet and pleasant, but dangerous, whereof footing, for there is no time
wherein men do more forget God. It is a rare and difficult thing to find a man
who does willingly attribute unto him the cause of his felicity. And this is
the cause why in the greatest prosperity we must use the counsel of our
friends, and give them more authority over us, than at other times; and
therefore we must carry our selves as in an evil and dangerous way, go with
fear and doubt, desiring the hand and help of another. In these times of
prosperity, adversity is a medicine, because it leads us to the knowledge
of our selves.

The third is to retain our desires, and to set a measure unto them.
Prosperity puffs up the heart, spurreth us forward, Si qua finiri non
possunt, extra sapientiam sunt.

Against all adversity, these are the general aduisements. In the first
place, we must take heed of the common and vulgar 8 Of adversity, and that it
is no evil.
opinion, erroneous and always different from true reason, for to discredit
and to bring into hatred and horror all adversity and afflictions, they call
them evils, disasters, mischiefs, although all outward things be neither good
nor evil. Never did adversity make a man wicked, but has rather served as a
means to mend those that are wicked, and are common both to the good and to
the wicked.

Doubtless, crosses and heavy accidents are common to all, but they work
diverse effects, according to that subject 9 It is common to all, but diversely.
whereupon they light. To fools and reprobate persons they serve to drive them
into despair, to afflict and enrage them: Perhaps they enforce them (if they
be heavy and extreme) to stoop, to cry unto God, to look up unto Heaven;
but that is all: To sinners and offenders they are so many lively instructions,
and compulsions to put them in mind of their duty, and to bring them to the
knowledge of God: To virtuous people, they are the lists and theaters wherein
to exercise their virtue, to win unto themselves greater commendations and a
nearer alliance with God: To wise men they are matter of good, and sometimes
stages and degrees whereby to pass and mount up to all height and greatness,
as we see and may read of diverse, who being assailed by such and so great
crosses, as a man would have thought them their utter overthrow and undoing,
have been raised by the selfsame means to the highest pitch of their own
desires, and contrariwise without that infelicitie, had still remained under
hatches, as that great Athenian Captain knew well when he said, perier amus
nisi perijssemus. A very excellent example here of was Joseph the son of
Jacob. It is true that these are blows from heaven, but the virtue and
wisdom of man serves as a proper instrument, from whence came that wise
saying of the Sages, To make of necessity a virtue. It is a very good
husbandry, and the first property of a wise man, to draw good from evil, to
handle his affairs with such dexterity, and so to win the wind, and to set
the bias, that of that which is ill, he may make good use, and better his own
condition.

Afflictions and adversities proceed from three causes, 10 It has three
causes and three effects.
which are the three authors and workers of our punishments; sin the first
inuentor which has brought them into nature; the anger and justice of God,
which sets them aworke as his Commissaries and executioners; the policy of
the world troubled and changed by sin, wherein as a general revolt, and
cruill tumult, things not being in their due places, and not doing their
office, all evils do spring and arise; as in a body the disiointing of the
members, the dislocation of the bones brings great pain, and much
unquietness. These three are not favorable unto us, the first is to be hated
of all as our enemy, the second to be feared as terrible, the third to be
avoided as an imposture. That a man may the better defend and quit himself
from all three, there is no better way than to use their own proper arms,
wherewith they punish us, as David cut off Goliahs head with his own sword,
making of necessity a virtue, profit of pain and affliction, turning them
against themselves. Affliction is the true fruit or science of sin, being
well taken is the death and ruin thereof, and it does that to the author
thereof, which the viper does to his damme that brought him forth. It is the
oil of the Scorpion, which heals his own sting, to the end it may perish by
it own invention: perijt art sua: patimur quia peccauimus: patimur vt non
peccemus. It is the file of the soul, which scoureth, purifieth and cleanses
it from all sin. And consequently it appeaseth the anger of God, and freeth
us from the prisons and bands of Justice, to bring us into the fair and clear
sunshine of grace and mercy. Finally, it weaneth us from the world, it
plucketh us from the dug, and makes us distaste with the bitterness thereof,
like wormwood upon the teat of the nurse, the sweet milk and food of this
deceitful world.

A great and principal mean for a man to carry himself well in adversity,
is to be an honest man. A virtuous man 11 A general advice.
is more peaceable in adversity, than a vicious in prosperity: like those
that have a fever, who feel and find more harm and violence in the heat and
cold thereof, and in the extreamitie of their fittes, than such as are sound in
the heat and cold of Summer and Winter. And even so they that have their
consciences sick, are much more tormented, than they that are sound, that are
honest men. For having the inward part whole and healthful, they can no way
be endamaged by the outward, especially opposing against it a good courage.

Adversities are of two sorts: some are true and natural, as 12 An advice more
special.
sickness, griefs, loss of those things we love: others are false and
fained, either by a common or particular opinion, and not in verity. That it
is so, man has his spirit and body as much at command, as before they happened.
To these kind of men, only this one word; That which thou complainest of, is
neither painful nor troublesome, but thou make it such, and make thy self
to believe it.

As touching the true and natural, the more prompt and popular and more sound
opinions are the more natural and 13 Natural.
more just. First we must remember, that a man indureth nothing against the
humane and natural law, since even at the To endure is natural and humane.
birth of man all these things are annexed, and given as ordinary. In
whatsoever does afflict us, let us consider two things, the nature of that that
happens unto us, and that which is in our selves: and using things according to
nature, we can receive no tediousness or offense thereby. For offense is a
malady of the soul contrary to nature, and therefore should by no means
come near unto us. There is not any accident in the world which may happen
unto us, wherein nature has not prepared an aptness in us to receive it, and
to turn it to our contentment. There is no manner of life so strait that has
not some solace and recreation. There is no prison so strong and dark that
gives not place to a song sometimes to comfort a prisoner. Jonas had leisure to
make his prayers unto God even in the belly of the Whale, and was heard. It is
a favor of nature that it finds a remedy and ease unto our evils in the
bearing of them, it being so that man is borne to be subject to all sorts of
miseries, omnia ad quae gemimus, quae expauescimus tributa vitaesunt.

Secondly, we must remember, that there is only the lesser part of man subject
to fortune; we have the principal in our 14 It touches but the lesser part of
man.
own power, and it cannot be overcome without our own consent. Fortune may
make a man poor, sick, afflicted, but not vicious, dissolute, dejected; it
cannot take from us probitie, courage, virtue.

Afterward we must come to fidelity, reason, justice. Many times a man
complains unjustly, for though he be sometimes 15 It is not against reason
and justice.
surprised with some ill accident, yet he is more often with a good, and so the
one must recompense the other. And if a man consider well thereof, he shall
find more reason to content himself with his good fortunes, than to complain
of his bad: and as we turn our eyes from those things that offend us, and
delight to cast them upon green and pleasant colors, so must we divert our
thoughts from heavy and melancholic occurrents, and apply them to those that
are pleasant and pleasing unto us. But we are malicious resembling
cupping-glasses, which draw the corrupt blood, and leave the good; like a
covetous man who sells the best wine, and drinks the worst, like little
children, from whom if you take away one of their play-games, in a fury they
cast away all the rest. For if any misfortune happen unto us, we torment our
selves, and forget all the rest that may any way comfort us: yea some there are
that for small losses term themselves unfortunate in all things, and forget
that they ever received any good, in such sort that an ounce of adversity
brings them more hearty grief then ten thousand of prosperity, pleasure or
delight.

We must likewise cast our eyes upon those that are of a 16 It is little in
comparison.
far worse condition than our selves, who would think themselves happy if
they were in our place.

Cum tibi displiceat rerum fortuna tuarum,
Alterius specta, quo sis discrimine peior.
It were good and necessary that these complainers did practice the saying and
advice of a wiseman, that if all the evils

After all these opinions, we may conclude that there are two great remedies
against all evils and adversities, which may be reduced almost to one: Custom
for the vulgar and baser sort, and meditation for the wiser. Both of them have
their force from time, the common and strongest salve against all evils; but
the wise take it before hand, this is foresight, and the feeble and vulgar sort
after hand. That Custom prevails much it does plainly appear, in that those
things that are most tedious and offensive, are made thereby easy and
pleasing. Natura calamitatum mollimentum consuetudinem inuenit. Slaves weep
when they enter into the galleys, and before three months be ended they sing.
They that have not been accustomed to the sea, are afeard, though it be at the
calmest, when they wey anckor, whereas the mariners laugh in the midst of a
tempest. The wife grows desperate at the death of her husband, and before a
year be expired she loves another. Time and Custom brings all things to
pass; that which offends us is the novelty of that which happens unto us,
omnia nouitate grauiora sunt.

Meditation performs the same office with wise men, and by the force thereof
things are made familiar and ordinary, 18 Foresight or providence.
quae alij diu patiendo leuia faciunt, sapiens leuia facit diu cogitando. He
considers exactly the nature of all things that may offend him, and
presents unto himself whatsoever may happen unto him most grievous and
insupportable, as sickness, poverty, exile, injuries, and examineth in them
all that which is according to nature or contrary to it. For foresight or
providence is a great remedy against all evils, which cannot bring any great
alteration or change, happening to a man that attends them; whereas contrarily
they wound and hurt him greatly, that suffers himself to be surprised by
them. Meditation and discourse is that which gives the true temper to the
soul, prepares it, confirms it against all assaults, makes it hard, steely,
impenetrable against whatsoever would wound or hurt it. Sudden accidents how
great soever, can give no great blow to him that keeps himself upon his
guard, and is always ready to receive them, praemeditati mali mollis ictus
venit: quicquid expectatum est diu, leuius accidit. Now to attain this
foresight, we must first know that nature has placed us here, as in a thorny
and slipppery place; that that which is happened unto another, may also light
upon us; that that which hangs over all, may fall upon every one of us; and
that in all the affairs that we undertake we premeditate the inconveniences
and evil encounters which may happen unto us, to the end we be not surprised
unawares. O how much are we deceived, and how little judgment have we, when
we think that that which happens to others cannot likewise fall upon us! When
we will not be wary and provident, for fear lest we should be thought
fearful. Contrariwise, if we take knowledge of things, as reason would have
us, we would rather wonder that so few crosses happen unto us, and that those
accidents that follow us so near, have stayed so long before they catch us,
and having caught us, how they should handle us so mildly. He that takes
heed, and considers the adversity of another, as a thing that may happen
unto himself, before it shall happen, is sufficiently armed. We must think of
all, and expect the worst; they are fools and ill advised, that say, I had not
thought it. It is an old saying, that he that is suddenly surprised, is half
beaten, and he that is warned is half armed, nay is two against one. A wise
man in time of peace makes his preparation for war: A good mariner before he
go forth of the haven, makes provision of what is necessary to resist the
violence of a tempest: it is too late to provide against an evil, when it is
already come. In whatsoever we are prepared before hand, we find our selves
apt and admirable, what difficulty soever it have; and contrariwise there is
not any thing so easy that does not hurt and hinder us, if we be but
nouelists therein; Id videndum ne quid inopinaium sit nobis, quia omnia
nouitate grauiora sunt. Doubtless it seems that if we were so provident as
we should and may be, we should wonder at nothing. That which thou saw
before it came, is happened unto thee, why then wonderest thou? Let us then take
a course that accidents do not surprise us; let us ever stand upon our guard,
and foresee what is to come. Animus aduersus omnia firmandus, vt dicere
possimus, non vlla laborum, O virgo, noua mi facies inopinaue surgit, Omnia
percepi atque animo mecum ipse peregi. Tu hodie ista denuntias; ego semper
denuntiaui mihi: hominem paraui ad humana.

CHAP. VIII. To obey and observe the Laws, Customs, and Ceremonies of the
Country, how and in what sense.
EVen as a savage and untamed beast, will not suffer himself to be taken, led,
and handled by man, but either flies 1 The beginning, institution and
authority of the laws.
and hides himself from him, or armeth himself against him, and with fury
assaulteth him, if he approach near unto him; in such sort that a man must use
force mingled with Art and subtlety to take and tame him: So folly will not
be handled by reason, or wisdom, but strives and stirs against it, and
adds folly unto folly; and therefore it must be taken, and led, like a
wild beast, (that which a man is to a beast, a wise man is to a fool)
astonished, feared, and kept short, that with the more ease it may be
instructed and won. Now the proper mean or help thereunto, is a great
authority, a thundering power and gravity, which may dazell it with the
splendour of his lightning, Sola authoritas est quae cogit stultos vt ad
sapientiam festinent. In a popular fight or sedition August.
, if some great, wise, ancient and virtuous personage come in presence, that
has won the public reputation of honor and virtue, presently the mutinous
people being stricken and blinded with the bright splendour of this authority,
are quieted, attending what he will say unto them.

Veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta
Seditio est, saeuit que animis ignobile vulgus,
Iamque faces and sax a volant, furor arma ministrat:
Tum pietate grauem ac meritis, si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus astant,
Ille regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet.
There is nothing greater in this world than authority, which is an image of
God, a messenger from Heaven: if it be sovereign it it is called majesty, if
subalterne, authority: and by two things it is maintained, admiration and
fear mingled together. Now this majesty and authority is first and properly
in the person of the sovereign prince and lawmaker, where it is lively,
actual and moving; afterward in his commandments and ordinances, that is to
say, in the law, which is the head of the work of the prince, and the image of
a lively and original majesty. By this are fools reduced, conducted, and
guided. Behold then of what weight, necessity and utility, authority and the
law is in the world.

The next authority and that which is likest to the law, is custom, which is
another powerful and Emperious mistress; 2 Of Custom.
It seaseth upon this power, and usurps it traitorously and violently, for it
planteth this authority by little and little, by stealth, as it were
insensibly, by a little pleasing, and humble beginning; having settled and
established it self by the help of time, it discovers afterward a furious
and tyrannical visage, against which there is no more liberty or power left,
so much as to lift up ones eyes; It takes it authority from the possession
and use thereof, it increases and ennobleth it self by continuance like a
river; it is dangerous to bring it back to his original fountain.

Law and custom establish their authority diversely, custom by little and
little, with long time, sweetly and without force 3 A comparison of them both.
, by the common consent of all, or the greater part, and the author thereof
are the people. The law springs up in a moment with authority and power, and
takes his force from him that has power to command all, yea many times
against the liking of the subjects, whereupon some compare it to a tyrant, and
custom to a king. Again, custom has with it neither reward nor punishment;
the law has them both, at least punishment, nevertheless they may mutuallie
help and hinder one another. For custom which is but of sufferance, authorized
by the sovereign, is better confirmed: and the law likewise setleth it own
authority by possession and use; and contrariwise custom may be caschiered by
a contrary law, and the law loses the force thereof by suffering a contrary
custom: but ordinarily they are together, that is law and custom; wise and
spiritual men considering it as a law, idiots and simple men as a custom.

There is not a thing more strange, than the diversity and strangenes of some
laws and customs in the world; Neither 4 Their diversity and strangeness.
is there any opinion or imagination so variable, so mad, which is not
established by laws and customs in some place or other. I am content to
recite some of them, to show those Of laws and customs in the world.
that are hard of belief herein, how far this proposition does go. Yet
omitting to speak of those things that belong to religion, which is the
subject where the greatest wonderments and grossest impostures are: but because
it is without the commerce of men, and that it is not properly a custom, and
where it is easy to be deceived, I will not meddle with it. See then a brief
of those that for the strangenes are best worth the noting. To account it an
office of piety in a certain age to kill their parents and to eat them. In
Innes to pay the shot, by yielding their children, wives and daughters to the
pleasure of the host: public brothelhouses of males: old men lending their
wives unto young: women common: an honor to women to have accompaned with many
men, and to carry their locks in the hembes of their garments: daughters to go
with their privy parts uncovered, and married women carefully to keep them
covered: to leave the daughters to their pleasures, and being great with child
to enforce an obort in the sight and knowledge of all men; but married women to
keep themselves chaste and faithful to their husbands: women the first night
before they company with their husbands, to receive all the males of the
estate and profession of their husbands, invited to the marriage, and ever after
to be faithful to their husbands: young married women to present their
virginity to their prince, before they he with their husbands: marriages of
males: women to go to war with their husbands: to die and to kill themselves
at the decease of their husbands, or shortly after: to permit widows to marie
again, if their husbands die a violent death, and not otherwise: husbands to
be divorced from their wives without alleging any cause: to sell them if they
be barren, to kill them for no other cause but because they are women, and
afterward to borrow women of others at their need: women to be delivered
without pain or fear: to kill their children because they are not fair, well
featured, or without cause: at meat to wipe their fingers upon their priuities
and their feet: to live with man's flesh: to eat flesh and fish raw: many men
and women to lie together to the number of ten or twelve: to salute one
another by putting the finger to the ground, and afterward lifting it toward
heaven: to turn the back when they salute, and never to look him on the face
whom a man will honor: to take into the hand the spittle of the prince: not to
speak to the king but at a peepe-hole: in a man's whole life never to cut his
hair nor nails: to cut the hair on one side, and the nails of one hand, and
not of the other: men to piss sitting, women standing: to make holes and pits
in the flesh of the face, and the dugs, to hang rings and jewels in: to
contemn death, to receive it with joy, to sue for it, to plead in public for
the honor thereof, as for a dignity and favor: to account it an honorable
burial to be eaten with dogs, birds, to be boiled, cut in pieces and pounded,
and the powder to be cast into their ordinary drink.

When we come to judge of these customs, that is the complaint and the
trouble: the vulgar sot and pedante, are 5 Examination and judgment.
not troubled he^ewith, for every seditious rout condemns as barbarous and
beastly whatsoever pleases not their palate, that is to say, the common use and
custom of their country. And if a man shall tell them, that others do speak
and judge the same of ours, and are as much offended with ours, as we with
theirs, they cut a man short after their manner, tearming them beasts and
barbarians, which is always to say the same thing. A wise man is more advised,
as shall be said, he makes not such haste to judge, for fear lest he wrong
his own judgment: and to say the truth, there are many laws and customs
which seem at the first view to be savage, inhumane, and contrary to all
reason, which if they were without passion, and soundly considered of, if they
were not found to be altogether just and good, yet at the least they would not
be without some reason and defense. Let us take amongst the rest for example
the two first which we have spoken of, which seem to be both the strangest
and farthest off from the duty of piety; to kill their own parents at a
certain age, and to eat them. They that have this custom do take it to be a
testimony of piety and good affection, endeavoring thereby first of mere pity
to deliver their old parents, not only unprofitable to themselves and others,
but burdensome, languishing, and leading a painful and troublesome life, and
to place them in rest and ease: afterward giving them the most worthy and
commendable sepulcher, lodging in themselves and their own bowels the bodies
and relics of their parents, in a manner reviving them again, and
regenerating them by a kind of transmutation into their living flesh, by the
means of the digestion and nourishment. These reasons would not seem
ouer-light to him that is not possessed with a contrary opinion: and it is an
easy matter to consider, what cruelty and abomination it had been to these
people, to see their parents before their own eyes to suffer such grief and
torment, and they not able to succor them, and afterward to cast their
spoils to the corruption of the earth, to stench and rottennes, and the food
of worms, which is the worst that can be done unto it. Darius made a trial,
asking some Greeks for what they would be persuaded to follow the custom of
the Indians in eating their dead fathers. To whom they answered, that they
would not do it for any thing in the world. And on the other side assaying to
persuade the Indians to burn the bodies of their dead parents as the Greeks
did, it seemed to them a matter of such difficulty and horror, as that they
would never be drawn unto it. I will add only one other, which concerns
only matter of decency and comeliness, and is more light and more pleasant:
One that always blew his nose with his hand, being reprehended for
inciuilitie, in the defense of himself, asked what privilege that filthy
excrement had, that a man must afford it a fair handker chief to receive,
and afterward carefully wrap and fold it up, which he thought was a matter of
greater lothsomnes than to cast it from him. So that we see that for all things
there may be found some seeming reason, and therefore we are not suddenly and
lightly to condemn any thing.

But who would believe how great and imperious the authority of custom is? He
that said it was another nature, did 6 The authority thereof.
not sufficiently express it, for it does more than nature, it conquereth
nature: for hence it is that the most beautiful daughters of men draw not unto
love their natural parents; nor brethren, though excellent in beauty, win
not the love of their sisters. This kind of chastirie is not properly of
nature, but of the use of laws and customs, which forbid them, and make of
incest a great sin, as we may see in the fact not Genesis 11. 20. 29. 35. Exodus
6. Leuit. 28.
only of the children of Adam, where there was an enforced necessity, but of
Abraham and Nachor brethren; of Jacob and Judas Patriarchs, Amram the father
of Moses, and other holy men: And it is the law of Moses which forbad it in
these first degrees; but it has also sometimes dispensed therewith not only in
the colaterall line, and betwixt brothers, and their brothers wives, which was
a commandment, and not a dispensation Deuteronomy. 25. 2. Reg. 12. 3. Reg. 2.
: and which is more, between the natural brother and sister of diverse wombs,
but also in the right line of alliance, that is to say, of the son with the
mother in law; for in the right line of blood, it seems to be altogether
against nature, notwithstanding the fact of the daughters of Lot with their
father, which nevertheless was produced purely by nature, in that extreme
apprehension and fear of the end of humane kind, for which cause they have
been excused by Chrysostom. Ambrose. August.
great and learned doctors. Now against nature there is not any dispensation,
if God the only superior thereunto give it not. Finally of casual incests and
not voluntary the world is full, as Tertullian teaches. Moreover, custom
does enforce In Apolog.
the rules of nature, witness those Physicians who many times leave the natural
reasons of their art by their own authority, as they that by custom do live
and sustain their lives with poison, Spiders, Emmets, Lyzards, Toades, which
is a common practice amongst the people of the West Indies. It likewise dulleth
our senses, witness they that live near the fall of the river of Nilus, near
clocks, armories, milles, and the whole world according to some Philosophers,
with the sound of a heavenly kind of music, and the continual and diverse
motions of the heavens dulleth our senses, that we hear not that which we
hear. To conclude, (and it is the principal fruit thereof) it overcomes all
difficulty, makes things easy that seem impossible, sweetneth all sower,
and therefore by the means hereof a man lives in all things content, but yet
it mastereth our souls, our beliefs, our judgments, with a most unjust and
tyrannical authority. It does and undoes, authoriseth and disauthoriseth
whatsoever it please, without rhythme or reason, yea many times against all
reason: It establishes in the world against reason and judgment all the
opinions, religions, beleefs, obseruances, manners, and sorts of life most
fantastical and rude, as before has been said. And contrarily, it wrongfully
degradeth, robs, beats down in things that are truly great and admirable,
their price and estimation, and makes them base and vile.

Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quidquam
Principio, quod non cessent mirarier omnes
Paulatim. --
So that we see that custom is a thing great and powerful. Plato having
reprehended a youth for playing at cobnut, or chery-pit, and receiving this
answer from him, That he controuled him for a matter of small moment, replied,
My child, custom is not a matter of small moment. A speech well worth the
noting for all such as have youth to bring up. But it exercises it power with
so absolute authority, that there is no striving against it, neither is it
lawful to reason, or call into question the ordinances thereof: it enchanteth
us in such sort, that it makes us believe that what is without the bounds
thereof, is without the bounds of reason, and there is nothing good and just,
but what it approves; ratione non componimur, Senec.
sed consuetudine abducimur: honestius putamus quod frequentius: recti apud nos
locum tenet error, vbi publicus factus. This is tolerable with idiots and the
vulgar sort, who wanting sufficiency to look into the depth of things, to
try and to judge, do well to hold and settle themselves to that which is
commonly held and received: but to wise men, who play another part, it is a
base thing to suffer themselves to be carried with customs.

Now the advice which I here give unto him that would be wise, is to keep and
observe both in word and deed the 7 An advice.
laws and customs which he finds established in the country where he is:
and in like manner to respect and obey the magistrates and all superiors, but
always with a noble spirit, and after a generous manner, and not seruilely,
pedanticallie, superstitiously, and withal not taking offense, nor lightly
condemning other strange laws and customs, but freely and soundly judging and
examining the one and the other, as has been said, and not binding his
judgment and belief but unto reason only. Hereof a word or two.

In the first place according to all the wisest, the rule of rules, and the
general law of laws, is to follow and observe 1 Laws and customs are to be
observed.
the laws and customs of the country where he is, (...), avoiding carefully
all singularity, and strange extrauagant particularitie, different from the
common and ordinary; for whatsoever it be, it always hurts and wounds
another, is suspected of folly, hypocrisy, ambitious passion, though perhaps
it proceed from a sick and weak soul. Non conturbabit sapiens publicos
mores, nec populum in se, nouitate vitae conuertet. We must always walk under
the covert of the laws, customs, superiors, without disputation or
tergiuersation, without undertaking sometimes to dispense with the laws,
sometimes like a frugall servant to enhaunce the price.

But that it be (which is the second rule) out of a good mind and after a good
manner; nobly and wisely, neither for the love 2 Not for their justice and
equity.
nor fear of them, nor for the justice or equity that is in them, nor for
fear of that punishment that may follow for not obeiing them: to be brief,
not of superstition, nor constrained, scrupulous, fearful servitude, eadem
quae populus, sed non eodem modo, nec eodem proposito faciet sapiens, but
freely and simply for public reverence, and for their authority. Laws and
customs are maintained in credit, not because they are just and good, but
because they are laws and customs; this is the mystical foundation of their
authority, they have no other; and so is it with superiors, because they are
superiors, quia supra Cathedram sedent, not because they are virtuous and
honest, quae faciunt, nolite facere. He that obeys them for any other cause,
obeys them not because he should, this is an evil and a dangerous subject,
it is not true obedience, which must be pure and simple, vnde vocatur depositio
discretionis mera executio, abnegatio sui. Now to go about to measure one
obedience by the justice and goodness of laws and superiors, were by
submitting them to our judgment, to serve them with process, and to call our
obedience into doubt, and disputation, and consequently the state and the
policy according to the inconstancy and diversity of judgments. How many
unjust and strange laws are there in the world, not only in the particular
judgments of men, but of universal reason, wherewith the world has lived a
long time in continual peace and rest, with as great satisfaction as if they
had been very just and reasonable? And he that should go about to change or
mend them, would be accounted an enemy to the weale-publike, and never be
admitted: The nature of man does accommodate it self to all with the times,
and having once caught his fish, it is an act of hostility to go about to
alter any thing: we must leave the world where it is, these trouble-houses and
newfangled spirits, under a pretext of reformation mar all.

All change and alteration of laws, beleefes, customs and Against innouatours.
obseruances is very dangerous, and yields always more evil than good; it
brings with it certain and present evils, for a good that is uncertain and
to come. Innouatours have always glorious and plausible titles, but they are
but the more suspected, and they cannot escape the note of ambitious
presumption, in that they think to see more clearly than others, and that to
establish their opinions, the state, policy, peace and public quiet must be
turned topsy turuy.

I will not say for all this that has been said before, that 3 Strange things
are not lightly to be condemned.
we must absolutely obey all laws, all commandments of superiors, for such
as a man knows evidently to be either against God or nature, he is not to
obey, and yet not to rebel and to trouble the state: how he should govern
himself in such a case shall be taught hereafter, in the obedience due unto
princes; for to say the truth, this inconvenience and infelicitie, is rather,
and more common in the commandments of princes, than in the laws: neither is
it sufficient to obey the laws and superiors because of their worth and
merit, nor seruilely and for fear, as the common and profane sort do; but a
wise man does nothing by force or fear, soli hoc sapienti contingit, vt nil
faciat inuitus, recta sequitur, gaudet officio, he does that which he should,
and keeps the laws, not for fear of them, but for the love of himself,
being jealous of his duty; he has not to do with the laws, to do well;
that is that wherein he differs from the common sort, who cannot do well, nor
know what they ought to do, without laws; at iusto and sapienti non est lex
posita. By right a wise man is above the laws, but in outward and public
effect, he is their voluntary and free obedient subject. In the third place
thereof, it is an act of lightness and injurious presumption, yea a testimony
of weakness and insufficiency, to condemn that which agrees not with the
law and custom of his country. This proceeds either from want of leisure or
sufficiency to consider the reasons and grounds of others; this is to wrong
and shame his own judgment, whereby he is enforced many times to recant, and
not to remember that the nature of man is capable of all things; It is to
suffer the eye of his spirit to be hood winked, and brought asleep by a long
custom, and prescription to have power over judgment.

Finally it is the office of a generous spirit and a wise man 4 Wisely to
examine all things.
(whom I here endeavor to describe) to examine all things, to consider apart,
and afterward to compare together all the laws and customs of the world,
which shall come to his knowledge, and to judge of them (not to rule his
obedience by them, as has been said, but to exercise his office, since he
has a spirit to that end) faithfully and without passion, according to the
rule of truth and universal reason and nature, whereunto he is first obliged,
not flattering himself, or staining his judgment with error: and to content
himself to yield obedience unto those whereunto he is secondly and
particularly bound, whereby none shall have cause to complain of him. It may
fall out sometimes, that we may do that, by a second particular and
municipall obligation (obeying the laws and customs of the country) which is
against the first and more ancient, that is to say, universal nature and
reason; but yet we satisfy nature by keeping our judgments and opinions true
and just according to it. For we have nothing so much ours, and whereof we may
freely dispose; the world has nothing to do with out thoughts, but the outward
man is engaged to the public course of the world, and must give an account
thereof: so that many times, we do justly that, which justly we approve
not. There is no remedy, for so goes the world.

After these two mistresses, Law and Custom, comes the 8 Of Ceremonies.
third, which has no less authority and power with many, yea is more rough
and tyrannical to those that too much tie themselves thereunto. This is the
ceremony of the world, which to say the truth, is for the most part but vanity;
yet holds such place, and usurps such authority, by the remissness and
contagious corruption of the world, that many think that wisdom consists
in the observation thereof, and in such sort do voluntarily enthrall
themselves thereunto, that rather than they will contradict it, they prejudice
their health, benefit, business, liberty, conscience and all; which is a very
great folly, and the fault and infelicity of many Courtiers, who above others
are the idolaters of ceremony. Now my will is, that this my Wiseman, do
carefully defend himself from this captivity. I do not mean, that out of a
kind of loose inciuilitie, he abuse a ceremony, for we must forgive the world
in some thing, and as much as may be outwardly conform our selves to that
which is in practice; but my will is, that he tie not, and enthrall himself
thereunto, but that with a gallant and generous boldness he know how to leave
it when he will, and when it is fit, and in such manner, as that he give all men
to know, that it is not out of carelesnes, or delicacie, or ignorance, or
contempt, but because he would not seem ignorant how to esteem of it as is
fit, not suffer his judgment and will to be corrupted with such a vanity, and
that he lends himself to the world when it pleases him, but never gives
himself.

CHAP. IX. To carry himself well with another.
THis matter belongs to the virtue of justice, which teaches how to live
well with all, and to give to every one that which appertains unto him, which
shall be handled in the book following, where shall be set down the
particular and diverse opinions according to the diversity of persons. Here
are only the general, following the purpose and subject of this book.

There is here a twofold consideration (and consequently two parts in this
Chapter) according to the two manners of

It is a great vice (whereof this our Wiseman must take heed) and a defect
inconvenient both to himself and to another 3 Facility and universality of
humors.
, to be bound and subject to certain humors and complexions, to one only
course, that is, to be a slave to himself, so to be captiuated to his proper
inclinations, that he cannot be bent to any other, a testimony of an anxious
scrupulous mind, and ill bred, too amorous, and too partial to it self. These
kind of people have much to endure and to contest; and contrariwise it is a
great sufficiency and wisdom to accommodate himself to all, I stud est
sapere, qui vbicunque opus sit animum possis flectere, to be supple and
manaiable, to know how to rise and fall, to bring himself into order when
there is need. The fairest minds, and the best borne, are the more universal,
the more common, appliable to all understandings, communicatiue and open to all
people. It is a beautiful quality, which resembles and imitateth the goodness
of God, it is the honor which was given to old Cato, huic versatile ingenium,
sic pariter adomnia fuit, vt natum ad id vnum diceres, quodcunque ageret.

Let us see the aduisements of the first consideration, of the simple and
common conversation, I will here set down some 4 The first part. Advice
touching simple and common conversation.
, whereof the first shall be, to keep silence and modesty.

The second, not to be ouer-formall, in not applying himself to the follies,
indiscretions and lightnesses which may be committed in his presence; for it is
an indiscretion to condemn all that pleases not our palate.

The third, to spare, and thriftily to order that which a man

The fourth, not to enter into discourse and contestation against all, neither
against great men to whom we owe a duty

The fifth, to be honestly curious in the inquiry of all things

The sixth and principal is, to employ his judgment in all things, which is
the chief part which works, rules, and

The seventh is, never to speak affirmatively, and imperiously, with
obstinacy and resolution; that hurts and wounds all.

Peremptory affirmation and obstinacy in opinion, are ordinary signs of
senslesnesse and ignorance. The style of the ancient Romans was, that the
witnesses deposing, and the judges determining that which of their own proper
knowledge they knew to be true, they expressed their mind by this word, It
seems (it a videtur). And if these did thus, what should others do? It were
good to learn to use such words as may sweeten and moderate the temeritie of
our propositions, as, It may be, It is said, I think, It seems, and the
like: and in answering, I understand it not, What is that to say? It may be, It
is true. I will shut up this general part in these few The conclusion.
words; To have the countenance and the outward show open and agreeable to all,
his mind and thought covered and hid from all, his tongue sober and discreet,
always to keep himself to himself, and to stand on his guard, frons aperta,
lingua parca, men's clausa, nulli fidere, to see and hear much, to speak
little, to judge of all, vide, audi, iudica.

Let us come to the other consideration, and kind of conversation more
special, whereof the instructions are these. 11 The second part, of special
conversation.
The first is to seek, to confer, and converse with men of constancy and
dexterity; for thereby the mind is confirmed and fortified, and is elevated
above it self, as with base and weak spirits it is debased, and utterly lost:
the contagion herein is, as in the body, and also more.

The second is not to be astonished at the opinions of another, for how
contrary soever to the common sort, how strange, how frivolous or extrauagant
they seem, yet they are suitable to the spirit of man, which is capable to
produce all things, and therefore it is weakness to be astonished at them.

The third is not to fear or to be troubled with the rude inciuilitie and
bitter speeches of men, whereunto he must harden and to endure them, to correct
and to be corrected. It is a fading pleasure, to have to do with a people that
yield, flatter, and applaud a man in all things.

The fourth is to aim always at the truth, to acknowledge it, ingenuously and
cheerfully to yield unto it, of what side

The fifth is, in disputation not to employ all the means that a man may have,
but such as are best and fittest, that are more

The sixth and principal is, in all things to keep a form it self, goes
forth of the lists merrily and gloriously, as having won the victory, when
it never came near it.

The seventh, if there be place of contradiction, he must

CHAP. X. To carry himself wisely in his affairs.
THis does properly belong to the virtue of prudence, whereof we shall speak
in the beginning of the book following, where shall be set down in
particular diverse counsels and aduisements according to the diverse kinds of
prudence and occurrents in our affairs. But I will here set down the
principal points and heads of wisdom, which are general and common
aduisements to instruct in gross our disciple, to carry himself well and
wisely in the traffic and commerce of the world, and the managing of all
affairs; and they are eight.

The first consists in understanding, that is, well to know the persons with
whom a man has to deal, their proper and 1 Knowledge of the persons and
affairs.
particular nature, their humor, their spirit, inclinatino, designement, and
intention, their proceedings: to know likewise the nature of the business
which he has in hand, and which is proposed unto him, not only in their
superficial and outward appearance, but to penetrate into the inside thereof,
not only to see and know things in themselves, but the accidents and
consequents that belong thereunto. The better to do this, he must look into
them with all manner of visages, consider them in all senses; for there are some
that in one side are very precious and pleasing, and on the other base and
pernicious. Now it is certain, that according to the diverse natures of the
persons and affairs, we must change our style and manner of proceeding, like a
Seaman, who according to the diverse state of the sea, and the diversity of the
winds, does diversely turn and guide his sails and his oars. For he that in
all things shall direct and carry himself after one and the same fashion,
would quickly mar all, play the fool, and make himself ridiculous. Now this
twofold knowledge of the persons and affairs is no easy matter, so much is
man disguised and counterfeited; but the way to attain thereunto, is to
consider them attentively and advisedly, reuoluing them many times in our
minds, and that without passion.

We must likewise learn to esteem of things according to their true worth,
giving unto them that price and place 2 Estimation of things.
which appertains unto them, which is the true office of wisdom and
sufficiency. This is a high point of philosophy; but the better to attain
thereunto, we must take heed of passion, and the judgment of the vulgar sort.
There are Not according to the vulgar judgment.
six or seven things which move and lead vulgar spirits, and make them to
esteem of things by false ensigns, whereof wise men will take heed; which
are, novelty, raritie, strangeness, difficulty, Art, invention, absence, and
privation or denial, and above all, report, show, and provision. They esteem
not of things if they be not polished by Art and science, if they be not
pointed and pa^nted out. The simple and natural, of what value soever they be,
they attend not; they escape and drop away insensibly, or at least are
accounted plain, base, and foolish; a great testimony of humane vanity and
imbecillitie, which is paid with wind, with false and counterfeit money, in
steed of current, from whence it is, that a man prefers Art before nature,
that which is studied and difficult, before that which is easy; vehement
motions, and impulsions, before complexion, constitution, habit; the
extraordinary before the ordinary; ostentation and pomp, before true and
secret verity; another man's, and that which is strange, which is borrowed,
before that which is proper and natural. And what greater folly can there be
than all this? Now the rule of the wise is not to suffer themselves by all
this, to be caught and carried, but to measure and judge But according to the
wise.
and esteem of things, first by their true, natural and essential value,
which is many times inward and secret; and then by their profit and commodity;
the rest is but deceit or mockery. This is a matter of difficulty, all things
being so disguised and sophisticated: many times the false and wicked being
more plausible, than the true and good. And Aristotle says, that there are
many falsehoods, which are more probable, and have a better outward appearance,
than verities. But as it is difficult, so is it excellent and divine: Si
separaueris pretiosum Difficult. Excellent. N^cessary. ^eneca.
a vili, quasi os meum eris: And necessary before all works; quam necessarium
pretiarebus imponere; for to small purpose does a man endeavor to know the
precepts of a good life, if first he know not in what rank to place things,
riches, health, beauty, nobility, science, and so forth, with (...)
their contraries. This precedence and pre-eminence of things is a high and
excellent knowledge, and yet difficult, especially when many present
themselves, for plurality hinders, and herein men are never of one accord.
The particular tastes and judgments of men are diverse, and it is fit and
commodious it should be so, to the end that all run not together after one
and the same thing, and so be a let or hindrance to another. For example, let
us take the eight principal heads, of Eight principal heads of goods
spiritual and corporal.
all goods spiritual and corporal, four of each kind, that is to say,
Honesty, Health, Wisdom, Beauty, Ability or Aptness, Nobility, Science,
Riches. We do here take the words according to the common sense and use,
wisdom for a prudent and discreet manner of life and carriage with and toward
all; Ability for sufficiency in affairs; Science for the knowledge of things
acquired out of books: the other are clear enough. Now touching the ranging
of these eight, how many diverse opinions are there? I have told my own, and I
have mingled and in such sort enterlaced them together, that after and next
unto a spiritual, there is a corporal corrospondent thereunto, to the end we
may couple the soul and the body together. Health is in the body, that which
honesty is in the soul; the health of the soul, is the honesty of the body,
men's sana in corpore sano: Beauty, is as wisdom, the measure, proportion, and
comeliness of the body, and wisdom a spiritual beauty. Nobility is a great
aptness and disposition to virtue. Sciences are the riches of the spirit.
Others do range these parts otherwise, some place all the spiritual first,
before they come to the first corporal, and the least of the spirit above the
greatest of the body: some place them apart, and all diversely, every one
abounds in his own sense.

After and from this sufficiency and part of prudence, to know well how to
esteem of things, does spring and arise 3 Choice and election of things.
another, that is, to know well how to choose, where not only the conscience,
but also the sufficiency and prudence is likewise many times showed. There are
choices very easy, as of a difficulty, and of a vice, of that which is
honest, and that which is commodious, of duty and of profit: for the
pre-eminence of the one is so great above the other, that when they come to
encounter, honesty always wins the field, except (it may be) some
exception very rare, and with great circumstance, and in public affairs only,
as shall be said hereafter in the virtue of Prudence: but there are other
choices far more hard and troublesome, as when a man is caught or driven into
a narrow streit between two vices, as was that Doctor Origin, either to become
an Idolater, or to prostitute hunselfe to the carnal pleasure of a base impure
Ethiopian. The rule is, that when a man finds himself in any doubt or
perplexity touching the choice of those things that are not evil, he must
choose that part that has most honesty and justice in it; for though it fall
out otherwise than well, yet it shall be always some comfort and glory to a
man to have chosen the better; and besides a man knows not (if he had chosen
the contrary part) what would have happened, or whether he had escaped his
destiny: when a man doubts which is the better and shortest way, he must
take the streitest. And in those things that are evil (whereof there is never
any choice) a man must avoid the more base and unjust: this is a rule of
conscience, and belongs to honesty. But to know which is the more honest,
just, and profitable, which the more dishonest, unjust, and unprofitable, it is
many times very difficult, and belongs to prudence and sufficiency. It
seems that in such like streits and extremities the surer and better way is
to follow nature, and to judge that the more just and honest which comes
nearest unto nature, that the more unjust and dishonest which is farthest from
it. Before we leave this discourse of the choice and election of things, in two
words let us remove this question: From whence comes in our souls the choice
of two indifferent things in all things alike? The Stoics say, from an
extraordinary, immoderate, strange and rash operation of the soul. But a man
may say, that never do two things present themselves unto us, wherein there is
not some difference or other be it never so little, and that there is always
something in the one, which moves us to that choice, although it be
insensible, and such as we cannot expresle. He that is equally balanced
betwixt two desires, can never choose, for every choice and inclination does
infer an inequality.

Another precept in this matter, is to take advice and counsel of another:
for, for a man to believe himself, and to trust 4 Consultation.
only in himself, is very dangerous. Now here are required two aduertisements
of Prudence; the one is in the choice of those, to whom a man must address
himself for counsel; for there are some whose counsel we should rather
avoid, and fly from. First, they must be honest and faithful men (which is
here all one) and secondly, men sensible, advised, wise, and of experience.
These are the two qualities of good counselors, honesty, and sufficiency. A
man may add a third, and that is, that neither they nor their nearest and
inward friends have any particular interest in the business; for although a
man may say, that this cannot hinder them to give good counsel, being, as is
said, honest men; yet I may answer, that besides that this so great and
philosophical honesty, which is no way touched with it own proper interest,
be very rare, it is also a great point of folly to bring it into doubt and
anxictie, and as it were to put the finger betwixt two stones. The other
advertisement is, well to hear and entertain the counsels, receiving them
without attending the event, with judgment and gentleness, delighting in the
free delivery of the truth. Having entertained and followed it as good, and
coming from a good hand and a friendly, he must not repent himself of it,
although it succeed not well, and according to expectation. Many times good
counsels have bad events. But a wise man must rather content himself to have
followed good counsel which has brought forth bad effects, than bad counsel
which has had a happy event, as Marius; sic correcti Marij temeritas gloriam
ex culpa inuenit, and not to do like fools, who having advisedly deliberated
and chosen, think afterward to have chosen the worse, because they weigh only
the reasons of the contrary opinion, never counterpoising them with those with
first induced them thereunto. Thus much breefly be said of those that seek
counsel: Lib. 3. ca. 2. art. 17.
of those that give it, we shall speak in the virtue of Prudence, whereof the
counsel is a great and sufficient part.

The fifth advice which I here give, to carry himself well in his affairs, is
a temperature and mediocritie betwixt too 5 Temperature betwixt fear and
assurance.
great a confidence, and distrust, fear and assurance. To trust and secure
himself, does many times hurt, and to distrust offends: he must take
special heed of making any show of distrust, even when there is cause; for it
displeases, yea offends much, and many times makes a friend an enemy. But
yet a man is not to be ouer-credulous, and confident, except it be of his best
assured friends, he must always keep the bridle in his hands, holding it
neither too loose nor too straight. He must never speak all, and let that
which he speaks be ever true. He must never deceive, but yet let him take
heed he be not deceived. He must ever temper and moderate that columbine
innocence and simplicity, in not offending any man with his serpentine
wisdom and subtlety, and keeping himself upon his guard, and preserving
himself from the deceits, treasons, and ambushments of another. Subtlety to
defend, is as commendable, as it is dishonest to offend. He must never
therefore advance and engage himself so far, but that he have always a
mean when he will, and when it shall be necessary to retire himself without
great damage or dislike. He must never forsake his own hold, nor so much
despise another, and presume of himself, that he fall into a kind of
presumption and carelesnes of his affairs; like those that think that no man
sees so clear as themselves, that look that every man should yield unto them,
that no man should dare to entertain a thought to displease them, and by that
means become dissolute, and cast away care, and in the end they are blinded,
surprised, and deceived.

Another advice and very important, is to take all things in their times and
seasons, and to good purpose, and for that To take time and occasion.
cause, he must above all things avoid precipitation, an enemy to wisdom, the
stepmother of all good actions, a vice much to be feared in young and youthful
people. It is in truth the Against precipitation.
work of a skillful and active man, to apply every thing to his true end,
well to manage all occasions and commodities, to make use both of the times and
the means. All things have their seasons, and even the good which a man may
do without purpose. Now too much speed and precipitation is contrary
heereunto, which troubles, marreth, and confounds all: canis festinans
caecos facit catulos. It proceeds commonly for that passion which carries us,
Nam qui cupit festinat: qui festinat euertit: vnde festinatio improuida and
caeca: duo aduersissima rectae menticeleritas and ira: and often enough from
insufficiency. The contrary vice, laziness, sloth, carelessness, Idleness.
which seems sometimes to have some air of maturitie and wisdom, is
likewise pernicious and dangerous especially in the execution. For it is said,
that it is lawful to be slow and long in deliberation and consultation, but
not in the execution; and therefore the wisest say, That a man must consult
slowly, execute speedely, deliberate with leisure, and with speed accomplish.
It falls out sometimes that the contrary is practiced with good success,
and that a man is happy in the event, though he have been sudden and rash in
his deliberation; Subiti consilijs, euentu faelices, but this is very seldom,
and by chance or fortune; according to which we must not rule and direct
ourselves; but take heed lest envy and emulation overtake us; for commonly a
long and unprofitable repentance is the reward of headlong hastiness. Behold
then two rocks and extremities which we must equally avoid; for it is as great
a fault to take occasions before they be ready, whilst they be green and
raw, as to suffer them to grow till they be ouer-ripe and past the taking. The
first fault, young men and forward hot-spurres commit, who for want of
patience, give no leisure to time and the heavens to do any thing for them,
they run, but they catch nothing: The second, heavy, lazy dull spirited men
do commonly fall into. To know the occasion, and to take it, a man must have
his spirit valiant and vigilant, and likewise patient: he must foresee it,
watch, attend it, see it coming, and prepare for it, and so take it just at
that instant when it is ready.

The seventh advice is, well to carry himself with these two masters and
superintendants of the affairs of the world, which 7 Industry and Fortune.
are industry or virtue, and fortune. It is an ancient question which of these
two has most credit, force, and authority: for it is out of all doubt, that
both have; and it is clearly false, that one only does all, and the other
nothing. It were perhaps to be wished that it were true, and that one only had
the whole empire, the business would go the better, a man would wholly attend
that, whereby it would be the more easy; the difficulty is to join them
together, and to attend them both. Commonly they that settle themselves unto
the one, contemn the other, the younger and bolder sort respect and trust to
fortune, hoping much good from it, and many times by them it works great
matters, in so much that it seems to favor them; the more ancient and stayed,
trust to their industry; and these of the two, have the more reason. If we
should compare them, and choose one of the two, industry is the more honest,
the more certain, glorious; for though fortune be contrary to it, and shall
make all industry and diligence vain, yet nevertheless there remains great
contentment, in that a man has not kept holy day, has performed his office or
duty, has carried himself like a man of courage. They that follow the other
part, are in danger to attend in vain, and though perhaps things succeed
according to their own desires, yet they want that honor and glory that the
former has. Now the advice of wisdom is, not wholly, and so much to settle
our selves to the one, that we contemn, and exclude the other; for they have
both a good part, yea many times they help, and do mutually attend one the
other. A wise man then must carry himself with them both, but yet unequally,
for the advantage and pre-eminence must be given, as has been said, to
virtue, industry; virtute duce, comite fortuna. This advice likewise is
required, to keep discretion, which seasoneth and gives a taste or relish to
all things; this is not a particular quality, but common, which mingleth it
self in all: Indiscretion marreth all, and takes away the grace from the best
actions, whether it be to do good to another; for all gratifications are not
well bestowed upon all sorts of people; or to excuse himself; for
inconsiderate excuses serve for accusations, or to play the part of an honest
and courteous man, for a man may exceed and degenerate into rusticitie, or
whether it be to offer, or to accept.

CHAP. XI. To keep himself always ready for death, a fruit of wisdom.
THe day of death is the master day, and judge of all other 1 The day of death.
days, the trial and touchstone of all the actions of our life. Then do we
make our greatest assay, and gather the whole fruit of all our studies. He that
judges of the life of a man, must look how he carried himself at his death;
for the end crowns the work, and a good death honors a man's whole life,
as an evil defameth and dishonors it: A man cannot well judge of any,
without wronging of him, before he has played the last act of his Comedy,
which is without all doubt the most difficult. Epaminondas one of the wise men
of Greece, being demanded whom of three men he esteemed most, himself,
Chabrias, or Iphicrates, answered, We must first see all three die, before we
resolve that question: the reason is, because in all the rest a man may be
masked, but in this last part, it is to no purpose to dissemble,

Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab imo
Eijciuntur, and eripitur persona; manet res.
Fortune from far seems to watch, and lie in wait for us, against this last
day, as a day long since named and appointed, to show her power, and in a
moment to overthrow all that we have built, and gathered together in many
years, and to make us cry out with Laberius, Nimirum hac die vna plus vixi
mihi, quam viuendum fuit: And so was it well and wisely said of Solon to
Croesus; Ante obitum nemo beatus.

It is an excellent thing to learn to die, it is the study of wisdom, which
aims wholly at this end: he has not 2 To know how to die.
spent his life ill, that has learned to die well; and he has lost his whole
time, that knows not well how to end it. Male viuet, quisquis nesciet been
mori: non frustra nascitur qui been Senec.
moritur: nec inutiliter vixit, qui foeliciter desijt: Mori tota vita discendum
est, and praecipuum ex vitae officijs est. He shootes not well, that looks
not on the mark; and he cannot live well that has not an eye to his death. To
be brief, the science of dying is the science of liberty, the way to fear
nothing, to live well, contentedly and peaceably; without this knowledge there
is no more pleasure in life, than in the fruition of that thing which a man
fears always to lose.

First and above all, we must endeavor, that our sins die before our selves:
Secondly, that we be always ready and

Vixi, and quem dederat cursum fortuna peregi.

Thirdly, we must endeavor, that our death be voluntary; for to die well, is
to die willingly.

It seems that a man may carry himself in death five diverse ways: He may
fear and fly it, as a very great evil; attend 4 A five fold manner of
carriage in death.
it sweetly and patiently, as a thing natural, inevitable, reasonable;
contemn it, as a thing indifferent, and of no great importance; desire and
seek after it, as the only haven of rest from all the torments of this life,
yea a very great gain; give it to himself, by taking away his own life. Of
these five, the three middlemost are good, befitting a good and settled soul,
although diversely, and in a different condition of life; the two extremes are
vicious and out of weakness, though it be with diverse visages. A word or two
of them all.

The first is not approved by men of understanding, though by the greater part
it be practiced: a testimony of great weakness. 5 To fear death.
Against these kind of men, and for your better comfort, either against your
own death, or the death of another, thus much briefly. There is not a thing
that men fear more, or have more in horror than death: nevertheless, there
is not a thing where there is less occasion or matter of fear, or that
contrarily yields greater reasons to persuade us with resolution to accept of
it. And therefore we must say, that it is a mere opinion, and a vulgar error
that has won the world thus to think of it. We give too much credit to the
It is opinion.
inconsiderate vulgar sort, who tell us, That it is a very great evil; and to
little credit to wisdom it self which teaches us, that it is a freedom
from all evils and the haven of life. Never did a present death do hurt to any
man; and some that have made trial, and partly knew what it is, complain not
of it: and if death be counted an evil, it is of all the evils the only that
does no harm, that has no evil in it; it is the imagination only of death
before it come, that makes us to fear it when it is come. It is then but
opinion, not verity; and it is truly where opinion bandeth it self most
against reason, and goes about to deface it in us, with the mask of death:
there cannot be any reason to fear it, because no man knows what it is, that
he should fear it: for why, or how should a man fear that he knows not?
And therefore wisely said he, that of all others was accounted the wisest, that
to fear death is to make show of greater understanding and sufficiency than
can be in a man, by seeming to know that, that no man knows: and what he
spoke he practiced himself; for being solicited at his death by his friends,
to plead before the Judges, for his justification, and for his life, this
oration he made unto them: My masters and friends, if I should plead for my
life, and desire you that I may not die, I doubt I may speak against my self,
and desire my own loss and hinderance, because I know not what it is to die,
nor what good or ill there is in death: they that fear to die presume to know
it, as for my self I am utterly ignorant what it is, or what is done in the
other world; perhaps death is a thing indifferent, perhaps a good thing, and to
be desired. Those things that I know to be evil, as to offend my neighbor, I
fly and avoid; those that I know not to be evil, as death, I cannot fear.
And therefore I commit my self unto your selves; and because I cannot know
whether it is more expedient for me to die, or not to die, determine you thereof
as you shall think good.

For a man to torment himself with the fear of death, it is 6 It is weakness.
first great weakness and cowardlinesse: There is not a woman that in few
days is not appeased and content with the death, yea the most painful that
may be, either of her husband or her child; And why should not reason and
wisdom do that in an hour, at an instant (as we have a thousand examples)
which time performs in a fool, in the weakest sex? What use is there of
wisdom and constancy in man, to what end serve they, if they speed him not in
a good action, if he can do no more with their help, than a fool with his
folly? From this weakness it is, that the most part of men dying, cannot
resolve themselves, that it is their last hour, and there is not any thing
where this deceitful hope does more busy man; which it may be, does likewise
proceed from this, that we account our death a great matter, and that all
things have an interest in us, and at our death must suffer with us, so much do
we esteem our selves.

Again a man shows himself herein unjust; for if death be a good thing, as
it is, why does he fear it? If an evil thing, 7 Injustice.
why does he make it worse, and add unto death evil upon evil, sorrow and
grief where there is none? like him that being robbed of a part of his goods
by the enemy, casts the rest into the sea, to let men know how little he is
grieved with his losses.

Finally to fear death, is for a man to be an enemy to himself, 8 To be enemy
to his own life.
and to his own life: for he can never live at ease and contentedlie, that
fears to dye. That man is only a free man, which fears not death; and
contrarily, life is but a slavery if it were not made free by death: For death
is the only stay of our liberty, the common and ready receptacle of all
evils: It is then a misery (and miserable are all that do it) to trouble our
life with the care and fear of death, and our death with the care of life.

But to say the truth, what complaints and murmuring would there be against
nature, if death were not, if we should Chiron refused immortality, being
informed of the conditions thereof by the god of Time, Saturn his father.
Doubtless death is a very beautiful and rich invention of nature, optimum
naturae inuentum nusquam satis laudatum, and a very proper and profitable
necessary to many things; If it were quite taken from us, we should desire it
more, than now we fear it, yea thirst after it more than life it self; such a
remedy is it against so many evils; such a mean to so many goods. What were
it on the other side, if there were not mingled with death some little
bitterness? doubtless men would run unto it with great desire and
indiscretion. To keep therefore a moderation, that is, that men might neither
love life too much, nor fly it, fear death, nor run after it, both of them,
sweetness and sharpnes, are therein tempered together.

The remedy that the vulgar sort do give herein, is too simple; and that is,
never to think or speak thereof: Besides 10 Remedies not to fear death.
that such a kind of carelesnes cannot lodge in the head of a man of
understanding, it would likewise at the last cost him dear: for death coming
unawares, and unexpected, what torments, outcryes, furies and dispaires are
there commonly seen? Wisdom advises much better, that is, to attend and
expect death with a constant foot, and to encounter it: and the better to do
this, it gives us contrary counsel to the vulgar sort, that is, to have it
always in our thoughts, to practice it, to accustom our selves unto it, to
tame it, to present it unto us at all hours, to expect it, not only in places
suspected and dangerous, but in the midst of feasts and sports: that the
burden of our song be, Remember thy end; that others are dead, that thought to
have lived as long as our selves; that, that which happened then to them may
happen now to us; following herein the custom of the Egyptians, who in their
solemn banquets placed the image of death before their eyes; and of the
Christians and all other, who have their Churchyards near their temples, and
other public and frequented places, that men might always (as says Licurgus)
be put in mind of death. It is uncertain in what place death attends us, and
therefore let us attend death in all places, and be always ready to receive
it.

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum.
Grata superueniet quae non sperabitur hora.
But let us consider the excuses and greeuances that these poor people
allege to cover and color their complaints, which are all vain and
frivolous: It grieueth them to die The greeuances and excuses of fearful men
answered.
young, and they complain as well in regard of others as themselves, that
death preuenteth them and cutteth them off in the flower and strength of their
years. The complaint of the vulgar sort, who measure all by the ell, and
account nothing precious, but that which is long, and durable, whereas
contrarily, things exquisite and excellent are commonly thin, fine, and
delicate. It is the mark of a skillful worke-master to enclose much in a
little space: and a man may say, that it is fatal to great and glorious men,
not to live long; Great virtue, and great or long life do seldom or never meet
together. Life is measured by the end, provided that that be good, and all the
rest has a proportion thereunto: the quantity is nothing to make it more or
less happy, no more than the greatness of a circle makes the circle more round
than the less; the figure here does all: A little man is as perfect a man as
a greater: Neither men nor their lives are measured by the ell.

Again, it troubles them to die far from their friends,

They are troubled to think they must leave all the world. And why? They have
seen all, one day is like another, there

Yea, but they leave their parents and their friends. Where they go they shall
find more, and such as they have never yet seen, and they they leave behind
them and desire so much shall shortly follow them.

But what shall become of their small children and orphans

But it may be they fear to go alone. This is great simplicity,

Finally, they go into a place where they shall not desire this life. How
desire it? If it were lawful to resume it, they vitam nemo acciperet, si
daretur scientibus. Why, or how should they desire it, since they are either
wholly nothing as miscreants believe, or in far better state than before, as
the wisest of the world do affirm? Why then are they offended with death,
since it quits them of all grief? The selfsame journey they have made from
death, that is to say, from nothing to life, without passion, without fear,
they make again from life unto death; reuerti vnde veneris, quid grave est?

But it may be that the spectacle of death displeases them,

But it takes out of our hands so many things, or rather takes us from them,
and us from our selves, it takes us from at horremus ignota, it takes us from
the light, to bring us into darkness; and to conclude, it is our end, our ruin,
our dissolution. These are the weightiest objections: whereunto in a word a man
may answer, that death being the inevitable law of nature (as shall be said
hereafter) we need not dispute so much thereof, for it is a folly to fear
that which a man cannot avoid. Dementis est timere mortem, quia certa
expectantur, dubia metuuntur, mors habet necessitatem aequam and inuictam. But
these kind of people make not their count well, for it is quite contrary to
that which they say, for in steed of taking any thing from us, it gives us
all; in stead of taking us from our selves, it sets us in liberty, and makes
us free to our selves; in steed of bringing us into darkness, it takes it from
us, and puts us into the light; and it does the same to us, that we do to all
fruits, spoiling them of their barks, their shells, their foldings, their
speres, their skins, to bring them into sight, use, nature; ita solet sieri,
pereunt semper velamenta nascentium; it takes us from a strait, incommodious,
rumatike dark place, where we see but a small part of the heavens, and the
light but afar off, through the two narrow holes of our eyes, to bring us
into an open liberty, an assured health, a perpetual light, into such a
place, such an estate, where we may wholly see the whole heavens, and the light
in his natural place; aequaliter tibi splendebit omne caeli latus, totam lucem
suo loco prope totus aspicies quam nunc per angustissimas oculorum vias procul
intueris and miraris. To conclude, it takes us from that death, which began in
the womb of our mother, and now ends, to bring us to that life which shall
never end. Dies iste quem tanquam extremum reformidas, aeterni natalis est.

The second manner of the carriage of man in this matter of 12 2 To attend death
it is good.
death, is of a good, sweet, and moderate soul, and is justly practiced in a
common and peaceable life, by those that with reason account of this condition
of life, and content themselves to endure it, but governing themselves
according to reason, and accepting of death when it comes. This is a well
tempered mediocritie, suitable to such a condition of life, between the
extremities (which are to desire and fear, to seek and to fly, vicious and
faulty, summum ne metuas diem, nec optes (mortem concupiscentes, and timentes
aeque obiurgat Epicurus) if they be not covered and excused by some reason not
common and ordinary, as shall be said in his place. To seek and desire death
is ill; it is injustice to desire death without a cause, and to be out of
charity with the world, which our lives may be beneficial unto. It is to be
unthankful to nature to contemn it, and not to make the best use thereof; to
be over anxious and scrupulous, and not to endure that estate that is not
burdensome, and we are called unto. To fly and fear death on the other
side, is against nature, reason, justice, and all duty.

For to die is a thing natural, necessary, and inevitable, just 13 Death is
natural.
and reasonable; Natural, for it is a part of the order of the whole Universe,
and of the life of the world: will thou then that the world be ruinated, and a
new made for thy self? Death holds a high place in the policy and great
commonwealth of the world, and it is very profitable for the succession and
continuance of the works of nature: the fading or corruption of one life, is
the passage to a thousand others: Sicrerum summa nouatur. And it is not only a
part of this great whole Universe, but of our particular essence, not less
essential than to live, to be borne. In flying death, thou fliest thy self;
thy essence is equally parted into these two, life and death, it is the
condition of thy creation. If it grieueth thee to die, why were thou borne? Men
come not into the world with any other purpose but to go forth again, and
therefore he that is not willing to go forth, let him not come in. The first
day of thy birth binds thee, and sets thee as well in the way to deat, as
to life.

Naseentes morimur sinisque ab origin pendet.

Sola mors ius aequum est generis humani, viuere noluit qui mori non vult, vita
cum exceptione mortis data est, tam stultus qui timet mortem, quam qui
senectutem.

To be unwilling to die, is to be unwilling to be a man, for all men are
mortal, and therefore a wise man said, and that without passion, having
received news of the death of his son; I knew I begot, and bred him up a
mortal man. Death being then a thing so natural and essential, both for the
world in gross, and forthy self in particular, why should it be horrible unto
thee? Thou go against nature, the fear of grief and pain is natural, but
not of death: for being so serviceable to nature, and nature having instituted
it, to what end should it imprint in us a hatred and horror thereof? Children
and beasts fear not death, yea many times they suffer it cheerfully: it is
not then nature that teaches us to fear it, but rather to attend and receive
it, as being sent by it.

Secondly, it is necessary, fatale, inevitable; and this thou know that
fear and weepest. What greater folly can 14 Necessary.
there be, than for a man to torment himself for nothing, and that willingly
and of purpose, to pray and importune him, whom he knows to be inexorable; to
knock at that door that cannot be opened? What is there more inexorable and
deaf than death? We must therefore fear things uncertain, do our best
endeavors in things that are not remediless; but such as are certain, as
death, we must attend, and grow resolute in things past remedy. The sot
fears and flies death, the fool seeks it and runs after it; the wise man
attends it: It is folly to grieve at that, that cannot be mended; to fear
that, that cannot be avoided; Feras non culpes, quod vitari non potest. The
example of David is excellent, who understanding of the death of his dear
child, put on his best apparel, and made himself merry, saying to those that
wondered at this kind of carriage, that whilst his son lived, he importuned
God for his recovery, but being dead, that care was ended, and there was no
remedy. The fool thinks he makes a better answer to say, that that is the
cause of his grief, and that he tormenteth himself, because there is no
remedy; but he doubleth and perfecteth his own folly thereby, Scienter
frustra niti extremae dementiae est. Now death being so necessary and
inevitable, it is not only to no purpose to fear, but making of necessity a
virtue, we must welcome it and receive it kindly; for it is better for us to
go to death, than that death should come to us, to catch that, before that
catch us.

Thirdly, to die is a thing reasonable and just, it is reason to 15 Just and
r^asonable.
ariue to that place, toward which we are always walking; and if a man fear
to come thither, let him not walk, but stay himself, or turn back again,
which is impossible to do. It is reason that thou give place to others, since
others have given place to thee: If thou have made thy commodity of this life,
thou must be satisfied and be gone, as he that is invited to a banquet takes
his refection and departs. If thou have not known how to make use and profit
thereof, what need thou care, if thou lose it, or to what end would thou
keep it? It is a debt that must be paid, a pawn that must be restored,
whenever it is demanded. Why pleadest thou against thy own schedule, thy
faith, thy duty? It is then against reason to spurn against death, since that
thereby thou acquitest thy self of so much, and dischargest thy self of so
great an account. It is a thing general and common to all to die, why then
troublest thou thy self? Will thou have a new privilege, that was yet never
seen, and be a lone man by thy self? Why fear thou to go whither all the
world goes, where so many millions are gone before thee, and so many millions
shall follow thee? Death is equally certain to all, and equallity is the first
part of equity, omnes eodem cogimur: omnium versatur vrna: serius ocyus sors
exitura, etc.

The third is the part of a valiant and generous mind, which is practiced with
reason, in a public, elevated, difficult, 16 To contemn death is good, if it
be for a thing that deserves it.
and busy condition of life, where there are many things to be preferred
before life, and for which a man should not doubt to die. In such a case
howsoever matters go a man must more account thereof than of his life, which is
placed upon the stage and scaffold of this world: he must run his race with
resolution, that he may give a luster to his other actions, and perform those
things that are profitable and exemplary. He must lay down his life, and let
it run his fortune. He that knows not how to contemn death, shall never
not only perform any thing of worth, but he exposes himself to diverse
dangers; for whilst he goes about to keep his life safe and sure, he lays
open and hazardeth his deuoire, his honor, his virtue and honesty. The
contempt of death is that which produces the boldest, and most honorable
exploits whether in good or evil. He that fears not to die, fears nothing:
he does whatsoever he will, he makes him-himselfe a master both of his own
life, and of another: the contempt of death is the true and lively source of
all the beautiful and generous actions of men: from hence are derived the
brave resolutions and free speeches of virtue uttered by so many great
personages. Fluidius Priscus whom the Emperor Vespasian had commanded not to
come to the senate, or coming, to speak as he would have him, answered, That
as he was a Senator it was fit he should be at the Senate; and if being there
he were required to give his advice, he would speak freely that which his
conscience commanded him. Being threatened by the same man, that if he spoke he
should die; Did I ever tell you (says he) that I was immortal? Do you what
you will, and I will do what I ought: It is in your power to put me unjustly
to death, and in me to die constantly. The Lacedaemonians being threatened much
hard dealing, if they did not speedily yield themselves to Philip the father of
Alexander, who was entered into their country with a great power; one for the
rest answered, What hard dealing can they suffer that fear not to die? And
being told by the same Philip that he would break and hinder all their
designments; What, say they, will he likewise hinder us from dying? Another
being asked by what means a man may live free, answered, By contemning death.
And another youth being taken and sold for a slave, said to him that bought
him, Thou shall see what thou have bought, I were a fool to live a slave
whilst I may be free, and whilst he spoke cast himself down from the top of
the house. A wise man said unto another, deliberating with himself how he
might take away his life to free himself from an evil that at that time
pressed him sore, Thou do not deliberate of any great matter: it is no great
thing to live, thy slaves, thy beasts do live, but it is a great matter to die
honestly, wisely, constantly. To conclude and crown this article, our
religion has not had a more firm and assured foundation, and wherein the
author thereof has more insisted, than the contempt of this life. But many
there are that make a show of contemning death, when they fear it. Many there
are that care not to be dead, yea they wish they were dead, but it greeueth
them to die. Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum nihili astimo. Many deliberate in
their health and soundest judgments to suffer death with constancy, nay to
murder themselves, a part played by many, and for which end Heliogabalus made
many sumptuous preparations; but being come to the point, some were terrified by
the bleeding of their nose, as Lucius Domitius, who repented that he had
poisoned himself. Others have turned away their eyes and their thoughts, as if
they would steal upon it, swallowing it down insensibly as men take pills,
according to that saying of Caesar, that the best death was the shortest; and
of Pliny, that a short death was the happiest hour of a man's life. Now no man
can be said to be resolute to die, that fears to confront it, and to suffer
with his eyes open, as Socrates did, who had thirty whole days to ruminate
and to digest the sentence of his death, which he did without any passion or
alteration, yea without any show of endeavor, mildly and cheerfullie. Pomponius
Atticus, Tullius Marcellinus, Romans, Cleantes the Philosopher, all three
almost after one manner: for having assayed to die by abstinence, hoping thereby
to quit themselves of those maladies that did torment them, but finding
themselves rather cured thereby, nevertheless they would not desist till they
had ended that they went about, taking pleasure by little and little to pine
away, and to consider the course and progress of death. Otho and Cato having
prepared all things fit for their death, upon the very point of the execution
settled themselves to sleep, and slept profoundly, being no more astonished at
death, than at any other ordinary and light accident.

The fourth is the part of a valiant and resolute mind, practiced in former
times by great and holy personages, and that 17 To desire death.
in two cases; the one the more natural and lawful is a painful and
troublesome life, or an apprehension of a far worse death: To be brief, a
miserable estate which a man cannot remedy. This is to desire death as the
retrait and only haven from the torments of this life, the sovereign good of
nature, the only stay and pillar of our liberty. It is imbecillitie to yield
unto evils, but it is folly to nourish them. It is a good time to die, when to
live is rather a burden than a blessing, and there is more ill in life than
good; for, to preserve our life, to increase our torment, is against nature.
There are some that say, that we should desire to die, to avoid those pleasures
that are according to nature; how much more then to fly those miseries that
are against nature? There are many things in life far worse than death, for
which we should rather die and not live at all, than live. And therefore the
Lacedaemonians being cruelly threatened by Antipater, if they yielded not to his
demand, answered, If thou threaten us with any thing that is worse than death,
death shall be welcome unto us. And the wisest were wont to say, That a wise
man lives as long as he should, not so long as he can, death being more at his
command and in his power, than life. Life has but one entrance, and that too
depends upon the will of another. Our death depends on our own wills, and
the more voluntary it is, the more honorable; and there are a thousand ways
unto it. We may want means whereby to live, but not to die. Life may be taken
away from every man by every man, but not death, vbique mors est, optime hoc
cauit deus, eripere vitam nemo non homini potest, at nemo mortem: mill ad hanc
aditus patent. The most favorable present that nature has bestowed upon us,
and that takes away from us all means of complaint, is, that it has left
unto us the key of the closet, liberty to die when we will. Wherefore
complainest thou in this world? It holds thee not; if thou live in pain, thy
idleness and fear is the cause; for to die, there is nothing necessary, but a
will.

The other case is a lively apprehension and desire of the life to come, which
makes a man to thirst after death, as after a great gain, the seed of a
better life, the bridge unto paradise, the way to all good, and an earnest
penny of the resurrection. A firm belief and hope of these things is
incompatible with the fear and horror of death: it persuades us rather to be
weary of this life, and to desire death, vitam habere in patientia, and mortem
in desiderio, to have life in affliction, and death in affection: their life is
a cross, their death a comfort, and therefore their vows and their voices
are, cupio dissolui: mihi mors lucrum: quis me liberabit de corpore montis
huius? And for this cause those Philosophers and Christians have been justly
reproched (which is to be understood of those that are weak and idle, and not
of all) that play the public dissemblers, and do not in verity believe that
which they do so much talk of, and so highly commend touching that happy
immortality, and those unspeakable pleasures in the second life, since they
doubt, and fear death so much, the necessary passage thereunto.

The fifth and last, is the execution of this precedent desire, 18 To kill
himself.
which is for a man to be his own executioner, and the author of his own
death. This seems to proceed from virtue, and the greatness of a man's courage,
having been ancientlie practiced by the greatest and most excellent men and
women of every nation and religion, Greeks, Romans, Egyptians, Persians,
Medes, French, Indians, Philosophers of all sects, Jews, witness that good old
man Razis, called the father of the Jews for his virtue; and his wives, who
under Antiochus, having circumcised their children, cast themselves hedlong
from the rock with them: And Christians too, witness those two canonized Saints,
Pelagius and Sophronia, whereof the first, with his mother and sisters cast
himself into the river, and the other killed her self with a knife, to avoid
the violence of Maxentius the Emperor: Yea witness diverse people and whole
cities, as Capona in Italy, Astupa, Numantia in Spain besieged by the Romans;
the Abideens enforced by Philip, a city in India besieged by Alexander. But
this resolution has been likewise approved and authorized by many
commonweals, by laws and rules established thereupon, as at Marseilles, in
the I Will of Cea; in Nigropont, and other nations, as in the Hyperborean Islands,
and justified by many great reasons, drawn from the precedent article, which
is of the just desire of death. For if it be permitted to desire, to ask, to
seek after death, why should it be an ill act to give it unto our selves? If
a man's own death be just in the will, why should it not be as just in the
hand, and the execution? Why should I expect that from another, which I can do
my self? and why should it not be better to give it, than to suffer another to
give it; to meet, than to attend it? for the fairest death is the more
voluntary. Finally, I offend not the law made against thieves and robbers,
when I take but my own goods, and cut but my own purse; neither am I guilty
of the laws made against murderers by taking away my own life. But this
opinion is reproved by diverse, not only Christians, but Jews, as Josephus
disputes against his captains in the cave du Puis: and Philosophers, as
Plato, Scipio, who held this proceeding not only for a vice of cowardlines and
impatiencie, for it is for a man to hide himself from the blows of fortune.
Now a true and lively virtue must never yield, for evils and crosses are
nourishments thereunto, and it is greater constancy well to use the chain
wherewith we are tied, than to break it; and more settled resolution in
Regulus, than in Cato.

Rebus in aduersis facile est contemnere vitam,
Fortius ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
Si fractus illabitur orbis
Impauidum ferient ruinae.
But also for a fault of desertion; for a man ought not to abandon his charge
without the express commandment of him that gave it him; we are not here
for our selves, nor our own masters. This then is not a matter beyond all
doubt or disputation.

It is first beyond all doubt, that we are not to attempt this last exploit
without very great and just cause (nay I cannot Pomponius Atticus, Marcellinus,
and Cleantes, Petus, of Scaurus, of Labio, of Fuluius the friend of Augustus,
Seneca, and diverse others, who died only to accompany their husbands in death,
or rather to encourage them therein. Cato and others, who died because their
business succeeded Grauius Siluanius, and Statius Proximus, being pardoned by
Nero. They that die to recover Lucretia, Sparzapizes the son of Queen
Tomyris, Boges the Lieutenant of king Xerxes. They that for no particular
cause, but only because murder themselves, as Nerua that great Lawyer, Vibius
Vircus, Iubellius in the taking of Capona. They that are weary with living, or
for private causes loath to live any longer. Brutus and Cassius, who killing
themselves before the time and occasion, lost the relics of the Roman
liberty whereof they were protectors. A man, says Cleomenes, must manage his
life, and make use thereof to the uttermost: for to take it away, a man never
wants time, it is a remedy which he has always in his own hands; but the
state of things may change and grow better. Joseph and diverse others have to
their great benefit practiced this counsel: things that seem altogether
desperate, do many times change and have a happy success; aliquis carnifici
suo superstes fuit.

Multa dies variusque labor mutabilis aeui
Retulit in melius.
A man must carry himself in his place and calling as a defendant against him
that assaileth him, cum moderamine inculpatae tutelae, he must try all manner
of means before he come to this extremity. Secondly and without doubt it is
far better and more commendable to suffer, and to continue constant and firm
to the end, than fearefullie and cowardly to fly or die: but forasmuch as it
is a gift not given unto all no more than continency is, non omnes capiunt
verbum istud, vnde melius nubere quam vri: the question is, whether an
insupportable and remediless evil happening, which may utterly undo and turn
topsy-turuie our whole resolution, and drive us into despair, despite and
murmuring against God, it be more expedient, or a less evil for a man
courageously to deliver himself, having his senses sound and settled, than by
standing to it, for fear of failing in his duty, expose himself to the
danger of sinking and being utterly lost. It is not a less evil to quit the
place, than to be obstinate and perish, to fly, than to be taken. It is true
that it seems by all humane and philosoph call reason to be practiced, as
has been said, by so many famous people of all countries and climats. But
Christianity does no way approve it, nor allows therein any dispensation.

Finally, it is a great point of wisdom to learn to know the point and
period, to choose a fit hour to die: Every man Si populo tuo sum necessarius,
non recuso laborem.

Death has diverse forms, some more easy than other, and 21 Forms of deaths
diverse.
takes diverse qualities according to the fantasy of every one. Among those
that are natural they that proceed from weakness and a numnesse of the
members, are the sweetest and the easiest: among those that are violent, the
best is the shortest, and the least premeditated. Some desire to make an
exemplarie and demonstratiue death of constancy and sufficiency; this is to
consider another thing, and to seek their own reputation: but this is
vanity, for this is no act of society, but of one only person, who has
enough to do with himself, to minister to himself inward comfort, and has
no need to trouble himself with what belongs to another, especially all the
interest he has in his reputation, ceasing with his death. That is the best
death which is well recollected in it self, quiet, solitary, and attends
wholly to that, which at that time is fittest. That great assistance of parents
and friends, brings a thousand discommodities, it oppresses and smoothereth
him that is dying, one tormenteth his ears, another his eyes, another his
mouth; their cries and complaints, if they be true, stifle the heart; if
fained, afflict and torment it. Many great personages have sought to die far
from their friends, to avoid this inconvenience, accounting it a childish
thing, and a foolish humor, to be willing by their miseries to move sorrow and
compassion in their friends; we commend constancy to suffer bad fortune, we
accuse and hate it in our friends, and when it is our own case, it is not
sufficient that they suffer with us, but they must afflict themselves too: A
wise man that is sick, should content himself with the settled countenance of
his assistants.

CHAP. XII. To maintain himself in true tranquillity of spirit, the fruit
and crown of wisdom, and the conclusion of this book.
THe tranquillity of the spirit is the sovereign good of Vera tranquillitas
non concuti.

The means to attain thereunto, to get and preserve it, are which are the
cause that a man is never content, and these are kindled and stirred in him by
those two contrary fortunes, prosperity and aduerfity, as with two violent and
mighty winds: and finally that vile and base captivity wherewith the spirit
(that is to say, the judgment and will) is enthralled like a beast under the
yoke of certain local and particular rules and opinions. Now he must
emancipate and free himself from these stocks and unjust subiections, and
bring his spirit into liberty, restore himself to himself, free, universal,
open, seeing into all, and wandering through the beautiful and universal
circuit of the world and of nature. In commune genitus mundum vt vnam domum
spectans toti se inferens mundo, and in omnes eius actus contemplationem suam
mittens.

The place being thus trimmed and made ready, the first foundations that are to
be laid, are a true honesty, and to live Conscientiam suam aperiens semperque
tanquam in publico viuens, se magis veritus, quam alios. Again he must keep
in himself and with others, and generally in all things, in his thoughts,
speeches, designments, actions, a moderation the mother or nurse of
tranquillity, laying aside all pomp and vanity, rule his desires, content
himself with a mediocrity and sufficiency, quod sit esse velit, nihilque
malit, rejoice in his fortunes. A tempest has a great deal less force, and
does less hurt when the sails are taken down, than when they are hoised up,
and laid open to the winds. He must be constant against whatsoever may wound
or hurt him, raise himself above and beyond all fear, contemning all the
blows of fortuen, of death, holding it as the end of all evils, and not the
cause of any, contemptor omnium, quibus torquetur vitae, supra omnia quae
contingunt acciduntque eminens. Imperturbatus, intrepidus. And so hold himself
firm unto himself, agree with himself, live at ease without any pain or
inward contention, full of joy, of peace, of comfort and content in himself;
Sapiens plenus gaudio, hilaris, placidus cum dijs ex pari viuit: Sapientiae
effectus gaudij aequalitas, solus sapiens gaudet: He must I say entertain
himself, and continue content in himself, which is the proper fruit and
effect of wisdom; Nisi sapienti sua non placent: omnis stultitia laborat
fastidio sui. Non est beatus, esse se qui non put at.

To conclude, to this tranquillity of spirit two things are necessary,
innocence, and a good conscience, this is the first and principal part which
does maruellously arm and confirm him with assurance; but this is not always
sufficient, in the force of the tempest, as it is many times seen in diverse
that are troubled and lost: Erit tanta tribulatio vt seducantur iusti. And
therefore the other is likewise necessary, which is force and constancy of
courage, as likewise this alone were not sufficient: for the force and
resistance of the conscience is marvelous, it makes us to betray, to accuse
our selves, and for want of other witnesses, it is as a thousand witnesses
against us.

Occultum quatiens animo tortore flagellum. It frames an enditement,
condemns and executes us, there is no closet close enough for wicked men,
says Epicurus, because they never can assure themselves to be hid, their own
conscience always discovering them to themselves. Prima est haec vltio, quod
se iudice nemo nocens absoluitur. So likewise neither a weak and fearful
soul, be it never so holy, nor a strong and courageous, if it be not sound and
pure, can never enjoy this so rich and happy tranquillity, but he that has
them all works wonders, as Socrates, Epaminondas, Cato, Scipio, of whom there
are three admirable exploits touching this subject. These two Romans being
publicly accused, made their accusers to blush, won the Judges and the whole
assembly being stricken with an admiration. He had a heart too great by
nature, says Titus Liuius of Scipio, to know how to be faulty, and to debase
himself so much, as to defend his own innocence.

FINIS.
OF WISDOM, THE THIRD BOOK. Wherein are handled the particular aduisements of
Wisdom, by the four moral virtues.
THE PREFACE.
FOrasmuch as our purpose in this Book, is by peecemeale to instruct unto
wisdom, and to give the particular aduisements after the general handled in
the Second Book, that we may the better hold a certain course and order
therein, we have thought that we cannot do better, than to follow the four
mistress and moral virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude; and Temperance; for
in these sour almost all the duties of our life are comprehended. Prudence, is
as a general guide and conduct of the other virtues, and of our whole life,
though properly it be exercised in the affairs that belong thereunto. Justice
concerns the persons of men; for it is to give unto every one that which
belongs unto him. Fortitude and Temperance, concerns all accidents good and
evil, pleasant and painful, good and ill fortune. Now in these three,
persons, affairs, and accidents, is contained all our life and humane
condition, and the traffic of this world.

Of Prudence, the first virtue.
CHAP. I.
Of Prudence in general.
PRudence is with reason put in the first rank, as the general Queen,
superintendent, and guide of all other virtues, 1 The excellency thereof.
auriga virtutum; without which there is nothing good, beautiful, fit, and
decent; it is the salt of our life, the luster, the ornament, the sauce or
seasoning of our actions, the square and rule of our affairs; and in a word,
the Art of our life, as Physic the art of our health.

It is the knowledge and choice of those things we must 2 The definition.
either desire, or fly; it is the just estimation and trial of things; it is
the eye that sees all, that directs and ordains all. It consists in
three things, which are all of one rank; to consult and deliberate well, to
judge and resolve well, to conduct and execute well.

It is a universal virtue, for it extends it self generally to all humane
things, not only in gross, but by peecemeale to 3 It is universal.
every particular thing, and is as infinite, as are the indiuiduals.

It is very difficult, both by reason of the aforesaid infinitnes, for the
particulars are without knowledge, as without 4 Difficult. Senec.
number, si qua finiri non possunt, extra sapientiam sunt; and of the great
uncertainty and inconstancy of human things, which are the greater by
reason of their accidents, circumstances, appertenances, dependancies, times,
places, persons; in such sort, that in the change of one only, and that the
least circumstance, the whole thing it self is altered: And likewise in the
office thereof, which is the gathering together and temperature of contrary
things, the distinction and trial of those that are like one another; the
contrariety and resemblance hinders much.

It is very obscure, because the causes and jurisdictions of things are
unknown, the seeds and roots are hidden, and such 5 Obscure.
as the nature of man cannot find, nor ought to seek after. Occultat eorum
semina deus, and plerunque bonorum malorumque causae Plin. in Paneg.
sub diuersa specie latent. Moreover, fortune, destiny, (use what words you
will) a sovereign secret, and unknown power and authority has always the
advantage, and maintains it against all counsels, foresights, and preuentions
whatsoever: whereby it many times comes to pass, that the best counsels have
the worst issues, that one and the same counsel does very happily succeed to
one, unhappily to another, in one and the same case, and with one and the same
man, things went luckily yesterday, unluckily to day. It is an opinion justly
received, that we ought not to judge of counsels, nor of the sufficiency and
capacity of persons by the events. And therefore one answered those well that
marvelled and were astonished at the ill success of their business,
considering with how wise and mature deliberation they were undertaken, That
they were masters of their deliberatio^s, not of the success of their
affairs: for that was in the power of fortune, which seems to sport it self
with all our fairest designments and counsels, overthrows in a moment that
which has a long time been proiected and deliberated, and seems to be
strongly fortified, choking, as they say, our artillarie. And indeed fortune to
show it authority in all things, and to abate our presumption, not being able
to make men wise, that are not apt thereunto, makes them nevertheless happy
in despite of virtue, whereby it many times comes to pass, that simple men
bring to a happy end great matters both public and private. Prudence then is
a sea without either bottom or brinke, and which cannot be limited and
prescribed by precepts and aduisements. It does but compass things and goes
about them, like a dark cloud, many times vain and frivolous.

Nevertheless it is of such weight and necessity, that alone and of it self
it can do much, and without it all the rest is nothing, 6 Necessary. Horat. 3.
od. Euripid. Liuius.
no not riches, means, force, vis consilij expers mole ruit sua, Men's vna
sapiens plurim vincit manus. Et multa quae natura impedita sunt, consilio
expediu^tur. And the principal cause of this necessity is the perverse nature
of man, the roughest and hardest to tame of all other creatures; Impatiens
aequi, nedum Senec. 1. de clement.
seruitutis; and which must be handled with art and industry, for it does not
more willingly set it self against any, than against those that would
contemn it. Now Prudence is the art to handle it, and a gentle bridle, that
holds it within Xenoph. in poedag.
the compass of obedience.

Now though the seed of Prudence, as of other virtues, be in us by nature, yet
it is acquired and learnt more than any 7 The acquisition thereof.
other, and that in some sort by precepts and aduisements; this is the
Theorick: but much better and principally (though with more time) by experience
and practice, which is twofold: the one, and the true, is that which is proper
and personal, whereof it takes the name; this is the knowledge of those things
which we have seen and handled: the other is strange by the act of another;
this is history which we know by relation or by reading. Now experience and
use is more firm and more assured; vsus efficacissimus omnium rerum magister,
the father and mistress of the arts, but more long; it is old, seris venit vsus
ab annis, more difficult, painful, rare. The knowledge of history, as it is
less firm and assured, so is it more easy, more frequent, open and common to
all. A man is made more resolute and assured at his own charges, but it is
more easy at the charge of another. Now from these two properly, Experience,
and History, does Prudence arise, vsus me genuit, matter peperit memoria, seu
memoriae anima and vita historia.

Now Prudence may and must be diversely distinguished 8 The distinction.
according to the persons and the affairs. In regard of the persons there is
private prudence, whether it be solitary and individual, which can hardly be
termed prudence; or sociable and Economical among a small company, and
prudence public and politic. This more high, excellent, difficult, and unto
which those foresaid qualities do properly belong; and it is twofold,
peaceable, and military.

In regard of the affairs, forasmuch as they are of two sorts, the one
ordinary, easy; the other extraordinary. These are accidents which bring
with them some new difficulty and ambiguitie. A man may likewise say that
there is an ordinary and easy prudence, which walks according to the laws,
customs, and course already established, another extraordinary and more
difficult.

There is likewise another distinction of prudence both in respect of the
persons, and of the affairs, which concerns Hesiod. Liuius. Cicero.
rather the degrees, than the kinds thereof, that is to say, proper prudence
whereby a man is wise, and takes counsel of himself; the other borrowed,
whereby a man follows the counsel of another. The wise say that there are
two sorts and degrees of wise men; the first and chiefest is of those that have
a clear insight into all things, and know of themselves how to find the
remedies and helps; but where are these to be found? Doubtless they are rare
and singular: the other is of those that know how to take, to follow, to make
use of the good counsels of another; for they that know neither how to give,
nor to take counsel, are fools.

The general and common aduisements, which belong to all sorts of prudence,
all sorts of persons and affairs, has Chap. 10.
fourthly, from them to take counsel upon all; fifthly, temperature between
fear and assurance, confidence and diffidence; sixthly, to take all things in
their season, and to sease upon the occasion; seventhly, to carry himself
well, with industry and fortune; lastly, discretion in all. We must now
handle the particulars, first of public wisdom, which respects the persons,
afterward of that which respects the affairs.

Of the politic prudence of a sovereign to govern states. THE PREFACE.
THis doctrine belongs to souereignes and governors of states. It is
uncertain, infinite, difficult, and almost impossible to be ranged into order,
to be limited and prescribed by rules and precepts: but we must endeavor to
give some small light, and brief instruction thereof. We may refer this
whole doctrine to two principal heads, which are the two duties of a
sovereign. The one comprehends and entreats of the props and pillars of a
state, principal and essential parts of public government, as the bones and
sinews of this great body, to the end that a sovereign may provide for
himself and his state; which are seven principal, that is to say, knowledge
of the state; virtue; manners and fashions; counsels; treasure; forces and
arms; alliances. The three first are in the person of the sovereign, the
fourth in him and near him, the three latter without him. The other is to act,
well to employ and to make use of the aforesaid means, that is to say, in
gross, and in a word, well to govern and maintain himself in authority,
and the love both of his subjects and of strangers, but distinctly; this part
is twofold, peaceable and military. Behold here summarily and grossly the
work cut out, and the first great draughts that are to be handled hereafter.
We will divide then this politic matter, and of state, into two parts; the
first shall be of provision, that is to say, of the seven necessary things;
the second, and which presupposes the first, shall be of the action of the
prince. This matter is excellently handled by Lipsius, according as he thought
good: the marrow of his book is here: I have not taken, nor wholly followed
his method, nor his order, as you may already see in this general division,
and more you shall hereafter: I have likewise left somewhat of his, and added
something of my own, and other men's.

CHAP. II.
The first part of this politic prudence and government of state, which is of
provision.
THe first thing that is required before all others, is the knowledge of the
state: for the first rule of all prudence 1 The chief point of this provision,
to know the state.
consists in knowledge, as has been said in the second book. The first in
all things, is to know with whom a man has to deal. For in as much as this
ruling and moderating prudence of states, which is a knowledge and sufficiency
to govern in public, is a thing relative, which is handled between the
sovereign and the subjects; the first duty and office thereof is in the
knowledge of the two parts, that is, of the people, and the souereigntie, that
is to say, of the state. First then the humors and natures of the people must
be known. This knowledge forms, and gives advice unto him that should
govern them. The nature of the people in general, has been described at
large in the first book, (light, inconstant, mutinous, vain, a lover of
novelties, fierce and insupportable in prosperity, cowardly and dejected in
adversity) but it must likewise be known in particular: so many cities and
persons, so many diverse humors. There are people choleric, audacious,
warriers, fearful, given to wine, subject to women, some more than others,
noscenda natura vulgi est, and quibus modis temperanter habeatur. And in this
sense is that saying of the wise to be understood: He that has not obeyed,
cannot tell how to command; nemo been imperat, nisi qui ante paruerit imperio.
Not because sovereigns Senec.
should or can always take upon them the name of subjects; for many are borne
kings and princes: and many states are successiue: but that he that will well
command, should acquaint himself with the humors and wills of his subjects,
as if himself were of their rank, and in their place. He must likewise know
the nature of the state, not only in general, such as it has been described,
but in particular that which he has now in hand, the form, establishment,
birth thereof; that is to say, whether it be old or new, fallen by succession,
or by election, obtained by the laws, or by arms, of what extent it is, what
neighbors, means, power it has. For according to these and other
circumstances, he must diversely manage the scepter, loose and straiten the
raines of his government.

After this knowledge of the state, which is as a preamble, 2 The second head
of this provision is virtue.
the first of those things that are required, is virtue, necessary in a
sovereign, as well for himself as for the state. It is first necessary and
convenient that he that is above all should be better than all, according to
the saying of Cyrus. And then it stands him upon for his credit and
reputation. For common fame and report gathers and spreads abroad the
speeches and actions of him that governs. He is in the eye of all, and can
no more hide himself than the sun: and therefore what good or ill soever he
does, shall not want means to blasen it, shall be talked of enough. And it
imports him much, both in respect of himself and his state, that his
subjects have a good opinion of him. Now a sovereign ought not only in
himself, and in his life and conversation to be virtuous, but he must likewise
endeavor that his subjects be like unto himself. For as all the wisest of the
world have ever taught, a state, a city, a company cannot long continue nor
Salust. ad Caesar.
prosper where virtue is banished; and they do grossly aequiuocate, who think
that princes are so much the more assured in their states, by how much the more
wicked their subjects are, because, say they, they are more proper and as it
were borne to servitude and the yoke, patientiores seruitutis, quos Plin. Pan.
non decet nisi esse seruos. For contrarily, wicked men bear their yoke
impatiently; and they that are good and debonaire fear much more than their
cause is. Pessimus quisque asperrime Salust ad Caesar.
rectorem patitur: Contra facile imperium in bonos, qui metuentes magis quam
metuendi. Now the most powerful means to induce them, and to form them unto
virtue, is the example of the Prince; for as experience tells us, all men do
frame themselves to the pattern and model of the Prince. The reason is,
because example presses more than law. It is a mute law which carries more
credit than a command, nec tam imperio Pli. Paneg.
nobis opus quam exemplo: and mitius iubetur exemplo. Now the eyes and thoughts
of the lesser are always upon the great; they admire and simply believe, that
all is good and excellent that they do: and on the other side, they that
command, think they sufficiently enjoin and bind their inferiors to imitate
them by acting only. Virtue then is honorable and profitable in a sovereign,
yea, all virtue.

But especially and above all, Piety, Justice, Valor, Clemency. These are
the four principal and princely virtues 3 Especially 4. virtues.
in principality. And therefore that great Prince Augustus was wont to say,
that Piety and Justice did deifie Princes. And Seneca says, that clemency
agrees better with a Prince, than any other. The piety of a sovereign
consists in his care for the maintenance and preservation of religion, as the
protector thereof. This makes for his own honor, and preservation of
himself: for they that fear God, dare not attempt, nay think of any thing
either against their Prince, who is the image of God upon earth, or against the
state. For as Lactantius does many times teach, it is a religion that
maintains humane society, which cannot otherwise subsist, and would soon be
filled with all manner of wickedness and savage cruelties, if the respect and
fear of religion did not bridle men and keep them in order. The state of the
Romans did increase, and flourish more by religion, says Cicero himself, than
by all other means. Wherefore a Prince must take care and endeavor that
religion be preserved in it purity, according to the ancient laws and
ceremonies of the country, and hinder all innovation, and controversies
therein, roughly chastising those that go about to break the peace thereof.
For doubtless change in religion, and a wrong done thereunto, draws with it
a change and declination in the Commonwealth, Dion.
as Mecenas well discourses to Augustus.

After piety comes Justice, without which states are but 4 Justice.
robberies; which a Prince must keep and practice both in himself and others:
In himself, for he must detest all those tyrannical and barbarous speeches,
which dispense with sovereigns, quitting them from all laws, reason, equity,
obligation; which tell them that they are not bound unto any other duty, than
to their own wills and pleasures; that there is no law for them; that all is
good and just that serves their turns; that their equity is their force,
their duty is in their power. Principi leges nemo scripsit: licet, si libet.
In summa fortuna, Plin. Pan. Tacitus. Senec. in tr.
id aequius quod validius: nihil iniustum quod fructuosum: Sanctitas, pietas,
fides, priuata bona sunt: qua iuuat reges eant. And he must oppose against them
those excellent and holy counsels of the wise, that he that has most power in
him to break laws, should take most care to keep them, and live most in
order. The greatest power should be the streightest bridle; the rule of power
is duty: minimum decet libere, cui Senec. Euripides.
nimium licet, non fas potentes posse, fieri quod nefas. The Prince then must
first be just, keeping well and inuiolablie his faith, the foundation of
justice to all and every one whosoever he be. Then he must cause that his
justice be kept and maintained in others, for it is his proper charge, and for
that cause he is installed. He must understand the causes and the persons, give
unto every one that which appertains to him, justly according to the laws,
without delay, labyrinths of suits and controversies, inuolution of process;
abolishing that villainous and pernicious mystery of pleading, which is an open
fair, or merchandise, a lawful and honorable robbery, concessum latrocinium;
avoiding the multiplicitie of laws and ordinances, a testimony of a sick
Commonweal, Corruptissimae Colum. Tacit.
reipublicae plurimae leges, as medicines and plasters of a body ill
disposed: and all this, to the end that that which is established by good laws
be not destroyed by too many Plin. Pan.
laws. But you must know, that the justice, virtue, and probitie of a
sovereign goes after another manner, than that of An advertisement.
private men: it has a gate more large and more free, by reason of the great
weight and dangerous charge which he carries and swayeth, for which cause it is
fit to march with a pase, which seems to others uneasy and irregular, but
yet is necessary and lawful for him. He must sometimes step aside, and go
out of the way, mingle prudence with justice, and as they say, cover himself
with the skin of the Lion, if that of the Fox serve not the turn. But this is
not always to be done, and in all cases, but with these three conditions, that
it be for the evident and important necessity of the wealepublike, For the
weale-pub.
(that is to say, of the State and of the Prince, which are things conjoined)
unto which he must run; this is a natural obligation, and not to be
dispensed with: and to procure the good of the Commonweal, is but to do his
duty.

Salus populi suprema lex esto. That it be to defend, and not to offend; to
preserve himself, and not to increase his greatness, to save and shield
himself For defense and conservation.
either from deceits and subtilties, or from wicked and dangerous enterprises,
and not to practice them. It is lawful by subtlety to prevent subtlety, and
among foxes to counterfeit the fox. The world is full of art and malicious
cousenage; and by deceits and cunning subtilties, states are commonly
overthrown, says Aristotle. Why then should it not be lawful, nay why should
it not be necessary to hinder, and to divert such evil, and to save the
weale-publike by the selfsame means that others would undermine and overthrow
it? Always to deal simply and plainly with such people, and to follow the
straight line of true reason and equity, were many times to betray the State,
and to undo it.

Thirdly it must be with discretion, to the end that others abuse it not, and
such as are wicked take from thence occasion 5 Discreetly without wickedness.
to give credit and countenance to their own wickedness. For it is never
permitted to leave virtue and honesty, to follow vice and dishonestie. There
is no composition or compensation betwixt these two extremities. And therefore
away with all injustice, treachery, treason, and disloyalty. Cursed be the
doctrine of those, who teach (as has been said) that all things are good and
lawful for sovereigns: but yet it is sometimes necessary and required, that
he mingle profit with honesty, and that he enter into composition with both.
He must never turn his back to honesty, but yet sometimes go about and coast
it, employing therein his skill and cunning, which is good, honest and lawful,
as says that great S. Basil, (...); and doing for the wealepublike as mothers
and physicians, who feed their children and sick with fair speeches, and
deceive them for their health. To be brief, doing that closely which he may not
do openly, join wisdom to valor, art and spirit, where nature and the hand
suffices not; be, as Pindarus says, a Lion in his blows, a Fox in his
counsel; a Dove and a Serpent as divine verity speaks.

And to this matter more distinctly, there is required in a sovereign
distrust, and that he keep himself close, yet so, as 6 Distrust required in a
Prince.
that he be still virtuous and just. Distrust, which is the first, is wholly
necessary, as the contrary, which is credulity; and a careless trust or
confidence, is vicious, and very dangerous in a sovereign. He watches over
all, and must answer for all, his faults are not light, and therefore he must
be well advised. If he trust much, he discovers himself, and is exposed to
shame, and many dangers, opportunus fit iniuriae, yea, he encourages such as
are false and treacherous, who may with little danger, and much recompense
commit great wickedness, aditum nocendi perfido praestat fides. It is
necessary therefore Senec.
that he cover himself with this buckler of distrust, which the wisest have
thought to be a great part of prudence, and the sinowes of wisdom, that is to
say, that he watch, believe nothing, take heed of all: and heereunto does the
nature of the Epichar. Euripid. Cicero.
world induce him, wholly composed of lies, colored, counterfeit, and
dangerous, namely such as are near unto him in the court and houses of great
personages. He must then trust but few, and those known by long experience and
often trials: Neither is it necessary that he abandon them, and in such sort
leave all the cord, that he still hold it not by one end, and have an eye unto
them: But he must cover and disguise his diffidence, yea when he distrusteth,
he must make a show and countenance of great trust and confidence. For open
distrust wrongeth, and inuiteth as much to deceive, as an ouer-carelesse
confidence, and many by making too great a show of fear to be deceived, show
the way how they may be deceived. Multi fallere docuerunt dum timent falli: as
contrarily a professed and open trust, has taken away the desire to deceive,
Senec.
has obliged to loyalty, and engendered fidelity; vult quisque sibi credi,
and habita fides ipsam plerumque obligat fidem.

From distrust comes dissimulation the science or seed thereof; for if that were
not, and that there were trust and fidelity 7 And dissimulation.
in all, dissimulation which opens the front, and covers the thought, could
have no place. Now dissimulation which is vicious in private persons, is very
necessary in Princes, who otherwise could not know how to reign, or well to
command. And they must many times dissemble not only in war, with strangers
and enemies, but also in time of peace, and with their subjects, though more
sparingly. Simple and open men, and such as carry, as they say, their hearts in
their foreheads, are not in any sort fit for this mystery of commanding, and
betray many times both themselves and their state: But yet he must play this
part with art and dexterity, and to the purpose, neither so openly nor so
simply as that it may be discerned. For to what purpose do thou hide and
cover thy self, if a man may see thee obliquely or sidewaies? Wily deceipts
and cunning subtilties, are no more deceits and subtilties when they are known
and vented out. A Prince then the better to cover his art, must make
profession of loving simplicity, must make much of free and open minded men,
as being enemies to dissimulation; and in matters of less importance he must
proceed openly, to the end he may be taken for such as he seems.

All this is in omission, in reteining himself, not acting: but 8 Practice.
it is likewise required sometimes that he pass farther and come to action,
and this is twofold. The one is to make and frame secret practices and
intelligences, cunningly to win and draw unto him the hearts and services
either of the officers, servants, and trustiest friends of other Princes and
foreign Lords, or of his own subjects. This is a subtlety which is much in
request and authority, and very common among Princes, and a great point of
prudence, says Cicero. It is wrought in some sort by persuasion, but
especially by presents and pensions, means so powerful, that not only the
Secretaries, the chief of the counsel, the most inward friends and favorites,
have been thereby drawn to give advice, and to divert the designments of their
master, yea, great captains to give their helping hand in the war, but also
wives have been won to discover the secrets of their husbands. Now this
subtle policy is all allowed and approved by many without difficulty or
scruple. And to say the truth, if it be against an enemy, against a subject
whom he suspecteth, and likewise against any stranger, with whom he has no
alliance nor league of fidelity and amity, it is not greatly to be doubted:
But against his alliance, his friends and confederates, it cannot be good; and
it is a kind of treachery, which is never permitted.

The other is to win some advantage, and to obtain his purpose, by close and
covert means, by equivocations and 9 Subtilties.
subtilties, to circumuent by fair speeches and promises, letters, ambassages,
working and obtaining by subtle means, that which the difficulty of times
and affairs will not permit him otherwise to do, and to do that closely
which he cannot do openly. Many great and wise men say that this is lawful
and to be permitted, Crebro mendacio and fraud vti imperantes Plato. Plin.
Val. Max.
debent ad commodum subditorum. Decipere pro moribus temporum, prudentia est.
It were overboldness simply to affirm that it is permitted. But a man may
say, that in a case of great necessity, in troublesome and tumultuous times,
when it is not only to procure the great good, but to divert a great mischief
from the state, and against such as are wicked and traitorous, that it is no
great fault, if it be a fault.

But there is a greater doubt and difficulty in other things, because they
have a smell of much injustice in them. I say much, and not wholly, because
with their injustice there are Injustice profitable to the wealepublike.
mingled in them some grains of justice. That which is wholly and apparently
iniust, is reproved of all, even of the wicked, at least wise in word and show,
if not in earnest and in deed. But of these actions ill mingled, there are so
many reasons and authorities on the one side and the other, that a man hardly
knows how to resolve himself. I will reduce them here to certain heads. To
dispatch and secretly to put to death, or otherwise without form of justice,
some certain man that is troublesome and dangerous to the state, and who well
deserves death, but yet cannot without trouble and danger be enterprised and
repressed by an ordinary course; herein there is nothing violated but the
form. And the prince, is he not above forms?

To cut the wings, and to lessen the great means of any one, that shall raise
and fortify himself too much in the state, and makes himself fearful to
his sovereign; not staying till he be invincible and able to attempt any
thing against the state, and the head of his sovereign when it pleases him.

To take by authority the riches of the richest in a great necessity and
poverty of the state.

To weaken and cancel the laws and privileges of some subjects, who hold
them to the prejudice and diminution of the authority of the sovereign.

To take by prevention, and to possess himself of a place, city or province,
very commodious for the state, rather than to suffer another strong and
fearful neighbor to take and possess it, to the great hurt, subjection and
perpetual alarm of the said state.

All these things are approved as just and lawful by many great and wise men,
provided that they succeed well and happily; of whom these are the sayings and
sentences: To do justice in great matters, a man may sometimes go astray
Plutarch.
in small; and To execute justice in gross, it is permitted to do wrong by
retaile: for commonly the greatest actions Tacit.
and examples have some injustice, which satisfies particular men by the
profit which arises to all in general, Omne magnum exemplum habet aliquid ex
iniquo, quod aduersus singulos vtilitate publica rependitur: That a prudent and
wise prince Plutarch. in flam.
should not only know how to command according to the laws, but also the laws
themselves, if necessity require; and they must make the laws to will it,
when they cannot do that they would In confused and desperate affairs, a
prince must not follow that which may be well spoken of, but that Sense.
which is necessary to be executed. Necessity, a great support, and excuse to
humane fragility infringeth all law, and therefore he is not very wicked, that
does ill by constraint. Necessitas magnum imbecillitatis humanae patrocinium,
omnem legem frangit: non est nocens quicunque non sponte est nocens. If a
Aristot. in Politico. Democrit.
prince cannot be wholly good, it suffices if he be half good, and that he be
not wholly wicked: That it cannot possibly be that good princes should commit
no injustice. To all this I would add for their justification, or diminution
of their faults that princes finding themselves in such extremities, they ought
not to proceed in such actions, but with great unwillingness and grief of
mind, acknowledging that it is an infelicity and a disfavor from heaven, and
so carrying themselves therein as a father when he is enforced to cauterise or
cut off a member of his child, to save his life, or to pluck out a tooth to
purchase ease. As for other speeches more bold, which refer all to profit,
which they either equal or prefer before honesty, an honest man must ever
abhor them.

We have stayed long upon this point of the virtue of justice, because of the
doubts and difficulties that arise from the accidents and necessities of
states, and which do many times hinder the most resolute and best advised.

After justice comes valor. I mean that military virtue, wisdom, courage,
and sufficiency to play the warrior, 11 Valor.
necessary in a Prince for the defense and safety of himself, the state, his
subjects, of the public peace and liberty, and without which he can hardly
deserve the name of a prince.

But let us come to the fourth princely virtue, which is clemency, a virtue
which enclineth the Prince to a sweet kind 12 Clemency.
of mildness and lenity, whereby he lesseneth and qualifieth the rigor of
justice, with judgment and discretion. It moderateth and sweetly manageth all
things, delivers those that are faulty, relieueth those that are fallen,
saves those that are like to be lost. It is that in a prince, which humanity
is in a common person. It is contrary to cruelty, and extreme rigor, not to
justice, from which it differs not much, but it sweetneth and moderateth it.
It is necessary by reason of our humane infirmity, the frequency of offenses,
the facility to offend; for an over great and continual rigor and severity,
ruinateth all, and makes chastisements contemptible; Seuerit as amittit
assiduitate authoritatem: It stirs malice and Senec.
rancor, moves rebellions, and men by despite are made wicked. For fear that
keeps men in their duty, must be sweet and temperate; if it be too sharp
and continual, it is changed into rage and revenge. Temperatus timor est qui
cohibet, assiduus and acer in vindictam excitat. It is likewise very profitable
Senec.
to a Prince and a State, it wins the love and good wills of his subjects,
and consequently confirms and assures the state, firmissimum id imperium quo
obedientes gaudent, as shall be said hereafter. It is likewise very honorable
to a Tit. Liuius ca. 3. in the beginning.
sovereign, for his subjects will honor and adore him as a god, as their
tutor, their father, and in stead of fearing him, they will fear all for him,
lest any ill happen unto him. This then shall be the lesson of the Prince, to
know all that passes, not to believe all, yea, many times to dissemble,
wishing rather Tacit. in Agricol.
to be thought to have found good subjects, than to have made them such, to
pardon light faults, to lessen the rigor of the great: not to be ouer-streight
and exact in punishing, (which is as great a dishonor and infamy to a Prince,
as to a Physician many patients that die under his hand) to content himself
many times with repentance as a sufficient chastisement.

-- ignoscere pulchrum
I am misero, poenaeque genus vidisse precantem.
And let him not fear that which some object very untruly, that it debaseth,
vilifieth, and weakneth the authority of the sovereign and of the state; for
contrarily it fortifieth it, and gives credit and vigor thereunto: And a
Prince beloved, shall do more by love, than by fear, which makes men fear and
tremble, but not obey: and as Salust discoursed to Caesar, Salust. ad Caesar.
those states that are governed with fear, are never durable. No man can be
feared by many, but he must likewise fear many, and that fear which he would
put upon all, falls upon his own head. That life is doubtful wherein a man
neither before nor behind, nor on any side is covered, but is always in
agitation, in danger, in fear. It is true, as has been said in the beginning,
that it must be with judgment; for, as tempered and well conducted it is very
venerable, so being too loose, too remiss, it is very pernicious.

After these four principal and royal virtues, there are 13 After which are
required also liberality.
also others, though less worthy and necessary, yet in a second place very
profitable, and requisite in a sovereign, that is to say, liberality, so fit
and necessary for a Prince, as it is less befitting him to be vanquished by
arms, than by magnificence. But yet there is herein required a great
discretion, otherwise it will be more hurtful, than commodious.

There is a twofold liberality, the one consists in charge and show, and
this serves to small purpose. For it is an idle Liberality twofold.
thing in sovereigns, and to little end, to endeavor by great and excessive
charges to make show of themselves, or to increase their credit especially
with their subjects where they have power to do what they list. It is a
testimony of pusillanimitie, and that they understand not what they are, and
besides that, it seems to their subjects, the spectators of these triumphs,
that they make this glorious show with their own spoils, that they feast it
at their charges, that they feed their eyes with that, that should feed their
bellies. And again a Prince should think that he has nothing properly his:
he owes himself to another. The other liberality, consists in gifts
bestowed upon another, and this is far more commodious and commendable, but
then it must be well governed, and he must be well advised to whom, how, and
how much he must give. He must give to those that have deserved it, that have
done service to the weale-publike, that have run their fortunes, and spent
themselves in the wars. No man will envy them, if they be not very wicked.
Whereas contrarily, great gifts, bestowed without respect and merit, shame the
giver, and purchase envy to the receiver, and is received without
thankfulness and acknowledgement. Some tyrants have been sacrificed to the
malice of the people, even by those whom they have advanced, railing on them
with the rest of the people, and securing their goods, by making known how
much they contemn and hate him from whom they received them. Again, this
liberality must be with measure, for if it be not, and that he give unto all,
and upon all occasions, the ruin of the state and sovereign must needs ensue:
This is to play, and to lose all. For men will never be satisfied, but be as
excessive in asking as the Prince shall be in giving, framing themselves not
according to reason, but example; so that when the common treasury shall
fail, he shall be enforced to lay hands upon the goods of another, and supply
by injustice, that which ambition and prodigality did dissipate, quod
ambitione exhaustum, per scelera supplendum. Now it is far better not to give
at all, than to take away to give, for a man shall never enjoy in so high a
degree the love and good will of those whom he has clothed, as the hatred and
ill will of those whom he has robbed and spoiled. And again, this liberality
without measure, works the ruin of himself, for a fountain dries up if it
be overmuch drawn. Liberalitate liberalitas perit. Liberality likewise must
be spun Hieronym.
with a gentle thread by little and little, and not all together, for that
which is done ouer-speedily, be it never so great, is in a manner insensible,
and soon forgotten. Pleasant and pleasing things must be exercised with ease
and leisure, that a man may have time to taste them: Things rude and cruel (if
they must needs be done) must contrarily be executed speedily. There is then
art and prudence in giving, and in the practice of liberality. Falluntur
quibus luxuria specie liberalitatis imponit: perdere multi sciunt, donare
nesciunt. And to say the truth, Tacit.
liberality is not properly any of the royal virtues, for it agrees and
carries it self well with tyranny it self. And such as are the governors of
young Princes do wrong in working so strong an impression of this virtue of
bounty in their minds and wills, that they should refuse no means to put it
in practice, and think nothing well employed but that which they give (this is
their common language) but they do it either for their own benefit, or else
they know not to whom they speak it. For it is a dangerous thing to imprint
liberality in the mind of him that has means to furnish himself as much as
he will at the charges of another. A prodigal or liberal Prince without
discretion and measure, is worse than a covetous: but if this liberality be
well ruled and ordered, as has been said, it is well beseeming a Prince, and
very profitable both to himself, and the state.

Another virtue requisite in a Prince in a second degree, is magnanimity and
greatness of courage, to contemn injuries 14 Magnanimity and moderation of
choler. Senec.
and bad speeches, and to moderate his choler; never to vex himself for the
outrages and indiscretions of another, magnam fortunam magnus animus decet:
Iniurias and offensiones superne despicere indignus Caesaris irae. For a man to
afflict himself, and to be moved, is to confess himself to be faulty,
whereas by neglect and light account it easily vanishes. Conuitia si irascare,
agnita videntur: spreta exolescunt. And if Tacit.
there be fit place, and a man must be angry, let it be openly, and without
dissimulation, in such sort that he give not occasion to suspect a hidden
grudge and purpose of revenge: this is a token of a bad and incurable nature,
and best befitting the baser sort: Obscuri and irreuocabiles reponunt odia:
Saeuae cogitationis Tacit.
indicium secreto suo satiari. It does better become a great personage to
offend, than to hate. The other virtues are less royal and more common.

After virtue come the manners, cariages, and countenances that become and
belong unto Majesty, very requisite in a 15 The third head of this provision:
The manners of the Prince
Prince. I will not stand upon this point: I only say as it were passing by,
that not only nature helps much heereunto, but also art and study.
Heereunto do appertain the good and beautiful composition of the visage, his
port, pase, speech, habilliments. The general rule in all these points, is a
sweet, moderate and venerable gravity, walking betwixt fear and love, worthy
of all honor and reverence. There is likewise his residence and conversation or
familiarity. Touching his residence or abode, let it be in some glorious,
magnificent, and eminent place, and as near as may be in the middle of the
whole state, to the end he may have an eye over all, like the Sun, which from
the middle of heaven gives light to all: for keeping himself at one end, he
gives occasion to those that are farthest from him to rise against him, as he
that stands upon one end of a table, makes the other end to rise up. His
conversation and company, let it be rare, for to show and to communicate
himself too much, breeds contempt and deiecteth majesty, continuus aspectus
minus verendos magnos homines ipsa satietate facit. Maiestati mayor ex
longinquo reuerentia, Liuius. Tacit.
quia omne ignotum pro magnifico est.

After these three things, knowledge of the state, virtue and manners, which are
in the person of the prince, come those 16 The fourth head of this provision,
Counsel.
things which are near and about the prince; That is to say, in the fourth
place Counsel, the great and principal point of this politic doctrine, and
so important that it is in a manner all in all. It is the soul of the state,
and the spirit that gives life, motion and action to all the other parts: and
for that cause it is said that the managing of affairs consists in prudence.
Now it were to be wished that a prince had in himself counsel and prudence
sufficient to govern and to provide for all, which is the first and highest
degree of wisdom, as has been said; and if so it were, the affairs would
go far better: Chap. 1.
but this is rather to be wished than hoped for, whether it be for want of a
good nature, or a good institution; and it is almost impossible that one only
head should be sufficiently furnished for so many matters, Nequit princeps sua
scientia cuncta complecti, nec vnius men's tantae molis est capax. A lone Tacit.
man sees and hears but little. Now kings have need of many eyes, and many
ears; and great burdens, and great affairs have need of great helps. And
therefore it is requisite that he provide and furnish himself with good
counsel, and such men as know how to give it: for he, whosoever he be, that
will take all upon himself, is rather held to be proud, than discreet or
wise. A Prince then had need of faithful friends and seruitours to be his
assistants, quos assumat in partem curarum. These are his true treasures, and
profitable instruments Tit. Liui. Tacit.
of the state. In the choice whereof he should especially labor and employ
his whole judgment, to the end he may have them good. There are two sorts of
them, Plin.
the one aid the prince with their duty, counsel and tongue, and are called
Counselors; the other serve him with their hands and actions, and may be
called Officers. The first are far more honorable: for the two greatest
philosophers say, that it is a sacred and divine thing, well to deliberate, and
to give good counsel.

Now Counselors must be first faithful, that is to say in a word, honest men,
Optimum quemque fidelissimum puto. Secondly, 17 The condition of good
counselors. Fidelity. Plin. Sufficiency.
they must be sufficient in this point, that is to say, skillful in the state,
diversely experimented and tried (for difficulties and afflictions are excellent
lessons and instructions; mihi fortuna multis rebus ereptis vsum dedit been
suadendi) And in a word, they must be wise and prudent, indifferent quick and
not over sharp: for such kind of men are too moveable, nouandis quam gerendis
rebus aptiora ingenia illa ignea. And that Curtius.
they may be such, it is requisite, that they be old and ripe, for besides
that young men by reason of the soft and delicate tenderness of their age, are
easily deceived, they do as easily believe and receive every impression. It is
good that about Princes there be some wise, some subtle; but much more such as
are wise, who are required for honor and for all times, the subtle only
sometimes for necessity. Thirdly, it is necessary that in proposing and giving
good and wholesome counsel, they carry themselves freely and courageously,
without flattery, Liberty.
or ambiguity, or disguisement, not accommodating their language to the present
state of the prince; Ne cum fortuna potius principis loquantur quam cum ipso,
but without sparing the Tacit.
truth, speak that which is fit and requisite. For although liberty,
roundnesse of speech and fidelity, hurt and offend for the time, those against
whom it opposes it self, yet afterward it is reverenced and esteemed. In
praesentia quibus risistis, offendis, deinde illis ipsis suspicitur
laudaturque. And fourthly, constantly, without yielding, varying and changing
at every meeting to please and follow the humor, pleasure and passion of
another, but without opinatiue obstinacy, and a spirit of contradiction, which
troubles and hinders all good deliberation, he must sometimes change his
opinion, which is not inconstancy but prudence. For a wise man marches not
always with one and the same pase, although he follow the same way, he
changes not, but accommodateth himself; Senec.
non semper it vno gradu, sed vna via; non se mutat, sed aptat. As a good
mariner orders his sails according to the times, and the wind, it is
necessary many times to turn and wind, and to arrive to that place, obliquely
by fetching a compass, when he can not do it directly, and by a straight
line. Again, a religious dexterity to keep secret the counsels and
deliberations Silence.
of Princes, is a thing very necessary in the managing of affairs, res
magnae sustineri nequeunt ab eo cui tacere grave est. And it suffices not to
be secret, but he must not pry and Curtius.
search into the secrets of his Prince, this is an ill, and a dangerous thing;
exquirere abditos principis sensus illicitum and anceps: Tacit.
yea he must be unwilling and avoid all means to know them. And these are the
principal good conditions and qualities of a counselor, as the evil which
they must warily avoid are presumptuous confidence, which makes a man to
deliberate and determine over boldly and obstinately; for a The vices that
counselors must avoid. Presumptuous confidence. Tit. Liuius.
wise man in deliberating, thinks and rethinketh, redoubting whatsoever may
happen, that he may be the bolder to execute. Nam animus vereri qui scit, scit
tuto aggredi. Contrarily the fool is hardy and violent in his deliberations:
but when he comes to the issue, his nose falls a bleeding, Consilia calida and
audacia prima specie laeta sunt, tractatu dura, enentu tristia. Secondly, all
passion of choler, envy, hatred, avarice, concupiscence, and all private and
particular affection, Passion.
the deadly poison of judgment, and all good understanding, priuatae res
semper offecere officientque publicis consilijs, pessimum very affectus and
iudicij venenum sua cuique vtilitas. Lastly precipitation Tacit. Precipitation.
Sec lib. 2. cap. 10. Tacit.
an enemy to all good counsel, and only fit to do mischief. And thus you
see what manner of men good counselors ought to be.

Now a prince must make choice of such as are good, either by his own
knowledge and judgment, or if he cannot so 18 The duty of the prince in
abusing good counselors.
do, by their reputation, which does seldom deceive; whereupon one of them
said to his prince, Hold us for such as we are esteemed to be. Nam singuli
decipere and decipipossunt, nemo omnes, neminem omnes fefellerunt. And let him
take heed that he choose not his minions and favorites, courtiers, flatterers,
slaves who shame their masters and betray them. There is nothing more dangerous
than the counsel of the cabinet. And having chosen and found them, he must
wisely make use of them, by taking counsel of them at due times and hours,
not attending the event and execution, and losing the time whilst he harkneth
to them; and this must he do with judgment, not suffering himself to be
carried ouer-loosely by their counsels, as that simple Emperor Claudius was;
and with mildness, without roughness, being more reasonable, as that wise
Marc. Antonius was wont to say, to follow the counsel of a good number of
friends, than such as are constrained to bend unto his will. And making use of
them, do it with an indifferent authority, neither rewarding them with
presents for their good counsel, lest by the hope of the like presents he draw
such as are wicked unto him, nor use them ouer-roughlie for their bad counsels;
for he shall hardly find any Curtius.
to give him counsel, if there be danger in giving it: and again, many times
bad counsel has a better success than good, by the provident care and
direction of the sovereign. And such as give good counsel, that is to say,
happy and certain, are not therefore always the best, and most faithful
seruitours, nor for their liberty of speech neither, which he should rather
agree unto, looking into such as are fearful and flatterers with a wary eye.
For miserable is that prince with whom men hide or disguise the truth, cuius
aures ita formatae Tacit.
sunt, vt aspera quae vtilia, and nil nisi iucundum and laesurum accipiant. And
lastly, he must conceal his own judgment and resolution, secrecy being the
soul of counsel, nulla meliora Veget.
consilia, quam quae ignorauerit aduersarius antequam fierent.

As touching officers which are in the next place, and who 19 Of Officers.
serve the Prince and state in some charge, he must make choice of honest men,
of good and honest families. It is to be thought that such as serve the Prince,
are the best sort of people, and it is not fit that base people should be near
him, and command others, except they raise themselves by some great, and
singular virtue, which may supply the want of Nobility: but by no means let
them be infamous, double, dangerous, and men of some odious condition. So
likewise they should be men of understanding, and employed according to their
natures. For some are fit for the affairs of the war, others for peace. Some
are of opinion that it is best to choose men of a sweet carriage, and
indifferent virtue, for these excellent surpassing spirits, that keep
themselves always upon the point, and will pardon nothing, are not commonly
fit for affairs, vt pares negotijs, neque supra: sint recti, non erecti.

After counsel, we place treasure, a great and puissant mean. This is the
sinews, the feet, the hands of the state. There is 20 The fi^^ head of
p^^uision: Treasure.
no sword so sharp and penetrable, as that of silver, nor master so imperious,
nor orator that wins the hearts and wills of men, or conquer Castles and
Cities, as riches. And therefore a Prince must provide that his treasury never
fail, never be dried up. This science consists in three points, to lay the
foundation of them, to employ them well, to have always areseruation,
Exchequer knowledge in three points.
and to lay up some good part thereof for all needs and occasions that may
happen. In all these three a Prince must avoid two things, injustice, and base
nigardlines, in preserving right toward all, and honor for himself.

Touching the first, which is to lay the foundation and to increase the
treasury, there are diverse means, and the sources 21 1 To lay the foundation.
are diverse, which are not all perpetual, nor alike assured; that is to say,
the demaine and public revenue of the state, which Romans were wont to do,
carrying to the Exchequer very great sums, and the treasuries of conquered
cities and countries, as Liuy reports of Camillus Flaminius, Paulus Emillius,
of the Scipioes, Lucullus, Caesar; and afterward receiving from those
conquered countries, whether from their natural countries left behind them, or
from colonies sent thither, a certain annual revenue. Presents, gratuities,
pensions, free donations, tributes of friends, allies, and subjects, by
testaments, wrought and dressed, and the bringing in of such wares as are raw,
and not of such as are wrought; and in all things to charge the stranger much
more than the subject. For a great foreign imposition increases the treasure,
and comfort the subject: to moderate nevertheless the imposts upon those
things that are brought in, necessary for life. These four means are not
only permitted, but just, lawful, and honest. The fifth which is hardly honest,
is the traffic which the sovereign 5 Antoninus Pius. Seuerus. August.
uses by his factors, and is practiced in diverse manners more or less base;
but the vilest and most pernicious is of honors, estates, offices, benefices.
There is a mean that comes near to traffic, and therefore may be placed
in this rank, which is not very dishonest, and has been practiced by very
great and wise princes, which is, to employ the coin of the treasure or
exchequer to some small profit, as five in the hundred, and to take good
security for it, either gages, or some other sound and sufficient assurance.
This has a threefold use, it increases the treasure, gives means to
particular men to traffic and to make gain; and which is best of all, it
saves the public treasure from the paws of our theeuing courtiers, the
importunate demands and flatteries of favorites, and the ouer-great facility
of the prince. And for this only cause, some princes have lent their public
treasure without any profit or interest, but only upon pain of a double
forfeiture for not payment at the day. The sixth and last is in Romans did,
being put to an extremity by Hanibal. And if the common treasury be so poor
that it cannot repay it, and that they must needs proceed by way of imposition,
making known unto them the poverty and necessity, and preaching the word of
that king of kings, Dominus ijs opus habet, insomuch that they make them see,
if need be, both the receipt, and the charge. And, if it may be, let persuasion
prevail without constraint, as Themistocles said, Impetrare melius quam
imperare. It is true that the prayers of sovereigns are commandments, Satis
imperat qui rogat potentia, armatae sunt preces regum; but yet let it be in the
form of a free donation, at the least that they be extraordinary moneys; for
a certain prefixed time, and not ordinary; and never prescribe this law upon
the subjects, except it be with their own consent. Thirdly, that such
impositions be levied upon the goods, and not the heads of men (capitation
being odious to all honest

The second point of this science, is well to employ the treasure. And these in
order are the articles of this employment 22 To employ the treasure.
and charge; The maintenance of the kings house, the pay of men of war, the
wages of officers, the just rewards of those that have deserved well of the
Commonweal, pensions and charitable succors to poor, yet commendable
persons. These five are necessary, after which come those that are very
profitable, to repair cities, to fortify and to defend the frontiers, to mend
the high ways, bridges, and passages, to establish colleges of honor, of
virtue, and learning; to build public houses. From these five sorts of
reparations, fortifications, and foundations, comes very great profit,
besides the public good: arts and artificers are maintained; the envy and
malice of the people because of the levy of moneys cease, when they see them
well employed; and these two plagues of a commonweal, idleness and poverty,
are driven away. Contrarily, the great bounties, and unreasonable gifts, to
some particular favorites; the great, proud, and unnecessary edifices,
superfluous and vain charges are odious to the subjects, who murmr that a
man should spoil a thousand to cloth one; that others should brave it with
their substance, build upon their blood and their labors.

The third point consists in the reservation, which a man 23 3 To make spare
and reservation.
must make for necessity, to the end he be not constrained at a need to have
recourse to ready, unjust, and violent means and remedies: this is that which
is called the treasury or exchequer. Now as to gather together too great
abundance of treasure of gold and silver, though it be by honest and just
means, is not always the best, because it is an occasion of war active or
passive, either by breeding envy in others to see it done, when there is no
cause, there being plenty of other means, or else because it is a bait to
allure an enemy to come, and it were Esaias 30.
more honorable to employ them as has been said: So to spend all and to leave
nothing in the Exchequer is far worse, for this were to play to lose all; wise
princes take heed of this. The greatest treasuries that have been in former
times, are that of Darius the last king of the Persians, where Alexander found
four score millions of gold. That of Tiberius 67. millions; of Traian 55.
millions kept in Egypt. But that of David 2. Paralip.
did far exceed all these (a thing almost incredible in so small a state)
wherein there were six score millions. Now to provide that these great
treasuries be not spent, violated or robbed, the ancients caused them to be
melted, and cast into great wedges and bowls, as the Persians and Romans: or
they put them into the temples of their gods as the safest places, as the
Greeks in the temple of Apollo, which nevertheless has bin many times pilled
and robbed; the Romans in the temple of Saturn. But the best and securest way
and most profitable is, as has been said, to lend them with some small profit
to particular persons, upon good gages, or sufficient security. So likewise
for the safer custody of the treasures from thieves and robbers; the managing
of them, and the exchequer offices must not be sold to base and mechanical
persons, but given to gentlemen, and men of honor, as the ancient Romans were
accustomed to do, who chose out young men from amongst their nobles and great
houses, and such as aspired to the greatest honors and charges of the
commonwealth.

After counsel and treasure I think it not amiss to put arms, which cannot
subsist, nor be well and happily levied 24 The sixth head of this provision. An
armed power.
and conducted without these two. Now an armed power is very necessary for a
prince, to guard his person and his state: for it is an abuse to think to
govern a state long without arms. There is never any surety between the
weak and the strong; and there are always some that will be stirring either
within or without the state. Now this power is either ordinary at all times,
or extraordinary in times of war. The ordinary consists in the persons
and places; The persons are of two sorts; the guard for the body and person of
the sovereign, which serve not only for the surety and conservation, but also
for his honor and ornament: for that good saying of Agesilaus is not
perpetually true, and it were too dangerous to try and trust unto it, That a
prince may live safely enough without guard, if he command his subjects, as a
good father does his children (for the malice of man stays not it self in so
fair a way). And certain companies, maintained and always ready for those
necessities and sudden occurrences that may fall out. For at such times to be
busied in leuying powers is great imprudencie. Touching the places, they are
the fortresses and cittadels in the frontiers, in place of which, some, and
they ancient too, do more allow of the colonies. The extraordinary force
consists in arms, which he must levy and furnish in times of war. How he
In the chapter following.
should govern himself therein, that is to say, enterprise and make war, it
belongs to the second part, which is of the action: this first belongs to
provision. Only I here say, that a wise prince should besides the guards of
his body, have certain people always prepared, and experienced in arms,
either in great number or less, according to the extent or largeness of his
state, to repress a sudden rebellion or commotion, which may happen either
without or within his state, reserving the raising of greater forces, until
he must make war, either offensive or defensive, willingly and of purpose;
and in the mean time keeping his arsenals and storehouses well furnished, and
provided with all sorts of offensive and defensive arms, to furnish both foot
and horsemen, as likewise with munitions, engines, and instruments for war.
Such preparation is not only necessary to make war, (for these things are
not found and prepared in a short time) but to let and hinder it. For no man is
so foole-hardy, as to attempt a state, which he knows to be ready to receive
him, and thoroughly furnished. A man must arm himself against wars, to the
end he may not be troubled with it, qui cupit pacem, paret bellum.

After all these necessary and essential provisions, we will 25 The seventh
head of this provision. Alliance or leagues. With whom.
lastly put alliances or leagues, which is no small proppe and stay of a state.
But wisdom is very necessary in the choice thereof, to build well and to take
heed with whom and how he join in alliance; which he must do with those
that are neighbors and puissant: For if they be weak and far off, wherewith
can they give aid? It is rather likely, that if they be assaulted, that from
their ruin ours may follow. For then are we bound to succor them, and to
join with them because of this league, whosoever they be. And if there be
danger in making this alliance openly, let it be done secretly, for it is the
part of a wise man to treat of peace and alliance with one, in the view and
knowledge of all, with another secretly; but yet so, as that it be without
treachery and wickedness, which is utterly forbidden, but not wisdom and
policy, especially for the defense and surety of his state.

Finally, there are many sorts and degrees of leagues or alliances: 2. How.
the lesser and more simple is for commerce and traffike only, but commonly it
comprehends amity, commerce and hospitality; and it is either defensive
only, or defensive and offensive together, and with exception of certain
princes and states, or without exception. The more strait and perfect is that
which is offensive and defensive toward all, and against all, to be a friend
to his friends, and an enemy to his enemies: and such it is good to make with
those that are strong and puissant, and by equal alliance. Leagues are
likewise either perpetual, or limited to certain times; commonly they are
perpetual, but the better and surest is, to limit it to certain times, to the
end he may have means to reform, to take away, or add to the articles, or
wholly to depart if need be, as he shall see it most expedient. And though a
man would judge them to be such, as should be perpetual, yet it is better to
renew them (which a man may and must do before the time be expired) than to
make them perpetual. For they languish and grow cold, and whosoever finds
himself aggrieued will sooner break them, if they be perpetual than if they
be limited, in which case he will rather stay the time. And thus much of
these seven necessary provisions.

CHAP. III. The second part of this politic prudence and government of the
state, which concerns the action and government of the Prince.
Having discoursed of the provision, and instructed a sovereign with what and
how he should furnish and defend 1 A summary description of the action of the
prince.
himself and his state, let us come to the action, and let us see how he
should emploie himself, and make use of these things, that is to say, in a
word, well to command and govern. But before we come to handle this
distinctlie, according to the division which we have made, we may say in
gross that well to govern and to maintain himself in his state, consists
in the acquisition of two things, goodwill and authority. Goodwill is a love
and affection toward the sovereign Benevolence, Authority two pillars of a
prince and state.
and his state. Authority is a great and good opinion, an honorable esteem
of the sovereign and his state. By the first, the sovereign and the state is
loved, by the second feared. These are not contrary things, but different, as
love and fear. Both of them respect the subjects and strangers, but it seems
that more properly, Benevolence belongs to the subject, and authority to
the stranger; amorem apud populares, metum apud hosts quaerat. To speak
simply and absolutely, Tacit.
authority is the more strong and vigorous, more large and durable. The
temperature and harmony of both is a perfect thing, but according to the
diversity of states, of peoples, their natures and humors, the one is more
easy and more necessary in some places, than in others. The means to attain
them both, are contained and handled in that which has been said before,
especially of the manners and virtue of a sovereign; nevertheless of each we
will speak a little.

Benevolence or goodwill (a thing very profitable and almost 2 Benevolence is
attained by clemency.
wholly necessary, insomuch that of it self it prevails much, and without
it all the rest has but little assurance) is attained by three means,
gentleness or clemency, not only in words and deeds, but much more in his
commands and the administration of the state; for so do the natures of men
require, who are impatient both of serving wholly, and maintaining themselves
in entire liberty, nec totam seruitutem pati, Tacit.
nec totam libertatem. They obey willingly as subjects, not as slaves, domiti
vt pareant, non vt seruiant. And to say the truth, a man does more willingly
obey him which commands gently and mildly; remissius imperanti melius
paretur: qui vult Senec.
amari languida regnet manu. Power (says Caesar a great doctor in this matter)
indifferently exercised preserves all; but he that keeps not a moderation
in his commands, is never beloved nor assured. But yet it must not be an
ouer-loose, and soft effeminate mildnes, lest a man thereby come into contempt,
which is worse than fear, Sed incorrupto ducis honor. Tacit.
It is the part of wisdom to temper this, neither seeking to be feared by
making himself terrible, nor loved by too much debasing himself.

The second mean to attain benevolence is beneficence, 3 Beneficence.
I mean first toward all, especially the meaner people, by providence and
good policy, whereby corn and all other necessary things for the sustenance
of this life may not be wanting, but sold at an indifferent price, yea may
abound if it be possible, that dearness and dearth afflict not the subject.
For the meaner sort have no care for the public good, but for this end, vulgo
vna ex republica annonae cura. Tacit.


The third mean is liberality (beneficence more special) 4 Liberality.
which is a bait, yea, an enchantment, to draw, to win and captiuate the
wills of men: So sweet a thing is it to receive, honorable to give. In such
sort, that a wise man has said, That a state did better defend it self by
good deeds, than by arms. This virtue is always requisite, but especially in
the entrance and in a new state. To whom, how much, and how liberality must be
exercised, has been said before. The means of benevolence have been wisely
practiced by Augustus, Chap. 2. act. 23. Tacit.
qui militem donis, populum annona, cunctos dulcedine otij pellexit.

Authority is another pillar of state, maiestas imperij, salutis 5 Authority.
tutela; The invincible fortress of a prince, whereby he brings into reason
all those, that dare to contemn or make head against him. Yea because of this
they dare not attempt, and all men desire to be in grace and favor with him. It
is composed of fear and respect, by which two a prince and his state is feared
of all, and secured. To attain this authority, besides the provision of
things above named, there are three means which must carefully be kept in the
form of commanding. By what it is acquired.


The first is severity, which is better, more wholesome, assured, durable, than
common lenity, and great facility, 6 Severity.
which proceeds first from the nature of the people, which as Aristotle
says, is not so well borne and bred, as to be ranged into duty and obedience
by love, or shame, but by force and fear of punishment; and secondly from the
general corruption of the manners, and contagious licentiousnes of the world,
which a man must not think to mend by mildnes and lenity, which does rather
give aid to ill attempts. It ingendreth contempt, and hope of impunitie, which
is the plague of Commonweals and states, Illecebra peccandi maxima spes
Cicero.
impunitatis. It is a favor done to many, and the whole weale-publike
sometimes well to chastise some one. And he must sometimes cut off a finger,
lest the Gangreene spread it self through the whole arm, according to that
excellent answer of a king of Thrace, whom one telling that he played the mad
man, and not the king, answered, That his madness made his subjects sound and
wise. Severity keeps officers and magistrates in their deuoire, drives away
flatterers, courtiers, wicked persons, impudent demaunders, and petytyrannies.
Whereas contrariwise too great facility opens the gate to all these kind of
people, whereupon follows an exhausting of the treasuries, impunitie of the
wicked, impouerishing of the people, as rheumes and fluxes in a rheumatike and
diseased body, fall upon those parts that are weakest. The goodness of
Pertinax, the licentious liberty of Heliogabalus are thought to have undone
and ruinated the Empire: The severity of Seuerus, and afterward of Alexander,
did reestablish it, and brought it into good estate. But yet this severity
must be with some moderation, intermission, and to purpose, to the end that
rigor toward a few might hold the whole world in fear, vt poena ad paucos,
metus ad omnes. And the more seldom punishments serve more for the reformation
of a state, says an ancient writer, than the more frequent. This is to be
understood, if vices gather not strength, and men grow not opinatiuely
obstinate in them; for then he must not spare either sword or fire, crudelem
medicum intemperans aeger facit.

The second is constancy, which is a stayed resolution, whereby the prince
marching always with one and the same 7 Constancy.
pase, without altering or changing, mainteineth always, and enforces the
observation of the ancient laws and customs. To change and to be readuised,
besides that it is an argument of inconstancy and irresolution, it brings
both to the laws and to the sovereign, and to the state contempt and sinister
opinion. And this is the reason why the wiser sort do so much forbid the
change, and rechange of any thing in the laws and customs, though it were for
the better: for the change or remove brings always more evil and
discommoditie, besides the uncertainty and the danger, than the novelty can
bring good. And therefore all innouators are suspected, dangerous, and to be
chased away. And there cannot be any cause or occasion strong and sufficient
enough to change, if it be not for a very great, evident, and certain
utility, or public necessity. And in this case likewise he must proceed as
it were stealingly, sweetly and slowly, by little and little and almost
insensibly, leuiter and lent.

The third is to hold always fast in the hand the stern of stands him upon,
not overmuch to raise and make great any person, Communis custodia principatus
neminem vnum magnum facere. And if there be already any such, he must Aristot.
draw him back and bring him into order, but yet sweetly and gently; and never
make great and high charges and offices perpetual or for many years, to the
end a man may not get means to fortify himself against his master, as it
many times falls out. Nil tam vtile, quam breuem potestatem esse, Senec.
quae magna sit.

Behold here the just and honest means in a sovereign to maintain with
benevolence and love his authority, and to 9 Against unjust authority and
tyraunie.
make himself to be loved and feared altogether: for the one without the other
is neither secure nor reasonable. And therefore we abhor a tyrannical
authority, and that fear that is an enemy to love and benevolence, and is
with a public hate, oderint quem metuant, which the wicked seek after abusing
their power. The conditions of a good prince and of a tyrant are nothing alike,
and easily distinguished. They may be all reduced to these two points, the one
to keep the laws of God and of nature, or to trample them under foot; the
other to do all for the public good and profit of the subjects, or to employ
all to his particular profit and pleasure. Now a prince that he may be such as
he should, must always remember, that as it is a felicity to have power to do
what a man will, so it is true greatness to will that that a man should; Caesari
cum Plin. de Traia.
omnia licent, propter hoc minus licet: vt felicitatis est posse quantum velis,
sic magnitudinis velle quantum possis, vel potius quantu^ debeas. The greatest
infelicitie that can happen to a prince, is to believe that all things are
lawful that he can, and that pleases him. So soon as he consents to this
thought, of good he is made wicked. Now this opinion is settled in them by the
help of flatterers, who never cease always to preach unto them the greatness of
their power; and very few faithful seruitours there are, that dare to tell
them what their duty is. But there is not in the world a more dangerous
flattery, than that where with a man flattereth himself, when the flatterer
and flattered is one and the same; there is no remedy for this disease.
Nevertheless it falls out sometimes in consideration of the times, persons,
places, occasions, that a good king must do those things which in outward
appearance may seem tyrannical, as when it is a question of repressing
another tyranny, that is to say, of a furious people, the licentious liberty
of whom, is a true tyranny: or of the noble and rich, who tyrannize over the
poor and meaner people: or when the king is poor and needy, not knowing
where to get silver, to raise loanes upon the richest. And we must not think
that the severity of a prince is always tyranny, or his gards and
fortresses, or the majesty of his imperious commands, which are sometimes
profitable, yea necessary, and are more to be desired than the sweet prayers
of tyrants.

These are the two true stays and pillars of a prince, and of a state, if by
them a prince know how to maintain and preserve 10 Hate and contempt, two
murderers of ae prince.
himself from the two contraries, which are the murderers of a prince and
state, that is to say, hatred and contempt, whereof the better to avoid them,
and to take heed of them, a word or two. Hatred contrary to benevolence, is a
wicked and obstinate affection of subjects against the prince, and his A rist.
lib. 5. Pol. Hatred.
state: It ordinarily proceeds from fear of what is to come, or desire of
revenge of what is past, or from them both. This hatred when it is great, and
of many, a prince can hardly escape it, Multorum odijs nullae opes possunt
resistere. He is exposed Cicero.
to all, and there needs but one to make an end of all. Multae illis manus,
illi vna ceruix. It stands him upon therefore to preserve himself, which he
shall do by flying those things that engender it, that is to say, cruelty and
avarice, the contraries to the aforesaid instruments of benevolence.

He must preserve himself pure and free from base cruelty, 11 Hatred
proceeds from cruelty. Cap. 2. art. 12.
unworthy greatness, very infamous to a prince: But contrarily he must arm
himself with clemency, as has been said before, in the virtues required in a
prince. But for as much as punishments, though they be just and necessary in a
state, have some image of cruelty, he must take heed to carry himself therein
with dexterity, and for this end I will give him this advice: Let him not put
his hand to the sword of justice, An advice for punishments. Senec.
but very seldom and unwillingly: libenter damnat qui cito: ergo illi
parsimonia etiam vilissimi sanguinis: 2. Enforced for the public good, and
rather for example, and to terrify others from the like offense: 3. That it be
to punish the faulty, and that without choler, or joy, or other passion: And
if he must needs show some passion, that it be compassion: 4. That it be
according to the accustomed manner of the country, and not after a new, for new
punishments are testimonies of cruelty: 5. Without giving his assistance, or
being present at the execution: 6. And if he must punish many, he must dispatch
it speedily, and all at a blow; for to make delays, and to use one correction
after another, is a token that he takes delight, pleases and feeds himself
therewith.

He must likewise preserve himself from avarice, a sin ill 12 Avarice.
befitting a great personage. It is showed either by exacting and gathering
overmuch, or by giving too little. The first does much displease the people, by
nature covetous, to whom their goods are as their blood and their life: The
second, men of service and merit, who have labored for the public good, and
have reason to think that they deserve some recompense. Now how a prince
should govern himself herein, and in his treasure and exchequer affairs,
either in laying their foundation, or spending or preserving them, has been
more at large discoursed in the second chapter. I will here only say, that a
prince must carefully preserve himself from three things; First, from
resembling, by over great and excessive impositions, these tyrants,
subiectmongers, canibals, qui deuorant plebem sicut escam panis (...), quorum
aerarium spoliarium ciuium cruentarum que praedarum receptaculum, for this
breeds danger of tumult, witness so many examples, and miserable accidents:
Secondly, from base dishonest parsimony, as well in gathering together,
(indignum lucrum ex omni occasioue odorari; and vt dicitur, etiam a mortuo
auferre; and therefore he must not serve his turn herein, with accusations,
confiscations, unjust spoils) as in giving nothing, or too little, and that
mercenarily, and with long and importunate suite: Thirdly, from violence in the
levy of his provision, and that if it be possible, he never sease upon the
moueables and vtensils of husbandry. This does principally belong to receivers
and puruoyers, who by their rigorous courses, expose the prince to the hatred
of the people, and dishonor him, a people subtle, cruel, with six hands and
three heads, as one says. A prince therefore must provide that they be honest
men, and if they fail in their duties, to correct them severely, with rough
chastisement, and great amends, to the the end they may restore and disgorge
like spunges, that which they have sucked and drawn unjustly from the people.

Let us come to the other worse enemy, contempt; which 13 Contempt.
is a sinister, base, and abject opinion of the prince, and the state: This is
the death of a state, as authority is the soul and life thereof. What does
maintain one only man, yea an old and worn man, over so many thousands of
men, if not authority and the great esteem of his person? which if it be once
lost by contempt, the prince and state must necessarily fall to the ground. And
even as authority, as has been said, Art 5.
is more strong and large than benevolence, so contempt is more contrary and
dangerous than hatred, which dares not any thing, being held back by fear,
if contempt which shakes off fear, arm it not, and give it courage to
execute. It is true that contempt is not so common, especially if he be a true
and lawful prince, except he be such a one, as does wholly degrade and
prostitute himself, and videatur exire de Plin. in Panch.
imperio. Nevertheless we must see from whence this contempt does come, that
we may the better know how to avoid it. It proceeds from things contrary to
those means that win and get authority, and especially from three, that is
to say, from too loose, effeminate, mild, languishing and careless, or very
light form of government, without any An ill form of government.
hold or stay; this is a state without a state, under such princes the subjects
are made bold, and insolent, all things being permitted, because the prince
takes care of nothing. Malum principem habere, sub quo nihil vlli liceat: peius
sub quo omnia omnibus. Secondly, from the ill hap and infelicitie of the
Infelicitie.
prince, whether it be in his affairs, which succeed not well, or in his line
and issue, if he have no children, who are a great proppe and stay to a
prince, or in the uncertainty of his successors, whereof Alexander the great
complained, Orbitas mea quod sine liberis sum, spernitur: Munimen aulae Manners.
regij liberi. Thirdly, from manners, especially dissolute, loose and
voluptuous, drunkenness, gluttony, as also rusticitie, childishness,
scurrilitie.

Thus in gross have I spoken of the action of a prince. To handle it more
distinctly and particularly, we must remember, 14 The distinction of the
action of a prince.
as has been said in the beginning, that it is twofold, peaceable and
military; by the peaceable I here understand that ordinary action, which is
every day done, and at all times of peace and of war; by the military, that
which is not exercised, but in time of war.

The peaceable and ordinary action of a sovereign cannot Of the peaceable.
be wholly prescribed, it is an infinite thing, and consists as well in
taking heed to do, as to do. We will here give the principal and more
necessary aduisements. First therefore An advice.
a Prince must provide that he be faithfully and diligently advertised of all
things. This all things may be reduced to two heads, whereupon there are two
sorts of aduertisements and aduertisers, who must be faithful and assured,
wise and secret, though in some there be required, a greater liberty and
constancy than in others. Some are to advertise him of his honor and duty, of
his defects, and to tell him the truth. There are no kind of people in the
world, who have so much need of such friends, as Princes have; who neither see
nor understand, but by the eyes and ears of another. They maintain and hold up
a public life, are to satisfy so many people, have so many things hid from
them, that before they be aware, they fall into the hatred and detestation of
their people, for matters that would be easily remedied and cured, if they had
been in time advertised of them. On the other side free aduertisements, which
are the best offices of true amity, are perilous about sovereigns, though
Princes be over delicate and show great infirmity, if for their good and
profit, they cannot endure a free aduertisment, which enforces nothing, it
being in their power, whatsoever they hear, to do what they list. Others are
to advertise the Prince of whatsoever passes, not only amongst his subjects,
and within the circuit of his state, but with his bordering neighbors. I say
of all, that concerns either a far off, or near at hand, his own state or
his neighbors. These two kind of people answer in some sort to those two
friends of Alexander, Ephestion and Crateras, of whom the one loved the King,
the other Alexander, that is to say, the one the state, the other the person.

Secondly, a Prince must always have in his hand a little 15 2 To have a
memorial of the 1 Affairs.
book or memorial containing three things: first and principally a brief
register of the affairs of the state: to the end he may know what he must do,
what is begun to be done, and that there remain nothing imperfect, and ill
executed: A catalogue or bedrowle of the most worthy personages that 2 Persons.
have well deserved, or are likely to deserve well of the wealepublike: A
memorial of the gifts which he has bestowed, to whom and wherefore; otherwise
without these three, there 3 Gifts.
must necessarily follow many inconveniences. The greatest princes and wisest
politicians have used it, Augustus, Tiberius, Vespasian, Traian, Adrian, the
Antonies.

Thirdly, in as much as one of the principal duties of a 16 3 To appoint
rewards and punishments.
prince, is to appoint and order both rewards and punishments, the one whereof
is favorable, the other odious, a prince must retain unto himself the
distribution of rewards, as estates, honors, immunities, restitutions, graces
and favors, and leave unto his officers, to execute and pronounce
condemnations, forfeitures, confiscations, deprivations, and other punishments.

Fourthly in the distribution of rewards, gifts, and good 17 4 To distribute
rewards.
deeds, he must always be ready and willing, give them before they be asked,
if he can, and not to look that he should refuse them; and he must give them
himself, if it may be, or cause them to be given in his presence. By this
means gifts and good turns shall be better received, and given to better
purpose, and he shall avoid two great and common inconveniences, which deprive
men of honor and worth of those rewards that are due unto them: the one is a
long pursuit, difficult and chargeable, which a man must undergo, to obtain
that which he would, and thinks to have deserved, which is no small grief to
honorable minds, and men of spirit: The other, that after a man has obtained
of the prince a gift, before he can possess it, it costeth the one half, and
more, of that it is worth, and many times comes to nothing.

Let us come to the military action, wholly necessary for 18 Of the military
action which consists in three points.
the preservation and defense of a prince, of the subjects, and the whole
state, let us speak thereof briefly. All this matter or subject may be reduced
to three heads, To enterprise, make, finish war. In the enterpise there must
be two things, justice and prudence, and an auoidance of their contraries,
injustice To enterprise, where two things are required.
and temeritie. First, the war must be just, yea justice must march before
valor, as deliberation before execution. These reasons must be of no force,
yea abhorred, That right consists in force; That the issue or event decideth
it; That the stronger carries it away. But a prince must look into the cause,
into the ground and foundation, and not into the issue; War has it laws and
ordinances as well as peace. God favors just wars, and gives the victory
to whom it pleases him, and therefore we must first make our selves capable of
this favor by the equity of the enterprise. War then must not be begun and
undertaken for all causes, upon every occasion, non ex omni occasion quaerere
triumphum: And above all a Plin. in Pan.
prince must take heed that ambition, avarice, choler, possess him not, and
carry him beyond reason, which are always, to say the truth, the more ordinary
motives to war: vna and ea Salust.
vetus causa bellandi est profunda cupido imperij and diuitiarum: maximam
gloriam in maximo imperio putant: Repere foedus impius lucri furor, and ira
praeceps.

That a war may be in all points just, three things are necessary, 19 Three
things make an enterprise just.
that it be denounced and undertaken by him that has power to do it, which is
only the sovereign.

That it be for a just cause, such as a defensive war is, which is absolute
just, being justified by all reason amongst the wise, Cic. pro Milo.
I say defensive, of himself, that is, of his life, his liberty, his parents,
his country: of his allies and confederates, in regard of that faith he has
given; of such as are unjustly oppressed, Qui non defendit, nec obsistit, si
potest, iniuriae, tam est in vitio, quam si parents, aut patriam, aut socios
deserat. These three In officijs.
heads of defense are within the bounds of justice, according to S. Ambrose,
Fortitudo, quae per bella tuetur a barbaris patria, vel defendit infirmos, vel
a latronibus socios, plena iustitiae est. Another more briefly, divides it
into two heads, faith and health; Nullum bellum a ciuitate optima suscipitur,
nisi aut pro fide, aut pro salute: and to offensive war he puts two
conditions; Salust.
That it proceed from some former offense given, as outrage or usurpation, and
having redemaunded openly by a herald that which has been surprised and taken
away (post clarigatum) Plin. l. 22. not. hist. ca. 2.
and sought it by way of justice, which must ever go foremost. For if men be
willing to submit themselves unto justice, and reason, there let them stay
themselves; if not, the last, and therefore necessary, is just and lawful,
iustum bellum, Liuius.
quibus necessarium; pia arma quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes.

Thirdly to a good end, that is to say, peace and quietness. Sapientes pacis
causa bellum gerunt, and laborem spe otij sustentant: vt in pace sine iniuria
viuant.

After justice comes prudence, whereby a man does advisedly 22 Prudence.
deliberate before by sound of trumpet he publishes the war. And therefore,
that nothing be done out of passion, and ouer-rashly, it is necessary that he
consider of the points: of forces and means, as well his own, as his enemies;
secondly of the hazard and dangerous revolution of humane things especially of
arms, which are variable, and wherein fortune has greatest credit, and
exercises more her empire, than in any other thing, wherein the issue may be
such, that in an hour it carries all, simul parta ac sperata decora vnius
horae Liuius.
fortuna euertere potest.

Thirdly, of those great evils, infelicities, and public and particular
miseries, which war does necessarily bring with it, and which be such as the
only imagination is lamentable. Fourthly of the calumnies, maledictions, and
reproaches that are spread abroad against the authors of the war, by reason of
those evils and miseries that follow it. For there is nothing more subject to
the toongs and judgments of men than war. But all lights upon the
Chieftaine, iniquissima bellorum conditio Tacit.
haec est, prospera omnes sibi vendicant, aduersa vni imputantur. All these
things together make the iustest war that may be, detestable, says S.
Augustine; and therefore it stands a sovereign upon, not to enter into
wars but upon great necessity, as it is said of Augustus; and not to suffer
himself to be carried by those incendiaries and firebrarnds of war, who for
some particular passion, are ready to kindle and inflame him: quibus in pace
durius seruitium est, in id nati, vt nec Pindar.
ipsi quiescant, neque alios sinant. And these men are commonly such, whose
noses do bleed when they come to the fact it self. Dulce bellum inexpertis. A
wise sovereign will keep himself in peace, neither provoking, nor fearing
war, neither disquieting either his own state, or another, betwixt hope and
fear, nor coming to those extremities of perishing himself, or making others
to perish.

The second head of military action, is to make war, whereunto are required
three things, Munitions, Men, Rules of war. (...)
The first is provision and munition of all things necessary for war, which
must be done in good time and at leisure, for it were great indiscretion in
extremities to be employed about the search and provision of those things which
he should have always ready. Diu apparandum est, vt vincas celerius. Now of
the ordinary and perpetual provision required for the good of the prince and
the state at all times, has been spoken in the first part of this Chapter,
which is wholly of this subject. The principal provisions and munitions of war
are three, Money, which is the vital spirit, and sinews of war, whereof has
been spoken in the second Chapter. 2. Arms both offensive and defensive,
whereof likewise heretofore. These two are ordinary, and at all times. 3.
Victuals, without which a man can neither conquer, nor live, whole armies are
overthrown without a blow stricken, soldiers grow licentious, and unruly,
and it is not possible to do any good. Disciplinam non seruat ieiunus
exercitus. Cassiod.
But this is an extraordinary provision, and not perpetual, and is not made
but for war. It is necessary therefore that in the deliberating of war,
that there be great storehouses made for victuals, corn, poudered flesh, both
for the army which is in the field, and for the garrisons in the frontiers,
which may be besieged.

The second thing required to make war, are men fit to assail and to defend:
we must distinguish them. The first distinction 24 Men.
is, into soldiers, and leaders or captains, both are necessary. The
soldiers are the body, the captains the soul, the life of the army, who
give motion and action: we will speak first of the soldiers who make the
body in gross. There are diverse sorts of them: There are footmen and
horsemen; natural of the same country, and strangers; ordinary and
subsidiarie. We must first compare them all together, to the end we may know
which are the better, and to be preferred, and afterward we will see how to
make our choice, and lastly how to govern and discipline them.

In this comparison all are not of one accord. Some, especially 25 Rather
foot than horse.
rude and barbarous people, prefer horsemen before footmen; others quite
contrary. A man may say that the foot are simply and absolutely the better,
for they serve both throughout the war, and in all places, and at all
occasions; whereas in hilly, rough, craggie, and strait places, and in sieges,
the caualarie is almost unprofitable. They are likewise more ready and less
chargeable: and if they be well led and armed, as it is fit they should, they
endure the chock of the horsemen. They are likewise preferred by such as are
doctors in this art. A man may say that the caualarie is better in a combat;
and for a speedy dispatch; Equestrium virium proprium cito parare, cito cedere
victoriam. For the foot are not so speedy, but what they do they perform
more surely.

As for natural soldiers and strangers, diverse men are likewise 26 And
natural than strangers.
of diverse opinions touching their precedencie; but without all doubt the
natural are much better, because they are more loyal than mercenarie
strangers.

Venalesque manus, ibi fas, vbi maxima merces. More patient and obedient,
carrying themselves with more honor and respect toward their leaders, more
courage in combats, more affection to the victory, and good of their country:
They cost less, and are more ready than strangers, who are many times
mutinous, yea in greatest necessities, making more stir, than doing service,
and the most part of them are importunate, and burdensome to the Commonweal,
cruel to those of the country, whom they forage as enemies. Their coming
and departure is chargeable, and many times they are expected and attended with
great loss and inconvenience. If in some extremity there be need of them, be
it so, but yet let them be in far less number than the natural, and let
them make but a member and part of the army, not the body. For there is
danger that if they shall see themselves equal in force, or more strong than
the natural, they will make themselves their masters that called them, as many
times it has fallen out. For he is master of the state, that is master of the
forces. And again, if it be possible, let them be drawn from allies and
confederates, who bring with them more trust and service than they that are
simply strangers. For to make more use of strangers, or to employ them more
than natural subjects, is to play the tyrants, who fear their subjects, and
because they handle them like enemies, they make themselves odious unto them,
whereby they fear to arm them, or to employ them in the wars.

As touching ordinary soldiers and subsidiaries, both are 27 As well ordinary
as subsidiary.
necessary; but the difference between them is, that the ordinary are in
less number, are always a foot and in arms both in peace and in war: and of
these we have spoken in the provision, a people wholly destinated and confined
to the wars, formed to all exercise of arms, resolute. This is the ordinary
force of the prince, his honor in peace, his safeguard in war: such were the
Roman legions. These should be divided by troops in times of peace, to the
end they raise no commotions. The subsidiaries are in far greater number, but
they are not perpetual, and wholly destinated to war: they have other
vocations: At a need and in times of war they are called by the sound of a
trumpet, enroled, mustred, and instructed to the wars; and in times of peace
they return, and retire themselves to their vocations.

We have understood their distinctions and differences, 28 Well to choose.
we must now consider of the good choice of them: A matter whereof we must be
carefully advised, not to gather many, and in great numbers, for number
wins not the victory, but valor; and commonly they are but few that give
the overthrow. An unbridled multitude does more hurt than good. Non vires habet
sed pondus, potius impedimentum quam auxilium. Victory then consists not in
the number, but in the force and valor, manibus opus est bello, non multis
nominibus. There must therefore be a great care in the choice of them (not
pressing them pell-mell) that they be not voluntary adventurers, ignorant of
war, taken forth of cities, corrupt, vicious, dissolute in their manners,
arrogant boasters, hardy and bold to pillage, far enough off from blows,
leuerets in dangers, Assuet^ latrocinijs bellorum, insolentes, galeati lepores,
purgamenta vrbium, quibus ob egestatem and flagitia maxima peccandi necessitudo.

To choose them well, there needs judgment, attention and instruction, and to
this end five things must be considered of, 29 Election of soldiers consists
in five things. 1 Country. Veget.
that is to say, the place of their birth and education. They must be taken out
of the fields, the mountains, barren and hard places, countries near
adioining to the sea, and brought up in all manner of labor. Exagris supplendum
praecipue robur exercitus, aptior armis rustica plebs sub dio and in laboribus
enutrita, ipso terrae suae solo and coelo acrius animantur. Et minus mortem
timet, qui minus deliciarum nouit in vita. For they that are brought up in
Cities, in the pleasant shadow and delights thereof, in gain, are more idle,
insolent, effeminate; Vernaculo Tacit. 2 Age.
multitudo, lasciuiae sueta, laborum intolerans. Secondly the age, that they be
taken young, at eighteen years of age, when they are most pliant and
obedient: the elder are possessed with many vices, and not so fit for
discipline. Thirdly the bodies, 3 Bodies.
which some will have to be of a great stature, as Marius and Pirrhus: but
though it be but indifferent, so the body be strong, dry, vigorous, sinowie,
of a fierce look, it is all one. Dura corpora stricti artus, minax vultus,
mayor animi vigor. Fourthly the spirit, which must be lively, resolute, bold,
glorious, 4 Spirit.
fearing nothing so much as dishonor and reproach. Fifthly the condition, which
imports much; for they that 5 Condition.
are of a base and infamous condition, of dishonest qualities, or such as are
mingled with effeminate arts, serving for delicacie and for women, are no way
fit for this profession.

After the choice and elections comes discipline: for it is not enough to
have chosen those that are capable, and likely 30 Well disciplined.
to prove good soldiers, if a man make them not good; and if he make them
good, if he keep and continue them not such. Nature makes few men valiant, it
is good institution Veget.
and discipline that does it. Now it is hard to say how necessary and
profitable good discipline is in war: This is all in all, it is this that
made Rome to flourish, and that won it the seignorie of the world: yea, it was
in greater account, than the love of their children. Now the principal point
of discipline is obedience, to which end served that ancient precept, That a
soldier must more fear his captain, than his enemy.

Now this discipline must tend to two ends; to make the soldiers valiant, and
honest men: and therefore it has two Discipline has two parts. 1 Valor which
is attained by exercise.
parts, valor, and manners. To valor three things are required; daily exercise
in arms, wherein they must always keep themselves in practice without
intermission; and from hence comes the Latin word Exercitus, which signifies
an army. This exercise in arms, is an instruction to manage and use them
well, to prepare themselves for combats, to draw benefit from arms, with
dexterity to defend themselves, to discover and present unto them whatsoever
may fall out in the fight, and come to the trial, as in a ranged battle: to
propose rewards to the most apt and active, to inflame them. Secondly, travel
or pains, which is as well to harden 2 Travel.
them to labor, to sweatings, to dust, exercitue labor proficit, otio
consenescit, as for the good and service of the army, and fortification of the
field, whereby they must learn to dig, to plant a pallisade, to order a
barricado, to run, to carry heavy burdens. These are necessary things, as
well to defend themselves, as to offend and surprise the enemy. Thirdly order,
which is of great use, and must be kept in war for 3 Order.
diverse causes, and after a diverse manner. First, in the distribution of the
troops, into battallions, regiments, ensigns, camerades. Secondly, in the
situation of the camp, that it be disposed into quarters with proportion,
having the places, entries, issues, lodgings fitted both for the horsemen and
footmen, whereby it may be easy for every man to find his quarter, his
companion. Thirdly, in the march in the field, and against the enemy, that
every one hold his rank; that they be equally distant the one from the other,
neither too near, nor too far from one an other. Now this order is very
necessary and serves for many purposes. It is very pleasing to the eye,
cheereth up friends, astonisheth the enemy, secureth the army, makes all the
remooues, and the commands of the captains easy; in such sort, that without
stir, without confusion the General commands, and from hand to hand his
intents and purposes come even to the least. Imperium ducis simul omne copiae
sentiunt; and ad nutum regentis sine tumultu respondent. To be brief, this
order well kept, makes an army almost invincible; and contrarily, many have
lost the field for want of this order, and good intelligence.

The second part of this military discipline concerns manners, which are
commonly very dissolute and in armies hardly Manners the second part of
discipline.
ordered, assidue dimicantibus difficile morum custodire mensuram.
Nevertheless there must be pains taken, and especially to enstale (if it may
be) three virtues, Continency, whereby Continency.
all gluttony, drunkenness, whordome, and all manner of dishonest pleasures
are chased away, which do make a soldier loose and licentious. Degenerat a
robore ac virtute miles assuetudine voluptatum; witness Hannibal who by
delicacie Tacit.
and delights in a winter was effeminated, and he by vice was vanquished, that
was invincible, and by arms vanquished all others. Modesty in words, driving
away all vanity, vain Modesty.
boasting, bravery of speech; for true valor stirs not the tongue, but the
hands, does not speak but execute. Viri nati militae factis magni, ad verborum
linguaeque certamina rudes: discrimen ipsum certaminis differt: viri fortes, in
opere acres, ante id placidi. And contrarily great speakers are small doers.
Nimij verbis linguaferoces. Now the tongue is for counsel, the hand for
combat, says Homer; Modesty in action, (that is, a simple and ready
obedience, without merchandising or contradicting the commands of the
captains) haec sunt bonae militiae, velle, vereri, obedire. Abstinencie,
whereby soldiers keep their hands clean from all violence, forraging,
roberie. Abstinencie.
And this is a brief sum in the military discipline; the which the General
must strengthen by rewards and recompenses of honor toward the good and
valorous, and by severe punishments against offenders: for indulgence undoes
soldiers.

Let this suffice of soldiers: Now a word or two of captains, without whom
the soldier can do nothing: they 33 Of captains.
are a body without a soul, a ship with oars without a master to hold the
stern. There are two sorts, the General and first, and afterward the
subalterne, the master of the Camp, Colonels: But the General (who must never
be but one, under Of the General.
pain of losing all) is all in all. And therefore it is said, that an army
can do as much as a General can do; and as much account must be made of him
as of all the rest, plus in duce repones, Tacit.
quam in exercitu. Now this General is either the prince himself and
sovereign, or such as he has committed the charge unto, and made choice of.
The presence of a prince is of great importance to the obtaining of a victory;
it doubleth the force and courage of his men; and it seems to be requisite
when it stands upon the safeguard and health of his state, and of a province.
In wars of less consequence he may depute another: dubijs praeliorum exemtus
summae rerum Tacit.
and imperij seipsum reseruet. Finally, a General must have these qualities,
he must be wise and experienced in the art military, having seen and
suffered both fortunes: Secundarum ambiguarumque rerum sciens eoque interitus.
Secondly, he must be provident and well advised; and therefore staid, cold,
Tacit.
and settled; far from all temerity and precipitation, which is not only
foolish, but unfortunate. For faults in war cannot be mended; Non licet in
bello his peccare. And therefore he Sertori. in Plut.
must rather look back, than before him, Ducem oportet potius respicere, quam
prospicere. Thirdly, he must be vigilant and active, and by his own example,
teaching his soldiers to do his will. Fourthlie happy, good fortune comes
from heaven, but yet willingly it follows and accompanies these three first
qualities.

After the munitions and men of war, let us come to the 34 The third head of
the rules and counsels to make war.
rules and general aduisements to make war. This third point is a very great
and necessary instrument of war, without which both munitions and men, are but
fantasies, Plura consilio quam vi perficiuntur. Now to prescribe certain
rules and perpetual, it is impossible. For they depend of so many things that
are to be considered of, and whereunto a man must accommodate himself, whereupon
it was well said, That men give not counsel to the affairs, but the affairs
to men, that a man must order his war by his eye. A man must take his
counsel in the field, Consilium in arena: for new occurrents yield new
counsels. Nevertheless there are some so general, and certain, that a man
cannot fail in the delivery and observation of them. We will briefly set
down some few of them, whereunto a man may add as occasions shall fall out.
Some are to be observed throughout a war, which we will speak of in the
first place, others are for certain occasions and affairs. Rules for the
whole time of war.


1 The first is carefully to watch and to meet the occasions not to lose any,
nor to permit, if it be possible, the enemy to take his: occasion has a great
place in all humane affairs, especially in war, where it helps more than
force.

2 To make profit of rumors and reports that run abroad, for whether they be
true or false, they may do much, especially in the beginning. Fama bella
constant, fama bellum conficit, in spem metumue impellit animos.

3 But when a man is entered his course, let not reports trouble him: he may
consider of them, but let them not hinder him to do that he should, and what he
can, and let him stand firm to that which reason has counseled him.

4 Above all, he must take heed of too great a confidence and assurance,
whereby he grows into contempt of his enemy, and thereby becomes negligent
and careless; it is the most dangerous evil that can fall out in war. He
that contemns his enemy, discovers and betrayeth himself, Frequentissimum
initium calamitatis securitas. Nemo celerius opprimitur quam qui non timet. Nil
tuto in host despicitur: quem spreueris, valentiorem negligentia facies. There
is nothing in war that must be despised: for therein there is nothing little:
and many times that which seems to a man to be of small moment, yields
great effects. Saepe paruis momentis magni casus: vt nihil timendi, sic nihil
contemnendi.

5 To enquire very carefully, and to know the estate and affairs of the
enemy, especially these points, 1. The nature, capacity, and designments of
the Chieftaine. 2. The nature, manners, and manner of life of his enemies. 3. The
situation of the places, and the nature of the country where he is. Hannibal
was excellent in this.

6 Touching the fight or maine battle, many things are 35 For the fight.
advisedly to be considered of, when, where, against whom, and how, to the end
it be not to small purpose. And a man must not come to this extremity, but
with great deliberation, but rather make choice of any other mean, and seek
to break the force of his enemy by patience, and to suffer him to beat
himself with time, with the place, with the want of many things, before he
come to this hazard. For the issue of battles is very uncertain, and
dangerous: Incertiexitus pugnarum. Mars communis, qui saepe spoliantem and iam
exultantem euertit; and perculit ab abiecto.

7 A man then must not come to the battle, but seldom, that is to say, in
great necessities, or for some great occasion. When.
In necessity, as if the difficulties grow on his part; his viands, his
treasure fails; his men begin to distaste the wars, and will be gone, and
he cannot long continue, capienda rebus in malis praeceps via est; upon great
occasion, as if his part be clearly the stronger; that the victory seems to
offer it self, that the enemy is weak, and will shortly be stronger, and will
offer the battle; that he is out of doubt and fear, and thinks his enemy
far off; that he is weary and faint, reuictualleth himself; his horses feed
upon their litter.

8 He must consider the place, for this is a matter of great consequence in
battles. In general, he must not attend (if he Where.
may prevent it) his enemy till he enter within his own territories. He must
go forth to meet him, or at least stay him in the entrance. And if he be
already entered, not hazard the battle, before he have another army in
readiness, to make a supply; otherwise he puts his state in hazard. More
particularly he must consider the field where the battle is to be fought,
whether it be fit for himself, or his enemy: for the field many times gives a
great advantage. The plain champion is good for the caualarie; strait and
narrow places, set with piles, full of diches, trees, for the infanterie.

9 He must consider with whom he is to fight, not with the strongest, I mean
not the strongest men, but the strongest With and against whom.
and stoutest courages. Now there is not any thing that gives more heart and
courage, than necessity, an enemy invincible. And therefore I say, that a man
must never fight with such as are desperate. This agrees with the former, that
is, not to hazard a battle within his own country, for an enemy being
entered fights desperately, knowing if he be vanquished, he cannot escape
death, having neither fortress, nor any place of retrait or succor, vnde
necessitas in loco, spes in virtute, salus ex victoria.

10 The manner of fight that brings best advantage with it, How.
whatsoever it be, is the best; whether it be surprise, subtlety, close and
covert faining to fear, to the end he may draw the enemy, and catch him in
his ginne, spe victoriae inducere, vt vincantur; to watch and mark his
ouersights and faults, that he may the better prevail against him, and give
the charge.

For ranged battles these things are required. The first and principal is a
good and comely ordering of his people. 2. A 36 Rules for ranged battles.
supply and succor always ready, but close and hidden, to the end that
coming suddenly and unawares, it may astonish and confound the enemy. For
all sudden things though they be vain and ridiculous, bring fear and
astonishment with them.

Primi in omnibus praelijs oculi vincuntur and aures. 3. To be first in the
field, and ranged in battle ray. This a General does with so much the more
ease, and it much increases the courage of his soldiers, and abateth his
enemies: for this is to make himself the assailant, who has always more
heart than the defendant. 4. A beawtifull, gallant, bold, resolved countenance
of the General and other leaders. 5. An oration to encourage the soldiers,
and to lay open unto them the honor, commodity and suertie that there is in
valor; That dishonor, danger, death, are the reward of cowards; minus timoris
minus periculi, audaciam pro muro esse, effugere mortem, qui eam contemnit.

Being come to hand-strokes, if the army waver, the General must hold himself
firm, do the duty of a resolute Leader, 37 Having joined battle.
and brave man at arms, run before his astonished soldiers, stay them
recoyling, thrust himself into the throng, make all to know, both his own,
and his enemies, that his head, his hand, his tongue trembles not.

And if it fall out that he have the better, and the field be his, he must stay
and withold them, lest they scatter and disband themselves, by too obstinate
a pursuit of the vanquished. That is to be feared, which has many times come
to pass, that the vanquished gathering heart, make use of despair, gather to
a head, and vanquish the vanquishers, for this necessity is a violent
schoole-mistris. Clausis ex desperatione enescit audacia: and cum spei nihil
est, sumit arma formido. It is better to give passage unto them, and to remove
all lets and hindrances that may stay their flight. Much less must a General
suffer himself or his men to attend the booty, or to be allured thereby over
hastily, if he be conqueror. He must use his victory wisely, lest the abuse
thereof turn to his own harm. And therefore he must not defile it with
cruelty, depriving the enemy of all hope, for there is danger in it. Ignauiam
necessitas acuit; saepe desperatio spei caussa est, grauissim sunt morsus
irritatae necessitatis. But contrarily, he must leave some occasion of hope,
and ouerture unto peace, not spoiling and ransaking the country which he has
conquered; for fury and rage are dangerous beasts. Again he must not stain
his victory with insolency, but carry himself modestly and always remember
the perpetual flux and reflux of this world, and that alternatiue revolution,
whereby from adversity springs prosperity, from prosperity adversity. There
are some that cannot digest a good fortune, Magnam foelicitatem concoquere non
possunt. fortuna vttrea est, tunc cum splendet frangitur: O infidam fiduciam!
and saepe victor victus. If he be vanquished, wisdom is necessary well to
weigh and consider of his loss, it is sottishness to make himself believe
that it is nothing, and to feed himself with vain hopes, to suppress the
news of the overthrow. He must consider thereof as it is at the worst,
otherwise how shall he remedy it? And afterward with a good courage hope for
better fortunes, renew his forces, make a new leuy, seek new succors, put
good and strong garrisons into his strongest places. And though the heavens be
contrary unto him, as sometimes they seem to oppose themselves to holy and
just arms; it is nevertheless never forbidden to die in the bed of honor,
which is far better than to live in dishonor.

And thus we have ended the second head of this subject, which is to make
war, except one scruple that remains: 38 A question of the stratagems of
war.
That is to say, whether it be lawful to use subtilty, policy, stratagems in
war. There be some that hold it negatiuely, that it is unworthy men of
honor and virtue, rejecting that excellent saying, Dolus, an virtus quis in
host requirat? Alexander would take no advantages of the obscurity of the
night, saying, that he liked not of theeuing victories, malo me fortunae
pigeat, quam victoriae pudeat. So likewise the first Romans sent their
schoolmaster to the Phaliscians; to Pyrrhus his traitorous Physician, making
profession of virtue, disauowing those of their country that did otherwise,
reproving the subtilty of the Greeks and Aphricanes, and teaching that true
victory is by virtue, quae salua fide and integra dignitate paratur, that
which is gotten by wit and subtlety, is neither generous, nor honorable, nor
secure. The vanquished hold not themselves to be well vanquished, non virtute,
sed occasion and art ducis se victos rati: ergo non fraud neque occultis sed
palam and armatum hosts suos vlcisci. Now all this is well said and true, but
to be understood in two cases, in private quarrels, and against private enemies,
or where faith is not given, or a league and alliance made. But without these
two cases, that is to say, in war, and without the prejudice of a man's faith,
it is permitted by any means whatsoever to conquer the enemy that is already
condemned. This, besides the judgment of the greatest warriers (who contrarily
have preferred the victory Polyb. lib. Plut. in Marcell. Vlp. lib. 1. de Prob.
Aug. quaest. sup. Iosue.
gotten by occasion, and by subtle stratagems, before that which is won by
open force; whereupon to that they have ordained an ox for a sacrifice, to
this only a cock) is the opinion of that great Christian Doctor, Cum iustum
bellum suscipitur, vt aperte pugnet quis, aut ex insidijs, nihil ad iustitiam
interest. War has naturally reasonable privileges, to the prejudice of
reason. In time and place it is permitted to make use and advantage of the
sottishness of an enemy, as well as of his weakness or idleness.

Let us come to the third head of this military matter, 39 The third head of
this military subject, to finish war.
more short and pleasing than the rest, which is to finish the war by peace.
The word is sweet, the thing pleasant, and good in all respects, pax optima
rerum quas homini nouisse datum est, Pax vna triumphis innumeris potior, and
very commodious to both parts, the conquerors and conquered. But first Of
peace in respect of the vanquished.
to the vanquished, who are the weaker: to whom I do first give this counsel,
to continue armed, to make show of security, assurance and resolution. For he
that desires peace, must be always ready for war, whereupon it has been
said, That treatises of peace do well and happily succeed when they are
concluded under a buckler. But this peace must be honest, and upon reasonable
conditions: otherwise, though it be said, that a base peace is more profitable
than a just war, yet it is better to die freely and with honor, than to serve
dishonourablie. And again it must be pure and free, without fraud and
hypocrisy, which finisheth the war, deferreth it not, pace suspecta tutius
bellum. Nevertheless in times of necessity a man must accomodate himself as
he may. When a pilot fears a shipwreck, he casts himself into the sea to
save himself; and many times it succeeds well, when a man commits
himself to the discretion of a generous adversary. Victores qui sunt alto
animo secundae res in miserationem ex ira vertunt. To the vanquishers I give
this counsel, that they In respect of the vanquishers.
be not over hardly persuaded to peace, for though perhaps it be less
profitable unto them, than to the vanquished, yet some commodity it brings,
for the continuance of war is odious and troublesome. And Lycurgus forbids
to make war often against one and the same enemies, because they learn
thereby to defend themselves, and in the end to assail too. The bitings of
dying beasts are mortal. Fractis rebus violentior vltima virtus. And again
the issue is always uncertain, Melior tutiorque certa pax sperata victoria,
illa in tua, haec in decrum manu est. And many times the poison lies in the
tail, and the more favorable fortune is, the more it is to be feared: Nemo
se tuto diu periculis offerre tam crebris potest. But it is truly honorable, it
is a glory having a victory in his hands, Honorable.
to be facill and easily persuaded unto peace: it is to make known that he
undertakes a war justly, and does wisely finish it. And contrarily, to
refuse it, and afterward by some ill success to repent the refusal, it is
very dishonorable, and will be said that glory has undone him. He refused
peace, S. Bernard.
and would have honor, and so has lost them both. But he must offer a
gracious and a debonaire peace, to the end it may be durable. For if it be over
rough and cruel, at the first advantage that may be offered, the vanquished
will revolt. Si bonam de deritis, fidam and perpetuam, si malam, haud
diuturnam. Liuius.


It is as great greatness to show as much lenity toward the suppliant
vanquished, as valor against the enemy. The Romans did very well put this
in practice, and it did them no harm.

CHAP. IIII. Of that prudence which is required in difficult affairs and ill
accidents, public and private. THE PREFACE.
Having spoken of that politic prudence required in a sovereign, for the
carriage of himself and his good government, we will here severally speak of
that prudence that is necessary for the preservation of himself, and the
remedying of those affairs, and difficult and dangerous accidents which may
happen either to himself, or his particular subjects.

First these affairs and accidents are very diverse: they are either public or
particular: either to come, and such as threaten The division of this matter by
distinction of the accidents.
us, or present and pressing us: the one are only doubtful and ambiguous, the
other dangerous and important because of their violence. And they that are the
greater and more difficult, are either secret and hid; and they are two, that
is to say, conspiracy against the person of the Prince, or the state, and
treason against the places and companies: or manifest and open, and these are
of diverse sorts. For they be either without form of war and certain order,
as popular commotions for small and light occasions, factions and leagues
between subjects, of the one against the other, in small and great number,
great or little; seditions of the people against the prince or magistrate,
rebellion against the authority and head of the Prince: or they are ripe and
formed into a war, and are called civil wars: which are of so many kinds,
as the above named troubles and commotions, which are the causes, foundations
and seeds of them: but have grown, and are come into consequence and
continuance. Of them all we will speak distinctly, and we will give advice
and counsel, as well to sovereigns, as particular persons, great and small,
how to carry themselves wisely therein.

I. Of the evils and accidents that do threaten us.
IN those cross and contrary accidents, whereunto we are subject, there are
two diverse manners of carriage: and they may be both good, according to the
diverse natures both of the accidents, and of those to whom they happen. The one
is strongly to contest, and to oppose a man's self against the accident, to
remove all things that may hinder the diuerting thereof, or at least to blunt
the point, to dead the blow thereof, either to escape it, or to force it. This
requires a strong and obstinate mind, and has need of hard and painful care.
The other is incontinently to take and receive these accidents at the woorst,
and to resolve himself to bear them sweetly and patiently, and in the mean
time to attend peaceably whatsoever shall happen, without tormenting himself,
or hindering it. The former studieth how to range the accidents; this himself.
That seems to be more courageous; this more sure. That continues in
suspense, is tossed between fear and hope; this puts himself into
safety, and lies so low that he cannot fall lower. The lowest march is the
surest, and the seat of constancy. That labors to escape; this to suffer:
and many times this makes the better bargain. Often times it falls out,
that there is greater inconvenience and loss in pleading and contending, than
in losing; in flying for safety, than in suffering. A covetous man tormenteth
himself more than a poor, a zealous than a cuckold. In the former, prudence
is more requisite, because he is in action; in this patience. But what
hinders, but that a man may perform both in order: and that where prudence
and vigilancie can do nothing, there patience may succeed? Doubtless in
public evils a man must assay the first, which such are bound to do, as have
the charge and can do it; in particular let every one choose the best.

II. Of evils and accidents present, pressing, and extreme.
THe proper means to lighten evils, and to sweeten passions, is not for a man
to oppose himself, for opposition enflameth and increases them much more. A
man by the jealousy of contention and contradiction sharpneth and stirs the
evil: but it is either in diuerting them elsewhere, as Physicians use to do,
who knowing not how to purge, and wholly to cure a disease, seek to divert it
into some other part less dangerous, which must be done sweetly and
insensibly. This is an excellent remedy against all evils, and which is
practiced in all things, if a man mark it well, whereby we are made to swallow
the sowrest morsels, yea death it self, and that insensibly: abducendus
animus est ad alia studia, curas, negotia, loci denique mutatione tanquam
aegroti non conualescentes saepe curandus est. As a man counsels those that
are to pass over some fearful deep place, either to shut or to divert their
eyes. When a man has occasion to lance a sore in a child, he flattereth him,
and withdraws his mind to some other matter. A man must practice the
experiment and subtlety of Hypomenes, who being to run with Atlanta, a
damsel of excellent beauty, and to lose his life if he lost the goal, to
marry the damsel if he won it, furnished himself with three fair apples of
gold, which at diverse times he let fall, to stay the course of the damsel
whilst she took them up, and so by diuerting her, get the advantage of her,
and gained her self: so if the consideration of some present unhappy
accident, or the memory of any that is past do much afflict us, or some
violent passion, which a man cannot tame, do move and torment us, we must
change and turn our thoughts to some thing else, and substitute unto our
selves some other accident and passion less dangerous. If a man cannot
vanquish it, he must escape it, go out of the way, deal cunning lie, or
weaken and dissolve it, with other thoughts and alienations of the mind, yea
break it into many pieces; and all this by diuersions. The other advice, in
the last and more dangerous extremities that are in a manner past hope, is a
little to cast down the head, to lend unto the blow, to yield unto necessity,
for there is great danger, that by too much obstinacy in not relenting at all,
a man gives occasion to violence to trample all under foot. It is better to
make the laws to will that they can, since they cannot do that they would. It
was a reproach unto Cato to have been ouer-rough in the civil wars of his
time, and that he rather suffered the commonweal to run into all
extremities, than succored it by tying himself ouerstrictlie to the laws.
Contrarily Epaminondas in a necessity, continued his charge beyond his time,
though the law upon the pain of his life did prohibit him: and Philopemenes is
commended, that being borne to command, he did not only know how to govern
according to the laws, but also command the laws themselves, when public
necessity did require it. A Leader at a necessity must stoop a little,
apply himself to the occasion, turn the table of the law, if not take it
away, go a little out of the way, that he lose not all; for this is prudence,
which is no way contrary either to reason or justice.

III. Doubtful and ambiguous affairs.
IN things doubtful, where the reasons are strong on all parts, and the
inabilitie to see and choose that which is most commodious, brings with it
uncertainty and perplexity, the best and safest way is to lean to that part
where there is most honesty and justice: for notwithstanding it fall not out
happily, yet there shall always remain an inward content, and an outward
glory to have chosen the better part. Besides, a man knows not, if he had
taken the contrary part, what would have happened, and whether he had escaped
his destiny. When a man doubts which is the better and the shorter way, let
him take the streighter.

IIII. Difficult and dangerous affairs.
IN difficult affairs, as in agreements, to be ouer-carefull to make them
ouer-sure, is to make them less firm, less assured, because a man employeth
therein more time, more people are hindered, more things, more clauses are
mingled and interposed, than are needful, from whence arise all differences.
Add heereunto, that a man seems hereby to scorn fortune, and to exempt
himself from her jurisdiction, which cannot be, vim suorum ingruentem refringi
non vult. It is better to make them briefly and quietly with a little danger,
than to be so exact and curious.

In dangerous affairs a man must be wise and courageous, he must foresee and
know all dangers, make them neither less nor greater than they are by want of
judgment, think that they will not all happen, or shall not all have their
effects, that a man may avoid many by industry or by diligence, or otherwise;
what they are from whom he may receive aid and succor, and thereupon take
courage, grow resolute, not fainting for them in an honest enterprise. A wise
man is courageous, for he thinks, discourses, and prepares himself for
all, and a courageous man must likewise be wise.

V. Coniurations.
WE are come now to the greatest, most important, and dangerous accidents,
which we will handle in order, expressly describing them one after the other,
giving afterward in every one of them some aduisements fit for a sovereign,
and in the end for every particular person.

Coniuration is a conspiracy and enterprise of one or many against the person
of the prince or the state; It is a dangerous 1 The decsription.
thing hardly avoided or remedied, because it is close and hidden. How should a
man defend himself against a covert enemy, such a one as carries the
countenance of a most officious friend? How can a man know the will and
thoughts of another? And again, he that contemns his own life, is master of
the life of another, contemnit omnes ille, qui mortem prius. In such sort that
the prince is exposed to the mercy of a private man, whosoever he be.

Machiauell sets down at large, how a man should frame and order, and
conduct a conspiracy; we, how it may be broken, hindered, prevented.

1 The counsels and remedies hereupon are, first a privy search and
countermine by faithful and discreet persons fit 2 Remedies and aduisements.
for such a purpose, who are the eyes and ears of the prince; These must
discover whatsoever is said and done, especially by the principal officers.
Conspiratours do willingly here and there defame the prince, or lend their
ears to those, that blame and accuse him. Their discourse and conference then
touching the prince must be known, and a prince must not stick to be
bountiful in his rewards and immunities to such discouerers: But yet he must
not ouer-lightlie give credit to all reports; He must lend his ear to all, not
his belief, and diligently examine, to the end he oppress not the innocent,
and so purchase unto himself the hatred and hard speech of the people.

2 The second advice is, that he endeavor by clemency and innocence to win
the love of all, even of his enemies, fidissima custodia principis innocentia.
By offending no man, a man takes a course to be offended by none: And it is to
small purpose for a man to show his power by wrongs and outrages, male vim suam
potestas aliorum contumelijs experitur.

3 The third is to make a good show, to show a good countenance according to
the accustomed manner, not changing or depressing any thing; and to publish in
all places, that he is well persuaded of those meetings and assemblies that men
appoint, and to make them believe that he has them not in the wind, that he
descrieth not their plots and purposes. This was an experiment which Denis the
tyrant made good use of against an enemy of his, which cost him dear.

4 The fourth is to attend without astonishment and trouble whatsoever may
happen unto him. Caesar did well put in practice these three latter means, but
not the first. It is better, says he, to die once, than to live, nay to die
always in a trance, and a continual fever of an accident, which is past
remedy, and must be wholly referred unto God. They that have taken another
course, and have endeavored to prevent it by punishments and revenge, have very
seldom found it the best way, and have not for all that escaped the danger, as
many Roman Emperors can well witness.

But the conspiracy being discovered, the truth found out, what is to be done?
The conspiratours must rigorously be 3 Punishment of conspirators, and the
advice thereupon.
punished: To spare such people, is cruelly to betray the wealpublike. They are
enemies to the liberty, good, and peace of all: Justice requires it. But yet
wisdom and discretion is necessary herein; and a man must not always carry
himself after one and the same manner. Sometimes he must execute suddenly,
especially if the number of the conspiratours be small. But whether the number
be little or great, he must not seek by tortures to know the confederates (if
otherwise and secretly he may know them, and to make as though he knew them
not, is good) for a man seeks that which he would not find. It is sufficient
that by the punishment of a small number good subjects are contained in their
duty, and they diuerted from their attempts, that either are not, or think
not themselves bewrayed. To know all by tortures does perhaps stir up men's
hearts against him. Sometimes he must delay the punishment, but yet never be
slow in procuring his safety. But yet the conspiratours may be such, and the
treason discovered at such a time, that a man must not dissemble, and to punish
them instantly is to play and lose all. The best way of all others is, to
prevent the conspiracy, to frustrate it, faining nevertheless not to know the
conspiratours, but so to carry himself, as if he would provide for another
thing, as the Carthaginians did to Hannon their Captain, optimum and solum
saepe Justin. li. 1. Tacit.
insidiarum remedium, si non intelligantur. And which is more, a prince must
sometimes pardon, especially if he be a great man, that has deserved well of
the prince and state, and to whom they are both in some sort bound, whose
children, parents, friends, are mighty. For what should he do? How should he
break this band? If with safety he may, let him pardon, or at least lessen
the punishment. Clemency in this case is sometimes not only glorious to a
prince, nil gloriosius principe impune laeso; but it helps much for safety
to come, diuerteth others from the like designments, and works either shame
in them or repentance; the example of Augustus toward Cinna is very excellent.

VI. Treason.
TReason is a secret conspiracy or enterprise against a place, or a troup or
company: it is as a coniuration, a secret 1 Description.
evil, dangerous and hardly avoided: for many times a traitor is in the
middle and bosom of the company, or place which he sells and betraieth. To
this unhappy mystery are willingly subject, such as are covetous, light
spirits, hypocrites: and this is commonly in them, that they make a fair show
of trust and fidelity, they commend and keep it carefully in small matters,
and by that means endeavoring to cover, they discover themselves. It is the
mark whereby to know them.

The aduisements are almost the same, that belong to coniurations: except in
the punishments, which here must be 2 Aduisements and remedies.
speedy, grievous, and irremissible: for they are a kind of people ill borne
and bred, incorrigible, pernicious to the world, whom to pity, it is cruelty.

VII. Commotions of the people.
THere are many sorts, according to the diversity of the 2 Aduisements and
remedies.
those that are raised in a heat, as sudden tumults, that endure not long. The
aduisements and remedies are to procure some one or other to speak, and show
himself unto them, that is of authority, virtue, and singular reputation,
eloquent, having gravity mingled with grace, and industry with smooth speech
to win the people: for at the presence of such a man, as at a sudden
lightning, the people grow calm and quiet:

Veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta
Seditio est, saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus
Iamque faces, and saxa volant: furor arma ministrat.
Tum pietate grauem, ac meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus adstant.
Ille regit dictis animos, and pectora mulcet.
Sometimes the captain himself must undertake this business. But it must be
done with an open front, a strong assurance, having his mind free and pure from
all imagination of death, and the worst that may happen unto him: for to go
amongst them with a fearful, and unconstant countenance, with flattery and
humble carriage, is to wrong himself, and to do little good. This Caesar did
excellently put in practice upon those mutinous legions and armies that rose up
against him.

-- stetit aggere fulti
Cespitis intrepidus vultu, meruitque timeri
Nil metuens. --
And Augustus did as much to his Actiaque legions, says Tacitus. There are
then two means to quiet and appease a moved and furious people: the one is by
rough usage, and pure authority and reason. This is the better and more noble,
and becomes a captain, if it stand him upon; but yet he must take heed how
he do it, as has been said. The other more ordinary is by flattery and
fair speeches, for he must not make an open resistance. Savage beasts are
never tamed with blows: and therefore a man must not be sparing of good words,
and fair promises. In this case the wise have permitted a man to lie, as men
use to do with children and sick folk. Herein Pericles was excellent, who
woone the people, by the eyes, the ears, and the belly, that is to say, by
shows, comedies, feasts, and hereby did what he list. This means more base
and servile, but yet necessary, must be practiced by him whom the captain
sends, as Menenius Agrippa did at Rome. For if he think to win them by
maine force, when they are without the bounds of reason, no way yielding unto
them, as Appius, Corcolanus, Cato, Phocion endeavored to do, he is mistaken,
and deceives himself.

VIII. Faction and confederacy.
FAction or confedracie is a complot and association, of one Description.
against another between the subjects, whether it be between the great or
the small, in great numbers or little. It arises sometimes from the hatreds
that are between private men and certain families, but for the most part from
ambition (the plague of states) every one coveting the first rank. That which
falls out between great personages, is more pernicious. There are some that
stick not to say, that it is in some sort profitable for a sovereign, and it
does the self same service to a commonweal that brawles of servants do in
families, says Cato: But that cannot be true, except it be in tyrants, who
fear lest their subjects should agree too well, or in small and light quarrels
between cities, or between ladies of the Court to know news. But not
important factions, which must be extinguished in their first birth with their
marks, names, habiliments, which are many times the seeds of villainous
effects, witness that great deflagration, and those bloody murders happened
in Constantinople, for the colors of green and blew, under Justinian. The
aduisements hereupon are, that if the factions be betwixt two great
personages, 2 The aduisements and remedies.
the Prince must endeavor by good words or threatenings to make peace and
atonement betwixt them, as Alexander the Great did betwixt Ephestion and
Craterus, and Archidamus betwixt two of his friends. If he cannot do it, let
him appoint arbitrators, such as are free from suspicion and passion. The like
he should do, if the faction be betwixt diverse subjects, or cities and
communities. And if it fall out that it be necessary that he speak himself,
he must do it with counsel, being called, to avoid the malice and hatred of
those that are condemned. If the faction be between great multitudes, and that
it be so strong, that it cannot be appeased by justice, the prince is to employ
his force for the utter extinguishment thereof. But he must take heed that he
carry himself indifferent, not more affectioned to one than to another; for
therein there is great danger, and many have undone themselves: And to say the
truth, it is unworthy the greatness of a prince, and he that is master of all
to make himself a companion to the one, and an enemy to the other: And if
some must needs be punished, let it light upon those that are the principal
heads, and let that suffice.

IX. Sedition.
SEdition is a violent commotion of a multitude against a 1 The description.
prince or a magistrate. It arises and grows either from oppression or
fear: For they that have committed any great offense, fear punishment; others
think and fear they shall be oppressed, and both of them by the apprehension of
an evil, are stirred to sedition to prevent the blow. It likewise springs
from a licentious liberty, from want and necessity, in such sort, that men
fit for this business, are such as are indebted, malcontents, and men ill
accommodated in all things, light persons, and such as are blown up, and fear
justice. These kind of people cannot continue long in peace: peace is war
unto them, they cannot sleep but in the midst of sedition, they are not in
liberty but by the means of confusion. The better to bring their purposes to
pass, they confer together in secret, they make great complaints, use
doubtful speeches, afterward speak more openly, seem zealous of their
liberty, and of the public good, and case of the people, and by these fair
pretenses they draw many unto them. The aduisements and remedies are, First the
selfsame that served 2 Aduisements and remedies.
for popular commotions, to cause such to show themselves and to speak unto
them, that are fit for such a purpose, as has been said. Secondly, if that
profit not, he must arm and Ferocior plebs ad rebellandum, quam bellandu^:
tentare magis quam tueri libertatem. Thirdly, he must in the mean time try all
means to shake and dissolve them, spem offer, metum intend. Fourthly, endeavor
to disioine them, and to break the course of their intelligence. Fifthly, he
must win Irrita facies quae per seditionem expresserint, and to make all
whole with lenity and clemency. Lastly, if they return unto reason and
obedience, and become honest men, into the rest of the confederates, that all
may think themselves in safety and in grace and favor.

X. Tyranny and rebellion.
Tyranny, that is to say, a violent rule or domination against the laws and
customs, is many times the cause The description.
of great and public commotions, from whence comes rebellion, which is an
insurrection of the people against the Prince, because of his tyranny, to the
end they may drive him away and pluck him from his throne. And it differs
from sedition in this, they will not acknowledge the Prince for their master;
whereas sedition proceeds not so far, being raised only from a discontent
of the government, complaining and desiring an amendment thereof. Now this
tyranny is pactised by people ill bred, cruel, who love wicked men, turbulent
spirits, tale-bearers, hate and fear men of honesty and honor, quibus semper
aliena virtus formidolosa, nobilitas, opes, omissi gestique honores pro
crimine, ob virtutes certissimum exitium: and non minus ex magna fama quam
mala. But they carry their punishment with them: being hated of all, and enemies
to all. They live in continual fear and apprehension of terror, they suspect
all things: they are pricked and gauled inwardly in their consciences, and at
last die an evil death, and that very soon; For an old tyrant is seldom
seen.

The aduisements and remedies in this cafe, shall be set down at large
hereafter in his proper place. The counsels Chap. 16. Plutarch. in Bruto.
suffer and obey him. It is better to tolerate him, than to move sedition and
civil war, peius, deteriusque tyrannide, sieve iniusto imperio bellum civil,
for there is nothing gotten by rebelling or spurning against him, but it rather
incenseth wicked princes and makes them more cruel: Nihil tam exasperat
feruorem vulneris, quam ferendi impatientia. Modesty and obedience allaieth
and pacifieth the fierce nature of a prince: for the clemency of a prince,
says that great prince Alexander, does not only consist in their own
natures, but also in the natures of their subjects, who many times by their ill
carriage and bad speeches, do provoke a prince, and make him far worse,
obsequto mitigantur imperia, and contra contumacia inferiorum lenitatem
imperitantis diminui: contumaciam cum pernicie Curt. Tacit.
quam obsequium cum securitate malunt.

XI. Civil wars.
When one of these forenamed public commotions, popular insurrections,
faction, sedition, rebellion, 1 The description.
comes to fortify it self, and to continue until it get an ordinary train
and form, it is a civil war: which is no other thing, but a press and
conduct of armies by the subjects, either amongst themselves; and this is a
popular commotion, or faction and confederacy: or against the prince, the
state, the magistrate; and this is sedition or rebellion. Now there is not a
mischief more miserable, nor more shameful, it is a sea of infelicities. And
a wise man said very well, That it is not properly war, but a malady of the
state, a fiery sickness, and frenzy. And to say the truth, he that is the
author thereof, should be put out from the number of men, and banished out of
the borders of humane nature. There is no kind of wickedness that it is freed
from, impiety and cruelty between parents themselves, murders with all
manner of impunitie, Occidere palam, ignoscere non nisi fallendo licet, non
aetas, non dignitas quenquam protegit, nobilitas cum plebe perit, lateque
vagatur ensis. All kind of disloialtie, discipline abolisheth, In omne fas,
nefasque auidos aut venales, non sacro, non prophano abstinentes. The inferior
and basest sort, are companions with the best. Rheni mihi Caesar in vndis dux
erat, his socius. Facinus quos inquinat, aequat. He dares not to open his
mouth, for he is of the same profession, though he approve it not, obnoxijs
ducibus and prohibere non ausis. It is a horrible confusion, Metu ac
necessitate huc illuc mutantur. To conclude, it is nothing but misery. But
there is nothing so miserable as the victory. For though it fall into the hands
of him that has the right on his side, yet there follows this inconvenience,
that it makes him insolent, cruel, inhumane, yea though he were before of a
mild and generous nature. So much does this intestine war flesh a man in
blood, yea, it is a poison that consumes all humanity. Neither is it in the
power of the captains to withhold the rest.

There are two causes to be considered of civil wars. The one is secret,
which as it is neither known nor seen, so it cannot 2 The causes.
be hindered nor remedied: It is destiny, the will of God, who will chastise or
wholly dispeople a state. In se magna ruunt, laetis hunc numina rebus crescendi
posuere modum. The other is well understood by the wise, and may happily be
remedied, if men will, and they to whom it appertains set to their helping
hand. This is the dissolution and general corruption of manners, whereby men of
no worth, and that have nothing to do, endeavor to turn all topsy turuie, to
put all into combustion, cover their wounds with the hurt of the state, for
they love better to be overwhelmed with the public ruin, than their own
particular. Miscere cuncta and priuata vulnera reipublicae malis operire: nam
ita se res habet, vt publicaruina quisque malit quam sua proteri, and idem
passurus minus conspici.

Now the aduisements and remedies for this mischief of civil war, are to
end it as soon as may be, which is done by 3 The counsels and remedies.
two means, agreement, and victory. The first is the better, although it be
not such as a man desires, time will help the rest. A man sometimes must
suffer himself to be deceived, to the end he may end a civil war, as it is
said of Antipater, bellum finire cupienti, opus erat decipi. Victory is
dangerous, because it is to be feared that the conqueror will abuse it, whereby
a tyranny may ensue. To the end a man may carry himself well herein, he must
quit himself of all the authors of troubles and other commotions, and such
like bloud-suckers, as well on the one part as the other, whether it be by
sending them far off with some charge, or under some fair pretext, and so
dividing them; or by employing them against the stranger; and handling the
meaner sort with lenity and gentleness.

XII. Aduisements for particular persons touching the foresaid public
divisions.
THus we have seen many kinds of public troubles and divisions, for which and
every one of them, we have given counsels and remedies in respect of the
prince, it remains that we now give them for particular persons. This cannot
be determined in a word: there are two questions; the Two questions.
one, whether it be lawful for an honest man to join himself to one part, or
to remain quiet and indifferent; the second, how a man must carry himself in
both cases, that is to say, being joined to one part, or not joined to either.
Touching the The first.
first point, it is proposed for such as are free, and are not yet engaged to
any part, for if they be, this first question belongs not to them, but we send
them to the second. This I say, because a man may join himself to the one
part, not of purpose and by election, yea to that part which he approves not,
but only because he finds himself carried and bound with strong and puisant
bands, which he may not easily break, which carry with them a sufficient
excuse, being natural and equivalent. Now the first question has contrary
reasons and examples. It seems on the one side, that an honest man cannot do
better than to keep himself quiet, for he knows not how to betake himself
to either part without offense, because all these divisions are in their own
natures unlawful, and cannot be carried, nor subsist without inhumanitie and
injustice. And many good people have abhorred it, as Asinius Pollio answered
Augustus, who desired him to follow him against Marc Anthony. On the other
side, is it not a thing reasonable for a man to join with the good, and such
as have right on their side? Wise Solon has judged affirmatively, yea roughly
chastised him, that retireth himself and takes not part. The professor of
virtue, Cato has likewise put it in practice, not being content to take one
part, but commanding it. To determine this doubt, it seems that men of worth
and renown, who have both public charge and credit, and sufficiency in the
state, may and ought to range themselves into that part which they shall judge
the better: for they must not abandon in a tempest the stern of that ship
which in a calm sea they are content to govern; especially being an
honorable part to provide for the safety of the state; And secondly that
private men, and such as are of a lower degree in the charge of the state,
should stay and retire themselves into some peaceable and secure place, during
the division: and both of them so to carry themselves as shall be said
hereafter. Finally touching the choice of the part, sometimes there is no
difficulty, for the one is so unjust, and so unfortunate, that a man can not
with any reason join himself thereunto: But at another time the difficulty
is very great, and there are many things to be thought of besides the justice
and equity of the parts.

Let us come to the other point, which concerns the carriage of all. This is
determined in a word, by the counsel and The second.
rule of moderation, following the example of Atticus, so renowned for his
modesty and prudence in such tempests, always held to favor the good part,
yet never troubling, nor intangling himself with arms, and without the
offense of the contrary part.

1. For they that are known to be of one part, must not be moved overmuch,
but carry themselves with moderation, not Outrageous. Moderate.
busying themselves with the affairs, if they be not wholly carried and pressed
unto it, and in this case carry themselves in such order and temperature, that
the tempest being passed over their heads, without offense they have not any
part in these great disorders and insolences that are committed, but
contrarily sweetning and diuerting them as they can. 2. They that are not
engaged to any part (whose condition is sweetest and best) though it may be
inwardly and in affection they incline rather to one then another, must not
remain as neuters, that is, taking no care of the issue, and of the state of
either Neuters.
the one or the other, living to themselves, and as spectators in a Theater,
feeding upon the miseries of other men. These kind of men are odious to all,
and at the last they run a dangerous fortune, as we read of the Thebanes in
the war of Xerxes, and of Iabes Gilead. Neutralitas nec ami^os parit, Judge.
21. Tit. Liu.
nec inimicos tollit. Neutraliltie is neither fair nor honest, if it be not
with consent of parts, as Caesar, who held neuters for his friends, contrary
to Pompey, who held them for enemies; or that he be a stranger, or such a one,
as for his greatness and dignity ought not to mingle himself with such a rout,
but rather reclaim them if he can, arbitrating, and moderating all. Much less
must men in such a case be inconstant, wavering mungerels, Prothees, far more
odious than neuters, and offensive to Inconstant.
all. But they must (continuing partakers in affection if they will, for
thought and affection is wholly our own) be common Common.
in their actions, offensive to none, officious and gracious to all,
complaining of the common infelicitie. These kind of people neither get
enemies, nor lose their friends. They are fit to be mediators, and loving
arbitratours, who are better than Mediators.
the common. So that of such as are not partakers, who are four, two are
evil, neuters, and inconstant persons; two good, common, and mediators: but
always the one more than the other; as of partakers there are two sorts,
headie outrageous, and moderate.

XIII. Of private troubles and divisions.
IN private divisions a man may commodiously and loyally carry himself
between enemies, if not with equal affection, yet in such a temperate manner,
as that he engage not himself so much to one more than to another, as that
either part may think they have more interest in him, and so contenting
himself with an indifferent measure of their grace, report nothing but
indifferent things, and such as are known, or that serve in common to both
parts, speaking nothing to the one that he may not say to the other in it due
time, changing only the accent and the form thereof.

Of Justice, the second virtue.
CHAP. V. Of Justice in general.
Justice is to give to every one that which appertains unto 1 The description.
him, to himself first, and afterward to others: so that it comprehends all
the duties and offices of every particular person: which are twofold, the
first to himself, the second to another, and they are contained in that
general commandment, which is the summarie of all justice, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self, which does not only set down the duty of a man
toward another in the second place, but it shows and rules it according to
the pattern of that duty and love he owes toward himself: for as the
Hebrews say, a man must begin charity with himself.

The beginning then of all justice, the first and most ancient commandment,
is that of reason over sensuality. Before a 2 The first and original justice.
man can well command others, he must learn to command himself, yielding
unto reason the power of commanding, and subduing the appetite, and making it
plaint to obedience. This is the first original, inward, proper, and most
beautiful justice that may be. This command of the Spirit over the brutall
and sensual part, from whence the passions do arise, is compared to an esquire
or horseman, who by reason that he keeps his horse and mounteth him often,
and is ever in the saddle, he turns and manageth him at his pleasure.

To speak of that justice which is outwardly practiced and with another, we
must first know that there is a twofold 3 The distinction of justice.
justice; the one natural, universal, noble, philosophical; the other after
a sort artificial, particular, politic, made and restrained to the necessity
of policies and states; That has better rules, is more firm, pure and
beautiful, but it is out of use, unprofitable to the world such as it is; Very
iuris germanaeque iustitiae solidam and expressam effigiem nullam tenemus;
vmbris and imaginibus vtimur; is not in a manner capable thereof, as has been
said. That is the rule of Polycletus, inflexible, inuariable. This is more
loose and flexible accommodating it self to humane weakness, and vulgar
necessity. It is the leaden Lesbian rule, which yields and bends it self
as there is need, and as the times, persons, affairs, and accidents do
require. This permits upon a necessity, and approves many things, which
that wholly rejects and condemns. It has many vices lawful, and many good
actions unlawful. That respects wholly and purely reason, honesty; This
profit, joining it as much as may be with honesty. Of that, which is but an
Idea and in contemplation we shall not need to speak.

The usual justice, and which is practiced in the world, is first twofold,
that is to say, equal, bound, and restrained to 4 Justice in practice
distinguished.
the terms of the law; according to which judges and magistrates are to
proceed: the other just and conscionable, which not enthralling it self to
the words of the law, marches more freely, according to the exegencie of the
case, yea sometimes against the words of the law. Now to speak better, it
handles and rules the law as need requires: And therefore says a wise man,
the laws themselves and justice have need to be ordered and handled justly,
that is to say, with equity, quae expositio and emendatiolegis est, exponit
sensum, emendat defectum. This is the fine flower of justice, which is in the
hand of those that judge in sovereignty. Again to speak more particularly,
there is a twofold justice; the one commutatiue, betwixt private men, which is
handled and practiced by Arithmeticke proportion; the other distributive,
publicly administered by Geometrical proportion, it has two parts, reward,
and punishment.

Now this usual and practiced justice, is not truly and perfectly justice:
humane nature is not capable thereof no more 5 There is no true justice in the
world.
than of all other things in their purity. As humane justice is mingled with
some grain of injustice, favor, rigor, too much, or too little, and there is
no pure and true mediocritie; from whence have sprung these ancient proverbs,
That he is enforced to do wrong by retaile, that will do justice in gross: and
injustice in small things that will do justice in great. Lawyers to give course
and passage to commutatiue justice, do covertly and silentlie suffer
themselves to deceive one another, and that in a certain measure, so that they
pass not the moitie of the just price; and the reason is, because they know
not how to do better. And in distributive justice, how many innocents are
apprehended and condemned, how many guilty quit and set at liberty, and that
without the fault of the Judges, never dreaming either of that too much, or too
little, which is almost perpetual in the purest justice? Justice is a let and
hindrance to it self, and humane sufficiency cannot see and provide for all.
And here we may take notice among other matters, of a great defect in
distributive justice, in that it punishes only and rewards not, although
these are the two parts and the two hands of justice: but as it is commonly
practiced it is same, and inclines wholly unto punishment. The greatest favor
that a man receives from it, is indemnitie, which is a play too short for such
as deserve better than the common sort. But yet this is not all; for if a man
be falsely accused, and upon that accusation committed, he is sure to endure
punishment sufficient: at the last his innocence being known, he escapes
perhaps his uttermost punishment, but without any amends of that wrongful
affliction he has endured, even such perhaps as shall never leave him. And the
accuser in the mean time, be the color and ground of his accusation never so
light (which is easy to do) escapes without punishment; so sparing is justice
in rewarding, as that it consists wholly in chasticement, whereof that common
speech arises, That to do justice, and to be subject unto justice, is always
to be understood of punishment. And it is an easy matter for any man that
will, to bring another man into danger and punishment, even to such an estate,
as that he shall never know which way to get forth, but with loss.

Of justice and duty there are three principal parts: for 6 The division of
this matter.
man is indebted to three, to God, to himself, to his neighbor: to one above
himself, to himself, and to others beside himself: of his duty toward God,
which is piety and religion, has sufficiently been spoken before. It
remains that we now speak of his duty toward himself and his L 2. c. 5.
neighbor.

CHAP. VI.
Of the justice and duty of man toward himself.
THis is sufficiently contained in this whole work; in the first book which
teaches a man to know himself, and all humane condition; in the second, which
teaches a man to be wise, and to that end gives aduisements and rules; and in
the rest of this book, especially in the virtues of fortitude and temperance.
Nevertheless I will here summarilie set down some aduisement, more express
and formal.

The first and fundamental advice is, to resolve not to live carelessie, after
an uncertain fashion, and by chance and adventure, as almost all are
accustomed to do, who seem to mock and deceive themselves, and not to live
in good earnest, not leading their life seriously and attentively, but living
from day to day, as it falls out. They taste not, they possess not, they
enjoy not their life: but they use it to make use of other things. Their
designments and occupations do many times trouble, and hurt their life more
than do it service. These kind of people do all things in good earnest,
except it be to live. All their actions, and the lesser parts of their life are
serious, but the whole body thereof passes away as if they thought not
thereof: it is a bare supposition, that is not worth the thinking of. That
which is but an accident is principal unto them, and the principal as an
accessarie. They affect and incline themselves to all things, some to get
knowledge, honors, dignities, riches: others to take their pleasures, to hunt,
to sport themselves, to pass away the time; others to speculations,
imaginations, inventions: others to manage and order affairs: others to other
things; but to live is the least they think of. They live as it were
insensibly, being wholly addicted, and fastening their thoughts upon other
things. Life is unto them but as a term, and a procrastination or delaie to
employ it about other things. Now all this is very unjust, it is an infelicity
and treason against a man's self: it is for a man to lose his life, and to go
against that which every man should do, that is, live seriously, attentively,
and cheerfully, been viuere and laetari: sibi semper valere and viuere doctus,
to the end he may live well, and well die: it is the fault of every man. A man
must lead and order his life, as if it were a business of great weight and
consequence, and as a bargain made whereof he must give an account exactly by
parts and parcels. It is our greatest business, in respect whereof all the rest
are but toies, things accessarie and superficial. There are some that
deliberate and purpose to do it, but it is when they must live no longer,
wherein they resemble those that put off their buying and selling till the
market be past, and when they see their folly, they complain saying, Shall I
never have leisure to make my retrait, to live unto my self? quam serum est
incipere viuere cum desinendum est? quam stulta mortalitatis obliuio? dum
differtur, vita transcurrit. And See lib. 1. chap. 36.
this is the reason why the wise cry out unto us, well to use the time,
tempori parce; That we have not need of any thing so much as time, says
Zenon. For life is short, and art is long; not the art to heal, but rather
to live, which is wisdom. To this first and principal advice, these following
do serve:

To learn to dwell, to content, to delight himself alone, yea to quit
himself of the world if need be; the greatest and in sinu suo gaudere, He
that has won this point pleases himself in all places and in all things. He
must carry a countenance conformable to the company and the affairs that are in
hand and present themselves, and accommodate himself unto another, be sad if
need be, but inwardly to keep himself one and the same: this is the meditation
and consideration, which is the nourishment and life of the spirit, cuius
viuere est cogitare. Now for the benefit of nature, there is not any business
which we do more often, continue longer, that is more easy, more natural, and
more our own, than to meditate, and to entertain our thoughts. But this
meditation is not in all after one manner, but very diverse, according to the
diversity of spirits. In some it is weak, in others strong; in some it is
languishing idleness, a vacancy and want of other business. But the greater
spirits make it their principal vacation and most serious study, whereby they
are never more busied, nor less alone, (as it is said of Scipio) than when
they are alone, and quitting themselves of affairs, in imitation of God
himself, who lives and feeds himself with his eternal thoughts and
meditations. It is the business of the gods (says Aristotle) from whence
does spring both their, 3 To know and culture himself.
and our blessedness.

Now this solitary employment, and this cheerful entertainment of a man's
self, must not be in vanity, much less in any thing that is vicious; but in
study and profound knowledge, and afterward in the diligent culture of
himself. This is the price agreed, the principal, first and plainest travel
of every man. He must always watch, taste, sound himself, never abandon,
but be always near, and keep himself to himself: and finding that many
things go not well, whether by reason of vice, and defect of nature, or the
contagion of another, or other casual accident that troubles him, he must
quietly and sweetly correct them, and provide for them. He must reason with
himself, correct and recall himself courageously, and not suffer himself to
be carried away either with disdain or carelessness.

He must likewise in avoiding all idleness, which does but 4 To keep himself
in exercise.
rust and mar both the soul and body, keep himself always in breath, in
office and exercise, but yet not over bent, violent and painful, but above
all, honest, virtuous and serious. And that he may the better do it, he must
quit himself of other business, and propose unto himself such designments as
may delight him, conferring with honest men, and good books, dispensing his
time well, and well ordering his hours, and not live tumultuouslie and by
chance and hazard.

Again, he must well husband, and make profit of all things 5 To make use of
all things.
that are presented unto him, done, said, and make them an instruction unto
him, apply them unto himself, without any show or semblance thereof.

And to particularise a little more, we know that the duty of man toward
himself consists in three points, according 6 To govern his spirit, that
is, his judgment.
to his three parts, to rule and govern his spirit, his body, his goods.
Touching his spirit (the first and principal, whereunto especially do belong
these general aduisements which we are to deliver) we know that all the
motions thereof are reduced to two, to think, and to desire, the understanding
and the will; whereunto do answer science and virtue, the two ornaments of the
spirit. Touching the former, which is the understanding, he must preserve it
from two things, in some sort contrary and extreme, that is, sottishness and
folly, that is to say, from vanities and childish follies, on the one side;
this is to bastardise and to lose it: it was not made to play the nouice or
baboun, non ad iocum and lusum genitus, sed ad seueritatem potius; and from
fantastical, absurd, and extrauagant opinions, on the other side; this is to
pollute and debase it. It must be fed and entertained with things profitable
and serious, and furnished and endued with sound, sweet, and natural opinions:
and so much care must not be taken to eleuate and mount it, to extend it beyond
the reach as to rule, and order it. For order and continency is the effect of
wisdom, and which gives price to the soul, and above all to be free from
presumption and obstinacy in opinion; vices very familiar with those that have
any extraordinary force and vigor of spirit; and rather to continue in doubt
and suspense, especially in things that are doubtful, and capable of
oppositions and reasons on both parts, not easily digested and determined. It
is an excellent thing, and the securest way, well to know how to doubt, and to
be ignorant, and the most noble philosophers, have not been ashamed to make
profession thereof, yea it is the principal fruit and effect of science.

Touching the will, it must in all things be governed and Nulla placidior quies
nisi quam ratio composuit. An honest man must govern and respect himself, and
fear his reason and his conscience, which is his bonus genius, his good
spirit, in such sort that he cannot without shame stumble in their presence,
rarum est, vt satis se quisque vereatur.

As touching the body, we owe thereunto assistance, and

Touching goods and the duty of every man in this case, there are many and
diverse offices, for to gather riches, to keep

These are two extremities alike vicious, to love and affect riches: to hate
and reject them. By riches I understand that which is more than enough, and
more than is needful. A wise man will do neither of both, according to that
wish and prayer of Solomon, Give me neither riches nor poverty: but he will
hold them in their place, esteeming them as they are, a thing of it self
indifferent, matter of good and evil, and to many good things commodious.

The evils and miseries that follow the affecting and hating of them, have been
spoken of before. Now in five words we set down a rule touching a mediocritie
therein. 1. To desire them, but not to love them, sapiens non amat diuitias,
sed mauult. As a little man and weak of body, would willingly be higher and
stronger, but this his desire is without care or pain unto himself, seeking
that without passion which nature desires, and fortune knows not how to take
from him. 2. And much less to seek them at the cost and damage of another,
or by art, and bad and base means, to the end no man should complain or
envy his gains. 3. When they come upon him, entering at an honest gate, not to
reject them, but cheerfullie to accept them, and to receive them into his
house, not his heart; into his possession, not his love, as being unworthy
thereof. 4. When he possesses them, to employ them honestly and discreetlie,
to the good of other men; that their departure may, at the least, be as honest
as their entrance. 5. If they happen to depart without leave, be lost or
stolen from him, that he be not sorrowful, but that he suffer them to depart
with themselves, without any thing of his, si diuitiae effluxerint, non
auferent nisi semetipsas. To conclude, he deserves not to be accepted of God,
and is unworthy his love, and the profession of virtue, that makes account of
the riches of this world.

Aude hospes contemnere, and te quoque dignum singe deo. Of the justice and
duty of man toward man. An aduertisment.
THis duty is great, and has many parts, we will reduce them to two great
ones: In the first we will place the general, simple, and common duties
required in all, and every one, toward all and every one, whether in heart,
word, or deed, which are amity, faith, verity, and free admonition, good
deeds, humanity, liberality, acknowledgement or thankfulness. In the second
shall be the special duties required for some special and express reason and
obligation between certain persons, as between a man and his wife, parents
and children, masters and servants, princes and subjects, magistrates, the
great and powerful, and the less.

The first part, which is of the general and common duties of all toward all,
and first

CHAP. VII. Of love or friendship.
Amity is a sacred flame, kindled in our breasts first by nature, and has
expressed it first heat between the husband 1 The description.
and the wife, parents and children, brothers and sisters; and afterward
growing cold has recovered heat by art, and the invention of alliances,
companies, fraternities, colleges, and communities. But forasmuch as in all
this being divided into many parts, it was weakened, and mingled with other
profitable and pleasant considerations, to the end it might restrengthen it
self and grow more fervent, it has recollected it self, and united it own
forces into a narrower room, betwixt two true friends. And this is perfect
amity, which is so much more fervent and spiritual than other, by how much
the heart is hotter than the liver, and the blood than the veins.

Amity is the soul and life of the world, more necessary (say the wise) than
fire and water: amicitia, necessitudo, amici necessary, it is the sum, the
staff, the salt of our life: for without it all is darkness, and there is no
joy, no stay, no taste of life: amicitia iustitiae consors, naturae vinculum,
ciuitatis praefidium, senectutis solatium, vitae humanae portus: ea omnia
constant, discordia cadunt. And we must not think that friendship 3 How
necessary to the weale-pub.
is profitable and delightful to private men only, for it is more commodious to
the weale-publike: it is the true nursing mother of humane society, the
preserver of states and policies. Neither is it suspected, nor displeases any
but tyrants and monsters, not because they honor not it in their hearts, but
because they cannot be of that number, for only friendship suffices to
preserve the world. And if it were every where in force, there would be no need
of a law, which has not been ordained but as a help, and as a second remedy
for want of friendship, to the end it might enforce and constrain by the
authority thereof that which for love and friendship should be freely and
voluntary; but howsoever, the law takes place far below friendship. For
friendship rules the heart, the tongue, the hand, the will, and the effects,
the law cannot provide but for that which is without. This is the reason why
Aristotle said, That good lawmakers have ever had more care of friendship,
than of justice: And because the law and justice do many times lose their
credit, the third remedy and least of all has been in arms and force,
altogether contrary to the former, which is friendship. Thus we see by degrees
the three means of public government. But love or friendship is worth more
than the rest; for second and subsidiarie helps are no way comparable to the
first and principal.

The diversity and distinction of friendship is great: That of the ancients
into four kinds, Natural, Sociable, Hospital, 4 The first distinction of the
causes.
Venereous, is not sufficient. We may note three; The first is drawn from the
causes which engender it, which are four, nature, virtue, profit, pleasure,
which sometimes go together in troop; sometimes two, or three, and very often
one alone: But virtue is the more noble and the stronger, for that is
spiritual, and in the heart as friendship is: Nature in the blood, profit in
the purse, pleasure in some part, or sense of the body. So likewise virtue is
more liberal, more free, and pure, and without it the other causes are poor,
and idle; and frail. He that loves for virtue is never weary with loving, and
if friendship be broken, complains not. He that loves for profit, if it
fail, complains, and it turns to his reproach, that when he has done all
he can, he has lost all. He that loves for pleasure, if his pleasure cease,
his love cease with it, and without complaint enstrangeth himself.

The second distinction which is in regard of the persons, is 5 2 Of persons
in three kinds; the one is in a straight line between superiors and
inferiors, and it is either natural, as between parents and children, uncles
and nephues; or lawful, as between the prince and the subjects, the lord and
his vassals, the master and his servants, the doctor and the disciple, the
prelat or governor and the people. Now this kind to speak properly, is not
friendship, both because of the great disparitie that is betwixt them, which
hinders that inwardnes and familiarity and entire communication, which is the
principal fruit and effect of friendship, as likewise because of the
obligation that is therein, which is the cause why there is less liberty and
less choice and affection therein. And this is the reason why men give it
other names than of friendship: for in inferiors there is required of them
honor, respect, obedience; in superiors care and vigilancie over their
inferiors. The second kind of friendship in regard of the persons, is in a
collateral

3 The third kind of friendship in regard of the persons is mixed, and as it
were compounded of the other two, whereby the wife was not taken out of the
head, nor foot, but the side of man. Again, such as are married, in all things
and by turns exercise and show both these friendships, that which is in a
straight line in public; for a wise woman honoreth and respects her husband;
that which is collateral in private, by private familiarity. This matrimonial
friendship is likewise after another fashion double and compounded; for it is
spiritual and corporal, which is not in other friendships, save only in that
which is reproved by all good laws, and by nature it self. Matrimonial
friendship then is great, strong, and puissant. There are nevertheless two or
three things that stay and hinder it, that it cannot attain to the perfection
of friendship; The one, that there is no part of marriage free but the entrance,
for the progress and continuance thereof is altogether constrained, enforced,
I mean in christian marriages; for every where else it is less enforced, by
reason of those diuorcements which are permitted: The other is the weakness and
insufficiency of the wise, which can no way correspond to that perfect
conference and communication of thoughts and judgments: her soul is not
strong and constant enough to endure the streightnes of a knot so fast, so
strong, so durable: it is as if a man should sow a strong and course piece of
cloth to a soft and delicate. This fills not the place, but vanishes and is
easily torn from the other. Again, this inconvenience follows the
friendship of married cupples, that it is mingled with so many other strange
matters, children, parents of the one side and the other, and so many other
distaffe business that do many times trouble and interrupt a lively affection.

The third distinction of friendship respects the force and intention, or the
weakness and diminution of friendship. 7 3 Of degrees.
According to this reason, there is a twofold friendship, the common and
imperfect, which we may call good will, familiarity, private acquaintance: and
it has infinite degrees, one more strict, intimate and strong than another:
and the perfect, which is invisible, and is a Phoenix in the world, yea hardly
conceived by imagination.

We shall know them both by confronting them together, 8 The differences of
friendship common and perfect.
and by knowing their differences. The common may be attained in a short time.
Of the perfect it is said, that we must take long time to deliberate, and they
must eat much salt togther before it be perfected.

2 The common is attained, built, and ordered by diverse profitable and
delightful occasions and occurrents; and therefore a wise man has set down
two means to attain unto it, to speak things pleasant, and to do things
profitable; the perfect is acquired by an only true and lively virtue
reciprocallie known.

3 The common may be with and between diverse, the perfect is with one only,
who is another self, and between two only, who are but one. It would entangle
and hinder it self amongst many, for if two at one time should desire to be
succored, if they should request of me contrary offices, if the one should
commit to my secrecy a thing that is expedient for another to know, what
course, what order may be kept herein? Doubtless, division is an enemy to
perfection, and union her cosen-germaine.

4 The common is capable of more and less, of exceptions, restraints, and
modifications, it is kindled and cooled, subject to accession and recession,
like a fever, according to the presence or absence, merits, good deeds, and so
forth. The perfect not so, always the same, marching with an equal pase,
firm, hawtie, and inconstant.

5 The common receives, and has need of many rules and cautions given by the
wise, whereof one is, to love without respect of piety, verity, virtue,
amicus vsque ad aras. Another, so to love as that a man may hate, so to hate,
as that he may likewise love, that is, to hold always the bridle in his hand,
and not to abandon himself so profusely, that he may have cause to repent, if
the knot of friendship happen to untie.

Again to aid and succor at a need without entreaty: for a friend is
bashful, and it costs him dear, to request that that he thinks to be his
due. Again, not to be important to his friends, as they that are always
complaining, after the manner of women. Now all these lessons are very wholesome
in ordinary friendships, but have no place in this sovereign and perfect.

We shall know this better by the portrait and description of perfect
friendship, which is a very free, plain, and universal 9 The description of
perfect friendship.
confusion of two souls. See here three words. 1. A confusion, not only a
conjunction, and ioining together, as of solid things, which howsoever they be
fastened, mingled, and knit together, may be separated and known apart. For the
souls of men in this perfect amity are in such sort plunged and drowned the
one within the other, that they can no more be divided, neither would they,
than things liquid that are mingled together. 2. Very free, and built upon the
pure choice and liberty of the will, without any other obligation, occasion,
or strange cause. There is nothing more free and voluntary than affection. 3.
Universal, without any exception of all things, goods, honors, judgments,
thoughts, wills, life. From this universal and full confusion it proceeds,
that the one cannot lend or give to the other, and there is no speech betwixt
them of good turns, obligations, acknowledgements, thankfulness, and other the
like duties, which are the nourishers of common friendships, but yet
testimonies of division and difference, as I know not how to thank my self
for the service I do unto my self, neither does that love which I bear unto
my self increase by those succors and helps I give unto my self. And in
marriage it self, to give some resemblance of this divine knot, though it come
far short thereof: donations are forbid between the husband and the wife:
and if there were place for the one to give unto the other, he is the giver
that gives cause to his friend to express and employ his love, and he
receives the good turn, that by giving binds his companion: for the one and
the other seeking above all things even with a greedy desire to do good to one
another, he that gives the occasion and yields the matter, is he that is
liberal, giving that contentment to his friend, to effect that which he most
desires.

Of this perfect friendship and communion, antiquity yields some examples.
Blosius taken for a great friend of 10 Examples.
Tiberius Gracchus then condemned to die, and being asked what he would do
for his sake, and he answering that he would refuse nothing, it was demanded
what he would do if Gracchus should entreat him to fire the Temples? To whom
he answered, that Gracchus would never entreat such a matter at his hands, but
if he should he would obey him. A very bold and dangerous answer. He might
boldly have said, that Gracchus would never have required such a matter, and
that should have been his answer, for according to this our description, a
perfect friend does not only fully know the will of his friend, which might
have sufficed for an answer, but he holds in his sleeue, and wholly
possesses it. And in that he added, that if Gracchus would have required it,
he would have done it, it is as if he had said nothing, it neither alters
nor hurts his first answer concerning that assurance that he had of the will
of Gracchus. This of wills and judgments. 3. Touching goods, There were three
friends (this word three is some impeachment to our rule, and may make us
think that this was no perfect amity) two rich, and one poor charged with an
old mother, and a daughter to marry; this man dying made his will, wherein he
bequeathed to one of his friends his mother to be fed and maintained by him; to
the other his daughter, to be married by him, enioining him withal to bestow
upon her the best dowry that his ability would afford, and if it should
happen that the one of them should die, he should substitute the other. The
people made themselves merry with this will or testament; the legataries
accepted of it with great contentment, and each of them received unto them
their legacy; but he that had taken the mother, departing this life within five
days after, the other suruiuing and remaining the sole universal inheritour,
did carefully intertaine the mother; and within a few days after he married
in one day his own and only daughter, and her that was bequeathed unto him,
dividing betwixt them by equal portions all his goods. The wise according to
this description have judged that the first dying, expressed greatest love, and
was the more liberal, making his friends his heirs, and giving them that
contentment, as to employ them for the supply of his wants. 4. Touching life,
that history is sufficiently known of those two friends, whereof the one being
condemned by the tyrant to die at a certain day and hour, he requested that
giving bail, he might in the mean time go and dispose of his domestical
affairs, which the tyrant agreeing unto upon this condition, that if he did
not return by that time his bail should suffer the punishment. The prisoner
delivered his friend, who entered into prison upon that condition: and the time
being come, and the friend who was the bail resolving to die, his condemned
friend failed not to offer himself, and so quit his friend of that danger.
Whereat the tyrant being more than astonished, and delivering them both from
death, desired them to receive, and to adopt him in their friendship as a third
friend.

CHAP. VIII. Of faith, trust, treachery, secrecy.
ALl men yea the most treacherous know and confess that faith is the band of
human society, the foundation 1 The dignity of fidelity.
of all justice, and that above all things it ought to be religiously observed.
Nihil augustius fide, quae iustitiae fundamentum est, nec vlla res vehementius
rempublicam continet and vitam. Sanctissimum humani pectoris bonum:

Ante Iouem generata decus diuumque hominumque Cic.

Qua sine non tellus pacem non aequora norunt,
Iustitiae consors tacitumque in pectore numen.
Nevertheless the world is full of treacheries. There are 2 Fidelity rare
but few that do well and truly keep their faith. They break it diverse ways,
and they perceive it not. So they find some pretext and color thereof, they
think they are safe enough. Others seek corners, euasions, subtilties;
Quaerunt latebras periurio. Now to remove all the difficulties, that are in
this matter, and truly to know how a man should carry himself, The division
of this matter.
there are four considerations, whereunto all the rest may be referred: The
persons, as well he that gives faith, as he that receives it; the subject
whereof the question is made, and the manner according to which the faith is
given.

As touching him that gives faith, it is necessary that he have power to do
it. If he be subject to another, he cannot 3 He that gives faith.
give it, and having given it without the leave and approbation of his master,
it is of none effect; as it did well appear in the Tribune Saturnine and his
accomplices, who coming forth of the Capitol (which they had taken by
rebellion) upon the faith given by the Consuls, subjects, and officers of the
Commonweal, were justly slain. But every free man must keep his faith, how
great and honorable so ever he be: yea the greater he is, the more he is bound
to keep it, because he is the more free to give it. And it was well said, That
the simple word of a prince should be of as great force, as the oath of a
private man.

As touching him to whom faith is given, whosoever he be 4 He that receives it.
, it must carefully be kept, and there are but two exceptions which are clear
enough, the one if he received it not, and were not contented with it, but
demanded other caution and assurance. For faith is a sacred thing, must simply
be received; otherwise it is no more faith, nor trust, when hostages are
demanded, suerties are given; to take gages or cautions with faith, is a thing
ridiculous. He that is held under the guard of men, or walls, if he escape and
save himself is not faulty. The reason of that Roman is good: Vult sibi
quisque credi, and habita fides ipsam sibi obligat fidem: fides requirit
fiduciam, and relatiua sunt. The other if having accepted it, he first brake
it, Frangenti fidem, fides frangatur eidem: quando tu me non habes pro
Senatore, nec ego te pro Consule. A treacherous man deserves not by the law of
nature that faith should be kept unto him, except it be after an agreement,
which covers the treachery and makes revenge unlawful. Now these two cases
excepted, a man must keep his faith to whomsoever, to his subject as shall be
said. 2. To an enemy, witness that act of Attilius Regulus, the proclamation
of the Senate of Cap. 14.
Rome against all those that had been licenced by Pyrrhus upon their faith
given to depart; and Camillus, who would not so much as make use of the
treachery of another, but resent the children of the Falissians with their
master. 3. To a thief and public offender, witness that fact of Pompey to
the pirates and robbers, and of Augustus to Crocotas. 4. To the enemies of
religion, according to the example of Joshua against the Gabaonites. But faith
ought not to be given to these two latter, thieves and heretics, or
apostates, nor taken of them: for we ought not to capitulate, nor to treat
wittinglie of peace and alliance with such kind of people, except it be in
extreme necessity, or for the winning of them to the truth, or for the
public good; but being given it ought to be kept.

As touching the thing subject, if it be unjust or impossible, a man is quit:
and being unjust, it is well done to fly from it, 5 The subject of faith.
and a double fault to keep it. All other excuses besides these two, are of no
account, as loss, damage, displeasure, discommoditie, difficulty; as the
Romans have many times practiced, who have rejected many great advantages to
avoid the breach of faith, quibus tanta vtilitate fides antiquior Liuy.
fuit.

Touching the manner of giving faith, there is some doubt: 6 The manner of giving
faith.
for many think that if it have been extorted either by force and fear, or
by fraud and sudden surprise, a man is not bound unto it, because in both
cases, he that promised has not a will whereby all things are to be judged.
Others are of a contrary opinion: and to say the truth, Joshua kept his faith
and promise to the Gabaonites, though it were extorted from him by a great
surprise, and false intelligence, and it was afterward declared that he did
therein what he ought to do. And therefore it seems that a man may say, that
where there is only a simple word and promise past a man is not bound, but if
faith or promise given be confirmed and authorized by an oath, as in the fact
of Joshua, he is bound to perform it in regard of the name of God: but yet
that it is afterward in judgment to seek means to right himself of that
either deceit or violence. Faith given with an oath, and the interposition of
the name of God, binds more than a simple promise; and the breach thereof
which includes perjury with treachery, is far worse. But to think to give
assurance of faith by new and strange oaths, as many do, is superfluous
amongst honest men, and unprofitable, if a man will be disloyal. The best way
is to swear by the eternal God, the revenger of those that vainlie use his
name, and break their faith.

Treachery and perjury is in a certain sense, more base and execrable than
atheism. The Atheist that believes there 7 Treachery injurious to God.
is no God, is not so injurious against him in thinking there is no God, as he
that knows him, believes in him, and in mockery and contempt does
periuriously abuse his name. He that swears to deceive, mocketh God, and
fears man. It is a less sin to contemn God, than to mock him. The
horror of treachery and perjury cannot be better deciphered, than it was by
him that said, It was to give a testimony of the contempt of God, and the fear
of men. And what thing is more monstrous than to be a coward with men, and
resolute and valorous with God? Treachery is secondly the traitor and capital
enemy of humane society. For it breaks To man.
and destroieth the band thereof, and all commerce which depends upon the
word and promises of men, which if it fail we have nothing else to stick unto.

To the keeping of faith belongs the faithful guard of 8 To keep secrets.
the secrets of another, which is a charge full of inconvenience, especially of
great personages, which though it may wisely be performed, yet it is good to
fly the knowledge of them, as sometimes that Poet did the secrets of
Lysimachus. He that takes into his custody the secrets of another, draws a
greater trouble upon him, than he dreams of: for besides the care that he takes
unto himself, to keep them well, he binds himself to feign, and to deny
his own thoughts, a thing very irksome to a noble and generous heart.
Nevertheless he that takes that charge upon him, must keep it religiously,
and to the end he may do it well, and play the good secretary, he must be such
a one by nature, not by art and obligation.

CHAP. IX. Verity and free admonition.
FRee and hearty admonition is a very wholesome and excellent 1 An excellent
thing.
medicine, and the best office of amity. For to wound and offend a little, to
profit much, is to love soundly. It is one of the principal and most
profitable Evangelical commandments: Si peccauerit in te frater tuus, corripe
illum, etc.

All have sometimes need of this remedy, but especially all 2 To whom
profitable.
those that are in prosperity, for it is a very hard thing to be happy and
wise together. And princes who lead a life so public and are to furnish
themselves with so many things, and have so many things hid from them, cannot
see nor understand, but by the eyes and ears of another. And therefore they
have great need of aduertisements, otherwise they may chance to run strange
and hard fortunes, if they be not very wise.

This office is undertaken by very few; There are required thereunto (as the
wise affirm) three things, judgment or discretion, 3 Rare, difficult,
dangerous.
courageous liberty, amity and fidelity. These are tempered and mingled
together, but few there are that do it, for fear of offending, or want of true
amity; and of those that do it, few there are that know how to do it well. Now
if it be ill done, like a medicine ill applied, it wounds without profit, and
produces almost the same effect with grief, that flattery does with pleasure.
To be commended, and to be reprehended vnfittinglie and to small purpose, is
the selfsame wound, and a matter alike faulty in him that does it. Verity
how noble soever it be, yet it has not this privilege, to be employed at all
hours and in all fashions. A wholesome holy reprehension may be vitiouslie
applied.

The counsels and cautions for a man well to govern himself herein (it is to
be understood where there is no great 4 The rules of true admonition.
inwardnesse, familiarity, confidence, or authority and power, for in these
cases there is no place for the careful observation of these rules following)
are these: 1. To observe place and time; that it be neither in times nor places
of feasting and great joy, for that were (as they say) to trouble the feast;
nor of sorrow and adversity, for that were a point of hostility, and the way
to make an end of all; that is rather a fit time to succor and comfort a man.
Crudelis in re aduersa, obiurgatio, damnare est obiurgare, cum auxilio est
opus. King Perseus seeing himself thus handled by two of his familiar friends,
killed them both. 2. Not to reprehend all faults indifferently, not small and
light offenses, this were to be envious, and an importunate, ambitious
reprehender; not great and dangerous, which a man of himself does
sufficiently feel, and fears a worse punishment to come, this were to make a
man think he lies in wait to catch him. 3. Secretly and not before witness, to
the end he make him not ashamed, as it happened to a young man, who was so much
abashed, that he was reprehended by Pythagoras, that he hanged himself. And
Plutarch is of opinion, that it was for this cause that Alexander killed his
friend Clitus, because he reprehended him in company: but especially that it
be not before those whose good opinion he that is reprehended desires to
retain, and with whom he desires to continue his credit, as before his wife,
his children, his disciples. 4. Out of a simple careless nature and freedom
of heart, without any particular interest, or passion of the mind, be it never
so little. 5. To comprehend himself in the same fault, and to use general
terms, as, We forget our selves; What do we think of? 6. To begin with
commendations, and to end with proffers of service and help, this tempereth the
tartness of correction, and gives a better entertainment: Such and such a
thing becomes you well, but not so well such and such a thing. 7. To express
the fault with better words than the nature of the offense does require; as,
You have not been altogether well advised; in steed of, You have done
wickedlie: Receive not this woman into your company, for she will undo you; in
steed of, Allure her not, persuade her not to yield to your desires, for
thereby you will undo your self: Enter not into dispute with such a man; in
steed of, Quarrel not, envy not such a man. 8. The admonition being ended, be
not presently gone, but stay and fall into some other common and pleasant
discourse.

CHAP. X. Of Flattery, lying, and dissimulation.
Flattery is a very dangerous poison to every particular person, and almost
the only cause of the ruin of a prince 1 Flattery a pernicious and villainous
thing.
and the state: it is worse than false witness, which corrupts not the
Judge, but deceives him only, causing him to give a wicked sentence against
his will and judgment: but flattery corrupts the judgment, enchanteth the
spirit, and makes him unapt to be farther instructed in the truth. And if a
prince be once corrupted by flattery, it necessarily follows that all that
are about him, if they will live in grace and favor, must be flatterers. It is
therefore a thing as pernicious as truth is excellent, for it is the corruption
of truth. It is also a villainous vice of a base beggarly mind, as foul and
ill beseeming a man, as impudency a woman. Vt matrona meretrici dispar erit
atque discolor, infido scurrae distabit amicus. Flatterers are likewise
compared to harlots, sorcerers, oyle-sellers, to woolfes; and another says,
That a man were better fall among crows than flatterers.

There are two sorts of people subject to be flattered, that is to say, such as
never want people to furnish them with this 2 Especially to two sorts of people.
kind of merchandise, and easily suffer themselves to be taken by it; that is
to say, princes, with whom wicked men get credit thereby; and women, for there
is nothing so proper and ordinary to corrupt the chastity of women, than to
feed and entertain them with their own commendations.

Flattery is hardly avoided, and it is a matter of difficulty to be preserved
from it, not only to women by reason of their 3 Hardly avoided.
weakness, and their natures full of vanity and desirous of praise; and to
princes, because they are their kinsfolk, friends, principal officers, whom
they cannot avoid, that profess this mystery; (Alexander that great king and
philosopher could not defend himself from it, and there is not any private man
that would not yield much more unto it than kings, if he were daily assaulted
and corrupted by such base rascal sort of people as they are) but generally
unto all; yea to the wisest, both by reason of the sweetness thereof; in such
sort, that though a man withstand it, yet it pleases, and though he oppose
himself against it, yet he never shuts it quite out of doors, vnde saepe
exclusa nouissime recipitur; and because of the hypocrisy thereof, whereby it
is hardly discovered: for it is so well counterfaited and covered with the
visage of amity, that it is no easy matter to discern it.

It usurps the offices, it has the voice, it carries the name and
counterfeit thereof so artificially, that you will say that it It imitateth
and resembles amity, but it is the plague thereof.
is the same. It studieth to content and please, it honoreth and commends; It
busieth it self much and takes much pains to do service, it accomodateth it
self to the wills and humors of men: What more? It takes upon it even the
highest and most proper point of amity, which is to chide, and freely to
reprehend. To be brief, a flatterer will seem to exceed in love him that he
flattereth, whereas contrariwise, there is nothing more opposite unto love, not
detraction, not injury, not professed enmity: It is the plague and poison of
true amity; they are altogether incompatible, non potes me simul amico and
adulatore vti. Better are the sharp admonitions of a friend, than the kisses of
a flatterer: Melior a vulnera diligentis, quam oscula blandientis.

Wherefore not to mistake it, let us by the true picture thereof, 4 The
description and antithesis of flattery and amity.
find out the means to know it, and to discern it from true amity. 1.
Flattery respects for the most part it own particular benefit, and thereby
it is known; but true friendship seeks not the good of it self. 2. The
flatterer is changeable and diverse in his judgments, like wax, or a
looking-glass that receives all forms: He is a Camelion, a Polypus: feign to
praise or dispraise, and he will do the like, accommodating himself to the
mind of him he flattereth. A friend is firm and constant. 3. He carries
himself too violently and ambitiouslie in all that he does, in the view and
knowledge of him he flattereth, ever praising and offering his service, non
imitatur amicitiam, sed praeterit. He has no moderation in his outward
actions, and contrariwise inwardly he has no affection, which are conditions
quite contrary to a true friend. 4. He yields and always gives the
victory to him he flattereth, always applauding him, having no other end than
to please, in such sort that he commends all and more than all, yea sometimes
to his own cost, blaming and humbling himself like a wrestler, that stoopeth
the better to overthrow his companion. A friend goes roundly to work, cares
not whether he have the first or the second place, and respects not so much
how he may please, as how he may profit, whether it be by fair means, or by
foul, as a good Physician uses to do to cure his patient. 5. A flatterer
sometimes usurps the liberty of a friend to reprehend; but it is with the
left hand and untowardly. For he stays himself at small and light matters
that are not worthy reprehension, faining want of knowledge of any greater; but
yet he will be rude and rough enough in the censuring of the kindred and
servants of him he flattereth, as failing much in that duty they should do unto
him. Or he faineth to have understood some light accusations against him, and
that he could not be quiet until he knew the truth thereof, and if it fall
out that he that is flattered deny them, or excuse himself, he takes
occasion to commend him the more. I was much astonished at it (says he) and I
could not believe it, for I see the contrary. For how should I think that you
will take from another man, when you give all that is your own, and take more
care to give than to take? Or at leastwise he will make his reprehension to
serve his turn, that he may flatter the better, telling him that he takes not
care enough of himself, he is not sparing enough of his person and presence so
necessary to the commonweal, as once a Senator did to Tiberius in a full
Senate, but with an ill sent and a bad success. 6. Finally, to conclude in a
word, a friend always respects, procures, and attempteth that which is
reason, and honesty, and duty; the flatterer that which belongs to passion and
pleasure, and that which is already a malady in the mind of him that is
flattered. And therefore he is a proper instrument for all things that belong
to pleasure and licentious liberty, and not for that which is honest or
painful and dangerous. He is like an ape, who being unfit for any other
service, as other beasts are, serves for a play-game and to make sport.

A near neighbor and alliance to flattery is lying, a base vice; and
therefore said an ancient Philosopher, That it was 5 Of lying, the fowlenesse
and hurt thereof.
the part of slaves to lie, of freemen to speak the truth. For what greater
wickedness is there, than for a man to belie his own knowledge? The first
step to the corruption of good manners is the banishment of truth, as
contrarily, says Pindarus, To be true is the beginning of virtue. It is
likewise pernicious to humane society. We are not men, neither can we knit and
join together in humane society, as has been said, if this be wanting.
Doubtless silence is more sociable, than untrue speech. If a lie had but one
visage as truth has, there were some remedy for it; for we would take the
contrary to that which a lier speaks to be the certain truth. But the
contrary to truth has a hundred thousand figures, and an indefinit and
unlimited field. That which is good, that is to say, virtue and verity is
finite and certain, because there is but one way to the mark: That which is
evil, that is to say, vice and error, and lying is infinite and uncertain,
because there are a thousand ways to miss the mark. Doubtless if men knew
the horror of lying, they would pursue it with sword and fire. And therefore
such as have the charge of youth are with all instance and diligence to hinder
it, and to withstand the first birth and progress of this vice, as likewise of
opinatiue obstinacy, and that in time, for they never leave growing.

There is likewise a covered and disguised lie, which is hypocrisy and
dissimulation (a notable quality of Courtiers, and 6 Of hypocrisy
in as great credit amongst them as virtue) the vice of licentious and base
minds; for a man to disguise and hide himself under a mask, as not daring to
show himself to be that which he is, it is a cowardly and servile humor.

Now he that makes profession of this goodly mystery, lives in great pain;
for it is a great unquietness for a man to 7 The difficulty thereof.
endeavor to seem other than that he is, and to have an eye unto himself,
for fear lest he should be discovered. It is a torment for a man to hide his
own nature, to be discovered, a confusion. There is no such pleasure as to
live according to his nature, and it is better to be less esteemed and to
live openly, than to take so much pains to counterfeit and live under a
canopie; so excellent and so noble a thing is freedom.

But the mystery of these kind of men is but poor; for dissimulation 8 The
discommodity.
continues not long undiscovered, according to that saying, Things fained and
violent dure not long, and the reward of such people is, that no man will trust
them, nor give them credit when they speak the truth, for whatsoever comes
from them is held for apocryphal and mockery.

Now here is need of indifferency and wisdom. For if 9 The counsel hereupon.
nature be deformed, vicious and offensive to another, it must be constrained,
and to speak better, corrected. There is a difference between living freely
and carelessly. Again, a man must not always speak all he knows, that is a
folly, but that which he speaks, let it be that which he thinks.

There are two sorts of people in whom dissimulation is excusable, 10
Dissimulation befitting women.
yea sometimes requisite, but yet for diverse reasons, that is to say, in the
prince for the public benefit, and the good and peace of himself or the
state, as before has been said; and in women for the conueniency thereof,
because an over free and bold liberty becomes them not, but rather inclines to
impudency. Those small disguisements, fained cariages, hypocrisies, which well
befit their shamefastness and modesty, deceive none but fools, beseem them
well and defend their honors. But yet it is a thing which they are not to take
great pains to learn, because hypocrisy is natural in them. They are wholly
made for it, and they all make use of it, and too much, their visage, their
vestments, their words, countenance, laughter, weeping; and they practice it
not only toward their husbands living, but after their death too. They feign
great sorrow, and many times inwardly laugh. Iuctantius moerent quae minus
dolent.

CHAP. XI.
Of Benefits, obligation and thankfulness.
THe science and matter of benefits or good turns, and the thankful
acknowledgement of the obligation, active and passive is great, of great use,
and very subtle. It is that wherein we fail most. We neither know how to do
good, nor to be thankful for it: It should seem that the grace as well of the
merit, as of the acknowledgement is decayed, and revenge and ingratitude is
wholly in request, so much more ready and ardent are we thereunto. Gratia oneri
est, vltio in quaestu Tacit. Sen.
habetur: altius iniuriae quam merita descendunt. First then we will speak of
merit and good deeds, where we will comprehend humanity, liberality, alms
deeds, and their contraries, inhumanity, cruelty: and afterward of
obligation, acknowledgement, and forgetfulness, or ingratitude and revenge.

God, nature and reason, do inuit us to do good, and to deserve well of
another; God by his example, and his nature, 1 An exhortation to good works by
diverse reasons.
which is wholly good, neither do we know any better means how to imitate God,
nulla re propius ad Dei naturam accedimus, quam beneficentia. Deus est mortalem
succurrere mortali; nature, witness this one thing, that every one delights
to see him, to whom he has done good: it best agrees with nature, nihil tam
secundum naturam, quam iuuare consortem naturae. It is the work of an honest
and generous man to do good, and to deserve well of another, yea to seek
occasions thereunto, liberalis etiam dandi causas quaerit. And it is said that
good blood cannot lie, nor fail at a need. It is greatness Ambros.
to give, baseness to take, Beatius est dare quam accipere. He that gives
honors himself, makes himself master over the receiver, he that takes
selles himself. He, says one, that first invented benefits or good turns,
made stocks and manacles to tie and captiuate another man. And therefore
diverse have refused to take, lest they should wound their liberty, especially
from those whom they would not love, and be beholding unto, according to the
counsel of the wise, which advises a man not to receive any thing, from a
wicked man, lest he be thereby bound unto him. Caesar was wont to say, that
there came no sound more pleasing unto his ears, than prayers and petitions:
It is the mot of greatness, Ask me, inuocame in die tribulationis (eruam te)
and honorificabis me. It is likewise the most noble, and honorable use of our
means or substance, which so long as we hold and possess them privately, they
carry with them base and abject names, housen, lands, money, but being brought
into light, and employed to the good and comfort of another, they are enobled,
with new and glorious titles, benefits, liberalities, magnificences. It is the
best, and most commodious imploiment that may be: ars quaestuosissima, optima
negotiatio, whereby the principal is assured, and the profit is very great.
And to say the truth, a man has nothing that is truly his own, but that which
he gives, for that which he retains, and keeps to himself, benefits neither
himself, nor another; and if he employ them otherwise, they consume and
diminish, pass through many dangerous accidents, and at last death it self.
But that which is given, it can never perish, never wax old. And therefore
Marc. Antony being beaten down by fortune, and nothing remaining to him, but
his power to die, cried out that he had nothing, but that which he had given,
hoc habeo quodcunque dedi. And therefore this sweet, debonaire and ready will
to do good unto all, is a right excellent and honorable thing in all respects;
as contrarily, there is not a more base and detestable vice, more against
nature, than cruelty, for which cause it is called inhumanity, which
proceeds from a contrary cause, to that of bounty and benefits, that is to
say, dastardly cowardlinesse, as has been said.

There is a twofold manner of doing good unto another, by profiting and by
pleasing him: for the first a man is admired 2 The distinction of benefits.
and esteemed; for the second beloved. The first is far the better, it
regards the necessity and want of a man, it is to play the part of a father
and true friend. Again, there are two sorts of bounties or good turns, the
one are duties, that proceed out of a natural or lawful obligation; the other
are merits and free, which proceed out of pure affection. These seem the more
noble; nevertheless if the other be done with attention and affection, though
they be duties, yet they are excellent.

The benefit and the merit is not properly that, that is given, is seen, is
touched; this is but the gross matter, the mark, 3 Inward and outward benefits.
the show thereof, but it is the good will. That which is outward is many times
but small, that which is inward very great; for this has commonly with it a
kind of hunger and affection, and is always seeking occasions to do good; It
gives so much as it can, and what is needful, forgetting it own benefit, in
beneficio hoc suspiciendum quod alteri dedit, ablaturus sibi, vtilitatis suae
oblitus. Contrarily where the gift is great, the grace may be small; for it is
commonly given with an ill will, with an expectation of much entreaty, and
leisure enough to consider whether he may give it or no. This is to make too
great preparation thereunto, and too great use thereof, to give it rather to
himself, and his ambition, than to the good and necessity of the receiver.
Again that which is outward may incontinently vanish, that which is inward
remain firm: The liberty, health, honor, which is to be given, may all at an
instant, by some accident or other, be taken away, the benefit nevertheless
remaining entire.

The aduisements whereby a man should direct himself, in his bounties and
benefits he bestows, according to the 4 Rules of benefits. 1. To whom.
rules and instruction of the wise, are these: First, to whom must he give? to
all? It seems that to do good unto the wicked and unworthy, is at one
instant to commit many faults, for it brings an ill name upon the giver,
entertaineth and kindles malice, gives that which belongs to virtue and merit,
to vice also. Doubtless free and favorable graces are not due, but to the good
and worthy; but in a time of necessity, and in a generality all in common.
In these two cases the wicked and ungrateful have a part, if they be in
necessity, or if they be in such sort mingled with the good, that the one can
hardly receive without the other. For it is better to do good to those that
are unworthy, for their sakes that are good, than to deprive the good for
their sakes that are evil. So does God good unto all, he suffers the sun
to shine, and the rain to fall indifferently upon all: But yet his special
gifts he gives not but to those whom he has chosen for his; non est bonum
sumere panem filiorum and proijcere canibus: multum refert vtrum aliquem non
excludas an eligas. At a need therefore, in a time of affliction and necessity
we must do good unto all, hominibus prodesse natura iubet, vbicunque homini
beneficio locus. Nature, and humanity teach us, to regard and to offer our
selves unto them, that stretch out their arms unto us, and not unto those that
turn their backs toward us; rather unto those to whom we may do good, than
unto those that are able to do good unto us. It is the part of a generous mind
to take part with the weaker side, to succor the afflicted, and to help to
abate the pride and violence of the conqueror, as Chelonis once did, the
daughter and wife of a king, whose father and husband being at variance and
wars, one against the other, whenever her husband had got the better
against her father, like a good daughter she followed and served her father in all things, in his afflictions; but the chance turning, and her father getting
the mastrie, like a good wife, she turned to her husband, and accompanied him
in his hard est fortunes.

Secondly, he must do good willingly and cheerefullie, non ex tristitia aut
necessitate; hilarem datorem diligit deus: Bis est 5 2. Willingly.
gratum, quod opus est, si vltro offeras, not suffering himself to be
ouer-intreated, and importuned; otherwise it will never be pleasing; Nemo
libenter debet quod non accepit sed expressit: That which is yielded by force
of entreaty and prayers is dearly sold; non tulit gratis qui accepit rogans,
imo nihil charius emitur, quam quod precibus. He that prays and entreats,
humbles himself, confesses himself an inferior, covers his face with
shame, honoreth him whom he entreats: whereupon Caesar was wont to say, after
he had overcome Pompey, That he lent not his ears more willingly, nor took so
much content in any thing, as to be entreated; whereby he gave a kind of hope
unto all, even his enemies, that they should obtain whatsoever they should
request. Graces are silken vestments, transparent, free, and not constrained.

Thirdly, speedily and readily. This seems to depend upon the former, for
benefits are esteemed according to the 6 3. Speedily.
will wherewith they are bestowed; Now he that stays long before he succor
and give, seems to have been a long time unwilling to do it, qui tarde
fecit, diu noluit. As contrarily, a readiness herein doubleth the benefit:
bis dat, qui celeriter. That indifferency and careless regard, whether it be
done, or not done, that is used herein, is not approved by any, but impudent
persons. Diligence must be used in all points. Herein then there is a
fiue-fold manner of proceeding, whereof three are reproved; to refuse to do a
good turn, and that slowly too, is a double injury: to refuse speedily, and
to give slowly, are almost one; And some there are that are less offended with
a quick denial; Minus decipitur cui negatur celeriter. The best way then is,
to give speedily; but that which is most excellent, is, to anticipate the
demand, to prevent the necessity and the desire.

Fourthly, without hope of restitution, this is that wherein the force and
virtue of a benefit does principally consist. If it 7 4. Without hope of
restitution.
be a virtue, it is not mercenarie: tunc est virtus dare beneficia non
reditura. A benefit is less richly bestowed, where there is a retrogradation
and reflection; but when there is no place for requital, yea it is not known
from whence the good turn comes, there it is in it true luster and glory.
If a man look after the like, he will give slowly and to few. Now it is far
better to renounce all such hopes of like returns, than to cease to merit, and
to do good; for whilst a man seeks after that strange and accidental
payment, he depriueth himself of the true and natural, which is that inward
joy and comfort he receives in doing good. Again, he must not be twice
entreated for one thing. To do wrong, is in it self a base and abominable
thing, and there needs no other thing to dissuade a man from it: so to deserve
well of another, is an excellent and honorable thing, and there needs no other
thing to inflame a man to it. And in a word, it is not to do good to look
after a like return, it is to make merchandise and profit thereof: Non est
beneficium quod in quaestum mittitur. A man should not confound and mingle
together actions so diverse: demus beneficia, non foeneremus. It is pity but
such men should be deceived that hope after such requitals: dignus est decipi
qui de recipiendo cogitaret, cum daret. She is no honest woman who either for
fear, or the better to inflame, or to draw a man on, refuses: quae quia non
licuit non dedit, ipsa dedit. So he deserves nothing that does good, to
receive good again. Graces are pure virgins, without hope of return, says
Hesiodus.

Fifthly, to do good in a proportion answerable to the desire 8 5. According to
the desire of the receiver.
of a man, and as it may be acceptable to him that receives it, to the end he
may know and find, that it is truly intended and done unto him. Concerning
which point, you are to know, that there are two sorts of benefits, the one are
honorable to the person that receives, and therefore they should be done
publicly: The other are commodious, such as succor the want, weakness,
shame, or other necessity of the receiver. These are to be done secretly, yea
if need be, that he only may take notice that receives them; and if it be
fit, the receiver should not know from whence they come (because it may be he
is bashful, and the knowledge thereof may discourage him from taking, though
his needs be great) it is good and expedient to conceal it from him, and to
suffer the benefit to drop into his hand, as it were unawares. It is enough the
benefactor know it, and his own conscience serve him for a witness, which is
better than if he had a thousand lookers on.

Sixthly, without the hurt and offense of another, and the 9 6. Without the
offense of another.
prejudice of justice: to do good not doing evil: To give to one at the charge
of another, is to sacrifice the son in the presence of the father, says a
wise man.

Seventhly, wisely. A man may be sometimes hindered from answering demands and
petitions, from refusing or 10 7 Wisely.
yielding unto them. This difficulty proceeds from the evil nature of man,
especially of the petitioner, who vexes himself too much in the enduring of
a repulse, be it never so just and reasonable. And this is the reason why some
promise and agree to all (a testimony of weakness) yea, when they have
neither power, nor will to perform, and referring the avoiding of this
difficulty to the very point of the execution, they hope that many things may
happen that may hinder and trouble the performance of their promise, and so
think to quit themselves of their obligation; or if it fall out there be
question made thereof, they find excuses and auoidances, and so for that time
content the petitioner. But none of all this is to be allowed, for a man ought
not to promise or agree to any thing, but to that which he can, will, and ought
to perform. And finding himself between these two straits and dangers,
either of a bad promise, because it is either unjust, or ill befitting, or an
absolute denial, which may stir up some sedition, or misconceit, the
counsel is, that he salve this matter either by delaying the answer, or in
such sort composing the promise in such general and doubtful terms, that
they bind not a man precisely to the performance thereof. But here is craft
and subtlety, far different from true freedom, but this iniquity of the
petitioner is the cause thereof, and he deserves it.

Eighthly, it must proceed from a manly heart, and hearty affection, homo sum,
humani a me nihil alienum puto, especially 11 8. From a hearty affection.
toward those that are afflicted and in want, and this is that which we call
mercy. They that have not this affection, (...) and immanes, are inhumane, and
carry the marks of dishonest men. But yet this must proceed from a strong,
constant, and generous, not a soft, effeminate, and troubled mind: for that is
a vicious passion, and which may fall into a wicked mind, whereof in this place
we have already spoken: for there is a good and an evil mercy. A man must
succor the afflicted, not afflicting himself, and applying the evil unto
himself, derract nothing from equity, and honor; for God says, that we must
not have pity of the poor in judgment: and so God and his Saints are said to
be merciful and pitiful.

Ninthly, it must be without boasting, and show, or public proclamation
thereof, for this is a kind of reproach: These 12 9. Without boasting.
kind of vaunts do not only take away the grace, but the credit, and make a
benefit odious, hoc est in odium beneficia perducere. And in this sense it is
said, that a benefactor must forget his good deeds.

He must continue them, and by new benefits confirm, and renew the old, (this
inuiteth the whole world to love 13 10. Continue them without repentance.
him, and to seek his love) and never repent himself of the old, howsoever it
may seem, that he has cast his seed upon a barraine and unthankful ground,
beneficij tui etiam infelicitas placeat, nusquam haec vox, vellem non fecisse.
An unthankful man wrongs none but himself, and a good turn is not lost by
his ingratitude; It is a holy consecrated thing that cannot be violated, nor
extinguished by the vice of another. And it is no reason because another is
wicked, that therefore a man should cease to be good, or discontinue his
office: and that which is more, the work of a noble and generous heart is to
continue to do well, to break and to vanquish the malice and ingratitude of
another man, and to mend his manners, optimi viri and ingentis animi est tamdiu
far ingratum, donec feceris gratum: vincit malos pertinax bonitas.

Lastly, not to trouble, or importune the receiver in the fruition thereof, as
they do who having given an honor, or an 14 11. Not to revoke or trouble a good
turn.
office to a man, will afterward execute it themselves; or at leastwise
procure them one good, that they may reap another themselves. He that is the
receiver, ought not to endure this, and therefore is not unthankful; and the
benefactor defaceth the benefit, and cancelleth the obligation. One of our
Popes denying a Cardinal an unjust boon which he demanded, all eaging unto
him that he was the cause why he was made Pope, answered him, Why then give
me leave to be Pope, and take not that from me that thou have given me.

After these rules and aduisements concerning good deeds, we must know that
there are some benefits, more acceptable 15 Distinctions of benefits.
and welcome than others, and which are more or less binding. They are best
welcome, that proceed from a friendly hand, from those whom a man is inclined
to love without this occasion; and contrarily it is a grief to be obliged unto
him, whom a man likes not, and to whom he would not willingly be indebted. Such
benefits also are welcome, that come from the hand of him, that is any way
bound to the receiver: for here is a kind of justice and they bind less.
Those good deeds that are done in necessities, and great extremities, carry
with them a greater force; they make a man forget all injuries and offenses
past, if there were any, and bind more strongly; as contrarily, the denial
in such a case, is very injurious, and makes a man forget all benefits past.
Such benefits likewise, as may be requited with the like, are more gladly
received, than their contraries, which engender a kind of hate, for he that
finds himself wholly bound, without any power or possibility of repaiment,
as often as he sees his benefactour, he thinks he sees a testimony of his
inabilitie or ingratitude, and it is irksome to his heart. There are some
benefits, the more honest and gracious they are, the more burdensome are they
to the receiver, if he be a man of credit, as they that tie the conscience and
the will, for they lock faster, keep a man in his right memory, and some
fear of forgetfulness, and failing his promise. A man is a safer prisoner
under his word, than under lock and keie. It is better to be tied by civil
and public bands, than by the law of honesty, and conscience: two notaries
are better than one. I trust your word and your faith, and conscience: here is
more honor done to the receiver; but yet constraint fastneth, solliciteth, and
presses much more; and here is more safety to the lender, and a man carries
himself more carelessly, because he doubts not but that the law, and those
outward ties will awaken him, when the time shall serve. Where there is
constraint, the will is more loose, where there is less constraint, the will
has less liberty: quod me ius coget vix a voluntate impetrem.

From a benefit proceeds an obligation, and from it a benefit; 16 Obligation
the mother and daughter of a benefit or good turn.
and so it is both the child and the father, the effect, and the cause, and
there is a twofold obligation, active and passive. Parents, princes and
superiors, by the duty of their charge, are bound to do good unto those that
are committed and commended unto them, either by law or by nature; and
generally all men that have means are bound to relieve those that are in want,
or any affliction whatsoever, by the command of nature. Behold here the first
obligation; afterward from benefits or good turns, whether they be due, and
sprining from this first obligation, or free and pure merits, arises the
second obligation, and discharge, whereby the receivers are bound to an
acknowledgement and thankful requital. All this is signified by Hesiodus, who
has made the Graces three in number, holding each other by the hands.

The first obligation is discharged by the good offices of every one that is
in any charge, which shall presently be discoursed 17 The first obligation
and mother.
of in the second part, which concerns particular duties: but yet this
obligation is strengthened, and weakened, and lesned accidentally by the
conditions and actions of those that are the receivers. For their offenses,
ingratitudes, and unworthiness do in a manner discharge those, that are bound
to have care of them; and a man may almost say as much of their natural
defects too. A man may justly with less affection love that child, that
kinsman, that subject, that is not only wicked and unworthy, but foul,
misshapen, crooked, unfortunate, ill borne; God himself has abated him much,
from their natural price and estimation: but yet a man must in this abatement
of affection, keep a justice, and a moderation, for this concerns not the
helps and succors of necessity, and those offices that are due by public
reason, but only that attention, and affection which is in the inward
obligation.

The second obligation, which arises from benefits, is that 18 The second
obligation which is thankfulness.
which we are to handle, and concerning which, we must at this time set down
some rules: 1. the law of dutiful acknowledgement and thankfulness is
natural, witness beasts themselves, not only private and domestical, but
cruel and savage, among whom there are many excellent examples of this
acknowledgement, as of the Lion toward the Roman slave. Officia etiam ferae
sentiunt. Secondly it is a certain act of virtue, and a testimony of a good
mind, and therefore it is more to be esteemed than bounty or benefit, which
many times proceeds from abundance, from power, love of a man's proper interest,
and very seldom from pure virtue, whereas thankfulness springs always from
a good heart; and therefore howsoever the benefit may be more to be desired,
yet kind acknowledgement is far more commendable. Thirdly it is an easy
thing, yea a pleasant, and that is in the power of every man. There is nothing
more easy, than to do according to nature, nothing more pleasing, than to be
free from bands, and to be at liberty.

By that which has been spoken, it is easy to see how base and vilanous a
vice forgetfulness and ingratitude is, 19 Of ingratitude.
how unpleasing and odious unto all men, Dixeris maledicta cuncta, cum ingratum
hominem dixeris; It is against nature, and therefore Plato speaking of his
disciple Aristotle, calls him an ungrateful mule. It is likewise without all
excuse, and cannot come but from a wicked nature, grave vitium, intolerabile
quod dissociat homines. Revenge which follows an injury, Senec.
as ingratitude a good turn, is much more strong and pressing (for an injury
inforceth more than a benefit, altius iniuriae quam merita descendunt) it is a
very violent passion, but yet nothing so base, so deformed a vice as
ingratitude. It is like those evils that a man has, that are not dangerous,
but yet are more grievous and painful than they that are mortal. In revenge
there is some show of justice, and a man hides not himself, to work his will
therein; but in ingratitude there is nothing but base dishonesty and shame.

Thankfulness or acknowledgement that it may be such 20 Rules of thankfulness.
as it should be, must have these conditions. First he must graciously
receive a benefit, with an amiable and cheerful visage, and speech, qui grate
beneficium accepit, primam eius pensionem soluit. Secondly, he must never
forget it, Ingratissimus Senec.
omnium qui oblitus, nusquam enim gratus fieri potest, cut totum beneficium
elapsum est. The third office is to publish it; ingenui Idem.
pudoris est fateri per quos profecerimus, and haec quasi merces authoris. As a
man has found the heart, and the hand of another, Plin.
open to do good, so must he have his mouth open to preach and publish it, and
to the end the memory thereof may be the more firm, and solemn, he must name
the benefit, and that by the name of the benefactor. The fourth office is to
make restitution, wherein he must observe these four conditions: That it be
not too speedy, nor too curiously; for this carries an ill sent with it, and
it bewraies too great an unwillingness to be in debt, and too much haste to
be quit of that band. And it likewise gives an occasion to the friend or
benefactor, to think that his courtesy was not kindly accepted of; for to be
too careful, and desirous to repay, is to incur the suspicion of ingratitude.
It must therefore follow some time after, and it must not be too long neither,
lest the benefit grow too ancient, (for the Graces are painted young) and it
must be upon some apt and good occasion, which either offers it self, or is
taken, and that without noise and rumor. That it be with some usury, and
surpass the benefit, like fruitful ground, ingratus est, qui beneficium
reddit sine vsura, or Ingratus est, qui metu gratus est; eodem animo beneficium
debetur, quo datur: errat si quis beneficium libentius accipit, quam reddit.
Lastly,

The second part, which concerns the special duties of certain men, by
certain and special obligation. THE PREFACE.
BEing to speak of special and particular duties, differing according to the
diversity of persons and their states, whether they be unequal, as superiors
and inferiors, or equal, we will begin with married folks, who are mixed, and
hold with both equallitie and inequallitie. And so much the rather, because we
are first to speak of private and domestical justice and duties, before
public, because they are before them; as families and houses are before
commonweals, and therefore that private justice which is observed in a
family, is the image, and source, and model of a commonweal. Now these
private and domestical duties are three, that is to say, between the husband
and the wife, parents and children, masters and servants, and these are the
parts of a household or family, which takes the foundation from the husband
and the wife, who are the masters and authors thereof. And therefore first of
married folk.

CHAP. XII. The duty of married folk.
ACcording to those two diverse considerations that are in marriage, as has been
said, that is to say, equality and 1 Common duties.
inequality, there are likewise two sorts of duties and offices of married
folk, the one common to both, equally reciprocal of like obligation, though
according to the custom of the world, the pain, the reproach, the
inconvenience, be not equal: that is to say, an entire loyalty, fidelity,
community, and communication of all things, and a care and authority over
their family, and all the goods of their house. Hereof we have spoken more at
large in the first book.

The other are particular and different, according to that inequality that is
betwixt them, for those of the husband 2 Particular duties of the husband.
are: 1. To instruct his wife with mildness in all things that belong unto her
duty, her honor and good, and whereof she is capable. 2. To nourish her,
whether she brought dowry with her or no. 3. To cloth her. 4. To lie with
her. 5. To love and defend her: The two extremities are base and vicious, to
hold her under like a servant, to make her mistress by subiecting himself unto
her. And these are the principal duties. These follow after, to comfort her
being sick, to deliver her being captive, to bury her being dead, to nourish
her living, and to provide for his children he has had by her, by his will and
testament.

The duties of the wife, 1. are to give honor, reverence, and respect to her
husband, as to her master and lord; for so have 3 Of the wife.
the wisest women that ever were termed their husbands, and the hebrew word
Baal signifies them both, husband and lord. She that discharges hirselfe of
this duty honoreth her self more than her husband: and doing otherwise,
wrongs none but her self. 2. To give obedience in all things just and lawful;
applying and accommodating her self to the manners and humors of her husband;
like a true looking-glass, which faithfully represents the face, having no
other particular designement, love, thought, but as the dimensions and
accidents which have no other proper action or motion, and never move but with
the body, she applies her self in all things to her husband. 3. Service, as
to provide either by her self or some other his viands, to wash his feet. 4.
To keep the house; and therefore she is compared to the Tortuis, and is
painted having her feet naked, and especially in the absence of her husband.
For her husband being far from her, she must be as it were invisible, and
contrary to the Moon (which appears in her greatness when she is farthest
from the sun) not appear, but when she comes near her sun. 5. To be
silent, and not to speak but with her husband, or by her husband: and
forasmuch as a silent woman is a rare thing and hardly found, she is said to
be a precious gift of God. 6. To employ her time in the practice and study of
huswifrie, which Eccles. 26.
is the most commodious and honorable science and occupation of a woman, this
is her special mistress quality, and which a man of mean fortune should
especially seek in his marriage. It is the only dowry that serves either to
ruinate, or preserve families, but it is very rare. There are diverse that are
covetous, few that are good huswiues. We are to speak of them both, of
household husbandry presently by it self.

In the private acquaintance and use of marriage there must 4 An aduisement upon
the acquaintance of married folks.
be a moderation, that is, a religious and devout band, for that pleasure that
is therein, must be mingled with some severity; it must be a wise and
conscionable delight. A man must touch his wife discretlie and for honesty, as
it is said, and for fear, as Aristotle says, lest provoking her desires too
wantonlie, the pleasure thereof make her to exceed the bounds of reason, and
the care of health: for too hot and too frequent a pleasure alters the seed,
and hinders generation. On the other side, to the end she be not
ouer-languishing, barraine, and subject to other diseases, he must offer
himself unto her though seldom. Solon says thrice in a month; but there can
no certain law or rule be given hereof. Plutar. in Solone.


The doctrine of household husbandry does willingly follow, and is annexed
unto marriage.

CHAP. XIII. Household Husbandry.
1 Household husbandry is an excellent, just, and profitable occupation. It is
a happy thing says Plato, for a man to go through his private affairs
without injustice. There is nothing more beautiful than a household well and
peaceably governed.

2 It is a profession which is not difficult, for he that is capable of any
thing else, is not incapable of this; but yet it is careful, and painful,
and troublesome, by reason of the multitude of affairs, which though they be
small and of no great importance, yet forasmuch as they are common and
frequent, and never at an end, they do much annoy and weary a man. Domestical
thorns prick, because they are ordinary; but if they come from the principal
persons of the family, they gaul and exulcerate, and grow remediless.

3 It is a great happiness and a fit mean to live at ease, to have one whom a
man may trust, and upon whom he may repose himself; which that he may the
better do, he must choose one that is true and loyal, and afterward bind him
to do well by that trust and confidence he puts in him: habita fides ipsam
obligat fidem; multi fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli; and alijs ius
peccandi, suspicando dederunt:

4 The principal precepts and counsels that belong to frugalitie, or good
husbandry are these: 1. To buy and sell all things at the best times and
seasons, that is, when they are best and best cheap. 2. To take good heed lest
the goods in the house be spoiled or miscarrie, be either lost or carried
away; This does especially belong to the woman, to whom Aristotle gives this
authority and care. 3. To provide first and principally for these three,
necessity, cleanliness, order: and again, if there be means, some advise to
provide for these three too; (but the wiser sort wish no great pains to be
taken therein: non ampliter sed munditer conuinium: plus salis quam sumptus):
abundance, pomp, and preparation, exquisite and rich fashion. The contrary is
many times practiced in good housen, where you shall have beds garnished with
silk, embrodered with gold, and but one simple couerlid in winter, which were
a commodity far more necessary. And so of the rest.

4. To rule and moderate his charge, which is done by taking away
superfluities, yet providing for necessity, and that which is fit and
beseeming. A ducket in a man's purse will do a man more honor and honesty,
than ten prodigally spent, says one. Again (but this requires industry
and good sufficiency) to make a great show with a little charge, and above
all, not to suffer the expense to grow above the receipt and the income.

5. To have a care and an eye over all; the vigilancie and presence of the
master, says the proverb, fatteth the horse and the land. And in any case the
master and mistrisse must take a care to conceal their ignorance and
insufficiency in the affairs of the house, and much more their carelessness,
making a show as if they attended and thought of nothing else. For if officers
and servants have an opinion that their masters look not unto them, they may
chance to make his hair grow through his hood.

CHAP. XIIII. The duty of Parents and children.
THe duty of parents and children is reciprocal and reciprocallie great
reason in Lacedemon and other good and politic states, there was a punishment
and a penalty laid upon the parents when the children were ill conditioned.
And Plato was wont to say, that he knew not in what a man should be more
careful and diligent than to make a good son. And Crates cried out in
choler, To what end do men take so much care in heaping up goods, and so
little care of those to whom they shall leave them? It is as much as if a man
should take care of his shoo and not of his foot. What should he do with
riches that is not wise and knows not how to use them? It is like a rich and
beautiful saddle upon a iades back. Parents then are doubly obliged to this
duty; both because they are their children, and because they are the tender
plants, and hope of the Commonweal: This is to till his own land together
with that of the weale-publicke.

Now this office or duty has four successiue parts, according to those four
goods or benefits that a child ought to receive 2 The division of the office of
parents.
successively from his parents, life, nourishment, instruction, communication.
The first regards the time, when the infant is in the womb, until his
coming into the world inclusiuelie: the second the time of his infancy in his
cradle, until he know how to go and to speak: the third all his youth; this
part must be handled more at large, and more seriously: the fourth concerns
their affection, communication and carriage toward their children now come to
man's estate, touching their goods, thoughts, designments.

The first, which regards the generation, and fruit in the womb is not
accounted of and observed with such diligence 3 The first part, the office of
parents.
as it ought, although it have as much part in the good or evil of a child (as
well of their bodies as their souls) as their education and instruction after
they are borne and come to some growth. This is that that gives the
subsistence, the temper and temperature, the nature; the other is artificial
and acquired: and if there be a fault committed in this first part, the second
and third can hardly repair it, no more than a fault in the first concoction
of the stomach, cannot be mended in the second nor third. We men go
unadvisedly and headlong to this copulation, only provoked thereunto by
pleasure, and a desire to disburthen our selves of that which tickleth and
presses us thereunto: if a conception happen thereby, it is by chance, for no
man goes to it warily, and with such deliberation and disposition of body as
he ought, and nature does require. Since then men are made at adventure, and
by chance, it is no marvel if they seldom fall out to be beautiful, good,
sound, wise and well composed. Behold then briefly, according to Philosophy the
particular aduisements touching this first point, that is to say, the begetting
of male children, sound, wise, and judicious: for that which serves for the
one of these qualities, serves for the other. 1. A man must not couple himself
with a woman that is of a vile, base and dissolute condition, or of a naughty
and vicious composition of body. 2. He must abstain from this action and
copulation seven or eight days. 3. During which time he is to nourish
himself with wholesome victuals, more hot and dry than otherwise, and such as
may concoct well in the stomach. 4. He must use a more than moderate exercise.
All this tends to this end and purpose, that the seed may be well concocted
and seasoned, hot and dry, fit and proper for a masculine, sound and wise
temperature. Vagabounds, idle and lazy people, great drinkers, who have
commonly an ill concoction, ever beget effeminate, idle and dissolute children
(as Hippocrates recounteth of the Scythians.) Again a man must apply himself
to this encounter after one manner, a long time after his repast, that is to
say, his belly being empty, and he fasting (for a full panch performs nothing
good either for the mind or for the body) and therefore Diogenes reproched a
licentious young man, for that his father had begotten him being drunk. And the
law of the Carthaginians is commended by Plato, which enioined a man to
abstain from L. 2. de leg.
wine that day that he lay with his wife. 6. And not near the monthly terms
of a woman, but six or seven days before, or as much after them. 7. And upon
the point of conception and retention of the seed, the woman turning and
gathering hirselfe together upon the right side, let her so rest for a time. 8.
This direction touching the viands and exercise must be continued during the
time of her burden.

To come to the second point of this office after the birth of must be washed
in warm water, somewhat brinish, to make The second part of the office of
parents. Ezech. 16.
the members supple and firm, to cleanse and dry the flesh and the brain, to
strengthen the sinews, a very good custom in the Eastern parts and among the
Jews. 2. The nurse if she be to be chosen, let her be young, of a temperature
or complexion the least cold and moist that may be, brought up in labor, hard
lodging, slender diet, hardened against cold and heat. I say if she be to be
chosen, because according to reason, and the opinion of the wisest, it should
be the mother; and therefore they cry out against her, when she refuses this
charge, being invited and as it were bound thereunto by nature, who to that end
has given her milk and dugs, by the example of beasts; and that love and
jealousy that she ought to have of her little ones, who receive a very great
hurt by the change of their aliment, now accustomed in a stranger, and perhaps
a bad one too, of a constitution quite contrary to the former, whereby they
are not to be accounted mothers but by halfes. Quod est hoc contra naturam
imperfectum, ac dimidiatum matris genus peperisse, and staim ab se abiecisse,
aluisse in vtero Aul. Gell. L. 12. c. 1.
sanguine suo nescio quid quod non videret: non alere autem nunc suo lacte,
quod videat iam viuentem, iam hominem, iam matris officia implorantem. 3. The
nourishment besides the dugge should be goats milk, or rather cream, the
most subtle and aerie part of the milk, sod with honey and a little salt.
These are things very fit for the body and the mind, by the advice of all the
wise and great Physicians, Greeks, and Hebrews. Galen. multis locis. Homer. 10.
Iliad. I say 7.
Butyrum and mel comedet, vt sciat reprobare malum, and eligere bonum. The
quality of milk or cream is very temperate, and full of good nourishment;
the dryness of the honey and salt consumes the too great humiditie of the
brain, and disposes it unto wisdom. 4. The infant must by little and little
be accustomed and hardened to the air, to heat and cold: and we are not to be
fearful thereof; for in the Northern parts of the world they wash their
children so soon as they come out of the womb of their mothers in cold water,
and are never the worse.

The two first parts of the office of parents we have soon dispatched; whereby
it appears, that they are not true fathers matters that is fit; for they are
the cause and occasion, either by carelessness or otherwise, of the death and
untimely birth of their children; and when they are borne they care not for
them, but expose them to their own fortunes, for which cause they are deprived
by law of that fatherly power over them that is due unto them; and the
children to the shame of their parents are made slaves by those that have
nourished them and brought them up, who are far from taking care to preserve
them from fire and water, and all other crosses and afflictions that may light
upon them.

The third part which concerns the instruction of children 6 The third part
of the office of parents.
we are to handle more seriously. So soon as this infant is able to go and
to speak, and shall begin to employ his mind and his body, and that the
faculties thereof shall be awakened and show themselves, the memory,
imagination, reason, which begin at the fourth or fifth year, there must be An
instruction very important.
a great care and diligence used in the well forming thereof: for this first
tincture and liquor wherewith the mind must be seasoned, has a very great
power. It cannot be expressed how much this first impression and formation of
youth prevails, even to the conquering of nature it self. Nourture, says
one, excels nature. Lycurgus made it plain to all the world, by two little
dogs of one litter, but diversely brought up, to whom presenting before them in
an open place a pot of pottage and a hare, that which was brought up tenderly
in the house fell to the pottage; the other that had been ever trained up in
hunting, forsook the pottage andranne after the hare. The force of this
instruction proceeds from this, that it enters easily, and departs with
difficulty: for being the first that enters, it takes such place and wins
such Quint, Senec.
credit as a man will, there being no other precedent matter to contest with
it, or to make head against it. This mind then wholly new and neat, soft and
tender, does easily receive that impression that a man will give unto it, and
afterward does not easily lose it.

Now this is not a thing of small importance, but a man may rather say it is
the most difficult and important that may be. fault that is in our policies,
noted by Aristotle and Plutarch) we see that the conduct and discipline of
youth is wholly left unto the charge and mercy of their parents what kind of
men soever they be, many times careless, foolish, wicked, and the public
state regards it not, cares not for it, whereby all goes to ruin. Almost the
only states that have given to the laws the discipline of children, were that
of Lacedemon and Creet: But the most excellent discipline of the world for
youth, was the Spartaine; and therefore Agesilaus persuaded Xenophon to send
his children thither, for there, says he, they may learn the most excellent
science of the world, and that is to command and to obey well, and there are
formed good Lawyers, Emperors at arms, Magistrates, Citizens. This youth and
their instruction they esteemed above all things; and therefore Antipater
demanding of them fifty children for hostages, they answered him, that they
had rather give him twice as many men at their ripest years.

Now before we enter into this matter, I will here give an

To make an entrance into this matter, we may refer it unto three points, the
forming of the spirit, the ordering of 9 The division of this matter.
the body, the ruling of the manners. But before we give any particular
counsel touching these three, there are general aduisements that belong to
the manner of proceeding in this business, that show us how to carry our selves
worthily and happily therein, which must be first known as a preamble to the
rest.

The first is carefully to guard his soul, and to keep it neat and free from
the contagion and corruption of the world, The first general advice touching
instruction. To guard the ears.
that it receive not any blot nor wicked attainture. And the better to do this,
he must diligently keep the gates, which are the ears especially, and then
the eyes, that is to say, give order, that not any, no not his own father,
come near unto him to buz into his ears any thing that is evil. There needs
no more but a word, the least discourse that may be, to make an evil almost
past reparation. Guard thine ears above all, and then thy eyes. And for this
cause Plato was of opinion, that it was not fit that servants and base persons
should entertain children with discourse, because their talk can be no better
than fables, vain speeches and fooleries, if not worse. This were to train up
and to feed those tender years with follies and fooleries.

The second advice concerns not only the persons that must have charge of
this child, but the discourse and conference 11 The second general advice
touching the choice of instructors. Conference. Books.
wherewith he must be entertained, and the books he must read. Touching the
persons, they must be honest men, well borne, of a sweet and pleasing
conversation, having their head well framed, fuller of wisdom than of science;
and that they agree in opinion together, lest that by contrary counsels, or a
different way in proceeding, the one by rigor, the other by flattery, they
hinder not one another, and trouble their charge and designments. Their books
and communication must not be of small, base, sottish, frivolous matters, but
great and serious, noble and generous; such as may rule and enrich the
understanding, opinions, manners; as they that instruct a man in the knowledge
of our humane condition, the motions and mysteries of our minds, to the end he
may know himself and others; such, I say, as may teach him what to fear, to
love, to desire; what passion is, what virtue, how he may judge betwixt
ambition and avarice, servitude and subjection, liberty and licentiousnes. He
is deceived that thinks that there is a greater proportion of spirit required
to the understanding of those excellent examples of Valerius Maximus, and all
the Greek and Roman histories (which is the most beautiful science and
knowledge of the world) than to understand Amadis of Gaul, and other like
vain and frivolous discourses. That child that can know how many hens his
mother has, and who are his uncles and his cosens, will as easily carry away
how many kings there have been, and how many Caesar's in Rome. A man must not
distrust the capacity and sufficiency of his mind, but know how to conduct and
manage it.

The third is to carry himself toward him, and to proceed 12 The third
general advice. Instruction mild and free.
not after an austere, rude and severe manner, but sweetly, mildly, and
cheerefullie. And therefore we do here altogether condemn that custom which
is common in all places, to beat and to box, and with strange words and
outcries to hazen children, and to keep them in fear and subjection, as the
manner is in free-schooles and colle^dges. For it is a custom too unjust, and
as foul a fault, as when a Judge or Physician shall be moved to choler against
an offender and patient: prejudicial and quite contrary to that purpose that
a man has, which is to stir up a desire in them, and to bring them in love
with virtue, wisdom, science, honesty. Now this imperious and rude carriage
breeds in children a hatred, horror and detestation of that they should love;
it provoke them, makes them headstrong, abateth and takes away their
courage, in such sort that their minds become servile, base and slavish, like
their usage; Parents ne prouocetis ad iracundiam silios vestros ne despondeant
animum. For seeing themselves Coloss. 3.
thus handled, they never perform any thing of worth, but curse their master
and their apprentishippe. If they do that which is required at their hands, it
is because the eye of the master is always upon them, it is for fear, and not
cheerefullie and nobly, and therefore not honestly. If they fail and perform
not their task, to save themselves from the rigor of the punishment, they
have recourse to base unlawful remedies, lies, false excuses, tears of
despite, flights, triuentings, all worse than the fault they have committed.

Dum id rescitum iri credit, tantisper cauet; Terent.

Si sperat fore clam, rursum ad ingenium redit:
Ille, quem beneficio adiungas, ex animo facit;
Studet par refer, praesens, absensque idem erit:
My will is that they be handled freely and liberally, using therein reason,
and sweet and mild persuasions, which engender in their hearts the affections
of honor and of shame. The first will serve them as a spur to what is good,
the second as a bridle to check and withdraw them from evil. There is
something, I know not what, that is servile and base in rigor and constraint,
the enemy to honor and true liberty. We must clean contrary fat their hearts
with ingenuity, liberty, love, virtue and honor.

Pudore and liberalitate liberos retinere Terent.

Satius esse credo, quam metu.
Hoc patrium est potius consuefacere filium
Sua sponte recte facere, quam alieno metu.
Hoc pater ac dominus interest, hoc qui nequit
Fate atur se nescire imperare liberis.
Blows are for beasts that understand not reason: injuries and brawles are for
slaves. He that is once accustomed thereunto is mard for ever. But reason the
beauty of action, the desire of honesty and honor, the approbation of all
men, cheerfulness and comfort of heart, and the detestation of their
contraries, as brutishness, baseness, dishonor, reproach and the improbation
of all men; these are the arms, the spurs and the bridles of children well
borne, and such as a man would make honestmen. This is that which a man should
always sound in their ears; and if these means cannot prevail, all other of
rigor and roughness shall never do good. That which cannot be done with
reason, wisdom, endeavor, shall never be done by force; and if happily it be
done, yet it is to small purpose. But these other means cannot be
unprofitable, if they be employed in time, before the goodness of nature be
spent and spilt. But yet for all this, let no man think that I approve that
loose and flattering indulgence, and sottish fear to give children cause of
discontent and sorrow, which is another extremity as bad as the former. This
were like the Iuie, to kill and make barren the tree which it embraces, or the
ape that kills her young with culling them: or like those that fear to hold
him up by the hair of the head that is in danger of drowning, for fear of
hurting him, and so suffer him to perish. Against this vice the wise Hebrew
spoke much. Youth must be held in obedience and discipline, not Eccles. 30.
bodily like beasts and madmen, but spiritual, humane, liberal according to
reason.

We come now to the particular and more express aduisements of this
instruction. The first head of them is, as we 13 Particular aduisements
touching the mind.
have said, to exercise, sharpen and form the mind. Whereupon there are diverse
precepts, but the first principal and fundamental of all others, which
respects the end of instruction, and which I most desire to inculcate,
because it is least embraced and followed, and every man runs after the
contrary, which is a common and ordinary error, is, to have much more, and
the chief and principal care to exercise, to husband and manure, to use the
proper good, and much less to get and to endeavor the attainment of that which
is strange; to strive and study more for wisdom, than for science and art;
rather well to form the judgment, and by consequence the will, and the
conscience, than to fill the memory, and to inflame the imagination. These are
the three mistress parts of a reasonable soul: But the first is the
judgment, as before has been discoursed, to which place I resend the Reader.
Now the custom of the world is quite contrary, which runs wholly after
art, science, and what L. 1. ca. 7.
is acquired. Parents to the end they may make their children wise, are at
great charge, and their children take great pains, Vt omnium rerum sic
literarum intemperantia laboramus: and Tacit.
many times all is lost. But to make them wise, honest, apt and dexterious,
which is a matter of small charge or labor, they take no care at all. What
greater folly can there be in the world, than more to admire science, that
which is acquired, memory, than wisdom, than nature? Now all commit not this
fault with one and the same mind; some simply carried by custom, think that
wisdom and science are not things different, or at leastwise, that they march
alwaier together, and that it is necessary a man have the one to attain the
other; these kind of men deserve to be taught: others go out of malice, and
they think they know well enough what they do, and at what price soever it be
they will have art and science: For this is a mean in these days in the
occidentall parts of Europe to get fame, reputation, riches. These kind of
people make of science an art and merchandise, science mercenarie,
pedanticall, base and mechanical. They buie science to sell it again. Let us
leave these merchants as incurable. Contrariwise, I cannot here but blame the
opinion and fashion of some of our gentlemen of France, (for in other nations
this fault is not so apparent) who have knowledge or art in such disdain and
contempt, that they do less esteem of an honest man only for this, because he
has studied: they discarde it as a thing that seems in some sort to impeach
their nobility. Wherein they show themselves what they are, ill borne, worse
advised, and truly ignorant of virtue and honor; which they likewise bewray
in their carriage, their idleness, their impertinencies, their insufficiency,
in their insolences, vanities, and barbarities.

To teach others, and to discover the fault of all this, we must make good two
things; The one, that science and wisdom 14 A comparison of science and
wisdom.
are things very different; and that wisdom is more worth than all the
science or art of the world; as heaven exceedes the price of the earth, gold
of iron: the other, that they are not only different, but that they seldom or
never go together, that they commonly hinder one another; he that has much
knowledge or art is seldom wise, and he that is wise has not much knowledge.
Some exceptions there are herein, but they are very rare, and of great, rich,
and happy spirits. Some there have been in times past, but in these days
there are no more to be found.

The better to perform this, we must first know what science and wisdom is.
Science is a great heap, or accumulation 15 The definition of science and
wisdom.
and provision of the good of another; that is, a collection of all that a man
has seen, heard and read in books, that is to say, of the excellent sayings
and doings of great personages that have been of all nations. Now the garner
or storehouse where this great provision remains and is kept, the treasury
of science and all acquired good, is the memory. He that has a good memory,
the fault is his own if he want knowledge, because he has the mean. Wisdom
is a sweet and regular managing of the soul. He is wise that governs
himself in his desires, thoughts, opinions, speeches, actions, with measure
and proportion. To be brief, and in a word, wisdom is the rule of the soul:
and that which manageth this rule is the judgment, which sees, judges,
esteems all things: rangeth them as they ought, giving to every thing that
which belongs unto it. Let us now see their differences and how much wisdom
excels the other.

Science is a small and barraine good in respect of wisdom, for it is not only
not necessary (for of three parts of the world paucis est opus literis ad
bonam mentem, nay, it rather hinders it. He that will mark it well shall find
not only more honest people, but also more excellent in all kind of virtue
amongst those that know little, than those that know most; witness Rome, which
was more honest being young and ignorant, than when it was old, crafty, and
cunning, Simplex illa and aperta a virtus in obscuram and solertem scientiam
versa est. Science serves not for any thing, but to invent crafts and
subtleties, artificial cunning, devises, and whatsoever is an enemy to
innocence, which willingly lodges with simplicity and ignorance. Atheism
errors, sects, and all the troubles of the world have risen from the order of
these men of art and knowledge. The first temptation of the devil, says the
scripture, and the beginning of all evil, and the ruin of mankind, was the
opinion and the desire of knowledge: Eritis sicut dij scientes bonum and malum.
The Sirenes to deceive and entrap Ulysses within their snares, offered unto him
the gift of science; and S. Paul advises you all to take heed, ne quis vos
seducat per philosophiam. One of the sufficients men of knowledge that ever
was, spoke of Science, as of a thing not Solomon in his Ecclesiast.
only vain, but hurtful, painful, and tedious. To be brief, Science may
make us more humane and courteous, but not more honest. 4. Again, it serves
nothing to the sweetning of our life, or the quitting us of those evils that
oppress us in the world; but contrarily it increases and sharpneth them,
witness children and fools, simple and ignorant persons, who measuring every
thing by the present taste, run through them with the less grief, bear them
with better content, than men of greatest learning and knowledge. Science
anticipateth those evils that come upon us, in such sort that they are sooner
in the soul of man by knowledge, than in nature. The wiseman said, that he
that increases knowledge, increases Ecclesiastes 1. 18.
sorrow: Ignorance is a more fit remedy against all evils, iners malorum
remedium ignorantia est. From whence proceed those counsels of our friends,
Think not of it, put it out of your head and memory. Is not this to cast us
into the arms of ignorance, as into the best and safest sanctuary that may
be? But this is but a mockery, for to remember and to forget is not in our
power. But they would do as Chirurgions use to do, who not knowing how to heal
a wound, yet set a good show upon it by allaying the pain and bringing it
asleep. They that counsel men to kill themselves in their extreme and
remediless evils, do they not send a man to ignorance, stupiditie,
insensibilitie? Wisdom is a necessary good, and universally commodious for
all things: it governs and rules all: there is not any thing that can hide,
or quit it self of the jurisdiction or knowledge thereof: It bears sway
every where, in peace, in war, in public, in private: It rules and
moderateth even the insolent behauiors of men, their sports, their daunces,
their banquets, and is as a bridle unto them. To conclude, there is nothing
that ought not to be done discretlie and wisely; and contrarily, without
wisdom all things fall into trouble and confusion.

Secondly, Science is servile, base, and mechanical in respect of wisdom, and
a thing borrowed with pain. A learned

Thirdly, the conditions are diverse, the one more beautiful and more noble
than the other. Learning or Science is fierce, presumptuous, arrogant,
opinatiue, indiscreet, querulous, scientia inflat. 2. Science is talkatiue,
desirous to show it self, which nevertheless knows not how to do any thing,
is not active, but only fit to speak and to discourse: wisdom acts and
governs all.

Learning then and wisdom are things very different, and wisdom of the two
the more excellent, more to be esteemed than science. For it is necessary,
profitable to all, universal, active, noble, honest, gracious, cheerful.
Science is particular, unnecessary, seldom profitable, not active, servile,
mechanical, melancholicke, opinatiue, presumptuous.

We come now to the other point, and that is, that they are not always
together, but contrarily almost always separated. 19 Learning and wisdom
meet not together.
The natural reason, as has been said, is, that their temperatures are
contrary. For that of science and memory is moist, and that of wisdom and
judgment dry. This also is signified unto us, in that which happened to our
first parents, who as soon as they cast their eyes upon knowledge, they
presently desired it, and so were robbed of that wisdom wherewithal they
were endued from their beginning; whereof we every day see the like in common
experience. The most beautiful and flourishing states, Commonweals, Empires,
ancient and modern, have been and are governed very wisely, both in peace and
war, without science. Rome the first five hundred years, wherein it
flourished in virtue and Wisdom without science.
valor, was without knowledge; and so soon as it began to be learned, it
began to corrupt, to trouble, and ruinate it self by civil wars. The most
beautiful policy that ever was, the Lacedemonian built by Lycurgus, from
whence have sprung the greatest personages of the world, made no profession of
learning, and yet it was the school of virtue and wisdom, and was ever
victorious over Athens, the most learned city of the world, the school of all
science, the habitation of the Muses, the storehouse of Philosophers. All
those great and flourishing realms of the east and west Indies, have stood for
many ages together without learning, without the knowledge of books or
writings. In these days they learn many things, by the good leave and
assistance of their new masters, at the expense of their own liberty, yea
their vices and their subtilties too, whereof in former times they never heard
speech. That great, and it may be the greatest and most flourishing state and
Empire which is at this day in the world, is that of that great Lord, who like
the Lion of the whole earth, makes himself to be feared of all the Princes and
Monarks of the world; and even in this state, there is not any profession of
science, nor school, nor permission or allowance to read, or teach
publicly, no not in matters of religion. What guides and governs, and
makes this state to prosper thus? It is wisdom, it is prudence. But come we
to those states wherein learning and sciences are in credit. Who do govern
them? Doubtless not the learned. Let us take for example this our realm,
wherein learning and knowledge have greater honor than in all the world
besides, and which seems to have succeeded Greece it self: The principal
officers of this crown the Constable, Marshall, Admiral, the Secretaries of
the state, who dispatch all affairs, are commonly men altogether illiterate.
And doubtless, many great Lawyers, founders, and Princes have banished science
as the poison and pestilence of a Commonwealth; Licinius, Valentinian,
Mahomet, Lycurgus. And thus we see what wisdom is without science. Let us now
see what science is without wisdom, which is not hard to do. Let us look a
little into those that Science without wisdom.
make profession of learning, that come from Schools and Universities, and
have their heads full of Aristotle, Cicero, Bartolus. Are there any people in
the world more untoward, more sottish, more unfit for all things? From hence
comes that proverb, that when a man would describe a fool, or an vntowardlie
person, he calls him Clerk, Pedante: And to express a thing ill done, it
is the manner to say, It is Clearklike done. It should seem that learning does
intoxicate, and as it were hammer a man's brains, and makes him to turn sotte
and fool, as king Agrippa said to S. Paul, Multae Act. 26.
te literae ad insaniam adducunt. There are diverse men that had they never
been trained up in schools and colleges, they had been far more wise; and
their brethren that have never applied themselves to learning, have proved the
wiser men: Vt melius fuisset non didicisse: nam post quam docti prodierunt,
boni desunt. Come to the practice, choose me one of these learned scholars,
bring him to the common counsel of a city, or any public assembly, wherein
the affairs of the state are consulted of, or matter of policy, or household
husbandry, you never saw a man more astonished, he waxes pale, blusheth,
cougheth, and at last knows not what to say. And if he chance to speak, he
enters into a long discourse, of definitions, and divisions of Aristotle; ergo
potlead. Mark in the selfsame counsel a merchant, a burgess, that never
heard speak of Aristotle, he will yield a better reason, give a sounder
judgment and more to purpose than these scholasticall doctors.

Now it is not enough to have said, that wisdom and learning seldom concur
and meet together, unless we seek 20 The reason of this separation.
the reason and cause thereof, not doubting thereby but sufficiently to content
and to satisfy those, that mislike what I have said, or think me perhaps an
enemy to erudition and learning. The question thereof is, from whence it
comes that learning and wisdom do seldom encounter and meet together in
one and the same man: And there is great reason why we should move this
question: for it is a strange thing and against reason, that a man the more
learned he is, should not be the more wise, learning and knowledge being a
proper means, and instrument unto wisdom Behold therefore two men, the one a
student, the other none; he that has studied, is in some sort bound to be
far the wiser of the two, because he has all that the other has, that is,
nature, reason, judgment, spirit; and besides these the counsels, discourses,
judgments of all the greatest men of the world, by reading their books. Is
there not then great reason, he should be much more wise, more dexterious, more
honest than the other, since that with these proper and natural means, he
attaineth so many extraordinary on every side? For as one says well, the
natural good cohering and concurring with the accidental frames an excellent
composition: and yet nevertheless, we see the contrary, as has been said.

Now the true reason and answer to all this, is the evil and sinister manner of
study and ill instruction. They learn our 21 An answer
of books and schools excellent knowledge, but with ill to ill discipline.
means, and as bad success. Whereby it comes to pass, that all their study
profits them nothing at all, but they remain indigent and poor, in the
midst of their plenty and riches, and like Tantalus, die for hunger in the
midst of their dainties: the reason is, because whilst they pore upon their
books, they respect nothing so much as to stuff and furnish their memories
with that which they read and understand, and presently they think themselves
wise: like him that put his bread into his pocket and not into his belly, when
his pocket was full, died for hunger. And so with a memory fully stuffed, they
continue fools; Student non sibi and vitae, sed alijs and scholae. They
prepare themselves to be reporters; Cicero has said it, Aristotle, Plato has
left it in writing, etc. but they for their parts know nothing. These men
commit a double fault, the one in that they apply not that which they learn,
to themselves, that so they may form themselves unto virtue, wisdom,
resolution, by which means their knowledge is unprofitable unto them: the
other is, that during all that time, which with great pains and charge they
employ, to the heaping together and pocketing up for another without any profit
to themselves, whatsoever they can rob from other men, they suffer their own
proper good to fall to the ground, and never put it in practice. They on the
other side that study not, having no recourse unto another, take a care to
husband their natural gifts, and so prove many times the better, the more
wise, and resolute, though less learned, less gainers, less glorious. One
there is that has said as much, though otherwise and more briefly; That
learning marreth weak wits and spirits, perfecteth the strong and natural.

Now hearken to that counsel that I give hereupon; A man must not give
himself to the gathering and keeping 22 Good discipline.
the opinions and knowledges of another, to the end he may afterward make
report of them, or use them for show or ostentation, or some base and mercenary
profit; but he must use them so, as that he may make them his own. He must not
only lodge them in his mind, but incorporate and transubstantiate them into
himself. He must not only water his mind with the deaw of knowledge, but he
must make it essentially better, wise, strong, good, courageous; otherwise to
what end serves study? Non paranda nobis solum, sed fruenda sapientia est. He
must not do as it is the manner of those that make garlands, who pick here
and there whole flowers, and so carry them away to make nose-gaies, and
afterward presents, heap together out of that book and out of this book
many good things, to make a fair and a goodly show to others; but he must do
as bees use to do, who carry not away the flowers, but settle themselves upon
them, like a hen that covers her chicken, and draws from them their spirit,
force, virtue, quintessence, and nourishing themselves, turn them into their
own substance, and afterward make good and sweet honey, which is all their
own; and it is no more either thyme or sweet mariarom. So must a man gather
from books the marrow and spirit (never enthrawling himself so much as to
retain the words by heart, as many use to do, much less the place, the book,
the chapter; that is a sottish and vain superstition and vanity, and makes
him lose the principal) and having sucked and drawn the good, feed his mind
therewith, inform his judgment, instruct and direct his conscience and his
opinions, rectify his will; and in a word, frame unto himself a work wholly
his own, that is to say, an honest man, wise, advised, resolute. Non ad pompam
nec ad speciem, nec vt nomine magnifico sequi otium velis, sed quo Tacit.
firmior aduersus fortuita rempublicam capessas.

And heereunto the choice of sciences is necessary. Those that I commend above
all others, and that best serve to that 23 2 The second advice touching the
choice of sciences.
end, which I propose and whereof I am to speak, are natural and moral,
which teach us to live, and to live well, nature and virtue; that which we are,
and that which we should be: under the moral are comprehended, the Politics,
Economicks, Histories. All the rest are vain and frothie, and we are not to
dwell upon them, but to take them as passing by.

This end of the instruction of youth and comparison of learning and wisdom,
has held me too long, by reason of 24 3 The means to learn.
the contestation. Let us now proceed to the other parts and aduisements of
this instruction. The means of instructions are diverse, especially of two
sorts; the one by word, that is to By word of mouth.
say, by precepts, instructions, and lectures; or else by conference with
honest and able men, filing and refining our wits against theirs, as iron is
cleansed and beautified by the file; This means and manner is very pleasing and
agreeable to nature.

The other by action, that is, example, which is gotten not 25 By example.
only from good men by imitation, and similitude, but also wicked, by
disagreement in opinions; For some there are that learn better by the
opposition and horror of that evil they see in another. It is a special use
of Justice, to condemn one, that he may serve for an example unto others. And
old Cato was wont to say, That wise men may learn more of fools, than fools
of wise men. The Lacedaemonians the better to dissuade their children from
drunkenness, made their servants drunken before their faces, to the end that
seeing how horrible a spectacle a drunken man was, they should the rather
detest it.

Now this second means or manner by example, teaches us with more ease and
more delight. To learn by precepts A comparison of these two.
is a long way, because it is a painful thing to understand well, and
understanding to retain well, and retaining to use and practice well. And
hardly can we promise our selves to reap that fruit which they promise unto
us. But example and imitation teach us above the work or action it self,
inuit us with much more ardour, and promise unto us that glory which we
learn to imitate. The seed that is cast into the earth draws unto it self
in the end the quality of that earth whereunto it is transported, and becomes
like unto that which does there naturally grow: So the spirits and manners of
men conform themselves to those with whom they commonly converse.

Now these two manners of profiting by speech and by example, 26 From the living.
are likewise twofold, for they are drawn from excellent personages, either
living, by their sensible and outward frequentation and conference; or dead, by
the reading of their books. The first, that is the commerce with the living,
is more lively and more natural, it is a fruitful exercise of life, which was
much in use amongst the ancients, yea the Greeks themselves, but it is casual
depending on another, and rare: It is a difficult matter to meet with such
people, and more difficult to make use of them. And this is practiced either by
keeping home, or by traveling and visiting strange countries, not to be fed
with vanities as the most do, but to carry with them the knowledge and
consideration especially of the humors and customs of those nations. This is
a profitable exercise, the body is neither idle, nor tired with labor, for
this moderate agitation keeps a man in breath, the mind is in continual
exercise, by marking things known and new. There is not a better school to
form the life of man, than to see the diversity of so many other lives, and
to taste a perperuall variety of the forms of our nature.

The other commerce with the dead by the benefit of their books, is more sure,
and more near unto us, more constant, 27 From the dead by books.
and less chargeable. He that knows how to make use of them, receives
thereby great pleasure, great comfort. It discharges us of the burden of a
tedious idleness, it withdraws us from fond imaginations, and other outward
things, that vex and trouble us: It counsels us, and comfort us in our
griefs and afflictions: but yet it is only good for the mind, whereby the
body remains without action, alters and languisheth.

We must now speak of that order of proceeding and formalitie which a teacher
of youth must keep, that he may 28 4 To make the scholar to speak and to
reason.
happily ariue to his proposed end. It has many parts; we will touch some of
them. First, he must often examine his scholar, ask his judgment and opinion
of whatsoever shall present it self unto him. This is quite contrary to the
ordinary style, which is, that the master do always speak and teach his
child with authority, and work into his head as into a vessel, whatsoever he
will, in so much that children are only auditors and receivers, which manner of
teaching I can not commend, obest plerunque ijs, qui discere volunt, authoritas
eorum qui docent. Their spirits must be awakened and inflamed by demands, make
them first to give their opinions, and then give them the same liberty, to
ask others, to enquire and to open the way at their own will. If without
questioning with them a man speak wholly unto them, it is a labor in a manner
lost, the child is not profited thereby, because he thinks it belongs not unto
him, so long as he yields not an account thereof; he lends only his ears and
those coldly too; he sets not forward with so good a pase, as when he is a
party in the business. Neither is it enough to make them give their
judgment, but that they maintain it, and be able to give a reason of their
saying, to the end that they speak not by rote, but that they be attentive,
and careful of that they speak: and to give them the better encouragement
thereunto, a man must not seem to neglect that they say, but commend at the
least their good essay and endeavor. This form of teaching by questions and
demands is excellently observed both by Socrates (the principal in this
business) as we see every where in Plato, where by a long connection and
enfolding of demands wittily and dexteriouslie made, he sweetly leads a
man to the closet of verity; and also by the Doctor of verity Mat. 16. 22.
Luke 10. and 24.
in his Gospel. Now these questions must not be only of things touching
science and memory, as has been said, but matter of judgment. For to this
exercise all things may serve, even the least that are, as the follies of a
Laquey, the malice of a Page, a discourse at table: for the work of judgment
is not to handle and to understand great and high matters, but justly to weigh
them, and consider of them whatsoever they be. Questions therefore must be
moved touching the judgment of men and their actions, and by reason
determined, to the end that thereby men may frame their judgment and their
conscience. The tutor or instructor of Cyrus in Xenophon for a lecture proposed
this question; A great youth having a little coat or cassocke, gave it to one
of his companions of a less stature, and took from him his cassocke, which
was the greater: upon which fact he demanded his judgment. Cyrus answered,
that it was well, because both of them were thereby the better fitted. But his
master reprehended him sharply for it, because he considered only the
fitness and conueniencie thereof, and not the justice, which should first and
especially have been thought of, which was, that no man may be enforced in
that which was his own. And this no doubt is an excellent manner of
instruction. And though a man may recite authorities out of books, the sayings
of Cicero or Aristotle, yet it is not only to recite them, but to judge of
them, and so to frame and fashion them to all uses, and to apply them to diverse
subjects. It is not enough to report as a history, that Cato kilde himself at
Vtique, that he might not fall into the hands of Caesar; and that Brutus and
Cassius were the authors of the death of Caesar; for this is the least: but I
will that he proceed and judge, whether they did well herein or no; whether
they deserved well of the commonweal; whether they carried themselves therein
according to wisdom, justice, valor; and wherein they did ill, wherein well.
Finally and generally, in all these discourses, demands, answers, the
conueniencie, order, verity, must be inquired into, a work of judgment and
conscience. These things a man by any means must not dissemble, but ever press
them, and hold him subject unto them.

Secondly, he must accustom and frame him to an honest curiosity to know all
things; whereby he must first have his 29 5 An aduisement touching honest
curiosity.
eyes upon every thing, the better to consider all that may be said, done or
attempted concerning himself, and nothing must pass his hands, before it
pass and repasse his judgment; and then he must make an inquiry into other
matters, as well of right as of action. He that enquireth after nothing, knows
nothing, says one; He that busieth not his mind, suffers it to rust, and
becomes a fool; and therefore he must make profit of all, apply every thing to
himself, take advice and counsel, as well of what is past, the better to see
the error he has committed, as of that which is to come, the better to rule
and to direct himself. Children must not be suffered to be idle, to bring
themselves asleep, to entertain themselves with their own prattle; for
wanting sufficiency to furnish themselves with good and worthy matter, they
will feed upon vanities; they must therefore be always busied in some
imploiment, and kept in breath, and this curiosity must be engendered in them,
the better to awaken them, and to spur them forward, which being such as is
said, shall be neither vain in it self, nor tedious to another.

He must likewise fashion and mould his spirit to the general pattern and
model of the world and of nature, make it 30 6 Advice.
universal, that is to say, represent unto him in all things, the universal
face of nature: that the whole world may be his book: that of what subject
soever a man talk, he cast his eye and his thought upon the large immensitie
of the world, upon so many different fashions and opinions, which have been,
and are in the world touching that subject. The most excellent and noble
minds, are the more universal and more free; and by this means the mind is
contented, learneth not to be astonished at any thing, is formed to a
resolution and steadfast constancy. To be brief, such a man does no more
admire any thing, which is the highest and last point of wisdom. For
whatsoever does happen, or a man may report unto him, he easily finds that
there is nothing in the world either new or strange; that the condition of man
is capable of all things; that they have come from others, and that elsewhere
diverse things pass more strange, more great. And in this sense it was that
wise Socrates called himself a citizen of the world. And contrarily, there is
not any thing that does more deprave and enthraule the mind of man, than to
make him taste and understand but one certain opinion, belief, and manner of
life. What greater folly or weakness can there be, than to think that all
the world walks, believes, speaks, does, lives and dies according to the
manner of his country? like those barde block-heads, who when they hear one
recite the manners and opinions of foreign countries, very different and
contrary to theirs, they tremble for fear, and believe them not; or else do
absurdly condemn them as barbarous, so much are they enthralled and tied to
their cradell, a kind of people brought up (as they say) in a bottle, that
never saw any thing but through a hole. Now this universal spirit must be
attained by the diligence of the master or teacher, afterward by travel, and
communication with strangers, and the reading of books and the histories of
all nations.

Finally, he must teach him to take nothing upon credit and by authority: this
is to make himself a beast, and to but doubt, which perhaps is the better,
sounder, and surer course, to teach him likewise to resolve of nothing of
himself, but rather to distrust his own judgment.

After the mind comes the body, whereof there must likewise be a care taken,
at one and the same instant with the spirit, 32 An aduisement touching the body.
not making two works thereof. Both of them make an entire man. Now a master
must endeavor to keep his child free from delicacie and pride in apparel,
in sleeping, eating, drinking; he must bring him up hardly to labor and pains;
accustom him to heat and cold, wind and weather, yea and unto hazards too;
harden his muscles and his sinews, as well as his mind, to labor, and then
to pain and grief too; For the first disposes to the second, Labor callum
obducit dolori. To be brief, he must endeavor to make him lusty and vigorous,
indifferent to all kind of viands. All this serves not only for his health,
but for public affairs and services.

We come now to the third head which concerns manners, wherein both body and
soul have a part. This is twofold; 33 3 An aduisement touching manners.
To hinder the evil, to ingraft and to nourish the good. The first is the more
necessary, and therefore the greater care, and heed must be taken. It must
therefore be done in time, for there is no time too speedy, to hinder the birth
and growth of ill manners and conditions, especially these following, which are
to be feared in youth.

To lie, a base vice of servants and slaves, of a licentious and fearful
mind, the cause whereof arises many times 1 Evil manners.
from bad and rude instruction.

A sottish shame and weakness, whereby they seek to hide themselves, hold
down their heads, blush at every

All affectation and singularity in habit, carriage, gate, speech, gesture, and
all other things; this is a testimony of Licet sapere sine pompa, sine inuidia.

But above all, choler, sullenness, obstinacy; and therefore it is very
necessary that a child never have his will by such froward means, and that
he learn and find that these qualities are altogether unprofitable and
bootlesse, yea base and villainous; and for this cause he must never be
flattered, for that marreth and corrupts him, teaches him to be sullen and
froward, if he have not his will, and in the end makes him insolent, that a
man shall never work any good upon him. Nihil magis reddit iracundos, quam
educatio mollis and blanda.

By the selfsame means a man must ingraft into him 34 Good manners.
good and honest manners; And first instruct him to fear and reverence God, to
tremble under that infinite and invisible majesty, to speak seldom and
soberly of God, of his power, eternity, wisdom, will, and of his works; not
indifferently and upon all occasions, but fearfully, with shame and reverence.
Not to be over scrupulous in the mysteries and points of religion, but to
conform himself to the government and discipline of the church.

Secondly, to replenish and cherish his heart with ingenuitie,

For another and the company with whom he conuerseth, Omnis Aristippum decuit
color, and status and res. Herein Alcibiades was excellent. That he learn how
to be able, and to know how to do all things, yea excess and licentious
behauiours if need be; but that he love to do only that which is good: That
he refrain to do evil, not for want of courage, nor strength, nor knowledge,
but will? Multum interest virum peccare quis nolit, aut nesciat.

Modestly, whereby he contesteth not, nor tieth himself, See Lib. 2. cap. 9.
defends any thing obstinately, with affirmative, resolute, commanding words,
but sweet, submisse and moderate specches. Hereof has been spoken elsewhere.
And thus the three heads of the duties of parents toward their children are
dispatched.

The fourth concerns their affection and communication with them, when they
are great and capable of that whereunto 36 The fourth part touching the duty of
parents.
they were instructed. We know that affection is reciprocal and natural
betwixt parents and their children, but that of parents toward their children
is far more strong and more natural, because it is given by nature to love
those things that are coming on to the maintenance and continuance The love of
parents greater than the love of children.
of the world, especially those in whom a man does live when he is dead. That
of children toward their parents is retrograde, and therefore it goes not so
strongly, nor so naturally; and it seems rather to be the payment of a
debt, and a thankful acknowledgement of a benefit received, than a pure, free,
simple, and natural love. Moreover, he that gives and does good, loves more
than he that receives and is indebted: And therefore a father and every agent
that does good to another, loves more than he is beloved. The reasons of this
proposition are many. All love to be (which being is exercised and demonstrated
in motion and action.) Now he that gives, and does good to another, is after a
sort in him that receives. He that gives and does good to another, does that
which is honest and honorable; he that receives does none of this: honesty is
for the first, profit for the second. Now honesty is far more worthy,
firm, stable, amiable, than profit, which in a moment vanishes. Again, those
things are most beloved that cost us most; that is dearest unto us, which we
come more dearly by. Now to beget, to nourish, to bring up, is a matter of
greater charge than to receive all these.

This love of parents is twofold, though always natural, yet after a diverse
manner: the one is simply and universally 37 The love of parents twofold.
natural, and as a simple instinct which is common with beasts, according to
which parents love and cherish their children, though deformed, stammering,
halting, milke-sops, and use them like moppets, or little apes. This love is
not truly humane. Man endued with reason, must not seruilelie subject himself
unto nature as beasts do, but follow it more nobly with discourse of reason.
The other then is more humane and reasonable, whereby a man loves his children
more or less, according to that measure wherein he sees the seeds and sparks
of virtue, goodness, and towardliness to arise and spring up in them. Some
there are who being besotted and carried with the former kind of affection, have
but little of this, and never complaining of the charge so long as their
children are but small, complain thereof when they come to their growth, and
begin to profit. It seems that they are in a sort offended and vexed to see
them to grow and set forward in honest courses that they may become honest men:
These parents are brutish and inhumane.

Now according to this second, true, and fatherly love in 38 Of the true
fatherly love in communicating with his children being come to years of
discretion.
the well governing thereof, parents should receive their children, if they be
capable, into their society and partnership in their goods, admit them to
their counsel, intelligence, the knowledge and course of their domestical
affairs, as also to the communication of their designements, opinions and
thoughts; yea consent and contribute to their honest recreations and pastimes,
as the case shall require, always reserving their rank and authority. For
we condemn the austere, lordlike, and imperious countenance and carriage of
those that never look upon their children, nor speak unto them but with
authority, will not be called fathers but lords, though God himself refuse
not this name of father, never caring for the hearty love of their children, so
they may be feared, reverenced, and adored. And for this cause they give unto
them sparingly, keep them in want, that they may the better keep them in awe
and obedience, ever threatening them some small pittance by their last will,
when they depart out of this life. Now this is a sottish, vain, and ridiculous
foolerie; It is to distrust their own proper, true, and natural authority,
to get an artificial; And it is the way to deceive themselves, and to grow
into contempt, which is clean contrary to that they pretend. It causes their
children to carry themselves cunningly with them, and to conspire and find
means how to deceive them. For parents should in good time frame their minds
to duty, by reason, and not have recourse to these means more tyrannous than
fatherly.

Errat long mea quidem sententia,
Qui imperium credit esse grauius aut stabilius
Vi quod sit, quam illud quod amicitia adiungitur.
In the last disposition of our goods, the best and surest way is to follow the
laws and customs of the country. The laws 39 The usage of them in their
last wills according to the laws.
have better provided for it than we, and it is a safer course to suffer them
to fail in some thing, than to adventure upon our own defects, in our own
proper choice. It is to abuse that liberty we have therein, to serve our
foolish fantasies and private passions, like those that suffer themselves to be
carried by the unwonted officious actions and flatteries of those that are
present, who make use of their last wills and testaments, either by gratifying
or chastising the actions of those that pretend interest therein. A man must
conform himself to reason and common custom heerin, which is wiser than we
are, and the surer way.

We come now to the duty of children toward their parents, 40 Of the duty of
children toward their parents.
so natural and so religious, and which ought to be done unto them not as unto
pure and simple men, but demigods, earthly, mortal, visible gods. And this
is the reason why Philo the Jew said, that the commandment touching the duty
of children was written the one half in the first table, which contained the
commandments that concern our duty toward God; and the other half in the
second table, wherein are the commandments that concern our neighbor, as
being half divine, and half humane. This duty likewise is so certain, so
due and requisite, that it may not be dispensed withal by any other duty or
love whatsoever, be it never so great. For, if it shall happen that a man see
his father and his son so endangered at one and the same instant, as that he
cannot rescue and succor them both, he must forsake his son, and go to his
father, though his love toward his son be greater, as before has been
said. And the reason is, because the duty of a son toward his father is
more ancient, and has the greater privilege, and cannot be abrogated by any
later duty. 41 This duty consists in five points.


Now this duty consists in five points, comprehended in this word, Honor
thy father and thy mother. The first is reverence, not only in outward gesture
and countenance, but also inward, which is that high and holy opinion and
esteem, that a child ought to have of his parents, as the authors and
original causes of his being, and of his good, a quality that makes them
resemble God himself.

The second is obedience, even to the roughest and hardest 2 Ier. 35.
commands of a father, according to the example of the Rechabites, who to obey
the command of their father, never drank wine in all their lives: Nay more
than that, Isaac refused not to yield his neck to the sword of his father.

The third is to succor their parents in all their needs and Basil affirms)
feed and nourish In examer.
their old dames, cover them with their feathers, when they fall from them, and
couple themselves together to carry them upon their backs. Love furnishes
them with this art. This example is so lively and so significant, that the
duty of children toward their parents has been signified by the quality of
this creature, (...), reciconiare. And the Hebrews call this bird for this
cause, chasida, that is to say, Leuit. 11.
the debonaire, the charitable bird. We have likewise notable examples here
amongst men. Cymon the son of great Miltiades, whose father dying in prison,
as some say for debt, and not having wherewithal to bury his body, much
less to redeem it being arested for the debt, whilst it was carried to the
burial, according to the laws of that country, Cymon sold himself and his
liberty for money to provide for his funeral. He with his plenty and goods
relieved not his father, but with his liberty; which is deerer than all goods,
yea and life too. He helped not his father living and in necessity, but dead,
and being no more a father nor a man. What had he done to succor his father
living, wanting, and requiring his help? This is an excellent president. We
have two the like examples, even in the weak and feeble sex of women, of two
daughters which have nourished and given suck the one to the father, the other
to her mother, being prisoners and condemned to die by famine, the ordinary
punishment of the ancients. It seems in some sort a thing against nature,
that the mother should be nourished with the daughters milk; but this is
truly according to nature, yea those first laws, that the daughter should
nourish her mother.

The fourth is, not to do, to attempt, or enterprise any

The fifth is, mildly and gently to endure the vices, imperfections, and testie
and impatient humors of parents, their Manlius has made good proof hereof:
for the Tribune Pomponius having accused the father of this Manlius in the
presence of the people of many crimes, and amongst others, that he over cruelly
handled his son, enforcing him to till the earth: the son goes to the
Tribune and finding him in his bed, putting the point of his dagger to his
throat, enforced him to swear, that he should desist from that pursuit he made
against his father, desiring rather to endure his fathers rigor, than to see
him troubled for it.

A child shall find no difficulty in these five duties, if he consider how
chargeable he has been to his parents, and with what care and affection he
has been brought up. But he shall never know it well, until he have children
of his own, as he that was found to ride upon a hobbie-horse playing with his
children, entreated him that so took him to hold his peace until he were
himself a father, reputing him till then no indifferent judge in this action.

CHAP. XV. The duty of Masters and servants:
Here comes the third and last part of private and domestical justice,
which is the duties of masters and servants. Touching which it is necessary to
know the distinction of servants: for they are principally three sorts. That is
to say, of slaves, whereof all the world has been full in former time, and is
at this present, except a part of Europe, and no place more free than here
about France; they have no power neither in their bodies nor goods, but are
wholly their masters, who may give, lend, sell, resell, exchange, and use them
as beasts of service. Of these has been spoken of at large. There are
inferior servants, and servants, free people, masters of their persons and
goods, yea they cannot bargain, or otherwise do any thing to the prejudice of
their own liberty. But they owe honor, obedience, and serve until such
times, and upon such conditions, as they have promised, and their masters have
power to command, correct, and chastise them with moderation and discretion.
There are also mercenaries, which are less subject, they owe no service nor
obedience, but only work and labor for money; and they have no authority in
commanding or correcting them.

The duties of masters toward their servants, as well of Sunt homines,
contubernales, humiles Senec.
amici, conserui, aeque fortunae subiecti. To handle servants gently, seeking
rather to be beloved than feared, is the testimony of a good nature: to use
them roughly and too severely, proceeds from a crabbed and cruel mind, and
that he bears the same disposition toward all other men, but want of power
hinders the execution thereof. They ought to instruct them with godly and
religious counsel, and those things that are requisite for their health and
safety.

The duties of servants are, to honor and fear their masters whatsoever they
be, and to yield them obedience and fidelity, serving them not for gain, or
only outwardly and for countenance, but heartily, seriously, for conscience
sake, and without dissimulation. We read of most worthy, noble, and generous
services performed in former times by some toward their masters, even to the
engaging and hazard of their lives, for their masters safeguard and honor.

CHAP. XVI. The duty of Sovereigns and Subjects.
OF Princes and Sovereigns, their descriptions, notes, humors, marks, and
discommodities has been discoursed in the first book, chap. 49. Their duty
to govern the commonwealth has been spoken at large in this present book,
chap. 2. and 3. which is of politic prudence: yet we will touch a little here
the heads and general points of their duty.

The Sovereign as the mean between God and the people, 1 The duty of
Sovereigns.
and debtour to these two, ought always remember that he is the lively image,
the officer, and lieutenant general of the great God his sovereign; and to
the people a perfect mirror, a bright beam, a clear looking glass, an
elevated theater for every one to behold, a fountain where all refresh
themselves, a spur to virtue, and who does not any good; that is not famous,
and put in the register of perpetual memory. He ought then first of all to
fear and honor God, to To be religious.
be devout, religious, to observe piety not only for himself and for
conscience sake, as every other man, but for his state, and as he is a
sovereign. The piety which we here require in a prince, is the care he ought
to have, and to show for the conservation of religion and the ancient laws and
ceremonies of the country, providing by laws penalties and punishments that
the religion be neither changed, troubled, nor innouated. This is a thing that
highly redoundeth to his honor and security (for all do reverence, and more
willingly obey, and more slowly attempt or enterprise any thing against him
whom they see fears God; and believe to be in his protection and safeguard;
vna custodia pietas: pium virum Mercur. Trism.
nec malus genius nec fatum deuincit. Deus enim eripit eum ab omni malo.) And
also to the good of the state, for as all the wisest have said, Religion is the
band and cement of humane society.

The Prince ought also to be subject, and inuiolablie to observe 2 To observe
the laws of superiors.
and cause to be observed the laws of God, and nature, which are not to be
dispensed with: and he that infringeth them is not only accounted a tyrant, but
a monster.

Concerning the people, he ought first to keep his covenants 3 To keep his
promise.
and promises, be it with subjects or others with whom he is interessed or has
to do. This equity is both natural and universal. God himself keeps his
promise. Moreover, the prince is the pledge and formal warrant of the law and
those mutual bargains of his subjects. He ought then above all to keep his
faith, there being nothing more odious in a prince than breach of promise and
perjury; and therefore it was well said, that a man ought to put it among
those casual cases if the prince do abjure or revoke his promise, and that the
contrary is not to be presumed. Yea he ought to observe those promises and
bargains of his predecessors, especially if he be their heir, or if they be
for the benefit and welfare of the commonwealth. Also he may relieve himself
of his unreasonable contracts and promises unadvisedly made, even as for the
selfsame causes private men are relieved by the benefit of the prince.

He ought also to remember, that although he be above the law (I mean the
civil and humane) as the Creator is above 4 To observe the laws.
the creature (for the law is the work of the prince, and which he may change
and abrogate at his pleasure, it is the proper right of the sovereignty)
nevertheless though it be in force and authority, he ought to keep it: to
live, to converse and judge according unto it: and it would be a dishonor and a
very evil example to contradict it, and as it were falsify it. Great Augustus
having done something against the law, by his own proper act would needs die
for grief: Lycurgus, Agesilaus, Seleucus, have left three notable examples in
this point, and to their cost.

Thirdly, the prince owes justice to all his subjects; and he ought to measure
his puissance and power by the rule of 5 To do justice.
justice. This is the proper virtue of a prince truly royal and princelike,
whereof it was rightly said, by an old man to king Philip that delayed him
justice, saying he had no leisure, That he should then desist and leave off to
be king. But Demetriu sped not so well, who was dispossessed of his realm by his
subjects, for casting from a bridge into the river many of their petitions,
without answer, or doing them justice.

Finally, the prince ought to love, cherish, to be vigilant and careful of his
state, as the husband of the wife, the father of 6 To take care and affect the
common good.
his children, the shepherd of his flock, having always before his eyes the
profit and quiet of his subjects. The prosperity and welfare of the state is
the end and contentment of a good prince, vt respub, opibus firma, copijs
locuples, gloria ampla, virtute Senec.
honesta sit. The prince that tieth himself to himself abuses himself: for
he is not his own man, neither is the state his, but he is the states. He is a
Lord, not to domineere, but to defend. Cui non ciuium seruitus tradita, sed
tutela: to attend, to watch, to the end his vigilance may secure his sleeping
subjects, his travel may give them rest, his providence may maintain their
prosperity, his industry may continue their delights, his business their
leisure their vacation, and that all his subjects may understand and know that
he is as much for them, as he is above them.

To be such and to discharge his duty well, he ought to demean and carry
himself as has bin said at large in the second

And to contain all in a few words, he must love God above all things, be
advised in his enterprises, valiant in attempts,

The duty of subjects consists in three points, to yield due honor to their
princes, as to those that carry the image of 9 The duty of subjects.
God, ordained and established by him; therefore they are most wicked, who
detract or slander; such were the seed of Cham and Chanaan. 2. To be obedient,
under which is contained Exodus 12.
many duties, as to go to the wars, to pay tributes and imposts imposed upon
them by their authority. 3. To wish them all prosperity and happiness, and
to pray for them.

But the question is, Whether a man ought to yield these 10 Whether it be
lawful to lay violent hands upon the person of a tyrant. A double tyrant. The
entrance.
three duties generally to all princes, if they be wicked or tyrants. This
controversy cannot be decided in a word, and therefore we must distinguish.
The prince is a tyrant and wicked either in the entrance, or execution of his
government. If in the entrance, that is to say, that he treacherously
inuadeth, and by his own force and powerful authority gains the
sovereignty without any right, be he otherwise good or evil (for this cause
he ought to be accounted a tyrant) without all doubt we ought to resist him
either by way of justice, if there be opportunity and place, or by surprise:
and the Grecians, says Cicero, ordained in former times rewards and honors for
those that delivered the commonwealth from servitude and oppression. Neither
can it be said to be a resisting of the prince, either by justice or surprise,
since he is neither received, nor acknowledged to be a prince.

If in the execution, that is to say, that his entrance be rightful 2 In the
execution three ways.
and just, but that he carries himself imperiously, cruelly, and wickedlie,
and, according to the common saying, tyrannically, it is then also to be
distinguished; for it may be so three ways, and every one requires particular
consideration. The Heerof see above Chap. 4. in Chap. of tyranny and rebellion.
one is in violating the laws of God and nature, that is to say, against the
religion of the country, the commandment of God, enforcing and constraining
their consciences. In this case he ought not to yield any duty or obedience,
following those divine axioms, That we ought rather obey God than men, and
fear him more that commands the entire man, than those that have power but
over the least part. Yet he ought not to oppose himself against him by
violence or sinister means, which is another extremity, but to observe the
middle way, which is either to fly or suffer, fugere, aut pati; these two
remedies named by the doctrine of verity in the like extremities. 2. The other
less evil, which concerns not the consciences, but only the bodies and the
goods, is an abuse to subjects, denying them justice, imprisoning their
persons, and depriving them of their goods. In the which case he ought with
patience and acknowledgement of the wrath of God yield these three duties
following, honor, obedience, vows and prayers; and to be mindful of three
things, that all power and authority is from God, and whosoever resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God: principi summum rorum indicium dij
dederunt. Subditis obsequij gloria relicta est: bonos principes voto expetere,
quale scunque tolerare. And Tacit.
he ought not to obey a superior, because he is worthy and worthily
commands, but because he is a superior; not for that he is good, but because
he is true and lawful. There is great difference between true and good, every
one ought to obey the law, not because it is good and just, but simply,
because it is the law. 2. That God causes an hypocrite to reign for the
sins of the people, though he reserve him for a day of his fury; that the
wicked prince is the instrument of his justice, the which we ought to endure as
other evils, which the heavens do send us; quomodo sterilitatem aut nimios
imbres and caetera naturae mala, sic luxu^ and auaritiam dominantium tolerare.
Tacit.
3. The examples of Saul, Nabuchodonoser, of many Emperors before Constantine,
and others since him as cruel tyrants as might be: toward whom nevertheless
these three duties have been observed by good men, and enioined them by the
Prophets and learned men of those days, according to the oracle of the great
Doctor of truth, which infers an obedience to them which sit in the seat
of government, notwithstanding they oppress us with insupportable burdens,
and their government be evil.

The third concerns the whole state, when he would change or ruinate it,
seeking to make it elective, hereditarie, or of an Aristocracie, or Democracie,
a Monarchy, or otherwise: And in this case he ought to withstand and hinder
their proceedings, either by way of justice or otherwise: for he is not master
of the state; but only a guardian and a suertie. But these affairs belong not
to all, but to the tutours and mainteiners of the state, or those that are
interessed therein, as Electours of elective states; or Princes apparent in
hereditarie states; or states general, that have fundamental laws. And this
is the only case wherein it is lawful to resist a tyrant. And all this is said
of subjects, who are never permitted to attempt any thing against a sovereign
Prince for what cause L. Cogitationis ff de poen. L. Si quis non dicam c. de
sacros. Eccles.
soever, and the laws say that he deserves death, who attempteth, or gives
counsel, and which intends, or only thinks it. But it is honorable for a
stranger, yea, it is most noble and heroical in a prince by warlike means to
defend a people unjustly oppressed; and to free them from tyranny, as
Hercules did, and afterward Dion, Timoleon, and Tamberlaine prince of the
Tartars, who overcame Baiazeth the Turkish Emperor, and besieged
Constantinople.

These are the duties of subjects toward their living sovereigns: 12
Examinations of Sovereigns after their death.
But it is a point of justice to examine their life after they are dead. This
is a custom just and very profitable, which benefiteth much those nations
where it is observed: and which all good Princes do desire, who have cause to
complain, that a man handles the memory of the wicked as well as theirs.
Sovereigns are companions if not masters of the laws; for seeing justice
cannot touch their lives, there is reason, it takes hold of their reputation,
and the goods of their successors. We owe reverence and duty equally to all
kings, in respect of their dignity and office, but inward estimation and
affection to their virtue. We patiently endure them, though unworthy as they
are: We conceal their vices; for their authority and public order where we
live has need of our common help: but after they are gone, there is no reason
to reject justice, and the liberty of expressing our true thoughts; yea it is
a very excellent and profitable example, that we manifest to the posterity
faithfully to obey a Master or Lord, whose imperfections are well known. They
who for some private duty commit a wicked prince to memory, do private justice
to the public hurt. O excellent lesson for a successor if it were well
observed!

CHAP. XVII. The duty of Magistrates.
GOod people in a commonwealth would love better to 1 For what cause
Magistrates are allowed of.
enjoy ease of contentment; which good and excellent spirits know how to give
themselves in consideration of the goods of nature, and the effects of God,
than to undertake public charges, were it not that they fear to be ill
governed, and by the wicked, and therefore they consent to be magistrates: but
to hunt and follow public charges, especially the judgment seat is base and
vile, and condemned by all good laws, yea even of the heathen, witness the
law Iulia de ambitu: unworthy a person of honor, and a man cannot better
express his insufficiency, than by seeking for it. But it is most base and
vile by briberie or money to purchase them, and there is no merchandise more
hateful and contemptible than it: for it necessarily follows, that he which
buieth in gross, sells by retaile: Whereupon the Emperor Seuerus speaking
against the like inconvenience, says, Lamprid.
That a man can not justly condemn him which sells that he bought.

Even as a man apparrelleth himself, and puts on his 2 How a magistrate
ought to prepare himself before he take the charge.
best habit before he departs his house to appear in public: so before a
man undertake public charge, he ought privately to examine himself, to learn
to rule his passions, and well to settle and establish his mind. A man
brings not to the turney a raw vnmanaged horse, neither does a man enter into
affairs of importance, if he has not been instructed and prepared for it
before: so, before a man undertakes these affairs, and enters upon the stage
and theater of this world, he ought to correct that imperfect and savage part
in us, to bridle and restrain the liberty of affections, to learn the laws,
the parts, and measures thereof, wherewith it ought to be handled in all
occasions. But contrarily it is a vevery lamentable and absurd thing, as
Socrates says, that although no man undertakes the profession of any mystery
or mechanical art, which formerly he has not learned: yet in public
charges, in the skill to command and obey well, to govern the world, the
deepest and difficultest mystery of all, they are accepted, and undertake it,
that know nothing at all.

Magistrates are intermixed persons, placed between the sovereign and private
men, and therefore it behooves 3 A general description of magistrates.
them to know how to command, and to obey, how to obey their sovereign, yield
to the power of superior magistrates, honor their equals, command their
inferiors, defend the weak, make head against the great, and be just to all:
and therefore it was well said, That magistracy descrieth a man, being to play
in public so many parts.

In regard of his sovereign, the magistrate according to the diversity of the
commands, ought diversely to govern, 4 The duty of magistrates as touching the
sovereign.
or readily, or not at all to obey, or surcease his obedience. First, in those
commands which yield unto him acknowledgement and allowance, as are all the
warrants of Justice, and all other where this clause, or any equivalent unto it
(if it appear unto you) or which are without attribution of allowance, just
and indifferent of themselves, he ought to obey, and he may easily discharge
himself without any scruple and danger.

2 In those commands which attribute unto him no acknowledgement, but only the
execution, as are warrants of command, if they be against right and civil
Justice, and that have in them clauses derogatorie, he ought simply to obey:
for the sovereign may derogate from the ordinary law, and this is properly
that wherein sovereignty consists.

3 To those which are contrary to right, and contain no derogatorie clause,
but are wholly prejudicial to the good and utility of the commonwealth, what
clause soever it has, and though the magistrate knows it to be false, and
enforced against right and by violence, he ought not to yield readily in these
three causes, but to hold them in suspense, and to make resistance once or
twice; and at the second or third command to yield.

4 Touching those which are repugnant to the law of God, and nature; he ought
to dismiss and acquit himself of his office, yea to endure any thing, rather
than obey or consent: and he need not say that the former commands may have
some doubt in them: because natural Justice is more clear than the light of
the Sun.

5 All this is good to be done in respect of the things themselves; But after
they are once done by the sovereign, how evil soever they be, it is better to
dissemble them, and bury the memory of them, than to stir and lose all (as
Papinian did) frustra niti and mihi aliud, nisi odium quaerere, extremae
dementiae est.

In respect of private subjects, magistrates ought to remember, that the
authority which they have over them, they 5 As touching private men.
have but at a second hand, and hold it of the sovereign, who always
remains absolute lord, and their authority is limited to a prefixed time.

The magistrate ought to be of easy access, ready to hear and understand all
complaints and suits, having his gate Magna seruitus, magna fortuna. And for
this cause the law of Moses provided, that the Judges and judgment seats were
Deuteronomy. 16.
held at the gates of the cities, to the end every man might have easy access
thereto.

He ought also indifferently to receive and hear all, great

But he ought not to converse and be familiar with many, but with very few, and
those very wise and advised, and that Cleon called to the government of the
commonwealth, assembled all his friends, and there renounced and disclaimed
all intimation or inward amity with them, as a thing incompatible with his
charge, for Cicero says, he depriueth himself of the person of a friend, that
undertakes that of a Judge.

His office is especially in two things, to uphold and defend the honor, the
dignity, and the right of his sovereign, and 5 Cic. lib. 1. Officior.
of the weal public which he represents: gerere personam ciuitatis, eius
dignitatem and decus sustinere, with authority and a mild severity.

Then as a good and loyal interpreter and officer of the

Although the magistrate ought wisely to temper mildness with rigor, yet it
is better for a magistrate to be severe Prince, who made both. To be brief, to
discharge well his office, there is required two things, honesty and courage.
The first has need of the second. The first preserves the magistrate free
from avarice, respect of persons, of bribes, which is the plague, and smotherer
of truth. (Acceptatio munerum praeuaricatio est veritatis) from the corruption
of justice which Plato calls an hallowed virgin: Also from passions, of
hatred, of love, and others, all enemies to right and equity. But to carry
himself well against the threatenings of great men, the importunate entreaties
of his friends, the lamentations and tears of the poor distressed, which are
all violent and forceable things, and yet have some color of reason and
justice, and which makes sometimes the most resolute to relent, he had need of
courage. Firm and inflexible constancy is a principal quality and virtue in
a magistrate, to the end he may not fear the great and mighty, and be not
moved and mollified with the misery of another, though it carry with it some
show of goodness: But yet it is forbid to have pity of the poor in judgment.

CHAP. XVIII. The duty of the great and small.
THe duty of the great consists in two things, in indeuouring by all means,
to spend their blood and ability for the defense and conservation of piety,
justice, of the Prince, of the state, and generally for the welfare and good of
the commonwealth; of which they ought to be the pillars and supporters; and
after in defending and protecting the poor afflicted and oppressed, resisting
the violence of the wicked: and like good blood, to run to the wounded part,
according to the proverb; That good blood, that is to say, noble and generous,
can not lie, that is to say, deceive where is need. By this means Moses
became the head of the Jewish nation, undertaking the defense of men injured
and unjustly Exodus 2.
troad under foot. Hercules was deified for delivering the oppressed from the
hands of tyrants. Those that have done the like, have been called Heroes and
demigods, and to the like, all honors have been anciently ordained, that is,
to such as deserved well of the commonwealth, and were the deliuerers of the
oppressed. It is no greatness for a man to make himself to be feared, (except
it be of his enemies) and to terrify the world, as some have done, which also
have procured them hate. Oderint dum metuant. It is better to be beloved than
adored. This comes of a natural pride, and inhumanitie, to contemn and
disdain other men as the ordure and excrements of the world, and as if they
were not men; and from thence they grow cruel, and abuse both the bodies and
goods of the weak, a thing wholly contrary to true greatness and honor, who
ought to undertake the defense thereof.

The duty of inferiors toward their superiors, consists in two points, in
honoring and reuerencing them, not only ceremoniously and in outward show,
which he must do as well to the good as the evil, but with love and
affection, if they deserve it, and are lovers of the commonwealth. These are
two things, to honor, and to esteem, which are due to the good and truly
great: to others to bend the knee, to bow the body, not the heart, which is to
esteem and love. Moreover to please them by humble and serviceable duties, and
to insinuate into their favor.

Principibus placuisse viris non vltima laus est. And to make himself capable
of their protection, which if he cannot procure them to be his friends, yet at
the least not to make them his enemies, which must be done with measure and
discretion. For ouer-greedilie to avoid their indignation, or to seek their
grace and favor, besides that it is a testimony of weakness, it is silentlie
to condemn them of injustice and cruelty; Non ex professo cauere aut fugere:
nam quem quis fugit, damnat; Or to stir up in them a desire to execute their
fury, seeing so base and fearful a submission.

Of Fortitude the third virtue. PREFACE.
THe two former precedent virtues rule and govern man in company, or with
another: these two following rule him in himself and for himself: respecting
the two visages of fortune, the two heads and kinds of all accidents,
Prosperity, and Adversity: for fortitude armeth a man against adversity,
Temperance guides him in prosperity: moderating the two brutish parts of our
soul, fortitude rules the irascible, temperance the concupiscible: These two
virtues may wholly be comprised and understood by this word Constancy, which
is a right and equal stay ednesse of the mind, in all accidents and outward
things, whereby he is not puffed up in prosperity, nor dejected in adversity.
Nec aduersis frangitur, nec prosperis aestuat.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Fortitude or Valor in general.
Valor, (for this virtue is more properly so called than fortitude) is a
right and strong resolution, an equal, and 1 The description of valor.
uniform stay ednes of the mind against all dangerous, difficult, and dolorous
accidents: in such sort, that difficulty and danger is the object and matter
wherein it is exercised: to be brief, it is all that which humane weakness
fears, Timendorum contemptrix, quae terribilia, and sub iugum libertatem
nostram Senec.
mittentia, despicit, prouocat, frangit.

Of all the virtues in greatest estimation and honor, this is most renowned,
who for the prerogative thereof is simply 2 The praise thereof.
called a virtue. That is the more difficult, the more glorious, which
produces the greatest, famous, and most excellent effects; it contains
magnanimity, patience, constancy, an invincible resolution, heroical
virtues, whereupon many have sought the inconveniences that belong thereunto,
with greediness to attain so honorable employment. This virtue is an
impregnable bulwark, a complete armor to encounter all accidents, Munimentum
imbecillitatis humanae inexpugnabile: quod qui circundedit sibi, securus in hac
vitae obsidione Senec.
per durat.

But because many do mistake, and in place of the only true virtue conceive the
false and bastardly valors, I will in declaring 3 Of imperfect or false
valors.
more at large the nature and definition thereof, expel those popular errors
that are here intruded. We will note then in this virtue four conditions; the
first is generally and indifferently against all sorts of difficulties and
dangers: wherefore they are deceived that think there is no other valor than
the military, which only they esteem, because it may be it is most renowned
and glorious, and carries greatest reputation Military valor.
and honor, which is the tongue and trumpet of immortality; for to say truth,
there is more fame and glory therein than pain and danger. Now this is but a
small part and a little raye or light of the true, entire, perfect, and
universal, whereby a man is one and the same, in company, in bed with his
griefs, as in the field, as little fearing death in his house, as in the
army. This military valor is pure and natural in beasts, with whom it is as
well in females as in males; in men it is often artificial, gotten by fear
and the apprehension of captivity, of death, of grief, of poverty; of which
things beasts have no fear. Humane valor is a wise cowardlinesse, a fear
accompanied with foregsiht to avoid one evil by another; choler is the temper,
and file thereof; beasts have it simply. In men also it is attained by use,
institution, example, custom, and it is found in base and slavish minds: of a
servant or slave, or a factour, or fellow trained up in merchandise, is made a
good and valiant soldier, and often without any tincture or instinct of virtue
and true philosophical valor.

The second condition, it presupposes knowledge as well of the difficulty,
pain, and danger, which there is in the action 4 Temeritie or stupiditie.
that is presented, as of the beauty, honesty, justice, and duty required in
the enterprise or support thereof. Wherefore they are deceived that make valor
an inconsiderate temeritie, or a senseless brutish stupiditie: Non est
inconsulta temeritas, nec periculorum amor, nec formidabilium appetitio,
diligentissima Seneca.
in tutela sui fortitudo est: and eadem patientissima eorum quibus falsa
species malorum est. Virtue cannot be without knowledge and apprehension, a man
cannot truly contemn the danger which he knows not; if a man will also
acknowledge this virtue in beasts. And indeed they that ordinarily attempt
without any foresight or knowledge, when they come to the point of execution
the sent is their best intelligence.

The third condition; this is a resolution and stayednes of the mind grounded
upon the duty, and the honesty, and Bodily strength.
justice of the enterprise; which resolution never slacketh, whatsoever
happens, until he have valiantly ended the enterprise, or his life. Many
offend against this condition, first and more grossly they that seek this
virtue in the body, and in the power and strength of the limbs. Now valor is
not a quality of the body, but of the mind; a settled strength, not of the
arms and legs, but of the courage. The estimation and valor of a man
consists in his heart and will: here lies his true honor: and the only
advantage and the true victory over his enemy, is to terrify him, and to
arm himself against his constancy and virtue: all other helps are strange
and borrowed: strength of arms and legs is the quality of a porter: to make an
enemy to stoop, to dazell his eyes at the light of the sun, is an accident
of fortune. He whose courage fails not for any fear of death, quelleth not
in his constancy and resolution: and though he fall, is not vanquished of his
adversary, who perhaps may in effect be but a base fellow, but of fortune: and
therefore he is to accuse his own unhappiness, and not his negligence. The
most valiant are oftentimes the most unfortunate. Moreover they are deceived,
which disquiet themselves, and make account of those vain Thrasonicall brags
of such swaggering Braggadochios, who by their loftielooks, and brave words,
would win credit of those that are valiant and hardy, if a man would do them
so much favor to believe them.

Moreover, they that attribute valor to subtlety and craft, 6 Art and
industry.
or to art or industry, do much more profane it, and make it play a base and
abject part. This is to disguise things, and to place a false stone for a true.
The Lacedaemonians permitted no Fencers nor master-Wrestlers in their cities: to
the end their youth might attain thereto by nature, and not by art. We
account it a bold and hardy thing to fight with a Lion, a Bear, a wild Bore,
which encounter a man only according to nature: but not with Waspes, for they
use subtlety. Alexander would not contend in the Olympique games, saying,
there was no equality: because a private man might overcome, and a king be
vanquished. Moreover it is not fitting for a man of honor, to try and
adventure his valor in a thing, wherein a base fellow instructed by rule may
gain the prise. For such victory comes not of virtue, nor of courage, but of
certain artificial tricks and inventions: wherein the basest will do that,
which a valiant man knows not, neither should he regard to do it. Fencing is
a trick of art, which may be attained by base persons, and men of no account.
And although infamous and ruffinlike fellows are apt to fight or do any thing
in cities or towns, with the dexterity of the sword; if they see an enemy,
would they not run away? Even so is it in that, which is attained By long
habit and custom, as builders, tumblers, mariners, who undertake dangerous
things, and more difficult than the most valiant, being trained and instructed
therein from their youth.

Finally, they which consider not sufficiently the motive 7 Passion.
and circumstance of actions, wrongly attribute to valor and virtue, that
which appertains and belongs to some passion or particular intent. Eor as
it is not properly virtue, nor justice to be loyal and officious toward some,
which a man particularly loves; nor temperance, to abstain from the carnal
pleasure of his sister, or of his daughter; nor liberality toward his wife
and children: so is it not true valor to adventure himself to any danger, for
his own benefit and particular satisfaction. Wherefore if it be good for
gain, as spies, pioners, traitors, merchants on the sea, mercenarie soldiers;
if for ambition or reputation to be esteemed and accounted valiant; as the most
part of our men of war, who say, being naturally carried thereunto, that if
they thought they should lose their life, would not go; if weary of his life
through pain and grief, as the soldier of Antigonus, who living in extreme
torment by the means of a fistula he had, was hardy to attempt all dangers,
being healed avoided them; if to prevent shame, captivity, or any other evil;
if through fury and the heat of choler: to be brief, if by passion or
particular consideration, as Ajax, Catiline, it is neither valor nor virtue,
Sicut non martyrem poena, sic nec fortem pagna sed causa fecit.

The fourth condition. It ought to be in the execution 8 Indiscretion.
thereof wise and discreet, whereby many false opinions are rejected in this
matter, which are not to hide themselves from those evils and in conueniences
that threaten them: neither to fear lest they surprise us, nor to fly, yea
not to feel the first blows, as the noise of thunder or shot, or the fall of
some great building. Now this is to understand amiss: for so that the mind
remain firm and entire in it own place and discourse, without alteration,
he may outwardly disquiet and make a stir. He may lawfully, yea it is
honorable, to overthrow, to undo; and to revenge himself of evils, by all
means and honest indeauors: and where there is no remedy, to carry himself
with a settled resolution. Men's immota manet: lachrymae voluuntur inanes.
Socrates mocked those that condemned flight: What, says he, is it
cowardlinesse to beat and vanquish them by giving them place? Homer commends
in his Ulysses the skill to fly: the Lacedaemonians professors of valor in the
journey of the Plateans, retired, the better to break and dissolve the Persian
troop; which otherwise they could not do, and overcame them. This has been
practiced by the most warlike people. In other places the Stoickes themselves
allowed to wax pale; to tremble at the first sudden encounter, so that it
proceed no farther into the mind and courage. And this is valor in gross.
There are things which are justly to be feared and flied, as shipwracks,
lightnings, and those where there is no remedy, neither place of virtue,
prudence, valor.

Of fortitude or valor in particular.
TO divide the matter and discourse of that which is here The proposition and
division of this matter.
to be said, this virtue is exercised and employed against all that which the
world accounts evil. Now this evil is twofold, external, and internal,
the one proceeds from without, it is called by diverse names, adversity,
affliction, injury, unhappiness, evil and sinister accidents: The other is
inward in the mind, but caused by that which is outward: These are hateful and
hurtful passions, of fear, sadness, choler, and diverse others. We must
speak of them both; prescribe means and remedies to overcome, suppress, and
rule them. These are the arguments and counsels of our virtue, fortitude, and
valor. It consists then here of two parts, the one of evils or ill
accidents, the other of passions, which proceed thereof. The general advice
against all good and evil fortune has been declared before: we will speak
here more specially and particularly thereof.

CHAP. XX. The first part of outward evils.
WE will consider these outward evils three ways, in 1 The distinction and
comparison of evils by their causes.
their causes, which shall be declared in this chapter; afterward in their
effects; lastly in themselves distinctly, and particularly every kind of them:
And we will give advice and means in them all, by virtue to be armed against
them.

The cause of evil and hateful accidents, which happen to us all, are either
common and general, when at the same instant they concern many, as
pestilence, famine, war, tyranny. And these evils are for the most part
scourges sent of God, and from heaven, or at least the proper and nearest cause
thereof we cannot easily know: Or particulars, and those that are known, that
is to say, by the means of another. And so there are two sorts of evils;
public and private. Now the common evils, that is to say, proceeding of a
public cause, though they concern every one in particular, are in diverse
kinds, more or less grievous, weighty, and dangerous, than the private, whose
causes are known. More grievous, for they come by flocks and troops, they
assail more violently, with greater stir of vehemency and fury: they have
a greater concurse and train: they are more tempestuous, they bring forth
greater disorder and confusion. Less grievous: because generality and
community seems to mitigate, and lessen every man's evil. It is a kind of
comfort not to be alone in misery: it is thought to be rather a common
unhappiness, where the course of the world, and the cause is natural, than
personal affliction. And indeed those wrongs which a man does us, torment us
more, wound us to the quick, and much more alter us. Both these two have their
remedies and comforts.

Against public evils, a man ought to consider from whom, and by whom they
are sent, and to mark their cause. 2 The advice against public evils.
Providence. Destiny.
It is God, his providence, from whence comes and depends an absolute
necessity, which governs and rules all, whereunto all things are subject.
His providence, and destiny, or necessity, are not, to say the truth, two
distinct laws in essence, (...), neither are they one. The diversity is only
in the consideration and different reason. Now to murmr, and to be grieved at
the contrary, is first of all such impiety, as the like is not elsewhere
found: for all things do quietly obey, man only torments himself. And again
it is a folly, because it is vain and to no purpose. If a man will not follow
this sovereign and absolute mistress willingly, it shall carry all by force: ad
hoc sacramentum adacti sumus far mortalia, nec perturbari ijs, quae vitare
nostrae potestatis non est: in regno nati sumus, deo parere libertas est.

Desine fata deum flecti sperare querendo. There is no better remedy, than to
apply our wills to the will thereof; and according to the advice of wisdom
to make a virtue of necessity. Non est aliud effugium necessitatis, quam velle
quod ipsa cogat. In seeking to contend or dispute against it, we do but
sharpen and stir the evil. Laeto animo far quicquid acciderit quasi tibi
volueris accidere: debuisses enim velle, si scisses ex decreto Dei fieri.
Besides we shall better profit our selves, we shall do that which we ought to
do, which is to follow our general and sovereign, who has so ordained it.
Optimum pati, quod emendare non possis; and deum, quo authore cuncta
proueniunt, sine murmuratione comitari. Malus miles est qui imperatorem gemens
sequitur. And without contestation to allow for good whatsoever he will. It is
magnanimity of courage to yield unto him. Magnus animus qui se Deo tradidit.
It is effeminacie and dastardlines to murmr or complain, pusillus and
degener, qui obluctatur, de ordine mundi male existimat, and emendare mauult
Deum quam se.

Against those private evils, which do proceed from the act of another, and
which pierce us more, we ought first well to 3 The distinction. Of private evils.
distinguish them, lest we mistake them. There is displeasure, there is
offense. We often conceive ill of another, who notwithstanding has not
offended us neither in deed nor will, as when he has either demanded, or
refused any thing with reason, but yet was then hurtful unto us: for such
causes it is too great simplicity to be offended, since that they are not
offenses. Now there are two sorts of offenses, the one crosses our affairs
against equity; this is to wrong us: the others are applied to the person, who
is contemned by it, and handled otherwise than it ought, be it in deed or in
word. These are more grievous and harder to be endured, than any other kind of
affliction.

The first and general advice against all these sorts of evils, is to be firm
and resolute, not to suffer himself to be lead by 4 The advice against them in
general.
common opinion, but without passion to consider of what weight and importance
things are, according to verity and reason. The world suffers it self to be
persuaded and lead by impression. How many are there that make less account to
receive a great wound, than a little blow? more account of a word, than of
death? To be brief, all is measured by opinion: and opinion offends more
than the evil; and our impatience hurts us more, than those of whom we
complain.

The other more particular counsels and remedies are drawn first from our
selves, (and this is that we must first 5 Particular aduisements drawn from
our selves.
look into.) These pretended offenses may arise of our own defects and
weakness. This might be a follic grounded upon some defect, in our own
person, which any one in derision would counterfeit. It is folly to grieve and
vex himself for that which proceeds not from his own fault. The way to
prevent others in their scoffs, is first to speak, and to let them know, that
you know as much as they can tell you; if it be that the injury has taken his
beginning by our default, and that we have given the occasion of this abuse,
why should we be offended therewith? for it is not an offense, but a
correction, which he ought to receive, and make use of as a punishment. 3. But
for the most part it proceeds of our own proper weakness, which makes us
melancholy. Now he ought to quit himself of all those tender delicacies,
which makes him live vnquietlie, but with a manly courage, strong and stoutly
to contemn, and tread under foot the indiscretions and follies of another. It
is no sign that a man is sound, if he complain when one touches him. Never
shall thou be at rest if thou frame thy self to all that is presented.

They are also drawn from the person that offends. We 6 Of those who offend.
represent in general the manners and humors of those persons with whom we are
to live in the world. The most part of men take no delight but to do evil, and
measure their power by the disdain, and the injury of another. So few there
are which take pleasure to do well. He ought then to make account, that whether
soever we turn us, we shall find those that will harm, and offend us.
Wheresoever we shall find men, we shall find injuries. This is so certain
and necessary, that the lawyers themselves, who rule the traffic and
affairs of this world, have wincked at, and permitted in distributive and
commutatiue justice many escapes in law. They have permitted deceit and
hindrances even to the one half of the just price. This necessity to hurt
and offend, comes first of the contrariety, and incompatibilitie of humors
and wills, whereof it comes that a man is offended without will to offend.
Then from the concurrence and opposition of affairs, which infers that the
pleasure, profit, and good of one, is the displeasure, damage, and ill of
others; and it cannot be otherwise, following this common and general picture
of the world, if he who offends thee is insolent, a fool, and rash (as he
is, for an honest man never wrongeth any) wherefore complainest thou, since he
is no more his own man, than as a mad man? You can well endure a furious man
without complaint, yea, you will pity him; an innocent, an infant, a woman,
ye will laugh at them: a fool, a drunken man, a choleric, an indiscreet man
in like sort. Wherefore when these people assail us with words, we ought not
to answer them: we must hold our peace, and quit our selves of them. It is an
excellent and worthy revenge, and grievous to a fool, not to make any account
of him, for it is to take away that pleasure which he thinks to have in
vexing us, since our silence condemns his simplicity, and his own temeritie,
is smothered in his own mouth: if a man answer him, he makes him his equal,
and by esteeming him too much, he wrongs himself. Male loquuntur, quia been
loqui nesciunt, faciunt quod solent and sciunt, male quia mali, and secundum se.

Behold then for conclusion the advice and counsel of wisdom: we must have
respect unto ourselves, and unto him 7 The conclusion of these counsels and
with the rule of wisdom.
that offends us. As touching our selves, we must take heed we do nothing un
worthy and unbefitting our selves, that may give another advantage against us.
An unwise man that distrusteth himself, grows into passion without cause, and
thereby gives encouragement to another to contradict him. This is a weakness
of the mind, not to know to contemn offense: an honest man is not subject to
injury: he is inviolable: an inviolable thing is not only this, that a man
can not beat, but being beaten, neither receives wound nor hurt: This
resolution is a more strong bulwark against all accidents; that we can receive
no evil, but of our selves. If our judgment be as it ought, we are
inuulnerable. And therefore we always say with wise Socrates, Anitus and
Melitus may well put me to death, but they shall never enforce me to do that I
ought not. Moreouen, an honest man, as he never gives occasion of injury to
any man, so he cannot endure to receive an injury. Laedere enim laedique
coniunctum est. This is a wall of brass, which a man is not able to pierce;
scoffs, and injuries trouble him not. Touching him that has offended us, if
you hold him vain and unwise, handle him accordingly, and so leave him: if he
be otherwise, excuse him; Imagine that he has had occasion, and that it is not
for malice, but by misconceit and negligence; he is vexation enough to
himself, and he wishes he had never done it. Moreover, I say, that like good
husbands we must make profit and commodity of the injuries that are offered
us. Which we may do at the least two ways, which respect the offender and
the offended. The one, that they give us occasion to know those that wrong us,
to the end we may the better fly them at another time. Such a man has
slandered thee, conclude presently that he is malicious: and trust him no more:
The other, that they discover unto us our infirmity, and the means whereby we
are easily beaten, to the end we should amend and repair our defects; lest
another take occasion to say as much or more. What better revenge can a man
take of his enemies, than to make profit of their injuries, and thereby better
and more securely to manage our affairs?

CHAP. XXI.
Of outward evils considered in their effects and fruits.
AFter the causes of evils we come to the effects and fruits 1 General effects
very profitable.
thereof, where are also found true preservatives and remedies. The effects are
many, are great, are general and particular. The general respect the good,
maintenance and culture of the universe. First of all, the world would be
extinguished, would perish, and be lost, if it were not changed, troubled, and
renewed by these great accidents of pestilence, famine, war, mortality, which
season, perfect and purify it, to the end to sweeten the rest, and give more
liberty and ease to the whole. Without these a man could neither turn
himself nor be settled. Moreover besides the variety and interchangeable
course, which they bring both to the beauty and ornament of this universe,
also allparts of the world are benefited thereby. The rude and barbarous are
hereby polished and refined, arts and sciences are dispersed and imparted
unto all. This is as a great nurserie, wherein certain trees are transplanted
from other stocks, others pruned and pulled up by the roots, all for the good
and beauty of the orchard. These good and general considerations ought to
remain and resolve every honest and reasonable mind, and to hinder the
curious inquiry of men into those great and turbulent accidents so strange and
wonderful, since they are the works of God and nature, and that they do so
notable a service in the general course of the world. For we must think,
that that which is a loss in one respect, is a gain in another. And to speak
more plainly, nothing is lost, but such is the course of the world, so it
changes and so it is accommodated. Vir sapiens nihil indignetur sibi accidere,
sciat que illa ipsa quibus laedi videtur, ad conseruationem vniuersi pertinere,
and ex his esse, quae cursum mundi officiumque consummant. 2 Particular effects
diverse.


The particular effects are diverse, according to the diverse spirits and states
of those that receive them: For they exercise the good, relieve and amend the
fallen, punish the wicked. Of every one a word, for hereof we have spoken
elsewhere. 1. Lib. of the three verities, cap 11.
These outward evils are in those that are good, a very profitable exercise,
and an excellent school wherein (as Wrestlers and Fencers, Mariners in a
tempest, Soldiers in dangers, Philosophers in their Academies, and all other
sorts of people in the serious exercise of their profession) they are
instructed, made and formed unto virtue, constancy, valor, the victory of
the world and of fortune. They learn to know themselves, to make trial of
themselves, and they see the measure of their valor, the uttermost of their
strength; how far they may promise or hope of themselves; and then they
encourage and strengthen themselves to what is best, accustom and harden
themselves to all, become resolute and invincible; whereas contrarily, the long
calm of prosperity mollifieth them, and makes them wanton and effeminate.
And therefore Demetrius was wont to say, That there were no people more
miserable, than they that had never felt any crosses or afflictions, that had
never been miserable, calling their life a dead sea.

These outward evils to such as are offenders, are a bridle to stay them, that
they stumble not, or a gentle correction 3 Medicine and chastisment.
and fatherly rod after the fall to put them in remembrance of themselves, to
the end they make not a second revolt. They are a kind of letting blood, and
medicine or preservative to divert faults and offenses; or a purgation to void
and purify them.

To the wicked and forlorn they are a punishment, a sickle 4 Punishment.
to cut them off, and to take them away, or to afflict them with a long and
miserable languishment. And these are their wholesome and necessary effects,
for which these outward evils are not only to be esteemed of, and quietly
taken with patience and in good part, as the exploits of divine justice, but
are to be embraced as tokens and instruments of the care, of the love and
providence of God, and men are to make a profitable use of them, following the
purpose and intention of him, who sends and disposes them as pleases him.

Of outward evils in themselves and particularly. AN ADVERTISEMENT.
ALl these evils, which are many and diverse, are priuations of their contrary
good, as likewise the name and nature of evil does signify. And therefore as
many heads as there are of good, so many are there of evils, which may all be
reduced and comprehended in the number of seven, sickness, grief, (I include
these two in one) captivity, banishment, want, infamy, loss of friends,
death; which are the priuations of health, liberty, home-dwelling, means or
maintenance, honors, friends, life, whereof has been spoken before In the
first book.
at large. We will here inquire into the proper and particular remedies and
medicines against these seven heads of evils, and that briefly without
discourse.

CHAP. XXII. Of Sickness and grief.
WE have said before that grief is the greatest, and, to say the truth, the
only essential evil, which is most felt, and has least remedies.
Nevertheless, behold some few that regard the reason, justice, utility,
imitation and resemblance with the greatest and most excellent.

It is a common necessity to endure; there is no reason that

It is also a natural thing; we are borne thereunto, and to desire to be
exempted from it is injustice, we must quietly

If it be long, it is light and moderate, and therefore a Confide, summus non
habet tempus dolor. Si grauis, breuis; Si longus, leuis.

And again, it is the body that endures: it is not our selves that are
offended, for the offense diminishes the excellency there is not less
occasion of good. If the body be the instrument of the spirit, who will
complain when the instrument is employed in the service of that whereunto it
is destinated? The body is made to serve the soul: if the soul should afflict
it self for any thing that happens to the body, the soul should serve the
body. Were not that man over delicate and curious, that would cry out and
afflict himself, because some one or other had spoiled his apparel, some
thorn had taken hold of it, or some man passing by had torn it? Some base
broker perhaps would be aggrieued therewith, that would willingly make a
commodity thereof: But a man of ability and reputation would rather laugh at
it, and account it as nothing in respect of that state and abundance that God
has bestowed on him. Now this body is but a borrowed garment, to make our
spirits for a time to appear upon this low and troublesome stage, of which
only we should make account, and procure the honor and peace thereof. For
from whence comes it that a man suffers grief with such impatiencie? It is
because he accustometh not himself to seek his content in his soul; non
assuerunt animo esse contenti, nimium illis cum corpore fuit. Men have too
great a commerce with their bodies; And it seems that grief grows proud,
seeing us to tremble under the power thereof.

It teaches us to distaste that which we must needs leave,

The joy and pleasure we receive by the recovery of our health, after that our
grief or sickness has taken his course,

Now then if the grief be indifferent, the patience shall be easy: if it be
great, the glory shall be as great: if it seem ouerhard, and the reproach will
light upon our selves. It would make us afeard, and therefore it stands us
upon to take heart, and that when it comes it find us more resolute than was
imagined. Our yielding makes that more eager and more fierce, stare fidenter,
non quia difficilia non audemus: sed quia non audemus, difficilia sunt.

But lest these remedies should seem but fair words and Examples.
time endured long and grievous sicknesses with such constancy, that their
grief has rather given them life than courage; but have attended and borne
even with joy, yea, have sought after the greatest and most exquisit torments.
In Lacedemon little children whipped one another, yea sometimes to the death,
without any show in their countenance of any grief or smart that they felt,
only to accustom themselves to suffer for their country. Alexanders page
suffered himself to be burnt with a cole without cry or countenance of
discontent, because he would not interrupt the sacrifice: and a lad of
Lacedemon suffered a fox to gnaw his guts out of his belly before he would
discover his theft. Pompay being surprised by king Gentius, who would have
constrained him to reveal the public affairs of Rome, to make known that no
torment should make him to do it, did voluntarily put his finger into the
fire, and suffered it to burn, until Gentius himself took it out. The like
before that had Mutius done before another king, Porsenna; and that good old
Regulus of Carthage endured more than all these: and yet more than Regulus,
Anaxarchus, who being half pounded in a mortar by the tyrant Nicocreon, would
never confess that his mind was touched with any torment; Beat and pound the
sack of Anaxarchus till you be glutted, as for himself you shall never touch
him.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Captivity and imprisonment.
THis affliction is no more than nothing, and in respect of sickness and
grief it is an easy matter to vanquish it. For sick folk are not without
captivity in their beds, in their houses, for the time they lie in, yea, they
ingrosse as it were affliction above captivity; nevertheless, a word or two
thereof. There is nothing but the body, the cover, the prison of the soul
that is captive, the soul it self remains always free, and at libetie in
despite of all; and therefore how should that man know or perceive that he is
in prison, who as freely, yea and more freely too, may walk and wander whither
he will, than he that is abroad? The walls and dungeons of the prison are not
strong enough to shut him up, the body that touches him and is joined unto
him, cannot hold nor stay him. He that knows how to maintain himself in his
liberty, and to use and hold his own right, which is not to be shut up, no
not in this world, will but laugh at these fleight and childish embarments.
Christianus etiam extra carcerem saeculo renuntiauit: in carcere etiam carceri:
nihil interest vbi sit is in saeculo Tertul.
qui extra saeculum estis; auferamus carceris nomen, secessum vocemus, and si
corpus includitur, caro detinetur, omnia spiritui patent, totum hominem animus
circumfert, and quo vult transfert.

The prison has gently received into the lap thereof many great and holy
personages; it has been the sanctuary, the haven of health, and a fortress
to diverse that had been utterly undone if they had had their liberty, yea,
that have had recourse thereunto to be in liberty, have made choice thereof,
and espoused themselves unto it, to the end they might live at rest, and free
themselves from the cares of the world, e carcere in custodiarium translati.
That which is shut up under lock and key is in safest custody: and it is
better to be under the safeguard of a key, than to be bound and enthralled with
those fetters and stocks, whereof the world is full, that public places and
courts of great princes, and the tumultuous affairs of this world bring with
them, as iealousies, enuies, violent humors, and the like. Si recogitemus
ipsum Tertul.
magis mundum carcerem esse, exisse nos e carcere quam in carcerem introisse
intelligemus, maiores tenebr as habet mundus quae hominum praecordia excaecant,
grauiores catenas induit, quae ipsas animas constringunt, peiores immunditias
expirat, libidines hominum, plures postremo reos continet vniuersum genus
hominum. Many have escaped the hands of their enemies, and other great dangers
and miseries by the benefit of imprisonment. Some have there written books,
and have there bettered their knowledge. Plus in carcere spiritus acquirit quam
caro amittit. Diverse there are whom the prison having kept and preserved for a
time, has resent unto their former sovereign dignities, and mounted them to
the highest places in the world; others it has yielded up unto heaven, and
has not at any time received any that it restores not.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of Banishment and exile.
FXile is a change of place that brings no ill with it, but in opinion; it is a
complaint and affliction wholly imaginary: Duo quae pulcherrima sunt,
quocunque nos mouerimus, sequentur, natura communis and propria virtus.

In all places we find the selfsame common nature, the same heavens, the same
elements. In all places the heavens 2 Nature.
and the stars appear unto us in the same greatness, extent, and that is it
which principally we are to consider, and not that which is under us, and
which we trample under feet. Again, at a kenning we cannot see of the earth
above ten or twelve leagues: Angustus animus quem terrena delectant. But the
face of the great azured firmament, decked and counterpointed with so many
beautiful and shining diamonds, does always show it self unto us; and to the
end we may wholly behold it, it continually whirleth about us. It shows it
self all unto all, and in all respects in a day and a night. The earth which
with the sea and all that it contains, is not the hundredth and sixty part of
the greatness of the sun, shows not it self unto us but in that small
proportion that is about the place where we dwell: yea and that change of that
earthly floor that is under us is nothing. What matter is it to be borne in
one place and to live in another? Our mother might have lay en in elsewhere,
and it is a chance that we are borne here or there. Again, all Countries
bring forth and nourish men, and furnish them with whatsoever is necessary.
All countries have kindred; nature has knit us all together in blood and in
charity. All have friends; there is no more to to but to make friends, and to
win them by virtue and wisdom. Every land is a wise man's country, or rather
no land is his particular country. For it were to wrong himself, and it were
weakness and baseness of heart, to think to carry himself as a stranger in
any place. He must always use his own right and liberty, and live in all
places as with himself, and upon his own, omnes terras tanquam suas videre,
and suas tanquam omnium.

Moreover what change or discommoditie does the diversity of the place bring
with it? Do we not always carry about 3 Virtue.
us one and the same spirit and virtue? Who can forbid, says Brutus, a
banished man to carry with him his virtues? The spirit and virtue of a man is
not shut up in any place, but it is every where equally and indifferently. An
honest man is a citizen of the world, free, cheerful, and content in all
places, always within himself, in his own quarter, and ever one and the
same, though his case or scabberd be removed and carried hither and thither:
animus sacer and aternus vbique est, dijs cognatus, omni mundo and auo par. A
man in every place is in his own country where he is well. Now for a man to be
well, it depends not upon the place, but himself.

How many are there, that for diverse considerations have willingly banished
themselves? How many others banished 4 Examples.
by the violence of another, being afterward called home, have refused to
return, and have found their exile not only tolerable, but pleasant and
delightful, yea, never thought they lived until the time of their banishment,
as those noble Romans Rutilius, Marcellus? How many others have been led by
the hand of good fortune out of their country, that they may grow great and
puissant in a strange land?

CHAP. XXV. Of Poverty, want, loss of goods.
THis complaint is of the vulgar and miserable sottish sort 1 Poverty twofold.
of people, who place their sovereign good in the goods of fortune, and think
that poverty is a very great evil. But to show what it is, you must know that
there is a twofold poverty, the one extreme, which is the want of things
necessary, 1. Want of things necessary.
and requisite unto nature; This does seldom or never happen to any man, nature
being so just, and having formed us in such a fashion, that few things are
necessary, and those few are not wanting, but are found every where, parabile
est quod natura defiderat, and expositum, yea in such a sufficiency as being
moderatly used, may suffice the condition of every one. Ad manum est, quod sat
est. If we will live according to nature and reason, the desire and rule
thereof, we shall always find that which is sufficient. If we will live
according to opinion, whilst we live we shall never find it. Si ad naturam
viues nunquam eris pauper, si ad opinionem nunquam dives: exiguum natura
desiderat, opinio immensum. And therefore a man that has an art or science to
stick unto, yea, that has but his arms at will, is it possible he should
either fear or complain of poverty?

The other is the want of things, that are more than sufficient, 2 2. Want of
things superfluous.
required for pomp, pleasure and delicacie. This is a kind of mediocritie and
frugallitie: and to say the truth, it is that which we fear, to lose our
riches, our moueables, not to have our bed soft enough, our diet well dressed, to
be deprived of these commodities, and in a word, it is delicateness that
holds us, this is our true malady. Now this complaint is unjust; for such
poverty is rather to be desired than feared: and therefore the wise man asked
it of God, mendicitatem nec diuitias, Prouer. 30.
sed necessaria. It is far more just, more rich, more peaceable and certain,
than abundance which a man so much desires. More just; for man came naked,
nemo nascitur dives; The praise of sufficiency.
and he returns naked out of this world. Can a man term that truly his,
that he neither brings nor carries with him? The goods of this world, they
are as the moueables of an Inn. We are not to be discontented so long as we
are here, that we have need of them. More rich; It is a large segnorie, a
kingdom, magnae diuitiae lege naturae composita paupertas: magnus 1. Timot. 6.
quaestus pietas cum sufficientia. More peaceable and assured; it fears
nothing, and can defend it self against the enemies thereof, etiam in obsessa
via paupertas pax est. A small body that may cover and gather it self under a
buckler, is in better safety than a great, which lies open unto every blow.
It is never subject to great losses, nor charges of great labor and burden.
And therefore they that are in such an estate, are always more cheerful and
comfortable, for they neither have so much care, nor fear such tempests. Such
kind of poverty is free, cheerful, assured, it makes us truly masters of our
own lives; whereof the affairs, complaints, contentions that do necessarily
accompany riches, carry away the better part. Alas what goods are those, from
whence proceed all our evils? That are the cause of all those injuries that we
endure, that makes us slaves, trouble the quiet of our souls, bring with them
so many iealousies, suspicions, fears, frights, desires? He that vexes
himself for the loss of these goods is a miserable man, for together with his
goods he loses his spirit too. The life of poor men is like unto those that
sail near the shore; that of the rich like to those that cast themselves into
the maine Ocean. These cannot attain to land, though they desire nothing more,
but they must attend the wind and the tide; the other come aboard, pass and
repasse as often as they will.

Finally, we must endeavor to imitate those great and generous personages,
that have made themselves merry with Zenon, after his shipwreck, Fabricius,
Seranus, Curious. It should seem that poverty is some excellent and divine
thing, since it agrees with the gods who are imagined to be naked, since the
wisest have embraced it, or at least have endured it with great contentment.
And to conclude in a word, with such as are not over passionate it is
commendable, with others insupportable.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Infamy.
THis affliction is of diverse kinds. If it be loss of honors and dignities, it
is rather a gain than a loss: Dignities are but honorable seruitudes, whereby
a man by giving himself to the weale-publike, is deprived of himself. Honors
are but the torches of envy, jealousy, and in the end exile and poverty. If
a man shall call to mind the history of all antiquity, he shall find that
all they that have lived, and have carried themselves woorthily and virtuously,
have ended their course, either by exile, or poison, or some other violent
death: witness among the Greeks, Aristides, Themistocles, Phocion, Socrates;
amongst the Romans, Camillus, Scipio, Cicero, Papinian; among the Hebrews the
Prophets: In such sort that it should seem to be the liuerie of the more
honest men, for it is the ordinary recompense of a public state to such kind
of people. And therefore a man of a gallant and generous spirit should contemn
it, and make small account thereof, for he dishonors himself, and shows
how little he has profited in the study of wisdom that regards in any
respect the censures, reports, and speeches of the people, be they good or
evil.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the loss of Friends.
I Here comprehend parents, children, and whatsoever is near and dear unto a
man. First we must know upon moerere hoc euentum inuidi magis quam amici est.
The true use of death is to make an end of our miseries. If God had made our
life more miserable, he had made it longer.

And therefore to say the truth, it is upon our own good that this complaint
and affliction is grounded: now that becomes us not; it is a kind of injury
to be grieved with the rest and quiet of those that love us, because we our
selves are hurt thereby. Suis incommodis angi non amicum, sed seipsum amantis
est.

Again, there is a good remedy for this, which fortune can not take from us,
and that is, that suruiuing our friends, we

Of death.
WE have spoken hereof so much at large and in all respects in the eleventh
and last chapter of the second book, that there remains not any thing else
to be spoken, and therefore to that place I refer the Reader.

The second part of inward evils, tedious and troublesome passions. THE PREFACE.
FRom all these above named evils, there spring and arise in us diverse passions
and cruel affections: for these being taken and considered simply as they are,
they breed fear, which apprehends evils as yet to come, sorrow for present
evils, and if they be in another, pity and compassion. Being considered as
coming and procured by the act of another, they stir up in us the passions
of choler, hatred, envy, jealousy, despite, revenge, and all those that
procure displeasure, or make us to look upon another with an envious eye. Now
this virtue of fortitude and valor consists in the government and receipt of
these evils according to reason, in the resolute and courageous carriage of a
man, and the keeping of himself free and clear from all passions that spring
thereof. But because they subsist not, but by these evils, if by the means and
help of so many aduisements and remedies before delivered, a man can vanquish
and contemn them all, there can be no more place left unto these passions. And
this is the true mean to free himself, and to come to the end, as the best
way to put out a fire is to withdraw the fuel that gives it nourishment.
Nevertheless we will yet add some particular counsels against these
passions, though they have bin in such sort before deciphered, that it is a
matter of no difficulty to bring them into hatred and detestation.

CHAP. XXVIII. Against Fear.
LEt no man attend evils before they come, because it may be they will never
come: our fears are as likely to deceive us as our hopes; and it may be that
those times that we think will bring most affliction with them, may bring
greatest comfort. How many unexpected adventures may happen that may defend a
man from that blow we fear? Lightning is put by with the wind of a man's
hatte, and the fortunes of the greatest states with accidents of small moment.
The turn of a wheel mounteth him that was of lowest degree, to the highest
step of honor; and many times it falls out that we are preserved by that,
which we thought would have been our overthrow. There is nothing so easily
deceived as humane foresight. That which it hops, it wants; that which it
fears, vanishes; that which it expects happens not. God has his counsel
by himself; That which man determines after one manner, he resolves after
another. Let us not therefore make our selves unfortunate before our time, nay
when perhaps we are never likely to be so. Time to come which deceives so
many, will likewise deceive us as soon in our fears, as in our hopes. It is a
maxim commonly received in Physic, that in sharp maladies the predictions
are never certain: and even so is it in the most furious threatenings of
fortune; so long as there is life, there is hope, for hope continues as long in
the body as the soul, quamdiu spiro, spero.

But forasmuch as this fear proceeds not always from

CHAP. XXIX. Against Sorrow.
THe remedies against sorrow (set down before as the most tedious, hurtful,
and unjust passion) are twofold: some are direct or straight, others oblique. I
call those direct which Philosophy teaches, which concern the confronting
and disdaining of evils, accounting them not evils, or at least wise very small
and light (though they be great and grievous) and that they are not worthy
the least motion or alteration of our minds; and that to be sorry for them,
or to complain of them, is a thing very unjust and ill befitting a man, so
teach the Stoics, Peripateticks, and Plantonists. This manner of preserving a
man from sorrow and melancholic passion, is as rare, as it is excellent, and
belongs to spirits of the first rank. There is likewise another kind of
Philosophical remedy, although it be not of so good a stamp, which is easy
and much more in use, and it is oblique, this is by diuerting a man's mind and
thought to things pleasant and delightful, or at least indifferent from that
that procures our sorrow: which is to deal cunningly, to decline and avoid an
evil, to change the object. It is a remedy very common, and which is used
almost in all evils, if a man mark it, as well of the body as of the mind.
Physicians when they cannot purge a rheum, they turn it into some other part
less dangerous. Such as pass by steep and precipitate deepes and downfals,
that have need of launcings, searingirons, or fire, shut their eyes, and turn
their faces another way. Valiant men in war do never taste nor consider of
death, their minds being carried away by the desire of victory: In so much
that diverse have suffered death gladly, yea have procured it, and been their
own executioners, either for the future glory of their name, as many Greeks
and Romans; or for the hope of another life, as Martyrs, the disciples of
Hegesias, and others after the reading of Plato his book to Antiochus, de
morte contemnenda; or to avoid the miseries of this life, and for other
reasons. All these are they not diuersions? Few there are that consider evils
in themselves, that relish them as Socrates did his death; and Flauius
condemned by Nero to die by the hands of Niger. And therefore in sinister
accidents and misaduentures, and in all outward evils, we must divert our
thoughts, and turn them another way. The vulgar sort can give this advice;
Think not of it. Such as have the charge of those that are any way afflicted,
should for their comfort furnish affrighted spirits with other objects.
Abducendus est animus ad alia studia, solicitudines, curas, negotia; loci
denique mutatione saepe curandus est.

CHAP. XXX. Against mercy and compassion.
THere is a twofold mercy, the one good and virtuous, which is in God and in
his saints, which is in will and in effect to succor the afflicted, not
afflicting themselves, or diminishing any thing that concerns honor or
equity; the other is a kind of feminine passionate pity, which proceeds
from too great a tenderness and weakness of the mind, whereof has been
spoken before in the aboue-named passion. Again, this wisdom teaches us to
succor the afflicted, but not to yield and to suffer with him. So is God said
to be merciful; as the Physician to his patient; the advocate to his client
affoordeth all diligence and industry, but yet takes not their evils and
affairs to the heart; so does a wise man, not entertaining any grief, or
darkning his spirit with the smoke thereof. God commands us to aid, and to
have a care of the poor, to defend their cause; and in another place he
forbids us to pity the poor in judgment.

CHAP. XXXI. Against Choler.
THe remedies are many and diverse wherewith the mind must before hand be armed
and defended, like those that fear to be besieged; for afterward it is too
late. They may be reduced to three heads; The first is to cut off the way, and
to stop all the passages unto choler. It is an easier matter to 1 The first
head.
withstand it, and to stay the passage thereof in the beginning, than when it
has seized upon a man to carry himself well and orderly. He must therefore quit
himself from all the causes and occasions of choler, which heertofore have
been produced in the description thereof, that is to say, 1. weakness and
tenderness; 2. malady of the mind in hardening it self against whatsoever
may happen; 3. too great delicateness; the love of certain things do
accustom a man to facility and simplicity, the mother of peace and quietness.
Adomnia compositi simus: quae bona and paratiora sint nobis meliora and
grauiora; it is the general doctrine of the wise. King Cotys having received
for a present many beautiful and rich vessels, yet frail and easy to be
broken, brake them all, to the end he might not be stirred to choler and fury
when they should happen to be broken. This was a distrust in himself, and a
base kind of fear that provoked him thereunto. 4. Curiosity according to the
example of Caesar, who being a conqueror, and having recovered the letters,
writings, and memorials of his enemies, burnt the^ all before he saw them; 5.
Lightness of belief; 6. and above all, an opinion of being contemned, and
wronged by another, which he must chase from him as unworthy a man of spirit:
for though it seem to be a glorious thing, and to proceed from too high an
esteem of himself (which nevertheless is a great vice) yet it comes of
baseness and imbecillitie. For he that thinks himself to be contemned by
another, is in some sense his inferior, judges himself, or fears that in
truth he is so, or is so reputed, and distrusteth himself. Nemo non eo a quo
se contemptum iudicat minor est. A man must therefore think that it proceeds
rather from any thing than contempt, that is, sottishness, indiscretion, want
of good manners. If this supposed contempt proceed from his friends, it is too
great familiarity. If from his subjects or servants, knowing that their master
has power to chasten them, it is not to be believed that they had any such
thought. If from base and inferior people, our honor or dignity, or
indignity, is not in the power of such people: indignus Caesaris ira.
Agathocles and Antigonus laughed at those that wronged them, and hurt them not
having them in their power. Caesar excelled all in this point; and Moses,
David, and all the greatest personages of the world have done the like; magnam
fortunam magnus animus decet: The most glorious conquest is for a man to
conquer himself, not to be moved by another. To be stirred to choler is to
confess the accusation; Conuitia si irascare agnita videntur, spreta
exolescunt. He can never be great, that yields himself to the offense of
another: If we vanquish not our choler, that will vanquish us. Iniurias and
offensiones superne despicere.

The second head is of those remedies that a man must employ 2 2. Head.
when the occasions of choler are offered, and that there is a likelihood that
we may be moved thereunto, which are, first, to keep and contain our bodies
in peace and quietness, without motion or agitation; which inflameth the blood
and the humors, and to keep himself silent and solitary. Secondly, delay
in believing and resolving, and giving leisure to the judgment to consider. If
we can once discover it, we shall easily stay the course of this fever. A wise
man counseled Augustus being in choler, not to be moved before he had
pronounced the letters of the Alphabet. Whatsoever we say or do in the heat
of our blood, ought to be suspected. Nil tibiliceat dum irasceris. Quare? Quia
vis omnia licere. We must fear and be doubtful of our selves, for so long as
we are moved, we can do nothing to purpose. Reason when it is hindered by
passions, serves us no more than the wings of a bird being fastened to his
feet. We must therefore have recourse unto our friends, and suffer our choler
to die in the midst of our discourse. And lastly, diuersion to all pleasant
occasions, as music etc.

The third head consists in those beautiful considerations wherewith the
mind must long before be seasoned. First, 3 3. Head.
in the consideration of the actions and motions of those that are in choler,
which should breed in us a hatred thereof, so ill do they become a man. This
was the manner of the wise, the better to dissuade a man from this vice, to
counsel him to behold himself in a glass. Secondly and contrarily, of the
beauty which is in moderation; Let us consider how much grace there is in a
sweet kind of mildnes and clemency, how pleasing and acceptable they are unto
others, and commodious to our selves: It is the adamant that draws unto us
the hearts and wills of men. This is principally required in those whom
fortune has placed in high degree of honor, who ought to have their motions
more remiss and temperate, for as their actions are of greatest importance, so
their faults are more hardly repaired. Finally, in the consideration of that
esteem and love which we should bear to that wisdom which we here study,
which especially shows it self in retaining and commanding it self, in
remaining constant and invincible; a man must mount his mind from the earth,
and frame it to a disposition, like to the highest region of the air, which is
never ouer-shadowed with clouds, nor troubled with thunders, but in a
perpetual serenitie; so our mind must not be darkened with sorrow, nor moved
with choler, but fly all precipitation, imitate the highest planets that of
all others are carried most slowly. Now all this is to be understood of inward
choler and covered, which indureth being joined with an ill affection, hatred,
desire of revenge, quae in sinu stulti requiescit, vt qui reponunt odia;
quodque saeuae cogitationis indicium est, secreto suo satiantur. For the
outward and open choler is short, a fire made of straw, without ill affection,
which is only to make another to see his fault, whether in inferiors by
reprehensions, or in others by showing the wrong and indiscretion they commit,
it is a thing profitable, necessary, and very commendable. It is good and
profitable both for himself and for another sometimes to be moved to anger,
but it 4 To be angry when it is good and commodious.
must be with moderation and rule.

There are some that smother their choler within, to the end it break not
forth, and that they may seem wise and moderate; but they fret themselves
inwardly, and offer For himself.
themselves a greater violence than the matter is worth. It is better to chide
a little, and to vent the fire, to the end it be not over ardent and painful
within. A man incorporateth choler by hiding it. It is better that the point
thereof should prick a little without, than that it should be turned against it
self: Omnia vitia in aperto leuiora sunt, and tunc perniciosissima cum
simulata sanitate subsidunt.

Moreover, against those that understand not, or seldom suffer themselves to
be led by reason, as against those kind of servants that do nothing but for
fear, it is necessary that 5 For another with conditions.
choler either true or dissembled put life into them, without which there can
be no rule or government in a family. But yet it must be with these
conditions. First, that it be not often, upon all, or light occasions. For
being too common, it grows into contempt, and works no good effect. Secondly,
not in the air, murmuring and railing behind their backs, or upon
uncertainties, but be sure that he feel the smart that has committed the
offense. Thirdly, that it be speedily, to purpose and seriously, without any
mixture of laughter, to the end it may be a profitable chastisement for what is
past, and a warning for that which is to come. To conclude, it must be used as
a medicine.

All these remedies may serve against the following passions.

CHAP. XXXII. Against Hatred.
THat a man may the better defend himself against hatred, he must hold a rule
that is true, that all things have two handles whereby he may take them: by the
one they seem to be grievous and burdensome unto us, by the other easy and
light. Let us then receive things by the good handle, and we shall find that
there is something good and to be loved, in whatsoever we accuse and hate. For
there is nothing in the world that is not for the good of man. And in that
which offends us, we have more cause to complain thereof, than to hate it:
for it is the first offense, and receives the greatest damage, because it
loses therein the use of reason, the greatest loss that may be. In such an
accident then, let us turn our hate into pity, and let us endeavor to make
those worthy to be beloved, which we would hate, as Lycurgus did unto him,
that had put out his eye, whom he made, as a chastisement of that wrong, an
honest, virtuous, and modest citizen, by his good instruction.

CHAP. XXXIII. Against Envy.
AGainst this passion, we must consider that which we esteem and envy in
another. We willingly envy in others riches, honors, favors, and the reason
is, because we know not how dearly they have cost them. He that shall say, thou
shall have as much at the same price, we would rather refuse his offer, than
thank him for it. For before a man can attain unto them, he must flatter,
endure afflictions, injuries; to be brief, lose his liberty, satisfy and
accommodate himself to the pleasures and passions of another. Man has nothing
for nothing in this world. To think to attain to goods, honors, states,
offices otherwise, and to pervert the law or rather custom of the world, is to
have the money and wares too. Thou therefore that make profession of honor
and of virtue, why do thou afflict thy self if thou have not these goods,
which are not gotten but by a shameful patience? Do thou therefore rather
pity others, than envy them. If it be a true good that is happened to another,
we should rejoice thereat; for we should desire the good of one another: To be
pleased with another man's prosperity, is to increase our own.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Against Revenge.
AGainst this cruel passion, we must first remember, that

Secondly, there is nothing so great and so victorious, as Vltio doloris
confessio est: non est magnus animus quem incuruat iniurta: ingens animus and
verus aestimator sui non vindicat iniuriam, quia non sentit.

But some will object, that it is irksome and dishonorable to endure an
offense; I agree thereunto, and I am of opinion Caesar was excellent. It is a
glorious victory to conquer, and to make the enemy to stoop, by benefits,
and of an enemy to make him a friend, be the injury never so great. Yea to
think that by how much the greater the wrong is, by so much the more worthy
it is to be pardoned; and by how much more just the revenge is, by so much the
more commendable is clemency.

Again, it is no reason that a man should be judge and a Jupiter might alone
dart out his favorable lightnings; but when there grew a question of sending
forth his revenging thunderbolts, he could not do it without the counsel and
assistance of the twelve gods. This was a strange case that the greatest of the
gods, who of himself had power to do good to the whole world, could not hurt
a particular person, but after a solemn deliberation. The wisdom of Jupiter
himself fears to err, when there is a question of revenge, and therefore he
has need of a counsel to deteine him.

We must therefore form unto our selves a moderation of the mind, this is the
virtue of clemency, which is a sweet 5 Clemency.
mildness and graciousnesse, which tempereth, retains, and represseth all
our motions. It armeth us with patience, it persuades us that we cannot be
offended but with our selves; that of the wrongs of another nothing remains
in us, but that which we will retain. It wins unto us the love of the whole
world, and furnishes us with a modest carriage agreeable unto all.

CHAP. XXXV. Against Jealousy.
THe only mean to avoid it, is for a man to make himself worthy of that he
desires, for jealousy is nothing else Aurelius, of whom Faustine his wife
demanded what he would do, if his enemy Cassius should obtain the victory
against him in battle, answered, I serve not the gods so slenderly, as that
they will send me so hard a fortune. So they that have any part in the
affection of another, if there happen any cause of fear to lose it, should
say, I honor not so little his love, that he will deprive me of it. The
confidence we have in our own merit, is a great gage of the will of another.

He that prosecuteth any thing with virtue, is eased by having a companion in
the pursuit; for he serves for a comfort, and a trumpet to his merit.
Imbecillitie only fears the encounter, because it thinks that being
compared to another, the imperfection thereof will presently appear. Take
away emulation, you take away the glory and spur of virtue.

My counsel to men against this malady, when it proceeds from their wives,
is, that they remember that the greatest Lucullus, Caesar, Pompey, Cato,
Augustus, Antonius, and diverse others. But thou will say, the world knows it
and speaks of it: and of whom speak they not in this sense, from the greatest
to the least? how many honest men do every day fall into the same reproach? and
if a man stir therein, the women themselves make a jest of it: the frequencie
of this accident should moderate the bitterness thereof. Finally be thou such
that men may complain of thy wrong, that thy virtue extinguish thy hard
fortune, that honest men may account nevertheless of thee, but rather curse
the occasion.

As touching women, there is no counsel against this evil, for their nature
is wholly composed of suspicion, vanity, curiosity. Liuia to Augustus,
Stratonice to king Deiotaurus; and for multiplication of stock Sara, Lea,
Rachel to Abraham and Jacob.

Of Temperancie, the fourth virtue.
CHAP. XXXVI. Of Temperancie in general.
TEmperancie is taken two ways, generally for a moderation and sweet temper
in all things. And so it is not a special 1 Temperancie twofold. General.
virtue, but general and common, the seasoning sauce of all the rest: and it
is perpetually required, especially in those affairs where there is
controversy and contestation, troubles and divisions. For the preservation
thereof, there is no better way, than to be free from particular fantasies and
opinions, and simple to hold himself to his own deuoire. All lawful
intentions or opinions are temperate; choler, hatred are inferior to duty and
to justice, and serve only those that tie not themselves to their duty by
simple reason.

Specially, for a bridle and rule in things pleasant, delightful, 2 Special.
which tickle our senses and natural appetites. Habena voluptatis, inter
libidinem and stuporem naturae posita, cuius duae parts; verecundia in fuga
turpium, honestas in obseruatione decori: We will here take it more at large,
for a rule and duty in all prosperity, as fortitude is the rule in all
adversity, and it shall be the bridle, as fortitude the spur. With these two
we shall tame this brutish, savage, untoward part of our passions which is in
us, and we shall carry our selves well and wisely in all fortunes and
accidents, which is a high point of wisdom.

Temperancie then has for the subject and general object thereof all
prosperity, pleasant and plausible things, but especially 3 The description
of temperancie.
and properly pleasure, whereof it is the razor and the rule; the razor to cut
off strange and vicious superfluities; the rule of that which is natural and
necessary: Voluptatibus imperat, alias odit and abigit, alias dispensat, and
ad sanum modum redigit: nec vnquam ad illas propter illas venit, scit optimum
esse modum cupitorum, non quantum velis, sed quantum debeas. This is the
authority and power of reason over concupiscence and violent affections, which
carry our wills to delights and pleasures. It is the bridle of our soul, and
the proper instrument to clear those boiling tempests which arise in us by the
heat and intemperancie of our blood, that the soul may be always kept one,
and appliant unto reason, that it apply not it self to sensible objects, but
that it rather accommodate them unto it self, and make them serve it. By this
we weane our soul from the sweet milk of the pleasures of this world, and we
make it capable of a more solid and sovereign nourishment. It is a rule that
sweetly accommodateth all things unto nature, to necessity, simplicity,
facility, health, constancy. These are things that go willingly together,
and they are the measures and bounds of wisdom; as contrarily art, lust, and
superfluity, variety, and multiplicitie, difficulty, malady, and
delicateness keep company together, following intemperancie and folly:
Simplici cura constant necessaria, in delitijs laboratur. Ad parata nati sumus:
nos omnia nobis difficilia facilium fastidio fecimus.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Prosperity, and counsel thereupon.
THat prosperity which sweetly falls upon us, by the common course and
ordinary custom of the world, or

Prosperity is very dangerous: whatsoever there is that is

From thence it comes that there is not any thing more into heavy and
lamentable, and fortune of a loving mother, is turned into a cruel step-dame.

Now the best counsel that I can give to a man, to carry Non est tuum,
fortuna quod fecit tuum. Qui tutam vitam agere volet, ista viscata beneficia
deuitet, nil dignum putare quod speres. Quid dignum habet fortuna quod
concupiscas?

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Pleasure, and advice thereupon.
PLeasure is an apprehension and sense of that which is agreeable to nature, it
is a pleasant motion and tickling: The description and distinction of pleasure.
as contrarily, grief or sorrow is unwelcome and unpleasing to the senses;
nevertheless, they that place it in the highest degree, and make it the
sovereign good, as the Epicures, take it not so, but for a privation of evil
and displeasure, in a word Indolence. According to their opinion, the not
having of any evil, is the happiest estate that man can hope for in this life.
Nimium boni est cui nihil est mali: This is as a midway or neutralitie betwixt
pleasure taken in the first and common sense, and grief; it is as sometime the
bosom of Abraham was said to be, betwixt paradise and the hell of the damned.
This is a sweet and peaceable state and settling, a true, constant and stayed
pleasure, which resembles in some sort the tranquillity of the soul,
accounted by Philosophers the chief and sovereign good: the other first kind
of pleasure is active and in motion. And so there should be three estates, the
two extreme opposites, Grief and Pleasure, which are not stable nor durable,
and both of them sickly: and that in the middle, stable, firm, sound, whereunto
the Epicures gave the name of pleasure (as indeed it is in regard of grief and
sorrow) making it the chief and sovereign good. This is that which has so
much defamed their school, as Seneca has ingenuously acknowledged and said,
that their evil was in the title and words, not in the substance, having never
had either doctrine or life more sober, temperate, and enemy to wickedness
and vice than theirs. And it is not altogether without reason that they called
this Indolence and peaceable state, Pleasure: for that tickling delight which
seems to mount us above indolence, aims at nothing else but indolence, or
want of grief, as it proper butte; as for example; that appetite that
rauisheth us with desire of women, seeks nothing else but to fly that pain
that an ardent and furious desire to satisfy our lust brings with it, to
quit our selves of this fever, and to purchase our rest.

Pleasure has diversely been spoken of, and more briefly and sparingly than
was fit; some have deified it, others detested 2 Against it.
it as a monster, and tremble at the very word, taking it always in the worser
part. They that do wholly condemn it say; First, it is short, a fire of
straw, especially if it be lively and active. Secondly, frail and tender,
easily and with nothing corrupted and ended, an ounce of sorrow marres a whole
sea of pleasure: It is called a choked piece of artillery. Thirdly, base,
shameful, exercising it self by vilde instruments, in hidden corners, at
least for the most part, for there likewise are magnificent and pompous
pleasures. Fourthly, quickly subject to satietie. A man knows not how to
continue long in his pleasures, he is impatient as well in his delights as his
griefs, and it is not long ere repentance follow, which many times yields
pernicious effects, the overthrow of men, families, commonweals. Fifthly, and
above all they allege against it, that when it is in his greatest strength,
it mastreth in such a manner, that reason can have no enterteinment.

On the other side, it is said, to be natural, created and established of God
in the world, for the preservation and continuance 3 For it, See Lib. 2. ca. 6.
thereof, as well by retaile of the individual parts, as in gross of the
special kinds. Nature the mother of pleasure, in those actions that are for
our need and necessity, has likewise mingled pleasure. Now to live well is to
consent unto nature. God, says Moses, has created pleasure, Plantauerat
dominus paradisum voluptatis, has placed and established man in a pleasant
estate, place and condition of life: and in the end, what is the last and
highest felicity, but certain and perpetual pleasure? Inebriabuntur ab
vbertate domus tuae, and torrente voluptatis tuae potabis eos. Suis contenta
finibus res est diuina voluptas. And to say the truth, the most regular
Philosophers, and the greatest professors of virtue, Zeno, Cato, Scipio,
Epaminondas, Plato, Socrates himself have been in effect amorous, and
drinkers, dancers, sporters, and have handled, spoken, written of love and
other pleasures.

And therefore this matter is not decided in a word, but we must distinguish,
for pleasures are diverse. There are natural, 4 The distinction of pleasures.
and not natural: This distinction as more important we will presently better
consider of. There are some that are glorious, arrogant, difficult; others that
are obscure, mild, easy and ready. Though to say the truth, Pleasure is a
quality not greatly ambitious; it is accounted rich enough of it self,
without the addition of any thing to the reputation thereof, and it is loved
best in obscurity. They likewise that are so easy and ready are cold and
frozen, if there be no difficulty in them: which is as an inducement, a bait,
a spur unto them. The ceremony, shame and difficulty that there is in the
attainment of the last exploits of love, are the spurs, and matches that give
fire unto it, and increase the price thereof. There are spiritual pleasures
and corporal, not (to say the truth) because they are separated: for they al
belong to the entire man, and the whole composed subject: and the one part of
our selves has not any so proper, but that the other has a feeling thereof,
so long as the marriage and amorous band of the soul and body continues in
this world. But yet there are some wherein the soul has a better part than the
body, and therefore they better agree with men, than with beasts, and are more
durable, as those that enter into us by the sense of seeing and hearing, which
are the two gates of the soul, for having only their passage by them, the
soul receives them, concocteth and digesteth them, feeds and delights it
self a long time; the body feels little. Others there are wherein the body
has the greater part, as those which belong to the taste and touch, more
gross and material, wherein the beasts bear us company, such pleasures are
handled, tried, used and ended in the body it self, the soul has only the
assistance and company, and they are but short, like a fire of straw, soon
in, soon out.

The chief thing to be considered herein, is to know how we should carry
and govern our selves in our pleasures, 5 Aduisements hereupon.
which wisdom will teach us, and it is the office of the virtue of temperance.
We must first make a great and notable difference between the natural, and
not natural. By the not natural we do not only understand those that are
against nature, and the true use approved by the laws; but also the natural
themselves, if they degenerate into too great an excess and superfluity,
which is no part of nature, which contenteth it self with the supply of
necessity; whereunto a man may likewise add decency and common honesty. It
is natural pleasure to be covered with a house and garments Which are natural.
against the rigor of the elements, and the injuries of wicked men; but that
they should be of gold or silver, of Jasper or Porpherie, it is not natural:
Or if they come unto a man by other means than natural, as if they be sought
and procured by art, by medicines, or other unnatural means: Or if they be
first forged in the mind, stirred by passion, and afterward from thence come
unto the body, which is a preposterous order: for the order of nature is, that
pleasures enter into the body, and be desired by it, and so from thence ascend
unto the mind. And even as that laughter that is procured by tickling the
arme-holes, is neither natural nor pleasing, but rather a kind of conuulsion;
so that pleasure that is either sought or kindled by the soul, is not natural.

Now the first rule of wisdom concerning pleasures is this, 6 The first and
general rule.
to chase away, and altogether to condemn the unnatural, as vicious,
bastardly (for as they that come to a banquet unbidden, are to be refused; so
those pleasures that without the inuitation of nature present themselves, are
to be rejected) to admit and receive the natural; but yet with rule and
moderation: and this is the office of temperancie in general, to drive away
the unnatural, to rule the natural.

The rule of natural pleasures consists in three points:

First, that it be without the offense, scandal, damage, and prejudice of
another. Rules for the natural.


Secondly, that it be without the prejudice of himself, his honor, his health,
his leisure, his duty, his functions.

Thirdly, that it be with moderation, that he take them no more to the heart,
than against the heart, neither covet them, nor fly from them, but take and
receive them, as men do honey with the tip of the finger, not with a full
hand; not to engage himself in them too far, nor to make them his principal
business, and only work; much less to enthrall himself unto them, and of
recreations make them necessities, for that is the greatest misery of all
others. Pleasure should be but as an accessarie, a recreation for the time,
that he may the better return to his labor, as sleep which strengthens the
body, and gives us breath to return the more cheerfullie to our work. To be
short, a man must use them, not enjoy them. But above all, he must take heed of
their treason: for some there are, that whilst we give our selves unto them,
and love them over dearly, return evil for good, and more displeasure than
delight: but this is treacherously: for they go before to besot and deceive
us, and hiding from us their tail, they tickle us and embrace us to strangle
us. The pleasure of drinking goes before the pain of the head: such are the
delights and pleasures of indiscreet and fiery youth, wherewith they are made
drunken. We plunge our selves into them, but in our old age they forsake us, as
it were drowned and overwhelmed, as the sea in his reflux ouer-runneth the
sandy banks: That sweetness which we have swallowed so greedily, ends with
bitterness and repentance, and fills our souls with a venomous humor that
infecteth and corrupts it.

Now as moderation and rule in pleasures is an excellent and profitable thing
according unto God, nature, reason: so 8 Want of government in pleasure
preiudicious.
excess and immoderate unruliness is of all others the most pernicious, both
to the public and private good. Pleasure ill valued, softneth and weakneth the
vigor both of soul and body; Debilitatem induxere delitiae, blandissimae
dominae: it besotteth and effeminateth the best courages that are, witness
Hannibal: and therefore the Lacedaemonians that made profession of contemning all
pleasures were called men, and the Athenians soft and delicate women. Xerxes to
punish the revolt of the Babylonians, and to assure himself of them in time to
come, took from them their arms, forbidding all painful and difficult
exercise, and permitting all pleasures and delicacies whatsoever. Secondly, it
banisheth and drives away the principal virtues, which cannot continue under
so idle and effeminate an empire: Maximas virtutes iacere oportet voluptate
dominante. Thirdly, it degenerateth very suddenly into the contrary thereof,
which is grief, sorrow, repentance: for as the rivers of sweet water run their
course to die in the salt sea, so the honey of pleasure ends in the gall of
grief; In praecipiti est, ad dolorem vergit, in contrarium abit, nisi modum
teneat. Extrema gaudij luctus occupat. Finally, it is the seminary of all
evils, of all ruin. Malorum esca voluptas. From it come those close and secret
intelligences, then treasons, and in the end euersions and ruins of
Commonweals. Now we will speak of pleasures in particular.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of eating and drinking, Abstinence, and Sobriety.
VIctuals are for nourishment, to sustain and repair the infirmity of the
body; the moderate, natural, and pleasant 1 The use of victual.
use thereof entertaineth it, makes it a fit and apt instrument for the soul;
as contrarily an unnatural excess weakneth it, brings great and loathsome
diseases, which are the natural punishments of intemperancie; Simplex ex
simplici causa valetudo; multos morbos supplicia luxuriae, multa fercula
fecerunt. A man complains of his brain for sending down so many rheumes,
the foundation of all dangerous maladies; but the brain may well answer him,
Define fundere, and ego desinam fluere; Be thou sober in pouring down, and I
will be sparing in dropping down. But what, the excess and provision, the
multitude, diversity, and exquisit preparation of viands is come in request;
and it is our custom even in the greatest and most sumptuous superfluities, to
crave pardon for not providing enough.

How preiudicate both to the mind and to the body a full Alexander, otherwise a
great Prince, being overcome with this vice, killed his dearest friend Clitus,
and being come to himself, would have killed himself for killing Clitus. To
conclude, it wholly robs a man of his sense, and peruerteth his
understanding: Vinum clauo caret, dementat sapientes, facit repuerascere senes.

Sobriety though it be none of the greatest and more difficult virtues, and
which is not painful to any but fools and 3 Sobriety commended.
madmen, yet it is a way and a kind of progress to other virtues: It
extinguisheth vice in the cradell, and stifleth it in seed: It is the mother of
health, and an assured medicine against all maladies, and that that lengthneth
a man's life. Socrates by sobriety had always a strong body and lived ever in
health; Masinissa the soberest king of all the rest got children at 86. years
of age, and at 92. vanquished the Carthaginians; whereas Alexander by his
drunkenness died in the flower of his age, though he were better borne and of
a sounder constitution than them all. Many subject to goutes and Hierom.
other diseases by Physic incurable, have recovered their health by diet.
Neither is it serviceable to the body only, but to the mind too, which
thereby is kept pure, capable of wisdom and good counsel; Salubrium
consiliorum parens sobrietas. All the greatest personages of the world have
been sober, not only the professors of singular virtue and austeritie of
life, but all those that have excelled in any thing, Cyrus, Caesar, Julian the
emperor, Mahumet: Epicurus the great doctor of pleasure herein excelled all
men. The frugalitie of the Roman Curij and Fabritij is more extolled than
their great victories: The Lacedaemonians as valiant as they were, made express
profession of frugalitie and sobriety.

But a man must in time and from his youth embrace this part of temperancie,
and not stay till the infirmities of old Sera in fundo parsimonia; it is to
play the good husband when there is nothing left but bare walls, to make his
market when the fair is ended.

It is a good thing for a man not to accustom himself to a delicate diet,
lest when he shall happen to be deprived thereof, his body grow out of order,
and his spirit languish and faint; and contrarily to use himself to a grosser
kind of sustenance, both because they make a man more strong and healthful,
and because they are more easily gotten.

CHAP. XL. Ofriot and excess in apparel and ornaments, and of frugalitie.
IT has been said before that garments are not natural, nor necessary to a
man; but artificial, invented and used only but a nest of all manner of vices,
vexillum superbiae, nidus luxuriae, the subject of riot and quarrels: for from
hence did first begin the propriety of things, mine and thine; and in the
greatest communities or fellowships that are, apparel is always proper, which
is signified by this word, disrobe.

It is a vice very familiar and proper unto women (I mean

Now the true and lawful use of apparel is to cover our selves against wind
and weather, and the rigor of the air, and should never be used to other end;
and therefore as they should not be excessive nor sumptuous, so should they not
be too base and beggarly. Nec affectatae sordes, nec exquisitae munditiae.
Caligula was as a laughing stock to all that beheld him, by reason of the
dissolute fashion of his apparel. Augustus was commended for his modesty.

CHAP. XLI. Carnal pleasure, Chastity, Continency.
Continency is a thing very difficult, and must have a careful and a
painful guard: It is no easy matter wholly 1 See the chap. 24.
to resist nature, which in this is most strong and most ardent.

And this is the greatest commendation that it has, that I speak here of
simple continency, and only in it self, which is a thing altogether barren
and unprofitable, and hardly commendable, no more than not to play the glutton,
not to be drunken; and not of Christian continency, which to make it a virtue
has two things in it, a deliberate purpose always to keep it, and that it be
for Gods cause. Non hoc in virginibus August.
praedicamus, quod sint virgins, sed quod deo dicatae; witness the Vestalles,
and the five foolish virgins shut out of doors; and therefore it is a common
error, and a vanity, to call continent women honest women and honorable, as
if it were a virtue, and there were an honor due unto him that does no evil,
does nothing against his duty. Why should not continent men in like sort have
the title of honesty and honor? There is more reason for it, because there is
more difficulty, they are more hot, more hardy, they have more occasions,
better means. So unlikely is it that honor should be due unto him that does
no evil, that it is not due unto him that does good, but only, as has been
said, to him that is profitable to the Lib. 1. ca. 60.
weale-publike, and where there is labor, difficulty, danger. And how many
continent persons are there stuffed with other vices, or at least that are not
touched with vainglory and presumption, whereby tickling themselves with a
good opinion of themselves, they are ready to judge and condemn others? And
by experience we see in many women how dearly they sell it unto their
husbands, for dislodging the devil from that place where they row, and
establishing the point of honor as in it proper throne, they make it to mount
more high, and to appear in the head, to make him believe that it is not any
lower elsewhere. If nevertheless this flattering word, honor, serve to make
them more careful of their duty, I care not much if I allow of it. Vanity it
self serves for some use, and simple incontinencie and sole in it self is
none of the greatest faults, no more than others that are purely corporal, and
which nature commits in her actions either by excess or defect without
malice. That which discrediteth it and makes it more dangerous, is, that it is
almost never alone, but is commonly accompanied and followed with other
greater faults, infected with the wicked and base circumstances of prohibited
persons, times, places; practiced by wicked means, lies, impostures,
subornations, treasons; besides the loss of time, distractions of those
functions from whence it proceeds by great and grievous scandals.

And because this is a violent passion and likewise deceitful, 3 An aduisement.
we must arm our selves against it, and be wary in descrying the baits
thereof, and the more it flattereth us, the more distrust it: for it would
willingly embrace us to strangle us; it pampereth us with honey, to glut us
with gall; and therefore let us consider as much, that the beauty of another
is a thing that is without us, and that as soon it turns to our evil as our
good; that it is but a flower that passes, a small thing and almost nothing
but the color of a body; and acknowledging in beauty the delicate hand of
nature, we must prise it as the sun and moon for the excellency that is in
it: and coming to the fruition thereof by all honest means, always remember
that the immoderate use of this pleasure consumes the body, effeminateth the
soul, weakneth the spirit; and that many by giving themselves overmuch
thereunto, have lost, some their life, some their fortune, some their spirit:
and contrarily, that there is greater pleasure and glory in vanquishing
pleasure, than in possessing it: that the continency of Alexander and of
Scipio has been more highly commended, than the beautiful countenances of
those young damsels that they took captives.

There are many kinds and degrees of continency and incontinencie. The
conjugal is that which imports more of Countries, which have brought in
marriages; of families, transferring unjustly the labor of another to a
stranger; and lastly, Justice it self, bringing in uncertainties, iealousies,
and brawles amongst kindred, depriving children of the love of their parents,
and parents of the piety and duty of their children.

CHAP. XLII. Of Glory and Ambition.
AMbition, the desire of glory and honor (whereof we have already spoken) is
not altogether and in all respects to be condemned. First, it is very
profitable to the weale-publike as the world goes, for it is it from whence
the greatest of our honorable actions does arise, that hartneth men to
dangerous attempts, as we may see by the greatest part of our ancient heroical
men, who have not all been lead by a philosophical spirit, as Socrates,
Phocion, Aristides, Epaminondas, Cato, and Scipio, by the only true and lively
image of virtue; for many, yea the greatest number have been stirred thereunto
by the spirit, of Themistocles, Alexander, Caesar: and although these honorable
atchieuments and glorious exploits have not been with their authors and
actors, true works of virtue but ambition; nevertheless their effects have
been very beneficial to the public state. Besides this consideration,
according to the opinion of the wisest, it is excusable and allowable in two
cases: the one in good and profitable things, but which are inferior unto
virtue, and common both to the good and to the evil, as arts and sciences:
Honos alit arts: inconduntur omnes ad studia gloria; inventions, industry,
military valor. The other in continuing the good will and opinion of another.
The wise do teach, not to rule our actions by the opinion of another, except
it be for the avoiding of such inconveniences as may happen by their contempt
of the approbation and judgment of another.

But that a man should be virtuous, and do good for glory, as if that were
the salarie and recompense thereof, is a false and vain opinion. Much were the
state of virtue to be pitied, if she should fetch her commendations and prise
from the opinion of another, this coin were but counterfelt, and this pay too
base for virtue; She is too noble to beg such recompense. A man must settle
his soul, and in such sort compose his actions, that the brightness of honor
dazell not his reason, and strengthen his mind with brave resolutions, which
serve him as barriers against the assaults of ambition.

He must therefore persuade himself, that virtue seeks not a more ample and
more rich theater to show it and are not desired but by feeble and sick
spirits. Otanes one of the seven that had title to the sovereignty of Persia,
gave over unto his companions his right, upon condition, that he and his might
live in that Empire free from all subjection and magistracy, except that which
the ancient laws did impose, being impatient to command, and to be
commanded. Diocletian renounced the Empire, Celestinus the Popedom.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Temperancie in speech, and of Eloquence.
THis is a great point of wisdom: He that rules his tongue well, in a word,
is wise, qui in verbo non offendit hic perfect us est: The reason hereof is,
because the tongue is all the world, in it is both good and evil, life and
death, as has been said before. Let us now see what advice is to be given to
rule it well.

The first rule is, that speech be sober and seldom: To know how to be silent
is a great advantage to speak well; 1 Rules of speeach.
and he that knows not well how to do the one, knows not the other.

To speak well and much, is not the work of one man; and the best men are
they that speak least, says a wise man.

They that abound in words, are barraine in good speech and good actions; like
those trees that are full of leaves and yield little fruit, much chafe, and
little corn.

The Lacedaemonians, great professors of virtue and valor, did likewise
profess silence, and were enemies to much speech: And therefore has it ever
been commendable to be sparing in speech, to keep a bridle at the mouth: Pone
domine custodiam ori meo. And in the law of Moses that vessel that had not
his covering fastened to it, was unclean. By speech a man is known and
discerned: The wise man has his tongue in his heart, the fool his heart in
his tongue.

The second, that it be true: The use of speech is to assist the truth, and to
carry the torch before it, to make it appear; Cap. 10.


The third, that it be natural, modest, and chaste: not accompanied

The fourth, that it be serious and profitable, not vain otio abundantis, and
abutentis. Neither is it good to enter into any large discourse of his own
actions and fortunes; for others take not so much pleasure to hear them, as he
to relate them.

But above all, it must never be offensive, for speech is the instrument and
forerunner of charity, and therefore to use

The sixth, to be gentle and pleasing, not crabbed, harsh, and envious; and
therefore in common speech acute and

Lastly, that it be constant, strong, and generous, not loose, effeminate,
languishing, whereby we avoid the manner of

To this point of Temperancie belongs secrecy (whereof 8 Chap. 8.
we have spoken in the Chapter of faith or fidelity) not only that which is
committed unto us, and given us to keep, but that which wisdom and discretion
tells us ought to be suppressed.

Now as speech makes a man more excellent then a beast, 9 Of eloquence and the
commendation thereof.
so eloquence makes the professors thereof more excellent then other men. For
this is the profession or art of speech, it is a more exquisite communication
of discourse and of reason, the stearne or roother of our souls, which
disposes the hearts and affections like certain notes to make a melodious
harmony.

Eloquence is not only a purity and elegancie of speech, 10 The description.
a discret choice of words properly applied, ending in a true and a just fall,
but it must likewise be full of ornaments, graces, motions; the words must be
lively, first, by a clear and distinct voice, raising it self, and falling by
little and little; Afterward by a grave and natural action, wherein a man may
see the visage, hands, and members of the Orator to speak with his mouth,
follow with their motion that of the mind, and represent the affections: for
an Orator must first put on those passions which he would stir up in others.
As Brusidus drew from his own wound the dart wherewith he slew his enemy: So
passion being conceived in our heart, is incontinently formed into our speech,
and by it proceeding from us, enters into another, and there gives the like
impression which we our selves have, by a subtle and lively contagion. Hereby
we see that a sweet and a mild nature is not so fit for eloquence, because it
cannot conceive strong and courageous passions, such as it ought, to give life
unto the Oration; in such sort, that when he should display the master-sailes
of eloquence in a great and vehement action, he comes far short thereof;
as Cicero knew well how to reproach Callidius, who accused Gallus with a cold
and ouermild voice and action, in nisi fingeres, sic ageres? But being likewise
vigorous, and furnished as has been said, it has not less force and
violence then the commands of tyrants, environed with their gards and
halberds; It does not only lead the hearer, but intangleth him, it reigns
over the people, and establishes a violent empire over our souls.

A man may say against Eloquence that truth is sufficiently 11 Objections
answored.
maintained and defended by it self, and that there is nothing more eloquent
then it self: which I confess is true, where the minds of men are pure, and
free from passions: but the greatest part of the world, either by nature, or
art, and ill instruction is preoccupated, and ill disposed unto virtue and
verity, whereby it is necessary that men be handled like iron, which a man
must soften with fire before he temper it with water: So by the fiery motions
of eloquence, they must be made supple and manageable, apt to take the temper
of verity. This is that whereunto Eloquence especially tends; and the true
fruit thereof is to arm virtue against vice, truth against lying and
calumnies. The Orator, says Theophrastus, is the true Physician of the soul,
to whom it belongs to cure the biting of serpents by the music of the pipe,
that is, the calumnies of wicked men by the harmony of reason. Now since no
man can hinder, but that some there are that sease upon eloquence, to the end
they may execute their pernicious designments, how can a man do less than
defend himself with the same arms; for if we present our selves naked to the
combat, do we not betray virtue and verity? But many have abused eloquence to
wicked purposes, and the ruin of their country: It is true, but that is no
reason why eloquence should be despised, for that is common to it with all the
excellent things of the world, to be used or abused, well or ill applied,
according to the good and bad disposition of those that possess them. Most men
abuse their understanding, but yet we must not therefore conclude that
understanding is not necessary.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 89. lin. 23. which we most fly.

Page 118. lin. 19. unclean seed.

Page 215. lin. 4. with those that know them.

Page 244. lin. 7. ouerruleth the mind.

Page 292. lin. 23. live severely.

Page 336. lin. 23. in the way to death.

Page 357. lin. 1. it is religion.

Page 395. lin. 24. And this in a brief sum, is the military discipline.

Page 433. lin. 24. constant.

Page 502. lin. 24. wherefore if it be for gain.

Page 540. lin. 24. and stifleth it in the seed.


