ENGLANDS Mourning Garment:

Worn here by plain Shepherds, in memory of their sacred Mistress,
ELIZABETH; Queen of Virtue while she lived, and Theme of Sorrow being dead.

To the which is added the true manner of her Imperial Funeral. With many new
additions, being now again the second time reprinted, which was omitted in the
first Impression.

After which follows the Shepherds Spring-Song, for entertainment of King
JAMES our most potent Sovereign.

Dedicated to all that loved the deceased Queen, and honor the living KING.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Millington, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Crane in Paul's Churchyard by Walter Burre.

1603.

To all true Lovers of the right gracious Queen Elizabeth, in her life; being
undoubtedly those faithful Subjects that now honor and affect our most potent
Lord, King James, after her death.
MY Epistle to you, is like the little Town that the Cynicke would have
persuaded the Citizens was ready to run out at the great gates, being scarce
so long as the Title. In a word, the negligence of many better able, has made
me bold to write a small Epitomie, touching the abu^dant virtues of Elizabeth
our late sacred Mistress. Entreating of her Princely birth, chaste life, royal
government, and happy death; being a Lady borne, living, reigning, dying, all
for Englands good. The manner is handled between Shepherds, the form of
speech like the persons, rude: Affection exceeds Eloquence, and I have not
shown much Art; but expressed the duty of a loving heart: Shead some tears in
reading our Shepherds sorrow; and in that true passion, let your love to our
royal Lord be shown: who hates hypocrites, as just men hell. Farewell all of
you, that give the dead Queen a sad Farewell, and the living King, a glad
Welcome; the rest are Time-pleasers, and I write not to them.

Foelicem fuisse infaustum.

Englands Mourning Garment.
Worn by plain Shepheardes, for the death of that most excellent Empress
Elizabeth, Queen of Virtue, while she lived; and Theme of Sorrow being dead.
THENOT. COLLIN.
Thenot. COllin, thou lookst as lagging as the day,
When the Sun setting toward his western bed,
Shows, that like him, all glory must decay,
And frolique life with murkie clouds o re-spred
Shall leave all earthly beauty among the dead;
Such is the habit of thy new array:
Why art thou not preparde to welcome May,
In whose clear Moon thy younglings shall be fed,
With nights sweet dewes, and open flowers of day?

Collin. I answer thee with woe and well away,
I am in sable clad, since she cannot be had
That me and mine did glad; there is all I Will say.

Thenot. Well spoken Swain, let me thy sorrow ken,
Rich soul, though wronged by idle Antike men,
And driven by falsehood to a cloudie den, Tell me thy grief.

Collin. O it is past relief; and which is worst of worst,
Bayards and beasts accursed, with grosest flattery nursed:
Have sung her sacred name, and praised her to their shame,
Of maiden Queens who was our last and first.

Thenot. Dear Collin, do not check the humblest song,
The will is ever master of the work:
Those that can sing, have done all Shepherds wrong,
Like Lozels in their cottages to lurk:
The airs the air, though it be thick and murke.
If they to whom true Pastorals belong,
In needful lays, use neither pipe nor tongue, Shall none the virtuous raise?

Collin. Yes* those that merit Bays* though tears restrain their lays,
Some weeping hours or days, will find a time,
To honor Honor still, not with a rural quill,
But with the soul of skill, to bless their rhyme.
Aye me! why should I dote, on rimes, on songs, or note,
Confusion can best quote, sacred Elizaes loss,
Whose praise does grace all verse, that shall the same rehearse,
No gold need deck her hearse; to her all gold is dross.

With that, Collin in discontent, brake his pipe, and in that passion, as if
his heart had been like his pipe, parted each piece from the other, he fell
without sense on the earth, not then insensible of his sorrow; for it yielded,
wept, and groand at once, with his fall, his weepings and his sighs. Poor Th.
showted for help; at whose call came some Nymphs full of sorrow for their
Sovereign; and no whit amazed to see him lie as dead, their hearts were so
dead, with thinking of that which had astonished his. But yet, as gathering of
companies draw more and more to wonder, so proved it among the Shepherds,
that left none but their curres to attend their flocks, themselves flocking
about Thenot and Collin, who now recovered from his trance, and all asking the
reason of his grief, with tears abounding in his eyes, that likewise drew
more abundantly from theirs, he distractedly answered,

Illum nec enim reprehendere fas est,
Qui fleat hanc, cuius fregerunt stamina parcae,
Solus honor sequitur mortales ille misellos.
And therewithal making a sign for the Shepherds and Nymphs to sit down, he
told them, they had lost that sacred Nymph, that careful Shepherdess ELIZA,
but if it pleased them to lend attention, he would repeat something of her,
worth memory, that should live in despite of death: whereupon a still silence
seizd them all, saving only now and then, by sighing they expressed their hearts
sorrow: and Collin thus began.

Seeing Honor only follows mortals, and the works of the virtuous die not
with their deaths, and yet those works nevertheless with the honors and
rites due to the departed, might be much blemished, if there were no gratitude
in their successors: let us poor Rurals (though no other ways able to erect
Statues for our late dread Sovereign worthy all memory) among our selves
repeat part of her excellent Graces, and our benefit obtained by her
Government: for, to reckon all, were Opus infinitum, alabour without end.

She was the undoubted issue of two royal Princes, Henry of Lancaster, and
Elizabeth of York. In whose union the quiet of us poor Swains began: for
till that blessed marriage, England was a shambles of slaughtred men: so violent
was the blood of ambition, so potent the factions, and so implacable their
heads; whose eyes were never cleard till they were washed in blood, even in the
dear blood of their Objects hearts. This King, Grandfather to our late Queen,
was the first British King, that many a hundred years before wore the
Imperial Diadem of England, France, and Ireland: in him began the name of
Tewther, descended from the ancient British King, to flourish; the issue male
of royal Plantagenet ending in his beginning: his wife Grandmother to our late
Elizabeth, being the last Plantagenet, whose Temples were here circled with a
sphere of gold. Which King and Queen lived and loved, and now lie intoombed in
that most famous Chapel, built at his Kingly charge in the Abbey of
Westminster: King Henry dying in a good age, left England, rich, beautiful,
and full of peace; and so blessed with his issue, after royally matched to
Scotland and France, besides his undoubted heir King Henry of famous memory
the eight; that no Kingdom in the earth more flourished.

His son, the Father of our Elizabeth, was to his Enemies dreadful, to his
friends gracious, under whose Ensign the Emperor himself served: so potent a
Prince he was: besides, so liberal and bounteous, that he seemed like the
Sun in his Meridian, to shower down gold round about the Horizon: But he
died too, and left us three Princely hopes; all which have severally succeeded
other, royally maintaining the right of England, and resisted with power all
foreign wrong.

For King Edward our late Sovereigns Brother, though he died young in years,
left instance he was no Infant in virtues; his learning, towardnes, and zeal,
was thought fitter for the society of Angels than men, with whom no doubt his
spirit lives eternally.

Such assurance have we of the happiness of that royal, gracious and worthy
Lady Mary his eldest sister: who in her death expressed the care of her
Kingdoms, so much lamenting one Towns loss, that she told her attendant
Ladies, if they would rip her heart when she was dead, they should find
Callice written in it. O Thenot, with all you other Nymphs and Swains (setting
by her affection to Papal religion, wherein she was borne and lived) learn
by this worthy Queen, the care of Sovereigns, how heartsick they are for
their subjects loss; and think what felicity we poor worms live in, that
have such royal Patrons, who cark for our peace, that we may quietly eat the
bread of our own labor, and tend our flocks in safety, asking of us nothing
but fear and duty, which humanity allows, and heaven commands.

With this Thenot interrupted Collin, telling him, there were a number of true
shepherds misliked that Princes life, and ioyed greatly at her death: withal,
beginning to show some reasons, but Collin quickly interrupted him in these
words.

Peace Thenot, peace, Princes are sacred things,
It fits not Swains to think amiss of Kings.
For, says he, the faults of Rulers (if any be faulty) are to be reprehended
by them that can amend them, and seeing none is superior to a King but God, to
him alone refer their actions. And where thou termest them true shepherds
that so envied that Ladies government, thou art deceived: for the true
shepherds indeed, that suffered in her time by the malice of Romish Prelates,
prayed heartily for her even in the fire, and taught the people to obey her
government: but such as rayld at her, are still as they then were, proud
phanatike spirited counterfaites, expert in nothing but ignorance, such as hate
all rule, for who resists correction more than fools, though they deserve it
most? Believe me Thenot, and all you well affected Swains, there is no
greater mark for a true shepherd to be known by, than Humility, which, God
he knows, these mad men most want: too much experience have we of their
threed-bare pride, who bite the dead, as living Curres may Lions: not contented
with their scandals of that Royal Lady, our late Sovereigns Sister, but they
have troubled the clear springs of our Mistress Elizabeth's blessed
government: nay, my self have seen and heard with glowing ears some of them,
even in the fields of Calydon, when his Excellence, that is now our Imperial
shepherd, was only Lord of their foldes, speak of his Majesty more
audaciouslie and malapertly, than any of us would do of the meanest officer.
For as I said even now, if Rulers chance to slip: it is most insufferable, that
every impudent rayler should with the breath of his mouth stir the chaffie
multitude, whose ears itch for novelties, whose minds are as their numbers,
diverse: not able to judge themselves, much less their Sovereigns. But they
ought, if they be true Pastors, to follow the great Pan the Father of all good
shepherds Christ, who teaches every of his Swains to tell his brother
privately of his fault, and again, and again: by that glorious number, three,
including numbers numberless, before it be told the Church. If then they
must, being true shepherds, deal so with their brethren, how much more ought
their followers do to their Sovereigns, being Kings and Queens? And not in
the place where sacred and moral manners should be taught, contrarily to teach
the rude, to be more unmannerly, instructing every Punie to compare with the
most reverend Prelate, and that by that example to have every Cobbler account
himself a King.

Oh said Thenot, Collin, there are some would ill think of you, should they
hear you thus talk, for they reprove all out of zeal, and must spare none.

Peace to thy thoughts Thenot, answered Collin, I know thou know there is a
zeal, that is not with knowledge acquainted, but let them and their mad zeal
pass, let us forget their raylings against Princes: And begin with her
beginning, after her Royal Sisters ending, who departing from this earthly
Kingdom the seventeenth of November, in the year of our Lord 1558.
immediately thereupon, Elizabeth the hand-maide to the Lord of Heaven, and
Empress of all Maids, Mothers, Youth, and men, then living in this English
Earth, was proclaimed Queen with general applause; being much pitied, for
that busy slander and respectlesse envy had not long before brought her into
the disfavor of her Royal Sister Mary, whom we last remembered: In the
continuance of whose displeasure, still still made greater by some great Enemies:
how she escaped, needs no repeating, being so well known. Preserved she was
from the violence of death, her blood was precious in the sight of GOD, as is
the blood of all his Saints: it was too dear to be poured out like water on
the greedy earth; she lived, and we have lived under her forty and odd
years so wonderfully blessed, that all Nations have wondered at their own
afflictions and our prosperity: and she died as she lived with us, still
careful of our peace; finishing even then the greatest wonder of all (our
deserts considered) by appointing the Kingdom to so just and lawful a Ruler
to succeed her: whom all true English knew for their undoubted Lord,
immediately after her death. But least we end ere we begin, I will return to
her: who being seated in the Throne of Majesty, adorned with all the virtues
divine and moral, appeared to us like a goodly Palace where the Graces kept
their several Mansions.

First, faith abundantly shone in her then young, and lost not her brightness
in her age, for she believed in her Redeemer, her trust was in the King of
Kings, who preserved her as the Apple of his eye, from all treacherous
attempts, as many being made against her life, as against any Princess that
ever lived: yet she was still confident in her Savior, whose name she
glorified in all her actions, confessing her victories; preseruings, dignities,
to be all his, as appeared by many luculent examples, this one serving for the
rest, that after the dissipation of the Spanish Armatho accounted invincible,
she came in person to Paul's cross, and there, among the meanest of her
people, confessed, Non nobis Domine, non nobis; sed nomini tuo Gloria. And as
she was ever constant in cherishing that faith wherein she was from her
infancy nourisht, so was she faithful of her word, with her people, and with
foreign Nations. And albeit I know some (too humorously affected to the Roman
government) make a question in this place, whether her highness first brake
not the truce with the King of Spain: to that I could answer, were it
pertinent to me in this place; or for a poor shepherd to talk of state, with
unreprovable truths, that her highness suffered many wrongs before fhe left
off the league.

O says Thenst, in some of those wrongs resolve us, and think it no unfitting
thing, for thee have heard the songs of that warlike Poet Philisides, good
Meliboee, and smooth tongued Melicert; tell us what thou have observed in their
sawes, seen in thy own experience, and heard of undoubted truths touching
those accidents: for that they add, I doubt not, to the glory of our Eliza.

To this entreatie Collin condiscended, and thus spoke. It is not unknown the
Spaniard a mighty Nation, abounding with treasure, being wars sinews, torn
from the bowels of Mines, fetched from the sands of Indian Rivers, by the
miserable captiued Natives, have purposed to be Lords of Europe. France they
have attempted and failed in, Navarre they have greatly distressed, Lumbardy the
garden of the world, they are possessed of: Naples and Sicilie, Sardinia,
Corsica, are forced to obey their laws, and that they reckoned England should
be theirs, with such small case, even in a manner with threatening: their songs
taught little Infants from Andolozia to Galizia are witness. The dice were cast:
her Majesty's subjects craftily put into the Inquisition upon every small
color: if they escaped, which seldom sorted out so well, alive, they could of
their goods have no restitution. Their King gave pensions to our Queens
Rebellious fugitive subjects, and not only to such, that in regard of their
Religion fled the land, but unto such as had attempted to resist her in active
rebellion: and yet not staying there, out of his treasury proposed rewards for
sundry to attempt the murder of her sacred person: of which perfidious gilt she
ueuer was tainted: let any Spaniard, or Spanish affected English, prove where
she ever hired, abetted, or procured any such against their Kings Majesty, and
I will yield to be esteemed as false as falsehood it self: nay, they cannot
deny, but that even with the Rebels of her Realm of Ireland, stird up to
barbarous and inhumane outrages by the Spanish policy, she has no way dealt
but by by fair and laudable war.

But before I enter into her Majesty's lenity in that Irish war, against
sundry known Rebels, and punishing some of her subjects, that upon zealc to
her, or perchance, to get themselves a glory, adventured their own lives by
treachery to cut off the lives of some great Leaders of the Rebels, I will a
little digress, least I should be thought, after her death, to maintain the
fire of hate, which I ever in heart desired might honorably be quenched,
between these potent kingdoms of England and Spain.

I wish all that read this, to bury old wrongs, and to pray that it would
please God of his inestimable mercy, to root out all malice from Christian
Nations: and as our Royal Sovereign now reigning, has conserved league and
peace with all Princes, so, for the weal of Christendom, it may more and more
increase, that the open enemies of Christ may the better be repelled from those
wealthy Kingdoms in the East, where they have many hundred years most
barbarously tyrannized: for no man doubts, but the blood shed within these
thirty years, as well of English, as Scottish, Spanish, Dutch, and Portugal,
in the quarrel of Religion, might, if GOD had so been pleased, been able, to
have driven the heathen Monarch from his nearest hold in Hungaria, to the fall
of Danubia in the Euxine Sea, especially with the assistaunce of the French
that have cruelly fallen, either upon others swords.

But I trust God has suffered this offense, to add more glory to our mighty
King, that he should be the most famous of all his predecessors: as indeed
he is the most mighty, and has been raised to this Realm as a Savior, to
deliver England, and make it more abundant in blessings, when many looked it
should have had all her glory swallowed up of spoil.

The highness of his Imperial place, greatness of his blood, mightiness of
his alliance, but most, his constancy in the true profession of Religion, even
amid my sorrows, Thenot, fill me with joys: when I consider how a number that
gaped for our destruction, have their mouths shut close, yet empty where they
thought to eat the sweetes of our painful sweat: but God be praised, as I
said before, her Highness that ruled us many years in peace, left us, in her
death, more secure, by committing us to our lawful Prince, matched to a royal
fruitful Lady, that has borne him such hopeful issue, that the days we
lately feared, I trust are as far off, as this instant is, from the end of
all earthly times: who shall not only with their royal Father, maintain these
his Kingdoms in happy peace, but subject more under him, and spread the
banners of Christ in the face of misbeleeuers.

In this hope I here break off, and return to our late Sovereigns care of
keeping Faith, even toward her Rebel subjects, which I will manifest in some
two or three examples of the Irish.

When the Oneale, in the time of that memorable Gentleman Sir Henry Sidney his
Deputie-ship of Ireland, was mightily strengthened in his Country, and so
potent, that the Deputy had many dangerous skirmishes against him; A servant
of her Majesty's, one Smith, thinking to do a worthy piece of service, by
poisoning the Oneale, prepared a little bottle, parted in the midst; one side
containing good wine, the other with tempered poison of the same color, and
that he carries to the Oneale, under color of gratification for that his army
lay far from the Sea, or Marchantable Towns, and he thought Wine was unto
him very dainty: which the Oneale accepted kindly, for that the said Smith was
borne in the Oneales Country: and such the Irish do especially, and before
others, trust, to bring messages even from their greatest enemies, under whom
they serve. But the deceit being quickly spide, Smith was by the Oneale sent
bound to the Deputy, to whose plot he would feign have imputed the same
practice: but contrarily, the Deputy publicly punished the said Smith, and
her Majesty refused him for her servant; saying, she would keep none near
her that would deal treacherously, no though it were against traitors.

The like example was shown on an other, that would have attempted the
poisoning of Rory Og, a bloody and dangerous Rebel.

To which may be added, that her Highness among other trespasses, objected by
her Attorney against a convicted Deputy: was, that he went about by poison to
have took away the life of Feff Mac Hue, a Rebel more immane and barbarous
than any of the other two: the Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas (yet
living) opening at the same time, how just a spirit her Majesty was possessed
with, that she hated treason, even to traitors: much more then to anointed
Kings, whose honors and reputations, she so maintained, that she not long
since punished by fine and imprisonment, a wealthy rayler, for vnreuerent
words spoken against the person of King Philip, her open and professed enemy:
So faithful, so just, so gracious was she.

And to make it more plain, that Spain intended England the first wrong, long
time before it was muttered; but after that memorable battle of Lepanto,
wherein Don John of Austria obtained the tryumphant Christian victory against
the Turks; to reward him, England was the Kingdom set down, being then in
her Majesty's possession: but he had it, when they could give him it that
promised the same, which was at latter Lammas. And I trust his Niece shall have
as good success, with her pretended title. For if God strengthened her
Majesty so, that against her, being a woman, they could not prevail, we trust
his Almightinesse will be as careful of our King, being already Lord of three
such people as have seldom been equalled in battle, except they have
unnaturally contended among themselves: the sight of which day, dear
shepherds, let us pray never again to see. Besides, to express her farther
intent: to preserve faith and league, notwithstanding infinite of open wrongs:
and certain knowledge that a Navy for invasion of this Realm had been
preparing more than fifteen year; yet did she bear, until against all law
of Nations, the Ambassador liedger of Spain, honored with many favors, did
notwithstanding plot and confeder with native traitors of this land; and the
matter being apparently proved; he was by her mild sufferance admitted to
depart the Realm, without any violence: to his perpetual reproach, and her
neuer-dying glory. Well, I will here conclude touching this virtue of faith
both toward God and man: she was as firm in the one as mortality could be;
and in the other approved glorious among all the Princes of her time.

For Hope, the second divine virtue, she rather therein abounded, than was any
way wanting; for her Hope was no way wandering: she believed, and it came to
pass; her enemies arise, but before their arising, she was certain to see
them fall; she having by example of things past, nothing doubted of things to
come. And she was not deceived till the hour of her death. For ever her
expectation was fulfilled; she kept peace within, chased the spoyler without;
and even as it is sung of Epaminondas that valiant Theban Captain, in his last
victorious battle, wherein yet death of him got victory, he thus gloried:
Herein am I comforted, that I dye a conqueror. For even when death laid his
last siege to her yet vnvanquished life, Tyrone, the long disturber of her
State, besought by agents mercy at her feet. O Nymphs and Shepherds, doubt
not she was full of divine Hope, whose heart obtained ever the thing it
faithfully desired; and that her desires were all of faith, I could add
infinite examples to these already alleged: but that it is needelesse to
cast water in the Sea, or to make question of that all men know, and will
confess, except some whose hearts are strangers from Truth, and the professed
Receptacles of falsehood.

Her Charity the third and principal divine Grace to the eye of mortals: (for
that Faith and Hope bend principally their service to Heaven, and Charities
effects are manifested on earth) has been extended over all her Realms, and
stretched to the comfort of her oppressed neighbors. The multitudes of poor
daily relieved from her purse, the numbers of sick persons yearly visited,
and by her own hand their corrupt sores touched, the washing of poor women's
feet, and releeuing their wants, was a sign that she was humble, as well as
charitable: for Humility is Charities sister; they are two twins born at one
time, and as they are borne together in any soul whateuer, so do they live and
die together: the humble spirit being ever charitable, and the charitable ever
humble: for it is as impossible to have a proud man charitable, as to reconcile
fire and water; or to make accord between any contraries. As she was in these
particulars, exceeding all Ladies of her time, given to this helpful virtue,
so had she general impositions through all her kingdom, for her well able
subjects to follow her example: and so much did her example prevail, that
besides the ordinary and weekly alms distributed through the Realm, there
have been more particular Almes-houses builded for the relief of the aged,
then in any six Princes Reigns before. And as all parts of England have in
this imitation bin very forward, so has the City of London exceeded all;
wherein diverse private men have builded sundry houses for the poor, and
allowed them pensions: but the Corporations have been most bountiful, as most
able: and among all, the right Worshipful the Merchant-Tailors have exceeded
the rest: all have done well that have done any thing, but they best of any
other, as I will one day in a song of liberal Shepherds thankfully express:
though for my self I know him not in the least gift to whom I am in that sort
bounde^, but I ken not Thenot, how I may, for there is none living but may
lack. As the City, so many knights, Gentlemen, honorable and devout persons
have followed her example: above the rest, an honorable, careful, reuer end
and learned watchman, as full of mildness and piety, as he is of years and
griefs for his good and royal Mistress loss; at Croiden has builded a
worthy Receptacle to the like charitable end.

As for the poor and decrepit with age, her Royal Majesty had this
charitable care* so for soldiers, and suitors, she was very provident. The last
being oppressed in any part of her Realms by men of much wealth and little
conscience, she allowd them counsel and proceedings in Forma pauperis, and
maintenance weekly in the Terms, for some part of their succor: if any were
delayed and abused, it was utterly against her will. For soldiers, and men of
service, her decrees of provision are extant: besides, it is most clear, no
Prince in the world, to land, or Seamen, was more bountiful, or at least
willing, than her Highness: out of her Coffers it went; but there is an old
Proverb Thenot, carriage is dear: and I have heard, but I will stand to
nothing; base Ministers, and under-officers, curtall the liberalities of great
and potent Masters. Some have in her time been taken with the manner, and,
besides bodily punishment and fines, displaced: as I will remember, and cannot
omit amid my grief to tell, though somewhat from this subject it dissent,
being of a fellow too mean, how her Highness in one of her Progresses,
walking in the Garden of a house where she was received, being somewhat near
the highway, heard on a sudden* a market woman cry: and from an Arbor
beheld one of her own servants, a Taker up of provision, use the woman
vnciuillie: whereupon the cause being examined, and the poor woman found by
the same fellow to be wronged, as well before as then, her Highness causd him
presently to be dischargd of her service and punished: yet the fault being but
slight, the Taker was countenanced to make suit to be restord: and some half
year after, fell down before her Majesty desiring mercy, and restoring: her
Highness pitying his distress, commanded him to be provided for in some
place, where he could not wrong her poor subjects, but in any case not to make
him a Taker. Many such false ones she has punished with death, and those that
have by power, friends, or favor scapd, let then Zacheus restore, least their
ends be worse than their beginnings. I could in this as all the rest, reckon
multitudes of examples, but I will end with her Excellence in this Act of
Charity extended to her neighbors: whom she has by her bounty delivered
from the tyranny of oppression, and aided the right of others against
rebellious subjects: others assisted to recover their Kingdoms, not sparing
millions to sustain the quarrel of the righteous. The reward of which mercy
and charity she now finds, being done for his cause: that leaves no deed of
mercy unrecompensed.

As she was richly stored with divine graces, so in moral virtues, no
Princess everliving in the earth can be remembered to exceed her. Her
wisdom was without question in her life by any vnequalled, she was
sententious, yet gracious in speech; So expert in Languages, that she answered
most Ambassadors in their Native tongues: her capacity was therewith so
apprehensiue, and invention so quick, that if any of them had gone beyond
their bounds, with gracious majesty she would have limited them within the
verge of their duties, as she did royally, wisely, and learnedlie, the last
strutting Poland Messenger, that thought with stalking looks, and swelling
words to daunt her undaunted Excellence. But as he came proud, he returned not
without repentance; having no other wrong here but the shame of his own
sausinesse.

Many such examples I could set down, but I will satisfy you with one more.
When the Spaniards having their Armatho ready, temporisde with her Highness
Commissioners in the low Countries, thinking to find her unprovided: at last,
when they accounted all sure, they sent her their Kings choice either of peace,
or war, wittily included in four Latin verses: portending, that if she
would cease to defend the Low Countries, restore the goods taken by reprisall
from the Spaniards; build up the Religious houses diuerted in her Fathers time,
and let the Roman Religion be received through her land; why then she might
have peace: if not, it was too late to expect any. Which proud commanding
Embassy, with royal magnanimity, gracious wisdom, and fluent wit, she
answered instantly in one known prouerbiall line, which she suddenly made into
a Verse.

Ad Graecas haec fiant mandata Kalendas. O Thenot, did not assurance of our
kingly Poets love to the Muses, somewhat comfort me, I should utterly despair
ever to hear Pastoral song again, filled with any conceit; seeing her
Excellence, whose brain was the Hellican of all our best and quaint
inventions, is dried up by the inevitable heat of death.

Her own justice was such, as never any could truly complain of her; neither
did she pardon faults unpardonable, as murder, rape, Sodomie, that sin almost
not to be namd: neither was there in her (with her knowledge) extremity of
justice shown to other malefactors: if any such did fall, it was either by
falsehood or malice of the evidence, practice of corrupt men or some other
secret wherewith poor Shepherds are unacquainted: only this we are taught:
that God sometime punishes the sins of parents on their children to many
generations.

But for her self, she was always so inclined to equity, that if she left
Justice in any part, it was in showing pity: as in one general punishment
for murder it appeared: whereas before time there was extraordinary torture, as
hanging wilful muderers alive in chains; she having compassion like a true
Shepheardnesse of their souls, though they were of her erring and utterly
infected flock; said their death satisfied for death: and life for life, was
all could be demanded: affirming more, that much torture distracted a dying
man: in particular, she saved many. Among some unworthy of her mercy, that
proud fellow, who unjustly named himself Doctor Parry, and an other as I
remember called Patrick an Irish man: the first having offended in burglary,
against a lawier able and willing to take away his life, thereto urged by many
misdemeanors: and for that Parry doubted his attempt to kill and act of
felony was without compass of pardon, considering the place where it was
done, and against whom; thought a lease of his life safest, which of her
benign mercy he obtained for 21. years; but ere 3. of the^ were past, he did
unnaturally attempt her death that had given him life; for which traitorous
ingratitude he worthily was cut off: the Irish man likewise being pardoned for
a man slaughter, proved unthankful, and ended as he lived shamefully. Besides,
she was so inclinable to mercy, that her just and severe Judges told her, how
some desperate malefactors building on friends, and hopes of pardon, cared not
for offending, but even scoffed at authority; whereof when she heard, she took
special care, considering it was as great injustice to pity some, as spare
others, taking order to sign no pardon, except the Judges hand were at it
first, which truly knew the cause why the party was condemned: by which means
murderers, and presumptuous offenders were cut off from all hope.

One notable example of her justice among many I will here remember: Certain
condemned for Piracie, having made some end with them they wronged, lay for
their lives at her mercy, and the Judge of her Admiraltie having signified
favorably of the quality of their offense, she was moved to pity them, and
had commanded their pardon to be drawn. In the mean time two of them, trained
up in the fashion of our common Cutters, that I may tell thee ( Thenot) swarm
rather like devils than men about the country, that swear as if they had
license to blaspheme, and stab men as if they had authority; nay, sometime
themselves for very trifles* two such I say, were in the company of these
condemned Pirates, hourly hoping for their lives: and brauing either other of
their manhood, saying, one durst more than the other: the eldest being Master
of their late ship, wherein they had sailed to that place of sorrow, slyces his
own flesh with a knife, asking the other if he durst do as much: the Younker
was very ready, and two or three times followed the old fool, in that
desperate wounding of himself. This brutish act being committed in the prison
belonging to her Majesty's own house, came quickly to her royal ear, and
some few days after, their pardon to be signed; who graciously gave life to
all the rest; but commanded them by express name to execution, saying, they
were unworthy mercy, that of themselves had none: adding, it was very likely,
that such as in a prison, and in their state, would be so cruel to shead their
own blood, would have small compassion of others whom they overcame at sea;
and so leaving them to the law, they were worthily executed.

Of her mercy nothing can be said more, but that it equalled, or rather as I
said before, exceeded her justice. Among infinite numbers whom she pardoned,
that one especially being a clear witness, who shot the Gunne off against
Greenwich, even into her Majesty's Barge, hurt the next man to her, at broad
daylight; almost impossible to be excused by negligence or ignorance; for that
any man having his piece charged, would rather upon retyring home, have
discharged it among the Reeds, than toward the breadth of the River, whose
silver breast continually bore up a number of vessels, wherein men passed on
sundry affairs. How ever wilful or vnwilfull the act was, done it was, and
by a Jury he was found guilty, and adjudged to die: toward execution he was
led, with such clamor and injuries of the multitude, as sildome any the like
has been seen or heard; so heinous and odious his offense appeared unto them,
that being upon the ladder ready to be cast off, the common people had no
pity of him: when even just in that moment of despair and death, her Majesty
sent a gracious pardon, which delivered him to all men's wonder. I want but the
Arcadian Shepherds inchaunting phrase of speaking, that was many times
witness to her just mercies, and merciful justice: yet rude as I am, I have
presumed to handle this excellent Theme, in regard the Funeral hastens on, of
that sometime most Serene Lady, and yet I see none, or at least past one or two
that have sung any thing since her departure worth the hearing; and of them,
they that are bestable, scarce remember her Majesty. I cannot now forget the
excellent and cunning Collin indeed, (for alas, I confess my self too too
rude,) complaining that a liberal Mecaenas long since dying, was immediately
forgotten, even by those that living most labored to advance his fame: and
these as I think close part of his songs:

Being dead no Poet seeks him to revive,
Though many Poets flattered him alive.
Somewhat like him, or at least to that purpose of a person more excellent,
though in ruder verse I speak.

Death now has ceaz'd her in his ycie arms,
That sometime was the Sun of our delight:
And pitiless of any after-harmes,
Has veyld her glory in the cloud of night.
Nor does one Poet seek her name to raise,
That living hourly strived to sing her praise.
He that so well could sing the fatal strife
Between the royal Roses White and Red,
That praised so often Eliza in her life,
His Muse seems now to dye, as she is dead:
Thou sweetest song-man of all English swains,
Awake for shame, honor ensues thy pains.
But thou alone deseru'st not to be blamde,
He that sung forty years her life and birth,
And is by English Albion so much famde
For sweet mixed lays of majesty with mirth
Does of her loss take now but little keep;
Or else I guess, he cannot sing, but weep.
Neither does Corin full of worth and wit,
That finished dead Musaeus gracious song,
With grace as great, and words, and verse as fit;
Chide meager death for doing virtue wrong:
He does not seek with songs to deck her hearse,
Nor make her name live in his lively verse.
Nor does our English Horace, whose steel pen
Can draw Characters which will never die,
Till her bright glories unto listening men,
Of her he seems to have no memory.
His Muse an other path desires to tread,
True Satyrs scourge the living, leave the dead.
Nor does the silver tongued Melicert,
Drop from his honied Muse one sable tear
To mourn her death that graced his desert,
And to his lays opend her Royal ear.
Shepherd remember our Elizabeth,
And sing her Rape, done by that Tarquin, Death.
No less do thou (sweet singer Coridon)
The Theme exceeds Edwards Isabel.
Forget her not in Poly-Albion;
Make some amends, I know thou lou'dst her well.
Think it was a fault to have thy Verses seen
Praising the King, ere they had mourned the Queen.
And thou delicious sportiue Musidore,
Although thou have resigned thy wreathe of Bay,
With Cypress bind thy temples, and deplore
Elizaes winter in a mournful Lay:
I know thou can: and none can better sing
Hearse songs for her, and Paeans to our King.
Quick Antihorace though I place thee here,
Together with young Moelibee thy friend:
And Hero's last Musaeus, all three decree,
All such whose virtues highly I commend:
Prove not ingrate to her that many a time
Has stoopt her Majesty, to grace your rhyme.
And thou that scarce have fligd thy infant Muse,
(I use thine own word) and commend thee best,
In thy proclaiming James: the rest misuse
The name of Poetry, with lines unblessed;
Holding the Muses to be masculine:
I quote no such absurdity in thine.
Thee do I thank for will; thy work let pass:
But wish some of the former had first writ,
That from their Poems like reflecting glass
(Steeld with the purity of Art and wit)
Eliza might have lived in every eye,
Always beheld till Time and Poems dye.
But cease you Goblins, and you under Elues;
That with rude rimes and meeters reasonlesse;
Fit to be sung for such as your base selves,
Presume to name the Muses Patroness:
Keep your low Spheres, she has an Angel spirit:
The learned Swain can hardly sing her merit.
Only her brother King, the Muses trust
(Blood of her Grandsires blood, placed in her Throne)
Can raise her glory from the bed of dust:
To praise her worth belongs to Kings alone.
In him shall we behold het Majesty,
In him her virtue lives and cannot die.
At this Thenot and the rest desired him to proceed in his discourse of her
virtues; remembering where he left, at Justice, and though the matter pleafed
them so well that they could endure the hearing many days, yet seeing the
Sun began to dye the West Sea with vermilion tincture, the palace of the
morning being hidden in sable clouds, and that the care of their flocks must
be respected, requested him to be as brief, as the time limited him.

To which Collin answered; Thenot, I perceive thou art as all or the most part
of the world is, careful only of thine own: and how ever friends fall, yet
profit must be respected. Well, thou do well; and in this I dubbly praise
thee: to carke for sheep and lambs that cannot tend themselves, and not to
mourn as without hope our great Shepherdess; who after long life and glory
on earth, has obtained a longer and more glorious life in heaven. But to
proceed. As she was constant in faith, steadfast in hope, cheerful in giving,
prudent in speaking, just in punishing, but most merciful in pardoning: so for
the third morrall Virtue Temperance, there was in no age before, a woman so
exalted to earthly honor ever read off; that so long, so grationsly, in
outward and domestic affairs governed her kingdom, family, and person, with
like moderation.

First, for her kingdom, what can be devised more near the mean, than she
has in all things followed? For in religion as in other things, there has
been an extreme erring from the truth, which like all virtues, (being indeed
the head of all) keeps place in the midst; so has she established the true
Catholic and Apostolical Religion in this Land, neither mingled with
multitudes of idle superstitions; nor yet wanting true honor and reverence for
the Ministry, in laudable and long received ceremonies.

But here I shall be carpt at, in that I call the Religion professed in her time,
true Catholic and Apostolical: considering the Sea of Rome and such English
only as be her sworn Sons, think that seat all one to hold the
Apostolical faith: excluding her Majesty, and all other Christian Princes
with their subjects, that have not fallen before that Chair, as people
worthy to be cut off from Christ's congregation: giving them names of
Protestants, Lutherans, and I know not what. And on another side, a selected
company, that would needs be counted Saints and holy ones, when there is
nothing but corruption in their hearts, they forsooth condemned her sacred
government for Antichristian: when to the amazement of superstitious Romans,
and selfe-praysing Sectuaries, God approved her faith by his love toward her.
And lest I should be taskd of ignorance, and termed a Nullifidian in defending
neither of these sides: and only of the faith that the Colliar professed, which
was ever one with the most. I say, I was borne and brought up in the Religion
professed by that most Christian Princess Elizabeth, who believed not that the
spirit of God was bound or tide to any one place, no more to Rome than
Antioch, that the Candlestick of any Church might be removed, for neglecting
their first love, and teaching traditions of men, in stead of sacred verity:
and no man can truly deny but the church of Rome has so taught and stands
not in her first estate, but if it were in the Primitive Church perfectly and
fully established: then has it received many traditions since, which our
Elizabeth nor any of her faithful subjects would obey, being no way by Gods
word thereunto warranted: besides, there is apparent proofs that the church of
Rome has many hundred years persecuted with great cruelty: which is no badge
of the true Apostolical Church.

For the other sort: it is well known, they are for the most part, ignorant
and mechanic people, led by some few hot spirited fellows, that would
feign have all alike. These tying themselves to a more strait course outwardly
than other men, though they be utterly object to the Romanists; yet have they
more he Saints and she Saints among them than are in the Romish Calendar: where
none or at least very few are called Saints, but holy Virgins, Martyrs, and
Confessors; but all the brethren and sisters of the other side, are at the
first receiving into their communion, Sainted, if it be but Kit Cobbler, and
Kate his wife; and both he and she presume they have as sufficient spirits
to teach and expound the Scriptures, as either Peter, or John, or Paul, for so
bluntly they term the blessed Apostles: but their vanity and pride our
Elizabeth hated, and therefore brideled their ways, and was not moved with
their hypocritical fastes; because they fasted to strife and debate, as it is
written by the Prophet Esaias 58. and to smite with the fist of wickedness.

Her Highness therefore taught all her people the undoubted truth: faith in
Christ alone, the way, the door, and the life: not turning either to the
right hand, or to the left: and in this being the best mean, her Temperance
chiefly appeared: this rule she taught her kingdom, her family, her self: at
least caused them to be taught by excellent Pastors, to whom humbly she gave
public ear.

And in this, so for apparel, manners and diet, she made Laws, and gave
example in her own person: to curb the vanity of pride in garments: by
express Statutes, appointing all men and women to be apparelled in their
degree and calling. To express the excess of drinking, and hated sin of
drunkenness, she has commanded no drink in her Land to be brued above an
easy price: and to avoid gurmandize, she has yearly commanded the Lent and
Fasting-daies to be kept, as in times before, not for superstition sake, but
common policy, to have Gods creatures received indifferently; and also to
increase Mariners for the strength of the I Will, whose numbers while fish is
contemnd, by neglect of fishing mightily decay: fishers being indeed* pretty
traind Mariners; by reason that they have experience in most of the Havens,
Creekes, Shoales, Flats, and other profits and dangers near the place they
used. But what should I say; if they that will only make the scripture their
cloak, and yet respect not this part; Obey the Magistrate for conscience:
their sin fall upon themselves. I trust the Prince is excusable, that would
his subjects would do well; and so I am certain was her Excellence.

True said Thenot, but for all her Laws, these courses were little set by, I
have seen vpstarts iette it gayer than Lords, numbers drink till they have
seemde dead, and multitudes eat flesh even upon good Friday. What remedy said
Collin: they that will break the Kings Law, make little account of Gods: such
subjects are like falfe Ezecutors, that perform not the Legacies of the dead,
her highness was not the worse for that good Laws were violated, they that
dealt so with her, dealt worse with God: offending him double by breaking his
Laws and hers. But in her own household and person she observed all these
rules: and though many abroad by corruption were winkt at; yet sometime there
were some taken and paid home.

But her excelling Self, though her Table were the aboundantliest furnished of
any Princes in the world, with all variety: yet fed she oftenest of one
dish, and that not of the daintiest. For quaffing as it was unfitting her Sex,
so she extremely abhord it: hating superfluity as hell: and so far was
she from all niceness, that I have heard it credibly reported, and know it
by many instances to be true, that she never could abide to gaze in a mirror
or looking-glass: no not to behold one, while her head was tired and adorned,
but simply trusted to her attendant Ladies for the comeliness of her attire:
and that this is true, Thenot I am the rather persuaded, for that when I was
young, almost thirty years ago, courting it now and then: I have seen the
Ladies make great shift to hide away their looking-glasses if her Majesty had
past by their lodgings.

O humble Lady, how meek a spirit had thou? How far from affecting
beauty, or vain pride: when thou desiredst not to see that face, which all
thy subjects longed daily to behold, and sundry Princes came from far to
wonder at.

As in these things she kept truly the Mean, so likewise in her gifts: as I
first nored touching her Charity, which was still so tempered (notwithstanding
her great charge in aiding her distressed neighbors:) that she was ever truly
liberal, and no way prodigal: as I trust his Royal Majesty shall, by the
treasure, find.

As she was adorned with all these virtues, so was she endued with Fortitude
and Princely courage, so plentifully, that her displeasure shook even her
stoutest adversaries: and those unnatural traitors, that came armed sundry
times with bloody resolution to lay violent hands on her sacred Majesty, her
very looks would daunt, and their instruments prepared for her death, dropped
from their trembling hands with terror of their consciences, and amazement to
behold her countenance; Nay, when she knew they came of purpose to kill her,
she has singled diverse of them alone, and let some pass from her with mild
caueats a far off: whose lenity, rather increasing then diminishing their
malice, they have followed destruction which too timely ouertooke them.

I could in this place name many particular men, as Parry and others: but I
will content ye with one private example ouerpassing the general; when
Appletree whom I remembered before, had hurt her water-man, being next to her in
the Barge; the French Ambassador being amazed, and all crying Treason, Treason:
yetshee with an undaunted spirit, came to the open place of the Barge, and
bade them never fear, for if the shot were made at her, they durst not
shoot again: such majesty had her presence, and such boldness her heart,
that she despised all fear; and was as all Princes are, or should be; so full
of divine fullness, that guilty mortality durst not behold her but with
dazeled eyes.

But I wonder says Thenot, she in so many years built no goodly Aedifice
wherein her memory might live.

So did she answered Collin, the goodliest buildings in the earth, such as
like fleeting Isles commanded the seas, whose outward wal's are dreadful Engines
of brass, sending fearful thunder among enemies. And the inhabitants of
those wooden Isles, are worthy Seamen, such as dread to danger, but for her
would have run even into destructions mouth. I tell thee Thenot, I have seen
in a fight some like nimble spirits hanging in the air by little cords, some
lading ordinance with deathfull powder; some charging Muskets, and discharging
ruin on their enemies; some at the foreship, others busy at helm, skipping
here and there like Roes in lightness, and Lions in courage; that it would
have powered spirit into a sick man to see their resolutions. For such tenants
made she many buildings, exceeding any Emperors Navy in the earth: whose
service I doubt not will be acceptable to her most worthy Successor, our dread
Sovereign Lord and King.

Other Palaces she had great store of, which she maintained and yearly
repaired, at least would have done, if those that had care of her suruaying,
would have been as careful for hers as for their own.

What should I say of her? the clowdie mantle of the night, couers the beauty
of the heaven: and this evening looks like those four days that preceeded the
morning of her death. The beasts the night that she ended her fate in earth,
kept an unwonted bellowing, so that I assure thee Thenot, being assured of her
sickness, I was troubled (being awakened with their cries) with imagination
of her death, that I pitied not my bleating flock, who with their innocent
notes kept time with my true tears, till the hour of her death was past, when
immediately a heavy sleep shut up the windows of mine eyes: at which time,
(as I have since heard) deaths eternal sleep utterly benumbed all her senses,
whose soul (I doubt not) has already entered endless rest, whither God will
draw her glorified body in his great day. Sweet Virgin, she was borne on the
Eve of that blessed Virgins Nativity, holy Mary Christ's mother: she died on
the Eve of the Annunciation of the same most holy Virgin; ablessed note of her
endless blessedness, and her society in heaven with those wise Virgins,
that kept Oil ever in their Lamps, to awayte the Bridegroom. She came unto
the Crown after her Royal sisters death, like a fresh Spring even in the
beginning of Winter, and brought us comfort, as the clear Sun does to
storme-dressed Mariners, she left the Crown likewise in the winter of her
Age, and the beginning of our Spring: as if the Ruler of heaven had ordained
her Coronation in our sharpest Winter, to bring us happiness, and uncrowned
her in our happiest Spring, to leave us in more felicity by her Succeeder. O
happy beginning, and more happy end: which notwithstanding, as natural sons
and subjects, let her not go vnwept for toher grave. This evening let us be
like the Evening, that drops dewy tears on the earth: and while our hindes
shut up* the sheep in their folds, sing a Funeral song for the loss of
divine Elizabeth; inuocating absent Scholars to bewail her, whom in sundry
Schools she cherisht, and personally in either of their Universities visited:
let us bid soldiers lament her, toward whom, besides many apparent signs of
her exceeding love, this is one most worth memory; she came amongst them
mounted at Tilburie, being gathered into a royal Army against the Spanish
Invasion; promising to share with them in all fortunes, if the enemy durst but
show his face aland. Let Citizens likewise shead tears for her loss,
especially those of London, to whom she was ever a kind Sovereign, and
bountiful neighbor.

I need not bid the Courtiers weep, for they can never forgette the
countenance of their gracious Mistress, till they have engraven in their
hearts the favor of their most Royal Master. For us poor Shepherds; though
we are not able to suit our selves in black, fine enough to adorn so Royal
an Enterrement, yet Thenot quicken thy invention, Dryope and Chloris shall
bear part; and let us conclude our sorrow for Eliza in a Funeral Hymn; that
shall have power to draw from the swelling Clouds, waters to assist our woe.
The Springs, taught by the tears that break from our eyes, already ouerflow
their bounds: The Birds sit mute to hear our music, and our harmless
flock hearken to our moanes.

To this they all, as gladly as their grief would suffer them, consented.
Collin for his broken Pipe toooke Cuddyes, who could neither sing nor play, He
was so full of passion and sighs.

The Funeral Song between Collin and Thenot; Dryope and Chloris, upon the
death of the sacred Virgin ELIZABETH.
Collin. YE sacred Muses dwelling,
Where Art is ever swelling;
Your learned Fount forsake,
Help Funeral Songs to make:
Hang them about her Hearse
That ever loved Verse:
Clio writ down her Story,
That was the Muses Glory.

Dryope. And ye soft-footed Hours,
Make ready Cypress Bowers:
Insteade of Roses sweet
(For pleasant Springtime meet)
Strew all the paths with Yeugh,
Nightshade and bitter Reugh.
Bid Flora hide her Treasure:
Say it is no time of pleasure.

Thenot. And you diuinest Graces,
Veyle all your sacred faces
With your bright shining hair;
Show every sign of care:
The Heart that was your Phane,
The cruel Fates have slain:
From earth no power can raise her,
Only our Hymns may praise her.

Chloris. Muses, and Hours, and Graces,
Let all the hallowed places
Which the clear Moon did view,
Look with a sable hiew:
Let not the Sun be seen,
But weeping for the Queen,
That Grace and Muse did cherish,
O that such worth should perish!



Collin. So turn our verse, and on this lofty Pine,
Each one ingraue for her some Funeral line:
Thus I begin.


Collins Epitaph. Eliza Maiden Mirror of this Age,
Earths true Astraea while she liu'de and raign'de,
Is thrown by Death from her triumphant Stage,
But by that fall has endless glory gain'de:
And foolish death would feign if he could weep,
For killing Her he had no power to keep.

Thenots Epitaph. Eliza rich and Royal, fair and just:
Gives heaven her Soul, and leaves her Flesh to dust.

Dryopes Epitaph. There is no beauty but it vades,
No glory but is veyld with shades:
So is Eliza Queen of Maids stoopt to her Fate.
Yet Death in this has little thriu'de,
For thus her virtues have atchieu'de,
She shall, by verse, live still reuiu'de in spite of Hate.

Chloris Epitaph. Eliza that astonished her foes,
Stoopt her rebellious subjects at her feet:
Whose mind was Her Royal word or motto was, Semper Eadem.
Still the same in joy and woes.
Whose frown was fearful, and her favors sweet:
Swaid all this land, but most her self she swaide,
Liu'de a chaste Queen, and di'de a Royal Maid.

These Epitaphs ended, the Nymphs and Shepherds led by Collin and Thenot, who
before plaide heavy tunes on their oaten Pipes, got to their several
cottages, and spent their time till midnight, mourning for Eliza: But Sleep,
the equaller of Kings and captives, banished their sorrows. What humor they
are in after rest, you shall in the morning hear: for commonly, as the day is,
so are our affections disposed.

The order and proceeding at the Funeral of the Right High and Mighty
Princess Elizabeth Queen of England, France, and Ireland: from the Palace of
Westminster called White Hall: To the Cathedral Church of Westminster: the 28.
of April. 1603.
FIrst, the Knight Marshals men, to make way. Fifteen poor men. Next, the
260. poor women, by four and four. Then, servants of Gentlemen, Esquiers,
and Knights. Two Porters. Next, four Trumpetors* After them Rose, Pursiuant at
Arms. Two Sergeants at Arms. The Standerd of the Dragon, borne by Sir George
Bourcher. Two Querries leading a horse, covered in black cloth. Then the
messengers of the Chamber, four and four. Children of the Almondry. Children
of the Woodyard, Children of the Skullery.
Children and furners of the pastry. The Skalding house. The Larder. After
them, Grooms, being
Wheat porters. Coopers. Wine-porters. Conducts in the Bakehouse. Bel-ringer
Maker of Spice-bags. Cart takers, chosen by the board. Long Carts. Cart takers.
Of the Almery. Of the Stable. Of the Woodyard. Skullery. Pastrie. Skalding
house. Poultrie. Caterie. Boiling house. Larder. Kitchen. Laundrie. Ewry.
Confectionary. Wafery. Chaundry. Pitcherhouse. Buttrie. Seller. Pantrie.
Bakehouse Counting house.
Then Noblemens and Ambassadors servants, and Grooms of the chamber. Four
Trumpetters. Blewmantle. A Sergeant at Arms. The Standerd of the Greyhound,
borne by M. Herbert, brother to the Earl of Penbroke. Yomen of the Seruitors
in the hall, four and four. Yomen Cart-takers. Porters. Almondrie.
Herbingers. Woodyard. Skullerie. Pastrie^. Poultrie and Scalding house.
Purueyors of the Poultry. Purueyors of the Acatrie. Stable. Boiling house.
Larder. Kitchen. Ewrie. Confectionarie. Waferie. Purueyor of the wax. Tallow
Chandler. Chaundrie. Pitcher house. Brewers. Buttrie. Purueyors. Seller.
Pantrie. Garneter. Bakehouse. Counting house. Spicerie. Chamber. Robes.
Wardrop.
Earls and Countesses servants. Four Trompetors. Portcullis. A Sergeant at
Arms. The Standerd of the Lion, borne by M. Thomas Somerset. Two Quirries
leading a horse trapped with black velvet. Sergeant of the Vestrie. Children
of the Chapel in surplesses. Gentlemen of the Chapel in copes all of them
singing Clearks. Deputy Clarke of the Market. Clerks extraordinary. Coferer.
Diet. M. Cook for the household. Pastrie. Larder. Skullerie. Woodyard. Poultrie
Bakehouse. Acatrie. Stable. Sergeants.
Gent. Herbinger. Wood-yard. Scullery. Pastry. Catery. Larder Ewry. Seller.
Pantrie. Bakehouse.
Master Cook of the Kitchen. Clarks of the Querrie. Second and third clarke of
the Chaundrie. Second and third clark of the Kitchen. Superuisors of the
Dresser. Surueyer of the dresser, for the chamber. Musitions. Apoticaries and
Chirurgions. Sewers of the hall. Marshall of the hall. Sewers of the chamber.
Groom Porter. Gentlemen vshers quarter waiters. Clarke, Marshall and Auenor.
Chief clarke of the wardrop. Chief clarke of the Kitchen. Two clerks
controllers. Clerks of the green cloth. Master of the household. Sir Henry
Cock cofferer. Rouge Dragon. A Segeant at Arms. The Banner of Chester borne
by the L. Zouch between two Seargeants at Arms. Clarks of the council, four
and four. Clarks of the privy Seal. Clarks of the Signet. Clarks of the
Parliament. Doctors of Physic. The Queens Chaplains. Secretaries for the
Latin, Italian and French tongues. Rouge Cross. Between two Seargeants at
arms. The banner of Cornwall borne by the L. Herbert Son and heir to the
Earl of Worcester. Officers to the Mayor of London. Aldermen of London.
Solliciter, Attorney, and Sergeant at Law. Master of Revels, and M. of the
tents Knights Bachelors. Lord chief Baron, and Lord chief Justice of the
common pleas. Master of the Jewel house. Knights which have been Ambassadors
and Gentlemen Agents. Sewers for the Queen. Sewers for the body. Esquiers of
the body. Gentlemen of the privy chamber Gentlemen Pensioners houlding their
Pol-axes heads down wards covered with black. The Banner of Wales, borne by
the Viscount Bindon. Master of the Requests. Agents for Venice, and the
Estates. Lord Mayor of London. Sir John Popham. Sir John Fortescue. Sir Robert
Cicell principal Secretary. Controller and Treasurer of household Windsor.
Banner of Ireland borne by the Earl of Clanricard. Barons. Bishops. Earls
eldest sons. Viscounts. Dukes second sons. Earls. Marqueses. Bishop of
Chichester, Almoner, Preacher at the funeral. Lord Keeper and Archbishop of
Cant. The French Ambassador. Four Sergeants of Arms. The great Embrodered
banner of England borne by the Earl of Penbroke, and the Lord Haward of
Effingham. Somerset and Richmond. York, Helm and Crest. Chester, Target.
Norrey, king at Arms, Sword. Clarenceaux king at Arms, Coat. The lively
picture of her Highness whole body, crowned in her Parliament Robes, with her
Scepter in her hand, lying on the corpse, balmed and leaded, covered with Purple
velvet, borne in a chariot, drawn by four horses trapt in black velvet.
Gentlemen Vshers: white rods. About it twelve Banner-Rols, six on each side,
carried by 12. noblemen. Six Earls assistants with them the Footmen. A
Canapie borne over the chariot by four Noblemen. The Earl of Worcester,
Master of the Horse, leading the Palfrey of Honor. Two Esquiers and a Groom
to attend and lead him away. Gentlemen Vshers of the Privy chamber. Garter,
king of Arms. Lady Marchioness of Northamton, assisted by the Lord Treasurer
and Lord Admiral. Chief Mourner, her train carried by two Countesses, and
Master Vicechamberlaine. Fourteen Countesses assistants. Ladies of Honor
Countesses Viscountesses. Earls daughters. Baronesses. Maids of Honor of the
privy chamber. Captain of the Guard, with all the Guard following, five and
five in a rank, their holberds downward. The twelve Bannerols were carried by
twelve Barons, beginning at the youngest first.
The first Banner, was of king Henry the second, and Elenor of Aquitaine,
carried by the Lord Norris. The second, of king John, and Isabel of Angolisme,
carried by the Lord Compton. The third, of king Henry the third, and Elenor of
Arragon, carried by the Lord Chandoies. The fourth, of king Edward the first,
and Elenor of Castile, carried by the L. The sift of Edward the second, and
Isabel of France, carried by the Lord Darcie of the South. The sixth, of king
Edward the third, and Philippa of Haynolt, carried by the L. Cromwell. The
seventh, of Edmond Langley Duke of York, and Isabel of Castile, carried by the
L. Windsor. The eight, of Richard Earl of Cambridge, and Anne Mortimer, carried
by the L. Darcie of the North. The ninth, of Richard Duke of York, and Cicely
Neuill carried by the Lord Dudley. The tenth of king Edward the fourth, and
Elizabeth Woodnile, carried by the Lord Gray. The eleventh, of king Henry the
seventh, and Elizabeth daughter to king Edward the fourth: carried by the Lord
Cobham. The twelfth, of Henry the eight and Anne Bulline, father and mother to
our late deceased Queen: carried by the Lord de la Ware.

The Shepherds Spring-Song, in gratulation of the royal, happy, and
flourishing entrance to the Majesty of England, by the most potent and prudent
Sovereign James King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.
Collin. THenot and Chloris, red lipt Driope,
Shepherds, Nymphs Swains, all that delight in field
Living by harmless thrift your fat herds yield
Why slack ye now your loved company?
Up sluggards, learn, the larkes do mount and sing.
Their cheerful Carrolls, to salute our King.
The Mauis blacke-bird, and the little Wren,
The Nitingale upon the hawthorne brire,
And all the wingd Musitions in a Quire,
Do with their notes rebuke dull lazy men.
Up shepeheards, up; your sloth breeds al your shames
You sleep like beasts, while birds salute K. James.
The gray eyde morning with a blustering cheek,
Like Englands, Royal Rose mixed red and white,
Summons all eyes to pleasure and delight:
Behold the euenings deaws do upward reeke,
Drawn by the Sun, which now does gild the sky,
With his light-giuing and world-cheering eye.
O that's well done; I see your cause of stay,
Was to adorn your tempels with fresh flowers:
And gather beauty to bedecke your powers,
That they may seem the cabinets of May:
Honor this time, Sweetest of all sweet Springs.
That so much good so many pleasures brings.
For now alone the livery of the earth
Gives not live comfort to your bleating lambs,
Nor fills the strouting vdders of their dams;
It yeeldes another cause of gleesome mirth,
This ground wears all her best embrodery,
To entertain our Sovereigns Majesty.
And well she may, for never English ground
Bore such a Sovereign as this royal Lord:
Look upon all Antiquities Record;
In no Inrolment such a King is found.
Begin with Brute, (if that of Brute be true)
As I Will not doubt, but give old Bards their due.
He was a Prince unsettled, sought a shore,
To rest his long tossed Trojan scattered race:
And (as it is sed) found here a resting place:
Grant this: but yield he did false gods adore.
The Nations were not called to Christ that time,
Black Pagan clouds darkened this goodly clime.
So, when dissension brought the Romans in,
No Caesar till the godly Constantine,
(Descended truly from the British line)
Purged this Isles air from Idoll-hated sin;
Yet in care of Rome left Deputies:
Our James maintains (himself) his dignities,
The Saxon, and the Dane, scourgd with sharp steel,
(So did the Norman Duke) this beauteous land,
Inuading Lords, reign with an iron hand:
A gentler ruling in this change we feel,
Our Lion comes as meekly as a dove,
Not conquering us us by hurt, but hearty love*
Even as a calm to tempest-tossed men,
As bread to the faint soul with famine vexed;
As a cool spring to those with heat perplexed,
As the Suns light into a fearful den,
So comes our King* even in a time of need,
To save, to shine, to comfort, and to feed.
O Shepherds, sing his welcome with sweet notes,
Nymphs, strew his way with Roses red and white,
Provide all pastimes that may sense delight,
Offer the fleeces of your flocks white cotes:
He that now spares, does in that saving spill;
Where Worth is little, Virtue likes good will.
Now from the Orchades to the Cornish Isles,
From thence to Cambria, and the Hiberian shore,
The sound of civil war is heard no more,
Each countenance is garnished with smiles,
All in one hymn with sweet contentment sing,
The praise and power of James our only King.
Our only King: one Lord, one Sovereign;
O long-desired, and perfected good!
By him the heat of wrath, and boiling blood
Is mildly quenched; pale Envy counted vain.
One King, one people: blessed unity!
That ties such mighty Nations to agree.
Shepherds, I Will not be tedious in my song;
For that I see you bent to active sport;
Though I persuade me all time is too short
To welcome him, whom we have wished for long.
Well done, dance on; look how your little lambs,
Skip as you spring, about their fleecie dams.
Thus were ye wont to trip about the Green,
And dance in ringlets, like to Fairie Elues,
Striving in cunning to exceed your selves,
In honor of your late-falne summer Queen:
But now exceed; this May excels all springs,
Which King and Queen, and Prince and Princess brings.
Showtioyfully, ye Nymphs and rural Swains,
Your master Pan will now protect your folds,
Your cottages will be as safe as Holds,
Fear neither Wolves, nor subtle Foxes trains,
A royal king will of your weal take keep,
Heel be your Shepherd, you shall be his sheep.
He comes in pomp; so should a king appear,
Gods Deputy should set the world at gaze,
Yet his mild looks drive us from all amaze,
Clap hands for joy, our Sovereign draws near,
Sing Io, Io, shepherds dance and sing,
Express all joy, in welcoming our King.
The air, the season, and the earth accord
In Pleasure, Order, both for sight and sense:
All things look fresh to greet his excellence,
And Collin humbly thus salutes his Lord:
Dread and beloud, live Englands happy King,
While seasons last Fresh as the lively Spring.

FINIS.

