THE CHRISTIAN PATH-VVAY.

Delivered in a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the last of June 1611.

By Thomas Cheaste, Minister and Preacher of Gods Word.

EPHESIANS 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear Children.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, dwelling near Holborne-Bridge. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR JOHN SWINERTON KNIGHT, LORD MAYOR OF THE MOST
HONORABLE CITY OF London; and to the right Worshipful the Aldermen and
Shrieues of the same City; the abundant increase of Spiritual Grace in this
Life, and in the World to come everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our only
Savior.
AS the time now approaches wherein every grateful person will not only in
word, but also in deed with their presents and gifts show some sign and token
of their loving and kind affection: So (preventing the time near at hand) I,
as a poor labourer having gleaned and gathered these two handsful of corn,
two hours labor in the Lords Harvest, I dedicate it (as the best present that
I have) unto your favorable acceptance. It may be thought great boldness in
me (right Honorable and right Worshipful) thus presuming to seek the
patronizing of this my poor endeavors under the protection of your Honorable
and Worshipful countenances. But if the name and nature of this my little
book be rightly considered, and your dignity of place and Office therewith
justly weighed: this boldness I hope will be thought in me but modest duty,
and your kind acceptance hereof the true testimony of religious devotion. I
must confess your serious and zealous attention in hearing this plain Sermon
when it was Preached in your presence; and the experience of your religious
devotion, not only in frequenting the service of God, but also in protecting
and Patronizing the Preachers and Professors of Gods Word, encouraged me to
prefer this my newborn Orphant, this little book, to your grave
protection, wherein I seek not, as a Temporizer, to find out matter to fit
and feed Humorists, but in the care of a Christian to make proof of a better
mind: Knowing, that your grave and religious minds do contemn idle and
frivolous flying Pamphlets: What this Book is, your Judgments can discern,
and what I am, your kindness shall command: so leaving it, with my continual
prayers to Almighty God, that he may direct you in the right pathway through
the vale of misery into eternal felicity.

Your Honors, and Worships in all duty. THOMAS CHEASTE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
GEntle Reader, the most skillful Fisher may sometime catch a Carpe: For no
doubt but there are many busy brains, itching ears, taunting tongues, and
carping conceits, that will Critically play the right Momes: especially those
that do least good will find greatest fault with others good endeavors. But
from such I appeal to thy courteous and charitable censure (with consideration
of the want of time and health) commending this small book to thy courteous
entertainment: And so I bid thee heartily farewell.

A SERMON Preached at Paul's Cross the last of Inn 1611. by M. THOMAS
CHEASTE, Minister and Preacher of Gods WORD. THE TEXT.
EPHESIANS 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear Children.


THE Apostle Saint Paul, right Honorable, right Reverend, right Worshipful,
and well-beloued in our Lord and Savior Christ, in this heavenly parcel of
sacred Scripture, does insinuate unto us, who are by conception sinful, by
nature men; not perceiving the things of God, and by life and conversation such
as do no good: that the means therefore most fit, and the way most direct for
the consummating of our days, as acceptable to the Almighty, is the
incontinent removing and forsaking of all our unruly affections, fighting in
our minds, and the soule-abandoning of immoderate concupiscence, reigning and
raging in our members, by the suggestion of the Devil; whom, with all his
works, we must relinquish, and renounce, before we can enter, be entertained,
or received into the holy service of Almighty God: A reason of this the Apostle
shows, saying: That there is no communion between light and darkness, 2.
Cor. 6.14.
no concord betwixt Christ and Belial, no part has the infidel with the
believer.

Then let us forsake the works of darkness, and renounce the Prince of
darkness, and put on the armor of light, and walk as children of the light,
and follow the Prince of light. Next, let us depose our selves from all wicked
and rebellious thoughts, words, and works; which come by the motion,
suggestion, and persuasion of the Devil. And lastly, let us cease to be
incredulous, and believe on the name of our Lord JESUS, and in faith apprehend
him, as our only Redeemer; that we may be ingrafted as sons unto God, and
be followers of God, as dear children: as this our Text teaches us.

Wherein we may note an exhortation to imitation; out of which (omitting all
long circumstances, and curious divisions) we may observe, although it is not
an ordinary kind of method, 1 The persons that should imitate and follow. 2
The imitation it self. 3 Thirdly, the person whom we should follow. 4
Fourthly, the manner how we should follow him.
1 The first expressed in these words: Be ye. 2 The second in this word:
Followers. 3 The third in these words: Of God. 4 The fourth in these words: As
dear Children.


Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear Children.

[Therefore] insinuates a reason consequent of a matter precedent, which now I
omit.

First to the persons exhorted: Not only the Ephesians, But all Christians.
A Christian and well-gouerned Commonwealth may be compared to an house,
being builded and erected of diverse matters and substances; as stones for the
foundation, timber for the erection: and other things more to bring it to
perfection. So in the building of a Commonwealth there must be diverse orders:
some of high degree, some of mean estate, and some of low condition: and all
to finish this House or Commonwealth. And as in sumptuous buildings, one
chief stone, pillar, or post, cannot easily be wrenched out, without shaking
of all the rest; even as Salomons post underpropped the whole house: The King.
So the King being under God the stone, stay, pillar, and post of the
Commonwealth; if he mis-carry, all the strength of his Commonwealth is
shaken, and put in hazard of a downfall. To avoid therefore this dangerous
breach in this godly building, it is the duty of all faithful and true-hearted
subjects to pray unto God, the King of all Kings, to give unto our King (his
viceroy here on earth) a wise and an understanding heart, to give to his
Counselors the spirit of Council, Council.
to give to his Judges Judges.
the spirit of Judgment, to discuss and judge rightly of all matters;
remembering that themselves shall be adjudged as well as others whom they have
judged; as one ancient Father writes.

Veniet, veniet qui iudicata reiudicabit, illicita iurata confutabit; qui
faciet iusticiam iniuriam patientibus, and arguet in aequitate pro mansuetis
terra.

He will come, he will come, who will judge again matters wrongfully judged,
who will reprove unlawful oaths, will right them that suffer wrong, and plead
in equity for the meek of the earth: let them think, that if not shortly,
yet sharply will the day of judgment come to those that neglect the coming of
the eternal Judge.

Veniet, veniet dies Iudicij vbi plus valebit pura corda, quam astuta verba;
and consciencia bona, quam marsupia plena: quandoquidem Iudex ille, nec verbis
falletur, nec donis flectetur.

The day will come, the day of Judgment will come, when clean hearts will
more avail then crafty words, and a good conscience more then a great purse:
seeing that Judge will neither be deceived with words, nor weighed with gifts.
But to speak to them of whom most are absent, I will abstain, and frame my
speech to them that are present.

And seeing the Magistrate Magistrate.
is one of the stays, pillars, and posts of the Commonwealth, it behooves him
to attend his charge, assuring himself that he shall render an account at the
last day, how he has governed and behaved himself in his Magistracy and
place; whether he has been careful to beat down sin, and suppress vice:
to maintain virtue, and support goodness; whether his eyes have been open in
looking to his charge, (...), the people due been op^^ in the Lords (...)
^^mplaints of the poor (...) labored; whether his mouth has been open in
giving them comfortable answers; whether his hands have been ready in
defending them; whether his feet have been shood in hastening to redress
wrongs for to such ends should he and all his members be applied and employed:
to wit, To punish the nocent, and defend the innocent: To correct the hurtful,
and protect the harmless. To suppress the subtle, and support the simple.


As the silly sheep in the storm and tempest, running to the hedge and
thicket, to shroud and shelter themselves from the wind and weather, are
oftentimes ensnared amongst the thorns and briers, out of which, with much
ado they wind and wrest themselves with labor and loss of their wool, and
in seeking to avoid a small damage they incur a greater danger: So you that
are Magistrates, ought to look diligently into the dealings of your under
Officers, least that the poor man (like the simple and silly sheep)
oftentimes being oppressed and wronged by his adversary, running to them who
should and ought to right them, by delays and sinister dealings is fleeced of
more then he lost before, and with the woman seeking for one lost groat, leese
the other nine; and with the man that had an hundred sheep, having lost one,
spend the other ninty and nine in suing for that on^, (...) for want of right
loose all. Luke 1^.
Have a special regard, you (...) of God, therefore, what Officers you (...)
elect, let them be well qualified; Exodus 18.21.
Iethro, Moses father-in-law, counseled Moses to elect Magistrates and
Officers being thus qualified: to wit, Men of courage; such as fear God, such
as deal truly, and such as hate covetousness: Men of courage, not fearing
any man's threatening words, not proud looks, fearing God, not fearing what man
can do unto them, dealing truly and uprightly between man and man, without
favor or affection, hating covetousness, not corrupted with gifts, nor
carried from the right with bribes: O happy, and twice happy, are the people
and Commonweal whom God has blessed with such Magistrates! that
Commonwealth and Country is in good estate where the Prince makes good Laws,
the Magistrates execute them, and the people obey them.

Minister.
There is also another stay of Gods building, or Christian Commonwealth, which
must not be omitted, to wit, the zealous and learned Minister, whose doctrine,
by warrant of Gods word, must be a rule to guide and direct all their laws by,
otherwise they will be out of square. These Workmen should not be idle in
Gods Harvest, For the Harvest is great, but the laborers are few. Math. 9.37.


It is recorded in sacred Scripture that a certain man hired laborers into
his Vineyard. Math. 20.
The owner and Master of this Vineyard is the Lord, the laborers, his
Ministers and Preachers, the Vineyard is the world, the people the branches,
but in the Lords Vineyard we may find some laborers, some loiterers, and
some lookers on: Volentes, nolentes, and non valentes;

To the first volentibus, to them that execute the Lords business with willing
minds, rejoicing that God has enabled them to do the work of Evangelists,
it will be said; Well done thou good servant, because thou have been faithful
in a little, I Will make thee ruler over much.

To the second, nolentibus, to them that are able and yet not willing, it may
be said: He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten
with stripes.

To the third and last, non valentibus (without offense I may say the worst)
that are neither able nor willling, it may be said: Thou unbidden guest, how
camst thou in? at the door, or at the window? surely not at the door, unless
thou have borrowed Simon Magus silver piclocke, Math. 22.12.]
Friend how camst thou hither, not having a wedding garment? take him, bind him
hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness.

Let us pray unto God that every (...) well-ruling Elder, suffer no unruled and
unlearned lookers and gazers on, to steal into the Lords Vineyard, who are
ready to receive the penny and take no pains; to take the fleece, and starve
the sheep: too too many such in times past have crept in, Math. 13.28.
but how came this to pass? surely, the envious man has done this: Therefore
right Reverend, you, to whom by authority it appertains, ought now to be
careful and respective herein, lest that the adversaries of our profession, by
the ignorance and weakness of some Professors: take an occasion by such
advantage to scandalize, both the profession and professors, to defend this
dangerous breach in Gods building, you ought to be studious and vigilant:
Math. 13.25.
For when the husbandman sleeps, the envious man will be ready to sow the
tares amongst the wheat; And so by your zealous care over the Lords heritage,
his Vineyard in time might be cleansed from such lookers and gazers on: and
his Church purged of such penny-father idols: and hereafter such ignorant
tongue-tied blind guides debarred by such your good means from entering into
the Lords Vineyard. Which God for his Name sake, for his Sons sake, for his
mercy sake, for his Church and dear children sake grant: Thus much touching
the persons especial, now in general.

(...). Ephe. 5.1.

EVEN as Christ fed four thousand men, Math. 15.33.34.35.
besides women and children, with seven loaves and a few little fishes, when
they had followed him three days, in the desert or wilderness, and would not
send them away empty, least they should faint by the way.

So with these seven loaves of the bread of life, are fed four thousand, yea
forty thousand, yea thousand thousands of men, women, and children (for women
and children have souls to save as well as men:) if we, according to our Text,
follow him in the desert of this wide world, (no wider then wicked) three days
in the true faith of the Trinity, God will not send us away empty, nor suffer
our souls for want of spiritual food to faint. Therefore, let us be
followers of him as dear children: and be ready to obey this precept of
imitation, which is the second part of this our Text to be entreated of.

If we enter into due consideration of man's nature, Imitation it self.
we shall find it strangely addicted to imitation; and although in truth we
should live by laws more then by examples, yet we shall perceive, that
examples do more move in these days then laws; servants in a family,
soldiers in an army, subjects in a Co^mon-weale may confirm this to be true,
for Servants most commonly imitate their Masters, Soldiers their Captains,
Subjects their Governors, be they good, be they bad, get they praise, or
dispraise, profit or disprofite, fame or infamy thereby: thinking their lives
to be a Law, and that to be well done, which is done after their example.

Cicero said of Judges, that mighty men, should mightily be tormented.

We must all appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.10.
Revel. 22.12.
to receive according to our own deeds.

The licentious life of the Magistrate, shall not excuse the Subject if he
live not under the Law, nor the wicked life of the Master, acquit the Servant,
if he be ungracious, nor the evil conversation of the Preacher be a cause to
save the hearer if he be ungodly: the reason is, for that soul that sins
(whatsoever he be) shall die. Ezech. 18.4.


Two kinds of examples. 1 Of Christ. 2 Of man.
In Christian imitation there are two kinds of examples to be followed: The one
both necessary and always, the other but sometime and in some things,
necessary and always, the example of our Lord and Savior Christ, but sometime
and in some things, the examples of good men and women are to be followed.

Strange it may seem to some, that good men but sometime, and in some things,
are to be followed; yet it is not so strange as true, for every example of
theirs is not to be followed of us, for the better conceiving whereof we may
note that there are four examples 4 Examples.
of the faithful, and elect, in sacred Scriptures.

Abraham's faith, Joseph's chastity, David's zeal, Tobias pittifulnesse toward
the poor, and such like: these are looking-glasses set before our eyes, that
we should not be slothful in following them, but follow them as they follow
Christ, which through faith and patience inherit the promises.

David's adultery, Peter's denial, the Apostles ambition, and such like: which
are not recorded in despite to disgrace them, but are placed before us, for
these three ends: 3 Ends:


do is sin.

Abraham's readiness to offer up his son in sacrifice; The spoiling of
Egyptians in robbing them of their Jewels and treasures, commendable in them,
because they were commanded; but damnable in us because we are forbidden, to
them the one acceptable, the other commendable; but in us, the one the next
degree to murder, the other to theft, whereby we may note that good men in all
things are not to be followed: 2. Cor. 11.1.
but as Saint Paul would be followed, as he followed Christ, so should they
be.

Now to the person whom we should follow, to wit, CHRIST.
When I was called heretofore to this place, by the warrant of Gods word, I
delivered certain documents wherein we might learn, The way to Life; and now
in this Text we may learn whom we should follow, as our guide in the way to
Life: namely, CHRIST.

Grave and judicious Audients, Christ is the example, of us to be followed; and
that always and necessary: Always, for that he is most perfectly good: And
necessary, because both he and his Apostles have commanded us so to do.

Yet I pray you mistake me not: for all-be-it I say, our Savior Christ is
always; yet do I not say, in all things: and although necessary to be
followed, yet not as he is God: for he fasted 40. days, and 40. nights, he
raised the dead, gave sight to the blind, and many other miracles by the
Almighty power of his Godhead: he wrought things vn-able to be imitated of
mortal men.

In these things which our Savior Christ did, as he is God, he is most
religiously to be worshipped: and in these things which he did, as man, he is
zealously to be followed. He that loves and hates what Christ, as God, does
love and loath, does follow Christ as far as a man may follow God. He that
does that which Christ did, as man, does follow Christ as a Christian man
should do.

We ought to abhor the vanity of this world, Bernard.
and that cuoragiously, because JESUS would not be elected a King, he fled
from the multitude: to repent, and that heartily; for JESUS was killed as a
Lamb: to have true Charity; for JESUS prayed for his enemies. Christians have
their names of Christ; therefore it is meet, as they are co-heires of his name,
so should they be followers of his holiness. No man is rightly called a
Christian, who to the uttermost of his power, does not resemble Christ, in life
and conversation: he that follows not Christ, may be called a Christian; but
is none. So Saint Augustine Augustine.
says: What does it profit thee, to be called a Christian, whereas thou art
not? to usurp a strange name? If thou love to be called a Christian, show
the fruits of Christianity; and then well may thou take the name of a
Christian unto thee.

Whereas by natural inclination we are addicted to imitation, let us follow
the best: wisdom would so; partly because we are Englishmen, who are
reported, above all other nations, to be famous or infamous in imitating and
following every strange and newfound fashion. Many have gotten fame in
imitating Cicero in eloquence, Aristotle in Philosophy, Justinians in Law; and
Galen in Physic, and such like. But more have gotten shame in imitating one
Country in vanity, another in luxury: the Spanish, in bravery; the Italian, in
letchery; the Barbarian, in cruelty; the Turk, in incredulity; the Grecian, in
Gluttony; the Papist, in Idolatry; the Atheist, in impiety; and the Libertine,
in impurity: and not in following our Savior Christ in heavenly wisdom and
godliness of manners.

Saint Paul admonishing the Colossians to an imitation of Christ and his
holiness, Coloss. 3.5.
first exhorts them to mortification; as though without that means it were
impossible: Mortify therefore your members upon earth, and gives a reason of
his exhortation, saying; If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye. Romans 8.13.
As God commanded Moses to put off his shoes before he should approach near
him, so God commands us to put away all our sinful affections before we
begin to follow Christ: he will have us to forsake our sins before he will
suffer us to follow him. As Peter forsook his boats, nets and all, and
followed Christ: so should we leave all worldly gain and commodity, and
follow Christ. Matthew left his office of custom (although it was gainful
unto him) and followed Christ: So should we resign all worldly gain and
riches, and follow Christ, who will make us rich in him. Peter often used his
former trade of life, and Matthew never returned to his office? Peter was a
fisherman, and did get his living by his lawful pains, and honest means and
labor; but Mathewes Custome-office was very seldom, or never executed without
corruption: and therefore it was unlawful for him, being a follower of Christ,
to return to it again. 1. Kings. 19.20.
Elisha left his Plow and Oxen, and followed Elias: so should we leave oxen,
lands, house, country, kindred; yea our selves, rather then forsake Christ.

In following Christ we must travel the right way: we may find in sacred
Scriptures, two ways proponed, the one straight and narrow, Math. 7.13.14.
Luke 13.24.
the other wide and broad: the one leads to life, the other to death: the
one to heaven, the other to hell: The one straight and narrow in the beginning,
but broad and pleasant in the end: the other wide and broad in the beginning,
but straight and painful in the end. The one in the beginning, Take up thy
cross and follow me: but in the end, Fear not my little flock, for it is
your fathers will to give you a kingdom. The other in the beginning, All the
world, and the riches thereof, will I give thee, if thou will worship me (says
Satan:) but in the end, Take him, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into
utter darkness. In the one a good change, from a cross to a kingdom: In the
other a bad change; from a kingdom to a prison, and dungeon of utter
darkness. Leave therefore the broad and wide way, for it leads to
destruction, and walk in the narrow and straight way, for it leads to life.

If thou will follow Christ, thou must travel his way; not a broad, pleasant,
wide, and delightful way, full of pleasure, wantonness, and worldly joys:
but a narrow, troublesome, and straight way, full of afflictions, crosses,
tribulations and sorrows. All men, as long as they live in this vale of
misery, shall have their part of misery; every man shall have his turn of
sorrow, more or less, one time or other; which way soever we walk, we shall
hear every man complain of some sorrow or misery. What shall we do then?
Before it come, let us prepare our selves for it: when it is come, bid it
welcome, and bear it patiently: when it is departing, give it but half a
farewell, still expecting when it will return again. Yet keep thou this
narrow way, and follow Christ, and thou shall be safe, and find rest unto thy
soul: but if thou wander out of this way, into the pleasant paths of sin,
and turn thy back to God, and leave his protection, there is no help for
thee, Satan will take thee prisoner, lead thee captive, bind thee hand and
foot, and cast thee into the deep dungeon of darkness. For this assure thy
self; If thou will not follow Christ, Satan will follow thee: Be not like
these idle Epicures, and careless slacke-graces, who live as though they had
no souls to save, as though there were neither God nor Devil, no joys in
heaven, nor torments in hell; lest thou loose the one, to thy grief, and find
the other, to thy endless pain. If thou will not follow Christ in the way
toward heaven, do not think that thou shall escape hell; there is no
starting-hole between both for thee covertly to hide thy self: the Angel
that fell from God, with all his adherents, could find no such place; none of
Adams children could so shroud themselves, but they were found out. Dives could
find no place between heaven and hell to stay him from torments, but needs
he must into them.

Consider therefore thine estate; to heaven thou can not come, but by
following of Christ. No man comes to the Father (says Christ) but by me. He
is gone to prepare a place for none but for them that follow him.

Will, Memory, and Understanding, the three golden wings of the faithful soul.

freed from all earthly things whatsoever; and that no terrestrial matter
shall cleave unto it, neither can it sin when it is freed from the sinful
flesh. Sin, and an accusing Conscience, will cleave closly to an impenitent
soul: these it shall be sure of; no other thing shall it have with it from
the earth, but sin, wherein it delighted, and a guilty conscience, saying (as
it were) we are thy sins, we will not leave thee, but follow and accompany
thee unto death, in death, after death, unto judgment, in judgment, after
judgment, and for ever. O careless man! remember in time, that the impenitent
sinner, of all his worldly joys, wealth, pleasures and delights, shall have
nothing to comfort him; but his sins and a guilty conscience cleaving fast
unto him, vn-remoueable, that neuer-dying worm, always biting and gnawing on
his sorrowful soul.

Therefore in time mortify thy sins (before it be too late) that they may
not mortify thy soul: for the hazard of eternal life depends on the dying
or not dying of sin; and that necessarily. Who is so void of understanding,
as not to think it expedient and necessary wisdom rather to destroy sin,
then himself: for one of the two must needs be mortified, either sin, or
the soul, must suffer death and dye. Therefore spare not sin, but mortify
it, crush the serpents head betimes, kill all thy sins, be partial to none:
for one darling sin is enough to bind thee fast unto Satan, seeing it is
easy to hold him that strives not to depart: One kind of sin may kill thy
soul as well as an hundred, and bring death which is eternal upon thee.
Remember Saul, and forget not thy soul, 2. Sam. 15.
God commanded him utterly to destroy the Amalekites; he sparing but some of
them, was cast off from God, and his kingdom rent from him. Our sins are the
Amalekites, which God commands us to destroy: we must kill them all, and
spare none; we must not spare Agag, we must not spare any captain sin,
lest God forsake us, and so we loose a better kingdom then ever Saul found.

As Amelek resisted the children of Israel in their journey toward the land of
promise: Deuteronomy. 25.17.
so Satan seeks by all means, to hinder and let us in following Christ, and
forsaking sin. These two obstacles he trumpeth in our way to stop us from our
conversion: to wit, Delectatio peccandi, and audacia defendendi. That is,
Delight of sinning, and Boldness of defending.


Peccatum quatuor modis perpetratur in cord, quatuorque modis consummatur in
opere. Sin is four manner of ways committed in heart, and four manner of
ways finished in action: That is, in heart By suggestion. Suggestion comes by
the Devil. By delight. Delight by the flesh. By consent. Consent by the
spirit. By boldness of defending sin. Boldness of defense by our elation
stubbornness.


With these four strokes the old and envious adversary of mankind, undermined
and overthrew the uprightness of the first man: the Serpent persuaded, Eve
delighted, Adam consented; and when he was urged to confess his fault, he
defended it by audacious excuse. After suggestion comes delight, after
delight comes defending of sin.

As (says Chrysostom Chrysostom.
) it is impossible to kindle fire with water, so it is impossible to stir up
repentance or conversion in a man that delights in sin: for as water does
quench the fire, and not kindle it, so delight in sin does bury repentance,
and not revive it. Therefore the Prophet David desires God to keep him from
sin, and from delight in sin; fearing lest presumptuous sins should have
the upper hand of him. And the Apostle Saint Paul exhorts us to mortify our
earthly members, as the best way to cut off the delight of sin, that sin may
dye.

I read in a pretty familiar history, (not impertinent to this purpose) that
there was a certain boy, having a great delight to play with a bird, tied a
third to the leg of the bird, and sat down and played therewith, letting
the bird come and go at his pleasure, Anselmus a godly man coming unto him,
grieuing to see him live that idle and evil kind of life, cut the third: so
the bird did fly away, and the boy arose and led a better kind of life.
Morally, it may be well applied thus, this boy may signify a sinner, this
bird, sin, this third, delight in sin, his sitting down his continuance in
sin, taking pleasure therein, and making pastime to sin at his pleasure:
This Anselmus may signify true repentance and unfeigned conversion in a man,
intending and fully purposing to forsake sin and follow Christ, which cutteth
the third, that is the delight of sin, sin dies, and the sinner (well
termed a boy for his childish and foolish actions) rises up, that is, sits
and continues not in sin, but leads henceforth a more sanctified kind of
life.

Saint John in his Epistle general, 1. Ioh. 2.15.
exhorting men to follow Christ, dehorteth them from the love of the world and
the delight of sin reigning in them that love the world: saying, Love not the
world, nor the things in the world: a reason in the 16 verse Verse 16.
he gives saying; For all that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eye, and the pride of life) is not of the Father, but of the world.

The world, is as the devils golden cheine, to hinder men from following of
Christ, which treasure he offers to bestow on them that will forsake God, and
follow him; and therefore he would have given it, and all the riches thereof,
to our Lord and Savior Christ, but it was none of his to give, he was but an
usurper: Therefore as our Lord and Master Christ denied him, so let us, his
servants, defy him, and as the same Apostle makes (as it were) anatomy of
certain great sins in which men so delight; so let us by his admonition hate
and detest them, and shun the way to hell, as hell it self; amongst other
capital sins which hinder and let us from following Christ, here are three
by the Apostle pointed out, to wit; covetousness, pride, and voluptuousness:
Colloss. 3.5.
coueteousnesse, although it be accounted good husbandry, and frugality: yet
the Apostle Paul calls it a let, Ephesians. 5.5.
and idolatry: idolatry because men so much love and embrace it; a let, because
it keeps us back from following Christ; if it be idolatry, how can covetous
men be good Christians, seeing they love the world more then Christ? if it be
a bar to keep men from heaven, how do covetous men think it possible to
enter through the eye of an needle, being swollen with this sin as great as a
Camel? if men were so covetous of the Kingdom of heaven, as they are greedy
of worldly wealth, they would not take so much pains in getting of it, and so
little labor in following of Christ: but we may find it true, That Impij
alacrius currunt ad mortem quam pij ad vitam: The ungodly run more hasty to
death, then the godly to life; they take more pains for destruction, then
others for salvation.

For coueteousnesse has no pleasure in it, but great trouble and misery; for
it is a trouble to the body, disquietnesse to the mind, and a grief to the
heart, it pincheth and pricketh with three great and deep wounds: The first to
the bone, the second to the brain, the third to the heart; to the bones in
tiring and wearying men in getting riches: to the brains, in great care to
keep them being gotten, as pricking thorns amongst the which the divine seed
of Gods words sown fructifieth not. Math. 13.8.9.
The last cut which is most greiuous that is to the heart, in leaving and
losing them, yea, and with his own self, his own soul, his own life, yea
life both of body and soul, too dear a price for so vile a thing, in selling
his soul for sin, Therefore Christ says: Math. 16.26.
What shall it avail me to win the whole world, and loose mine own soul?

Let us remember the covetous caterpillar, and meale-mouthed Farmer, that was
not contented with his barnes full of Corn and much wealth, how he was in a
monent satisfied with a mouthfull of dust, and, which was most lamentable, his
soul taken from him; I fear he has many sons this day living, whom I would
have take notice hereof, and see Gods judgment is such, that their wealth
shall be turned into woe, their plenty into scarcity, their prosperity into
poverty, their solace into sorrow, their gladness into sadness, their mirth
into mourning, their pleasure into pain, their tranquillity into calamity.

I read in ancient writing, Is^od.
that old men did picture Mercury, one of the Planets, like to a covetous
Merchant, having in his mouth a thorny tongue, with wings spread abroad in the
midst, seeming glittering gold, and upon his head a cock: The morallity of
this story may be thus applied: The thorny tongue may represent the deceiptfull
words, false oaths, and fraudulent dealing of cruel covetous men, in
bargaining, buying, and selling with men: The wings may represent the have,
speed, and celerity that coueteous men use in gathering of wealth, in
traveling from Market to Market, from Town to Town, from Kingdom to
Kingdom, over Sea and Land, omitting no time, occasion, or opportunity:
Glittering and shining may signify the gain of gold, seeming like fire, for
gold may be compared to fire, a little whereof is sufficient to warm a man,
but too much burns: Gold and gain, in good, honest, and lawful sort gotten,
prospers with a man, but by unjust and unlawful manner gathered damneth a
man: Well gotten, and well used it helps, but wickedly gotten and wickedly
used it hurts.

The cock represents the careful vigilance that possesses covetous men's
minds, who rise up early and lie down late, taking their rest but until the
cock croweth, or the clock strikes.

Thus the description of a covetous man's life is expressed: and Job has a
notable Epitaph at his death, to be ingraued upon his Tomb, He is dried up and
withered, Job. 6.17.
and in time consumed, and when it is hot he falls from his place; before he
departs from his way and course of life: A worthy note for shunning the like,
and a fearful judgment upon them that follow the covetous affections of this
wicked world, and forsake Christ whom they are bound to follow upon forfeiture
of salvation, and pain of condemnation.

Let us not settle our affections upon earthly things, hunting after the
insatiable desire of worldly wealth, like the mole or want that makes many
holes and diggeth many dens in the earth, and yet is not satisfied but still
labors and diggeth: Let us not build many houses, dig many sellars, buy
many Farms, fill many barnes, and yet be insatiable and unthankful, and in
all our abundance and plenty will not say, Blessed be the name of the Lord,
which Job did in his greatest poverty: The covetous cormorant when his barnes
were full and his house furnished, was satisfied, saying as it were, Soul thou
have sufficient, eat, drink, take thine ease; But some having enough, and
more then enough, are not satisfied, but would with satan compass the whole
world if they might: Seeing therefore that covetousness keeps us from
following Christ, the ready way to heaven, and leads us the headlong way to
hell, let us as the Apostle exhorts: Be followers of God, as dear children.

The other let that holds men back from following God, is Pride, and it is
no small enemy to mankind, although now it is accounted no sin: It caused the
Angel with many his Associates to loose heaven, it caused Adam and Eve to
loose Paradise, and it will be a cause to exclude and debar us of the
Kingdom of heaven, unless we humble our selves and follow Christ, as
dutiful scholars, learning the lesson which he has taught us, saying: Learn
of me, for I am humble and meek of heart: Again he says, He that exalts
himself shall be brought low; Proverb. 16.18
Solomon tells, that pride goes before, and destruction follows after: And
the old Writer Gregory Gregory.
says: As humilty is a sign of election and approbation, so pride is a sign
of reiection and reprobation. Pride may fitly be compared to a pale horse,
Revel. 6.8.9.
The name of him that rides thereon is death, and hell follows after: Pale
it is, for that it wants the cheerful and comfortable complexion of godly
charity, and death rides on it, for death is the wages of pride, which the
devil knew right well, who by pride brought spiritual death on all, and hell
follows after, being the place prepared for all proud persons, who are
betrayed by pride in their own bodies and members: As Absolon conspired his
fathers death by offering gifts to his fathers subjects: And Eve for a proud
mind to be like unto God, was made more unlike, and defaced the image of God
in her self, and thereby lost Paradise: Pride is a sin that God hates; all
other sins fly from God, but pride stubbornely stands with the hauty
Pharisee and faceth with God: Therefore, he that will be a follower of Christ
must forsake pride.

For a proud man is 1 Deo odibilis To God odible 2 Diabolo similis Like to the
diuil 3 and sibi damnabilis. and to himself damnable.


Three sorts of men my soul hates, etc. Eccle. 25.2.
examples in the Angels, and in men we have in no small number.



Iesabell, Reu. 18 7. Esaias 47.8.
of the proud strumpet of Babylon, of Senecharib, etc. who soaring aloft with
their proud plumes, being at the highest pitch of their exaltation, were
thrown down headlong and plunged in the deep lake and dungeon of
destruction, and as the wolf follows the prey, and the Hunter follows the
wolf to destroy him: so as man follows pride, punishment follows proud men
to destroy them. Virque scelus sequitur paenaque iusta virum.

Now the third let that hinders us in following Christ is voluptuousness,
which although in our time it is accounted but a sport: yet it is a canker that
eats up virtue in a man which is eternal: Augustine.
This vice old men should loath, and young men should leave, but by experience
many, yea too many young men, being trained up by their careful parents, either
in virtuous schools, or honest trades of life, leave manners with their
Masters, virtue in the schools, and run astray with the prodigal son,
luxuriousty spe^ding their portions: others, leaving their trades with their
Masters, and science in the shops; with Esau sell their Birthright for a
mess of voluptuous pottage, in the kitchen of wantonness spending their time
in satan's Synagogue of wickedness: The more pity that they have so little
piety, seeing it is not the loss only of Temporal goods, but the loss of
the Kingdom of heaven; and one ancient father says; Iustum est vt qui peccata
vti voluisset aeternaliter si potuisset, aeternaliter paenam sustinere
cogeretur, it is requisite that he that would use sin always, if he could,
should continually be constrained to suffer punishment, which that we may
escape let us both old and young cease to be voluptuous and turn to be zealous
in following of Christ, for as long as we harbor this vice in our hearts, we
carry (as Vrias did) letters to our own destruction, and as long as we
greedily follow after it, we do follow it (as Asahel followed Abner) to our
own death.

Thus we may see these great, gross, and grievous sins do stop, dampe,
and rampire the way against us to keep us out of heaven, as they excluded our
first parents out of Paradise, and thereby displaced and dis-inherited us of
the possession and interest thereof, if we hate him that undermines and
beguileth us of our earthly inheritance, as Esau hated his brother Jacob: how
much more should we detest these sins, that defraud us of our celestial
habitation?

We do exceedingly hate him that kills our father or mother: how much more
then should we hate these sins that have brought death and mortality upon all
our parents, our selves and our posterity.

The second Obstacle. Audacia defensionis.
THe second obstacle that fettereth the feet of our affection, is the boldness
of defending or excusing sin: this was in Adam after he had transgressed by
committing the foresaid sins, being urged by Almighty God to confess his
fault, still defended and excused his offenses: So there are many of Adams
children that will not (although they see and know their own nakedness)
confess it: but are less ashamed to commit sin, then to confess their sins
to God, and repent. As Nahash would have had the right eyes of the people of
Iabes Gilead to be put out, 1. Sam. 11.2.
and to bring that shame upon the Israelites: so that spiritual Nahash seeks
by his subtilty, to have the right eye, whereby we are brought to the sight and
knowledge of our sins, to be put out, and so to bring shame and confusion upon
us: like the Raven, that first of all strikes out the silly sheep eye, that
he may not escape his tyranny: so Satan would have us not to see the shame of
our sins: and when for want of shame we have sinned, he would have us ashamed
to confess them, and repent.

I read on a time, a pretty familiar history (agreeable heereunto) of certain
religious and well disposed persons, confessing their sins, to whom the
Devil approached; whom, when a godly and reverend father espied, he asked him
how he durst, or to what end he came so near such godly persons at so good an
exercise: who made this answer: I come (said he) to restore that which long
agone I have taken from them. The godly man maruelling that the Devil was
become a restorer, (exceeding many Christians that scarcely think on
restitution) demanded of him what that was. Shame, said he, which I took from
the^ in co^miting of sin, and now I bring it to them again, to keep them from
confessing of their sins. Thus we see that the Devil would have us not to be
ashamed to sin, but ashamed to confess our sins and repent: therefore when we
should forsake our sins, and follow Christ, if we shall perceive any
unwillingness in us to perform this duty, let us know from whence it came:
and so in despite of Satan put off his visard, and unmask our selves, that
we may see these dangerous caribdes, and avoid them, and so follow Christ our
precursor, our grand-captaine and protector.

The last part. As dear Children.
CHildren in the Scripture are diverse ways taken, besides them that come of
their parents, blood, and generation: and besides them which are in the right
descending line of the same lineage or stock.

For sometime subjects are called children: David spoke thus to Saul the King:
My Father, 1 Samuel 24.12.
behold, behold, etc. Thus Abimelech was called King and Father. Also these are
called Children that succed others in title or right of inheritance. Thus
Ieconias, that never had child, is said to beget Salathiel, because he was the
next of David's stock; Ierem. 22.30.
who therefore succeeded Ieconias in the kingdom of Judah.

They that are guided by the council of others, are called children: so Joseph
said: Genesis 45.8.
God has made me a father to Pharaoh.

Servants sometime are called children: The servants of Naaman said unto him:
Father, 2. Kings. 5.13.
if the Prophet had commanded thee a great thing, would not thou have done it?

Younger men and women are called children, in respect of their elders: Rebuke
not an Elder, 1. Tim. 5.1.2.
but exhort him as a Father, the elder women as mothers.

They which are under the tuition or help of others, are called children: so
Job said; Job. 29.16.
he was a father to the poor.

Scollers were called the sons of the Prophets: Elizeus said to Elias, My
father, my father. 2. Kings. 2.12.


Hearers are called children in respect of their pastors and teachers: 1. Kings
13.11.
Paul says to the Corinthians; ye have many teachers, but not many fathers.
And to the Galat. he says: My little children, Gal. 4.19.
of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you. All true
believers are said to be dear children in this Scripture, by the Apostles
doctrine, showing his fatherly love, and tender care over them that imitate
Christ. Romans 9.8.
The true children of Abraham are they that imitate him in faith.

Math. 21.28. Luke 15.11.
As in the parable of the Gospel it is recorded, that a man had two sons, the
one performing his fathers will, the other neglecting it: the one frugall, the
other prodigal. Likewise

Abraham had two sons, Ismael and Isaac, but Isaac only freeborn: so there
are two sorts of children; one, the children of God: the other, the children of
the world.

The children of God are they which are united to God by adoption, as Brothers
and Sisters in Christ, by hearing of the word of God, and keeping it. These are
my brethren (says Christ) that hear the word, and keep it.

The children of the world are they which fashion themselves like unto the
world, setting and settling their affections on worldly things: but the children
of God are changed in their shape, by renewing of their minds, they are of
another fashion, they are of a new birth, of the spiritual kindred of Christ
by regeneration. The children of God do follow Christ, the children of the
world do follow it, and are led by it: but the children of God are led by the
spirit of God. The children of the world have their whole trust and confidence
in worldy things: Romans 8.14.
but the children of God are predestined to be his adopted children, Ephesians.
1.5.
by faith in Christ. It is the greatest preferment in this world, amongst the
children of the world, to be made the heir of a King, Emperor, or Prince, and
to be in great account with men in this world: but the children of God are of
greater account with God and godly men, both in this world, and in the world to
come.

The children of Kings are attended by noble men, and great personages, and
guarded with strong men; yet all but men, whose breath is in their nostrils,
whose hands cannot accomplish the devises of their hearts: But the children of
God are guided by God himself, whose eye is always over the righteous, they
are guarded by Angels: Psalm. 34.15.
The Angels of God shall pitch their tents round about them that fear him.

The children of the world do take delight in such pleasures as the world does
afford them; as carnal security, worldly prosperity, beastly sensuality,
covetousness, pride, luxury, idleness, and such like. But the pleasures that
God affoordeth his dear children, are such as neither the world can give them,
nor take from them: As the love of righteousness, delight in the law of God,
Psalm. 1.2.
patience in affliction, love of them that excel in virtue, and such like.

The riches of the children of the world, are gold, silver, houses, lands,
lordships, rents, revenues, and such like: which thieves may steal, rust may
fret, fire may consume, water may drown, plague may infect, time may wear
out, and death may end. But the riches of Gods children are the word of God,
firm faith, forgiveness of sins, freedom from hell, liberty with the Saints,
the spirit of contentation, peace of conscience, continual joy in the holy
Ghost; and a kingdom of glory in heaven, which no thief can steal, no rust
can corrupt, no fire can consume, no water can drown, no plague can infect, no
time can wear out, no death can end.

The children of God are shrouded under the wings of his mercy; but the
children of the world are subject under the weapons of his justice, and a
fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of God in such a case. If the
children, that were disobedient to their parents in the time of the law, by the
law were stoned to death for their disobedience toward their earthly parents:
Deuteronomy. 21.21.
how much more are the wilful and wicked children of the world in danger of
the father of heaven, and God of heaven, and earth, for their disloialty and
disobedience in forsaking God, and following the world? If the children of the
righteous that offend God have not escaped Gods severe punishment, how shall
the ungracious children of ungodly parents abide it? If the sons of Eli, and
the sons of David were punished by death, as the reward and wages of their
sins, without pardon or partiality; although Eli was the holy Priest of God,
and David the Princely Prophet of God: the one high in Gods favor, the other
as great in his love. How then shall (...) the evil egg of a bad bird escape
vncrushed? ^ King. 2.23.24


If the children that mocked the prophet, were by Gods judgment torn in
pieces, and devoured of Bears: how shall these profane scoffers, and deriders
of the Gospel, and professors thereof escape Gods fearful judgments?

God loves those children that imitate their parents good examples, and follow
them as they follow Christ.

The Apostle in this our Text, makes a distinction between the children of
God and the children of the world; terming the children of God, Dear Children.
Dearly beloved, and dearly are they purchased with the precious and
pricelesse blood of his best loved Son Christ; whom as zealously they ought
to follow for his grace, 2. Kings 2.
as Elisha followed Elias for his mantle and spirit. If children follow their
parents, and obey their precepts for an earthly and terrestrial inheritance,
should we not much more obey our heavenly Father for an heavenly and
celestial heritage, assured to his dear children, that follow him, as he
has by his dearly beloved son, in his sacred word taught them.

The manner how we should follow him, is by the Apostle plainly expressed: to
wit, As dear Children, according to Christ's own words; affirming that
whosoever will enter into the kingdom of heaven, must be as a little Child,
innocent, humble and meek: Not clothed with covetousness, puffed with pride,
nor with voluptuousness: For to such (says Christ our precursor) belongs
the Kingdom of heaven. Young and unacquainted with gross sins are most fit
to follow God in the prime-time of their years, in the maidenhead of their
age, giving him the first fruits of their love.

John the Apostle and Evangelist was known by the name of the Disciple whom
JESUS loved. So was young Samuel favored of God. So was David, a man after Gods
own heart: for he was a man that followed God from his youth. So was little
Daniel, a great man with God: a little man amongst men, but a great Prophet of
God. This religious affection of virtuous youth Saint Paul learned of Christ,
and taught it to his scholar Timothy, and other Churches which he had by the
word planted. But if we seek to urge the youth of our time thereunto, they
will think that we come before our time; as though they might be licenced to
run a wilful and wicked course, Math, 8, 29,
and will be ready to tell us (as the Devil told Christ) that we torment
them before their time. The Prodigal son was the younger.

Christ our heavenly king is gone before us, and has opened the gate of
heaven: otherwise there had been no passage at all; yet he tells us, that
the gate is straight, Math, 7, 14,
and there are few that enter in thereat: therefore we must strive, strain,
and stoop, if we intend to enter in. First, we must strippe our selves out of
the old habit of sin: for if sin lie at the door, Genesis 4.7,
it will stop our passage, as it did Caines: whether it, these gross and
grievous sins, or any other beloved sin, which we so tenderly harbor and
foster in our hearts, like a rock, or an heap of sand, will stop and damme
up the gate. Therefore we must, like little children, creep low, and humble our
selves: for if we put on the true habit of humility and meekness, Satan
cannot hinder us. As the Serpents will not come into the vineyard when vines
bring forth their blossoms, no more will the old Serpent, and author of pride
come near us, if we, like fruitful branches, bud the blossoms of humility.
The want of this virtue cast Nebuchadnezar out of his earthly Kingdom, and we
must have it or else we shall not enter into the heavenly Kingdom. The
Pharisee swelled in his own proud conceit, and therefore he was too big to
enter in, but the poor Publican stooped and went in, little Zacheus was a
great rich man, but he diminished himself by restitution and giving to the
poor, he descended from the lofty branches to the root of humility, and so
entered in. This gate (it should seem) was made for none to enter, but for
these that are as children. Math. 18.3.
Verily I say unto you (says Christ) except ye become as little children, ye
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

How acceptable is the morning sacrifice of our tender age unto God, no
sacrifice of beasts was more welcome to God then young kids or lambs, none of
birds more acceptable then young pigeons or Turtle doves: Manna was to be
gathered in the morning before the Sun arose.

If we follow God as dear children, God will take us for his children, and
this is no small sign of Gods mercy, so much to favor, and so highly to grace
us with the title of his children, that we may call him father: Well, and
worthily may he be called a father, for he is omnium Creator fideliumque Pater,
the Creator of all men and Father of the faithful, and therefore it is
written, Is not he thy Father that has bought thee, and that made thee, and
proportioned thee? Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Yea without doubt, God is our Father, if we will obey him, an everliving and
an everlasting Father, as it is also written: Doubtless, thou art our Father,
Esaias 63.16.
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us not, yet thou o Lord art
our Father and our Redeemer, thy name is for ever. If he be our Father, and our
Lord, we should honor and fear him. Mallac. 1.6.
A son honoreth his father, and a servant his master, If then I be a Father
where is my honor? If I be a Master where is my fear, says the Lord of
Hosts? If therefore ye call him Father, 1. Pet. 1.17.
which without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, pass
the time of your dwelling here in fear, says the Apostle.

In all our miseries and fear we are imboldened by the Spirit of Christ to
call God our Father, as we may read: Gal. 4.6.
Because ye are sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, which cries Abba Father. Math. 23.9.
Wherefore Christ commands us to call no man father on earth, (that is, in
faith and religion) a reason he gives, saying: There is but one your Father
which is in heaven, he is a father that made both body and soul, and is ready
to save both, when earthly parents forsake us, he will take us; when they leave
us, he will receive us; when they will not, and cannot help us, he can and will
help us; when they dye, he lives, for he is an everlasting and an everliving
Father: first and last, the beginning and the end, a beginning, without
beginning, and an end without end.

Many children brag and boast of their parents gentry, and they account it a
great honor to be called the son of a King, as David said, when he should
marry Saul's daughter, Do you think it a small thing to be a Kings son?
Should the children of God think it a small thing to be the sons and
daughters of the King of Kings, and Lord of all Lords, King of heaven and earth?

He is worthily called a Father, for he is.

Pater sanctitatis. The Father of sanctity. Pater potestatis. The Father of
power. Pater pietatis. The Father of piety.
The Father of sanctity and holiness, and therefore Christ says; John 17.17.
Father sanctify them in the truth.

The father of power, because he can do all things, therefore he that knew
best, said; Mark. 14.36.
All things are possible to thee.

The Father of piety and mercy, and therefore the Apostle calls him, The
Father of mercy, 2. Cor. 1.3.
and God of consolation.

Seeing he is the Father of mercy we ought to pray to him with devotion, For
Christ says, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, John 16.23.
he will give it you.

Seeing he is the Father of power we ought to honor him, with humble
obedience: therefore the Holy Ghost by the Prophet Malachy says: Mallac. 1.6.
The Son honors the Father, etc.

Seeing he is the Father of mercy, we ought to follow and imitate him in mercy;
as Christ commands us, saying: Luke 6.36.
Be ye merciful as your Father is merciful.

And seeing he is the Father of power, of holiness and mercy, of him as
dutiful children, we should (bowing the knees of hearts) seek a blesnng:
Isaac his son said to his father, Have thou but one blessing: But the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob has a blessing for every faithful child of his, yea
a triple benediction: Benedictio preueniens, benedictio adiuuans, and
benedictio consummans, His blessing preventing, his blessing assisting, and his
blessing consummating or finishing: The first of his mercy, the second of his
grace, the third of his glory; The first of our conversion, the second of our
conversation, the third of our glorification.

The first Benediction: Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no sin:
Blessed is he whose sins are remitted.

The second: Blessed is the man that fears the Lord and walks in his ways.

The third and last benediction: Come ye blessed children of my Father,
receive the kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

FINIS.

