WHETHER CHRIstian faith may be kept secret in the heart, without confession
thereof openly to the world as occasion shall serve. Also what hurt comes by
the^ that has received the Gospel, to be present at Mass unto the simple and
unlearned.

iii. Regum. xviii. How long halte ye on both the sides? If the Lord be God,
the^ walk after him: but if Baal be he, the^ follow him. Matthew. vi. chapter. No
man can serve two masters: for either he shall hate the one, and love the other,
or else he shall lean to the one, and despise the other. Luke. xvi. chapi. That
which is high among men is an abhominatio^ before god. From Roane. Anno.
M.D.Liii. the.iii. of October.

ii. Cor. vi. chap i. Deu. vii
Bear not a strange yoke with the unbelievers. For what feloship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? what company has light with darkness? mat viii
How agrees Christ with Belial? Or what part has the beleuer with the
infidel? How accords the temple of God with images? Ye are the temple of the
living god, i. Corin iii. and vi. Leniti. xxvi. ezechie xxxvii. esai. lii.
as says god: I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people. wherefore come from among them, and separate your
selves (says the Lord) and touch no unclean thing, so will I receive you, and
be your father, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the almighty
Lord.
SAint Paul in the.x. to the Romans annexeth the faith of Christ in the heart
with Confession of the mouth, Romans x.
so that the one (it seems by him) ca^ be no more without the other, then fire
can be without heat, saing these words: the heart believes to justice, the
confession of the mouth is to salvation. wheri^ he declares, that eue^ as the
cause of our acceptio^, through Christ is the confidence and faith of the heart
in the promises of god: so is the confession outwardly of the same faith by
mouth, the fruit that al christian faithful hearts bring fourth through the
same gift of god, And where as this effect of confession is not: there wants
also the cause of confession, which is true faith. For as the tree is known by
her fruits: so is faith by her effects. And as the want of fruit, is a
demonstration that the tree is unprofitable: so the want of true confession of
faith, is a token that the faith is dead, the end of the unprofitable tree is
cutting down, and casting into the fire. The end of the fruitles faith is
death, and casting to eternal damnation. wherefore S. Peter requiteth us, Pe. iii
to make answer to every man, that demands of us, of such hope as is in us,
with gentleness and reverence, which is a very testimony that we sanctify god in
our hearts, as it is before in the same chap. For the greatest honor that man
can give to god: is to confess and answer in the time of trouble, truly and
faithfully to his holy word and faith. wherefore it is the duty of every
christian, to prai and study to have a through knoledge of his faith in Christ
and that as the glory of god shall require, and his religion attempt: to be
ready to make answer for the same. whatsoever the world fear, displeasure,
frendshippe, or other lettes should say to the contrary: upon pain says
Christ, that i will deny him before mi father, Mark viii Luke. ix^xii.
which is in heaven. But how hard a thing it is to confess Christ in the days
of trouble, not only the Scripture but also daily experience in good men and
women does declare. True confession is environed on every side with mani
dangers on the right hand and on the left hand, now with fair means, then
with foul thretni^gs, fearful and dangerous as it is said by Christ, they shall
betraye you to the judges, and of them ye shall be beaten and judged to death.
On the other side, shall pull us back the love of wife, children, brother sister,
ki^red, frinds, lands, and the love unto our selves, but he that is over come
by any of these means, Mat. x Luke. xiii.
has this judgment, He is not mete for me says Christ. These things are
impossible unto men, yet to christian men in Christ possible, and so necessary,
that christianity and true religion cannot be in him that is afraid to
confess Christ and his gospel in the time of persecution. The wisdom of the
world does say: although i do accomplish the desire of my frindes, and to the
sight of the world, am present at the mass, and with my body do as other men
do: or as i may do, yet my heart is clean contrary to their belefe, and I do
detest such idolatry, and believe that the thing that i am present at, is mere
idolatri and abomination. Here be fair words for an evil purpose, and a
pretensed excuse for a just co^de^nacio^ before god. For if it be true, ye know
the thing ye resort unto to be y^ dishonor of god: why do ye honor it with
your presence? If ye know it to be evil, why refrain ye not from it? If your
conscience say it is idolatry, why serves your bodi such things as your faith
abhors? If in your heart ye know but one God, whi with your external
presence serve ye the thing that ye know is not god? If your faith see
idolatri, whi does your silence co^fes and profes the same? Two me^ in one, god
loves not. If the inward man know the truth, whi does the outward man confess
a falshod? If the spirit be persuaded that the mass is idolatri, esaias. xxix.
ezechi. xxxiii. Mat. xv
whi does the corporal presence use it as god in doi^g godly honor to it? Do
ye not perceive what is written in Esaie and s. Matthew. This people honor me
with the mouth, but their hearts be far from me. The cause whi God was offended
with this people, Math. xv. Esaias. xix. Ese. xx.^ii.
was that outwardly they confessed him, but their hearts were far from him
inwardly. whereof ye may se what it is to bear ii. faces in one hode, outwardly
to serve god, and inwardly to serve the devil. Now mark of this place. If it
be so horrible and damnable a thing to be false in the heart, which none
knoeth but God, and is worthi also of damnation, what is to be judged of the
outward and manifest use of idolatry? which not only God, but also eueri good
man knoeth and abhors. There is no coulered nor clooked hypocrisy that god
can away with. If the heart think not as the tongue speaks, or elce the
tongue speak otherwise then the heart thinks, both be abominable before
god. Read the.iii. and.vi. cha. of the first Epi of s. Paul to the Corin. where
as S. Paul says: i. Corint. iii. and.vi.
know ye not y^ your bodies be ye temples of the holy ghost, if your bodies be
the temples of ye holy ghost, what agreement has it with through thy knoledge,
shall that weak brother perish for whom Christ died. When ye sin so against
the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ. This
judgment of s. Paull is more to be followed, then al our own fained and
wrested defenses that would seem to do well, when we halt on both sides, which
god abhors. Paull has a profound and a deep consideration of that man's
fact, that has knoledge, and perceives his dissimulation to be da^gerus and
perilous to all persons that he dwells withal First al such as be of a right
and stayed judgment, and will not prostrate their bodies to an idol, does he
condemn. Secondly, by their such dissimulatio^, the very idolaters them selves
have aconfirmatio^, and defense of their abomination, by the ptesence of him,
that the Christen congregation, knoeth to have knolege. Thirdly, the weak
sort, that would gladly take the best way, by a dissemblers halting and plaieng
on both hands: embraces both in body and in soul the evil that he abhors
in his heart, that has knowledge, and yet with presence honoreth it as other
do, that have no knoledge. If S. Paul said, that the weke brother does perish
for who^ Christ died, i^ him that abused knoledge in meats and drinks, that
of themselves be indifferent, how much more in the knoledge of him that uses
manifest idolatry, forbidden of god, as a thing not indifferent? Take heed
therefore what s. Paul means, and what he would prove against this manne that
had knoledge, that nether the idol nor the meats dedicated to Idolles were
any thing. Forsooth this he would prove, that a poor man that wanted knoledge,
by the example of him that has knoledge, does aue^ture to do evil, which he
would not do, in case he saw not those of whom he has good opinion go before
him as author of the evil. And in deed when the ignorant people or those that
be half persuaded in a truth, yea or else throwly persuaded, what is evil, yet
when they have any notable men or women for an example to follow. They think
in following of them, they be excused: yea although peradventure they do it
against their conscience, as ye may se by the example of Peter, Gala. ii.
how mani good men began to dissemble: yea, Barnabas himself Thapostle of the
Gentiles. But how great offense this is before God, so to make a doubtful and
relucting conscience to do any thing that is not godly: let the judgment of
men pass, and measure it by gods word. Christ says: it were better a millstone
were hanged about such an offenders neck, mat. xviii
and cast into the sea. And doubtless, the pain must be the greater, because we
give offense wittinglie against our own consciences, and this before God, is a
wicked knoledge, that causes another to perish. woe be to him that is learned,
to bring his brother to destruction. Does a christian manne know the truth to
bring his brother to a lie? for those weaklinges that we make to stumble,
Christ died for, as S. Paul says: God defend that we should confirm any
man's conscience in evil. Let every man of God weie with himself the Doctrine
of s. Paul, that commands us to fly from idolatrye. And mark what s.
Paul in that place calls idolatry. It is to be seen plainly, that he
speaks not of such idolatri, as men that lack knoledge in their hearts what
God is, and what is not god. For in the.viii. chap. before, he says that
men know that the idols were no gods, and that although by name the Gentyles
had mani gods: yet they knew there was but one God. Therefore he means nothing
by this commandment, fly idolatry, but to avoid such rites, ceremonies and
vsages as outwardly were used in the honor and reverence of the idols, that were
not god. And weiing the right use of the Lords Supper, and the dignity
thereof, with the manner and use of the gentiles toward their gods: would bring
the church of the Corinthians to understand, how that as the divine and sacred
rites, ceremonies and use of the blessed sacrament of Christ's body and blood
did sacrate, sanctify and declare him that uses it, to be the servant and
child of god: so did the rites and sacraments of the Gentiles define and
declare the uses thereof to be the servants and children of the idolles,
notwithstanding in their heart, they knew well enough the idol was nothing. God
by his sacraments does couple us to him self. Let us pray to him that we
pollute not our selves, with any rites, ceremonies or vsages, not instituted by
god. In this case a faithful man to be at the Mass, is to be considered with
what mind those that there he accompanies himself withal, comes thither, and
what the end is of the work that the priest does. The people come to honor
the bread and wine for god, and the prist purposes to consecrate both god and
man, and so to offer Christ to the father for remission of sin. Now do
those that adioyne themselves unto these people, profess and declare a
sosietie and fellowship of the same impiety, as s. Paul laid to the Corinthians
charge. S. Paull was not offended with the Corinthians because they lacked
knoledge of the true God: ii. Cor. vi
but because contrary to their knoledge, they associated themselves with
idolatores. For this is true* that in all rites, sacraments, and honoringes,
whether they be of God or of the Devil, there is a profession of the
communion: so that any man protests to be of the same religion that the rest
be of that be partakers with him. I do know there be many invasions made by
men, that teach a man with safeguard of his conscience to be at Mass, but
forasmuch as Master Calvin, Master Bullenger and others, have thoroughly
answered them, such as be in doubt, may read their books.

This is a true confession, and consonant to gods holy word.


