A CHRISTIAN DISCOVRSE upon certain points of RELIGION.

Presented unto the most high and puissant Lord, the Prince of Conde.

Translated out of French into English by John Brook of As^he next Sandwich.
1578.

1. PETER. 4. b. As every man has received the gift, minister the same one to
an other as good ministers of the manifold grace of God. Imprinted at London by
Thomas East: the 6. day of June. 1578.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable and his singular good Lady and Mistres, the Countess
of Oxenforde, John Brook wishes long and blessed life, with increase of much
honor. etc.
WHEN first true intent of bounden duty and entire zeal had quickened and
pricked me forward to present your Ladishippe with the dedication of this small
volume (Right honorable and my very good Lady) I grew full of doubts in my
self, whether to proceed and go forward, or else to surcease and revoke my
presumed enterprise. And abiding sometime in this uncertain and undetermined
conclusion, one while adaunted and suppressed with the unworthiness of the
work, in respect of mine own labors, being an unlearned translation, an
other while animated and encouraged by the godliness of the matter
comprehended and included therein: then pulled back, and in manner put to
silence by many doubts of presumption, rudeness, or rashness, eftsoons
again imboldened and hearted on, partly by duty to unfold and show my
willing mind, partly by certain knowledge and daily report of your Ladyships
good inclination to virtue and godliness, whereunto adjoined the great fame of
your singular humility and manifold courtesy, leaning at length only to this
staff, I wound in time out of this doubtful Laborinth of inconstant
passions, and became plainly resolved in the process and going forward of
this mine enterprise: whereunto I was yet the rather and more easily induced,
for that as within the hard and untoothsome bone, is included the sweet
marrowe, and as the unsavory shell, comprehends the pleasant kirnell: so
under the rough and vnsmothed grace of mine unlearned style, is shrouded much
wisdom, virtue, and godliness, and in the simplicity and plainness of my
translation, many profitable examples and wholesome lessons contained, worthy to
be embraced and followed of all men. It came unto my hands (right honorable)
in the French, and is entitled, A Christian Discourse upon certain points of
Religion. Which title drove me first to the ouerrunning of the matter, and
then finding the whole sum and contents, so well agreeing with the
nomination, I thought if I could put him on an English ^abite, I might thereby
pleasure and profit diverse of my native country men studious in the
Scriptures, to the contentation (I trust) of many, and to the offense of no
virtuous and well disposed person. May it therefore please you to admit the
same into your favorable acceptance: and that under your ensign it may have
safe conduct to enjoy publication and free passage. This request beei^g
granted and allowed of your good Ladyship, Let captious Zoilus cavil or find
fault. Let hateful heretic with all his forcible inuectiues, subtle
arguments, and strange reasons, diswade and seek to oppugn, impair, or
discredit the matter. Let proud Papist with all his authority, abjure, curse
and condemn, both book and author to the fire. Our immunitie, protection and
defense, rests in almighty God the high Judge of all. And for the cleernesse
of this matter, we refer us unto his most holy and pure word and sacred
Scriptures. Wherefore trusting the sincerity and truth of the matter shall
counteruaile the plainness of the interpretation, and that the conside^ation
of my zeal and bounden duty above rehearsed, shall abanndon all suspect of
arrogancy and rashness. I leave for this time to trouble your Ladyship,
beseechinge the Almighty to bless you with long and many happy yaeres in
this life, and the reward of Virtue in the life to come.

Your Ladyships servant all to command, John Brook.

TO HIS SAID LORD the Prince of Conde, the author sends health.
IF fear does make us understand the voice, and as David does witness, Esa.
28.^* Psa. 119.^
that he did err and go wrong before that he was afflicted and troubled,
what can we less do, after so many cyuil wars and persecutions of our own
country men, yea rather household servants, but to magnify the Lord, and
daily to meditate or study upon the maruels of his puissance and goodness? Exo.
5. a Judge. 5. d
If (say I) Moses and Debora, being set at liberty and enfranchised srom the
tyranny of the Egyptians and Chananeans, did consecrate of late unto God, so
many goodlye canticles and spiritual songs, what can we less do in this
same mean time of religion, but always to offer unto him sacrifices of
thanks giving: That is to say, Heb. 13. b.
the fruit of our lips, confessinge his name? And unto whom ought we to
direct such writings, but unto those, unto whom the Lord has drawn from the
midst of the waters, Exo. 2.
and reserved from among them that are killed, for to restore the ruins and
decayed places of his second temple, Agge. 2. a.
and to reestabish and set up again the true usage of the Christian religion?
Behold O Christian Prince, wherefore I have dedicated unto thee this little
work, having first premeditated to the honor of him, ^am. 1. c.
from whom does proceed every good and perfect gift. Assuring my self that
thou will receive it in as good part as the Lord did the two mites of that
poor widow mentioned in the gospel. Luc. 21. a*
Furthermore, I do not care what opinion men have: so that it be agreeable to
that true Judge, which does not judge men according to the sight of his eyes,
neither does reprove a matter at the first hearing: but does judge all things
in equity and righteousness, Our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for
ever, Amen.

A BRIEF ADVERTISMENT, wherein is showed, that we ought not to abuse the holy
Scripture, but to apply it to his proper use.
2. TIMOTH. 2. Chapter ^5. Study to show thy self laudable unto God, a workman
that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the word of truth justly.
Forasmuch as the holy Scripture does teach us, that the words of the Lord
are pure words: Psalm. 12. b.
even as the silver, which from the earth is tried and puryfied seven times in
the fire: and the gospel is the puissaunce of God to the salvation and health
of all that believe therein, insomuch that the Prophets speaking of the dignity
of the Herolds and Ambassadors of the gospel, do cry out: Esaie 52. b Romans
10. c
O how beautiful are the feet of the Ambassador, that brings the message
from the mounteine, and proclameth peace* that brings the good tidinges, and
preaches health, and says unto Sion: Thy God is the king. The wise, Daniel.
12. a
(such as have taught others) shall glyster as the shining of Heaven: and
those that have instructed the multitude unto godlynes shall be as the stars,
world without end. Truly we may perceive with our eyes what default it is to
declare or show forth the ordinances of the Lord, and to take his alliance or
promise in vain: In like manner, what temeritie and rashness it is to take
the childrens bread and to cast it to dogs, Math. 15. c
to declare the holy things unto brute beasts: and to give the pearls unto
swyne: Sapi. 1. a
Forasmuch as wisdom shall not enter into a froward soul, nor dwell in the
body that is subdued unto sin. For the holy Ghost abhors feigned nourture,
and withdraws himself from the thoughts that are without understanding: and
where wickedness has the upper hand, he flies from thence. I do say the
same to the end that every one have a regard to apply the holy scripture to
his proper use, 2. Tim. 3. d
for all Scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to
improve, and to instruct in ryghtuousnesse. Also, Romans 15. a
that we through patience and comfort of the scripture, might have hope, and
may apply it to ye in which it is dedicated, without profaning it, or wresting
it to any wicked purpose or unlawful things: Gregory Naza. li. 11 of his
Theology.
For as he that has dim eyes can not well and easily behold and look upon
the sun, so he which is wicked and corrupt in his soul, can not rightly
consider and know the meruailes contained in the holy scripture. Basil upon
the beginning of the proverbs.
And even as we ought not to put into a vessel that is mustie or infected, any
precious licor, so we ought not to give unto a malycious and froward heart,
one so rich and precious talent: Esaie. 66 a
For the Lord has regard of him which is afflicted, and of a lowly spirit,
and which stands in awe of his words: and the holy spirit is he which does
open the senses for to vnerstand the scripturs: To conclude, the scripture came
never by the will of man, 2. Peter. 1. d
but by the holy men of God, being moved by the holy Ghost did speak it. Job.
32. b.
To that end does Job write: I say (says he) that it becomes old men to
speak, and the aged to teach wisdom: every man (no doubt) has a mind, but
it is the inspiration of the almighty that gives understanding, wherefore we
do conclude here that three things are greatly necessary unto those which
will cause that precious talent and inestymable treasure of the holy Scripture
to profit. First of all to watch daily unto prayers and supplycations, to the
end that the Lord do open their understanding for to comprehend the secrets of
his Law. Psalm. 119. e.
As David does say, Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep
it unto the end, O give me understanding and I shall keep thy law, yea, I
shall keep it with my whole heart: Open mine eyes, that I may consider the
meruelles of thy Law. Even so (I say) does Solomon his son witness,
Sapience. 7. a
that he has desired, and understanding was given him: he called, and the
spirit of wisdom came into him. Ephe. 6. d
That is the cause wherefore saynct Paul does exhort so often his to pray
for him, that vtteraunce might be given unto him, that he might open his mouth
boldly, to utter the secrets of the Gospel. And also does admonyshe and warn
the Thessalonians to pray for him, 2. Thessae. 3.
that the word of god may have free passage, and to gloryfie the Lord. And
saynct Hierome says, S. Hierome in his Epistle unto Lutus.
that the reading ought to succeed and follow prayer, and prayer unto the
reading: Besides that, I do desire a pleasant heart, gracious and gentle: I
do understand and mean him which does humble himself under the law of the
lord, for to believe and obey willingly his commandments and ordinances: For
Jesus Christ does protest before God his Father, Math. 11.
that he has hid these things from the wise and prudent, and has opened them
unto Babes. Jeremy. 8. c
And the Lord did by his Prophet check the Scribes and Doctors of the law,
that they, may not vaunt themselves that they are wise in the Law, and that
the law of the Lord is with them, that it is in vain that there are Scribes:
and that the wise shall be confounded, and that they shall be afraid and
taken, as it is written, that God has given unto them a sleeping spirit, and
eyes that they should not see, Romans 11. b
and ears that they should not hear, even unto this present day. Romans 1. c.
And saint Paul speaking of the Philosophers, says, that they having known
God, did not gloryfie him as God, neither were thankful, but waxed full of
vanities in their own imaginations, and their foolish hearts were blinded: To
conclude, as says Lactantius Firmianus, Lactantius Fir. in his book of
Institutio^s.
Although we esteem the Philosophers to be wise, yet truly they have erred in
their own knowledge here and there as in a deep sea: For they have regarded
neither the way nor the leader, all their doctrine is without a head, because
that they do not know God, which is the head of all verity and doctrine.

Finally I do desire a long study and meditation of the holy letters, unto the
which Jesus Christ does send us: John. 5 g:
saying, Search the Scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal life.
And Saint Paul does admonish Timothe, 1. Timo. 4. d.
to give attendaunce to reading, Act. 7. c.
to exhortacion, and to doctrine: So was Moses learned in all manner wisdom of
the Egyptians, and was mighty in deeds and in words. Act. 22. a.
And saint Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and informed
diligently in the Law of the fathers. 2. Tim. 3. d.
And Timothe did know the holy Scriptures of a child: And truly we do not
make any difficulte that the study and daily labor is not necessary to the
knowledge of holy letters, as it is required of other disciplines, chiefly to
the true ministers of God. Forasmuch as Saint Paul does desire, Titus. 1. c.
that they would embrace the true word of doctrine, that they may be able to
exhort with wholesome learning, and to improve them that say against it. Heb.
5. d.
To conclude the holy Apostle does witness, that strong meats belongs to
them that are perfect, which thorough custom have their wits exercysed, to
judge both good and evil. Furthermore Saint Peter does advertise us, 2. Peter.
3. d.
that there are many things hard to be understood in the Epistles of S.
Paul. Gregory Nazaren. in his Apology.
For that same cause the Ebrwes did not accustom to all age, all kind of
doctrine, fearing that the dull and folyshe people would be offended with the
hardness of the same: S. Herome in the beginning of Ezechiel.
Insomuch that the things which do contain a simple and plain history, were
proposed and set forth unto the common people: and the secrets unto those the
which with their age do bring a judgment more whole and sound. Wherefore as
saint Ambrose does witness, S. Ambrose upon the psalm. 35.
he which will advance himself in the scriptures, that he do take that which
is necessary for him, he which does desire things more easy and common, that
he do refreshe his spirit in the valle, as the little ones, he that does fear
the flood, that he do drink of the River, and he which does fear the deep
water, that he do swim by the shore side. Wherein we are taught, that the holy
Scripture does apply and give it self unto al sorts of men, so that they do
refer it to his right use. In that respect there does consist and lie a
merueilous wisdom and discretion: chiefly for the respect of the ministers of
God. For as Clement says, Clement in his book of recogn.
one ought not to take any sense new and strange from the scripture for to
confirm it by the scripture, but to take or choose from the scripture the true
and natural sense of the verity. And as Saint Hilarie S. Hillary upon the
Psalm. 134.
does write, that he does read rightly the holy scripture, which does
understand the sense and meaning of the scripture by the same means, and will
not take from or put to the scripture a strange sense or contrary unto the
same. Such are the words of the songs of the spouse of the Lord, S. Augustine
in his book of the spirit and of the letter.
the which we may often refer rather and to apply it to some disordinate
pleasure, than to the fruit of a fervent love or charity: I will recite
besides that which is before, three or four notable examples of the old law.

First, that of the Prophet Fsaie, Esaias. 20 a
unto whom the Lord did command to loose off the sackcloth from his loins,
and to put off his shoes from his feet, and to go naked and bare foot. The
other is of the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 27. a
unto whom the Lord did declare expressly, that he did make bands and chains,
and put them about his neck, and did send them to the king of Edom. The
third shall be of Oseas, Ose. 1. a. 2.
unto whom the same Lord did ordeine and command to take an Harlot to his
wife. The last shall be of Ezechiel, Ezech. 4. ^. 12*
unto whom the Lord commanded him to sleep sometime upon the right side,
sometime upon the left side, to eat Barley cakes and to strike them with man's
dou^ge. Things truly that one should find very strange and far from the
verity, were not, but the law having the shadow of the good things to
come, be the things which are there presented, giving an assured witness that
all does serve for our instruction and learning. If any does demand wherefore
the Lord has not given his holy Scripture in all, or by all, more easy and
familiar? I do answer with Basil, Basil in the exposton upon Esai.
that the same was, to the end that our spirit being occupied to meditate and
understand such secrets of the scripture, should draw it so much the more from
evil things and hurtful: For as it daily happens or chances, that the
things which are gotten with great pain and labor, are best esteemed and set
by, and those are more durable, and will continue longer which are brought
forth by long space and continuance of time. Basil in the same book
To be short, as that which is offered at commandment, without any travail,
is despised: there will be also danger that the carnal men would not abuse
the holy scripture, without knowledging the price and worthiness of the same.
Even says Basil, Basil.
as the Lord would not that we should hate and abandon, incontynently (as other
brute beasts) all that which is necessary unto the use of man's life: but is
willing and desirous that man do resist such defalte by his industry and
labor. Even so the Lord has left a certain difficultnesse and hardness
in the scripture, to the end that our spirit should exercise it self more and
more to the knowledge of the verity. That is the cause wherefore the scripture
does not permit every one to teach. And saint Hierome S. Hierome in his
Epistle to Paulinus. 1. Cor. 12. d.
does complain of some which do presume, first rather to teath then to
learn. And the Lord has made some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some sheeperds and some teachers. And all are not Prophets and
teachers, and all do not speak with diverse tongues, and al do not
interpret: but the self same spirit does all those things, dividing to
every man, several gifts, even as he will. 1. Pet. 4 ^
To the end that as every man has received the gift, minister the same one to
an other, as good ministers of the manyfolde grace of God.

Furthermore the same does declare very well, that we ought to have in great
honor and reverence, the holy Scripture, and not to abuse it, as do the Panims
of their writings, I do mean to all matters of laughing, bawdry and
dyssolution. Ephe. 4 c
For Saint Paul does not suffer, that any fylthy communication should proceed
out of our mouths: but that which is good to edify with all, to the end that
it may give favor and grace unto the hearers: yea, Ephe. 5. ^.
and does expressly forbid, that fornication and all uncleanness or
covetousness be not once named among us, neither filthynesse, neither folish
talking, neither gestinge which are not comely. Also he would not that we
should mingle the holy words of the Scripture, with so many vile and dissolute
matters. For as says Saint Ambrose, S Ambrose in his book of his offices cap.
23.
although that it have pleasures pleasant and honest, yet notwithstanding they
are very far from the Christian and ecclesiastical rule: because that that
which we can not find in the holy scriptures, we ought not to vsurp. To that
purpose Eusebius Eusebius in his book of the prepara. of the gospel. ca. 1
does recite the example of a Tragical Poet, named Theodotus, who in applying
certain places of the Hebrews, unto a fable, was taken blind: and believing
that the same affliction and punishment was happened unto him for the same
occasion, did acknowledge his sins, and as that good aucthour says, yt with in
a little while after his sight was restored to him again. What shall we say of
those which do wrest the holy scripture after their own fa^tasie, and do abuse
it to ye art of ye Magicians, and inuocations of wicked spirits? Although that
the Apostle does admonish and warn them so many times, 2. Cor. 6. ^.
yt righteousness has no fellowship with unrighteousness, or light has no
company with darkness, or what concord has Christ with Belial, either what
part has he that believes with an Infidel? or how agrees the Temple of
God with images? Also that such disciplines are forbidden throughout the whole
scripture, I will not forget those which do abuse it to their private and
particular profit, as did of late the Scribes and Pharisees, who under the
color of paying their dismes and tithes, August. in his book of the
Christian doctrine.
which the Lord did vow for the service of his Temple, do defraude and deceive
in the mean time their proper and own parents of the duty which nature has
commanded the^, according as Jesus Christ did rebuke the^, saying: But ye say,
Math. 15. a.
every man shall say unto his father and mother, that which thou desire of
me to help thee with: is given GOD: and so shall he not honor his father or
his mother. And thus have ye made that the commandment of God is without
effect, thorough your traditions. As at this day many of the Romish Church do
handle the places of the scripture, not so much for to establishe the kingdom
of the son of GOD, as for to maintain their utility and profit, and truly
it is very hard that among such people one may find the true wisdom: For as
Job says, Job. 28. c
wisdom is not found, nor the place of understanding, in the land of those
which do live easily, and which have great riches: Plato. Sicero in his offices.
for the fear of the Lord is the true wisdom, and to retire and draw
himself from evil, is the understanding. We must not then be astonished or
amazed, if they do abuse the scripture after their own sense, forasmuch as
they do not esteem but their own pleasure, which is the enemy of reason: It
does grieve me very much to speak of those which for to please the will and
mind of their Auditors: And least they should hurt or grieve them, do apply
the Scripture, I know not to what matters of jesting and laughter, yea being
set in Moses Chair, in which place especially and chiefly it ought to be
entreated off, withal reverence and gravity. I do say furthermore, that they
are not ashamed to play by maskings and counterfaitlike, that which ought to be
taught with fear and al humility. To conclude, they do serve more willingly
to the pleasures of other, then to the honor of the Lord, and to the
edification of his congregation. Tertuli. in Apo. against the Gentiles. Cap. 45.
What shall I say of those which will refer and attrybute unto the holy
scripture, unto the books and writings of the heathen Philosophers, as if we
had borrowed the rule to live well of them, and not they of us? Eusebius. in his x.
book of the preparation of the Gospel. Cap. 2.
I will not deny but that the Philosophers, chiefly the Platonicians have
written many things very near unto the christian rule, and very much
confirmable and agreeing unto good manners. S Ambrose in his second book of
the christian doctrine. Cap. 3. and.12
But as Saint Augustine says, because that they have made it their own, ye
true Christians ought to serve to a better use, in asking it again of the^ as
unjust and unlawful possessours: even so as the Israelites have applied the
treasures and riches of the Egyptians, to the honor of the Lord. And as it
was lawful for ye people of Israel to take to wife an estraunger captive, Deuteronomy.
21. c.
so yt she do shave her head and pare her nails, and put the raiment that she
was taken in, from her: also it is not forbidden to apply the writings of the
heathen men and Panims to our religion, S. Hierome in his epistle to the great
Orator.
so yt we do cut off yt which does concern their idolatry and supersticion,
and that we do apply unto the honor of the Lord, that which does serve to ye
verity of our doctrine. That is the cause wherefore saint Paul disputing in
the city of Athens, Act. 17. d.
against certain Philosophers, did not fear to recite the saying of a Poet,
for to prove the doing of our religion. Titus. 1. c
And the same Apostle in another place of his Epistles, did not make it a doubt
to allow the saying of Epimenides against those of Crete: for all that, I will
not tax those which have the charge in the Church: 1 Thessalonians. 5. b.
But I desire that they may be so discrete and well advised in their
profession, that they may try and prove all things: but to keep that which is
good, after the example of the good chaungers, S. Herome in his Epistle to
Munerius and Alexander.
which do know very well to separate the good money from that which is false
and unlawful, to the end they do not bring any thing from other learninges
which might defile the word of God, or mar the doing of the christian
verity, in so much that the word of preaching be received of all men, not as
the word of man: but even as it was in deed, the word of God, which works
in you that believe, 1. These. 2 c.
to the advancement of the kingdom of his son our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory forever, Amen.

COLOSS. 4. Let your speech be always well sauoured and poudered with salt,
that ye may know how to answer every man. A prayer.
Esai. 50. b.
O Lord, which do give the tongue to teach well, to the end that one may
comfort them which are troubled, yea, and that in due season, Psalm. 19. b.
which give wisdom, unto the ignorant, and teach thy servants that which
they ought to say, give us thy grace to know that thy word is pure: even as
the silver which from the earth is tried and purified seven times in the fire:
to the end, that we may receive it, Psalm. 12. b
not as the word of man: 1 Thessalonians. 2. c
but even as it was in deed, the word of God, which works in you that
believe, and that we do not apply it to any evil use, or dissolute work:
but to the advancement of thy glory, and to the edifying of our neighbor.
Phillip. 2. d
In so much that we may be faultlesse and pure without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse nation: among which see that we shine as lights in the
world, holding fast the word of life. Finally that we do declare by our works
in this latter time, that we have not run in vain: neither have labored in
vain. John. 1. ^.
But for the verity of him, which from the beginning of all things was the
word of life, our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.

THAT THE LORD IN THE midst of afflictions, does reserve always certain
places of refuge for his, and certain true prophets to his Church, yea
certain valiant men for to withstand the tyranny of the wicked.
ESAIE. 49. ^. The prisoners shall be taken from the Giant, and the spoil
delivered from the violent: for I will maintain thy cause against thine
adversaries, (Says the Lord.) ESAIE. 59. D. I will make this covenant with
them (says the Lord) my spirit that is come upon thee, and the words which
I have put in thy mouth, shall never go out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy childrens children, from this time forth for ever more.
Cicero in his book of (...) paradoxes.
IF the Panim or Heathen man says, that the exile and banishment is terrible
and fearful unto those, which of a private and singular affection, do provide
for themselves an habitation for to dwell ever: not unto those which have the
whole world for a City.

And the Poet Ouide Ouide.
has written, that every country or land is an habitation unto a virtuous
and courageous man: As the sea is a floudde for all kind of fishes. If (I say)
the ancient Patriarchs, Heb. 11. c.
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by faith did dwell in the promised land, as
strangers in tents, looking for a city having a foundation, whose builder and
maker is God, although that some of them had not but the light of nature, for a
rule and discipline: the others had not so evident a witness as we have of the
revelation to come of the children of God, in the which our vile bodies shall be
made like unto the glorious body of the son of God. Truly so much the less
our exile and banishment ought to be unto us grievous and fearful, in as much
as we are assured by the mouth of Jesus Christ and of his Apostles, Heb. 13. c
that we have not here a continuing City: but that our conversation is in
heaven.

Also as Saint Paul writing unto the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 5. a.
does assure us, that if our earthly mansion wherein we now dwell, were
destroyed, that we have a building ordained of God, an habitation not made with
hands, but eternal in heaven. And herefore sigh we, desiring to be clothed
with our mansion which is from heaven. And although that that hope be
sufficient, for to assure the true christians and faithful, of the goodness
promised in that City, Jerusalem celestial: yet truly they ought to believe
also, that the Lord Jesus Christ by such means and afflictions, did provide a
certain better thing for his in this world, to the end that they be not
swallowed up with too great sorrow or heaviness. In the same respect and
consideration, Genes. 19. d.
the Lord did retire and draw away Lot, his faithful servant from the city
of Sodom, to the end he should not perish with the unfaithful. And in like
manner the Lord made Abraham to go out of his own country, Genes. 12. a.
for to assure him more and more of his holy promises and blessings, in a
strange country. 2. Cor. 4.
Insomuch, that although that the faithful are troubled on every side, yet
they are not without shift, they being in poverty, are not utterly destitute
or without somewhat, being persecuted, but not forsaken, being cast down,
perish not. Genes. 28. b
Jacob shall be witness, who flying by the commandment of his father, did
lay him down to sleep upon the earth in the midst of an open feelde, and
he dreamed, and did see a ladder upon the earth, whose top did reach up to
heaven, and the Angels of GOD went up and down upon it, yea, and the Lord
stood upon it, and said: the land which thou sleep upon, will I give
thee, and thy seed. For more greater witness, I will rehearse Joseph, who
being fled into Egypt, Genes. 41. a.
for the persecution of his brethren, is so kept of the Lord, that he is
exalted: yea, above all others, to the governing and ruling of all the country
of Egypt, and made as a father and norisher of the house of his father: unto
this I will add the example of the people of Israel, who being strayed and
scattered abroad in the wilderness, Exo. 13 d.
were fed with the celestial Manna, and conducted and lead in the night by a
pillar of fire, and by day in a Cloud. Numb. 11. b
Furthermore I will join unto this, that good prophet of GOD Elias, who flying
into the wilderness of Bersabe, 3. Regum. 17. b.
from the persecution of king Achab and his wife Iesabel, did receive daily
the meats that were necessary for him by the Angel of the Lord. I will
conclude with that disciple of the Lord, Apo. 1. c.
who being banished in the Isle of Pathmos, and deprived from all the
commodities and pleasures of the world: Is comforted of the Lord by so many
heavenly visions: and creaping yet on the earth, is made as a bourgesse and
Citizen of Heaven. The same does sufficiently declare, that we being deprived
from our goods, are not therefore destitute of all man's aid and succor,
for as of late the Lord did stir up those good patriarckes, Abraham and Lot,
for to aid and succor the need of the poor trauailers and wayfaring men,
Deuteronomy. 19. a
and did ordeine places of refuge unto those which were not culpable of the
faults laid unto their charge: Joshua. 2. a
Or as we do read, that the Lord by a divine providence did move and stir
up the spirit of Rahab the harlot, for to hide the spies of Israel, sent into
Jericho. 3. Reg. 17. a
A widow of Sareptha, for to assist and aid Elyas, being in extreme
oppression of hunger. 3. Reg. 18. a.
One Abdias, for to hide an hundredth Prophets, and ^ead the^. An Ethiopian,
Ierem. 38. c.
being an Eunuch, for to move and entreat the king for the deliverance of
the Prophet Jeremy, being in prison. A Daniell, History of Susanna. g.
for to adnull and call back again the arest given against that chaste
Susanna, being accused of adultery. Luc. 10. g.
A Martha for to receive Jesus Christ. To conclude, 2. Tim. 1. d.
an Onesiphorus for to assist and help Sanct Paul in his chains and bands:
even so the Lord, in what part so ever that it be, does reserve always
certain places of sure refuge for his, to the end, that they may not be
altogether desolate and comfortless. Psalm. 2. a.
And although that the people do rise up and do murmr in vain, and the
kings of the earth do advance themselves and stand up, and the Princes do
consulte together against the Lord and against his son Christ: yet truly
our God does suscitate and stir up always some Dauyd, 1. Reg 17. c.
for to offer himself against a Goliath. Some Gedeon, 2. Cro. ^^ ^.
for to withstand the pretense of the Madianites. Some Ezechiah, Judge 7. a.
for to repress the wickedness and blasphemies of a Sennacherib. 2. Cro* 2 ^.
Some Iosophat for to repulse the forces, strengthes and embushments of the
Ammonits, Mohabits and Assirians. Judith. 10 ^
Some Judith, for to confute the audacitie and boldness of an Holophernes: To
conclude, to draw as from the midst of ye flame of fire, a certain number of
his for to repair and amend the ruins and decayed places of his temple. As in
the time of the subversion and destruction of Jerusalem, he did raise and
stir up Daniel, Ezechiel, Aggeus, Zachary, and Esdras. It shall suffice me
besides that which is before, to rehearse two or iii. examples. The first is of
Pharao, who thincking altogether to put out of the land, Exo. 1.2.
the memory and posterity of the Hebrews, could not do so much by his
travails, but that Moses was saved from the midst of the waters, for to
magnify and praise the name of the Lord, and to increase the posterity of
the Hebrews. The second, is of the Queen Athalia, who having ruled the
kingdom by force and violence, 2. Cro. 22. d.
caused to be slain al those which of the lineage and seed roial, did then
offer: could not watch so narowly, but that Ioas was stolen from among the
midst of the^ yt were slain, and afterward established king, for to repair
and build up the Temple, Mat. 2. c.
and to ordeine divine service. The last is of Herod, who purposing to kill
all the children which were in Bethelem, and in all the country round about,
as many as were two year old and under, to ye end to abolish ye name of ye
true Messiah, our savior, could not hinder nor let, that Jesus Christ should
not accomplish and fulfill the course preordeined of God his father, for the
health and salvation of his. And therefore it is said in Daniel, Daniel. 12. a
that the great Prince Michaell, which stands on thy peoples side, shall
arise up, for there shall come a time of trouble, in that time the people of
God shall escape, yea, all those which are found written in the book of life.
The which is figured unto us in Joshua, where Joshua Joshua 15. d.
being come to the city of Jericho, did lift up his eyes and looked, and
behold there stood a man before him with his sword drawn in his hand. And
Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, art thou on our side, or on our
adversaries. And he answered nay, but I am the Captain of the host of the
Lord, and am now come for to succor and help it. Behold how the Lord is
assistaunt daily or always unto his, and unto his church, in what adversity
so ever it be, according as he has promised in Esaie, Esaias. 59. d.
where he says: I will make this covenant with the^ (says ye Lord) my
spirit that is come upon thee, and the words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall never go out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy childrens
children, from this time forth for ever more. According unto that which Jesus
Christ has promised unto his, Mat. 28. d.
saying: I am with you always, even until the end of the world, and in an other
place Jesus says: John. 14. b.
I will not leave you comfortless. Furthermore it is openly known, though
that ye Lord do tarry: yet nevertheless he does put and fasten certain marks
and lymits, unto the wicked, and tyrants, yt which they cannot pass. The
which this scripture does teach unto us, which did appear unto Balthazar
being set in his bancket with the princes of his people and his concubines: by
the which Daniel Daniel. 5. e.
did declare unto Balthazar, that GOD has numbered his kingdom, and brought it
to an end: that he has waied in the balance his doings, and those of
Nabuchodonosor his father. Where we shall note in the first palce, Mat. ^3. d.
that the lord does permit and suffer often times, that the wicked should
fulfill the measure of their Fathers, deferring their punishment unto the
third and fourth generation. Secondly, that the Lord is not slack to fulfill
his promise, as some men count slacknesse: but is patient to us ward, and
would have no man lost, but would receive all men to repentance. Thirdly that
we must not limit and appoint the time of the mercy of the Lord, nor to bind
the counsels of our God: As the queen Judith, Judith. 3. c.
does very well declare unto the inhabitauntes of Bethulia: 1. Pet. 5. c.
but to submit our selves under the mighty hand of GOD, that he may exalte us
when the time is come, and to cast all our care upon him, for he cares for
us. Finally, that we must believe that God would be exalted, in the patience
of his, and known to be the only sovereign Lord above all, in the
destruction of the wicked: Esaias 30. d
according as the scripture says, that GOD stands waiting, that he may have
mercy upon us, and lifts himself up, that he may receive us to grace. For
the Lord GOD is righteous: happy are all they that wait for him. And in the
book of Exodus, Exo 9. d Romans 9. c
the Lord said unto Pharao, for this cause I have constituted thee, for to
make thee know my power and strength, and to declare my name throughout all
the world. I do speak unto those, who by our exile, banishment, and loss of
our goods, have thought even hitherto to constrain us unto an extreme
indigence and poverty, and do not consider how the Lord has led his people
in the wilderness forty years: Deuteronomy. 29. a.
and their clothes did not wax old upon them, nor their shoes are waxed old
upon their feet. Besides this, they do imbraide and reprove unto us our exile
and banishment, as if the pain did note the persons of infamy, and not the
cause.

Unto the which we may answer with that great Orator of the latins, that
the towns and Cities are, The law Ictus fusttu^ under the title of those
which are noted of infamy. Cicero in his paradox. Cicero in his oration for
Cluent. Salust in his war of Catiline Saint Au. lib. 4. of the city of Cod
Chap. 4
those which are ruled by all right, equity and justice, which are the true
sinowes and cords of all common wealths, and without which the kingdoms and
cities can no more endure then the body without life: consequently that we
have not been driven from towns and cities, in as much as in them (as says
Salust of the city of Rome) there was no difference of the good from the
evil, but ambition and couetuousnesse did possess all the rewards of virtue,
the which does approach nigh unto the sentence of Saint Augustine, where he
does declare, that the kingdoms without justice, are the very dens and
retraytes of thieves and robbers.

I do report me unto the cruelties more then barbarous and Scythian, which have
been executed even here, in the best towns of this realm, within three year
past, in the mean time they do answer us, that they will not endure and
suffer two religions.

To the first place I would demand of them willingly, if it does apperteine
unto them to make the law unto the king, and if they may do it without charge
of conscience and fault of rebellion. Secondly, if the religion that they do
observe and keep, be not a double religion. Finally, if our doctrine and the
foundation of the same be any other then the same of the prophets and Apostles,
if I say we do acknowledge any other head in our Church then Jesus Christ,
and him crucified.

As touching the first, Romans 13. a
it is most certain that it belongs unto the higher powers, to give the law
unto their subjects, and not the subjects to give unto them the law, Prou. 8.
b.
for they do bear the sword as the servants of God, for to do justice in the
wrath of him which does evil, and unto such does apperteine to discern
justice: 1. Pet. 2. c
for they are sent of God for the punishment of evil doers, and unto the laud
and praise of them that do well. Which if the laws have so surely provided
against those which have marred and defaced the edict or statute of a
magistrate or a governor, which does not regard but a thing altogether civil
and politic: The law siquis, id quod.
what punishment do they deserve to have, which by assembles, bands, and
company of people, and by feate of arms, have broken in this time, all divine
and human laws? if the civil law do punish greeuouslie him which does not
obey the magistrate, what pain cruel enough can one ordeine for the
magistrate, which not only has wincked and dissembled at the wickedness and
faults of the people? But for to do that, without authority of the prince,
Esai. 10. a
has constituted and made unlawful ordinances and laws, and devised things
which be to hard to keep: through the which the poor are oppressed on every
side, Valerius lib. 6. ca. 3. Example of Cambises.
and the innocents of my people are therewith robbed in judgment. I will not
here allege the arest, given against the unjust judge, which was slain, and
his skin was hanged up over the judgment seat, for to be an example unto
others, and for to learn his son to exercise justice, in all equity and
right: it shall suffice me to conclude with the wise man, which says, Sapience
6. ^
that an hard judgment shall they have that bear rule. Mercy is granted unto
the simple, but they that be in authority shall be sore puninished: and the
mighty shall have the sorer punishment. As to the second matter, there is no
man that is wise which doubts, but that their religion is double, not only
forasmuch as it is painted and set out with the veil and false apperaunce of
true religion, but also forasmuch as it is builded and grounded, partly upon
the commaundeme^ts of God and partly upon the traditions of men. Insomuch that
the vice is greater among them to leave the traditions of men, then the
commau^dements of God: forasmuch then as God is the pure verity, yea in all
things whole and perfect, truly those do greatly err from the true way of
salvation, which do offer unto him a double heart, 2 Timothy 3. c
I do mean those which have the show and apperaunce of Godly living, but have
denied the power thereof: which do confess him with their mouths, and
honor him with their lips, Math. 6. d.
in the mean time have their heart far from him: to be short, they will
serve two masters together, as to please God and men. I do remember for this
matter, that which is written in the book of Deuteronomium, Deuteronomy. 25. d.
where the Lord did command that we should not have in our bag two manner
of weightes, a great and a small, neither diverse measures: a great and a
small. But we must have a perfect and a just measure. Malachi. 1. d
As also the dissembler was cursed, by the prophet which having in his flock
one that is male, and when he makes a vow offers a spotted one unto the
Lord. The Lord meaning and declaring thereby, that we ought not to offer unto
him an unclean and dissembling heart, and to give unto an other the honor
which does apperteine and belong unto him. Inasmuch then as those of ye Romish
Church, do steal away the honor which does belong unto the Lord, for to give
it unto men: turning their silver into dross (as says Esaie) and do mingle
their wine with water. I do mean, do confound and mingle ye true Christian
doctrine through their t^aditions, it is most certain, that of the Christian
Religion, they do make a double religion: As for us, the holy simplicity of
the Scripture does please us for all religion and doctrine, as says Sanct
Jerome. S. Hierome in his epistle to Pannarchius.
Or the simple and naked verity of the same, as says Lactancius, Lactancius
lib. 3. cap. 1.
and we will not add unto it, or diminish from it of our own head: because
that the scripture given by inspiration of GOD, is profitable to teach, 2 Timothy
3. d
to improve, to amend, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of GOD
may be perfect and prepared unto all good works: The which ought to suffice
our enemies, for to know, that it is too great injury and wrong done unto the
Lord and unto his holy Scripture, that they will not make themselves captives
and obedient unto the limittes and bounds of his commandments and his law.
But will add so many vain traditions, considering that of that which is
contained in the same, the man of God is made perfect and prepared unto all
good works. Furthermore, that which does make us yet more odious and hateful
unto the church of Rome, is, because that we do not acknowledge any other
head of the christian church, then Jesus Christ. Ephe. 1. d
Who (as says S. Paul) ye Lord has made him above all things, the head of
the Congregation which is his body, and the fullness of him that fills all
in all things, Collos. 1. c.
and which is the first begotten of the dead, that in all things he might have
the pre-eminence: no more also then we do admit and allow for to be Bishops
other then those who being called, Hebr. 5. ae
according to the christian rule, by their doctrine and good conversation,
giving assured witness unto the people of their vocation and election: And
therefore we do remove from the church of God, that man of sin the son of
perdition, which does raise and lift up himself, against all that which is
called God: And we do not hold or take for ministers of the church, so many
unprofitable and hired pastors: of whom Zachary Zacha. 11. d.
speaks off saying, O unprofitable shepherde that leauest the flock, cursed
be thou. And Jesus Christ in S. John John. 10.
says, an hired servant which is not ye shepherd flies, because he is an
hiered servant, and cares not for the sheep. It should serve for nothing here
for us to allege ye dignity of s. Peter, for as (says s. Cyprian Ciprian in
his book of the simplicity of the Prelates.
) the other Apostles were that ye S. Peter was, and in like degree of honor
and of power: But among ye Apostles one is chosen, to the end ye under one
head, we may avoid all occasion of scisme, discention and division. And our
enemies do deceive themselves in the same part, when thy do aledge unto us for
a title of the seculer possession, that the bishopps have succeeded immediately
the Apostles: For after that the bishops have changed and altered the
discipline and christian Doctrine, by good authority we may disauowe them, as
unlawful disciples and successors of the Lord, and of his Apostles. And to
have recourse unto the first rule of the Scripture: that is to say, to the
institution of ministes, to the end that from thence should spring and come
forth the reason of our dooinges: (as says Sanct Ciprian) whereof the order
and the original have taken their beginning. Ciprian in his epistle to
Pompilius.
And notwithstanding all that, our enemies are not ashamed to cry aloude and
clearly, yea, day and night: that they will not suffer two religions. Ierem.
2. c.
Be astonished (O ye heavens) be afraid and abashed at such a thing says the
LORD. Those in the Romysh Church do suffer in their Cities, the Jews and
Mahomettes, and do permit and suffer them, with all liberty to build
temples, and to erecte and set up Sinagogs: yet have they less shame to take
tribute daily of baudes and harlottes, Deuteronomy. 23. c
although that the Scripture does forbid them: I dare not say further, and do
make it a conscience, to suffer in their cities, those which for all Christian
rules, do content themselves with that, that the Lord has prescribed unto them
by his Testament and last will, the which he has ratified by his blood. But as
then he that was borne carnally, Galat. 4. d.
persecuted him that was borne spiritually, even so is it now. And as we do
read, that the Idol Dagon, the God of the Azotiens or Philistians could never
stand up before the Ark of the Lord, 1. Sam. 5. a.
but Dagon did fall down groueling upon the earth before it. So this Romish
church, being builded and grounded upon al idolatry and superstition of ye
Gentiles, seeing themselves almost beaten down and destroyed by the sword of
the word of God, in the presence of the true and reformed Christian Church:
has chosen the remedy of tyrants, and is armed with all felony and cruelty
for to drive away, and to banish the children of God. And God willing, Daniel.
2. c.
that will happen in the end which is showed by Daniel, that that great and
mighty Image, yea grimme to behold, shall be broken by that little stone hewn
out of the Rock, without man's hand, and shall be established for ever, the
kingdom of the son of God. Apoe* ^8. ^
Insomuch that we will sing all with one accord: great Babylon is fallen, is
fallen: because that she has made drunk so many people with the wine of her
fornication.

Esaie. 1.^ The daughter of Sion is left alone like a cotage in a vineyard,
like a watch house in time of war, and like a besieged City. A Prayer.
Lord God, heavenly father and altogether mighty, which have drawn away and
saved thy faithful servants Lot and Daniel, from the flaming fire: Genes. 19.
d. Exo 2. a. 2. Cro. 22. d.
Moses from the midst of the waters, one Ioas from among them that were
slain, and have reserved in the persecution of Achab, 3. Reg. 19. d.
and of Iesabel, so many thousand men which have not bowed their knees unto
Baal, yea, have left always unto thy people some prophets and true ministers
of thy law in the captivity of Babylon. Give unto us thy grace in this civil
war and persecution of our own country men, yea, our domestical servants,
Esaias 59. a
to acknowledge that thy hand is not so shortened, that it cannot save or
help, neither is thine ear so stopped that it cannot hear: But that our
iniquites have made the division between thee and us, and that our sins have
hid thy face from us. To the end that we staying on thy mercy, may not be
altogether desolate: Give O Lord such fear unto our enemies, that they may
have cause to invoke and call upon thy name, in such sort that we all with
one spirit and will may confess, that thou art the aid of the humble and
little ones: Judith. 9. d
the helper of the weak and feeble, the protector of them that are forsaken,
the savior of the abiectes: yea, thou art the Lord of hoastes, which do
reserve always for us a few alive, to the end that we should not be made
like unto Sodom and like unto Gomorra, Esaias. 1. c
and not to fall in despair with the unbelieving. And therefore we pray thee
in the favor or for the love of him which has cried with a loud voice, that
the Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have neastes, Math. 8. ^
but the son of man has not whereon to rest his head: he (I say) which
delivered himself unto death, for to assure us of our dwelling in the heavenly
kingdom, our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.

THAT THE CHRISTIAN Religion cannot be tied or bound to any limittes and
bounds. Cap. 3.
2. TIM. 2. b. The word of God is not bound.
IF it be written that the king being set upon the seat of his kingdom,
Deuteronomy. 17. d.
shall write the Law, and shall read therein all the days of his life, that he
may learn to fear the Lord his God, and for to keep all the words of his
law, and his ordinances, for to do them: and the same LORD does promise unto
his Church, Esaias. 49. g
that kings shall be her noursing Fathers, and Queens shall be her norishing
mothers. It is certain that as righteousness and truth are the estabishing of
the throne or feate of the Lord: Psalm. 89. c.
Prouer. 11
so does he preserve and keep the kings, and does maintain their scepter by
godliness and truth. (I do say further) if the Egiptians have in such
recommendation and praise the practice of their religion above all things,
Plato lib. 6 of the kingdom.
(as says Plato) that they will not create and make a king, except that he
were promoted and consecrated a priest: yea, greatly occupied or exercised in
the doings of the priests. And the Persians will not allow or admit for
their prince, but him which has the knowledge of the science and discipline of
the magiciens, Plato li. 16 of the kingdom.
which does contain the true use of their religion: Insomuch as unto ye young
Princes of ye country were ordained four schole masters, of who^ the first
did teach them ye magic of Orcastrus ye son of Oroniasus, which did
contain the doings of the religion. Plato in his book c^lled Alcibiades.
Truly we ought not to doubt but that the estate and duty of a christian
Prince, is first of al to establish and maintain ye doing of the religion,
Plutarch li. of the doctrine of princes.
and to acknowledge yt he is the minister of God, for ye health of al men, to
the end, that the goods which the Lord has given unto him, he should keep
part of the^, and distribute part of the^, and yt he do manifest and delare him
self by works: as Aristotle does write unto Alexander, Aristotle writing un to
Alexander.
yt the kingdom is given unto him, to ye end to do well unto man kind. To the
end also that under his obedience, the good may be defended from injuries and
oppressions of the wicked: leading a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty, 1. Tim. 2. a.
loking for that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the mighty God and of
our Savior Jesus Christ. Titus. 2. d.
Titus. 1. d.
Forasmuch then as it is nothing to profess to know God, and with the deeds
to deny him: 2. Tim. 3. b.
to have a similitude of godly living, but have denied the power thereof, that
is not also much to maintain a religion for certain and true, and in the
mean time do deprive themselves from ye exercise of ye same, Ephe. 4. c
for as the woorks do declare our faith, so the exercise of the religion, does
assure us that we be no more as children wavering and carried with every wind
of doctrine, but yt we following truth with love, we may grow and increase
altogether in him which is the head: yt is to say, Jesus Christ. To conclude,
yt the Lord would be known chiefly in the assembly of the true christians, as
Dauyd says, I will praise thee in the great congregation, Psalm. 22. f.
and perform my vows in the sight of all them that fear thee: and in another
place he says: Psalm 149. a
Sing unto the Lord a new song, Psalm. 68. f
let the congregation of the Saints praise him: and in an other place he
says, give thanckes O Israel unto God the LORD, in the congregations from the
ground of the heart. And Jesus Christ has promised his, that where there
shall be two or three gathered together in his name, Mat. 18. c.
that he will be in ye midst of them. Psalm. 119
Furthermore if the Prophet David has written that the word of God is a
lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths: and Jesus Christ would
not that that light should be hid under a bushel, Math. 5. b
but that it be set upon a candlestick, that it may give light unto all them
that are in the house. Therefore he would that our light should so shine
before men, that they may see our good works and glorify our heavenly father
which is in heaven.

Otherwise he that would limit and bind the doing and exercise of the true
christian religion in a certain place, as did of late certain of the Jews at
the temple of Jerusalem, and the other at the Mountain of Garizen, that should
be to give occasion of sclaunder, not only unto the Christians, estraungers
and others: but also unto the ancient enymies of our Relygion, Act. 10 f
to blame the name of the LORD. For as the LORD has no regard unto the
appearaunce of men: But in all people, he that fears him and works
righteousness is accepted with him: So his word ought not to be limited in
certain places or persons, inasmuch as by his word we have knowledge of him,
for unto ye end he has sent us (by his well-beloved disciple) saying: search ye
scriptures, John. 5. g
for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which do
testify of me. And for that cause chiefly the Lord will yt the dispensatio^
of his word and of his sacraments be open and manifest unto all the world: to
the end that we may separate the church and congregation of the true
chrystians, from so many sects and companies of heritickes, which do boast
themselves to have the Church with them, according as Lactancius Lactancius in
his book of institucions.
does write.

There would be also danger, or it is to be feared that ceasing the exercise
of ye religion, there would happen that which is written in the book of Judges:
that is to say, Judge. 21. d.
that every man do not that which seemed right in his own eyes, or yt which
we do read in the time of king Asa, 2. Cro. 15. a
that there was no peace to them that go out and in. But great vexation of the
inhabiters of all lands: for one nation shall destroy an other, and one city
another: for GOD will trounce them with all adversity, as oftentimes it
happens, that the Lord being not known of his, Romans 1. c
as he ought to be, did take from his understanding and wisdom, and did fill
them with blindness or darkness: and did give unto them a sleeping spirit,
Psalm. 69. d
and eyes that they cannot see, and ears yt they cannot hear, and does turn
their table into a snare, and that for their reward. Behold what does force
and constrain me to say, yt it is in the great cities, in ye which we ought to
establish first the exercise of ye true christian religion, because yt
oftentimes in the great cities are committed ye greatest wickedness, Oseas. 4.
extorcions and tyrannies: as the Lord so many times has rebuked by his
prophets the inhabiters of Jerusalem, that according to the benefits that he
has done unto them, they did multiply and increase their iniquities and
offenses. Daniel. 5. a.
And by his prophet Daniel, that ye iniquity has begun of the ancients and
doctors of the law, Esaias 2. ^
although that the law was come out of Sion, and the word of God from Jerusalem.

Not without cause ye Lord has established his temple, and ordained his
ceremonies in Jerusalem, the chief city of, Judah, for to repr^sse the sins
of his people, and to hold and keep them in the obedience of his holy
precepts and co^maundeme^ts, Ierem. 23. f.
because that his word is like a fire, and like a hammer, yt breaks the hard
stone: quick and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword:
Hebr. 4. e
and enters through even unto the dividing a sunder the soul and the spirit:
wherein the scripture does teach us that there is no means more greater to
same and to bridle the hearts and affections of men, then the word of God.

The which ought to serve for an example unto all true Princes, for to
establish and maintain the exercise of religion, I do mean yt, in the which
ye word of the Lord does sound daily, and is purely and rightly administered:
for in that point does consist their power, authority and greatness.

Xenophon lib. 4. of the sayings and doings of Socrates.
I do remember for this matter that Licurgus the writer of the laws of the
Lacedaemonians, could find no time more fitter for to cause ye city of Sparta
to flourish then to accustom the inhabitaunts of the same to obey the laws,
because (says he) that the laws do teach two things: that is to say, to
command and to obey to the commandment, adding over and besides the same
that the obedience does consist and lie in the exhortation, wherein we are
learned and taught, Xenophon lib. 1. of the expedition of Cirus.
that the exercise of ye true christian religion is so much more necessary for
to maintain and keep the rightes of Princes and Lords: the which by the word
of God we do learn to obey him as our Prince and sovereign Lord, and to give
unto all our superiors yt which is due unto them. Tribute to who^ tribute
belongs: Romans 13. b Math. 22. b.
Custom to who^ custom is due: Fear to whom fear belongs: Honor to who^
honor perteyneth: not only for the anger, but also for the conscience. And
although that this only argument be sufficient for to prove that we have
nothing attempted against the person of a Prince, his laws and preheminences,
yet truly our enemies have thought by ye means to make us odious and
hateful, not only unto those of the country, but also unto strangers. Act.
15. a
But as it happened of late among the disciples of the Lord, the doing of ye
religion being troubled, for certain differences or controversies which were
among the^ at yt time there, the Apostles did assemble themselves together, and
having ordered the doing of the religyon: Notwithstanding that they could not
do so much, but yt they were forced afterward, both in their persons and in
their religion, and declared to be rebels and seditious throughout all the
Sinagogges: Even so is it happened of our time. For though that by mere
deliberation and advise of the counsel, learned men and of good consciences,
have agreed unto some differences, for to maintain the unity of the kings
subjects, yet truly so many people have risen against us, from all places,
that in ye end have declared us to be rebels and seditious: to conclude we have
been forced in our persons, goods and conscienses. In so much that we may
bewail and lament, yt which S. Peter in his time did deplore and lament, after
ye saying of ye prophet David: Why do the heathen rage together and why do the
people imagine vain things: Psalm. 2. a.
the Kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his anointed.

And we must not here excuse our selves under color of some (yea of ye most
greatest part of the people) speaking against the Edict and statute of the
king, for the gift to interpret the scriptures, or to see and perceive the
differences which are done in the church, is a light and knoweledge which the
Lord has printed and embraced in the hearts of the true and faithful
Christians, and of those which of ready courage and free will, do believe the
word of God. And it is not bound or tied to the number of persons,
authority or greatness. According to that which Jesus Christ did promise his
Apostels in Saint John, John. 14. d John. 6. e
that the holy Ghost shall teach them all things, and that they shall be all
taught of God. 2. Peter. 1. d.
The which Saint Peter does declare more at large, showing, that the
scripture came never by the will of man: but holy men of God speak as they
were moved by the holy Ghost.

It is not then in the number of persons, that we must way the doing of the
Religion, but to the authority of the scripture and to the advice of those,
which with a good conscience do bring an eminent and ouerpassing knowledge.
Even so the ancients in the primitive Church do condemn Samosetanus and
Arrius, and do take none other judges for to discern and perceive the
differences then ye word of God, with the consenting of those which have been
Disciples or successors of the Apostles: I do mean Policarpus, Ireneus, and
Denis Nereus. For whosoever will have regard in that matter to the number of
persons, he must prefer the opinion of the Scribes and Pharisees unto that of
Marie, Anna, Simeon, Elizabeth, and Zachary. Because that the Scribes and
Pharisees, were more in number then those which did hold of the part of Jesus
Christ.

And our enemies do abuse themselves greatly, to think to stay or keep back
the course or passage of the gospel, or to win us to their Romish Church,
hindering the exercise of our religion: For if our exile, loss of our goods,
and so much shedding of blood through out all the Realm, could not force or
compel even there, the true Christians, to make them cleave or stick to the
Romish religion, so much less shall it serve to deprive us from the exercise of
the religion, which has been permitted us with good deliberation and advise of
counsel. And when we shall be driven or chased into strange countries, yet
truly, Psalm. 137. a
freely we shall sing the songs of Syon, Similitude of S. Augustine in his book
of the spirit and the letter
and the Lords songs. For even as ye course of a flood being stopped and
stayed, does show it self to be more vehement and of greater force: so ye true
faithful people being let and constrained in the doing of the religion, do
give themselus more willingly and with a better will to the true service of
God, and to the meditation and study of the holy scriptures.

And to the end not to dissemble and cloak that deed, what is he that will
bind that, that the Lord would show forth even to the uttermost ends of
the earth? Who shall stay or let that, which he has shed abroad as a water
floude, and as a mighty flowing stream, Esa. 66. d.
for the health and salvation of his? Who shall let that which he has set up
and established for ever? Or who shall bind that which he has ordained for
ever? The Lord has not bound or tied his word, and shall man shut it fast in
a certain place? Jesus Christ has showed and declared it openly, and shall
man hide it in darkness? He which has received the talent of the Lord for to
gain or win thereby, Mat. 25. b.
shall he hide it in the earth, Romans 1. b.
he (I say) which is debtor both to the Greeks and to them which are no
Greeks, unto the learned and also unto the unlearned, shall not he preach the
gospel? I do speak unto those, who following the Acts more then barbarous or
Scithian of one Antiochus Antiochus
and Epiphanus, Epiphanes
not being co^te^t to have shed hither to ye blood of the faithful, without
leave and authority of the magistrate, have proceeded to so great
wickedness, that they have burned holy books of the Lord: I do mean those
which do make mention of the eternal alliance of his son our Lord Jesus
Christ, thinking by that means more easily to establish and keep in their
temples and Churches their idolles and God Marsin. And yet nevertheless they
could not do so much by their travails and iourneis that the Lord has not
raised for us of the Machabeans, even as he did unto the Jews, from six
years to seven, after the persecution of Antiochus, for to give some liberty
unto his people, to repair the ruinous places of his Temple, and to assure
more and more the true faithful people in their religion.

Unto you O Christian Princes, these matters are directed, to the end that to
day if you do hear the voice of the Lord, you harden not your hearts. Heb.
3. b. Psalm. 95. c.
For if the father be compted cruel, which having many children, does give
of his goods: yea, of those which GOD has given him, to some, and not to
other some, which (I say) does administer the corporal food and other
necessaries to some, and denies it to other some: Truly the Christian prince
cannot excuse him self of ingratitude, to give some Christian liberty and
exercise of the Religion unto some of his subjects, and to deny it unto other
some. Forasmuch as the material bread, is not the proper meat of the body,
Mat. 4. c.
as the word of God is the nourishing of the soul: also that the princes (as
says Socrates in his book of Xenophon Xenophon lib. 3. of the doings and
sayings of bo^^^^es.
) be toward their subjects as ye shepherds are toward their flock, and the
fathers toward their children: that is the cause why Homere Homere.
did call a prince, gracious and loving sheepherd of the people. Plutarch in
his first Apotheg.
And Agasicles king of the Lacedaemonians being asked how a king can command
without a body of defense and company of people: answered that he would
command his subjects, as the father his children.

Now I would demand willingly what dishonor that should be unto a
Christian Prince unto whom does apperteine to establish and to keep the doing
of the religion, to show him self so negligent and unthankful toward his,
Lamen. 4. a.
that the little ones or young children should demand or ask of him ye
heavenly bread, and there was no man that gives it them. I do mean that the
young children should suffer, not the hunger of bread nor the thrist of water,
as says the Prophet Amos, Amos. 8. d.
but an hunger to hear the word of God. Let us consider in this matter what
reproach Jesus Christ did make unto the Scribes and Pharisees, when he said, Mat.
13. b.
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shut up the kingdom
of heaven before men, ye your selves go not in neither suffer ye them, that
come to enter in: the which words are applied, not to the Scribes and Pharisees
only, but unto all ministers ordained of the Lord, for to declare and
maintain his word.

Shall I speak of those who having taken or snatched away that heavenly bread
from the hand of the children of God, deuowring also the children themselves,
not being content to suppress by force and violence the exercise of the
religion, but do condemn to a most slanderous and cruel death, the
professors of the same: they are those of whom the Lord speaks off by his
prophet David, which eat up my people, Psalm. 14. b
as it were bread. I cannot here forget that which Plato Plato lib. 3 of his
laws
does write off, that is to say, that it should be a thing very grievous and
vile to nourish dogs for for to keep the flock, and in the mean time through
glouttonie, and impatience of hunger, or any other custom, the dogs do lift
themselves up, for to devour the flock, or for to hurt it, in what sort
soever it be, in such manner and sort that the dogs were made like unto ye
Wolves. We must also (as the same Author does write) take heed that they do
not the like (against the Citizens) which are governors of the towns, and in
steed to live with them in amity, Ezech. 34.
as familier and domestical, they do not rule over them in duritie and
rigorousnesse. I will not here blame the honor of some Magistrates or
governors. Exo. 22. c.
For it is written thou shall not curse the ruler of the people: Acts. 23. a
Their conscience may bear them witness in that matter, what it is to let the
true Christian religion, I do mean those which are confirmable and agreeable to
the Christian rule, and good manners. On the contrary I beseech them to
remember a law of the Egyptians, by the which, Plutarch in his Apotheg.
the kings of the country did adjure and swear the judges, not to judge any
thing wrongfully, yea, when the king has commanded them expressly, and if they
do disalowe me in this matter, I will put before their eyes, the exhortation
which Iehosaphat made unto the Judges of Judah, admonishing and warning them to
consider that they do not exercise the judgment of men, 2. Cor. 19. ^
but of GOD, and that it shall be with them according to the thing judged: to
have the fear of the Lord before their eyes, and to know that there is no
unrighteousness in the Lord your god, nor ye regarding of persons, nor taking of
rewards.

2. Cor. 3. a.
They have written this law, not with ynke, but with the spirit of the living
God: not in tables of stone, but in ye fleshly tables of their hearts. To the
end that by their arrestes and Edictes, they have moved by that before the
people unto a rage and fury, more then barbarous and Scythian: Esaias. 2. a.
they may be also an occasion that hereafter the Christian people do break
their swords and spears, to make sithes, sickles and sawes thereof. From that
time forth shall not one people lift up weapon against another, neither shall
they learn to fight from thencefoorth: but (as the prophet Job Job.
says) that we may all walk in the fear of the Lord: let us acknowledge also
on our part, that God has been provoked justly against us for our demerites,
and transgressions, according as he does menace and threaten some time his
people, Esaias 3. a.
by the Prophet, that he will take from them ye Captein and the Soldier, the
Judge and the Prophet: the wise and the aged man: the worshipful of fifty
year old, and the honorable: the Senators and men of understanding the
masters of crafts and Oratoures, and shall give unto them to be their
Princes, children, and babes shall have the rule over them. The people shall be
pilled and polled, and one shall ever be doing violence and wrong to an other.
The boy shall presume against the elder, and the vile person against the
honorable. Because says the Prophet, that both their words and counseils are
against the Lord, they provoke the presence of his majesty unto anger.
Wherefore O Christian and faithful people: let us consider our ways and
search them, Lamen. 3. e.
and let us return unto the Lord, and bewail us for our sins. Let us lift
up our hearts with our hands unto the Lord that is in heaven: saying, We
have been dissemblers, and have offended, will thou therefore not be entreated?
thou have converted us in thy wrath, and persecuted us, thou have slain us
without any favor, thou have hid thy self in a cloud, that our prayers
should not go through, thou have made us outcastes, and to be despised among
the heathen. All our enemies gape upon us, fear and snare is come upon us,
yea, dispite and destruction. O Lord be not so sore displeased and keep not
our offenses too long in thy remembrance, Esa. 64. c
but consider that we are all thy people. The cities of thy Sanctuary lie
wast. Syon is a wilderness, and Jerusalem a desert. Our holy house which is
our beauty, where our fathers praised thee, is brent up: yea, all our
pleasures and commodities are wasted away: remember not Lord our offenses, but
finish the work which thou have begun in us in this mean liberty of the
religion, that we may all sing in great hope and assurance with the Prophet
David: Psalm. 85. b
mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace kiss each other,
truth shall rise out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from
heaven. Grant us O Lord that grace, in the name and favor of thy well-beloved
son our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever Amen.

ESAIAS. 11. c. The Lord shall set up a token among the Gentiles, and gather
together the dispersed of Israel, yea, and of the outcastes of Judah from the
four corners of the world. A prayer.
O Lord which do disperse and break the counsels of ye nations, and do
bring too nothing the enterprises of the people, shed out the bowels of thy
mercies upon those, which do fight daily against thee, as their forefathers,
and would chase and drive thee from thy celestial throne, as ye king of
Babylon: To conclude, do put and set them selves against thy son Christ,
teachers and liers, as that son of perdition, for to pull up by the root
that which thou have planted, to destroy and to ruinate that, which thou have
builded, and to hinder and stop that, which thou have shed out, even unto the
uttermost ends of the earth, yea, do go about by all means to mar and to
spill that which thou have tried in the furnesse of the earth and purified
seven times in the fire, Psalm. 12. b
and to ad unto that which thou have ordained in all integrie and perfection.
To co^clud, would suppress and abolish by force, yt which thou have
established for ever: O Lord give the^ fear yt they may acknowledge and
confess him whom thou have raised up, to set up the kinreds of Jacob, Esa. 49.
b.
and to restore the destruction of Israel, and whom thou have given for to
lighten the Gentiles, that he may be thy health unto the end of the world, our
Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever. Amen.

AN ADVERTISEMENT Unto these which do cry daily, that we must not suffer two
religions. Cap. 4.
1. TIMOTH. 4. Therefore we labor and suffer rebuke, because we believe in the
living God, which is the savior of all men, but especially of all those that
believe.
IT is most evident and known by the discourse of the holy scripture, that as
the Lord is true, entire and perfect, so does he require of us an
acknowledging of him, neither fained nor cloked. That is the cause wherefore he
did regard rather the sacrifice of Abel then of Cain, Genes. 4. ^.
and did command in the law that is written, that we must have a perfect
and a just measure and weightes, and not to have two manner of weightes, he did
rebuke Saul, 1. Reg. 15. ^.
because that he did not wholly and fully accomplish his will and desire,
inasmuch as he did reserve some of the spoils which they had gotten against
the king of Amalech. Luc. 18. c.
And in the Gospel is more praised the prayer of the Publican, Act. 5. a
then that of the Pharisie: To conclude, in the book of the Acts of the
Apostles, Ananias is punished because he deceived the Apostles of the price of
his possession.

In the same respect, also we do greatly abhor, those which do mingle the
sacrifice of the living God, with that of Baal: the doings of the Jews, with
the fame of the Samaritans: the baptism with the circumcision: the Christian
law, with that of Antichrist. And yet at this day we shall find more
strange, that under color of some ordinary tribute: they do suffer
unpunished, the Jews with the Christians: the common harlots, with the married
women, the Temples consecrated unto strange and unknown Gods, among the
midst of the Christian Churches.

But for all that it follows not yt they ought to chase and drive us out of
the realm to deprive us from our goods, to exile and banishe us from our
lands: to conclude, to force us in our bodies and consciences, except that it
be first decided and determined by the word of GOD, that the Romish Church is
the true Church: on the contrary side that they do know by the same
Judgment that ours is contrary unto the true Christian Church. For as the
Lord does send us by his Prophet unto the law and to the witness, Esa.
not unto the dead. So does he command us by his well-beloved son, John. 5. g
to search diligently the Scriptures, because that they are those which do
bear witness of our salvation.

And even as (I say) that it was but a small thing that the Jews did reproach
Jesus, that he was a Samaritane and had the devil. John. 8. f
And that they did call his Apostles deceiuours, and sowers of new doctrine. To
conclude, that among the Romain Emperors they no more esteemed the Christian
religion, Swetonius in the life of Nero.
then of a new superstition or dangerous profession: Also it shall not much
serve to cry daily that they ought to kill us, banish and exile us from our
lands, except that they do declare unto us by the word of God, wherein we do
swerve from the Christian church. For it does not follow that our religion is
false, because that it is contrary unto the Romish Church, no mor then we must
say that the doctrine of Jesus Christ was evil because that it was contrary to
the traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees.

And it shall yet less serve in that matter to allege unto us the
prescription of the time, S. Cipria^s in his seed ^ book of his epistles the
3. epist.
in as much as the gospel does rule us, or the greatness and magnificence of
the Romish Church, in regard of ours, forasmuch as they do know, yt through
force and hypocrisy, the ministers of the same have usurped such power,
authority and greatness. For in those foundations the scepter and reign of
Antichrist is shored up and maintained. And such are the marks of all false
religion and doctrine, as does witness unto us (besides that which is said in
ye scripture, of the son of perdition) the good Cosba which did reign in ye
time of Hely, Adrian Emperor of ye Romans, and him which does call himself
at this day the great Lord. S Ambro* Can. conuenior.
For the true Christian religion does not consist and lie in weapon or
strength, but in weeping and in bewailing, no more then the brightness and
clerenesse of the same in the force and strength of hands: but in the patience
and hope of men: To conclude, the perfection of our law does not consist in
visible and outward things; but in the most deepest places of men's hearts and
imaginacions.

That is then without any purpose to conclude that we must be exiled from our
country, because they cannot suffer two religions, except that the subporters
and mainteiners of the Romish church do confess by the same means, that the
truth is odious unto them.

Valerius li. 5. cap of the vntha^keful.
Even so the people of Athens did chase and drive from their City, and did put
to death him in Cyprus, which has established the laws: Cicero lib. 5. de
Tuscu. ques.
Even so Licurgus was banished of those, whom he instructed in all good
dysciplyne and ordinances: Even so Aristides was exiled and banished his
country, although they could rebuke him of none other thing, but yt he was too
just. The time will not serve me to speak of the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, it suffiseth me to send or apply the rest unto that, which the
Apostle speaks off, unto the Hebrews, the xj. Chapter.

To conclude, the confession of so many martyrs of our religion joined with
the word of God, does give most sure witness that we are not the disciples
of the God of the Gentiles, for to deceive men through ambiguitie and
obscurity of matters, nor of an Idol Dagon, 1. Reg. 5. a
God of the Philistians, for to make us afraid in the presence of the Ark of the Lord. The humbleness and obedience of ours, and the despising that they
have of worldly goods, do evidently declare, how abominable the pride of
Babylon the mother of fornication is unto them. Apo. 17. b
Finally their bloodshed in all places, does sufficiently teach our enemies
what faith and hope they have unto the promises of the Lord, and to the merit
of Jesus Christ, and what defiaunce and distrust they have of the power and
might of creatures.

I will not here compare the policy and rule of our Church, unto that of the
Apostles, and yet less the manners of ours, to the life of them: I do leave
off to speak to them, which with right conscience, do bring some mean
knowledge to the holy scripture, what difference there is between the church
of Jesus Christ, and that of Rome, what deformity they do find of ours, to
that of the Apostles, I do mean for the regard and respect of the doctrine
and policy: assuring my self in that matter that if they do consider it
thoroughly, rightly, and without affection, they shall be more attentive to
correct and amend their own vices, then enclyned to condemn so lightly ours.

Furthermore, it is easy to judge that our religion is neither double, neither
feigned, in that chiefly we do hold nothing less then of the superstitions of
the Gentiles, nor of the ceremonies of the Hebrews, Hebr. 10. a
knowing that they were a shadow of things now come. No more then of so many
traditions of the scribes and Pharisees, but that the simplicity and plainnes
of the holy scripture does please us, or for to speak better, Saint Hierome in
his epistles. Lacta^cius.
the plain and simple verity of the same, making our selves agreeable to the
word of him which has said, that GOD would be worshipped in spirit and
truth, our LORD Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.

Jeremy. 2. c. My people has done two evils. They have forsaken me, the well
of the water of life, and dug them pittes, yea, vile and broken pittes, that
hold no water. A Prayer.
O Lord which art full of compassion and mercy, shed out thy mercy and fatherly
goodness upon that mad and furious people, which do gather themselves daily
against thee, for to abolish thy glorious name, and to deface from the earth,
the remembrance of thy son Christ. Regard with pity all those which go
about by all means to obscure and darken thy law, for to establish their
traditions, and do enforce themselves daily to chase and drive away him who^
thou have sent in thy name, for to receive him which of long time has usurped
the seat of thy son in his own name? yea, which are not ashamed to present
unto the Chrystyan people in steed of a Jesus Christ, a seditious Barrabas: of
a true Bishop and dyspensatour of thy holy will, an ambitious and covetous
hipocrite. To conclude, for a Mathias, a Simon Magus: yea, to drive from their
Cities and common wealths, the true religion, for to admit and bring in all
idolatry and superstition. Give them Lord such repentance and contrition, as
thou did of late unto the king Manasses, being all bloody with the blood
of the prophets: unto one Saul, afterward called Paul, altogether inflamed
with threateninges and killing, against the Disciples of Jesus Christ: unto a
poor Publican, whom thou have afterward chosen for to declare the Gospel of
thy grace, in the favor and merit of him, which being on the Cross for our
demerities and transgressions, has taught us to pray for our enymies, our
Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.

A BRIEF ADVERTISment unto those which do blame the true Christian religion,
for the poorness and littleness of the same, or do slander it for the
evil conversation and abuse of those which do profess it. Cap. 5.
Esaie. 41. ^. Be not afraid thou little worm Jacob, and thou despised
Israel, for I will help thee, says the Lord, and the holy one of Israel,
thine auenger.
IN the law of nature man being created, unto a dignity and singular
perfection, Genes. 12. d.
Genes. 11. a
sodeinely did forsake the ordinance and commandment of God, and within a
little while after the children of Adam did rise up for to build a Tower
called Babell. In the law that is written, the people did err and go astray
from the way that GOD commanded them, they made a Calfe of molten metal, and
bowed themselves before it, and delited in the works of their own hands. B^o
32. ^
In the book of Nombers they murmured so much against Moses, Nomb. 11. c
that Moses cried unto the Lord saying: I am not able to bear all this people
alone, for it is to heavy for me, kill me I pray thee, if I have found favor in
thy sight, and let me not see my wretchedness. In the book of the kings, so
many false prophets did conspire against Elias, 1. Reg. 19. a
that he desired to die, because that the children of Israel have forsaken the
covenant of the Lord, and have broken down his Alters, and slain his
prophets with the sword. The which we do read of Jeremy, Ierem. 20. d
when of a meruaylous zeal that he did bear unto the house of God (more the^
through impatience of sorrow) he did exclaim and cry out, saying: Cursed be
the day wherein I was borne: unhappy be the day, wherein my mother brought
me forth. Cursed be the man that brought my father the tidings to make him
glad, saying: thou have gotten a son. In the law evangelical, so many of
the scribes and pharisees did conspire against Jesus Christ and his word, that
he himself did reproach and check them, that he was come in ye name of his
father, and they received him not: and if an other do come in his own name,
they do receive him, and therefore ye same Lord does admonish and warn his,
Mat. 7. e
that they should beware of false prophets which come unto them in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. In the time of the Apostles,
so many of ye Emperors enemies of ye christian law: As Nero, Domitian, Herod,
and others. So many false prophets, as Simon Magus, Judas, Galileus, Therdas:
and after ye Apostles so many people corrupt in the law and manners that S.
Paul did exhort his for to beware of things to come, saying: Act. 20. f
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to rule the congregation of God, which he has
purchased with his blood. For I am sure of this, yt after my departing shall
grievous wolves enter in among you, which will not spare the flock.

The same does not learn or teach us therefore to blame the religion of the
LORD, Psalm. 19. c
for the law of the Lord is a perfect law, it quickens the soul: The
Testimony of the LORD is true, and gives wisdom eue^ unto babes, but to
acknowledge the malice of men, and the presumption of those which do rise up
against God. And besides it, teaches us not to believe to lightly every
spirit: but to prove the spirits whether they are of God or not. 1. John. 4.
a.


Furthermore, not to way or measure the true Christian religion to the opinion
of men: but to the rule and word of the Lord, according as it is said in
Moses. Deuteronomy. 6. c
Thou shall do that which is right and good in the sight of the Lord, not all
that which thou do think to be good. And not to slander us, in ye
malice of some Apostates, for through the incredulity and unbelieving of some
which have not believed, ye promise of God is not abolyshed or without effect:
because yt God is true, and all men are liars. Furthermore, to acknowledge our
imperfection and weakness after the example of those which have despised the
gifts, graces and liberalities of the Lord, Romans 3. a
and to pray without ceasing and intermission, that he do increase in us the
faith, to the end we do not vary from his law, either to the right hand, nor
to the left.

Act. 3. d
Finally, to suffer patiently ye wicked, until the day of the later
resurrection, which is the time of the restoring of all things, 1. Cor. 4. a
and to judge nothing before the time, until such time as the LORD does come:
which will lighten things that are hyd in darkness, and open the counsels
of the hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God.

Even so Aaron suffered the people rising up against him: Bxo. 32. a. Saint
Augustine epistle 163. Nomb. 11. e
and did consent that they should make and worship an Idol. Even so Moses
suffered so many thousand persons which did murmr against him. Even so Dauyd
did suffer patiently the manners of Saul, his persecutor and deadly enemy, and
did acknowledge him for king, and avenged his death. Even so Samuel did
discemble and cloak the manners of the children of Ely. Even so Esaie did bear
the rebellion and contumacie of his people. Eue^ so Jeremy, those of whom he
suffered so many wrongs and injuries: and all that to the end to keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephe. 4. a
As also Jesus Christ did suffer and abide in his company, one Judas, a thief
and a betrayer of his blood, and did permit and suffer him amongst good
men, to take our price. Finally, even so did the Apostles suffer the false
Apostles, and those which did seek ye things which were their own, not those
of Jesus Christ.

Saint Augustine epistle 119.
Not without cause saint Augustine says, that the church being established in
the myddest of chafe and darnell, does suffer many things, yet notwithstanding
ye things which are against the faith or the good life, she does not allow
them, she does not hide them, she does them not.

And truly those do abuse themselves greatly, which of ye same do thinck to
make a city platonical, I do mean which are an example of all infirmities,
vices and imperfections.

What is the cause yt we are not ashamed to confess yt there are in us
companies of the immitators and folowers of Peter, aduowing themselves
faithful servants of the Lord, John 13. d.
and yet nevertheless do disauow and deny it at the voice of a simple maid,
I do mean for a light and small occasion.

John. 13. g
Yea, of Pilates consenting unto ye death of the just, against their own
consciences, for the fear that they have to lose their estates, dignities and
promotions.

And we will not deny that one can not meet with the Nicodemians the secret
disciples of Jesus Christ.

And if it were needeful to require so near, they should there find of
Iudasses, which do marchaundise and sell the innocent blood, and do betray
the just for money.

What shall I say more, John. 19. f
there lacked not a souldyer, for to pearce the side of the just, I do mean
which do speak evil of him through false reports, injuries and wrongs.

And besides this, Math. 27. c
so many wicked people which do wagge their heads with the Jews, and do
mock the just hanged on the cross, saying, that we do promise many things,
but that we do execute nothing rightly.

And to make an end of this matter, one may there see a thief hanged on the
cross for his wickedness and faults, and yet accusing the just, having him
in dysdaine. But even as Jesus Christ being delivered to death by the Jews,
and forsaken of his Apostles and disciples, was known to be the son of God,
by the things mute and without understanding. For the elements forsaking their
right course, May. fh^^
have sufficiently declared his greatness: ye stones which did rent and break
asunder have openly declared what his puissau^ce was as well in heaven as in
earth, ye graves which did open, and the bodies that did rise, have declared
that he had power over the living and the dead. Also, if all the men of this
world did violence unto Jesus Christ and his word, the stones and dome
things, shall declare his praise, and shall publish and show forth his law.
According as he did rebuke sometime the Scribes and Pharyses, yt if the little
ones do hold their peace, sodeinly the stones would cry out, Math. 3. b. Luc.
3. b. Nom. 22. e. 2. Pet. 2. d
for God can of these stones raise up children unto Abraham: As of late the
LORD did stir up a dome Ass (speaking in a man's voice) for to rebuke the
madness of the prophet: Psalm. 119. m
Let us then conclude with David that the word of the Lord endures for ever
in heaven. Psalm. 33. c
And that his truth also remains from one generation to another. The Lord
brings the counsel of the heathen to naught: and makes the devises of the
people to be of none effect, and casts out the counsels of Princes: But the
counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever, and the thoughts of his heart from
generation to generation. Mat. 24. c Marc. 13. d
For he has builded his witnesses for ever. Heaven and earth shall pass, but
his words shall not pass. In this matter those of the Romish church taknig
occasion of that place, will say, ye one ought not to forsake their religion,
for the abuses, which one does se there daily, chiefly in their prelates: But
they ought to know that there is two marks, among other which do separate ye
true church from the false, that is to say, the true usage of ye word and of
the administration of ye sacraments ordained of God pure and whole, forasmuch
then as in the Romish church, there is nothing of all this, forasmuch as in it
the commandments of God are forsaken, for the traditions of men, and the
sacraments profaned and applied unto a hyre and ordinary traficke. It is not
without cause, Mat. 15. a
if we do disalow or deny that church, for although that their foundation (as
they say) be Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1. Cor. 3. c.
yet truly they do build upon ye foundation, so many vain and unprofitable
things, that one can scant know in their church any mark or sign of true
religion. And as we do read in Esaias, Esaias 53. ^
that Jesus Christ was so despised of the Jews, that every one did hide their
faces from him, insomuch as he had neither beauty nor favor in him: So we
seeing daily so many kinds of wrongs by those of ye Romish church, yt is to
say, in his word, in his person and his members, that one can skantly know
that he does reign in the midst of those, which do call themselves
Christians, and our enemies ought not to ground or build themselves upon that
that the bishops have succeeded the Apostles, for the discipline and christian
rule being changed by ye abuse of them, their estate and charge has been
altogether changed and adnulled: I do not mean to blame the bishops which
have followed the Apostles in their life and doctrine.

Furthermore, one may the better know yt the marks of ye true christians, are
those whereof our Lord speaks of in Esaias saying. Esaias 8. d
Lay the witnesses together, and seal the law with my disciples. And Jesus
Christ in his Gospel says, John. 10. b
my sheep do hear my voice. Forasmuch then as those of ye Romish church do
forsake the word of Jesus Christ our true shepherd, and do harken unto ye
voice of strangers: turning their ears from ye verity, and do give
themselves unto fables: to conclude, giving heed unto spirits of error, 1.
Tim. 1 and 4. ^
and devilish doctrine of the^ which speak false through hypocrisy, it is to
plain that we ought not to seek ye church in their company.

And they do deceive themselves greatly, if they do think that for their
evil conuersations only, we do abandon their religon, for although that for
such things, the name of the Lord is blamed not among ye christians only, Rom
2. d.
but also among the Gentiles. Yet truly we have not so much regard unto their
manners, as to their doctrine by ye which the men are inclined unto idolatry
and marvelous superstition. And therefore ye scripture does exhort us, to
depart from the city of Babylon, Esaias 48. d. Apoc 7 a
least we be partakers of her sins, and to hold him accursed which does preach
unto us any other gospel then yt which we have received, Gal. 1. a
we will follow those which are marked with this mark Thau upon their
foreheades, Ezech. 9. b Apoc. 7. a
I do mean those which have in a singular reco^mendatio^ ye law of ye Lord
(for as says ye scripture) whersoeuer ye dead carkas is, Math. 24. c. Luc. 17.
g.
thither will ye Eagles resort: wherein Jesus Christ does teach us, yt nothing
shall hinder or let, yt the christians be not united and knit unto their head.
Wherefore (as it is said) it shall be to no purpose to say, yt there are among us
so many false brethren, inasmuch as Jesus Christ does like^ his church unto a
net cast in ye sea and gathers of al kinds of fishes. For ye true mark of the
Church of God, does consist in the law, and in witness, unto the which the
Lord does send us by his prophet when he says: Esaias 8. d.
Is there a people any where, that asks not counsel at his God: whether it
be concerning the dead, or the living. If any man want light, let him look
upon the law and the testimony, whether they speak not after this meaning.
Notwithstanding then, Deuteronomy. 4. b.
that our enemies do glorify and boast themselves in the outward appearaunce
of their ceremonies and sacrifices, crying (with the Jews) that there is no
nation or people so great, that has ordinances and laws so righteous, as all this law which they set before the people. Although, say I, that they do
boast themselves of their Temples and sumptuous presents, and goodly
endowmentes, and that they do exclayme so many times daily. ere. 7. a.
This is the Temple of the Lord, despisinge the Christian and reformed Church,
for the poorness, baseness, and littleness of the same. Esaias 8. c Rom 9. g.
1. Pet. 2. b. Luc. 2. c.
They are not ignorant that Jesus Christ has not ben as a stone to stumble
at, and as a rock to fall upon, a snare and a net to both ye houses of
Israel, and shall be the fall and resurrection of many in Israel, and for a
sign which shall be spoken against. Insomuch that Saint Paul does witness that
Jesus Christ crucified is an occasion of falling unto the Jews, 1. Cor. 1. d
2. Cor. 2. d
and unto the Greeks of foolishness, and his doctrine a sweet savor of life
unto those which were saved, and of death unto those which do perish. What is
the cause that their reasons do serve to no purpose for to abolish or change
the verity of our religion, grounded upon the word of the Lord, but rather
for to condemn the malice of those which do abuse it (as the hoggs do of the
good pearls, and the dogs of the childrens bread) which if they do consider
well what their Romish Church is, they shall find it in nothing differing from
a policy or government altogether profane and worldly, having it subject not
unto the word, but to their opinion and private will, Math. 20. d
a thing as much contrary unto the Christian doctrine, as Jesus Christ does
teach us that the Lords of the Gentiles have domination over them. And they
that are great exercise power over them, but it shall not be so among them.

That is the cause why we do not see any other thing to reign in the Romish
Church, then an excessive ambition, and inordinate desire, Saint Hierome in the
life of Malchus.
to increase and augment their greatness, as saint Hierome does testify of his
time, that the Church being augmented and increased, in temporal riches, was
also weakened and diminished in christian virtues, in such sort that he
durst well call the Church of his time, a sink and puddle: in respect and
regard yt it had, and did bear unto the Church of of Jesus Christ, and of
his Apostles.

For the Christian Church is not bound unto titles, nor unto dignities: But to
ye word and to the true usage of the Sacraments ordained of the Lord, nor
limited unto a certain place (as of late the Jews did refer the doings of
their religion unto the Temple of Solomon, the benedictions and blessings of
the Lord to the mount Garizim) but in all people he that fears him and
works righteousness, Act. 10 f
is accepted with him, and his well-beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ is in
the mids of two or three gathered together in his name. Mat. 18. e


What shall I say more? the greatness of the Christian church does not consist
in the number of persons, Mar. 20. b
for as Jesus Christ says, many are called but few are chosen. And as Esdras
does witness, 4. Esdr. 8 a
the most highest made this world for many, but the world to come for few: As
when thou ask the earth, it shall say unto thee that it gives much moulde,
whereof earthen vessels are made, but little of it that gold comes off, even
so is it with the work of this world. There be many created, but few shall be
preserved. Insomuch that the Lord does make sometime his Church like unto a
wild and barraine vine, Esa. 4^. a
in the which one can find but a few grapes, yea, unto a budde, in the which
one can find but one grape: And he says, do not destroy it, for it is
blessedness. Esa. 29. e. Luc. 12. d.
And therefore the Lord called his number the little flock, Math. 7. b
and does tell us that strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which
leads unto life, and few there be that find it.

I do say moreover, that we ought not to apply or refer the christian church
unto man's commodity and felicity. For in ye law of nature, we do see an
Abel, the figure of the true christians put to death, and killed by his
brother: Genes. 4. b Genes. 9. d Genes. 28
a Noe, despised of his own son: Jacob and the other prophets, banished and
constrained to fly: that people of Israel, Exo. 1 c.
so much praised or esteemed of God, compelled by Pharao, unto a great and
miserable servitude and bondage: Nom. 10
A little while after, did wander and stray abroad by the wildernesses. The
king and his people, 4 Reg. 25. b
taken captive in Babylon: the Prophets constrained to hide themselves, for the
cruelty and tirannie of the kings. In the Christian law, the first Herolde
and Ambassador of Jesus Christ and of his gospel, John Baptist put to death
by king Herod. Math. 14. b Mat. 2. c
Jesus Christ from his birth or as soon as he was borne fled into Egypt. The
Apostles counted as sheep to be slain, and after the Apostles, I do mean
from the time of the Roman Emperors a very bucherie and slaughter of
Christians. Eusebius. in the ecclesiastical History.


For all the same we have none occasion to be offended or to be angry with our
selves, seeing the peace of the wicked and ungodly, or to withdraw us from ye
Christian Church, for the adversities of the same: for even as in the time of
the universal floude, Genes. 7. c
Noe and all his family were preserved from the waters, and the Arc could not
be forced with the winds and tempests, or as the people of Israel, erring and
wandering in the wilderness and unknown places, Exo. 13. d
were conducted and guided by the Lord, in the night by a pillar of fire, and
by day in a pillar of a cloud. Finally, Math. 14. d
as that ship wherein the Apostles were, being tossed up and down in the sea,
did seem to manasse the Apostles, of drowning: if it had not been that Jesus
Christ at his coming caused the winds to cease and the sea to be calm. Even
so this heavenly Arc (I do mean the Christian Church or congregation) being
builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephe. 2. d
and that corner stone which is Jesus Christ (yea him which has promised unto
his, that he will aid and help them even unto the end of the world) forasmuch
as he does fortify him in his afflictions, that now of late the Ark of Noah
did lift up it self above the waters, storms and tempests.

Wherefore it should be in vain for to no purpose for us, here to allege the
magnificence and greatness of the Romish Church, for that is as if one
should lean upon a stafe of a broken read, that is to say, upon man's force
and strength. Or for us to blame the poorness and littleness of our church,
forasmuch as it is stayed upon the word of the Lord, which abides for ever.
But we must rather accuse the malice of those which do rise up against us for
to destroy and ruinate that principal foundation, which is Jesus Christ,
Ephe. 2. d
in whom all the building coupled together, grows unto an holy Temple in the
Lord, in whom we also are built together, and made the habitation of God by the
spirit: for as we ought not to blame Moses, Exo. 1. c
nor to attribute unto his doctrine, that the people of God did not multiply
and increase, but unto king Pharao, which did force them unto an extreme and
miserable servitude and bondage: even unto ye killing of the first borne of the
people: neither unto the prophet Helyas that in his time the true Prophets were
no more at commandment: but rather unto king Achab and Iesabel his wife
which did follow and chase them unto death.

No more also then we ought to blame Saint John Baptist, Mat. 14 b
the messenger or forerunner of the son of God, or the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, because that so many people did put themselves against the Christian
law: But to accuse the ambition of the Roman Emperors together with the
privy hatred of ye Scribes and Pharisees, willing to deface in the earth the
memory of Christ. In like manner we ought not to condemn the true Christian
religion, or to stay us or tarry upon the default of those which do profess
it, but to acknowledge the rage and fury of the enemies of the cross of
Christ, 2. Timot. 2. d
and in the mean season to bear patiently ye manners of our domesticalls,
teaching them with gentleness, proving if God at any time will give them
grace, that being converted they may know the truth. And because that the
harvest is great, but the laborers are few, Mat ^. ^
let us on our part pray unto the Lord of the harvest, to send forth
laborers into his harvest and that for so many hired and unprofitable
shepherds he do send good shepherds into his fold, John. 10. a
looking for or beholding the coming of the true shepherde of our souls, our
Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.

1. CORINT. 1. d. When the world by wisdom, knew not God, in the wisdom
of God: it pleased god by folish preaching, to save them that believe. A prayer.
O Lord which have spoken by thy Prophet, I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and will cast away the understanding of the prudent: Esae. 29. c. 1. Cor.
1. c
yea, which have chosen the foolish things of this world for to confound the
wise, and the weak and feeble things, for to confound the strong, and the
vile and despised and those which are not, for to abolish those which are, to
the end that no flesh do glorify himself before thee. Pour out thy
vengeance upon those which are of a corrupt judgment, rebuke as concerning
the faith. Who as Iannes and Iambres withstode Moses, 2. Timot. 3. b
also of a purpose do resist the truth of thy gospel, and do count the word
of the cross folishnesse. Break a sunder and confound the enterprises and
counsels of all those which do eleuate themselves against thy holy Mounteine,
as thou have destroyed the strength and force of all the kings and monarkes of
the world, by that little stone cut out of the rock without any hands,
Daniel. 2. g
and have abated the pride of the mighty, through the humility of thy son,
to the end that all the world may know that thy kingdom is not of this
world, and that the felicity of thine does not lie in this present life, but
in the kingdom of the blessed. Finally, that the Christian Church is not an
assembly of proud and imperious Magistrates, but of those which do humble
themselves under thy obedience, and do put themselves under the yoke of thy
well-beloved son, Jesus Christ our Lord. And yet Lord, that because of us, thy
name is blamed, not among ye Christians only, but also among the strangers,
in so much that our sins and demerites, do give occasion unto our enemies of
slander, and to us of confusion and rebuke. Nevertheless O Lord, in as much as
thorough ye incredulity of some of ours, thy law is no less veritable and
true, as it is written, That thou might be justified in thy sayings, Romans 3.
a Psalm ^16. b Psalm. 51. a
and overcome when thou art judged. Remember not O Lord, for thy fatherly
goodness our offenses, and have not in mind the wickedness of those which do
polute and blame thy name, but behold the face of him which was holden and
taken to be of the company of the malefactors, and has protested before thy
majesty, that the rebukes of them which rebuked thee, Romans 15. a Psalm 69. b
were fallen upon him our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever,
Amen.

THAT NONE CAN HINder or stop the course of the religion, by fire and sword,
threatenings and bonds. Cap. 6.
2. CORINT. 13. c. We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.
IF the Scripture does teach us in diverse places that the Gospel is none other
thing but a message of peace, Esaias. 52. v. 7. Romans 10. c. 15.
according as Esaie says, that beautiful are the feet of him that brings
the message from the mounteine, and proclaims peace: that brings the good
tidings, and precheth health, and says unto Syon, thy God is the king: if say
I, the same prophet (speaking of the vocation and calling of the Gentiles and
message of the gospel) does write in the person of the Lord, Esaias. 66. d. 12:
that he will let peace into her, like a water flood, and the might of the
heathen like a flowing stream: and that in that same time men shall break
their swords and spears, Esaias. 2. a
to make sythes, sickles and sawes thereof. From that time forth shall not one
people lift up weapon against another, neither shall they learn to fight from
thenceforth according to that we do read, that at the fist or new coming of
the son of God that there was with the Angel a multitude of heavenly
soldiers, lauding God and saying, glory be to God in the hie heavens, and
peace in earth, and toward men good will. Luc. 2. b
As it is most evident that Jesus Christ our savior was borne under Caesar
Augustus reign, a kingdom full of tranquillity and peace, truly the
Ambassador and herald of one such message ought to observe and keep a great
meekness and gentleness, in his charge and profession.

For it is most certain that Moses and Jesus Christ, in that have had a
singular prerogative above all other: of Moses, the scripture says, Nom. 12. a
that he was a very meek man, above all the men of the earth, what Jesus
Christ was, he himself does manifest and declare it, when he cried with a
loud voice, come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, Mat. 31. d.
and I will ease you. Take my yoke on you, and learn of me that I am meek and
lowely in heart. In so much that the Prophet speaking of his meekness, Esa.
42. a
says, he shall not be an outcrier, nor an hie minded person. His voice shall
not be heard in the streates. A bruised read shall he not break, and the
smoking flax shall he not quench, he will not be hateful or odious unto him
self, nor yet werie him self. 1 Pet. 5. a
That is the cause wherefore Saint Peter did exhort ye pastors and shepherds
to feed Christ's flock, which is committed unto them, taking the ouer-sight of
the^, not as though they were compelled thereto, but willingly: not for ye
desire of filthy lucre, but of a good mind, not as though they were Lords
over the parishes: but that they should be an ensample to the flock. Even so
does Saint Paul say, writing unto the Thessalonians, 1. Thessa. 2. b
we have been, says he, tender among you, even as a nursse cherishes her
children, so was our affection toward you: our good will was not to have dealt
unto you, not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye
were dear unto us. Even so said Jesus Christ unto his Apostles, Mat. 20 b
behold I send you forth as sheep among wolves. Be ye therefore wise as
Serpents, and innocent as Doves. And in an other place of the same book, Ye
know says Christ that the Lords of the Gentiles have domination over them.
And they that are great, Mat. 20. d
exercise power over them. It shall not be so among you. But whosoever will be
great among you let him be your minister, and whosoever will be chief a mong
you, let him be your servant. As the Lord also does witness by his prophet,
(speaking of the remnants) I mean of the faithful congregation that the
remnant of Israel shall do no wickedness, nor speak lies: Sopho. 3. c
neither shall there any disceitful tongue be found in their mouths, for
they shall be fed, and take their rest, and no man shall make them a fraide.
And it is very well said of Plato, Plato in (...) 9 book^ his la^^
that he which does stablishe and make Laws in cities, ought to hold and keep
the office of a father and mother: Insomuch that his writings should contain in
them, rather a kind of love and wisdom, then of a tirant, thretning and
ruling by rigor and cruelnesse. And therefore the Lord did rebuke sometimes
the shepeherds of Israel, Ezech. 34. a
for yt they did rule over their flock in duritie and rigorousnes. Math. 23. a.
And Jesus Christ did declare unto the Scribes and Pharisees, that they did
bind heuie burdens and grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders:
but they themselves will not heave at them with one of their fingers, and love
to sit uppermost at feasts, and to have the chief seats in the sinagogs, and
greetings in the markets, and to be called of men Rabby. As it did appear that
the chief priest asked the Apostles, Act. 5. e
saying, did not we straitely command you yt ye should not teach in his
name? Such is and has been always the manner and condition of those which
have little regard to the christian religion, so that they may get unto
themselves power and authority. As we do read that king Nabuchodonosor did
compel and constrain the people to do homage and worship unto his idol:
Daniel. 4. b
one Antiochus which did cause the Jews and Machabees to forsake the divine
service and precepts of the elders, 1. Match. ^
one Cozba in the time of the Emperor, Elyas Adrianus would ye men should take
or acknowledge him for the true Messiah, promised in the law, or as we do se
in our time, an Emperor of the Turks, by force of arms did go about to
mingle the heaven and earth, for to obscure and darken the name of Christ, and
to deface his remembrance. Not without great cause Saint Hierome Saint Hierome
in the life of Malchus.
did complain sometimes, yt when the power was usurped by the prelates of the
Church: that the Church being increased in goods and riches, has been also
diminished and made weak in virtues, things much more dampnable and contrary
to our religion, as the word of the Apostle does admonish and teach us that
the weapons of our war are not carnal things but things mighty in God, to
cast down strong holds, 2. Cor. 10. b
wherewith we overthrow imaginations, and every hie thing that exalts it
self against the knoweledge of GOD. And very well a certain ancient author
said, that the Church does not know the corporal weapons, and that for her
only aid and help she does patiently abide and tarry patiently the Lords
leisure when it will please him to have pity on her, Le Can. porro. 16 cause.
que. S. Amb.
to the same end a Bishop of the Church of Rome said. When I shall be
compelled, I may not resist: I may besorrie, I may weep and lament: against
the armies and weapons of the men of Gotia, my tears and weepinges are my
weapons. Behold says that good author, the munitions and weapons of priests,
otherwise I can neither speak against, nor resist. Now for as much as our
enemies do go about and endeavor themselves to maintain their Religion by
fire and sword, threatenings and bands, they do sufficiently declare that they
cannot assure it by the scripture. Exo. 1. and 2
Even as king Pharao desiring to reign over the people of God, fearing that he
should not tread underfoot all other nations, did lay upon them importable
burdens, and at the last, caused to be killed all the first borne of the
people of Israel. Even so (I say) as Herod being troubled for the homage and
obedience yt men did bear unto Jesus Christ, Mat. 2 c
of his nativity, and considering the promises of the savior of the world
accomplished and fulfilled in him, did slaye all the children that were in
Bethelem, and in all the coasts thereof, as many as were two year old and
under, fearing least that the advancement of the kingdom of Christ should be
the ruin of other people. Behold the end of those which have no regard what
become of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, so that they may establish and set up
their puissaunce and greatness to the end they may reign and bear rule in
this world. Mat. 6. d.
But the meaning of the true christians is altogether otherwise, forasmuch then
as they do seek first ye kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof. Yet
they care not what their authority, power and greatness be, so that the word
of God have his free passage, and the name of the Lord be glorified. For that
same reason they put not their hope and strength in carnal weap^ns, but in
spiritual. Their sword is the word of God, Heb. 4. ^
quick and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and
enters through even unto the dividing asunder of the soul and of the
spirit, and of the joints and the marie: and judges the thoughts and
intentes of the heart. Their victory is that, 1. John 5.
that overcomes the world, eue^ our faith, by the which (as says the Apostle
unto the Hebrews). Hebr. 11. f
The ancient fathers, patriarks and Apostles, have subdued kingdoms, wrought
righteousness, obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of ye Lions: Apo. 2.
e
And as Jesus Christ said, that he will fight against his enemies with the
swoorde of his mouth. Ier. 1 b
Also he does give power and strength unto his, in the virtue and power of his
word to root out, break off, destroy and make wast, to build up and plant,
as he promised in Jeremy, and afterward confirmed by the mouth of his son,
sending his Apostles through out the whole world. Then let all those be
confounded and put to shame which do think to abolish the true christian
religion by force of arms, or with a great company of people, or by
threateninges.

Tertulian in his book of the persecution in ye flyinge to Scupula.
For as an ancient author has very well written, that it is no religion to
constrain the religion, the which men ought to receive with a willing heart,
our religion cannot be forced and constrained by force of arms, but by
words. As for us because that the Gospel has been preached throughout the
whole world, Lactanciu. lib. 5. ca. 20
among the horrible persecutions of the martyrs, and that the blood of them
has been the seed of the Church, yea, that the Church is come to her
perfection and greatness, S. Augus^^^^ li. 18. of the city of god Tertulian.
Saint H^erome in ye life of Malchus.
by those persecutions, and has been crowned by the punishments and witnesses
of the true faithful christians: we do make it no doubt to maintain and
defend our religion, by the same means by the which she has been
established, I do mean by patience and gentleness: in such sort that
although that our enemies do yet murmr, yet we are assured that the gates of
hell shall not overcome us, Psalm 69. b Man ^6 c
forasmuch as the church is the house of God, the pyller and ground of truth.
1. Tim 3. d
We do believe also that the persecutions which we do suffer, do not serve
for any other thing, then to witness the tyranny and cruelty of our enemies,
and to assure more and more, the verity of our doctrine, in our constantnesse
and patience.

Even as the persecution of Lot did figure none other thing but the utter
subversion of the City of Sodom. Genes. 19. ^
The affliction of the Israelites did declare and teach none other thing, Exo.
1. d
but the wast and destruction of the people of Egypt to be nigh at hand:
Lamen. 4 a
To conclude the blood of ye prophets did demonstrate and declare the
vengeance of God, upon that city of Jerusalem, so goodly and excelent:
According to that which is said in Jesus the son of Siraach, Eccles. 10. a
that because of unrighteous dealing, wrong, blasphemies, and diverse deceites,
a realm shall be translated from one people to an other. Phil. 1. b
And saint Paul does show and declare that the things which have happened
unto him are turned to the great furthering of the Gospel: So that his bands
in Christ were famous through out all the judgment hall, and in all other
places. Insomuch that many of the brethren in the Lord were boldened through
his bands, and dare more franckly speak the word. I do speak unto those which
do think to abolysh the true christian religion, by the blood of the
faithful, as some which are so mad and senseless, willing to quench the
fire, do put into it oil. Luc. 12. f
For the Lord is come to send fire on the earth: And what desires he more but
that it be kindled. If he himself has embraced it in the hearts of the
faithful, who shall quench it? Finally, Romans 8. g
who shall separate them from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish,
or persecution, either hunger, either nakedness, either peril, either sword?
God forbid: for in the same they are more the^ vanquished, by him which has
loved them. Wherefore those are to much deceived which do thinck by some
means whatsoever it be, to put out and quench in us that light and knowledge
of Christ, and celestial verity, and do not consider that sure love is
mighty as the death, and gelousie as the hell, Canci. 8. b
her coals are of fire, and a very flame of the Lord: so yt many waters are
not able to quench love, neither may the streams drown it. Here some will
say unto me, that the doing of the religion ought to maintain it self, not
by force of arms, but by patience and meekness: who have moved and stirred
up those of the reformed religion, to put themselves with force and arms
against the tyranny of their enemies? I do answer that as it was lawefull
by the old law for the people of God, to take weapons against the
Philistians, Moabites, Madianites and other nations contrary unto the people
of the Jews, then for that they were forced and constrained of them in their
religion, persons or goods. Also it has not been less lawful unto those
of the reformed religion: having express commandment of the king to keep
and defend by weapons, that which has been concluded and determined so holily,
by the privy counsel for the doing of the religion and the ecclesiastical
policy: Inasmuch as all was confirmable and agreeing to gods law and
express commandment of the king, who did aduowe them to do the same, by
many letters and writings. Even as David did take the weapons against Goliath,
1. Reg. 17. a
forcing and troubling the people of God. Judge. 7. a
And Gedeon did rise up against the Madianites for to deliver his people.
Judith against Holophernes willing altogether to destroy and exterminate the
Jews. Judith. 13


Furthermore, if the war be lawefull, as it appears, that the LORD did
allow so many wars of the Israelites. And our LORD Jesus Christ did not
despise the estate of the soldiers, Mat. 8. a. Luc. 7. b
and of the Centurian. In the Gospel, chiefly and principally in two things,
weapons may be lawefull: As king Alphonsus does very well declare, yt is to
say, for the law and for the flock, I do mean for the religion, and the
tuition of his person and of his subjects, and for that the consciences, the
bodies and the goods have been forced and compelled every where: and that
there was no more redyer help for to remedy that disease, then to take
weapons: Not without cause then we following the express commandment of the
king, and the advice of the best reformed Churches, together with the counsel
of the most learned strangers of the realm, have taken the weapons, for to
withstand such injuries and violences, pretending none other thing, but the
honor of GOD, the advancement of his kingdom, and the health of his: with
the preservation of the scepter of our king. Which if the Painim or Heathen man
has written, Cicero li. 1. of his ofices
that men ought to take weapons, to the end that without wrong they may live
in peace: In such sort that the intent of those which do carry them, is
none other thing, but to seek peace. Who shall be so shameless or mad that
dare say that it is evil done, to have vpholden and maintained by weapons the
assaults and force of our enemies for to live in rest, both of our goods and
of our consciences? Furthermore, if those children of the Machabeans are
praised to have constantly suffered death, for to maintain the laws of their
country: shall it be compted unto us dishonor and shame to have bestowed our
life and our goods, for to maintain the lawefull and christian laws of the
king? Cicero in his oration for Clement Saint, Augustine in his book of the
city of God.
Without the which (as the body without the soul) a common wealth can not
long endure and continue, as being destitute of her parts and her sinews:
yea, without them, the kingdoms are none other thing, but the very harbor of
thieves, runnagates and robb^rs. As it is written of Lycurgus, Xenophon in his
4 bok of the sayings and doings ^f Socrates Esaias. 30. d
that he could find no greater means to make the City of Sparta to flourish,
then to accustom the inhabitauntes thereof to obey laws. Finally it is
welknowen that in quietness and hope our strength does lie, stayinge our
strengthes have patiently attended, even until ye blood of ye true christians,
shed out every where, and in the best towns of the realm, does command us to
repulse and stand against such cruelties, forces and tira^nies, and we have not
taken that upon us for any ambition, desire of glory, private profit or
desire of vengeance: But for the zeal of the Lords house, of the which those
godly persons, Moses, Hely, Iehu, Mattathias, Math. 21. b John. 2. b.
and Jesus Christ our savior being godly moved, could not suffer that of the
Lords house, they should make a house of merchandise and a den of thieves.
On ye other side al men do know yt our enemies have taken those weapons, of
their own proper and private authority: willing to force and constrain
against their own consciences ye divine and human laws, and to defile the
name of the Lord, and to oppress ye just. To conclude, what other thing has
moved them to invade and strive against us, but a desire to hurt, a greediness
and ardency of vengeance, a courage and desire against us, and an unreconciled
hatred and enmity, an unlawful affection to speak against the edictes and
statutes of the king, a desire to reign and bear rule: things most damnable
in matters of war, as saint Augustine does write. Seint Augustine in his
book against Faustus Mam^ius.
Whereby our enemies do sufficiently declare their slanderous and wicked
faith. When they do accuse us to be rebels against the king, our natural
and sovereign Prince: and of that only point they themselves do uncover and
show sufficiently a rebellion, which have despised the Edictes and statutes of
the king, they do exercise still daily their cruelties and tyrannies toward
the faithful. Which thing if the great men (especially those which are in
degree and dignity of a maiestrate and gouernoure? do vaunce and brag
themselves to be so obedient and faithful servants of the king, how do
they dissemble and cloak such cruelties without providing by the rigor of
justice and severity of their laws? Rom 13. a.
And wherefore do they bear the word? If it be not to take vengeance on them
that do evil? If they do say that they can not resist the force and strength
of a people so furious and mad, I would demand of them willingly, who has
moved them to put weapon in the hands of a people so foolysh and rash: except
it be to give them liberty to do all kind of evil? Or wherefore do they
now make any doubt to forsake the weapons: especially in this time so quiet
and full of tranquillity, but for because that their consciences does accuse
them of so many murders and robberies? Sapien. 17. ^
For it is an heavy thing when a man's own conscience bears record of his
wickedness and condemns himself. And why? a vexed and wounded conscience,
takes over cruel things in hand. Fearfulness is nothing else, but a
declaring that man seeks help and defense to answer for himself. If they
do replye that some of our own country men have had since the Edictes and
statutes of the king, the weapons ready in their hands, I do answer that
that was not to abuse it to things unlawful or to let or hinder the office of
a magistrate, as our adversaries do daily, shedding of their own head and
authority the innocent blood, and do put them by force and violence to the
punishment of the seditious and rebels. But to the contrary that by that
means the ordinances and statutes of the king which should be kept, and the
good defended from injuries and oppressions of ye wicked: leding a quiet and
peaceable life, 1. Tim. 2. ^
in all godliness and honesty. Titus. 2. d
Finally to the end that we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this
present world, looking for that blessed hope and notable appearing of the
glory of the mighty God, which is of our savior Jesus Christ, unto whom be
glory for ever, Amen.

Psalm. 33. c. The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught, and
makes the devises of the people to be of none effect. But the counsel of the
Lord shall endure for ever, and the thoughts of his heart from generation to
generation. Esaie. 8. b. Go together ye people, and gather you, harken too, ye
all of far countries. Muster you, and gather you: Take your counsel
together. Yet must your counsel come to naught: Go in hand with all, yet
shall it not prosper except that God be with us. A Prayer.
O Lord which art wonderful in counsel, and excellent in all thy works,
turn thee again I pray thee, Psalm. 80. ^
look down from heaven, and behold and visit thy ^^ne, and the place of the
vineyarde that thy right h^^de has planted: and the branch that ^hou made
so strong for thy self. Iere. 31. e Math. 2. b
Behold the weeping and crying of that poor Rachel and of those which are
killed and put to death for thy name. Show forth thy puissaunce and might
among the midst of that mad and furious people, break their counsel by the
force and strength of thy right hand, as thou did break the enterprises of
these which would build the tower of Babel: Genes. 11. ^
as (I say) thou have abated the pride of Pharao, Exodus 14. d
pursuing and following after thy people. To conclude, Daniel. 14. b
of one Nabuchodonosor which did rise up against thee, that every one should
know that the work which thou have begun in us, in this mean exercise of
reliligion, is not a work or counsel of men, which may incontinent come to
naught: but a work which thou have prepared for thy glory, for to endure for
ever. Act. ^. ^
Ouerthorow the apointments and deceipts of those which of a set purpose do
go about and enforce themselves by all means to hinder the free passage of
thy word, as thou have broken the counsel of Achitophel, 2. Reg. 17. a
and brought to naught the bold and vnshamelesse pride and ambition of Haman,
Hester. 7
conspyring the death of Mardocheus and of the Jews. Cause that the enemies of
the truth, seeing thy wonderful works may acknowledge how precious the
death of the righteous are in thy sight: yea, may confess with heart and
mouth, that the blood of them is the true seed and increasinge of the kingdom
of thy son. Tertulian. Saint Hierome in the life of Malchus. Apo. 1. d
And that they may worship him as the first borne among the dead, and prince
of the kings of the earth, our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for
ever, Amen.

A BRIEF ADVERTISMENT, wherein is declared that the true Christians ought to
avoid parcialities and contentions, and to keep the unity of the spirit
through the band of peace. Cap. 7.
Philip. I. d. Continue in one spirit and in one mind, fighting altogether
through the faith of the gospel, and in nothing fear your adversaries.
FOrasmuch as the Scripture does teach us, 1. Cor. 14. f
that God is not the God of confusion but of peace. And that the Gospel of the
Christians is called by the Prophet, the message of peace. Esaias. 52. b
And the christian church the congregation of saints which do live in the
peace of God. Insomuch that the propht Esaie speaking of the church of God,
says, Esaias. 66. d
that God will let peace into her, as a water flood, and the might of ye
heathen as a flowing stream. And in Baruch Baruch. 5. b
ye god shall name his church with this name, that is to say, the peace of
righteousness and the honor of gods fear. Finally, 1. Timot. 3. d
forasmuch as the Church of GOD is the pillar and stay of gods truth, Ephe. 4.
a Rom 15. a
truly they may know plainly how we ought to be all diligent to keep
the unity of ye spirit through the band of peace, to the end that we all
agreeing together may after the ensample of Jesus Christ with one mouth (as
says Saint Paul) praise G^D which is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Ephe. 4. c
And that we hence forth be no more as children wavering and carried about with
every wind of doctrine. But let us follow the truth with love, and in all
things grow up in to him, which is the head, yt is to say, Christ. On the other
side we are taught to avoid as much as we may possible, the debates and
contentions of the law, and the parcialities touching the doing of the
religion. 1. Cor. 1. b
According as Saint Paul did exhort the Corinthians, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that they all speak one thing, and that there be no discentions
among them: But that they be knit together in one mind and in one judgment,
that they do continue of all one mind: al fighting of one courage by faith.
And also he did warn and admonish the Philippians Philip. 2. a
that they be like minded, having the self same love, being of one accord
and of one judgment, that nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but
that in meekness of mind, every man esteem other better then himself. On
the other side he writes unto Titus, that he do suppress foolish questions,
Titus. 3. c
and genelogies and brawling, and strife about the law, as vain and
superfluous. Also the same Saint Paul does complain to ye Philippians, Philip.
1. b
that some there are which preach Christ of envy and strife, and not purely.
Also in his second Epistle to the Corinthians he says, 2. Cor. 1. d
that he and Siluianus have preached unto you Gods son Jesus Christ, not in
double word, yea, and nay: but in this word which is true, that is to say,
yea. The same Apostle does give unto us the reason of this doctrine, 1. Tim. 6.
b
when he says that questions and strife of words, do engender envy, strife,
railings, evil furmising vain, disputations of men with corrupt minds. And
says also in an other place, 1. Cor. 3. a
yt if there be enuy^ng, strife, and sects among us, we do declare that we are
carnal, and walk after ye manner of men. For verily he that is contentious in
ye church, especially touching the doing of the religion, he sins many ways.

First, in that he breaks the unity of the Christian Church, which ought to
be united and joined together: not only by natural conjunction and amity,
but also by unity of doctrine. For as Jesus Christ says, John. 13. d
that by this, shall al men know that we are his disciples, if we have love
one to an other. Romans 16. c
Also saint Paul does warn us to beware of them which cause division and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which they have learned, and avoid them.
Consequently he which is contencious in the church concerning the doctrine or
doing of the religion. Collos. 1. ^
First of all he sins against Jesus Christ, which is the head of the
Christian church, and prince of peace (as says the prophet) inasmuch as he
has reconciled all things unto himself, and to set at peace through the
blood of his cross, both things in earth and things in heaven. Secondly, he
does give occasion unto the simple and foolish people to err and go astray
from the christian Church, in the which does lie and rest the pillar of our
salvation.

And that the same is greatly odious and hateful unto God, Jesus Christ does
teach and declare it, when he says, Luc. 17. a
Woe be unto him through whom offenses come, it were better for him that a
great millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the sea,
then yt he should offend one of these little ones. The which his Apostle does
confirm, showing unto the Galathians, Galat. 5. b
that he that troubles them, shall bear his condemnation, whosoever he be,
and desires that they that trouble them, may be cut off from them. Finally, he
does give occasion unto strangers, and enemies of our religion, to blame the
name of God. Mala. 1. b
According as the prophet did rebuke the governors and priests of the house
of Israel, that they have caused the multitude to be offended at the law. Rom
2. d
And Saint Paul writing unto the Romans, says, that the name of God is evil
spoken off, among the Gentiles through them. And by good right, a certain
ancient author did complain, S. Hierome upon the 4 chapter of Ezechiel.
that we many ways in the church do tear and rent Gods coat through our
contentions, the which the Soldiers durst not divide in his passion: the
which did move sometime the Jews (as Clement Alexandrinus does witness) to
swell and rise up even there, Clement li 7. stro.
against ye Christians, to say yt the Christian religion was not of God: but
some pernicious sect and false religion. Because that the Christians had
debates and contentions in the church. For the same occasion, that great
heriticke Celsus, and chiefest enemy of the christians, Origene li. 3. against
Celius.
did rebuke daily the christians of their divisions and parcialities, saying:
that it were not expedient that they should grow and increase to any more
greater number. Because that being but a few in number, they would be of one
accord and agree well together: but as soon as they did multiply and wax
many, they would fall into diversities of opinions. Also Samosetanus in ye
ecclesiastical history does witness, Samosus in the ecclesiastical history.
that the Emperor Constantine did suffer very impatiently the controversies
and contentions of the christians, saying that by that means they do turn many
men from the christian religion. Unto whom Themistus, a christian Philosopher
answered, that the differences and controversies of the christians were
nothing, in respect of the confusion of the sect of the Gentiles. Also the same
author says moreover, that for certain small contentions which do chance
and happen to the churches, the church must not therefore leave and forsake the
principal foundation of the true religion, nor to be ye true churches: but yt
by that means the Lord does try and prove the hearts of many, and does
declare and make plain the verity of the christian doctrine, as it is said,
that there must be even heresies among us, that they which are perfect among
us might be known. 1. Cor. 11. d
By that means we will not here deny, but that always there has been some
small contention in the doctrine, as it appeared, that for the same cause was
the counsel of the Apostles assembled together. Act. 15. c
To conclude the scripture does declare, the difference which was offered
between Peter and Paul Apostles. And the Christian histories do make mention
of some little controversies concerning the doing of the religion, between
Peter Alexandrinus and Myletus Epiphanius, and Chrysostom, Hierome and
Augustine: but we do exhort the Christians not to abuse the gifts of GOD,
through vain glory or contention, for to be seen and esteemed the one above
the other. On the other side to humble them selves under the wisdom of him
which has said, that he has not determined with himself to know any other
thing, 1. Cor. 2. a
save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 1. Cor. 41. d
And in an other place of the same Epistle he says, be assured that the
kindome of God is not in words, but in ye power of the spirit. Now the remedy
and help in such differences (as Cyprian Cyprian in his epistle ^o Pompey
says is to have recourse to ye beginning of Jesus Christ and of his gospel
and to the tradition of the Apostles. Cyprian li. 2. epistle 3.
To the end that from thence may rise and come forth the reason of our doing,
whereof the order has taken his beginning, For inasmuch as Jesus Christ ought
to be heard above all, we ought not to consider that which some have done
before us: But that which Jesus Christ has done and observed, which is before
all. Saint Augustine lib. of baptism against the Donatistes.
Insomuch that we must cast all the counsels, opinions and definitions of men
unto the holy scriptures, and in ye to depose and put down all hautinesse,
arrogancy and envious contencion: and where it shall happen that the holy
scripture has nothing concluded and determined: In that case they ought to
follow the manner and fashion of the most ancient Churches, with whom the
Apostles have been conversant: To conclude, Ireneus li. ^ cap. 41
when the tradition of ye apostles do fail, they must believe the tradition of
the churches, which have been ruled and governed be the disciples and
successors of the Apostles, or those which have had charge of them: behold
how they ought to resolve the doubts and controversies which are in ye
Churches, rather then by vain disputations and unprofitable contentions, which
do serve to none other end but to engender strifes. And it makes me afraid,
how that in these latter days, for the ignorance, and calamity of the time,
they have thought to declare and expound the dark places of the scripture,
and the debates moved in the Church, by questions of natural Philosophy,
rather then by the scripture rightly understood and applied unto his true
sense. Colos. 2. b
Also Saint Paul does admonish and warn us to beware least any man come
and spoil us through Philosophy, and deceitful vanity, through the
traditions of men, according to the ordinances of the world, and not after
Christ. Also since ye Apostles Tertulian Tertulian in his book of the soul
S. Hierome in his epistles.
an ancient author, has called the Philosophers the patriarchs of heriticks.
Also Saint Hierome has confessed that the opinions of heritickes are found
among the subtilties of Aristotle and of Crisippus. I will content my self at
this time with the witness of a certain Philosopher (whereof mention is made
in the counsel of Nyce) who being won and brought to the christian
religion: Eusebius. li to of his ecclesiastical history cap. 3
yea, without any kind of disputation by a poor, simple and foolish man (as
the text says) and being asked, how the same was happened unto him, forasmuch
as before the most learned men of the counsel could not va^quish and overcome
him by disputations and natural philosophy, answered, that as long as they
did speak against him, by subtlety of reasones, he knew very well to
answer to the arguments of his adversaries, by the same means: But when the
virtue was manifested unto him by the mouth of him which has pronounced it,
the words could not resist virtue, nor man could speak against God.

The same does learn us, first of all to submit our selves unto the ancient
church and best reformed, as it is said in Saint John, John. 10. ^
my sheep hear my voice.

Secondly, not to do any thing, Philip. 2. a
through envy, contention, or vain glory, but to bear with a patient mind,
one an other, in all meekness and humility.

Thirdly, not to presume so much, that they would apply and refer the
christian doctrine, or rule the doing of our religion, to man's philosophy:
but to bring it again to the true beginning and original of the Scripture and
to the traduction of Jesus Christ and of his successors.

Finally, to believe, that although that the slanders and herisies do come
and happen unto the church, as well for the advancement of Gods glory, as for
to prove and try the true faithful christians: yet truly he which is the
causer thereof shall bear the condemnation.

Wherefore inasmuch as the scripture does teach us, Act. 4. g
that the multitude of them that believed in the primative church were of one
heart and of one soul, and that from thence we have taken the beginning of our
religion and doctrine, going about and endeuouringe our selves as much as in us
is possible, and according to the portion and measure of the gifts and graces
which we have received of the Lord, to make our selves agreeable and
confirmable to that ancient church: insomuch that we being all of one mind,
2. Cor. 1^. d
may live in peace and love in the which we are called, and the God of love and
peace shall be with us. Amen.

GALATH. 5. c. If we do bite and devour one another: let us take heed least
we be consumed one off another. A prayer.
1. Cor. 14. f
O Lord, which art not the God of confusion, but of peace: yea which have
taught us by thy well-beloved son that every kingdom divided within it self,
Luc. 11. c
John. 13. d
shall be desolate. Give us grace that we all being united by one love and unity
of doctrine, our enemies may know, that not only we are the true disciples of
thy son: But that they may witness by works, that the church, Ephe. 4. a
to the which thou have incorporated us by one faith, one baptism, one God and
father of all that believe, is the true christian church, and the pillar and
stay of the truth: 1. Tim. 3. b
to the end that we all being joined together in love and in all riches of the
certitude of understanding: Collo. 2. b
may increase in thy knowledge, and be joined altogether as lively stones,
Ephe. 2. ^
for to be made an holy temple. Offering unto thee a sacrifice of praise, that
is, Heb. 13. e
ye fruit of our lips confessing his name. Through our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory for ever, Amen.

THAT IT IS THE DVETIE of a chrstian prince, to watch and take good heed that
the estate of the religion do abide and continue undefiled and impoluted, as
well in the true serving of God, as in the dispensation of his word. Cap. 8.
IF that king David be so much praised in the scripture, 2. Reg. 6 1. Cro. 15
and 16
because he prepared a place for the Ark of God, and ordained Leuits for to
serve: to make remembrance, to confess and praise the Lord for ever. ^. Reg.
6.
And Solomon his son is honored and praised of all nations, because he
builded and consecrated unto the Lord that proud and sumpteous temple of
Jerusalem: 4. Reg. 18 and 22
To conclud if the remembrance of those good kings Ezechias and Josias, does
endure and continue for ever: because they have forgotten nothing, nor spared
any thing to cleanse the Temple of the Lord from all idolatry and superstition
of the Gentiles: have destroyed the aulters of the Balamites, broken their
images, and commanded the people to read the book of Gods, appointment, and
to keep all the ordinances of God. Truly the true christian princes ought to
acknowledge and believe, that their duty is not only to establishe the true
religion, but also to have regard and a respect that the Temple of God do
abide and continue impolluted and undefiled from all kind of Idolatry and
man's supersticion. That is the cause wherefore the scripture does command so
often the children of Israel to honor God in his temple, and to abstain and
refrain themselves from the merchandise, company and society of the
uncircumcised people. For as the church is the spouse for God, 2. Cor. 11. ^
and a pure and chaste virgin, forasmuch truly as the son of God, is
delivered up of her: So he would that she should be kept unto him
irreprehensible, holy and glorious, as well for the regard of the true service
which is due, as for the respect that they ought to have to his word and usage
of the Sacraments ordained in the Church. And to that end are repeated so often
in ye scripture those two precepts, that is to say, Exo. 20. a
Thou shall have none others Gods in my sight, for I am a gelous God. And this
ye shall not do, every man that seems good in his own eyes: But
whatsoever I command you, that take heed ye do: and put naught thereto, nor
take ought therfro, declaring by those two precepts, that they ought not to
mingle the service of God, with the service of so many false gods or of
creatures: nor to join and compare the commandments of God to the traditions
of men. Iere. 7. b
For that occasion the Lord did complain of his people, that, they had polluted
his temple by a false service: and that their silver was turned to dross, Esaias
1. f
and their wine mixed with water. And Jesus Christ did declare unto the Scribes,
and Pharisees, Math. 25. a
that they did transgress the commandments through their traditions.
Beehold as I think whereunto chiefly the Christian Princes ought to endeavor
themselves, that is to say, to purge and cleanse the temple of God from a false
service, for to establish the true Religion, and to foresee and provide yt the
Christian doctrine be purely declared, and that it be not defiled with so many
of men's traditions. I will recite for this matter two examples, the first shall
be of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, Ptolome. Philades.
who caused the books of the Hebrews to be translated in to ye Greek for to
advance the religion of the people of God and his doctrine: and furthermore
did remit and set at liberty the Jews, which then were captives in Egypt. The
second, is of Constantine the Emperor, Constantin Emperor.
which did rise up for the quarrel of the christians, against Licinius Caesar:
willing to compel and force all the world to follow ye laws of ye Painyms.
Insomuch that Constantine having vanquished Licinius, not only caused the state
of the Religion to be established: but also the deed of Justice, which before
was subverted and marred through the tyranny and cruelty of Dioclesian,
Maximinian, Maximinius, and Mazentius, his predecessors. And truly in this
duty the christian princes cannot excuse themselves, for if they are so
diligent to foresee and provide that their Towns and Cities be not taken by
their enemies: shall not this be their estate to be careful and diligent,
that Gods temple do abide and continue impoluted and undefiled with Idolatry
and human superstition, if that be the property of a virtuous Prince to
watch diligently, that his subjects be kept under his obedience without
oppression and injury: shall not this be the true duty of a Christian
prince, Iere. 50. d Apo. ^7. a
to keep that his subjects be not hurt with the hammer of the whole world,
nor that they do not drink in that cup of gould of that great Babylon the
mother of fornication, and be drunk with the wine of her fornication: To
conclude, if the Christian princes are so curious and careful to beware that
their subjects be not given to wickedness and turned from their obedience by
strangers, Gene. 34. a
(as of late was Dina the daughter of Jacob) shall not they be careful that
they be not seduced and led here and there by strange doctrines? Heb. 13. b
The spouse of the Lord does cry out in the book of ye Canticles of Solomon.
Can. 2. d
Saying, get ye Foxes, yea, the little Foxes that hurt the vines, whilst that
the vines do bear blossoms. The Prophet Ezechiel does complain, saying, O
Israel, thy prophets are like ye Foxes upon the dry field. And the christian
princes will suffer so many false priests which devour widows houses: and
that under a color of praying long pray^rs. And of others, which peruerte
whole houses, Titus. 1. ^
teaching things which they ought not because of filthy lucre: Insomuch yt
those which ought to preach a gospel of peace, do preach a message of trouble
and sedition among the Christians: Those which ought to weep and be sorry for
the sins of the people, do rejoice to see every where the blood of the true
Chrstians shead: Those which do take the quality of the Apostles, and do
vaunce and boast themselves to be as sheep among wolves: wise (I say) as
serpents and innocent as doves, Mat. 7. b.
do devour the sheep and doves of the Lord. Mat. 10. d
Those unto whom the Lord has not sent for a sword but his word, do arm
themselves for to suppress his word and the kingdom of his well-beloved son
our Lord Jesus Christ. Luc. 9. ^
Those unto whom ye Lord commanded to take nothing to succor them by the
way: neither staff nor scrip, neither bread neither money, neither to have two
coats: do heap up infinite treasures, for to afflict and trouble the people
of God: Math. 23. c
They do tithe the Mint, Annise and Commin, and leave the weightier matters of
the law undone: judgment, mercy and faith. Iere. 2. c
Be astonished (O ye heavens) be afraid and abashed at such a thing: Those
which do boast and brag themselves to be lawful successors, of those good
ancient fathers, do make it a conscience to transgress the least of the
commandments of men: And do make it no conscience under color of true
religion, to bring to utter ruin and destruction the children of God. And
they dare not (as they say) to be found faulty in one small fault fearing to
lose their prebendes dignities and prerogatives, and in the mean time do make
it no conscience to be found daily with conspiracies and threatenings, for to
put an whole realm in a pray, and for to shed as water the innocent blood. O
time: O manners: the prince does understand it: the Senate does see it. And
yet nevertheless such good Lords do live, (what said I) live: yea, do sit
in counsel, which if they are so curious to mark the dooinges of their
fathers for to serve them in their own dooinges. They will remember very well
the saying of Saint Ambrose, S. Ambrose Can. porro 16. Cause quest 3.
being printed and set in their Canons, that is to say, that the true
munitions of Gods ministers, are weepings and tears. Insomuch that this good
author does cry so often, that being forced and constrained he may sigh and
weep, otherwise he cannot resist: In such sort that he did not determine to
take for his weapons against the injuries of the men of Gotia, 8. Ambrose canon
con. 23. cans question 5.
but his weepings and his tears, I will not here refer the doing of Moses,
Hely and Iehu (unto our time) and of an especial and particular act to make a
general rule among ye christian princes, for to arm and move them unto some
kind of cruelnesse against so many false priests. I do accord with them that
they do keep the zeal of them, and leave the deed such as it is: So that
according to the example of Jesus Christ, king of kings, and Lord of Lords,
John. 2. c
they do cast out of the christian Church, so many marchaunts and hired
priests, 1. Reg. 3. c
and do not suffer that of Gods house, they do make it a market or a den of
thieves. For even as Ely was grievously punished, for hiding and coueringe the
sins of his children: Also it is to be feared that the like do not chance
and happen unto those which are establyshed by the LORD, for to maintain and
keep the estate of the religion, and in the mean time do suffer freely and
unpunished the sins of the pastors and teachers of the people, and it is to
be feared but that the Lord will send in the end, that which is spoken of in
Ezechiell, Ezech. 3.
that is to say, calamity upon calamity, cry upon cry: that the law of the
priest do not perish, and the counsel of the elders. As the same Lord did
menace and threaten his people in an other place of the Prophet saying, Agge.
1. c
that he will forbid the heaven to give them any dew, and the earth to give
them increase. And will call for a drouth upon the earth, both upon the land
and upon the mountains, upon every thing that the ground brings, upon men
and upon cattle, yea, and upon al handie labor. Because says he, that his
house lies so wast, and that every man runs to his own house. The Lord
showing and declaring the fault and ingratitude of those which for to
understand the affairs and doings of this world, do negligentlie pass
their duty in that which apperteineth unto ye affairs of the religion. They
cannot abide that any thing should be attempted, either in deed or word,
against their persons or goods. And they do not think it strange to
crucify Jesus Christ, for to save a thief and a seditious Barrabas: or for to
cut off the head of John Baptist for to gratify and please the desire of
others. Have not, have not then (O ye christian princes) regard: to the
brightness and magnificence of the Romish Church: And believe not lightly all
lying spirits. 1. John. 4 a
But prove the spirits whether they are of God or not, for many false
prophets are gone out into the world, and way not the doing of ye religion to
the opinion of the common people: But to the word of God according to the which
the Lord would be served and honored, and not according to the minds of men.
Forasmuch the^ as such professors of the truth do go in sheep clothing and
inwardly are ravening wolves. Also do show outwardly in their temples, some
appearaunce of religion (as of late ye Egyptians did) yet in the mean time
under color of devotion, Similitude of Clement Alexandrinus.
do worship the creatures and works of their hands. And forasmuch as the
Lord hy his prophet does call you Noursses of his church: chase and drive away
from his sheepefolde, so many unprofitable and hired sheepheardes: Esaias. 49. f
And in their place, send workmen approved, workmen that need not to be
ashamed, which do divide the word of truth justly. 2. Tim. 2 ^
Cause that those which do profess to teach, do put from them foolish and
unlearned questions, 2. Tim. 2. d 1. Tim. 1. a
and that they do nothing in declining to one side: To conclude that they do
not give heed to ieerish fables and genealogies, nor to the commandments of
men, for to turn them from the truth, but that they do handle the word
purely, and as by God, before God: by Christ, not through envy, contention or
discord: But purely as those which are constituted for the defense of the
gospel. In that doing (as says Saint Paul of the true ministers of the
church) you shall save your selves, 1. Tim. 4. d
and those that do here the word, Amen.

2. Paralip. 29. a. Ezechias caused the Levites and priests to come, and
assembled the^ together into the East street. And said unto them, here me ye
Levites, purify your selves and halow the house of the Lord God of your
fathers, and bring out the filthiness out of the holy place. A Prayer.
O Lord in whom are the riches and honors and which reignest over all: 1.
Paral. 29 c
in whose hand are power and strength, and greatness and empire unto all
things: which prouest the hearts, and have pleasure in plainness, Psalm. 72. a
and disposest the thoughts of the hearts of the people. Give thy judgments and
thy justice unto the king whom thou have established over us, to the end that
he may justly command thy people to keep thy law. Prepare so our hearts,
that we living under his obedience in all sanctity and righteousness, may
worship thee also with one will in spirit and truth, John. 4. c Deuteronomy. 12. a
not doing that, that seems good in our own eyes: but that which is
agreeable unto thee, and that which thou commaundest us. To the end that by
that means all the world may know yt the same yt thou have of late forespoken
or prophesied of thy church, be verified in us: that is to say ye kings shall be
the nursing fathers of thy people, Esaias. 49. f
and queens shall be their noursing mothers for to norish and feed them of
spiritual meat: John. 4. e
of which thy well-beloved son said, yt his meat was to do the will of him ye
sent him, our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom be glory for ever.

THAT IT IS THE RENOWN of a Christian prince, to be beloved of his Subjects.
Cap. 9.
Siraac in his Ecclesiast. 6. c. A faithful friend is a strong defense.
Luc. 11. e.
FOrasmuch then as every kingdom divided within it self shall be desolate:
And every house divided within it self shall fall one upon an other. And
experience does teach us, Salust.
besides ye saying of ye Painim, yt through concord and amity, little things
become great, and the great do perish. Salust in ye w^rre of iugurth.
It is most certain and true yt the assurance of a kingdom consists not
only in an army or number of people, no more then-the force of a king in his
royal scepter: But in the amity and obedience that his subjects do owe unto
him. Xenophon lib 8. of his pedie
And very well the historiographer says, when he did write that sport or
pleasure is not durable, wherein one is established and set in by sword. ^^int
Cur ^. 8.
According to that another does teach, that those do abuse themselves greatly
which do think better to assure the realm by force then by amity.
Terentius.
Even so Theopompus being asked how a king may easelie keep a kingdom:
Plutarch (...) of his Ap^theg.
answered, if he do suffer his friends to speak freely of laweful things:
Isocrates in his precept yt he wrote unto the princes. Cicero li. 1 of his
offices.
And that he do right and justice unto those which are wicked and evil. For
he which is much feared cannot choose but that he have many enemies: For as it
is contained in a common proverb, men do hate willingly those whom they do
fear: and they do desire gladly the death of him whom they hate. We must
conclude that the most rediest means for to keep a realm, is to keep the
people under his obedience, by gentleness and amity. Pro. 20. d.
According as Solomon does write. That mercy and faithfulness preserve the
king, and with loving kindness his seat is holden up. Furthermore I will not
occupy my mind to search the examples of profane histories. All men do
know very well how the kingdoms of Dauyd and Solomon his son have
prospered in respect of those of Pharao, Saul and Nabuchodonosor. As the Lord
does witness unto us of Saul, Oseas. ^3. c.
that he has given him in his wrath, and in his displeasure will take him
away again. But as that is not mercy to desire one so great gentleness:
because that mercy ought to govern her self with all righteousness, Psalm.
29. a
equity and justice: Forasmuch as with true judgment the king sets up the
land, and the Lord does establish the seat of him which does judge the poor
in virtue.

Psalm. 45. b.
To conclude that the scepter of the kingdom of GOD is a right scepter: To be
short as he which sits in the judgment seat, ought not to be much
enflamed and moved against these which are wicked, or to weep with the people
that are grieved or afflicted: But to judge with all uprightness, without
being affectioned through too much clemency or rigorousnesse.

Also a virtuous and stout prince, ought not indiscretly, to repute for his
friends, all those which do offer themselves sodeinly to his friendship: But
to consider diligently under what condition they do bear him favor. That is
the cause wherefore Isocrates. Among other precepts that he did write unto a
Prince, did commend unto him three things above all others: First, Isocrates
in certain precepts yt he wrote unto princes.
that he would not repute for faithful, all those which do praise or allow all that, that he says or does: But those which do rebuke him when he has failed.

Secondly, that he would separate those which do flatter him by some kind of
deceit from among them which do honor him by amity: Least that the
condition of the wicked should be better then that of the good people.

Finally, that he do permit and suffer the prudent and sage people to speak
unto him freely, to the end that he may have people which may answer to the
purpose and satisfy him. And truly that great orator of the Latins has very
well said, Cicero in his book of amity. plato in his book of love.
that we must first judge before that we love: For that there are some men
which do love a great deal better the body then the soul, and do not seek
but to fulfill their desire. Plutarch of ye differenc of a flatterer and of a
friend.
For the true friend (as says Plutarch) does not follow all things: but the
things good and honest.

That is the cause wherefore a virtuous prince ought to be prudent even to
discern and judge of men to the end not to believe too lightly all those
which do call evil good, Esaias. 5. ^.
and good evil: which make darkness light, and light darkness, that make
sower sweet and sweet sower, which do sow pillowes under al arm holes,
Ezech 13. c.
and bolsters, under the heads both of young and old, to catch souls
withal. For as Quintus Curtius Quint. Cur ^ber 8.
says. That flattery is a pernicious thing and an ordinary evil of kings, by
which their riches are sooner wasted, then by the enemy. I will content my
self at this time with the example of Jeroboam, 3. Reg 12. b c
who refusing to comfort his people, according as he was taught of the elders,
was ye cause of the division and ruin of his kingdom. And I will not make
mention of king Achab, 3. Reg. 22. b
who for that he believed more the voice of ye false prophets, then the
wholesome admonitions and warnings of Micheah, does let all christian Princes
understand what it is to believe the counsel of the good. 2. Thessa. 2. c
As often times it chances because we received not the love of the truth that
we might be saved: God shall send us strong delusion for to believe lies, even
as Job does write, that the Lord changes the heart of the princes and kings
of the earth, Job. 1^.
and disapointeth them: So that they go wandering out of the way, and grope in
ye dark without ltght, staggering to and fro like dronken men: Psalm. 107. ^
And Dauyd does declare that the same Lord does make the princes hateful, and
does let them wander out of the way in the wilderness. The which ought to
serve for the christian princes: chiefly for to keep their subjects in their
obedience, rather by gentleness and amity then by severity and cruelnesse.
The example is manifest of Denis the tyrant, of whom Cicero Cicero li. ^. of
his ofices
speaking off, says, that he was shut into a merueilous prison, fearing very
much his subjects for ye cruelty that he used toward them. I will not
rehearse the common saying of the Emperor Anthonius Pius: Anthonius pius
that is to say, that he loved rather to keep one of his Citizens then to kill
a thousand of his enemies. I do leave willingly the sentence of Silla surnamed
the happy, Plutarch in his apotheg
which above all his prowesses did advance him self of two things. I do
mean of the amity of Pius Metellus, and for that he did not destroy the
City of Athens: but did spare it. As also Salust Salust in ye war of
Cateline.
(speking of ye ancient walls of the City of Rome does write that the Romans
were become great and puissant, because they pardoned their enemies. I will end
this matter by the sentence of Agesilaus, Xenophon in his book of ye praise of
Agesilaus.
king of the Lacedaemonians, warning oftentimes his soldiers not to wrong and
hurt those that they did take, as people unjust: But to keep them and
acknowledge them as men. If then the Painims and heathen men have used such
gentleness and humanity toward their enemies, shall the christian princes
use cruelty toward their subjects? If that one ought to keep faith among
the strangers as we do read of Marius Regulus, Cicero in his paradoxes.
who loved rather to return unto the punishment then to break the faith that
he promised unto his enemy: As also the ancient histories do witness unto
us, that the oath of Agesilaus, Xenophon in his oration of the praisee of
Agesilaus.
king of the Lacedaemonians was holden so certain and sure, that his enemies
have so assured it as the same faith and amity that they do bear the one to
the other.

By what excuse can a christian prince excuse himself, to break the faith
that he has promised unto his subjects? what shall I say, if the Machebeans
2. Macha. 7.
are praised to have given their lives for to maintain and keep the laws of
the country? Shall the christians be blamed and counted to be rebels to
have repulsed the force and strength of those which have even here violated al
divine and human laws.

To conclude, if the civil law has said that it is the interest of a Prince
to have of his subjects riches and goods: who can thinck that the Christian
Prince will destroy the best part of his subjects, for to fill the ambition
and unmeasurable couetuousnesse of some of his realm? The histories of the
Romans do teach us that Marcus Marcellus did bewail bitterly the ruin and
destruction that was to come upon the City of Syracusia.

And as Saint Augustine says, S. Augustine lib. primus of the city of god ca.
6
before the same City he did first shed forth his tears and weepings,
then his victories and prowesses. And shall ye christians take pleasure to see
to be shed as water the innocent blood, in the midst of ye most famous cities
of this realm? shall they pill and spoil the goods and substance of so many
good people? The Grecian (says Plato plato Dialogue 5. of the common wealth.
) will not destroy Greece, forasmuch as they are Grecians: nor burn their
houses nor will take from them their lands and possessions. And the Christians
will beat down and race the best Cities of France, and will take away the
goods of the Frenchmen: do take pleasure to see the rich and famous Cities of
the realm to come to decay and to be destroyed. If the examples of the painims
can not move us: yet at the least wise let us remember the humanity and
gentleness of the Hebrews, Deuteronomy. 20. e Eusebius li 8. of ye preparation of
the gospel. cap. 2
who did not suffer that one should destroy by fire or sword the lands, or
that one should spoil those which were fallen down, or slain in battle, or
that one should not do any wrong unto those which were taken prisoners, chiefly
unto women. For (as Cicero Cicero li. 3 of his ofices
says) of the nature of man, ye which we ought principally to follow, cruelty
is greatly an enemy: and there is no difference says the same author, whether
that man be changed and turned into a brute beast, or whether that under the
figure of a man he has a brutish cruelnesse. Inasmuch the^ as our Lord Jesus
Christ does teach us that blessed are the meek: Math. 5. a
for they shall inherit the earth. On the otherside, the Lord does threaten
the princes of Jacob and the dukes of the house of Israel, Iere. 26. c
that he will make Syon to be ploughed like a field, and Jerusalem shall be an
heap of stones, and the hill of the Lords house shall be turned into an hie
wood: for the tyranny of the princes, and abuse of the false priests and
prophets. By good right we do exhort the christian Princes to all gentleness
and humanity toward their subjects. To the end that they may be maintained
in their puissaunce, authority and greatness.

And moreover we do warn and admonish them not to believe too lightly, every
lying, spirit, fearing that they be not deprived of that blessed temple, that
heavenly Jerusalem. Furthermore we do beseech them to acknowledge how
pernicious and noysible unto a realm, are so many flatterers, false brethren
and hypocrites, which do honor them, not for to teach them, or advance them
to some thing: but for to draw them from profit, according as Plato plato in
his book of phi
does declare, that the flatterer is a dangerous beast and hurtful unto
mankind, and is like unto a wicked spirit, feeding and alluring the simple
and foolish people, under the color of pleasant meat and full of pleasure.
plato in his book of me nexenus.
And in an other place the same author does write, that the flatterer does
follow the good after the nature of the inchaunter and poysoner: Plutarche in
his book of ye difference of a flatterer and of a friend
yea that he is more pernicious then is the the thief and homicide. Because
that he does not steal away the money or the life only: but also as a
sacrileger, an hallowed thing: that is to say, the judgment of reason under the
color of good. Wherefore O ye kings of the people: and you, O Christian
princes which delight in royal seats and scepters, Sapien. 6. d
love that benignity and gentleness, that ye may reign for evermore.
Remember that sovereign prince, Esaias. 42. d
which has not been an outcrier, nor an hie minded person, nor which has not
broken the bruised reed, and the smoking flax he has not quenched, which
has not (I say) judged according to the outward appearaunce of the eyes, Esaias.
11. a
neither reproves a matter at the first hearing: but with righteousness has
he judged the poor, and with holiness he reformeth the simple of the world.
our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.

ECCLESIASTICVS. 6. c. 16. A faithful friend is a medicine, of life, and they
that fear the Lord shall find him. A prayer.
O Lord, Pro. 22. ^
which have the kings heart in thine hand, like as the rivers of waters,
Daniel. 8. f
and may turn it whether so ever thou will. Which have power upon all the
kingdoms of men, and set over them whom thou listest, Judge. 9. c
vouchesafe so to bend the heart of our king, that he reigning over us in
all verity and righteousness: may sometime witness with thy faithful
servants, Samuel and Nehemias, 1. Reg. 12. Nehem. 5.
that he has not grieved nor molested thy people. And as thou have established
him unto a Christian kingdom: he may be also a follower of that king, which is
the sovereign over all, whom thou have ordained over thy holy hill of Syon:
of whom (I say) his seat endures for ever: Psalm. 45. b Psalm.
and the scepter of his kingdom is a right scepter, to the end that by that
means he may follow righteousness and fly from all iniquity: to conclude,
that he be of an entier and perfect heart toward thee, Heb. 1. c
and humble and gentle toward his subjects, after the example of the same
Lord: who for to accomplish and fulfill thy will, did humble himself even
unto the death of the Cross. Our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be Glory for
ever, Amen.

THAT IT IS THE HONOR and renown of a Prince and his subjects, to cause the
laws and politic ordinances of his country to be kept inuiolated. Cap. 10.
ROMANS. 13. a. The king is the minister of God, for all men's wealth.
FOrasmuch then as the laws do teach us two things, that is to say, Xenophon
in his book of pedie. 1. Reg. 15. c
to command, and to obey unto the commandment, and that the Lord does
witness, that to obey is better the^ offering and to give heed is better then
ye fat of Rams, because that rebelliousnesse is as the sin of witches,
and stubburnnesse is wickedness and idolatry. It is most true that more
greater goodness cannot happen unto kingdoms, common wealths, and cities
well dispensed and governed, then to make them to obey the laws. Inasmuch
chiefly as they do teach none other thing but the obedience due unto the
superiors. As Xenophon does witness, that Lycurgus could find no better
means to make the city of Sparta to florishe, then to accustom the
inhabiters of the same to obey unto the laws. As more amply Cicero Cicero in
his oration for Cleme^cius.
does declare, that the spirit and the counsel, and the sentence of the
common wealth do consist in the laws, and as the body without the soul, so
the commonwealth without the law cannot stand: the which ought to be
understood, not only for the regard of the subjects but also of the
Magistrates, Xenophon in his first book of his pedie.
princes and other superious: and very well Cyrus the king of the Persians,
did declare unto his son, that he must be ^elie just, and a great obseruator
and keeper of the laws. Lex digna vox under the title of laws.
As also the laws of the Emperor do witness, that it is a kingly voice, and
worthy for a virtuous and he royeoll prince, to confess him self to be
subject and bound unto the law. That is the cause wherefore the Egyptians did
adjure their Judges and Magistrates, Plutarch in his book of his Apotheg.
to judge nothing unjustly and wrongfully, although that they had express
commandment. Even so Anthonius, ye third of ye name, did signify sometime by
letters unto his officers, that when he did command any thing contrary unto
ye laws, yt they should not obey him. And very well the civil law has
provided in that matter, Lex si vindica under ye constitution of Theodosibus de
si pe.
which would that ye Magistrate should not execute so sodeinly ye will of a
prince: who being moved with anger or with some unlawful desire of vengeance,
should command a thing contrary or repugnaunt unto the law: The saying of
Solon.
But as Solon did complain in his time, that ye laws were like unto the
spiders webbes: the which do suppress and easily take ye little beasts: but
are broken and destroyed by ye great beasts. Do demonstrate and declare yt ye
simple people and of a base and poor condition, were constrained to obey yt
laws: and that ye rich and puissa^t of this world do transgress them with all
license and without punishment. Also it is to be feared, yt not only the like
shall happen in our time (what say I) the like: but also yt the laws be not
violated, of ye poor and of the rich. And it does grieve me very much to
confess plainly, yt there are so many Magistrates in ye realm of France, and
that they do bear so little obedience unto ye princes laws: and I do no less
marvel, yt there are so few Magistrates in other countries: and great
obedience of the subjects. So many lawiers there are (I say) in this Realm,
and yet nevertheless they do regard neither the law, nor yet the right of
the subjects. On the contrary part among other nations a few people which
do profess the law, and yet nevertheless Justice duly administered and
executed: insomuch that it seemed (as says Cicero Cicero in his oration for
Roscius
a in certain oration) that we do not hold any thing of that which is of
right and of true Justice: but that we do use only the shadows and images of
things, in the mean time we do know very well to recite with the same
Orator, Cicero in his oration for Cecinna.
that there is nothing that we ought better to keep and retain in a city,
then the civil right: without the which, says that author, that no man
should be master of his own, or he should not know which is his own, or
which is an other man's: and there is nothing which may be ruled or governed
among men with right equality and justice. But some will demand of me where
is the fault, I will answer with Plato, Plato in his 3. book of the commonwealth
the laws although they are good, are dead without the Magistrates. But that
the Magistrates without the laws, are lively laws: and because that the
Magistrates of this realm, have more regard to their private profit, then unto
ye common wealth: and do traficke in administering their estates as they have
bought them to have them: the laws do abide as dead and buried, because that
no man can be found that does observe and keep them. The Jews, Turks, and
other barbarous and rude nations, do keep their edictes and statutes, and
shall the Christians despise the lawefull ordinances of their prince? The
Christians will observe and keep diligently ye which is established in their
favor, and shall they not be careful to keep and maintain the edictes and
statutes which do concern ye commonwealth? If they do take it upon them,
although it be little upon their persons or lands, they do complain by and
by: alleging the custom of the country, and the ordinance of the prince: if
it be not of force or effect, they have the reason. And in the mean season
shall they not have care and respect to maintain the right of the innocent and
afflicted, of the people of God? Things truly, which does make me to say, that
there is very little love or charity among the Christians: 1. Cor. 13. b
For love seeks not her own things: but the commodities of other. Historye of
Susanna. g
That little Daniel did return in judgment, for to save the innocie of that
chaste Susanna, and did put him self for her notwithstanding the credit and
authority of the judges. And shall, the Christian princes see before their
eyes the just to be oppressed and shall hold their peace? 3. Reg 3. c
That worthy king Solomon did sit in judgment for to do right beetweene two
harlots, and shall the christian princes see in all places, the blood of their
subjects unjustly shed: yea in dispising and contemning of their edictes and
statutes, and will suffer it patiently: if ye voice of the blood of Abel has
cried vengeance after the Lord: Genes. 4. b
shall the blood of so many christians, so ungently entreated and killed, hold
their peace: if Jesus Christ did rebuke the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23. d
for the blood of the prophet Zachary. which was killed between the temple
and the altar: shall not the lord judge and avenge the blood of so many good
christians, shed in the mids of his second temple and christian Church, for
the word of Jesus Christ, and for the witness of his name: Finally, Leuit. 35.
^
if it be written that the homicide or murderer shall die the death: how
shall those escape unpunished which are an occasion of infinite murders,
thinking thereby to pull down and suppress all divine and human laws
against their own consciences: for to get unto themselves fame and renown,
and to deface the memory of the true and faithful christians? I will use no
long discourse, I do believe yt they will confess unto me willingly, that the
edicts and statutes of a Prince are either laweful or unlawful: if the^ are
lawful, as we ought to presume of the edicts and statutes made with good
deliberation and advice of counsel: truly we ought to keep them, although
that the end of them are hurtful: Deuteronomy. 12. c
For we must not do evil to the end that there do come no good: but to do
that which is right, and that which the Lord commands. If they are
unlawful, I do mean contrary unto the religion and good manners, although we
ought not to keep them: yet truly we ought not to break them by an evil
means: But with all gentleness and patience to show what the fault of the^
is. We do read in the holy scripture that the children of the Hebrews did
not obey the commandment of king Nabuchodonosor, Daniel. 3. e
constraining and commpelling his subjects to worship his image, because that
it was altogether contrary to their religion: but we do not read that they
have made any rebellion against the king or his subjects, for to break and
infringe the edict of the king: but that they have modestly and soberly
declared ye doing of their religion, and the righteousness of their cause. In
like manner the books of the Machabees 2. Match. 7. a
do teach us that those seven brethren of ye Machabees have formeably and in
good order spoken against ye ordinance of king Antiochus, compelling them to
eat swines flesh, contrary unto the laws and ordinances of their country:
but we do not see that they have threatened, or yt they did confederate
themselves against the edict of the king. It is most true that they are
forbidden upon the commandment of their law. As the book of the acts of
the Apostles does teach us, Act. 5. ^
that the hie Priest did command expressly the Apostles that they should not
declare remission of sins, in the ^^ne of Jesus Christ. And notwithstanding
the Apostles not regarding the edict and commandment of the hie priest, did
as apperteineth to their vocation and calling: aunswering that it is better to
obey God then men. And in all that while we do not read that they have made
any violence or force, for to withstand the edict of the hie priests.
Furthermore the ecclesiastical history does teach us, that there was in the
City of Nicomedia, Eusebius li S. of the h^storie clesiastical cap. ^ li. 6.
of the history triperte ca. 30
a certain man come of an ancient house, and of great Authority: who seeing
that there were in all places edicts very cruel published against the
Christians, being moved and constrained of an earnest faith, did take the said
edicts and did tear them in pieces before the people. As also we do read in
like manner of one Artemenius a martyr, and of a woman named Publia Artemenius
martyr Publia.
who did break a great number of idolles, and crying with a loud voice (ye
Emperor being present. Psalm. 115. a
) Their images are but silver and gould, even the work of men's hands: But it
is not written that those people have shed the blood of the subjects, or
robbed their goods for to break such edictes, although that they were cruel
and full of tyranny, and yet nevertheless a man may find at this day so many
wicked and rash people among the Christians which are not ashamed to violate
the edictes of the Prince, although that they are confirmable to all divine and
human right: Thincking thereby to hinder and let the course of the religion.

Some might here reply, that ye same does charge greatly those of the
reformed religion: Inasmuch as they do put themselves by weapons against the
force and power of their enemy. Unto which I do answer first yt they have
done it by ye authority of the prince. Furthermore, that there is great
diversity to make a company of people, and to take weapon without the law and
authority of the magistrate, for to break the edictes of the king as our
enemies have done: and to put themselves against the force and strength of an
other for to defend the edyctes and authority of the king, as those of the
reformed religion have done. For in upholding and maynteyning the edyct of the
king, they do maintain it in the authority and puissance which the Lord has
given unto him: And by the same means they, do keep his subjects under ye
obedience of him, in all gentleness and friendship. On the contrary, in
forcing the edicte of the prince, they do despise the prince and him which has
set him upon his throne. And besides they do give an occasion unto the people
to give themselves to all liscenciousnesse and ungodliness. And consequently
he which does violate the law of his prince does sin many ways. Pro. 8. e
First of all he sins against God: through whom the kings reign, and the
princes make just laws, ye Lords bear rule, and all judges of the earth
execute judgment. Secondly, he does offend the Prince unto whom he ought to
yield himself subject, as saint Paul says, Romans 13 c
not only for fear of vengeance: but also because of conscience.

Finally, he does give an occasion of great slander unto his neighbor,
through an evil example: inasmuche as he does despise the commandment of his
Prince.

And truly if any will ask me how the commonwealth of Venice has continued
so long in his authority, puissance and greatness, and at this day is more
richer and opulent then ever it was. I will answer that the same was, because
that she did know how to keep her people under the obedience of her laws and
statutes. In like manner experience does teach us what is the force and
puissance of the Cantons or Suisse for the policy which they observe and
keep in their common welthes. It is to no purpose then ye men do vaunce
themselves to have a Sovereign parliament in their city, and that they do
magnify themselves under color of so many honorable and proud Senators.
And that in the mean time Justice does soiourne in their pai^^^s and houses.
Ciprian in his Epistle which begins been ad noue. donate.
Also it is to no purpose that from day to day they do publish and set forth
so many new statutes, and that the poor subjects are oppressed, spoiled and
robbed every where in their persons and their goods. Amos. 5. e
We do read that the place to execute justice, among the Hebrews, was set at
the gates of the cities where Saint Hierome Saint Hiesome upon the 5. chap. of
Amos.
says, that the same was to the end that the labourer and poor man, arriving
into the city for to defend his right: should not be moved at the frequence
of the city and of so strange a spectacle and beholding of the same. Also
that the Citizen should not go far for to seek justice, or that he was
afraid to find the judgment seat, which does make me to say, that it is a
very strange thing among the christians, that not only they are constrained
to make so many iourneis for to demand justice: But also that they must pursue
it with so great charges and expenses. I do remember a certain king of
Egypt, which ordained sufficient and honest wages for his Judges and
magistrates: saying, that the Judge ought neither to give nor take. Where a
certain christian author did exclaim and cry out, Erasmus in his apotheg
O how willingly I desire that the Princes of our time would follow that
example: who selling the estates, do destroy the Judges, and in the mean time
it must needs be that the Judges do live by stelth: and do get again through
dishonest gain, that, that they have unlawfully disboursed. Furthermore I will
not muse or study to mark and discover the faults of ours, it is enough for
me that every one do know that the puissance and greatness of the cities and
common wealths, do not lie and consist in an excessive and mad number of
magistrates: ^endinge and serving rather to the ruin and destruction of the
people, then to the comforting of them: No more then the justice and true rule
to live well, to so many new Edictes and statutes: But to the wisdom of the
magistrates, and true usage and exercise of the religion and justice. And I
will not be abashed if an Emperor of Rome called Licinius Caesar, The emperor
Licinius.
did call sometime a heap and company of officers, mothes and rattes.

As also one may daily see, that they do despise so many ways the edictes and
statutes of the Prince and of the superiors. Because that the number of
magistrates serves nothing to the common wealth: no more then so many edictes
and statutes of the magistrates, to the helping and comforting of the
subjects. I will end this matter by the prayer which king Solomon made,
as well for his own regard as for the regard of all his people. O Lord
forasmuch as thou have caused a young Ladde to reign over thy people: 3. Reg.
3. b
give unto him a heart full of knowledge to judge thy people and to know the
good from the evil, that he may walk in thy ways, in truth and
righteousness and keep thy statutes and commandments. Give unto him grace
that he may duly and rightly rule his subjects under the obedience of thy
laws and ordinances, teaching them the way by the which they shall walk in
the work that they shall do. Finally, O Lord, cause that the same Prince do
provide among the people virtuous men and fearing God: Exo. 18. d.
men loving truth and hating covetousness: and which do judge thy people at
all seasons, in all right, equity and justice. Esaias. 12. a
In ye favor of him which judges the poor with righteousness, and with
holiness reformeth the simple of the world. Our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom
be glory for ever, Amen.

Proverbs. 29.14. The seat of the king that faithfully judges the poor,
shall continue sure for evermore. Proverbs. 28. Because of sin the land
does often change her prince: But through men of understanding and wisdom, a
Realm endures long. A Prayer.
Sapien
O Lord which by thy mighty and puissant hand have made the world of nothing,
and which do dispose all things with a marvelous order and counsel. Esaias.
28. e Proverb 8. c
Which set up again righteousness in the ballaunce, and judgment in the
weights: yea, by whom the kings reign, and the Princes make just laws. Direct
so by thy grace the young age of our king, under thy fear, that he reigning
over us in all equity and righteousness, he do maintain his people in the
keeping of the laws which do concern ye advancement of thy glory and the
liberty of thine. O Lord make him to understand, that as al puissance and
power is from thee: Romans 13. a
So the Prince is the minister of God for all men's wealth. To the end that the
may employ and bestow the gifts which thou have given unto him to thy glory,
to the advancement of the kingdom of thy son, and to the comfort of his
people. Assist through thy fatherly goodness all those which are of his
counsel: That they may acknowledge that thy fear is the beginning of wisdom:
Pro. 1. ^ Philip. 2. e
and that they do not seek only their private commodities: but also those of
other men's, or that they seek not their own: but those of Jesus Christ, unto
whom be glory for ever, Amen.

A BRIEF DEMONSTRATION, unto those which do make it no conscience to shed the
innocent blood, under pretense, I know not of what foolish zeal, Wherein is
showed by examples of the scripture how odious before God, such cruelties are.
Cap. 11.
Genes. 9. a. He which sheddeth man's blould shall have his blood shed by man
again: For God made man after his own likeness. 1. Samuel. 15. g. Samuel
said unto king Agag as thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy
mother be childlesse among other women.
Pro. 6. b
Solomon does witness in his proverbs that there be six things which the Lord
hates, and the seventh he utterly abhors: A proud look, a dissembling
tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, an heart that goes about with wicked
immaginations, feet that be swift in running to do mischief, a false witness
yt brings up lies, and such one as sows discord among brethren. That is
the cause wherefore Dauyd prayed the Lord that he will not destroy his soul
with the sinners, nor his life with the blood thirsty. Psalm. 26. c
Where that good Prophet speaking unto GOD, does cry, thou (O God) shall cast
them down into the pit of destruction: Psalm 55. d
For ye blood thirsty and deceiptfull man shall not live out half their days.
The Lord tries the righteous, but his heart hates ye wicked and him that
loves violence. The which is sufficiently declared unto us by examples of the
scripture: yea, who will begin from the creation of the world. For from the
law of nature, Cain killed his brother Abel: for that cause the Lord said unto
Cain: Genes. 4. b
What have thou done? The voice of thy brothers blood cried unto me out of the
earth. And now cursed be thou as perteining to the earth, for when thou
tillest the ground, she shall hence forth not give her power unto thee: a
vagabund and a runnagate shall thou be upon the earth.

In the law that is written Pharao, king of Egypt went about by all means to
afflyct the people of GOD, until that he caused to be killed al ye men
children of the Hebrews: Exo. 1. d.
But in a little while after all the first borne in the land of Egypt were
killed, Exo. 12. e Exo. 14. g.
Pharao and all the Aegiptians were drowned in the seas.

Judge. 9. g
In the time of the Judges, Abimelech desiring to reign over Israel, caused to
be killed all the children of Gedeon, except Ioatham, insomuch that Abimelech
was made king in Sichem. But within a little while after, this vengeance
happened unto him: For Abimelech having besiged the City of Thebes and taken
it: and going to take a tower wherein the people were gotten together, a woman
did cast a peace of a millstone from the wall upon his head, and all to brake
his brain pan* So (as says the Scripture) all the wickedness of Abimelech
which he did unto his father in sleying his three score and ten brethren, God
did bring upon his head.

The Queen Iezabel caused Naboth to be killed for to have his vineyard: 3.
Reg. 21. f
But the Scripture does teach us that the Lord spoke against Iezabel, saying:
that the dogs shall eat Iezabel under the walls of Iezrael, the which came
to pass: For Iehu caused Iezabel to be thrown down out of a window, 4. Reg.
9. f
and Iezabel was eaten up with dogs, according to the word of Hely.

At the same time Athaliah the mother of Ochoziah, seeing that her son was
dead, rose up, and slew al ye seed of the kingdom, 4. Reg. 11. ^
except Ioas the son of Ochoziah, whom Iehosaba the daughter of king Iehoram
did steal from among the midst of the kings sons that were slain, and
hid him from Athaliah, yt he was not slain: But within a little while after,
Athaliah is carried out of the Temple, and when she was come to ye gate where
the kings horses went out, they killed her there.

Iehoram did rise against the kingdom of his father, 2. Cro. 21. a
and when he was settled he slew all his other brethren with the sword, and
diverse of the Lords of Israel there too: For which cause the Lord did smite
him with an incurable disease in his bowelles: And in process of time, even
about the end of two years, his guts fell out, by reason of his
sickness, and so he dyed of evil diseases.

Iehoas after the death Iehoida, 2. Cro. 24. f
did forsake the Lord: and caused Zachariah the Prophet to be killed in ye
court of ye house of the Lord: And when the year was out the host of the
Syrians came against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed
all the Lords of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of
them unto the king of Damasco: And when they were departed from him, though
they left him in great diseases: yet his own servants conspired against him,
for the blood of the children of Iehoiada the priest, and slew him in his
bed, and so he dyed.

2. Cro. 33. e
Manasseh shed much innocent blood, so much that he filled Jerusalem from the
one side unto the other. But afterward he was taken by the Assirians and
led captive to Bablilon. Act. 12. d


I will not here forget Herod who having vexed certain of the congregation, and
killed James the brother of John with the sword: by and by after he was smitten
of the Lord, and being eaten of worms, gave up the Ghost.

Furthermore, if we will know wherefore ye children of Israel were led captive
to Babilo^, 2. Cro. 36. e
in ye time of Zedekiah and Iehoachin. The scripture does answer, that ye
Lord God sent to them by his messengers, sending them betimes: for he had
compassion on his people and on his dwelling place. But they mocked the
messengers of God and despised their words, and misused his Prophets, until
the wrath of the Lord so rose against his people that it was past remedy. And
so he brought upon them the king of Caldey and slew their young men with the
swoorde in the holy Temple, and neither spared young man nor maid, neither
old man, neither so much as him that stowped for age: but gave all into his
hand.

The Prophet Jeremy does give the same reason of the later destruction of
Jerusalem, Lamen 4. c
which was in the time of Titus and Vespasian, when he says: neither the
kings of the earth nor all the inhabitors of the wolrd, would have believed
that the enemy and adversary should have come in at the gates of the City of
Jerusalem. Which nevertheless is come to pass for the sins of her Prophets
and for the wickedness of her priests that have shed innocents bloulde
within her.

To that same fault the son of Syrach did attribute the destruction, Romans 2. c
not of a City and of a common wealth only: Ecclesi. 10. a
Teaching that the kingdom because of unrighteous dealing, wrong blasphemies
and diverse deceipts, shall be translated from one people to an other. So our Lord
Jesus Christ does cry so often against ye Scribes and Pharisees, for the blood
of the righteous, Mat. 23. d
saying, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophtes and stonest them
which are sent to thee: How often would I have gathered thy children together,
as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but ye would not: Beholdy
our habitatio^ shall be left unto you desolate. These are ye same matters which
that first Deacon of ye church did direct unto them, when he says: Act. 7. g.
O ye people stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and ears: Ye have always
resisted the holy ghost: As your fathers did so do ye. Which of the prophets
have not your fathers persecuted? And they have slain them, which showed
before of the coming of the just, whom ye have now betrayed and murdered.

What shall I say more? the time will not serve me, if I would speak of Nero,
Sueton in the life of Nero.
Domitian, Caligula, and other Emperors of Rome. Who having exercised in their
life, more cruelties the^ Barbarous or Scithian: Also in their death have been
cruelly entreated of their own subjects.

For the like cause it was forbidden the children of Israel not to eat the
blood, Leuit. 17. c
for the life of all flesh is in the blood. For that same cause (I say) David
was not suffered to build the Lords house: 1. Cro. 22. a
because says the Scripture, that he had shed much blood and made great
battles, although that he had no wars, but against the enemies of God and
of his people. These things do sufficiently declare unto the Kings and
Princes of the earth, how odious before God all effusion of blood and cruelty
is: According as Solomon does teach us, Pro. 20. d
that mercy and faythfulnesse preserve the king, and with loving kindness his
seat is holden up. Math. 5. a
And Jesus Christ does witness, that blessed are the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth.

What need is it to search the places of the ancient fathers, inasmuch as the
examples of our time, do give unto us certain witness of the vengeance of
God against those: Who according to their ambition and private affection had
shed every where the blood of the just? which although the Lord do suffer
many at this time to reign: yet let us praise his goodness, and let us
acknowledge that his mercy and long taryinge shall bring them to repentance.
Let us also fear on the other side, that through their stubburnnesse and heart
that cannot repent, they heap unto themselves the wrath of GOD against the
day of vengeance, when shall be opened the righteous judgment of God. Mat. 23. d
Even as Jesus Christ did menace sometime the S^^^bes and ^harises saying:
Fulfill ye the measure of y^^ fathers, that upon you may come all the
righteous blood that was shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous
Abel unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye slew between
the temple and the Alter.

Number. 25. e
To no purpose, some do cover and cloak themselves with the zeal of Phinees
which did take a spear in his hand and did thrust through Zambry, and Cosby,
because they committed fornication together. Alleging the free will of Hely, ^
Reg. 18 g 4. Reg. 10. a
which killed all the priests of Baal. Furthermore they do propounde unto us
the ardent affection of Iehu, which caused the lxx. sons of Achab to be
slain. Also they do show forth the zeal and feruentnesse of Mathathiah,
which killed a Jew, 1. Math. 2. b
which did sacrifice unto Idols in the City of Modin: For such men besides
the express commandment of the law (which will that the Prophet which shall
presume to speak ought in my name, Deuteronomy. 1^. d
which I commanded not to speak, and he that speaks in the name of strange
Gods, the same Prophet shall dye) do hold the place and office of a
magistrate, and they do it not without just and great occasion. S. Augustine in
his book of the christian doctrine
But at this day it shall not be permitted for certain particular examples,
chiefly in our law evangelical, for every private person without leave and
authority of ye magistrate or knowledge of ye cause to commit such unlawful
acts, for to hide the^ afterward wc ye cloak of religion. Math. 26. ^
The which Jesus Christ does teach us in rebuking Peter for drawing his sword,
and smiting ye high priests servant: for to show unto us yt the using of the
same is forbidden unto private persons and reserved to ye magistrate. Romans 13. b
Of who^ S. Paul says yt he is the minister of God for thy wealth. But and if
you do evil the^ fear. For he bears not a sword for naught, but is ye
minister of God to take vengeance on the^ yt do evil. The same sentence is
repeated by Saint Peter in these words: ^. Peter. 2. c.
Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto ye king as unto the chief head: either unto rulers, as
unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil dooers, but for the
laud of them that do well.

Woe then unto you which desire the possessions, and have spoiled them: and the
houses, and have taken them: And have done wrong to a man and to his house, to
a man and to his inheritance: Which have stolen the coat and cloak from those
which went by safely retourning, from the battle: which have thrust out women
from their houses, of pleasure. And you also, mark this ye prophets which do
seduce the people, which do byte with the teeth and cry: peace, and if any
do give you nothing in the mouth, ye prepare against him battle. And upon
thee also, thou bloody City, altogether full of lies and of stealth, and
defiled with the blood of the just* which have not received discipline and
which have not had confidence in ye Lord: and art not aproched or come nigh
unto thy God. Sopho. 3. a
For thy princes were in the midst of thee as roaring Lions. Sopho. 3. a
And the ^^dges are as wolves in the evening which ^^aue nothing behind them
till the mo^owe. The hands of your Prophets are ^efiled with blood, Esaias. 59.
^
and their teeth with unrighteousness. Their lips speak leasinges, and
their tongue sets out wickedness. Their feet run to evil, and they make
have to shed innocent blood, their counselles are wicked counsels, harm and
destruction are in their ways.

I do speak unto those which have the knowledge, Malach. 2. b
and in whose mouth men may seek the law. Where is it written in the law,
that one may put a man to death without knowing the cause and authority of the
magistrate, unto what matter does Saint Paul defend himself in the presence
of the captain which ordained that he should be examined by the whippe, or
wherefore did he answer the Centurian yt it was not lawful to scourge a
Citizen of Rome, and uncondemned: Act. 22. f
except it were but for to show how odious and hateful before the Lord those
are which do shed the blood of the righteous? History of Susanna g
For what pretense did the Lord awaken and stir up the spirit of holy
Daniel, being a young child: but for to make known the innocencye of that
chaste Susanna, condemned to death? And for to speak better, what mo ue the said
prophet to return in judgment, and to cry with a loud voice, O ye children
of Israel are ye such fools that ye have here condemned a daughter of Israel
to death, and know not the truth wherefore? except it were but for to teach
us, that it is better to let the wicked go unpunished then to condemn the
innocent? And nevertheless, The law absence of Pocus.
not only ye consent unto murders: but do persuade the people (being set in
Moses chair (to do such cruelties and murders. That heavenly father has not
done so, as he does teach us, when he says ye cry of Sodom and Gomorra is
great, and their sin is exceeding grievous. Genes. 18. e
I will go down to see, whether they have done altogether according to the
cry which is come unto me or not, and if it be not so, that I may know.
John. 8. b
Even so I say, has not Jesus Christ his son done, which is ye true pastor
and sheaperd of our souls and chief pastor of the bishops: who being called
for to judge that poor sinful woman, did not pronounce incontinently
judgment against her (as the Scribes and Pharisees desired being all bloody
with the blood of the Prophets) but said unto them: John. 8. ^
Let him that is among you without sin, cast the first stone at her.
Admonishing and warning all true christians that gentleness and cleme^cie is
more seemly or better becomes pastors then cruelty and rigorousnesse.

Furthermore, I would willingly ask, wherein the people can excuse themselves
of such wickedness, to put a man to death, of whom he knows nothing, and to
condemn him as a schismaticke, heretic and imposter, when he himself knows
not any thing what religion is, and believes only upon the credit and sight
of other.

And yet nevertheless in that matter, his ignorance shall not excuse him. By
what color of justice, can a judge save himself in ye midst of such
cruelties: which has neither let the murders, nor condemned the murderers?
On the other side have made unrighteous laws, and devised things which be to
hard for to keep. Esaias. 10. ^
Wherthrough ye poor are orpressed on every side, and the innocents of my
people are therewith robbed of judgment.

To conclude, what punishments do those deserve to have, who being ordained
for to declare the Gospel of peace, do incite and stir forward with all
their power, the people to troubles and seditions? I that great law geeuer of
the Athenians, Cicero in his oration for Roscius
and one of the seven sages of Greece, named Solon, has not published any
law against the Paricides: esteeming that such a shameful crime could never
be committed: What punishment are they worthy off, Heb. 12. e
which do put to death the fathers of our souls? if with one only respect
(as says Cicero) that fatherly pity is hurted: Cicero in the said book Gal.
4. e
What shall that be of us, if we put to death those which daily do travail
to bear us again until Christ be fashioned in us? 2. Pet. 2. e
Wherefore let us not be like unto brute beasts, who following their
sensuality: and being made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of that
they know not, for they shall perish through their own destruction. John. 4. a
But let us judge the things in verity and righteousness, and before we
condemn any man, let us prove by the word, whether the spirits are of God or
not. In so doing we shall be afraid to condemn unto death so lightly him
for who^ Jesus Christ freely has shed his blood: In such sort that we leaving
all disordinate desire of vengeance and carnal affection, as spiritual men,
1 Cor. 2. d
may discern and discuss spiritual things, Amen.

Apocalip. 6. b. I saw under the alter the souls of them that were killed for
the word of God and for the testimony which they had. And they cried with a
loud voice, saying, how long tariest thou Lord holy and true, to judge and to
avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth. A Prayer.
O Lord, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which art marvelous in
puissaunce and infinite in mercy. Extend thy clemency and fatherly goodness
upon those. Who of an indiscreet zeal, and following the traditions of their
fathers, do bandon themselves against thy son Christ* and do shed daily
the blood of thy servants. Regard their threateninges, and give unto those
which do adore and fear thee, to declare thy word with all boldness, break
the force and strength of thine enemies by ye sword of thy mouth, yt they
acknowleging thy majesty may be wise as serpe^ts and innocent as doves: To
conclude yt every, one may call upon thee and magnify thee in the midst of
the nations, seeing the changing of thy right hand. And as thou have
foreshewed by thy Prophet, that at the birth of thy well-beloved son our Lord
Jesus Christ: Esaias. 2. a
the people shall break their swoordes and spears to make sithes, sickles and
sawes hereof, that one people lift not up weapon against an other. Esaias 36 f
But that thou will give unto them a new heart, and a new spirit, and that
thou will take that stony heart out of their bodies, for to cause them to
walk in thy commandments and to keep thy laws. Give unto us grace in this
mean liberty of religion and exercise of the same. Esaias 11. a
That the wicked being slain with the breath of thy mouth, the Wolf may dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down by the Goat, the Lion and
other cattle may keep company together, so that a little child may drive
them forth, I do mean that no man do any hurt unto thy holy mountain. But
that the earth be filled with thy knowledge, as if the waters of the sea did
cover all things. Finally, Esaias. 2. b
that we may all walk in the light of our LORD Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
for ever, Amen.

A BRIEF DEMONSTRAtion unto those which of a set purpose do turn themselves
from the known verity, without any force and compulsion.
Hebrews. 10. e. Cap* 2 If we sin willingly after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins.
FOrasmuch then as the law of the Lord has been published with thunderinges
and lighteninges Exo. 10. ^
and that the same Lord did sometime manifest and show him self unto the
people, in figure and show of a burning bush. As also it appears, Exo. 3. a
that the holy Ghost descending upon the Apostles, there came a sound from
heaven as it had been the coming of a mighty wind: Act. 2. a
Truly we cannot be ignorant what the troubles are to the manifestation of
the law, because of those which do speak against the true religion, Luc. 2. e
as it is written, that Jesus Christ shall be the fall and resurrection of many
in Israel, and a sign which shall be spoken against. Sapi. 17. ^
Also that the law does engender in us trouble, under consideration of the
pain appointed for the transgressors of the same. Forasmuch as it is an heavy
thing that a man's own conscience bears record of his wickedness and
condemns him.

Collo. 1. e
Insomuch that there is no means to appease such differences, but in the peace
of him who has reconciled all things unto GOD his father, and to set at peace
by the blood of his cross, Numb. 21. d
both things in heaven and things in earth. Even as in the old law there was
no better remedy for the biting and stinging of the Serpent, then by the
beholding and looking upon ye brazen serpent, lifted up in the wilderness.
According as Jesus Christ says in saint John, John. 3. ^
that as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of
man be lifted up: That none that believes in him perish, but have eternal
life. And nothwithstanding yt there was as well in the law of Moses as in the
christian law, great troubles and contradictions: yet truly there is great
difference of the one and of the other. Antithesis*
For the one does set before us threatenings, the other does declare unto us
peace: the one does represent a Moses terrible and fearful, the other does
represent unto us in person a gentle and gracious Jesus Christ. The one does
rebuke our faults and transgressions: the other does bring unto us our grace
and satisfaction.

Finally, the one does condemn us of eternal death: the other does justify
us before God in the death of his only and well-beloved son our Lord Jesus
Christ. And even as in the law that is written, Moses is justly condemned for
that he failed toward GOD at the waters of striefe. Numb. 20. e
And the children of Israel are rebuked because they murmured against ye same
Lord desiring the pleasures of the country of Aegipt. Even so in the law
evangelical, Jesus Christ will not hold for unguilty those which for common
afflictions, do d^strust of his grace, puissance and goodness For he has
said, whosoever shall knowledge me before men, Math. 10. c
him will I knowledge also before my father which is (...) heaven.

But whosoever shall deny me before men, Luc^. 12. c
him will I also deny before my father which is in heaven. That is the cause
wherefore he requires of us yt our lamps may b^ always burning: (burning I
say) of tha^ heavenly fire, whereof our Lord speaket^ in this manner: I am come
to send fire on earth: Luc. 12. g
and what is my desire, but that it were all ready kindled? and he would that
we should not be between both or luke* warm: Apo. 3. c
but that we should be hot or cold, and that we should cast our sorrows and
afflictions upon the love of him which has borne our pain, Esa. 53. b.
and takes away our infirmity: and has been wounded for our offenses, and
smitten for our wickedness. For in all those things we are more then
vanquishers, because that he has first loved us.

Furthermore, inasmuch as the same Lord does admonish us that he will be with
us always, even until the end of the world: Mat. 28. d
Truly, in what kind of affliction so ever it be, we ought always to
assure our selves in that word, and not to be like unto that disciple of
Jesus Christ our Savior, the which did fear the winds and outragiousnesse
of the weather, in the presence of him which has the power not only to
command both the sea and the land: but by one breath of his mouth, can at
one moment bring to naught and destroy all the creatures of the world: yea,
Phillip. 2. b
in whose name every knee shall boowe, both of things in heaven and things in
earth, and things under the earth.

On the other side, let us follow rather king Iehosophat, who being assieged
in the City of Jerusalem, 2. Cro. 20. c
and destitute of all man's help, did cry unto the LORD saying, O our GOD,
forasmuch as there is not in us any might for to resist and withstand this
great company that comes against us, neither know we what to do: But our
eis will be unto thee.

The which that good Queen Judith di^ know very well to practice, udith cap.
9 and 10
who seeing hi^ enemies at the gates, and the City being forced on every
side. To be short the inha^bitaunts of the same altogether amassed and
discomforted with fear: with a manly and courageous heart did lean and stay
her self upon the strength of him, which being infinite in puissance, cannot
be tied and bound in his mercy and goodness. Wherefore i^ the Lord do give
us the grace that we^ shall die for the name of his well-beloved son our Lord
Jesus Christ, let us meditate with our selves that we do not give unto him, 1.
Joan 4. d
but that which does apperteyne* and belong unto him: forasmuch as he loved us
first, and gave himself to die for us: that is to say, when we were all sold
under sin, he has freely pardoned and redeemed us by the blood of his
well-beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, let us confess boldly that although that we do render unto the
Lord life for life, death for death: yet truly that we do not render unto
him the egalitie of that, Saint Amb upon Saint Luke.
yt he has given unto us. Forasmuch then as our sins were infinite, so the
redeeming of the same was inestimable, and therefore there was no creature,
either ter^estiall or celestial, which can appease the ^^nger of that heavenly
father, but he which was GOD and man, that is to say, the ^onne of God.

Finally, let us well consider what the Lord ^oth propounde unto us, when he
does give us the grace that we should not only be^eeue in his well-beloved son
our Lord Jesus Christ: But also we should die for him. In this, that for a
frail and transitory life, he will give us a life eternal and per^urable: As
he has promised, that whosoever shall lose his life for his sake, the same
shall save it.

This is then a very strange thing among the Christians, Luc. 9. c
to fear death in a quarrel so just and reasonable. And to think that he which
does give the heavenly goods will deprive us of temporal and necessary goods
for man's life. It is, I say, yet more greater wrong done unto the Lord, to
forsake him for to save their goods, and to fear to die for him which humbled
himself even into these low places for to redeem us from sin, hell, and
eternal death: And notwithstanding all that which is said, although that in
our death we do offer unto him that which is not ours, yet truly he does
accept the smallness of our power and will, when we do lean unto him by
faith, upon the merit of his well-beloved son. He I say, which has protested
before the majesty of the father, and has cried with a loud voice. Psalm. 40.
b Heb. 10. b
Behold I come: in the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I
should fulfill thy will, Heb. 5. e
O my God: and in the days of his flesh, having offered up with great cries
and tears, prayers and supplications, unto him which was able to have saved
him from his death, and being heard, has been the author of eternal life unto
those that obey him. Woe be unto those then which do blame ye Lord against their
own conscience, and do blaspheme his majesty, by oaths and unlawful
witnesses, for to persuade the people that they are not the disciples of Jesus
Christ.

As Peter did, denyinge his master, in the presence of a maid, those are they
which do repulse the gifts and graces of the holy spirit, Heb. 6. a
without any force, vyolence or fear, and having tasted of the good words of
GOD, and of the power of the world to come, do call again in their own
filthiness and villainy.

Insomuch that it happened unto them according to the true proverb. 2. Pet. 2.
d
The dog is turned to his vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire. For if those children of the Hebrews, that is to say,
Sydrach, Misach and Abednago, Dan. 3. e
had rather to be cast into ye hot burning oue^, then to do homage or adore ye
Idol of king Nabuchodonosor: If I say yt chaste Susanna, History of Susanna. g
has not so much feared to fall into the hands of men, then to sin before
the majesty of God. To be short, if those Machabeans 2. Match. ^
have not spared their ^iues for to maintain the honor of God: yea, against
all the force and strength of ye tyrauntes. Shall we be so ungrateful, 1. Cor.
^. d
for certain private commodities, to abandon him which has been made for us
wisdom, and also righteousness, sanctifying and redemption? I do say yet
more, if the Panims have valiantly fought for to increase the honor of their
Princes, not seekinge thereby but a vain glory and worldly recompense: shall
the christians make it difficulte and a hard matter to give their goods,
dignities and prerogatives for the name of him which has endowed them with
all heavenly benedictions, has also gotten for them by his blood an
everlasting kingdom in heaven. The Lord does complain sometime of his people,
for that they having forsaken him: and dug them pittes, Iere. 2. c
yea, vile and broken pittes, that hold no water. And in an other place also
he rebukes them of their ingratitude, saying. The ox knows his Lord, and
the ass his masters stall, Esaias. 2. a
but Israel (which was his people) knows nothing and has no understanding.
And shall the same LORD at this day hold his peace, of so many apostates,
which of a set purpose do turn themselves from the known truth against
their own conscience? Forasmuch then as ye holy Scripture does tell us, yt in
death, an everlasting life: in the ignomie and slander of men, a glory before
the majesty of GOD: Luc. ^ ^
in the loss of our goods of of such treasures which the eye has not seen,
nor the ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man. To
conclude, for a despising of our favorable parents and friends, a glory
before the majesty of God, and a blessed reioising in ye company of Angels
and heavenly spirits. Let us then willingly embrace this cross, that we may
get an immortal life, and let us rejoice after the example of the Apostles,
Act. 5. c
when the Lord does give us that honor to suffer rebuke for his name.
Likewise let us receive joyfully the rauishment of our goods, knowledging with
our selves that we have a better reward in heaven, Heb. 11. d
which is permanent and endures for ever. Finally, let us not at all desire
the absence of our parents and friends, forasmuch as that true sheephearde of
our souls, our LORD Jesus Christ, does promise us that whosoever shall do the
will of his father which is in heaven: Mat. 12. a
that he will be his brother, sister and mother. And that our heavenly father
does assure us that he will gather us up: yea, 1. Cor. ^5. d
when we shall be forsaken of all our parents and friends; at the time of the
restoring of all things, when he shall be all in all, Amen.

Acts. 9. a. It is to hard for thee to kick against the prick. A Prayer to
the same end.
O Lord which art wonderful in puissance, and infinite in mercy, which
desire not the death of a sinner, but rather yt he repent. Ezech. 18. e
Regard and behold from thine heavenly throne the rage and fury of our
enemies, and of those which do pursue thy name. Nom. 23. a
As thou have of late inclined thy face upon Balaam, willing to force the
people whom thou had chosen for thine heritage. Show mercy and bring to
repentance those which of an indisceerte zeal, Act. 9. a
and not according to knowledge, do hinder daily the course and free passage of
thy word. To the end that they being cast down by ye sword of thy mouth,
after the example of that vessel of election, may acknowledge thy Christ and
magnify thy glorious name, among the midst of the Nations: yea, that they
do confess with heart and mouth, that it is eternal life, then to
acknowledge thee to be true God, John. 27. a
and not to vary, or any thing decline from the commandment of him who^ thou
have sent, our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.

A BRIEF DEMONSTRAtion unto those which have sustained even hitherto the
doing of the reformed religion for to confirm them more and more in their
first will. Cap. 13.
Psalm. 73: d. They that forsake thee shall perish: thou destroiest all them
that commit fornication against thee.
THE Scripture does witness that at the coming of the son of God, Mat. 24. a
many false Prophets shall arise and shall deceive many. And because iniquity
shall have the upper hand, the love of many shall abate. But he that endures
to the end, the same shall be safe. 2. Tim. 2. b:
As it is written, that he which strives for a mastrie is not crowned,
except he strive lawefully. And the husbandman, Luc. 4. f.
must first by laboring receive the fruits. And what he is among you (says
the Lord) yt is disposed to build a tower, sits not down before, and
counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to perform it? Least after he
has laid the foundation, and is not able to perform it, all that behold it,
begin to mock him: saying, this man began to build, and was not able to make
an end. Heb. 3. c.
I speak this my brethren least there be at any time in any of you an evil
heart and unfaithful to depart away from the living God. But exhort one
another daily, while it is called to day, least any of you wax hard hearted
through the disceitfulnesse of sin. For we are made pertakers of Christ if we
keep sure unto the end the beginning, wherewith we are holden up. And we do
exhort you of this, fearing that in forsaking him which has called you by
grace, you do transport your selves unto an other gospel, and seeing now ye
know God, Gal. 4. b
yea, rather taught of God, you do turn your selves backewarde unto impotent
and beggarly ceremonies observing (with the Jews) days and months, and
times and years: not for that I do distrust of your good will. But to the
end yt I may so assure you in the faith of ye Lord, that the course of this
present life finished, every one of you may say with the Apostle Saint Paul.
I have fought a good fight, 2. Timot. 4, b.
and have fulfilled my course, and have kept the faith. From henceforth is
laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord that is a righteous
Judge shall give me at that day: not to me only, but unto all them also that
love his coming. In like manner, to the end that ye be not as children carried
about with every wind of doctrine, as commonly chaunseth unto men. But let us
follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up into him which is the
head, that is to say Christ. Ephe, 4. d
The prophet does complain in the old law, that his people do halt between
two opinions neither following the living GOD nor Baal. 3. Reg. 18. d
Apo. 3. d
The Lord did rebuke the Angel of the Laodicians because that he was neither
hot nor cold, insomuch that therefore he will spew him out of his mouth. On the
other side he does promise to him that overcomes, Luce. 16. e
to sit with him in his throne, as it is written, no man can serve two masters,
for either he shall hate the one and love the other, or else he shall lean to
the one and despise the other. 2. Cor. 6. e
Righteousness has no fellowship with unrighteousness, neither light has
company with darkness, neither Christ accords with Belial. If then ye have
received the word of God, be ye not like unto him which has sowed his seed
upon stony ground. Mat. 7 d.
I do mean him which hears the word, and anon with joy receives it. Yet
has he no roots in himself, and therefore dureth but a season: for as soon
as tribulation or persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is
offended. Also be ye not followers of that foolish man, Mat. 7. d
which builded his house upon the sand: and the rain fell, and the floudes
came, and the winds blewe, and beat upon the house, and it fell, and great was
the fall thereof. Luc. 11. b
He that is not with me is against me (says the Lord): And he that gathers
not with me, scatters. That is the cause wherefore Saint John did complain
of some in his time, which did bear office in the church, 1 John. 2. d
and nevertheless did draw themselves away from the same, when he says,
they went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would doubtless have continued with us. But this comes to pass, that
it might appear, that they are not all of us. The Apostle saint Paul
speaking of the Apostates, says, Heb. 10. e
yt if we sin willingly after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins. For if we, after we have
escaped from the filthiness of ye world, 2 pet. 2. d
through ye knowledge of the Lord, and of the savior Jesus Christ, are yet
tangled again therein, and overcome: then is the latter end worse with us
then the beginning: for it had been better for us, not to have known the way
of righteousness, then after we have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment given unto us, according to the true proverb. The dog is
returned to his vomit again: and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the mire. Know then my brethren, Deuteronomy. 8. a. e
that God has nourtered you, even as the father nourtereth his children:: And
beware that thou forget not the Lord thy GOD, in not keeping his
commandments, laws and ordinances. That when you shall have the things
that you desire, and your riches and goods increased, then your heart rise, and
you forget the Lord your God which has delivered you from the hand of your
enemies.

Learn by ye example of ye people of Israel, yt he which ought to be right
has kicked: he I say, which was made fat, thick and smooth, has forsaken
and let God go that made him, and despised the God of Israel that saved him. As
also the same Lord does witness by his Prophet, that the iniquity of Sodom
was pride, Eze. 16. b
abundance of bread, and idleness. On the other side submit your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, 1. Pet. 5. c
that he may exalte you when the time is come. Cast all your care on him: for
he cares for you. Be sober and watch, for your adversary the devil as a
roaring Lion walks about seeking who^ he may devour. See that ye love not the
world, 1. John. 2. c
neither the things that are in the world. For all that is in the world, as
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of
the father, but of the world: and the world passes away and the lust
thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God, 1 John. 5. d
abides for ever. And truly we know that we are of God, and that the world
lies in wickedness. Dearly beloved, abstain from fleshly lusts which fight
against the soul: 1, Pet. 2. c
And as obedient children, not fashioning your selves unto ye old lusts of
your ignorance: 1. Pet. 2. c
But as he which called you is holy, even so be ye holy also in all manner of
conversation. And in all sobernes, Apo. 17. ^
and trust perfectly on ye grace yt is brought unto you by the revelation of
Jesus Christ. And beware my brethren of ye great Babylon, ye mother of
fornication, with whom have committed fornication yt kings of earth, yt they
are droncken with ye wine of her fornication. For although that that woman was
araied in purple and crimson, and gilded with gold and precious stones and
pearls, yet truly she had in her hand, a cup full of abominations and
filthiness of her fornication. Genes. 19. c
And as it happened at the subversion and destruction of Sodom and of Gomorra,
that Lots wife looking back was turned into a pillar of salt. Genes, 34, ^
And even as Dina the daughter of Jacob, going out to see the daughters of the
land, was ravished by the Princes of the said land. Fear on your part that
ye taking to great pleasure in worldly things, ye be not seduced and deceived:
and forsaking the commandments of the Lord, ye be not destroyed. Number. 25. ^
31, b
For as it happened that the children of Israel being induced and provoked by
the wives of the Madianits did trespass against the Lord because of Peor. It
is also to be feared, that you following to much that which is of ye world. You
do altogether forget the homage and obedience which you do owe unto the Lord.

Ephe. 6.
To be short, if ye enemy does oppress you, stand therefore, and you loins
girde about with verity, having on the breast plate of righteousness: and your
feet shode with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Above all, take to
you the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, the sword of the spirit which is
the word of God. And pray always with all manner prayer and supplication.

Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, put ye on the whole
armoure of God, that he may stand steadfast against the crafty assaults of
the Devil, for we wrestle not against flesh and blood: but against rulers,
against powers, and against ye worldly governors, the Princes of darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are above. If ye world do
pursue you, set your faith as a fort in expugnable against her pleasures, for
this is ye victory yt overcomes the world, even our faith. By which means
Samuel, ohn. 5. ^ vbr. 1^. f
David, and the other prophets have subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness,
obtained the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of
fire, escaped the edge of the sword. If your flesh be weak, watch and pray,
that ye fall not into temptation. And believe that ye Lord which is faithful
shall not suffer you to be tempted above your strength: 1 Cor. 10. c
but shall in the midst of the temptation make away, that ye may be able to
bear it. To conclude, assure your selves upon the word of God, when he says,
that his sheep do hear his voice, John. 10. c
and he knows them, and they follow him: and and he will give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them
out of his hand, because that his father which gave them him is greater then
all. Nomb. 20. ^
Remember that Moses and Aaron did not enter into the land of promise, because
they believed not the LORD: that he might be sanctified by them, in the eyes of
the children of Israel. No more then those which were gone out to search the
land shall see the same land which I the LORD swear unto their Fathers. But
his servant Caleb: Nomb. 24. ^
because there is an other manner spirit with him, and because he has followed
the Lord unto the uttermost, God gave him the said land for an heritage.
Finally, 4. Reg. 6. and 7. d
because that the captain of Samaria, would not believe the promise which the
Lord made unto him, by the mouth of the prophet Eliseus: foreshewing the great
abundance and plentiousnesse, within a little space was deprived from the
fruits thereof, and trodden under foot yt he died. Wherefore be not as some
faithless people, distrusting of the promises of him which is the God of
verity: But rather be ye imitators and followers of Gedeon, who being come to
the assault, blewe with his trumpet, held his lamps in his hand, Judge. 7. c
and brake his pitchers, figuring unto all true Christians, that they ought
always to keep that light of faith, and to be like unto the servant
attending their masters, when they shall be returned from the marriages. And
as the trumpet, to lift up their voice in the midst of all dangers, for to
magnify and praise the Lord.

2. Cor. 4. c
Furthermore, if need be, or if the case so require, not to spare their
bodies, which are but as earthen vessels to that heavenly treasure. In so
doing believe assuredly that by the same means, by them which they do
think to destroy and ruinate the work of God, by the same means it shall be
established and amplified. The which is also figured unto us by examples in ye
book of Exodus, Exo. 1. c
where the king of Egypt purposing to exterminate, and altogether to ruinate
and destroy the people of God, afflicting them through a long servitude and
bondage: in making mortar, brick, and other bondage work in the fields, was
partly a cause that the Lord did multiply and increase his people above al
other people, and prospered his faithful servant Moses among the midst of
all his enemies. In like manner, Exo. 2. d
the Lord did set up Joseph in the house of Pharao, then though his brethren
did sell him to the Ismaelites thincking thereby altogether to deface his
memory from the earth. Genes. 37. f


Furthermore, did bring to naught all ye deliberatio^s of Haman, conspiring ye
death of Mardocheus and of the Jews. Hester. 7
Finally the same Lord did draw from those that were slain a little Ioas,
against the rage and fuerie of queen Athalia his mother. The same does
sufficiently teach us that the means yt our enemies do take for to subvert
the true christian religion, 2. Cro. 23. c
the same means do serve for to increase and defend it against all the
enemies of the cross of Christ. For even as the good herb, the more yt it is
pressed, the more smelling it is. Even so the good men, the more that they are
afflicted of the world, the more they do magnify the religion of the Lord. The
which the Apostle does witness by his own example, when he does write unto
the Phillippians, Philip. 1. b
that the things which have happened unto him, are turned to the great
furthering of the gospel. So that his bands in Christ are famous throughout
all the judgment hall, and in all other places, insomuch that many of his
brethren in ye Lord are bouldned through his bands, and dare more franckly
speak the word. And truly God does not measure his works, according to the
thoughts of men. As it is written by the prophet Esaie, Esa. 55. c
yt his thoughts are not our thoughts, nor our ways are not his ways, but as
far as the heavens are hier then the earth, so far do his ways exceed
ours, and his thoughts ours.

Thou do see in Daniel Dane l. 2. c
that great and marvelous Image, yea, of which the beholding of him was
terrible and grimme, broken by a little stone hewn out of the rock, without
man's hand. Figuring that eternal kingdom of Jesus Christ, which ^ought to
bring to naught and break all the monarchs and kingdoms of the world, and
be established for ever.

Thou do read in the Scripture of one little Dauyd a figure of the true
Disciples of the LORD all ready to fight against the great Philistian: without
sword, 1. Reg. 17. f
buckler, or spear: but in the name of the Lord of hoastes, the GOD of the
host, and him whom the said Goliath has railed on and despised. Within a
little while after, Dauyd having the victory, did bring ye head of Goliath into
the city of Jerusalem, and he put his armoure in his tent. Furthermore the
holy scripture does teach thee, that Joshua Joshua. 6. ^
which was the leader of the people of God, at the sound of the trumpets made
the walls of the City of Jericho to fall down: yea, that the Angel of the
LORD at the prayer of king Ezekiah did kill a hundredth four score and five
thousand men, 2. Cro. 32. e
of ye camp of the Assirians. To be short, we may not be ignorant that Jesus
Christ being pursued to death, John. 18. b
and beeinge asked of the Scribes and Pharisees, if he were Jesus of Nazareth,
at that simple word, I am he, did so stonish and amase a band of soldiers and
officers, sent by the high priests and by ye Pharisees, that they went
backwards and fell to the ground. Finally, we may better know that the
Apostles of Jesus Christ, and those simple and idiotes have brought to good
order, a number of people to the obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Cor.
1. c. d
In such sort that by the preaching of the cross has been destroyed the
wisdom of the wise, and has cast away the understanding of the prudent:
Forasmuch as the foolishness of God is wiser then men: and ye weakness of God
is stronger the^ men. Also that the Lord has chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise. Assure your selves then of the promises of ye
Lord, though that the world do conspire, and men do imagine mischief:
Fortify and strengthen your selves with a lively faith, after the example of
that good patriarch Abraham, and father of all them that believe: who besides
hope, Romans 4. d
did believe in hope, and doubted not in the promises which the Lord made unto
him through unbelief: but was made strong in ye faith, and gave honor unto
God, full certified that what he had promised, he was able to make good. And
believe that the work which the Lord has builded in you, shall continue for
ever: if such and like admonitions will not suffice, behold what punishments
have followed those, who distrusting of Gods promises, have forsaken the known
verity, and the true service which was due unto him.

It is written in the book of Exodus, Exo. 32 a b
that when the people saw that it was long or Moses came down out of the
mountain; they gathered themselves together and came unto Aaron and said unto
him: up and make us a god to go before us. For of this Moses the fellow that
brought us out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. And
Aaron said unto them: pluc^ of the golden rings which are in the ears of your
wives, your sons and of your daughters: and of them to make a Calfe of molten
metal, and made an altar and worshipped it. Then ye Lord said unto Moses: go
get the down, for the people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt
have marred all, they are turned at once out of the way which I commanded
them. And the Lord said unto Moses, suffer me that my wrath may wax hot upon
them, and that I may consume them. Moreover the children of Israel did commit
idolatry and whoredom with the daughters of Moab, Nomb. 25. a
for that cause the LORD was angry against Israel, and said unto Moses: take
all the heads of the people, and hang them up unto the Lord against the sun,
that the wrath of the Lord may turn away from Israel.

Judge. 2. c.
The said children of Israel did wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and served
Baalim, and forsook the Lord God of their fathers which brought them out of
the land of Egypt, and followed strange gods, even of the gods of the nations
that were round about them, and bowed themselves unto them, and angered the
Lord. And so they forsook the Lord and served Baal and Astaroth. Wherefore the
Lord wared angry with Israel, and delivered them into the hands of raueners, to
spoil them, and sold them into the hands of their enemies round about them,
so that they had no power any longer, to stand before their enemies. But unto
whatsoever things they went, the hand of the Lord was upon them with evil
luck: afterward the Lord raised up Judges, which delivered the^ out of ye
hands of their opressours. After ye ye Judge was dead, they turned and did
worse then their fathers, in followinge strange gods, and in serving them.
Wherefore the Lord waxed angry, and sold them into the hands of Chusarim king
of Mesopotamia. Within a little while after ye chil of Israel cried unto the
Lord. Judge. 3. b
And the Lord stirred up a sauer and saved them: one Othoniel the son of
Kenes, Calebs younger brother and the land had rest forty years. And Othoniel
being dead, ye children of Israel did wickedly in ye sight of ye Lord, Judge. 3 b
and the Lord delivered them into ye hands of Egloh king of Moab, whom they
served by the space of xviij. years. And then they cried unto the Lord. And
the LORD stirred them up a sauer, Ahud the son of Gera. Judge. 4. a
Incontinently after the children of Israel began again to do wickedly in ye
sight of ye Lord, when Ahud was dead. And the Lord sold them into the hands of
Iabin king of Canaan, whose captain of war was Sisara. At which time Debora
a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth judged Israel, who exhorted Barack ye son
of Abinoam, to deliver the people: but the Lord at the prayer of Debora,
trounsed Sisara and all his charyottes, and all his heaste with the edge of the
sword, before Barack: insomuch that Sisara lighted down of his chariot, and
fled a foot. And of all the host of Sisara, there was not a man left.

Judge. 6^ 7
And sodeinly the children of Israel did begin again to do wickedly in the
sight of the Lord. And the Lord delivered them into the hands of the
Madianites by the space of seven years. The Lord had pity on them, and
ordein^d Gedeon for a deliverer of the people, (...) that time there the
Madianites were discomfited of a marvelous fashion.

Judge. 13 a 4 15.
The same people began again to commit wickedness in the sight of the Lord.
And ye Lord delivered them into ye hands of the Philstians forty years: but
the Lord having compassion of them ordained Samson for their deliverer.

Saul in the beginning of his kingdom did prosper greatly against his enemies,
Reg. 15. a
forasmuch as he obeyed the Lord and the voice of Samuel: But Saul having
transgressed the commandment of ye Lord, who commanded him to slay all the
Amalekites both man and woman, infant and suckling and Ox, sheep, Camel, and
Ass. Because that he reserved the spoil, is forsaken of ye Lord, and his
kingdom given unto an other, in which place is declared that rebelliousnesse
is as the sin of witchcrafte, and stubbernnesse is wickedness and idolatry:
yea, to obey is better then offering.

David because that he made alliance with the Lord, 2. Reg. 11. a
did profit in going and increasing, and the Lord of hoastes was with him:
insomuch that he won many victories, that is to say against the Philistians,
Idumeans and Sirians. As Soon as he had defiled Bethsabe, and caused her husband
to be slain, and contemned and despised the word of the Lord. The Lord said
unto him, 2. Reg. 12. c
behold I will stir up evil against thee, even of thine own house, and will
take thy wives before thine eyes and give them unto thy neighbor, which shall
sleep with them, in the sight of ye son. And although that the Lord had put
away his sin, after his repentance, notwithstanding, because in doing this
deed, he has given the enemies of the Lord a cause to rail, it was said unto
him, that ye child that was borne of Bethsabe shall dye surely.

After that time, 2. Reg. 2 ^. a
king David being touched with great pride, did number his people: and the
Lord being angry with him, did offer him by the prophet Gad to choose of three
plagues one: that is to say, famine, war or pestilence. And Dauyd choosinge
rather to fall into the hands of the Lord then into the hands of men. The
Lord sent a pestilence in Israel. And there dyed of the people, between Dan
and Bersabe, lxx. thousand men.

3. Reg. 11. a.
Solomon as long as he served the Lord, prospered wonderfully. In the time of
his old age, his heart was turned after strange gods: the LORD stirred up
adversaries, that is to say, Hadad, Razon, and also Jeroboam.

2. Cro. 12. a
Roboam, as soon as his kingdom was stablished and made strong, forsook the
law of the LORD, and all Israel with him, wherefore the fith year of king
Roboam, Sesac the king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because he had
transgressed against the Lord. And they took the strong cytyes that were in
Judah, and came to Jerusalem. Then came Semeiah the prophet, to Roboam, and to
the Lords of Judah, that were gathered to Jerusalem for fear of Sesac, and
said unto them: Thus says the LORD; ye have left me, and therefore will I
leave you also in ye hands of Sesac. Whereupon the Lords of Israel and the king
humbled themselves, and said, the Lord is righteous. And when the Lord saw that
they submitted themselves, the word of the Lord came to Semiah saying.
Forasmuch as they humble themselus I will not destroy them, but I will deliver
them somewhat. 2. Cro. 13. d


Jeroboam, and the children of Israel, were discomfited by Abiah, and the
children of Judah fortified: because they leaned unto the Lord GOD of their
fathers. And Jeroboam recovered no strength again in the days of Abiah. And at
the last the Lord plaged him, that he dyed.

Asa the son of Abiah reigned in his steed, 2. Cro. 14. a
in whose days the land was in quiet ten years. And Asa did that was good
and right in the eyes of the LORD his God. And Zarah a black Morian made war
against him. And Asa cried unto the Lord, and the LORD smote the black Mores
before Asa and Judah, that they fled. 2. Cro. 15. a


Then Azariah, the son of Obed, which had the spirit of GOD in him: went out
against Asa, and said to him: hear me Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin. The
Lord is with you, while ye be with him, and if ye seek him, he will be found
of you: but and if ye shall forsake him, he will forsake you. Then Asa and his,
made a covenant to seek the Lord God of their fathers with all their hearts,
and all their souls: so that all that sought not ye Lord God of Israel should
die for it, whether he were small or great, man or woman. And they swear unto
the Lord with a loud voice, and shooting, and with trumpets and horns. And
the Lord gave them rest round about them on every side.

2. Cro. 17. a
Iehosaphat his son reigned in his steed, and was mightier then Israel. And
the LORD was with Iehosaphat, because he walked in the old ways of his
father David, and sought not Baals. But sought the Lord God of his father, and
walked in his commandments, and not after the doing of Israel. Therefore the
Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought him presents, so
that he became exceeding rich and glorious, and prospered, and grew up on hie.
The Moabites and the children of Ammon came against Iehosaphat in battle, 2.
Cro. 20. a
and Iehosaphat bowed himself with his face to the City, and all Judah and the
inhabiters ^f Jerusalem fell before the Lord, to bow ^hemselues unto the
Lord. And as Iehosaphat rose early in the morning to get him ^ut unto the
wilderness of Thekna, he said unto them: hear me Judah and ye inhabiters of
Jerusalem. Believe in the Lord your God, and so shall ye continue: and
be^eeue his Prophets, and so shall ye prosper. Then the enemies of Iehosaphat
killed themselves, and the children of Israel had great victory.

Iehoram reigned after Iehosaphat, 2. Cro. 21. c
and bi^ause he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and committed
fornication with those of Judah, and with the inhabiters of Jerusalem, after
the fornication of the house of Ahab and killed his brethren. It was said by
the Prophet, that the Lord will smite his people, his children, his wives, and
all his goods with a mighty plague: and that he shall have much disease
through infirmity in his bowels, until his bowels fall out.

Iehoas, after the death of Iehoiada, 2. Cor. 4. f
became an Idolater, and the host of the Sirians came against him and came to
Judah and Jerusalem, and Iehoas was killed of his own servant. Amaziah after
that time that he did turn away from the Lord, ^. Cro. 25. g
they conspired treason against him in Jerusalem, he fled to Lachis. Whether
they sent after him and slew him there.

2. Cro. 26. h
Oziah did that pleased the Lord in all points as did Amaziah his father. And
he sought God while Zachariah ye teacher to see god lived, and as long as he
sought ye Lord, God made him prosper. And helped him against the Philistians,
against ye Arabians, and against the Ammonites.

2. Cro. 27. c
Ioathan the son of Oziah became mighty, because he directed all his ways
before ye Lord his god, he warred against ye king of ye children of Ammon and
vanquished them.

2. Cro. 28. a
Ahaz did not yt pleased ye Lord, as did his father David. But he offered burnt
incense in hill alters and on mountains, and under every green tree. Wherefore
ye Lord his God delivered him into the hand of ye king of the Sirians: which
b^at him and carried away a great multitude of his, captive into Damasco. And
also he was delivered into the hand of ye king of Israel, which slew of his a
mighty slaughter. For Phaketh sonnne of Romeliah, slew in Judah an-hundred and
twenty thousand in one day, and all fighting men, and that because they had
forsaken ye Lord God ^f their fathers. 2. Cro. 31. ^
Hezekiah throughout al Judah, did yt which was good, right and truth, before ye
Lord his God. And in all ye works yt he ^egan in ye service of ye house of God
to seek his God after the law and co^mmaundement, yt did he with all his heart,
and prospered greatly.

Manasseh succeeded Hezekiah, 2. Cor. 33. b
and did wickedly in ye sight of ye Lord, like unto ye abomination of the
heathen: and he made Judah and the inhabiters of Jerusalem to err, and to do
worse the^ ye heathen, which ye Lord destroyed before ye children of Israel.
And when ye Lord spoke to Manasseh and to his people, they attended not to him,
wherefore ye lord brought upon them ye captains of ye host of ye king of Assure,
which took Manasseh in an hold and bound him with chains, and carried him to
Babylon. And when he was in tribulation, he besought ye Lord his God and
humbled him self excedingly before ye God of his fathers, and made
intercession to him: and he was entreated of him, and heard his prayer, and
brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. And then Manasseh knew
how that the Lord was the very God. 2. Cro. 33. d
Amon did yt displeased ye Lord, like unto Manasseh his father, for Amon
sacrificed unto all the kerued images which Manasseh his father made, and
served them, and meekened not himself before ye Lord as Manasseh his father
had meekned himself: but Amon trespassed greatly, wherefore his own servants
conspired against him: and slew him, in his own house.

2 Cro. 34. g
Josiah and his people turned not aside from after ye Lord God of their
fathers, as long as he lived: but did put away al manner of abominations out
of all lands yt perteined to ye children of Israel, and brought al yt were
found in Israel, to serve ye Lord their god.

2. Cro. 36. a
Iehoahaz the son of Josiah is made king for his father in Jerusalem. For ye
king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and made Eliakim his brother king
upon Judah and Jerusalem, and did that displeased ye Lord his God. Against him
came Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, and bound him in fetters to carye him to
Babylon.

2. Cro. 36. b
Iehoachim reigned iij. months and x. days in Jerusalem and did that
displeased ye Lord and when the year was out, king Nabuchodonosor made
Zedekiah his fathers brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.

2. Cro. 36. c.
Zedekiah did yt displease the Lord his god, and humbled not himself before
Jeremiah the prophet at ye mouth ye of Lord. And ye Lord God of their fathers
sent to them by his messengers, sending them betimes: for he had compassion on
his people, and on his dwelling place. But they mocked the messengers of God,
and despised their words, and misused his Prophets, until ye wrath of the
Lord so arose against his people, that it was past remedy. And so he brought
upon the^ the king of Chaldey, and slew their young men with the swoorde in
their holy temple, neither spared he young man nor maid, neither old man,
neither so much as him that stowped for age. But gave all into his hands. And
forasmuch, as such and like examples do teach us yt the eyes of the Lord are
upon the righteous, Psalm. 34. c
and his ears are open unto their prayers. But the face of the Lord beholds
them that do evil, to destroy the remembrance of them out of the earth. That
the Lord does shed out his wrath over them which do despise him: and does show
himself tractable and gentle unto those which serve him with a contrite and
perfect heart, Phil. 2. b
I do mean in all holiness and righteousness. Let us keep as much as in us
in possible, the faith which we have promised unto the Lord, and assure our our
selves, that he which works in us both the will and the deed, according to
his good pleasure, will finish ye work which he has begone in us, to his
honor, to the advancement of the christian Church, and to the health of his.
Furthermore let us retire and draw our selves from the things which may
seduce us, and make us vary from the true service which is due unto him. 1
Cor. 9. d
Do we not know how that they that prove masteries, abstain from all things,
and they do it to obtain a corruptible crown: But we, to obtain an
incorruptible: Let us ru^ne then, not as at an uncertain thing, let us fight,
not as one that beats the air: But with patience in doing well, seeking
immortality and life everlasting. Amen.

Apocalips. 2. a. I know thou have suffered, and have p^tience: and for my
names sake have labored and have not fainted. Nevertheless I have somewhat
against thee, because thou have left thy first charity. A prayer.
O Lord God, heavenly father, and altogether puissant, which have said by the
mouth of thy well-beloved son our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 10. c
that he yt endures to the end shall be saved, as you have afterward confirmed
it by thine Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. a
that he yt strives for a mastrie shall not be crowned except he strive as he
ought to do. Phil. 1. d
Give us grace that we all continuing in one spirit and striving altogether in
one mind, through the faith of ye gospel, we may not be troubled by our
adversaries, Ephe. 4. ^
and that we be not as children wavering and carried about with every wind of
doctrine. But let us follow ye truth in love, and in all things grow up into
him, which is ye head, yt is to say, Christ. Give us such constancy and
strength in ye midst of those troubles and of our enemies, yt we faint not in
any thing: so yt with joy we may end our course and the charge which we have
received of thee, for to testify ye gospel of thy grace. Embrace so our hearts
and our souls in thine heavenly love, through thy holy spirit, and
especially, yt for all afflictions or threatenings, we nothing vary from thy
law, either to ye right hand nor to ye left: yt we having rightly accomplished
ye course of this present life. And ye time of our departing aprochi^g, every
one of us may say with thine apostle, I have fought a good fight, and have
fulfilled my course, and have kept ye faith: 2 Timothy 4. b
From heneforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
that is a righteous Judge, shall give me at that day, not to me only, but unto
all them also that love his coming. Phil. 2. a
For all which things Lord we pray thee, in the favor of him, who for to
accomplish and fulfill thy will, humbled himself, and became obedient unto the
death, even the death of the cross, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To whom
be glory for ever, So be it.

A BRIEF ADVERTISMENT, for to show that we must simply obey the voice of the
Lord, without further inquiring of the commandment: and to believe that eue^
as he is just in all his works, he is as puissa^t for to fulfill in us his will.
Cap. 14. e
1. Samuel. 15.^. To obeie is better then offering, and to give heed is better
then the fat of Rams. For rebelliousnesse is as the sin of witchcraft,
and stoubournnesse is wickedness and idolatry.
IT is written in the book of Jesus Siraach, Eccle. 3. c.
that many are excellent and of great renown, but unto ye wise are the
secrets revealed. For great power belongs only unto God, and he is honored
of the lowely. Seek not out the things that are above thy capacity, and
search not the ground of such things as are too mighty for thee: But look
what God has commanded thee, think upon that alwaie, and be not curious in
many of his works: For thou have not to do, to see with thine eyes the things
that are secret, where the son of Syrach does exhort us to execute willingly
and with a free will the commandment of the Lord, without enquiring any
further what is the cause of his commaundemen^ because that the servant that
knows his masters will and prepares not himself, Luc. 12. f
neither does according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. And
truly as a certain christian author has very well said, Saint Amb. in his
book of ye calling of ye gentiles
the Lord has left ye effect of many things, of which he has hid from us the
causes. Insomuch that we seeing with our eye the fulfilling of them: and yet
for all yt we know not to what end the Lord has ordained them, 1. Reg. 15.5
and in the mean time he would be obeyed. The which is taught us by an example
in ye book of Samuel, where ye Lord commanded Saul to destroy wholly all ye
Amalechites, both man and woman, infant and suckling, and oxen, sheep, camels
and asses. But Saul spared a live of the sheep and of the oxen and fat things,
and the lambs and all that was good, for to have sacrificed it unto the Lord.
Then the Lord said, it repents me that I have made Saul king, because he
has not performed my commandments. In which place is showed, that to obey
is better then offering.

The like example is witten in the book of the kings, 5. Reg. 13. c
where the Prophet which did contrary unto that that the Lord said unto him,
that is to say, that he should not eat bread, nor drink water, nor to turn
again by the same way he went: and he doing contrary, was torn in pieces and
devoured of a Lion. In all this we ought not to take any excuse upon the
difficultnesse and hardness of the commandment, or smalnesse or weakness of
our strengthes. For he which makes the commandment does give unto us also ye
mean to execute it. Let us remember, Exo. 4 d
yt Moses being called of God for to deliver the children of Israel, excused
him self, saying: Oh, my Lord, I am not eloquent, no not in times past and
namely since thou have spoken unto thy servant. But let us mark what the Lord
unto him. Who has made man's mouth, or who has made the dum or the deaf,
the seeing or ye blind? have not I ye Lord? Go therefore and I will be in thy
mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say. Even so Jeremy Iere. 1 b
being chosen of the Lord to be a Prophet unto the people of Jerusalem,
excused himself, saying: Oh lord God, I am unmeet, for I am yet but young, and
the Lord said unto him, say not so, I am to young. For thou shall go to all
that I shall send thee unto, and whatsoever I command thee, that shall thou
speak. And although that the commandment of the Lord does seem to be
sometime (according to man's sight) either to hard or contrary unto that, yt
they do ordinarily. Yet he ordeineth all to a good end, and for just
occasions. Exo. 14 d
As we do see that it seemed (to man's judgment) that ye children of Israel
should have been vanquished or taken by Pharao king of Aegipt: having the red
sea against them as a fort inevitable, for to stop them of their way: It seemed
also that they going to the promised land, under the conducting and leading of
Joshua, should never have entered the flood of Iordain, letting them: But the
LORD which has commandment upon all his creatures, divided the waters, and
the children of Israel went in through the midst of the sea upon the dry
ground. And the water was a wall unto them, both on their right hand and on
their left hand.

Iosuae. 3. d
As much chanced of the flood Iordain, for the waters which came down from
above, did stop and stood upon a heap a great way off. And the waters that
were on ye side of ye salt sea vanished and dried up, and ye people went
rightouer against Jericho. Furthermore, the Lord seems sometime to command
things altogether against the order of nature and good manners: Genes. 22.2
as when he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his only son Isaac, for to prove
his obedience. Also he commanded the Prophet Oseas Oseas. 1. a Ezech. 4. c
to take an harlot to his wife. Also he commanded an other Prophet to use
meats, not used of men. And nevertheless all that was not done without a
great secret and mystery: and nevertheless a man would never have believed
nor thought that a virgin should bear a child, Mat. 1. c Luc. 1. e
nor Elizabeth to conceive in her old age. To be short, he commanded king
Hezekiah to make the sun to go backewarde, Esa. 38. b
contrary from his ordinary course. And yet the things are happened after
the will of the LORD. Also after our outward senses, we do distrust our selves
often times of strengthes, in yt that the Lord commands us: Luc. 28 a
although that the things which are impossible with men, Philip. 2. b
are possible with God, which works in us both the will and also the deed,
(as says the Apostle) even of his free benevolence. Furthermore, we must not
mesure the commandment of the Lord, after the commandment of men, for
often times men being moved with anger, do command unlawful and dishonest
things: as did the Emperor Theodosius, The law Si vindica of pocus. c.
Eusebius in the ecclesiastical history.
which caused to be slain a great number of people, in the city of
Thessalonia, in ye time of Ambrosius, Bishop of of Millan. And for that cause
the Emperor Theodosius was excluded, from the company of the faithful, and
afterward the same Emperor acknowledging his offense, caused a law to be
proclaimed, which was, that the Judges should not execute so soon the
commandment of a prince, containing to great severity and cruelnesse. That
same reason moved the consultes, not to admit a libell of Refus under the title
of Refus, The law quod calore under ye title of Refus.
given of anger: that is to say, except it do appear that it was ordained with
a good deliberation and aduisement. The others being moved or stirred forward
with some kind of ambition or covetousness, do command often times things
contrary unto the truth and also unto good manners: as Pharao which commanded
all his people: Exo. 1. d.
that they should cast into the river all the men children of the Hebrews,
and save ye maid children alive. Mat. 2. c
A Herod which caused to be slain all the male children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, as many as were two year old and
under. A king Ahab, which caused Naboth to be slain for to have his vineyarde.
3. Reg. 21. d
Finally, some being puffed up with a disordinate desire of vengeance, or
rather at the request of others, have no regard to that that they do
command, 3. Reg. 22. c
as Ahab which caused Micheah the Prophet to be put in prison, because be told
him the truth. A king Ioas which caused Zachariah the prophet to be stoned to
death. 2. Cro. 24. f
Mat. 2^. b
A Herod who commanded the head of Saint John baptist to be cut off at ye
request of his wife and of his daughter. A Annanias ye hie priest: Act, 23. ^
which commanded them yt stood by saint Paul, to smite him on the mouth. But
with ye Lord it is altogether otherwise, for there is no unrighteousness in ye
Lord our god, Cro. 26. c
nor regarding of persons, nor taking of rewards. I will say yet moreover, men
do command often times yt which is not in their power: yea, yt they which have
the tharge given them, know not how to execute it: as those men which would
build the Tower of Babel. Genes. 11. a Mat. 4. b
And therein they resembled the Devil: For as the Devil took Jesus unto an
exceeding hie mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world,
promising to give them unto him, if he would fall down and worship him,
although he had nothing of all that in his power to give: so there are some
which many times do promise things which are not in their power to give.
Forasmuch then as all things are in the hands of the Lord, Philip. 3. b
also it is he that works in us both the will and the deed, even of his free
benevolence. And nevertheless, although ye commandments of the LORD are
easy, Psa. 119
and are none other thing then righteousness and truth. On the other side,
that ye commandments of men are full of deceit, guile and hypocrisy:
forasmuch as man of himself is but vanity, yet truly often times through the
traditions of men and men's commandments, we do leave and forsake the holy
precepts and admonitions of the Lord: even as the children of Israel did
despise the Manna of GOD. And in the mean time desired the flesh of Aegipt:
Nomb. 11. b
the which Jesus Christ rebuked the Scribes and Pharisees, when he said, Mat.
13. a
wherefore do ye transgress the commandments of God through your traditions?
Even so have not the Apostles done, Act. 4. d
unto whom although yt it was forbidden the^ by menasces and threatenings, that
in no wise, they should speak or teach in the name of Jesus, yet truly they
answered in the presence of all. Judge ye, whether it be right in the sight of
God, to obey you rather then God. For we cannot but speak those things which we
have seen and heard. As much said the Philosopher Socrates, Plato in his
Apologye for Socrates.
a little before he died, speaking unto the Athenians, O ye people of Athens
(says that good Philosopher) I love you very much: but I love rather to obey
God then you. Those are the words of those children of the Hebrews, Daniel.
3. c
being compelled to worship the Idol which the king Nabuchodonosor had made,
protesting and declaring in the presence of the king, that they will not serve
the gods of the Gentiles, and will not worship the Image which the king has
made. The which also in like manner, one of those seven Machebeans, 2. Match.
^. b
being near unto death, does witness, and crying with a loud voice unto
those which persecuted him, what seek thou, and what requirest thou of us? I
will not obey the kings commandment: but I will obey the commandment of the
law, which was given unto our fathers by Moses. Here some will say unto me:
that I am young, weak of body and spirit: and not able to suffer so many
torments and afflictions, which are ordained for those which will not obey the
comaundementes of men. I do answer, that even so were those children of the
Hebrews. And those seven Machebeans, Match. 7. b
and that notwithstanding they suffered death with a good courage, because of
the hope and trust that they had in God. The other will excuse her self,
saying. I am a woman, and weak of nature: Furthermore, if I do now dye, I
should leave so many small children, which daily will bewail my decease. So
was ye mother of those little Machebeans, and nevertheless it was she ye most
stirred them forward to keep the commandment of the Lord, and moreover she
exhorted them to be patient. Others there are which considering ye greatness of
their family will mourmure against God, and as the Painims will blame our
re^igion. To conclude, will save the earth for to lose the heaven. To those
kind of people, I would gladly demand whether they are worthier the^ Dauyd
which was a king and a Prophet: yea of the stock from who^ Jesus Christ the
son of God is come. And notwithstanding that he was afflicted on every side,
yea of his own son, yet truly he was not dicomforted: but blessed ye name
of GOD, which gave him grace to suffer for him. Let us leave off then al such
excuses, when it is a question to obey the commandment of the LORD: for when
the will is ready the power is lacking. Forasmuch as we do stay all in the
strength of him which has loved us: because that he which is in us, 1. John. a
is greater then he that is in the world. Let us have for example that liitle
Dauyd, 1. Reg. 17. f
who going to fight with that great Goliath, measured not his strengthes: but
the power of him in whose name he did fight. Mat 21. ^
Let us remember that the Apostles having express commandment of the Lord,
to go into a town that lies over against the^, to the end to unloose an Ass
and her colte, did not consider ye difficultnes of ye commandment but staying
themselves upon the authority of him which commanded them, did execute
incontinently their charge. When Jesus Christ did send his Apostles through out
the whole world for to preach and declare his gospel, Mat 10. a
they regarded not ye dangers that might have happened unto them by the way:
the force and puissaunce of the enemies of the cross of Christ. Furthermore,
they excused not themselves of their ignorance: but fortefying themselus in
this word, I will give unto thee a mouth and wisdom, to the which your enemies
cannot resist, did execute incontinently the commandment of the Lord.

Let us then take example of those whom Jesus Christ has sometime called for
to follow him, Luc. 9. g
whereof the one excused himself, saying: suffer me first to burye my father,
the other said: suffer me first to bid them farewell, which are at home at
my house. Unto whom the LORD answered, no man that puts his hand to the
ploughe, and looks back, is apt to the kingdom of GOD. Wherefore, when the
LORD does command us any thing, or when he does call us, let us do as that
good Samuel did, 1. Reg. 3. a
who as often times as he was called of the Lord, as often times answered, I
am here, for thou did call me. Or as saint Paul, Act. 9. b
who sodeinly at the voice of the LORD, answered. What will thou have me do?
To conclude, let us keep simply that which is commanded us for to do:
without putting too, Deuteronomy. 4. c Deuteronomy. 12. d
or taking from the word. Doing, not that which seems good in our eyes: but
that which God has ordained. For the Lord does protest by his Angel, Apo. 22.
d
unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this book: that if
any man shall add unto these things, GOD shall add unto him the plagues that
are written in this book. And if any man shall minish of ye words of the book
of this prophecy, God shall take away his part, out of the book of life, and
out of the holy City, and from those things which are written in this book.

Deuteronomium. 30. c. The commandment which I command thee this day, is not
separated from thee, neither far off. It is not in heaven that thou need
to say, who shall go up for us to heaven and fet it us, that we may hear it
and do it. Romans. 10. b. The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in
thine heart. This is that word of faith which we preach. A Prayer.
Psalm. 111. b
O Lord which have made fast for ever and ever all thy commandments, in all
truth and equity: and which put in man both the will and the desire to
fulfill them. Teach us the way of thy statutes, and shed and pour into our
hearts thy love through thy holy spirit, by the which thou do help our
infirmities: Romans 8. ^
that we distrusting in our strengthes, and despising the assaults of the
flesh, the world and ye devil, we may stay altogether upon ye love of him which
was once offered up for us, for to accomplish thy will. And have made us more
then vanquishers through the victory which does surmount the world, that is
to say, our faith, thy well-beloved son our LORD Jesus Christ, unto whom be
glory for ever, Amen.

A BRIEF DEMONSTRATION, unto those which do make profession of the true
christian Religion, and nevertheless do refuse the ecclesiastical discipline,
wherein is described somewhat the use and fruit thereoff. Cap. 15.
Psalm. 32. d. I will knowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness
have I not hid. And I said, I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so
thou forgauest the wickedness of my sin. 2. Timothe. 4. a. Preach the word,
be fervent in season and out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort with all long
suffering and doctrine. 2. Corinthians. d. So write I now being absent to them,
which in times past have sinned, and to all others, that if (...) come again,
I will not spare.
THe Prophet Joel Joel. 2. c
did complain of his people, calling them to repentance, saying: Turn you
unto the Lord with all your hearts, with fasting, weeping and mourning, rent
your hearts and not your clothes, and turn unto the LORD your God, for he is
gracious and merciful, long suffering, and of great compassion: and ready to
pardon wickedness. Then (no doubt) he also shall turn and forgive: and after
his chastening, he shall let your increase remain, for meat and drink
offerings, unto the Lord your God: blow out with the trumpet in Sion,
proclaim a fasting, call the congregation, and gather the people together:
warn the congregation, gather the elders, bring the children and sucklings
together. Let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of
her closet. Let the priests serve ye Lord betwixt the porch and the altar,
weeping and saying: be favorable, O Lord, be favorable unto thy people: let
not thine heritage be brought to such confusion, least the heathen be Lords
thereof. Wherefore should they say among the heathen: Where is now their God?
Esa. 1. e
Now go to (says the Lord) we will talk together. It is not so? though
your sins be as red as scarlet, shall they not be whiter then snow? And
though they were like purple, shall they not be like white woll? Esa. 30. d
Ezech. 18. g
The Lord stands waiting that he may have mercy upon you, and lifts
himself up, that he may receive you to grace. Be converted and turn you
clean from all your wickedness, so shall there no sin do you harm. Cast
away from you al your ungodliness, that ye have done, make you new hearts,
and a new spirit. Wherefore will ye die, O ye house of Israel? seeing I have
no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God. Mat. 11. d
Turn you then and ye shall live. Forasmuch then as the voice of the Lord is
commune to all, as yt of his son Jesus Christ has been commune, who has
said, Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Take
my yoke on you, and learn of me that I am meek and lowly in heart, and that
God is not parciall. Act. 10. e
But in all people he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted
with him. Truly the use of the word which consists chiefly in the
conversion of a sinner, ought to be referred to all those which have hope of
the eternal life. And we ought no more to think strange that the
ecclesiastical discipline, be public for just occasions, then we should
think strange that the word be public. Forasmuch as the ecclesiastical
discipline and correction is as a sinewe and cord, for to preserve and ke^pe
the word in his authority, puissaunce and greatenesse. To the end that even
as by our transgressions and faults, we have given occasion unto many to do
evil: Romans 2. d
yea, that the name of God is evil spoken off, by the enemies of our religion:
even so let the Lords name be magnified and exalted in our conversion: and the
sins a fear to all through our repentance and contrition. Furthermore, we
ought not to think it strange, to manifest our sins openly, if the case so
require, with true repentance and contrition, inasmuch as in him we have taken
pleasure in the company of many: for although that the Christian Church does
not pray generally for all poor sinners, chiefly for those which are of his
body. Yet the Lord will not that we be unprofitable servants, despising the
means so plesaunt and gracious the which he does propounde unto us, for to
obtain his grace and mercy. If thou have regard to thy dignity, excellency
and greatness, that thou do remember that Saint Paul an Apostle of Jesus
Christ and a chosen vessel, Act 9. c
was not ashamed to manifest unto the congregations, and before his very
enemies what he was before his conversion in the Jewish laws, and how he
persecuted the church of god by wrong. If the puissance and authority the
which thou have in the world does make thee to be a shamed: put before thee
David which was both a king and a Prophet, crying with a loud voice. Psa. 51. a
I acknowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me. Against thee only
have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. Forget not Manasses The power
of Manass. c
who confessed before God and men, that he has sinned above the number of the
sands of the sea, and reputed not himself worthy to look up toward he^uen.

The ecclesiastical trip. history.
Also one Theodosius an Emperor, and wonderful rich, being excluded from the
company of ye Christians: And afterward making open repentance. If thou art
ashamed because thou art young, consider the children of the Machabees, 2.
Match. 7. e
who confessed in ye midst of their torments, and before all, that they have
suffered for just occasion, because that they have offended the majesty of
God. If the fragilitie of thy kind does make thee weak and feeble, assure thy
self upon that poor sinful woman: who was not ashamed to bewail her sins and
to wash with her tears the feet of Jesus Christ our Lord, Luc. 7. f
as he sat at meat in the Pharisees house: yea, in the presence of all those
that were with him. If old age does keep theee back, with the greatness of
thy faults: Mat. 26.
S. Peter the head and most ancient of all ye apostles will give thee
boldness, weping bitterly for that he denied his master Jesus Christ. 3. Reg.
15. c
Learn then yt the lord will have mercy and not sacrifice, and that he came not
for to call ye righteous: but ye sinners to repentance. Mat 9. b Luc. 15. b
And be ye assured yt there shall be more joy in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over nintie and nine just persons which need not
repentance. Despise not the chastening of the Lord, Heb. 12. b
neither fainte when thou art rebuked of him: for although no manner of
chastesing for present time seems to be joyous, but grievous: but afterward,
it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them which are thereby
exercysed.

Consider king Achab despysing the correction of the prophet Micheas: 2. Cro.
18. e
was begyled by the false prophets, and afterward was slain in battle. Also
king Ioas who was slain by his own servant, 2. Cro. 24. e
and all the princes of his people destroyed, because they obeyed not the word
of Zacharye, the son of Ioiada the priest, admonishing the^ to return unto
the Lord. Finally, 2. Cro. 16. e
king Asa king of Judah, who was grievously punished: because he took not in
good part the holy demonstrations and admonitions of Hanany the prophet. Pro.
1. d
And take heed that the Lord laugh not in your destruction, and mock you,
when the thing that ye fear comes upon you, because that thou have despised
his counsel, and set his correction at naught. For God complayneth sometime in
the person of Dauyd, saying: Psalm. 50. c
Why do thou preach my laws, and take my covenant in thy mouth, whereas
thou hate to be reformed? 2. Cor. 7. c
These things do serve not to make you sorry or weary: but for to bring you
unto true and Godly repentance, to the end that ye be nothing hurt by us: for
godly sorrow causes amendment unto salvation, not to be repented off: but
the sorrow of this world causes death. 1 Thessalonians. 5. c
Of our part we do admonish you as the father does his children, and we do
desire you to comfort the feeble minded, and to forbear the weak: to the end
that you do admonish those who are unruly, and be patient toward all men, to
the end that he which is of a contrite and humble spirit, 1. Cor. 9. d
be not overcome through too much heaviness. What I say: to the weak I became
as weak, to win the weak, and to be made all things to all men: to save at
the least some, and this I do for the gospels sake, that I might have my part
thereof. Unto you also, O ye true ministers of our Lord Jesus Christ, they do
address these words, to the end ye may feed the flock of God, 1. Pet. 5. a
which depends upon you, caring for it, not as though ye were compelled
thereto, but willingly: not for ye desire of filthy lucre, but of a good mind:
not as though ye were lords over Gods heritage: but ye ye be ensamples to the
flock. For the servant of ye Lord must not strive: 2. Timo. 2. d
but must be peaceable unto al men, apt to teach and one yt can suffer the
evil men patiently. And can inform the^ yt are contrary minded proving if God
at any time will give them grace, yt being converted they may know the truth.
And being delivered out of the snare of ye devil, may come to ame^dement and
perform his will. Then rebuke, check, and exhort in all gentleness of spirit
of doctrine. 2. Cor. 10. b
For ye weapons of our warfare are not carnal things, but strong by ye power
of God, to cast down holds: wherwt we over throw imaginations, and every hie
thing yt is exalted against ye knowledge of god, and bring into captivity every
thought, to ye obedience of Christ. Ezech. 34. a
The Lord by his Prophet does co^plain of ye shepherds of Israel, because they
have not holde^ up ye weak, and ye sick they have not healed, and they have
not bound together ye broken, and because they have not brought again ye
outcastes, and because they have not sought after ye which was lost: but
churlishly and cruelly have they ruled over the^. And al you which are strong,
Romans 1 Romans 14. a
ought to bear ye frailnes of ye weak, him that is weak in the faith, take
unto you but not to enter into doutfull disputacions of controversies, Gal. 6. a
and again, if any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are
spiritual help to amend him in the spirit of meekenes, considering thy
self least thou be also tempted. Bear ye one an others burden, and so
fulfill the law of Christ. Which if any man obey not the law of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 3. d
send us word of him by a letter: and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed. Yet count him not as an enemy: but warn him as a brother, desiring
no other thing then the health of every man. Even as Saint Paul did deliver the
man (who committed fornication with his fathers wife) unto Satan, 1 Cor. 5. a
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus. In like manner Hymmenaeus and Alexander, ^ TImo. 1. d
that they do learn no more to blaspheme. For I advise you, Iam. 5. d
or let you know that he which converted the sinner from going astraye out of
his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hyde the multitude of sins.
To no purpose, some men here do allege, that Jesus Christ and the
Apostles have not always used such modesty and gentleness. As when Jesus
Christ said, woe be unto thee Chorasin, Mvt. 11. c
woe be unto thee Bethsaida: For if the miracles which were showed in you had
been done in Tire and Sydon. They had repen^ed long agone in sackcloth and
ashes. Such are the words of S. John toward the Scribes and Pharisees, crying
against them. O generation of vipers, Mat. 3. b
who has taught you to flee from the vengeance to come? Bring forth
therefore the fruits belonging to repentance. Even so said S. Paul, writing
to the Galathians: O foolish Galathians: Gal. 3. a
who has bewitched you, that ye should not believe the truth? To who^ Jesus
Christ was described before your eyes, and among you crucified. Now we will
answer briefly, that when Jesus Christ or his Disciples or Apostles do
rebuke, chide, and exhort by any severity or rigorousnesse of words. That is
not that they do not teach in all gentleness of spirit and of doctrine,
applying themselves to the simpli^itie, rudeness or malice of the hearers.
Wherein is to much manifested the impudency of those who without any
discretion, do lay the heavy burdens and which are not able to be borne
upon men's shoulders: and regard not that the Lord has regard or respect to
him which is of an humble spirit and a broken and a contrite heart: Psa. 52. d
Esa. 57. d
And that he dwells hie above, and in the sanctuary, and with him also that
is of a contrite and humble spirit: that he may heal a troubled mind, and a
contrite heart: these are they which do let pass the commandment of God by
their ordinances, and consider not that the commandments of God are easy
and gentle, Romans 10. a Deuteronomy. 30. c
for the righteousness which comes of faith, speaks on this wise: Say not
in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven? (that is nothing else then to fetch
Christ down). Either who shall descend into the deep? (that is nothing else
but to fetch up Christ from death). But what says ye scripture? the word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thine heart. This word is the word of
faith which we preach. For if thou shall knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is
the Lord, and shall believe with thine heart, that GOD raised him up from
death, Iamen. 3. c
thou shall be safe. Wherefore let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto
the Lord that is in heaven, and confess boldly that we have been rebels, and
let us seek him, and let us return unto ^he Lord, and he will not cast us
away ^or ever: which if he do give unto us anguish, then he will have
compassion of us, according to his great goodness, for he does ^ot punish and
afflict willingly the sons ^f men. Daniel. ^.
Let us not be ashamed to entreat ^im, in fastings, prayers, sackloth and
ashes: ^ea, in the open assembly of the Saints: to confess that unto him
belongs justice, and to us utter confusion, inasmuch as we have sinned
against him. Ephe. 4. c
Finally let ^s walk worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, in all
humility of mind, and meaknesse, and long suffering, forbearing one an other
through love, So be it.

1. Thessa. 5. c. We beseech you, that ye know them which labor among you
and have the oversight of you in the Lord, and give you exhortation that ye
have them the more in love, for their works sake. A prayer.
1 Timothy 2. b
O Lord God, most mighty and heavenly father, thou (I say) which desire not
ye death of a sinner: But wilt have all men saved, and come unto the knowledge
of the truth. Give us grace in the midst of these troubles and enemies, that
we despise not the means which thou have ordained for us to obtain eternal
life: but that we emploie and endeavor our selves with such fear and
trembling to our salvation, 1. Cor. 21. g
that when we shall be judged, we may acknowledge that we be taught by thee:
that we be not judged with ye world, and that willingly we may receive the
correction of the ministers and dispensers of thy law, confessing both with
heart and mouth, that power is given unto them to edification and not to
destruction, 2. Cor. 10. b
to overthrow all such presumption, as exalts it self against thee, and to
subdue all misdeedes to the obedience of thy son Christ, Phil. 2. c
so ye by that means doing althings without murmuring and reasoning, our
obedience may appear to all men, and that we may be faultlesse and pure, and
the sons of GOD without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
nation. And finally, that we may be fellowheairs with our Lord Jesus Christ,
which through his obedience has been exalted above the heavens, unto whom be
glory for ever and ever, So be it.

A BRIEF ADVERTISment upon the commandment to love God. Cap. 16.
Deuterono. 6. b. Hear Israel, the Lord thy God is Lord only, and thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all
thy might
THe Lord said in Saint John, John. 14. a
he that has my commandments and keeps them, the same is he that loves
me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my father and I will love him,
and will show mine own self to him manifestly. If a man love me, he will
keep my sayings: and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
will dwell with him. Where Jesus Christ does testify unto us, that the love
which we do owe unto ye lord, Basil upon ye Psa. 37.
consists in the observing of his precepts and commaundents. And herein is
to be noted, ye some obey ye co^maundeme^ts of the lord, as servant fearing
ye pain of sin, and the vengeance of our heavenly father. Romans 2. b
For ye Lord does give unto every one accoring to his works: that is to say,
unto those which with patience to do well, se^ke praise, honor and
mortality: eternal life. But unto them that are contentious and disobey the
truth, and follow iniquity, shall be rendered indignation and wrath:
tribulation and anguish upon the soul of every man that does evil. Luc. 22. f
Forasmuch as the servant that knew his masters will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.
Others obey the commandments of the Lord, because of the gain and profit.
And in that they resemble the hired servant which serve their master but for
the hire or reward. Of those David speaks off, when he said: psa. 19. c
the judgments of ye Lord are true and righteous altogether, more to be
desired are they then gold, yea, then much fine gold: sweeter also then ye
honey, and the honey comb. Moreover by them is thy servant taught, and in
keeping of them there is great reward. 1. Cor. 2. b Esa. ^4. b
For the eye has not seen, and the ear has not heard, neither have entered
into any man's mind ye things that God has prepared for them ye love him.
Finally, some love ye Lord, and obey him through benevolence and christian
amity, being stirred forward of a virtuous love, the which moves them to
love him who has given unto them the law, and which has the words of
eternal life: Act. 17. f
let us acknowledge him in who^ we live, move and have our being: and do love
him as the true children do love their fathers. For (as says the same Lord)
by his Prophet, the son does honor his father and a servant his master: if
I be then a father, Malach. 1. b
where is mine honor? if I be the Lord, where am I feared? where we conclude,
yt in these two things chiefly, one may know those which do love God: yt is to
say, when they bear a singular affection to the holy word of the Lord, Psa.
119. b n
and that they do keep the commandments contained in that word. As to the
first, Dauyd says, my delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forget
thy words. O what love have I to thy law? all the day long is my study in
it. O how sweet are thy words unto my throt? yea, sweeter then honey unto my
mouth. John. 8. f
He that is of GOD (says Jesus Christ) hears Gods words. As touching the
second, says the same Lord, if any man does love me, he does keep my word.
That is the cause wherefore it is written in the law. Deuteronomy. 6. h
Thou shall love thy Lord thy God: And these words which I command thee this
day, shall be in thine heart, and thou shall recite them unto thy children, and
shall talk of them when thou art at home in thine house, and as thou walk
by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: and thou shall
bind them for a sign upon thine hand. And they shall be papers of remembrance
between thine eyes, and shall write them upon the posts of thine house, and
upon thy Gates. Even so the LORD commanded Joshua Joshua. 1. h
that he keep and do according to all the law which Moses his servant
commanded him, and that he do not turn there from, neither to the right
hand, nor to the left: that he may have understanding in all he takes in
hand: let not the book of this law depart out of his mouth but that he
study therein day and night, Deuteronomy. 17. d
that he may be circumspect to do according to all that is written therein.
Yea the law would expressly, that when the king is set upon the seat of his
kingdom, he shall write him out this second law in a book taking a copy of
the priests the Levites. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein,
all days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, for to
keep all the words of this law, and these ordinances, for to do them* In
that same, David delighted, when he sung, Psalm. 119. b
I have as great delight in the way of thy testimonies as in all manner of
riches. I will exercise my self in thy commandments, and have respect unto
thy foot paths, my delight shall be in thy statutes, I will not forget thy
words. I will speak of thy testimonies even before kings, and will not be
ashamed: my delight shall be in thy commandments which I love. And they must
not here excuse themselves upon the difficultnes and hardness of the
commandments. For as says Saint John, 1. John. 5. a
his commandments are not grievous. That is the cause wherefore, Romans 10. a
Saint Paul said as Moses, Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into
heaven? either who shall descend into the deep? that is nothing else but to
fetch up Christ from death. But what says the scripture? The word is nie thee,
even in thy mouth and in thine heart. This word is the word of faith which we
preach. For if thou shall knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord, and
shall believe with thine heart that GOD raised him up from death, thou shall be
safe. Here some men will say unto me, and how can the commandments of ye Lord
be easy, Math. 7. b
for so much as the Lord commands to enter in at the strait gate, showing to
his people that wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to
destruction. Where we will briefly conclude, that if they have regard only to
the calamities of those which suffer for the name of Jesus Christ, truly the
way is rude and grievous. For the law is certain, which says, 2. Timo. 3. c
that we must enter into the kingdom of heaven through many oppressions and
griefs. Even as the Lord Jesus Christ himself said, to some of his
disciples, Luc. 24. ^
ye Christ ought to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory.
But if they have regard to the free will of those which suffer persecution,
Romans 8. g
all things are easy and gentle unto them, and in all those things they are
more then conquerours, through him that loved them. Act. 5.9
Even so the Apostles departed from the counsel rejoicing, that they were
counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Jesus Christ. And very well
has Saint Augustine Saint Augustine in his book of ye persecution of
righteousness.
declared, yt all things are easy and gentle to charity, to ye which only
ye charge of ye Lord is light and easy. Some other will say here, yt if to
love God, be to keep his commau^deme^ts. The philosophers having not ye law
written, doing nevertheless naturally the things which are of ye law, have loved
god: for they have observed ye law natural, which will, Math. 7. h
yt whatsoever ye would ye men should do unto you, even so do ye unto the^: for
this is ye law and ye prophets. To this purpose we may recite the sentence of
Socrates when he said, I do not know whether ye Lord will allow our works,
although it be yt we have taken pain to please him. The same Philosopher did
cry out sometime on the people of Athens, Plato in the apology for Socrates.
O ye people of Athens: I do love you greatly: but I love rather to obey God
then you. Whereunto we will answer, that we will not deprive the
Philosophers, from the grace which the Lord has promised unto the blessed:
Apo. 13. c. 8.
for the Lamb has been killed from the beginning of the world. Act. 4. b
But forasmuch as there is none other name give under heaven unto men whereby
we must be saved, then the name of Jesus. We do say in this matter, that ye
philosophers do differ from the love which ye true christians do bear unto the
Lord: forasmuch as the true christians do acknowledge one Jesus Christ and
him crucified, which is the brightness of the glory, and the image of the
person of the father: of whom the same father has said. Heb. 1. c
This is my well-beloved son, hear him. Also for to know perfectly the
father, and his will, we must know ye son, for this is life eternal, John.
17. a
yt they do know ye only very God, and he whom the Lord has sent: to wit,
our Lord Jesus Christ, according to that that the same Jesus Christ does
protest, John. 1. b. c
that the world knew him not, and that he has given the name of his father to
be known of his: that the love which ye father has loved be in them, and he
in them. Wherefore if the only begotten son, which is in the bosom of ye
father, has declared him. Who doubts but that the Christians have a more
perfecter knowledge of the will of the father, seeing the son, by whom the
father has spoken unto them in these later days, Heb. 1. a
and has left unto them the sacraments, as seals and marks of his promises:
are not (I say) more moved to love him then the Philosophers? Inasmuch as the
son has said unto Philippe: Philip he that has seen me has seen my
father: John. 14. ^
Beleuest thou not, that I am in my father, and my father in me? And yet
although that some Philosophers by ye law natural, have had knowledge of God,
consequently they have been moved to love him: yet (as says Saint Paul) they
glorified him not as god. Romans 1. c
Finally, some may here say, inasmuch as the Lord desires his, that they do
love him perfectly, that he desires of them a thing either impossible, or else
too hard. Whereunto we will answer, that the great perfection yt the Lord
desires, to love him, is not for us to command a thing which is too
rigorous, for he has said, yt his yoke is easy and his burden light: Mat.
11. c
But he has regard to our imperfection, fearing yt thorough our infirmity we
should forsake him, for to declare unto us the care that he has of us: to
gather, what is the greatness of the precept. Furthermore, in that yt he
says, with all thy heart, with all thy soul and with all thy strength: he requires
of us a perfect obedience, insomuch yt he would yt we should consecrate our
selves to his obedience and love. Romans 6. ^
The which also Saint Paul requires of us when he says, let not sin reign
therefore in your mortal body, that ye should obey sin in the lusts of ye
body. Neither give ye your members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin:
but give your selves unto God, as they that are alive from death, and give your
members as weapons of righteousness unto God. Romans 12. a
And in an other place, I beseech you therefore brethren by the mercifulness
of God, that ye offer your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
GOD, which is your reasonable serving of God. And fashion not your selves like
unto this world, but be ye changed in your shape, by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is the will of God, which is good, acceptable
and perfect: in such sort that the Lord would not that we should lend him
the tongue only, as the hipocrites do, who do make profession to know God, but
with their deeds deny him: Titus. 1. d
But he would that we should give him both the word and the work. Unto this
Saint John exhorts us, saying: my little children let us not love in word
neither in tongue only: 1. John. 3. d
but in deed and in truth. That is the cause wherefore the lord rebuked the
Jews (by his Prophet) that his people did approach nigh unto him with their
mouth, Esa. 29. d
and praised him highly with their lips, where as their heart nevertheless
is far from him. Furthermore in this he comprehends a singular perfection,
for the regard of his commandments. For whosoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet fails in one point, Iam. 2. b
he is guilty in all. Forasmuch as he which has said. Thou shall not commit
adultery, he has also said. Thou shall not kill. At the end he concludes: So
speak ye, and so do, as they yt shall be judged by ye law of liberty. He would
also by this commandment yt w^ should love him above al things: yea, above
our own life. For he protests yt he that loves his father or mother more
then him, is not meet for him. And he that takes not his cross, and follows
after him, is not meet for him. To conclude, by these words, he requires of
us, that we may be so careful to love him and with such affection, 1. Cor. 10.
g
that we may refer all our thoughts, words and works to his glory. Whether
therefore we eat or drink or whatsoever we do, let us do all to ye praise
of God. For none of us lives to himself: neither does any of us die to
himself. For whether we live, Romans 14. b
we live unto the Lord: or whether we die, we die unto the Lord, whether we
live therefore or die, we are the Lords. One may find at this day such a man,
unto whom if one demand if he love God, he will answer franckly and freely
that which Saint Peter answered unto Jesus Christ. John. 21. e
Yea Lord, thou know yt I love thee: yea, will say with the same Apostle,
Luc. 22. e
I love thee so much Lord, that I am ready to go with thee into prison and to
death. And nevertheless if it were a question to endure and suffer, some
danger for the Lord, he will protest with an oath: Mat. 26. g
yea at the word of a simple maiden (I mean for a small occasion) that he
knew him not. It makes me to remember for this matter, of the same Apostle,
Mat. ^7. a
who seeing Jesus Christ transfigured in the mountain, and his face shining
as the sun, and his clothes as white as the light, said unto Jesus, Master
here is good being for us: if thou will, let us make here three tabernacles:
but when the Lord said unto him that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer
many things, Mat. 16.
did find the things so strange that he began to rebuke Jesus, saying,
master look to thy self, this shall not be unto thee. Those are they who in
prosperity, willingly love the LORD, and in adversity do deny him, 1. John.
4. d
For there is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, for fear
has painfulness, and he that fears, is not perfect in love. Let us
propose the example of Saint Paul, Act. 20. e
who being advertised by the holy Ghost, that bands and troubles abide him at
Jerusalem, answered, that none of these things moved him, neither is his life
dear unto himself, so that he might fulfill his course with joy, and the
ministration which he received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of
the grace of God, the which he did not only of mouth, but also he
accomplished it by works. Let us remember those good women, Marc. 16. a
I mean Marie Magdalen, and Marie the mother of James, and Salome: who were
not only assistent to Jesus Christ before his afflictions: But also in his
cross: and after his death, bought sweet oyntementes of Aromatica, for to
embalme him: yea they followed him long time after his death. I do speak unto
those, who making profession of the true Christian religion, and being drawn
from the cares of the world, through the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus
Christ, for a small occasion afterward are fallen into them again and have
been overcome. Insomuch that that is happened unto them according to the true
proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again: 2. Pet. 2. d
and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. Mat. 19. e
Truly such people are like unto the young man which told our Lord Jesus
Christ that he has observed al these commandments from his youth: but when
Jesus said unto him, that he must sell all that he had and give it to the
poor for to get a treasure in heaven he went away mourning. We must al^o note
that there is an other regard or ^espect to the amity which we do bear unto
GOD, and to the amity whih we do bear unto men: S. August. in his book of ye
Christian doctrine
for GOD ought ^o be loved for his regard only, I do mean, because that of
himself he is altogether good, perfect, puissaunt and merciful. Man ought to
be loved, for the respect that we have unto GOD: that is to say, forasmuch as
he is created to the image of GOD, as we: endued with the gifts and graces of
GOD as well as we, and called to the ecclesiastical heritage as we. For he
that will consider man in himself, he is nothing else, but altogether
unrighteous, full of impiety and imperfection. The Prophet Esaie Esa. 64. b
shall be my witness, when he says, we are all as an unclean thing, and al
our righteousness are as a stained cloth. The which the royal Prophet Dauyd
does speak off more at large in his verses, Psae. 14. ^
saying. The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if
there were any that would understand and seek after God. But they are all gone
out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable: there is none that
does good, no not one. The like matter we do read off in Job, Job. 25. b
when he confessed most clearly, that man cannot justify himself toward
God. And how (says he) can he be clean which is borne of a woman. Behold,
the moon shines nothing in comparison to him, and the stars are unclean in
his sight. How much more then, man that is but corruption: and the son of
man, which is but a worm? wherefore man of himself is not amiable, but
inasmuch as he is regenerate of God: who through the merit of his well-beloved
son, does cover and hide wholly all those imperfections and impieties. And in
that respect we have greatly to consider the ingratitude and miscognisaunce of
those which love not the Lord, but for their proper respect, I do mean when
the Lord does send them the things even as they demand and desire: as great
abundance of worldly goods, a blessed life, great prosperity of the things
which appertain unto them, and also to their friends and kinsfolk, and other
pleasures of man's life: of whom, says David, ^sal. 144. c
happy are the people that be in such a case: but when any affliction
happens unto them, then they murmr against God, and do demand if there be
any providence in Heaven. The which Solomon forbids expressly, Eccles. 5. ^
when he says, use not thy mouth to cause thy flesh for to sin, that thou
say not before the Angel: my foolishness is in the fault. Such manner of
people are like unto those which seek Jesus Christ, John. 6. c
not because they saw his miracles, but because they eat of his loaves, and
were filled. proverb. 1^ e
For he which is a friend, as Solomon recites unto us, always loves, and in
adversity a man shall know who is his brother. Which if it be so that love
ought to be loved again: truly, we have most greatest occasion to love God,
and which is more we cannot without the vice of ingratitude, but that we
should love him: John. 4. d
inasmuch as he loved us first. And herein is love, not that we loved God,
but that he loved us, and sent his son to make agreement for our sins: For
God so loved the world, John. 3. b.
that he has geeuen his only begotten son, that none that beeleeue in him
should perish, but have everlasting life. If a man demand, what is the
goodness that he has done unto us at this present. Saint Paul does answer
unto the same, saying: that he spared not his own son, but gave him for us
all to death: Romans 8. f
how shall he not with him geeue us all things also? In this matter what can
we render vnt^ the LORD which may be equiualen^ to the amity that he has
borne unto us, for the injuries that his son our LORD Jesus Christ has
suffered in his flesh, S. Ambrose upon saint Luke.
for the stripes that he has received on his body, for the cross, for his
death, for his burial? woe be unto me if I do not say it, I dare well say
it: Peter has not rendered or restored: neither Paul has rendered or restored,
although he has restored death for death: but yet nevertheless he has not
altogether restored, for he owes a great deal. Romans 11. d
Mark, when he him self confesses who has given unto him first, and he
shall be recompensed again? For of him, and through him, and for him are all
things, to him be glory for ever. S. Ambrose in the same book.
And although we restore unto him the cross for the cross, and the grave for
the grave: that is to say, whether we restore unto him that which we have
received of him and through him: no truly. Wherefore the same Author
concludes, let us restore unto him love for love: for debte, love: for the
goodness that he has done unto us, a geeuing of thanks for the price of his
blood. I say moreover that from our birth, nature has put in us a certain
moving and pricking forward to the end to incitate and stir us to love our
God.

Forasmuch then as (by the same saying of Plato) beauty has gained that
advantage above all other things that of her self she is very much amiable:
Basil in his rulers ampli disputed 2. question.
and for that cause we desire very much the fair things. Yet truly the
heavenly beawtie excels and passes all things: forasmuch as it is not
subject to any filthiness or corruption, as are the other creatures. Cant. 2. c
Insomuch that the soul of a true Christian, regenerated through grace and
wounded of that heavenly love, is sick for that true spouse, which is Jesus
Christ: Romans 8. g
And which is more, it sigheth incessantly for the deliverance of this body,
which of it self is subject to corruption. Even so Dauyd did cry out,
saying: Psa. 120. ^
woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech: and to have mine
habitation among the Tents of Cedar.

Psalm. 44, a
My soul is a thirst for God, yea, for the living God, saying: Alas when shall
I come to appear before the presence of God? These are also the words of
Saint Paul, I am (says he) compassed in on both sides: phil. 1. c
desiring to be loosed and to be with Christ. The which is a great deal
better for me, that if for their virtue we do love them, whom we never saw,
Ciciero in his offices after plato.
as says Cicero, and if such is the force and strength of virtue which if one
may behold it with the eyes, it will stir up and embrace in us a marvelous
desire to love it: how much more, ought we to love God: of whom as of the
Nurse of al things does descend every good and perfect gift? Iam. 1. c
To conclude, if we love them which may help us with all things, 2. Cor. 15.
d
which are necessary for us. How much more ought we to love God, which is all
in all? and with whom all pleasure dwells, psalm. 16. b
as David witnesses, that fullness of joy is with his countenance, and at his
right hand there is pleasure and joy for ever. psalm. 36. b
That men shall be satisfied with ye plenteousnesse of his house, and he shall
give them drink of the river of his pleasures: for by him is the well of life,
and in his light, shall we see light. I do say this, not only for the
eternal goodness which are promised unto the blessed, in the resurrection to
come: but also for the goodness which the Lord gives unto us in this
present life. Even so the same prophet says, Psa. 104. d
so is this wide and great sea also, wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both small and great beasts. There go the ships over, and there is the
Leuiathan, whom thou have made to take his pastime therein.

They wait all upon thee, that thou may give them meat in due season. When
thou give it them they gather it: and when thou openest thine hand, they are
filled with good. But when thou hidest thy face, they are sorrowful: And if
thou take away their breath, they die, and are turned again to their dust.
Again, when thou let thy breath go forth they are made, and so thou
renuest the face of the earth. And in an other place he says: O fear the
Lord, Psa. 34. b
ye that be his saints: for they that fear him lack nothing.

Furthermore, in ye that the Lord desires that we should love him so
perfectly, we are sufficiently advertised that those which do give unto other
creatures, the homage and obedience which is due unto the Lord: be they dead
creatures or living creatures, they love not GOD perfectly: forasmuch then as
God has chosen us as a chaste virgin, for to be presented to his Christ,
according as he has foreshewed by the Prophet Oseas, Oseas. 2. d
that he will marie his own self unto her in righteousness, in equity, in
loving kindness and mercy, and in faith: yet when we do separate the love
which we owe unto the Lord, for to give of that which apperteineth unto him,
unto other creatures, truly we are unto him ungentle. Exo. 20. a.
Because he is a gelous God visiting the sin of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation. That is ye cause wherefore Moses says in
ye same, book. Exo. 34. b
Thou shall worship no strange GOD. For the Lord is called gelcus, because
he is a gelous GOD. Act, 10. e
For that same cause Saint Peter seeing that Cornelius fell down at his feet
to worship him, he took him up, saying: stand up, for even I my self am
a man. Acknowledging very well that Cornelius, for the affecttion that he did
bear unto him, did forgette the homage and obedience that he owed unto the
Lord. Act. 14. ^
In like manner Barnabas and Paul seeing that the inhabiters of Listria would
do sacrifice unto them, they rent their clothes and ran in among the people,
crying, and saying: O men, why do ye these things. We are mortal men like unto
you. In like manner it is written in the Revelation of S. John, that the Angel
seeing that Saint John was fallen down at his feet to worship him, he
said unto Saint John, Apo. 19. b
see thou do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and one of the brethen, which
have the testimony of Jesus, worship GOD. Even so has not Herod done, for
upon a day appointed, Act. 12. d
Herod being a^aied in royal apparel and sitting in his ^eate, made an
Oration unto the people: And the people gave a shoute, saying, it is the voice
of a God, and not of a man. And immediately the Angel of the Lord ^mote him,
because he gave not God the honor, so that he was eaten of worms. Plutarche.
As Much also happened unto Alexander the great, for having taken the City of
Babylon, raised him self against the commandment of the living GOD, and
would that his people should worship him and offer unto him Sacrifices.
Wherefore within a little while after he died through Gods punishment: for he
being over dry for lack of drink, fell into a grievous sickness, of which
he dyed. And that great person, who (as the world thought) feared not to
be overcome of men, was overcome and vanquished of wine. The same does learn
us and sufficiently declare unto us that the love the which we ought to bear
unto the creatures, ought to be ruled and governed by the word, that we ought
not to compare it to the love which we ought to bear unto GOD our creator.

I do speak this for those, which according to their private affections and
indiscreete zeal, do bear such honor as it pleases them unto the creatures,
and in the mean time consider not that the Lord is gelous, of the love and
obedience that they owe unto him, What shall I say of those, who making
profession of the Christian religion, do bear unto wicked spirits the love
that they owe to their Lord. And in what adversity or affliction that they
find themselves in, 1. Reg. 28. b
have recourse (As Saul) unto the Magicians and Witches, not trusting
themselves of the promise of the LORD. Who says. Psa. 50. ^
Call upon me in the time of trouble, so will I hear thee, that thou shall
thancke me. Things truly, which are very much forbidden in the law of God,
where Moses admonished the people of Israel saying: Leuit. 19. ^
Turn not your selves to them that work with spirits, neither regard them
that observe dismal days, that ye be not defiled by them, for I am the Lord
your god. And in the book of Deuterenomium, Deuteronomy. 18 ^
it is said: when thou art come into the land which the LORD thy GOD gives
thee, see that thou learn not to do after the abominations of these nations.
Let there not be found among you that makes his son or daughter to go
through the fire, or that uses Witchcrafte, or a chooser out of days, or that
regards the flying of fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a charmer or that councelleth
with spirits, or a prophecier, or that asks the advice of the dead. The
which also the Prophet Esaias confirms by the like words, saying: and
therefore if they say unto you: ask counsel of the Southsayers, Esa. 8 d
Witches, Charmers* and Coniurers: then make them this answer: Is there a
people any where, that asks not counsel at his GOD: whether it be concerning
the dead or the living? If any man want light, let him look upon the law,
and the testimony, whether they speak not after this meaning. Also the
Prophet Jeremy says in this manner. Iere. 27. b
And therefore follow not your Prophets, Southsayers, Expounders of dreams,
Charmers and Witches, which say unto you: Ye shall not serve the king of
Babylon. 1. Cor. 6. c
For as righteousness has no fellowship with unrighteousness neither light
with darkness, or Christ agrees not with Belial, or the faithful has no
part with the infidel, or the temple of GOD agrees not with idols: and no man
can serve two masters, Math. 6. d
for either he shall hate the one and love the other: or else he shall lean to
the one and despise the other. Such people do evidently declare that they love
not God perfectly. Iere 3. a
That is the cause wherefore the LORD rebuked his people, because they have
played the harlotte* with many lovers. And in the Prophet Oseas, Oseas. 2. c
the Lord threatens the same people that he will discover their foolishness,
even in the sight of her lovers. These things are so much more dampnable of
our time that the son of God manifested him self to us, for to declare unto
us the eternal law of his father.

For as says ye Apostle writing unto the Hebrews. Heb. 2. ^
If the word which was spoken by Angels was steadfast: and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: How shall
we escape? if we despise so great salvation? as much will we say of those
which give their bodies to an other kind of ungodliness and of sin. For as
long as they give themselves to vices: so long do they draw themselves from
the love and obedience that they owe unto ye Lord. These are the words of the
prophet Esaie, when he says, your misdeeds have separated you from your God
and your sins hide his face from you, yt he hears you not. Esa. 59. ^
Forasmuch then as our members are the temple of god, yet truly in
consecrating them both to ye one and the other, we make them members and
temples of an other then of GOD. And consequently forsaking the LORD for our
true spouse, we do altogether so as harlottes who commit fornication with
all sorts of men. 1. Cor. 6. d
That is the sentence of Saint Paul writing unto the Corinthians, know ye not
says he, that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlotte? GOD forbid, the
body is not for the harlotte: but for the Lord, and the LORD for the body,
ye are dearly bought for a price: therefore glorify GOD in your body, and in
your spirit, Romans 6. c
for they are Gods. Know ye not says the same Apostle, that to whom soever
ye commit your selves as servants to obey: his servant ye are to whom ye
obey: whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness?
Even so Jesus Christ seeing that the Jews advanced themselves, saying: we are
of Abraham's seed, John. 8. d
and were never bound to any man: answered them, that whosoever commits
sin is the servant of sin. For as the same Apostle witnesses, for to be
the seed of Abraham, they are not therefore all children: but in Isaac shall
the seed be called, that is to say, those which are children of the flesh, are
not therefore children of God: but those which are children of promise, are
reputed and taken for children, 2. pet. 2. d
and in vain do they promise liberty which are themselves the bond
servants of corruption: for of whomsoever a man is overcome unto the same he
is in bondage. Romans 9. b
Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body, that we should obey
sin, in the lusts of the body, neither give we our members as weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin: but give our selves unto God, as being dead, being
made alive, and let us give our members as weapons of righteousness unto God.
Let us here conclude, that as the Lord is perfect, he desires also of us a
perfect love, and a whole and sound heart. I mean not feigned nor dissmbled.
In such sort that those which think to love God and the world together,
those (I say) abuse themselves greatly. For as says saint John: if any man
love the world, 1. John. 2. c
the love of the father is not in him. Know ye not says Saint James, Iam.
2. ^
that the friendship of the world is enmity to God ward? Whosoever therefore
will be a friend of the world, is made the enemy of God. Behold that which
moved S. Paul to confess, Call. 1. b
that if he studied to please men, he should not be the servant of Christ.
Deuteronomy. 17. a
The which is also figured in the old law, where it was commanded not to
offer unto the Lord, no ox or sheep, Malach. 1. d
wherein is any deformity. And cursed be the dissembler which has in his
flock one that is male, and when he makes a vow offers a spotted one unto
the Lord. Deuteronomy. 27. d
As also the same law would that we should not have in our bag two manner
of weightes, that is to say, a great and a small. But yt we must have a perfect
and a just measure, For that cause was Ananias greatly punished, as we do
read in the Acts of the Apostles, who having sold a possession, and kept
away part of the price, his wife also being of counsel: and brought a
certain part and laid it down at the Apostles feet. Act. 5. a*
Then said Peter: Ananias, How is it that Satan has filled thine heart, that
thou should lie unto the holy Ghost, and keep away part of the price of the
possession? Thou have not lied unto men but unto GOD. When Ananias heard these
words, 1. John. 8
he fell down and gave up the ghost. The like happened unto his wife. The same
does sufficiently declare unto us, that we ought not to offer unto GOD a heart
that is vicious and full of dissimulation. As the law does not permit that
we should offer unto GOD a foul thing, and unclean.

And as it desires and commands that we should have a just measure and
weight, so the LORD would that man should keep toward his neighbor all
fidelity and equalness following the saying of the Apostle Saint Paul,
writing unto the Thessalonians, 1. Thessa. 4. b
exhortinge them that no man defraude and oppress his brother in any matter.
Wherefore if we be double hearted, as says Saint James, Iam. 4. b
let us cleanse our hearts. Forasmuch (I say) as GOD is righteous, let us love
him with an entire and perfect heart, Psalm. 103. ^^
that our heart may bless the LORD and all that is within us may praise his
holy name, and forget not all his benefits. Let us pour out our hearts like
water before the Lord, Lame^. 2. f
and let us lift up our hands unto him, and he will behold us with pity
in the favor of his well-beloved son our LORD Jesus Christ, unto whom be
glory for ever and ever, So be it.

Ecclesiastes. 12. d. 13. Fear God and keep his commandments for that
touches all men. 1. John. 2. d. The world passes away and the lusts
thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God abides ever. A Prayer.
O Lord, which have taught us by the mouth of Solomon the son of Dauyd, Cant.
8. b
that love is mighty as the death, and gelousie as the hell, her coals are of
fire, and a very flame of the LORD. So embrace our hearts in thine heavenly
love, chiefly by thy holy spirit, that we knowing that thou have loved us
first (having sent thy son to make agreement for our sins) that so of our
part we may love thee again, 1. John. 4. c
and show by our conversation that we love thee not in word, neither in
tongue only: but in deed and in truth. Honoring thee as our celestial and
heavenly father, 1. John. 3. d
and fearing thee as our sovereign LORD, all the days of our life. In such
sort, that neither death, Romans 8. g
neither life, neither Angels, nor principialities, neither powers, neither
things prese^^ neither things to come, neither height, neither depth, neither
any other creature shall be able to depart us from the love of GOD, which is
in Christ Jesus our LORD. To the end that when thou shall appear, 1. John.
13. b.
we may be bold and not ashamed before thee at thy coming, John. 13. a
nor by the majesty of him who being in the world loved his unto the end,
our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, So be it.

A CHRISTIAN ADVERtisment, upon the commandment to love a man's neighbor.
Cap. 17.
Deuterono. 15. b. The land shall never be without poor, wherefore I command
thee, saying: open thine hand unto thy brother, that is needy and poor in
the land. Proverbs 3. b. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the
firstlings of al thine increase: so shall thy barnes be filled with
plenteousnesse, and thy presses shall flow over with sweet wine. Job 1. c.
When the poor desires any thing at me, have I denied it them? have I caused
the widow to stand waiting for me in vain? have I eaten my portion alone,
that the fatherless has had no part with me? For mercy grew up with me fro
my youth, and compassion fro my mothers womb, have I seen any man perish
through nakedness and want of clothing? or any poor man for lack of raiment,
whose ^ides thancked me not, because he was warmed with the woll of my sheep?
did I ever lift up my hand to hurt the fatherless? yea in the gate where I
saw my self to be in authority: then let mine arm fall from my sholder, and
mine armeholes be broken from the joints. Job. 29. c. I have delivered the
poor when he cried, and the fatherless that wanted help. He that should
have been lost, gave me a good word, and the widows heart praised me. And
why? I put upon me righteousness, which covered me as a garment, and equity
was my crown. I was an eye unto the blind, and a foot to the lame, I was a
father unto the poor: and when I knew not their cause I sought it out
diligently, I brake the chayers of the unrighteous, and plucked the spoil out
of their teeth. An exhortation to love toward ones neighbor.
1. Cor. 13. ^
THE Apostle Saint Paul ^peaking of the excellency of love, says, Though I
speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not love, I am even as
lounding brave or as a tinckling cymball. And though I could prophecy and
understand all secrets, and all knowledge: yea, if I had all faith, so that I
could move mountains out of their places, and yet had not love, I were
nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to to feed the poor, and though I
give my body that I be burned, and yet have not love, it profits me nothing.
Love lustereth long: is courteous: love enuieth not: love does not boast it
self, swells not, disdaineth nothing as unbeseeming, seeks not her own
things, is not provoked to anger, thincketh not evil, rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in ye truth, suffers all things, believes al
things, hops al things, endures all things. Love does never fall away,
though that all prophecyings shall be abolished. And in the end of the said
chapter he concludes: now abides faith, hope and love, even these three: but
the chiefest of these is love. Mat. 6. ^
And forasmuch then as the life is more worth the^ meat, and the body more of
value then raiment. And also that Jesus Christ does command us to seek
first the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereoff: notwithout cause
if we maintain, that love consists, chiefly to help our neighbor, in that
which is necessary for him for his life. Insomuch that if the Lord has
given unto us any talent: I mean any grace, Mat. 25. ^
perfection or virtue, we ought not to hide it in ye earth, as unprofitable
servant: but ought to bestow it to the profit of every man. For the
manifestation is given to every one for to profit, 1. Pet. 4. c
to the end that as every man has received the gift, so admister the same
one to another, as good ministers of the manifold graces of god. And even as in
giving some little part of our goods, we do multiply that which ye Lord has
given unto us, also in administering the spiritual things to our neighbor, we
augment in us ye fruits of piety and Justice.

These are the words of Saint Paul when he told the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 9. d
that he that finds seed to the sower, will minister likewise bread for
food, and multiply their seed and increase the fruits of their benevolence,
that on all parts they may be made rich in all singleness. And as we be not
masters nor owners of our goods: Inasmuch as we enjoy and possess them of the
hand of the LORD: so we are not but ministers of the gifts of the holy
Spirit, which works in us all things. Even so says Saint Paul writing to
the Corinthians. ^ Cor. 4. a
Let a man so think of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers of
the secrets of GOD.

This declares unto us what was gods providence, in the dispensation and
bestowing of his gifts, who would not that they should abound altogether in
one man alone, to the end that by them helping one an other, every one may
acknowledge his imperfection, and should the better keep that band of amity
and Chrian charity. 1. Cor. 12 a
For although that we are all baptized by one spirit into one body: whether
they be Jews or Greeks, whether they be bond or free, and have all drunk
into one spirit, for the body is not one member, but many. And the eye cannot
say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor the head also to the feet, I
have no need of you. Yea, rather a great deal those members of the body
which seem to be more feeble, are necessary. And upon those members of the
body which we think most unhonesty, we put more honesty on: and very
well that great Orator of the latins has declared, Cicero in his oration for
Roscius Amerinus.
that we cannot do all things of our selves. And that one is more apt and
profitable for one thing then another is. That is the cause wherefore
friendshippes are gotten, to the end that common utility be kept through
great commune pleasures. Then if there be any grace in us let us not abuse it,
but let us consider with our selves, Iam. 1. c.
that every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the father of lights, and with the same let us give glory unto him,
John. 1. c
of whose abundance we have received even grace for grace. Furthermore, that
we remember that we have received that grace to serve for to profit every
one. Luc. 12. f
For unto whom much is given, of him shall be much received: and to whom men
much commit, the more of him will they ask.

Finally, let us confess boldly that such and so much excellency as is in
us, it is always joined with some imperfection: to the end that the wise man
rejoice not in his wisdom, Iere. 9. g
nor the strong man in his strength, neither the rich man in his riches: But
who so will rejoice, let him rejoice in this, that he understands and knows
that it is the Lord which does mercy, equity and righteousness, upon the
earth. In so much that if the Lord has put in us any knowledge, whether it
be the gift of tongues, or grace to interpret the holy scriptures: there
rests none other thing but to magnify and celebrate the name of him in whom
not only are hid all ye treasures of wisdom and knowledge: Collo. 2. a
but also him in whom does dwell all heauealy fullness corporally. Luc. 24. g
He which opened the wits of his desciples that they might understand the
scriptures.

Apo. 5. b
The Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of David, has obtained to open the
book, and to lose the seven seals theroff, and if such are our prowesses and
heroical deeds, that they excel and pass the deeds of Alexander ye great, or
of Julius Caeser: what can we better do, but to follow the example of the
four and twenty elders which fell down before him, Apo. 4. ^
that sat on the throne and worshipped him that lives for ever, and cast their
crowns before the throne saying: Thou art worthy O LORD to receive glory
and honor, and power: for thou have created all things, and for thy wills
sake they are, and have been created? And with the same also we ought to give
unto him all honor, homage and obedience, unto the Lamb. I say, which has
redeemed us unto GOD, through his blood, and has made us kings and priests
unto our GOD, I do mean the son of GOD, who on his vesture, Apo. 19. d
and on his thigh has a name written, king of kings and Lord of Lords.
Daniel. 7. c
Unto whom also a thousand times, a thousand served him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand stood before him. Briefly, we must conclude, that the
things which are in us: whether they be the goods of the body or the goods of
the soul, are of small value, if they be not bestowed unto the glory of the
Lord, and to the health of our neighbor. Luc. 16. b
Now being applied and bestowed to that end, they bring fruit to eternal
glory. As the Lord said, make you friends with the riches of iniquity, that
when ye shall depart, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.

Tob. 4. b
To the same end, Toby exhorted every faithful man, as follows. Be merciful
after thy power. If thou have much, give plenteously: if thou have little, do
thy diligence, gladly to give of that little. Psa. 41. a
For so gatherest thou thy self a good reward in the day of necessity. For
alms delivers from death, and suffers not the soul to come into
darkness. According as David has declared, that blessed is he that
considers the poor, for the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble.
Iam. 5. d
As touching the second point, Saint James does teach us, that if any of us
have erred from the truth, and another has converted him. Let the same know
that he which converted the sinner from going astray out of his way, shall save
a soul from death and shall hide the multitude of sins. By this we may know
plainly, that two things are proper to love: Basil in his short rules
disputacion question 175.
that is to say, to lament and be sorrowful for the misery of our neighctour.
And to rejoice and be glad of his prosperity and health. Exo. 32. g
Of the first Moses does give us an example, who being greatly sorrowful for
the sin of his people, cried with a loud voice and said, O Lord, this
people have sinned a great sin, yet forgive them their sin I pray thee: if
not wipe me out of thy book which thou have written. For that purpose, Romans 9.
a
Saint Paul wished himself to be separated from Christ, for his brethren
which are his kinsmen, as perteining to the sleshe. Phil. 3. d
And in an other place he complains with weeping, of some enemies of the
cross of Christ. Whose end is dampnation, whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is to their shame, which are worldly minded. 2. Cor. 11. a
And he himself does witness in his Epistle unto the Corinthians, that he is
gelous over them, with Godly gelousie, having prepared them for one husband,
to present them a pure Virgin to Christ: But he does fear least as ye serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilitie, even so their minds should be corrupt
from the simplicity that is in Christ. Psa. 119. g.
Even (...) Dauyd does cry out, saying: I am horribly afraid for the ungodly
that forsake thy law. On the other side, the Apostle Saint Paul reioysed at
the repentance of his, when he protested to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 7. c
that he reioysed, not that they were sorry, but that they so sorrowed that
they amended, for they sorrowed godly. But it is not enough to have compassion
of the misery of the needy, which does not assist him in the things
necessary for his life. For as saint James says, Iam. 2. e
if a brother or a sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of
you say unto them, Depart in peace, warm your selves, and fill your bellies:
notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body,
what helps it? Also it is not much to see our neighbor naked of spiritual
things, except that we go about by all means to bring him to the way of
salvation. Gal. 6. a
To this saint Paul exhorts us when he said: brethren, if any man be fallen
by occasion into any fault, ye which are spirtuall help to amend him in ye
spirit of meekness: for we which are strong, Romans 15. a
ought to bear the frailnesse of the weak, and not to look only to our
selves. Not without cause the LORD greatly rebuked the shepheardes of Israel,
Ezech. ^4. a
that they have eaten up the fat, and clothed them with the woll: ye best fed
have they slain, but ye flock have they not nourished. The weak have they not
holden up, the sick have they not healed: the broken have they not bound
together, the outcastes have they not brought again: the lost have they not
sought, but churlishly and cruelly have they ruled them. In this respect we
ought to repute and take him for our neighbor unto whom we ought to bestow
the works of charity and mercy. Luc. 10. f
The which saint Luke declares at large by a parable of him which descended
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell into the hands of thieves, which robbed
him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, and left him for half dead:
calling him the neighbor of him which fell into the hands of thieves, that
showed mercy on him. We must not then count him our neighbor only, which is
joined unto us by affinity or kindred, or common society: but by society of
reason. And in this respect, as S. Augustine very well says, all men are called
neighbors. For as witnesses the same author, Saint Augustine in his book of
ye christian doctrine
if the using of commune money does make ye people companions, truly a great
deal more, the reason of commune nature, by one self law of being not of
traficke, ought to join and knitte us together. And we must not say, that
apperteineth not to me nothing at al: he is neither my parents, neither my
kinsman, nor my neighbor, neither my country man. For although he be the
most stranger in the world, yet he is thy neighbor. Consider that the
Apostle after the example of the ancient patriarchs, Heb. 13. a.
does commend unto us very much hospitality, in this sort. Lot brotherly
love continue. Be not forgetful to lodge strangers, for thereby some have
received Angels into their houses unawares. Remember the^ that are in bands,
even as though ye were bound with them: and them which are in adversity, as if
ye were afflicted in ye body. Let us also remember that poor woman of
Sareptha, 2. Reg. a
which received the Prophet Eliah into her house, found so much favor of the
Lord, that she found a long time after wherewith to succor her self in ye time
of ^^e famine. In like manner the holy scrip^^re does teach us, that ye prophet
Elizeus ^btained a child for his hoastesse, who when ^he was dead, raised it up
again. 4. Reg. 4. ^
Insomuch that it does very well acquit or dis^harge her which has the use
of hospita^^tie rightly. Behold the occasion where^ore it is written in the
law of Moses, ^hen thou shall cut down the harvest in ^he field, Deuteronomy. 24.19.
and have forgote a shefe in the feelde, thou shall not go again to fetch it:
but it shall be for the stranger, the fatherless, and the widdowe. When thou
beatest ^owne thine Olive trees, you shall not make lean riddaunce after thee:
but it shall be for ^he stranger, the fatherless, and ye widow. And when thou
gatherest thy vineiarde thou shall not gather clean after thee: but it shall be
for the stranger, the father^esse and the widdowe. Even so the law
commands to separate the fruits for to give them unto the Leuite, to the
stranger, to the fatherless and to the widow. For that same reason those are
greatly to be blamed, who in time of famine and dearth do drive the poor
strangers out of their towns and Cities: in which time chiefly they ought to
succor and help them: They do separate those from the common rightes of the
heavenly father, with whom they ought to have all common society. The brute
beasts do esteem the use o^ the meats which the earth brings forth to be
common to them all, and with ye same they assist them in necessity: Saint
Ambrose lib. 3. of his offices cap. 17.
man refuses the duty of nature, unto him with whom he ought to have nothing
which is strange of any human thing. To a good purpose Plato plato in his ^.
dialogue of his laws
said, that the rightes of the strangers are known of GOD, above those of the
Citizens: for inasmuch as the stranger is without parents and friends, he has
need to be so much the more favored of GOD and men. Wherefore the said author
concludes that every one ought to take heed they do no wrong unto the
stranger. Such and like admonitions do learn us sufficiently that the work
of charity regards not these outward things: Basil in a sermon made of
Aluies.
but the only need and necessity. For although that he which does ask thee
an almose be nothing at all kind unto thee: but altogether unknown. Yet he is
of ye same nature with thy parents, of one self necessity, and a man as the
other are. Furthermore under that word of neighbor, we comprehend those also
which are not of the same reli^^on as we are. Insomuch that in time of
^^cessitie we ought not to take him as a ^^raunger which is of a contrary
religion. (...) he which we do read to have been ob^erued in the ancient
Church, not only ^monge the Christians: but also among ^^e painims. As we
do find written in ^he ecclesiastical history of Eusebius, Eusebius li 9.
hystorye ecclesiastical lib. 9 history trip. li. 9. cap. 26.
in which place it is said, that Julian the Apo^tate commanded a certain
bishop, to build and erect in every town and City hospitalles out of hand,
for to receive there ^ll strangers, and those which have need. And for to do
the same he ordained certain quantity of corn and wine every year, using
these words: It should be to much dishonestie that those wicked Galilae^ans
(for so they called the Christians) should not chase and drive away the Jews:
but that they should nourish them: yea, that they should nourish their poor
people and ours, and that the other of us are so cruel to forsake and leave
our own country men, destitute of all aid and man's help. Here some will
answer me, if we ought to use charity to those which are contrary to our
religion. Wherefore did the Lord forbid the children of Israel to contract
society or to have any alliance with the Amorites, Hethites, Gebusites,
Gegersites and the Pheresites, and other people contrary to ye Jewish
religion? Whereunto we will answer briefly, that the Lord has given ye
liberty unto his people for a certain time, to the end to turn them from
the abominations and idolatries of the Gentiles, as it is written in the book
of Exodus. But at this day, to wit in the law of grace, which has been
published throughout the universal world, such things shall not be lawefull.
Nevertheless for all that we have said, when we can not by any means
succor and help all those that be poor and needy: it is most expedient to
aid principally our poor neighbors at home, and those yt be of pure
religion. Gal. 6. c
This is the counsel which S. Paul does give, warning us to do good unto all
men: but specially, unto them which are of the houshoulde of faith. Even as it
shall not be evil done of him which shall see two men in like necessity and
misery, whereof one of them is his kinsman, and the other a stranger, he
ought of right to prefer and help his kinsman, if the case so require, yt
they were both of them in like degree of misery, and yt he could not help
them both. The work then of love and charity has no regard to the
condition, quality, Saint Augustine li. of his christian doctrine.
or affinity of persons: but it has regard to the only need, poverty
and misery. That is the cause wherefore Jesus Christ said in saint Luke, Luc.
14. d
when thou make a dinner or a supper, call not thy friends nor thy
brethren, neither thy kinsmen, or yet rich neighbors: least they also bid
thee again, and a recompense be made thee. But when thou make a feast, call
the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind. And thou shall be happy, for
they can not recompense thee, but thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection
of the just men. Not without cause Lactantius Firmianus rebuked sharply
Plautus, The error of plautus.
saying: that he did evil, who did give unto the beggar to eat, and that all
that is given unto him is lost, forasmuch as he prolongeth his life to more
greater misery. Lactantius li. 6. cap. ^.
Forasmuch then as such people can not deny but that it is the office of
humanity, to keep from danger him which is in some peril of death:
wherefore will they deny that the same is not a charitable deed to give meat
unto him which is an hungered? In like manner to give drink to him which is a
thirst? The same Author accuses greatly Cicero, The error of Ciciero.
because he has written that the liberality which is done of our own proper
house, has drawn up the fountain of all benignity and liberaltie. And the
more we use it, so much the less it may endure to many, As if that professor
of true sapience, Cicero would retire and draw men from all humanity, and to
command them, to keeepe better their chest, then the true justice. In that
point the same Author The error of ye same Author.
is greatly abused, when willing to revoke and call back again his saying,
thought that he should do pleasure unto those which are able to acquit it.
The which also moved Lactantius Firmianus, to say, that if Cicero had lived in
his time, he would then have cried with a loud voice, O Cicero, thou have
failed from the true justice, and of one only word thou have abolished it:
when thou have waied and mesured the right of piety and humanity by the only
profit: For we must not give unto those that are able: but to the contrary,
we must give to them that are less able. The which as it seemed the
Philosopher Plato plato in his book of Phedrus
was not ignorant off, when he said, that if it be a question to gratefie and
help the needy, that is to say, to do good unto them: we must not consider
the better: but we must have regard to the most poor or needy. For they
being delivered from great afflictions, will render unto thee immortal
thanks. And in our proper and private expenses and cost, we must not banquet
our friends: but let us banquet the most needy and poor, and those which are
an houngered, and th^se which are afflicted. Those, says he, will acknowledge
the pleasures, will follow thee and will stand at thy gates, will give thee
thanks, and besides will pray for thee. Saint Ambro^e li. 2. of his offices ca
37.
These are the very same causes, which have moved so many good people in the
old Church, to sell the precious vessels, and the costly ornaments of the
temples, for to help the needy and those that were in necessity: History
tri^. lib. 5. cap. 37
acknowledgeing in them the lively Images and temples of the Lord. And in this
matter the deed of Laurence the Martyr, has been greatly praised, who being
asked, what he had done with the treasures of the Temple, then he caused a
great number of poor people to come, for to declare, that they were truly
the treasures of the temple, in whom does dwell Jesus Christ, and the faith
of Jesus Christ. Those then are greatly abused and dampnable, which exercise
so much liberalities to the temples: temples, I say, consecrated without the
word of God, for to celebrate and make their name remain for ever in the
earth, Mat 6. c
and consider not, that in giving alms unto the poor, they gather up for them
treasures in heaven, where neither the mothes nor canker can corrupt, and
where thieves neither pearce through, nor yet steal. I do not make here
mention of those which do give in their last wills: so many excessive
bequeathes, so great gifts, to those which have no need, and in the mean
time do defraude their children from their proper inheritaunces: yea, they
forget the natural charity and love, that they owe to their own fathers,
saying as the Jews: Mat. 15. a
that every gieft that proceeds from me, thou shall be helped: Though he
honor not his father or his mother he shall be quite and without fault. I will
pass over willingly, and will make no mention of those, who having not used
any humanity in their life time, in the end of their days do give those
things that they cannot carry away with them, and give no ear unto the voice
of him, which says. Give and take, and sanctify thy soul, Si^a^c. 14. b
and work thou righteousness before thy death: do good unto thy friend
before thou die, and according to thy ability reach out thine hand, and give
unto the poor. And also Basil Basil in his treatise of alms.
the great, has very well written, that such people are like unto those
which do banquet and feast the great Lords of the remnaunt and that is left
of the superfluities of their tables: Forasmuch then as such men have offered
nothing to their benefectours in their life time, they will present unto them
in the end of their days, that which they cannot enjoy after their death.
Because that we have said, that the goods should not be common, as some
Philosophers and Anabaptists in our time have done, or to forbid parents to
gather and heap up riches for their children: so yt it be not gotten
unlawfully, 1. Thessa. 4. c
and yt no man oppress and defraude his brother in any matter: forasmuch as
the Lord is a venger of al such things. As also we will not allow the alms,
which is given of other men's goods: For the Lord will be honored with the
substance that is our own. Pro. 3. b
And the son of Syraac, Siraac. 34. ^
says: that who so brings an offering out of ye goods of the poor, does
even as one than kills the son before the fathers eyes: and he that gives
an offering of unrighteous goods, his offering is refused. That is the cause
wherefore it was forbidden ye children of Israel as it is written in
Deuteronomium not to bring into the house of the Lord in no manner of vow the
hyer of an whore. Deuteronomy. 23. c
On the other side, Ephesians. 4. ^
we desire that he that stole let him steal no more: but let him rather labor
and work with his hands the things which are good, that he may have to give
unto him that needs. For as Cicero Cicero lib. 1. of his offices.
says, many, and those which are desirous of renown and glory, do steal
from one to give it unto others: and they think that they shall be esteemed
gracious and liberal, if by any means, they enrich hem selves: but the same
is as contrary to the true office, that there is nothing more contrary to the
same. We must then use such liberality that it may profit one and not to
offend an other. Furthermore let us here observe, that we take not this
charity simply, as the painimes do, for a mutual amity or affection, the
which is borne and grows of ye conformity, of manners and good conversation
of life, which is conjoined to a prompte and ready will to help and succoure
the one the other: of which concord and amity that great Orator of ye latins
Cicero Cicero li. 2 of ye nature of Gods.
speaks off, when he said The word of love is very dear, whereof the name
of amity does spring, the which if we apply to our own private profit, and
not to the utility and profit, of him whom we love: that shall not he
called amity: but rather a merchaundise. Even so do we love our meadows,
lands, and our cattle, because that of them we receive profit. But the
charity and love of men is thankeful. The which is yet better confirmed by the
same Aucthour, Cicero in his book of amity.
by the example of Scipio, saying, has Affricane to do with me? no, nor I with
him: But I having in admiration his virtue: and he having in opinion my
manners, he has loved me. The great conversation which we have had together,
has augmented greatly the amity. Now the Christian charity has regard
more further: for she considers a conjunction and alliance of members under
one head, which is our Lord Jesus Christ, participating to one faith and
one baptism: the use of the sacraments, established in the Church of Jesus.
Christ, loking for the hope of the blessed, and the coming of the son of
God, of the which the Apostle saint Paul speaks off, Ephe. 4. ^
saying: forbear one another through love, endeavoring to keep the unity of
the spirit in the bond of peace. There is but one body, and one spirit, even
as ye are called in one hope of your calling. There is but one Lord, one faith
one baptism, one God and father of all which is above all things, and through
all things, and in you all. That same aliaunce is also taught us by the
sacrament of the holy supper. 1. Cor. 10. d
Is not the cup of blessing which we bless, the communion of the blood of
Christ? Is not the bread which we break, the communion of the body of Christ?
because that we which are many, are one bread and one body, inasmuch as we are
al partakers of one bread. And as we see that the amity and charity of the
panimes for every light or small occasion, changes often times to a great
enmity and hatred: inasmuch as it is not founded but upon a blind and
bryttle thing: so the Christians regarding not the true use of that love and
charity, do norish up among them infinite debates and great enmities and
hatreds. 1. Cor. 14 f
And do not consider that our God is not the God of confusion (as the Gods of
the Gentiles are) but is the God of peace. That is the cause wherefore the
panimes so oftentimes demand vengeance of their enemies, and being afflicted
and punished of their neighbors and kinsmen, do fall into impatience and
despair. Where as the true children of God do take all things in good part,
as come of Gods hands. Even so the kingly prophet David being wronged and
cursed of Semei, 2. Reg. 16. ^
would not take any vengeance: although that Abisai and his servants were
importunate upon him but he said unto them: behold my son which came out of
mine own bowels seeks my life: how much more then may this son of Iemini do
it: suffer him therefore to curse, for the Lord has bidden him: happily the
Lord will look on my weeping eyes and wretchedness, and do me good for his
cursing this day. Job. 2. b
Even so Job being persuaded by his wife to forsake God for the afflictions
that he suffered, said unto her: thou speak like a foolish woman: Seeing
we have received prosperity at the hand of God, wherefore should we not be
content with adversity also? Those holy men knew assuredly that there comes
no plague into a city without it be the Lords doing, Amos. 3. b
and also that we ought not to be overcome of that which is evil: Romans 12. d
but we must overcome evil with goodness: in fuffering patiently, him which
would force and compel us. If thou demand of me, wherein the true Christian
charity and the use of the same does consist: I do answer thee, that it
consists principally and chiefly the one to help and cherish an other in
perilous things. According to that which Solomon dofh speak of in his
proverbs, Pro. 17. c
saying, yt he is a friend yt always loves, and in adversity a man shall know
who is his brother, The which Jesus Christ witnesses, when he rebuked the
wicked yt he was an hongred, Mat. 25. d
and they gave him no meat: he thirsted and they gave him no drink was
herbourlesse, and they lodged him not: naked, and they clothed him not: sick
and in prison, and they visited him not. By this a man may plainly see and
percieue ye ingratitude of those, who in steed to help and assist the
necessities of their neighbors, parents and friends, do rebuke and check them
in their afflictions and calamities. Such people do make me to remember the
friends of Job, Job. 11. a
who rebuked and checked him, that he has well deserved and merited the
double of that, that he does suffer by right: and that GOD has forgotten him
because of his sins. The like injuries of late the Barbarians, Act. 28. a
objected unto Saint Paul. For they seeing that a viper which leapt out of the
fire to hang on his hand, they said among themselves, truly this man must
needs be a murderer, whom though he has escaped the sea, yet vengeance has
not suffered him to live. The like wrongs they yt passed by, Mat. 27. d
used to our Lord Jesus Christ as he hanged on the cross, wagging their
heads, and saying: Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days save thy self, if thou be the son of God, come down from the cross.
I do speak unto those who do not consider that the afflictions are common as
well to the good, as to ye evil, and are nothing ashamed to attribute them to
the true Christian religion, although that they know not in them whom they do
accuse, any other thing, then a pure and true christian sincerity, the which
is joined to an obedience due to the pure word of the LORD. Such has been,
and is yet at this day, the custom and manner of those which do turn all
things into the evil, even as did of late the Jews: Mat. 12. b Marc. 3. a
who seeing that Jesus Christ healed him which was possessed with a Devil,
said: that he drives the Devils no otherwise out, but through Beelzebub the
prince of the Devils. And then as he magnified and declared his mercy in the
conversion of sinners, murmured and said within themselves, that he was the
friend of publicans, sinners and harlots, yea, they cried with a loud voice,
behold a glutton and drincker of wine, Mat. 1^ c
a friend unto publicans and sinners. To be short, when he declared the
kingdom of GOD his father, and that he did miracles: his own rebuked him and
said, that he was mad and besides himself. The which also was afterward
objected against Saint Paul, by Festus, A^^. ^6. ^
then because he declared ye Christ should suffer, and that he should be the
first that should rise from the dead, and should show light unto the people,
and to the Gentiles. And as he thus answered for himself, Festus said with a
loud voice, Paul thou art besides thy self, much learning does make thee
mad.

Herein we sufficiently declare what we be: I mean but of small charity,
when the things the which ought to move us to pity and compassion, do
incitate and prick us forward to a more greater cruelty and in humanity.
The which I will more at large declare by a familier example. One can not deny
that the right of burying among the christians, but that it is a work very
charitable and pitiful: for the which Tobiah is greatly praised in the holy
scripture, Tob. 2. b 1. Reg. 31. d
and in whose favor the Iabanites were greatly agreeable unto king Dauyd for
the burying of the body of Saul. Luc. 1.2 d
Insomuch that the old law would not suffer ye the bodies of those which were
put to death by authority should abide any long time hanging upon the gybet:
But it would that they should be incontinently taken down and buried. And
nevertheless a man shall find at this day among the christians so much
unkindness and ungentleness, yt they are not content to have put to death
their neighbors: without the leave of the Magistrate, and authority of the
Justice: But they exercise toward their bodies of cruelties more then
Barbarous or Sithian, the which of late the kingly Prophet Dauyd lamented of
his people, when he said: the dead bodies of thy servants have they given
unto the fowls of the air to be devoured, Psa. 79. a
and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the land. Their blood have
they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem, and there was no man to bury
the^. Furthermore I would willingly demand if it be not a work of pity or
love to bury a dead body. What cruelty is that to rage on a dead body? if
he be cast into the fire (as says Saint Augustine) which has not given
meat unto the needy: S. Augustine of ye word of ye Lord
where shall he be sent which shall steal the bread of the poor? if he
which has not clothed the poor be put into eternal punishment, where shall
he be placed which shall spoil the poor of his raiment? if he be dampened
with the devil, who harbored not the wayfaring man and the trauailer, where
shall he become which has pilled and devoured the house of the trauayler?
Finally, if he ought to perish which has not visited them that are in prison:
what shall one do with him which has wrongfully imprisoned them? Behold my
brethren (says that good man) what hope can they have which do evil, when
they are dampened and cast into everlasting fire which do no good. What shall I
say in this matter? woe be unto me. If I do not speak it, if an h^athen Poet
named Ampedocles has written that all things were established and kept by
amity. Cicero. in his book of amity Saluste,
As also an other Historigrapher has taught, that through concord and amity
little things become great: And great things through discord and enmity do
come to decay and perish. According to the same which our Lord Jesus Christ
does witness, Luc. 11. c
ye every kingdom divided against it self is desolate: and a house divided
against it self falls. John. 13. d
Insomuch by this mark the LORD does know his true desciples, forasmuch as
they have* peace and love one to an other: how much is the charity or love of
the true Christians to be praised, by the which not only human things are
kept: but all things are reconciled to GOD through Jesus Christ. The which
has moved Solomon to say, Cant. 8. b
that love is mighty as the death, and gelousie as the hell. Her coals are of
fire, and a very flame of the Lord. And although that that love be agreeable
unto God and men, yet truly such are the debates and divisions among the
christians, insomuch that it should seem that we are come to the time, Miche.
7. a
of which the Prophet Micheas speaks off, saying: There is not a godly man
upon the earth, there is not one righteous among men. They labor all to
shed blood, and every man hunteth his brother to death, yet they say they
do well when they do evil. As the Prince will, so says the Judge: that he
may do him a pleasure again. The great man speaks what his heart desires:
and the hearers allow him. The best of them is but as a thistle, and the most
righteous of them is but as a brier in the hedge. And do give none ear unto
the voice of him which says, Gal. 5. c
that if we bite and devour one an other: Let us take heed that we be not
consumed one of another. Wherefore forasmuch as it is so yt this commandment
is so much commended off in the holy Scripture, John. 13. d John. 15. b
as Jesus Christ himself does call it a new commandment, sometime also he
calls it his commandment. And the Apostle Saint Paul does call it the
bond of perfection, saying: Collo. 3. c
let us forbear one an other, and forgive one an other, if any man have a
quarrel to an other: Even as Christ has forgiven us, even so do we. And
above all these things put on love which is the bond of perfectness, and the
peace of GOD rule in our hearts, to the which peace we are called in one
body of our LORD Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, and ever, So be
it.

1. John. 4. c. 16. God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God,
and GOD in him: and this commandment have we of God, that he which loves
God should love his brother also. Beloved let us love the one the other, for
love comes of god, every one that loves is borne of GOD, and knows God.
He that loves not, knows not God: for God is love. Psalm. 41. d. Blessed is
he that considers the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in the time of
trouble. A Prayer.
O Lord which have said by the mouth of thy well-beloved disciple, 1. John, 4. d
that he which loves not his brother who^ he has seen, that he can not love
GOD whom he has not seen: Imprinte so through thy grace and fatherly
goodness, such love in our hearts, that we considering that we are all
members of one head. That we may have also one self care the one for the
other: John. 3. b
and may acknowledge, that if thou have so much loved ye world, as to give thy
only son, that none that believe in him should perish, but have everlasting
life, that we also of our part bearing one an others Gal. 6. a
burden, and that also we distributing unto the necessities of the Saints,
Romans 12. c
we may show by our example and good conversation, that we do love thee of
deed and truth: yea, that we are the true successors and disciples of him
which has taught us not to gether up treasure up the earth, Mat. 6. c
but to make us friends with the riches of iniquity, that when we shall
depart, they may receive us into everlasting habitations. He I say, 2. Cor. 8.
b
which though he were rich, yet for our sakes became poor, that we through
his poverty, might be made rich, our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory
for ever Amen.

A CHRISTIAN ADVERtisement upon the commandment to honor our father and
mother. Chap. 18.
Exodus. 20. c 12. Deuteronomy. 5. b. 16. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy
days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.
THE Apostle Saint Paul writing unto ye Ephesians, Ephe. ^. a
says: children obey your fathers and mothers in the Lord. For so is it
right, Col. c. 3. b
And in an other place he says. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which is ye
first commandment that has any promise, you may be in good estate and live
long on earth. The which Jesus the son of Siraac, declares more at large,
when he said, that the Lord would have the Father honored of the children,
Siraac. 3. a
and look what a mother commands her children to do, he will have it kept.
Who so honoreth his father, his sins shall be forgeuen him: and he that
honoreth his mother is like one that geathereth treasure together. Whosoever
honoreth his Father, shall have joy of his own children, and when he makes
his prayer he shall be heard, he that honoreth his Father, shall have a long life:
And he that is obedient for the Lords sake, his mother shall have joy of him.
He that fears the Lord, honoreth his Father and Mother and does them
service, as it were unto the Lord him self. Now when we do speak in this
matter of honor, we take not simply the honor for an honor, by the which we do
go the one before the other: Romans 1^. g
be it by any outward sign, or by friendely and amiable words: 2. Timo 5. a
But we do take it as the holy Apostle Saint Paul when he says. The
Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, most specially they which
labor in the word and teaching. And in the same place he says further, 1.
Timo. 5. ^
honor widows which are true widows: Insomuch that that honor does
comprehend a subjection and obedience: also a natural bond, the which does
constrain us to assist those with necessary things in this present life,
unto whom we owe honor and obedience. The which the Lord himself rebuked
sometimes the Jews: For although the law commands, that the children
should nourishe their fathers and mothers, and to render unto them pleasures in
their old age, the which they have first received of them in their youth. The
Scribes and Pharisees, learned the children to say unto their fathers, Mat. 15. a
by every gift that proceeds from me, thou shall be helped: though he honor
not his father, or his mother: And thus have they made, that the commandment
of God, is without effect, Hierome (...) his epistle to Gern^^^^
through their traditiones: And so by that means they defraude their fathers,
of the duty ye nature commands them. Siraac 3. b
But mark what the son of Siraac says: honor thy father in deed, in word,
and in all patience, that thou may have his blessing: for the blessing of the
father builds up the houses of the children, but the mothers curse rooteth
out the foundations. Rejoice not when thy father is reproved, for it is no
honor unto thee, but a shame. For the worship of a man's father is his own
worship, and where the father is without honor, it is the dishonestie of the
son. My son make much of thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as
he lives. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise
him not in thy strength. For the good deed that thou show unto thy father,
shall not be forgotten: and when thou thy self want it shall be rewarded
thee. Saint Ambrose upon ye 8 chap. of S. Luke.
And very well for this purpose a certain ancient author said, that the
son of GOD honored his parents. As we read that he came into Nazareth, and
was subject unto them, and honored Marie and Joseph: not by duty of nature,
but by office of piety: has honored his father, being obedient unto him to
the death, even the death of ye cross. Nourishe then thy father and thy
mother, and when thou have nourished them, thou have not done that which thou
owe unto thy mother: thou have not rendered unto her all the pains and
travails that she has suffered for the love of thee, thou have not also
rendered unto her the services that she has done for thee, bearing thee in her
belly: thou have not rendered unto her the aliments and nurrishments that she
has given unto thee: of a tender affection and motherly love, pressing her
pappes under thy lips: thou have not rendered unto her the hunger that she
has suffered for thee, fearing least that she should eat any thing which
should hurt thee, or that she should eat any thing which should be noisome
and hurtefull to her milk: she has fasted for thy love: and for thy love she
has eaten: and for the love of thee she has not eaten the meat that she
louid: and will thou suffer her to be in need and to lack: that which thou
have thou owe unto her, unto whom thou owe that which thou art. The like
matters we do read off in Xenophon, Xenophon in his second book of ye sayings
and doings of Socrates.
when he declared that there was noe people that received more greater goods,
then the children do of their parents, the which are the cause that they
live. Furthermore, there are not that see so great goods, and are also
partakers of that which God has given unto men. The wife (as that good author
says) in conceauing her child, suffers that charge with most great werinesse
and dangers of her life, and of her proper substance nourishing her fruit,
goes about the day that she must travail and bring forth her child, with
great and diverse travails, and afterward she nourishes him, and besides she
is carful for him of whom she never received any pleasure: and who, not only
forgets what he was which did him good: but also can not only express the
things which are necessaries unto him. Insomuch that the mother, by conjectures
and presumtions, has regard to give unto him that which is agreeable and
profitable. Beehold the cause wherefore (that good Philosoper, Plato plato in
his 2. dialogue of his laws
said) that he of whom the father or mother, or their kinsfolks, do lay up in
the house as a treasure: he ought to beeleeue, that he cannot have one such
Image not more precious in his house, if he honor them as he ought.

To that purpose the same author recites the example of Oedippus, Plato.
who being despised of his own children, wished unto the^ ye affliction that
happened unto the^, as we do read in the holy scripture of Cham, one of the
sons of Noe: at the end he concludes that there is not a thing that we
ought so much to honor, as the fathers and mothers in their old age: who
when they are honored, GOD is well pleased thereby: for otherwise God will not
hear our prayers, and this purtracture and Image of the father is a great
deal more admirable, then so many other Images. For the lively Images when
they are honored of us, they do pray for us, and do bear unto us daily
favor: when they are despised, they do altogether the contrary: but those
which have no life, do nothing of all the same. For conclusion the said
Philosopher Plato, says, that he which does govern himself well toward his
father and mother, and toward his graundfathers, he has with him an Image
very fit for to win the love and amity of the LORD. Honor then thy
father, from thy whole heart, Siraac. 7. b
and forgette not the sorrowefull travail that thy mother had with this.
Remember that thou wast borne through them, and how can thou recompense them
the things that they have done for thee? Here one may demand this question?
that is, whether we must obey in all and through all the commandment of the
father: the which was thought to have been proposed by Aulus Gellius, Aulus
Gellius. li. 2. ca. 7.
an heathen author, and nevertheless a learned man and very ancient. The
said author answered, that the things are either honest, wicked, or
indifferent. And concludes in the end, that to things honest and indifferent
we must obey him, but to things that are wicked, we must not obey him:
calllng the mean things and indifferent, the ordinary actions of this common
life, which are such as we do govern our selves: that is to say to go to the
war, to labor and tille the earth, to be a Magistrate, to defend causes and
to marry. Furthermore this learned man does teach us, that in the places and
common charges, the deutie and right that the children owe unto their fathers,
ought to cease for a certain time: for the child or son being in degree of
a Magistrate, and sitting in the judgment seat, before whom there must be no
accaption of persons. 2. Cro. ^^. ^
And it is often times greatly to be feared that through to great familiarity,
there would grow a contemning or despising of the dignity: in that cause, I
say, Romans 15. e
the father ought to acknowledge the son, as him which is Gods minister. In
other places and private houses, the son ought to give all honor and
obedience unto the father. S. Hierome in his epist to Furia.
Let us then conclude with an other christian and very ancient author, that
we must honor our father: so yt he separate not us from the heavenly father:
and we ought to acknowledge this carnal alliance, as long as our carnal
father shall acknowledge his creator. Otherwise we here the voice of Dauyd,
Psa. 45. e
which says, hearken (O daughter) consider and incline thine ear: forget
thine own people, and thy fathers house. So shall the king have pleasure in
thy beauty, for he is thy LORD, and thou shall worship him. S. Hierome in his
first epistle to Heliodorus
The same author has written in the first of his Epistles, that if the
necessity does so require, that the love of parents is against the same of
GOD, and that both of them cannot be kept of him: that he must incur the
blame of his parents, for to keep piety and godliness toward GOD. Behold
the war the which Jesus Christ has opened of the father to the son, and of
the son against the father at his coming saying: Think not that I am come
to send peace into the earth. Mat. 10. d
I came not to send peace, but the swoorde, for I am come to set a man at
variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law. And a man's foes shall be they of
his own household, he that loves his father or mother more then me, is not
meet for me. Furthermore, I will say with the Philosopher Plato, plato li.
4. of his laws
that such is the duty of the child toward the father, that he ought to
think that all that which belongs to him, belongs properly to the father,
I mean the goods of the body, the external goods, and those of the
spirit: forasmuch as of them the son may comfort the father. If our father
have need of our counsel for to aid him in some thing, truly we ought not
to forsake him. I do except above all, the LORD, unto whom all things
apperteine. Plutarch does amplify that duty toward our fathers and
mothers, as follows. plutarch in^treateh of ye love of fathers.
The brute beasts, a little while after they have brought forth their young
ones, are out of all care, and are very well: but the nourishing and bringing
up of man is full of all travail: the advancement of him very slow: and to
acquire and get virtue yt is a thing of long continuance: And often times ye
fathers before that their children do come to perfection do die. Even as
Ariston did never see Plato to profess philosophy. Also the victories of
Tuchitidus and Sophocles were never known unto their fathers and mothers. And
very well has Valerius Valerius li. 5. cap 5.
said, that nature is the mister is of piety, who without any minister and
aid of voice, without the use of letters of her own proper force and strength
has shed out into ye hearts of children the love that they ought to bear to
their fathers. Wherefore the^ does learning profit in this matter (says this
good author) he answers, yt it does profit, not for to make their spirits
better: but more easy to be taught and instructed. In the same book the same
author does propunde unto us the example of a virtuous and good woman. Who of
long time nourished her father, being prisoner, altogether aged and lame of
her own milk. Furthermore, the seueritie^ and cruelty of the old law
against the obstinate and rebellious children, does sufficiently declare what
ought to be the obedience of the children toward their parents. Witness of
this shall Moses be, who says in this manner. When a man shall have a wicked
and rebellious child, which will not obey nor hearken unto the voice of his
father or mother, and they shall chastise and correct him, and he will not obey
them: then the father and mother shall take him and bring him to the auncientes
of the town, and from the gate of their place, and shall say unto the
ancients of their town: our son whom ye see here is wicked and rebellious,
and will not obey unto our voice: he is a glutton and a drunckarde: and all
the men of the town shall stone him with stanes to death: and so thou shall
put away the evil from among the midst of thee. And in an other place he
says: Deuteronomy. 37. c
Cursed be he that courseth his father or his mother, an all the people shall
say, amen. For he that curses his father and his mother, his lamp shall be
put out in the trouble of ^arknesse. Pro. 19. ^
And he that hurts his father or shuts out his mother, is a shameful and
an unworthy son. And in an other place the same Solomon does declare, Pro.
30. c
that who so laugheth his father to scorn, and sets his mothers
commandment at naught: the Ravens pick out his eyes in the valey, and
devoured be he of the young Eagles. That same reason has induced the Roman
Emperors, The law under ye title of ye paricides.
to invent and find out against the paricides, a marvelous cruel and strange
punishment: that is to say, to shut and keep them fast with an Ape, a Cock,
and a Serpent, and to cast them into the water or river: to the end (says the
law) that they should be deprived of all the elements. To be short, that in
their life, they might be removed from heaven, and in their death from the
earth. And Plato Plato in his 9. dialogue of his laws
in his laws has very well said, that the paricide does merit all the
pains of the wicked: yea, chiefly of sacrilege. For by an homicide he has
taken the life from him, who has begotten him, wherefore he concludes, that if
it were possible that a man might die many times, it should be most right and
reasonable that the paricide should die of many deaths. For as that great
Orator of the Latins writes. Cicero in his book of his paradoxes.
In violating the life of the father, we do sin many ways: we do wrong
unto him, who has created, nourished, instructed, and advanced us into the
degree of honor, and has placed us in the common wealth. Insomuch as
witnesses Justin Iustine in his histories
the historiographer, that there is no color or pretense, so that it be
right, which can excuse the paricide* Cicero in his oration for Roscius
Amerinus.
And for that cause, Solon the law giver of Athens, being on a time asked,
wherefore he did not establish any law against the paricides: answered that
never no man had persuaded him that one could commit an offense so heinous. The
like answered Licurgus, Plutarch
for the regard of the unthankful. In this pain and malediction of the
ancient law: we do not only comprehend those which do violence or wrong
of a set purpose to their fathers: but also those which blame them through
disdain of certain checkes and rebukes* for if he which has said unto his
brother Racha, Mat. 5. c
is worthy to be punished, by the counsel: by a more stronger reason, he
which shall do injury to his father, or which shall make him sorrowful. Woe
be unto him then, Esa. 45. b
that says to his father, why begatest thou me? I speak unto those, who
although yt they do no kind so wrong unto their fathers: yet if they durst
they would willingly shorten their days. L. cogitacioons regis iuris.
And although that the civil law do say, that of the only thought we do
not merit the pain of the law, Mat. 5. d
yet it is much punishable toward God: as ye Lord himself does witness,
that whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed aduoulterie
with her all ready in his heart. Cicero in his oration for Rosci^s Amerinus.
And very well that great Orator of ye Latins has said, yt through one only
vain sight or beholding that fatherly piety is hurted. If these things be
not sufficient, Genes 42.43
let us declare the example of Joseph: who not only when he was present, but
also being absent, did bear all honor, homage and obedience to his father,
and was very careful to help and succor him. Let us remember the obedience
of the Rechabites, whom the Lord himself put down at the rebellion of the
Jews: showing unto them that they have been obedient to their fathers in all
things that he commanded them: yea, Iere. 35. ^
not to drink wine, neither to build any houses, neither to sow corn, nor
plant vineiardes, but to dwell in tents all their life long. On the other
side, let us consider what has been the curse of Cham the son of Noe, Genes.
9. d
because he discovered his fathers priuities, and did not bear unto him the
honor the which he deserved. Insomuch that of that curse, S. Augustine in his
book of ye city of God.
a certain ancient author speaking, said: that we do not find in any place
of the holy scripture, this word servant: until such time as the just man
Noe had avenged the sin of his son. That name then merited vice, and not
nature. Let us have fear, and let us be amassed with fear, when we do see the
vengeance of the sin of Absalom, ^ Reg. 18. f
procuring the death of his father, and let us behold that the same which
served him to cover his head, has holden up his body hanged to a tree. Let us
meditate in our selves the sorrow and heuinesse that this good king and Prophet
did bear: Not so much deploring and bewailing the death of his son, as his
craftiness: crying with a loud voice, my son Absalom, my son, my son,
my son Absalom, would to god I had died for thee Absalom, my son, my
son. And very well a certain ancient author said, that, that good man
feared, what should happen and into what pains a soul so cruel and inflamed
with the blood of his father might be in. Finally, let us regard and mark
that the Lord does foreshew the ruin and destruction of his people: chiefly
for the faults and transgressions committed by ye children against their
fathers and mothers. Behold, the children of Israel, says the Prophet, every
one has been according to his strength with thee, for to shed blood: they
have in thee, defiled their father and mother. Declaring by those words, that
they have despised both their father and mother. When I do here speak of the
honor due unto our parents, I do comprehend also those who are the parents
of our souls, and instruct us to salvation. Gal. 4. c
To be short, which travail (as says the Apostle) in birth again, until
Christ be imprinted in us. I will use in this matter the argument of the
Apostle, writting to the Hebrews, Heb. 12. c
saying: Forasmuch as we have had the fathers of our bodies which corrected us,
and we gave them reverence: Siraac^ 38 ^
should we not much rather be in subjection unto the father of our spirits? If
the Physician be honored, because of necessity: shall not we honor him which
has administered unto us the word. Of the which the wise man Solomon speaking
off, Sapien. 16.
says: It was neither herb nor plaster, that restored the^ to health, but
thy word (O Lord) which heals all things. If I say, the Father ought to
be honored of the son, because he served to him as an instrument, for to
give unto him the corporal life: what honor, what homage, and what obedience
owe we unto him, which daily does show us ye means for to conduct and lead
us to eternal life? And what shall he be which will not receive, those whom
the Lord by his prophet speaks off, Esa. 52. b
saying. O how beautiful are the feet of ye Ambassador that brings the
message from the mountain, and proclaims peace, that brings the good
tidings and preaches health, and says unto Sion, Dan. 12. a
thy God is the King. And in Daniel, The wise (such as have taught other) shall
glister, as the shining of heaven: and those that have instructed the multitude
unto godliness, shall be as the stars, world without end. 1. Tim. 5. c.
Wherefore Saint Paul does teach us, that the Elders that rule well, are worthy
of double honor: most specially they which labor in the word and teaching.
The same Apostle exhorted the Thessalonians, 1. Thessa. 5. e
yt they should know the^, which labor among them and have the oversight of
them in the Lord, and which give them exhortatiton. That they may have the^ ye
more in love for their works sake. Also ye same Apostle, in his Epistle unto ye
Hebrews, Heb. 13. b
does advertise them to remember them which have the oversight of the^, which
have declared unto them the word of God: and to follow their faith, considering
what has been the end of their conversation. Also the same Apostle in his
Epistle which he sent unto ye Galatians, desires the^, yt he yt is taught in
ye word, minister unto him ye teaches the^ in all good things. Galat. 6. b
For as he himself witnesses in an other place, saying: if we have sowe^ unto
you spiritual things: is it a great thing if we reap your carnal things? ^.
Cor. 9. b
do ye not understand, how yt they with minister about ye sacrifice, eat of
things of ye temple? and they which wait at ye altar, are partakers with the
altar? Eue^ so also has ye Lord ordained yt they which preach ye gospel
should live of ye gospel. Eue^ so says ye son of Siraac: fear ye Lord with al
thy soul, and honor his priests. The same sufficiently declares yt eue^ as
we Sir^ac. 7. d.
owe unto our carnal fathers, honor and obedience: with the things which are
necessary unto them for their life: also we ought to owe unto our spiritual
fathers, and to the conductours of our souls the like duties. And forasmuch
then as the Lord has cruelly punished those which have shead the blood of
their carnal fathers or have done unto them any other wrong. Also the Lord
has showed his vengeance upon those which have despised the holy admonitions
of the pastors of our souls. My witness shall be Achab, 3. Reg. 22. c
who dispising the voice of Micheas: within a little while after was slain in
battle. 2. Cro. 16. c
Also king Asa which caused the prophet Hanani to be imprisoned, because that
he declared ye truth, which was partly the cause that the king Asa fell into a
certain disease in his feet whereof he dyed. 4. Reg. 2. d
Aso Ioas which caused the prophet Zachary to be stoned to death, and for that
deed he fell into great griefs and diseases. Insomuch yt his own servants
conspired against him, for ye blood of the children of Iehoiada ye priest, and
slew him on his bed. What shall I say of Heliseus, who being mocked of ye
little children: at the same instant was revenged by Gods punishment of ye
injury and wrong the which they did unto him: when two bears came out of the
wood and eat forty and two of the boys? Ciciero in his oration for Caius
Rabitius.
Woe be unto thee then thou Alexander, how great so ever thou have been, for
thy renown and worldly prowesses, when you did cause Clytus to be slain, who
preserved so carefully thy life. When I say, thou have caused to be slain that
great philosopher Calisthenes, because he would not worship thee: telling
thee that such duty and homage apperteineth to one only God, our true and
sovereign Lord. I will omit willingly to speak of Parmeno and Philotas,
Herodotus.
who were the conductors of all thy enterprises, and upon whom thou did put
an repose all thy force and strength, whom thou have recompe^sed with the like
reward: for so many good services. I do speak also unto thee, O thou people of
Athens: Iustine after Trogus pompeius.
which have chased and driven out of thy City, and put to death in Cyprus, he
which established for thee the laws, for to assure thy puissance and
greatness among so many enemies. Shall I forget Licurgus, Valerius in his first
bok of vnthankfulnsse.
which has been banished and driven away of them, whom he has instructed: by
which means one of his eyes was put out in a common sedition? In like manner
Aristides banished from his country, Cicero, li. 5. of his Tuscan questions
whom his own could never rebuke, but yt he was too just. The time will not
serve me to speak of Socrates, ye great Philosopher: which was choked with
poison by those whom he has nourished, in all religion, godliness and
righteousness. Sueto n in the life of Nero.
Also Seneca which was slain by Nero, although that he lead his young life in
all good manners and disciplines. These matters here are referred unto those,
which do honor their fathers, and fear to disobey the^. And sometime yt
rather for their authority and puissance, then of a christian charity and
faithful amity: and do not believe, that so many wrongs and violences
committed against the true ministers of God, do merit and deserve a worthy and
open punishment. They will nourish rather in their houses, some Iester and one
that is plesaunt at yt table, then a good man, which would teach their children
in good learning, and to fear God. What, say I? woe be unto me, if I do not
speak it: they do give the great charges and Ecclesiastical dignities, to
their domestical servants, so ignorant are they: and do chase and drive away
those, which for their wisdom and excellent knowledge, will do greatly their
endeavor to instruct them in all good disciplines. Whereof complained sometime
Basil the great, speaking of Gregory Nazia^zenus, as he does write. Basil in
his 10. Epistle.
Of our time (says that good author) this name of Bishop came from poor
people, children, and servants: Insomuch that of the Lords household, there is
no man which dare put him self against them. And nevertheless they have
driven away my brother Gregory of Nazianzenus, and have brought in his place
ama^, what say I a man? yea, a villain and bond servant. In such sort that it
seems that we are also returned to the time of Jeroboam, where it is said
that Jeroboam, 3. Reg. 13. g
turned not from his wicked, way: but turned away, and made of the lowest of
the people priests of ye hilaulters: and whosoever would, he filled their hands
and they became priests of the hilaulters. Or rather to the time, of whom it is
spoken in the second book of ye Machabees, 2. Match. 4. c
at which time the priests were no more occupied about the service of the
altar, but despised the^iemple, regarded not ye offerings: yea, gave their
diligece to learn to fight, to wrestle, to leap, to dance, and to put at the
stone: not setting by the honor of their fathers. Beehold briefly that which
we think to be due, as well toward the parents of our bodies as of our
souls. I will end by the same sentence, whereof came this word: Ephe. 6. a
Children, obey you fathers and mothers in the Lord. For so is it right. Honor
thy father and mother (that is the first commandment that has any promise,
that thou may be in good estate, Heb. 13. c
and live long on earth.) Obey them that have ye oversight of you, and submit
your selves to them: for they watch for your souls,, even as they that must
give accomptes. To the end that in all things God be glorified through our Lord
Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, So be it.

Proverbs. 23. ^. Give care unto thy Father, that beegate thee, and despise
not thy Mother when she is old. A Prayer.
O Lord which have said by the mouth of thy faithful servant Moses, Genes. 8. d
yt the imagination of man's heart is evil, even from ye very youth of him.
Direct through thy holy mercy and fatherly goodness, in such wise my way and
guide my paths, to the right and godly commandments: that they may love
thee, even as the true children ought to love their fathers and mothers, and
may fear thee as my sovereign Lord: I do honor also those who^ thou have
chosen for to bring me forth into the world: to the end that by that means
my days may be prolonged upon the land, obeying and walking always after thy
holy precepts and commandments, and that receiving in good part the holy
admonitions and corrections of my parents: I may show by works, Heb. 12. ^
that I am not a bastard: but that I am a son lawfully begotten. To
conclude, that in humbling my self under the yoke of thy holy law, I may be
felowheire of him which in all things made himself subject and obedient to
Joseph and Marie: Luc. 2. ^
and always to do the things which were pleasing and agreeable unto thee,
our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever, Amen.

A BRIEF ADVERTISment upon the duty of the Fathers toward their children.
Cap. 19.
Collossians. 3. d. Fathers provoke not your children to anger, least they cast
down their heart.
IT is written in the sixte Chapter to the Ephesians: Ye fathers move not your
children to wrath: but bring them up in instruction and information of the
LORD. Now we may plainly perceive, that the true office of a father toward
his children consists chiefly in two things: that is to say, to instruct
them in the law of GOD and other honest disciplines: and also to correct them
in all modesty and christian gentleness. As touching the first, Solomon in
his pro^erbes says: Pro. 3. a
O my son forgette not ^y law, but see that thine heart keep ^y
commandments. For they shall ^olong the days and years of thy life, and
bring thee peace. Pro. 2^. c.
For as witnesses ^e same Solomon: Where no Prophet (...), there the people
perish: but well is him that keeps the law. And as touching ^he second, it
is said in the same place, that the rod and correction ministers wisdom,
pro. 29. c
but if a child be not looked unto, he brings his mother to shame.

Nourture thy son with correction, and he shall comfort thee, yea, he shall
do thee good at thine heart. The which is ^eclared more at large in Siraac,
Siraac. 30. a
as follows, An untamed horse will be hard, so a wanton child will be
wilful. If thou bring up thy son delicatelie, he shall make thee afraid:
and if thou play with him, he shall bring thee to heaviness. Laugh not with
him, least thou weep with him also, and least thy teeth be set on edge at the
last. Give him no liberty in his youth, and excuse not his folly.

Bow down his neck while he is young, hit him upon the sides while he is
yet but a child, least he wax stubbourne and give no more force of thee, and
so shall thou have heaviness of soul. Teach thy child, and be diligent
therein, least it be to thy shame. Pro. 23 l.
And Solomon in his proverbs says: withholde not correction from the child,
for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not dye theroff. Thou smitest
him with the rod, but thou deliuerest his soul from hell. The same Siraac,
does set forth unto us the instruction which we ought to keep, as well
toward the son, as toward the daughter, when he says: If thou have
sons, Siraac. 7. c
bring them up in nourture and learning, and hold them in awe from their
youth up. Siraac. 26. b 42. b
If thou have daughters, keep their body and show not thy face cheerful
toward them. Marry thy daughter, and so shall thou perform a weighty
matter: But give her to a man of understanding. If thy daughter be not
shamefast, hold her straitely, least she abuse her self through over much
liberty. Wherefore, inasmuch as the children are willingly moved with certain
little gifts and honest presents. It should also be very good that their
fathers should let the^ understand and know the great goodness which the
Lord has ordained to them which observe and keep his law: and the danger
and persecutions which do follow and have always followed those which are
transgressors of his law. That is the cause wherefore in ye law of Moses are
so often repeated, the blessings unto the keepers of the law, and to the
transgressors of the same, Deuteronomy. 2^. a
the cursinges which are contained: chiefly in the books of Leuiticus and
Deuteronomium. And also in the prophecy of Esaie, the Lord said: Leuit. 26. a
If ye be loving and obedient, ye shall enjoy the best thing that grows in
the land. But if ye be obstinate and rebellious, ye shall be devoured with
the sword: for thus the Lord has promised with his own mouth. And by his
prophet Baruch Baruc. 3. b
he says: O Israel, hear the commandments of life: ponder them well with
thine ears, that thou maiste learn wisdom. But how happens it Israel that
thou art in thine enemies land? thou art waxen old in a strange country and
defiled with the dead. Why art thou become like them, that go down to their
graves? Even because thou have forsaken the well of wisdom. For if thou
had walked in the way of GOD, truly thou should have remained still
safe in thine own land. That is the very cause which has induced oftentimes
the Lord to cause to be set up for the people a certain mark, and perpetual
monument in the places in which he has given witness of his puissance and
greatness: to the end to declare and show unto the people that he was
favorable unto them. Also that the little children regarding, beholding, and
marking such tropes and monumentes: they should be admonished by their
parents, of the goodness and benignity of the Lord. I will recite for this
matter three examples of the old law: the first is in the book of
Deuteronomium, Deuteronomy. 6. b
where the LORD having given his law and precepts unto the people: commanded
them to write the^ upon the posts of their houses and upon their gates. And
to have them as papers of remembrance between their eyes, and that which
follows. To the end that by that means ye young people should be induced
and persuaded to observe them. In like manner it is written in Exodus, Exo. 12.
b* g
how he exhorted the^ to keep ye ordinances of ye Lords passover for ever,
and of the unleavened bread, in remembrance of ye deliverance out of the land
Egypt. To ye end says Moses, yt when your children ask you what manner of
service is this ye do? ye shall say: it is the sacrifice of the Lords
passover which passed over the houses of ye children of Israel in Egypt, as
he smote ye Egyptians, and saved our houses. Besides these things he ordained
that they should take ye blood of the said Lamb, and strike it on the two
side posts, and on ye upper door post of the houses, wherein they eat him. In
like manner the Lord commanded Joshua, Joshua. 4. ^
saying: as soon as the people shall go over Jordan: to take them twelve men
out of the people, of every tribe a man: and to take with them twelve stones,
and to erect and set up a trope and a perpetual monument, for a sign between
them and their posterity, that the waters of Iordin divided at the presence of
the Arc of the appointment of the LORD. In so doing the children taking
counsel by the examples of others should acknowledge the grace of God
toward those which obey his law, and his rigor and justice toward the
transgressors of the same. Plato litheaget.
Now the chiefest mark and end that the father ought to travail in, is to
make his sons honest men: even as the good labourer ought first to be
careful to till and dress the young plants, and afterward to provide unto
others. All the whole consists specially in two things: plato li. written to
Euphr on
I mean to fear the Lord, and to turn them as much as we shall possible
from all evil. The which Job Job. 28. c
very well declares, when he demanded, how that a man comes by wisdom,
and where is the place that men find understanding? verily no man can tell
how worthy a thing she is, (that good man answered) neither is she found in
the land of the living. The deep, says: she is not in me. She cannot be
gotten for the most fine gold, neither may the price of her be bought with any
money. No wedges of gold, of Ophir, no precious Onix stones, no Saphirs may be
compared unto her. In the end he concludes: Behold to fear the Lord is
wisdom, and to forsake evil is understanding. Even so the Lord said unto the
Jews, as it is written, in the prophet Esaias, saying: wash, you ^ake you
clean, put away your evil ^houghtes out of my sight, cease from doing ^uill
and violence, learn to do right. Timot. 3. d
And ^^rasmuch then as the whole scripture gi^en by inspiration of God, is
profitable ^o teach, to improve, to amend, and to in^truct in righteousness.
That the man of GOD may be perfect, Romans 15. ^
and instructed unto all good works: also whatsoever things are written before
time, are written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope: yet truly the true office of a father, is to
cause his children to read the holy Scriptures: Heb. 13. b
To the end (as says the Apostle) they be not carried about with diverse and
strange learning: yea, Ephesians. 4. c
that they be no more children, wavering and carried about with every kind of
doctrine, as commonly chaunseth unto men, and with craftiness, whereby they
lay in wait to deceive. For as Plato Plato in his book of vows,
has very well declared in his book of vows: that the possession of all
sciences is but of little profit. If that man does not acquire and get the
science and knowledge of all good things: again it is noysible and hurtful
unto him which does possess it. That is the cause wherefore Homer Homere.
speaks of one named Margites, that he did know a great many of things: but
he does very evil know all things. For the same cause, the Lacedaemonians (as
says Valerius) caused the books of Archilaus, to be carried out of their
City: because that they esteemed the reading of them not to be honest: and
therefore would not that the minds of their children, should be learned or
taught of them. Fearing also on the other side that it would be more
hurtefull unto their manners, then profitable to their wits. Wherefore Plato
in his book that he has entitled Protogoras, Plato in his book protogoras
speaking to a young man, advertised him, to take heed to put in danger the
things which are unto him very dear and precious: acknowledging that there
is a great deal more danger to disciplines, then to the buying of victail or
drink, because that he that buyeth victaile or drink, may before he use
and occupy them, put and change them into other vessels, and carry them into
his house, and enquire diligently of those which have the knowledge of the
things, what he ought to eat or drink. Insomuche that he may reject the
meats and drinks which are hurtefull unto him. To be short, to learn of
others what quantity he ought to take and in what time. As touching the
disciplines and learninges, it is not lawful for us to transport them into an
other vessel: But it must be, that he that buyeth them, must take them in
his mind and leaving the price of them to bear and carry them within him.
plato.
And that by them he is either made better or worse. Plutarch i^ his book
(...) Nursing and bringinge up of ch^ldren.
That is the cause wherefore the same Author requires that the Nurses, should
not content and please their children with vain unprofitable and dishonest
fables, fearing to defile their minds with so many folyes and evil manners.
Even as Saint Paull exhorted the Christians, to despise and cast away
profane and old wives fables: and to exercise themselves unto godliness. In
such sort that the same Philosopher, does declare, that the Poets ought to
sing in their Poetical verses, that man is a good man forasmuch as he is
governed and just: and thereby blessed or ^^ppa: be he great or strong: be
he little or feeble: Plato dialogue 2. of a legistes.
be he rich or poor: and that the wicked and unjust man, although that he
be more rycher then Cymras or Midas, is miserable, and p^sseth away his life
in extreme misery. I speak this to the end that those which disdain to
learn true piety and religion of the true Christians: at the least wise may
acknowledge their faults and transgressions: by the same saying of the pan^ms
and gentiles. And therein, truly, consists the great duty of a father
toward his children: But the like is no less necessary: that is to say, in
the conversation: Insomuch that even as the father ought not to spill and mar
his children through wicked and vain doctrines: even so he ought not to be
unto them as an example to do evil, for to draw them away from ye law of the
Lord. The father then which is a true Christian shall do nothing in the presence
of his children, which may make them swerve and stray away from the law of the
Lord. To this same purpose he exhorts al men generally, where he says, Let
no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths: But that which is,
Ephesians. 4. f
good: to the use of edefiyng, Ephesians. 5. a
that it may minister grace unto the hearers. Also in the same Epistle he does
advertise them, that fornicatyon, and all uncleanness or covetousness,
Gregory Nazia^zenus in his oration that he made aagainst Julian the Apostate.
be not once named among them as it be comes Saints, neither filthynesse,
neither foolyshe talking, neither jesting, which are things not comely: but
rather gyuing of thanks: For as witnesses a certain ancient and Christian
author very learned. Among other things we ought to keep the word, as a
thing consecrated unto the Lord: yea, as our own bodies, because that by the
word we ought to fight for the truth. The reason is great and very proper,
of him which has said that it is easy to follow vices: In such sort. that
when we cannot immitate and follow easily the virtues, we do follow the
faults or vices. Hiero^ in his Epistle to Leta.
This author does give the example of Alexander, the great, who forgetting the
virtues of Laonides, his master, could never refrain himself from the vices
of him. And the Philosoper Plato has Christianly spoken when he did write yt a
father must not get for his children great abundaunce of gold: but a great
deal of shame and fear. The which they can not do, but in correcting the
impudency and vnshamelesse boldness of the children. For the wise lawegiuer,
I mean him which garnished the cities and other common wealths with good laws,
will command rather the auncientes, that they be shamefast and fearful
before the young men, and that they take good heed that not a young man
hear, see, nor speak any wicked and dishonest thing. plato in his 5. d^alogue
of his laws
For when the old men have but a little shame, it is necessary that the
young men be much unshamefast. That is then an excellent discipline of the
young and of the old: Plato in the same book
not only the correction the which they do by word: but if he which does
rebuke and check, do in all his life time, that which he teaches. When I do
speak here of the couersation of the fathers or auncientes, I mean not only
their domestical servants: but also other people that live wickedly, which
may turn the spirits of the children from the verity: as it is evidently
seen, 1. Cor. 15. ^
that evil words corrupt good manners. Who so touches pytche, shall ^ee
filed withal, says the son of Siraac, Siraac. 13.2
and he that is familiar with the proud shall clothe himself with pride.
That is the cause wherefore David did confess, that he has not sitten
among vain persons, and has no fellowship with the deceitefull. That he
has hated the congregation of the wicked, and that he will not sit among
the ungodly. In the same Psalm Psalm. 26. h
he prays the Lord that he will not destroy his soul with the sinners,
nor his life with the bloudthirsty. In whose hands is wickedness, and their
right hand is full of gytes.

Behold the doctrine of Solomon, crying with a loud voice, saying: My son
hear thy Fathers doctrine, and forsake not the law of thy Mother: For that
shall bring grace unto thy head, proverb. 1. c
and shall be as a chain about thy neck. My son consent not unto sinners,
if they entise thee, and say come with us, let us lay wait for blood, and
lurk privily, for the innocent without a cause: let us swallow them up like ye
hell: let us devour them quick and whole, as those that go down into the
pit. So shall we find all manner of costly riches, and fill our houses with
spoils. Cast in thy lot, among us, we shall have all one pursse. My son,
walk not thou with them, refrain thy feet from their ways. For their feet
run to evil, and are hasty to shead blood. These places of the Scripture
teaches us sufficientlye that the duty of a father consists not only to
instruct well his children among his domestical and those of his family: But
also (if it be possible) among strangers. I will rehearse unto thee for this
matter the example of Dina, Genesis 34. a
the daughter of Jacob, who being departed from her fathers house, and desiring
earnestly to see the host of the children of Sichem, was ravished and defloured
by Sichem: I will rehearse for the same purpose, the example of the children of
Israel: Numer. 25. a
who being not content to dwell in Sittim: But willing to communicato with the
Moabites, were seduced by them, and committed fornication with the daughters of
Moab.

In like manner the women which were ravished by the Beniamites which came out
to dance. Judge. 21. d
I speak this for some men that are careful enough, that their daughters be
not hurt or stoung with the serpent or snake, Iere. 50. d
and fear not that they be wounded with the hammer of all ye whole world:
neither regard they, I say, that they do not drink of the wine of that
great Babylon, the mother of all fornication. Apo. 17. a Hierome in his epistle
to Leta
Insomuch that Plutarch Plutarch in his book of the nurture of children
complained not without a cause, as of a strange thing, that we accustom our
children to take their meat with the right hand: which if it happen yt they
do take it with the left hand, we do chastise and correct them grievously, and
have no regard what disciplines we learn them. The said author does recite
one Crates, a very ancient man, which was accustomed to say, O that it were
permitted me to go up to the highest place of the City, I would cry aloude.
O ye Citizens what do you: that you bestow all your travail to heap
together money, and have no regard or care of the children for whom you hoorde
it up, and to whom you will leave it? That is one of ye vanities, yt which
Solomon in his book of Ecclesiastices did bewail, when he said: I was weary
of all my labor which I had taken under the sun, Eccle. 2. e
because I should be feign to leave them unto an other man, that comes after
me, for who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? And yet shall
he be Lord of all my labors, which I with such wisdom have taken under the
sun. Is not this a vain thing? For all the same which we have spoken off
before we will not incitate or move the fathers to show too great severity
toward their children: but to show unto them how difficile and hard the
nurture and governing of the children in their youth is. According to that
which the Philosopher Plato Plato in his 7. dialogue of his la^es.
does witness unto us, that the child is a great deal worse to be
entreated and governed then all other beasts: Forasmuch as he has not yet
perfectly tasted the fountain of wisdom, and even as (says he) it happens
unto plants: that is to say, that it is very easy to prepare and dress the
ground before that we do plant: Lib. 3. written The^gates.
but when we do see and perceive the budde or sciences begin for to grow, it
is very hard and diffcctle to perceive and keep it until that it does bring
forth fruit. Even so is it of man: for the generation is very easy: but the
bringing up of him is full of great travail and weariness. Also we will not
counsel those which have a certain charge to instruct or teach the children,
to conduct and guide them with force, fear, or with too great bondage. For as
the same author witnesses, plato li. 7. of his laws
even as too much labor and travail is noisome and hurtful unto the body,
chiefly when it is taken by fear and compulsion: even so no manner discipline
of the soul forced and compelled, is profitable. Wherefore he concludes that
we must nourish and bring up the children in learning, not as compelled: but
as a play and pastime, to the end that we may the easelier know the
property of the spirits and minds of the children. And to a very good
purpose has the Poet Terence spoken, Terencius in Adelphis.
which said, that it is better to keep the children by shame and liberality
then by fear. That is the cause wherefore in the time of the Lacedaemonians,
the child beeinge taken in any fault was compelled to make certain Towers
over against the temple, and to pronounce and declare a prayer, the which was
composed and written to his shame and dishonor, which was none other thing
but to blame himself of his own mouth: geeuing us to understand by the same
edict and statute, that ye children who of themselves are clean, Plutarch in
his apotheg
are led to honest things through shame and gentleness, and that it is the
property of servants, to be conducted and led by fear. Finally, this
shall serve to the fathers, for to advertise and warn them not to slack so
much the bridle to their children, that they do not commit a thing which
may turn to their shame and dishonor, as it chanced unto Hely, as it
appears in the first book of Samuel: who for that he had borne too much with
his children in their faults, 1. Reg. 1.2.3.
was rebuked by the Prophet, and afterward he and his children cruelly
punished. And the same which Saint Paul speaks off, is greatly to be noted,
L. title patria potestate cap. de pa^i q^i fit ^ist.
in the instruction and demonstracion of the LORD: from the difference of some
panimes, who have the power of life and of death toward their children, and
may sell them for certain occasions. The which the christian law does not
permit and suffer: for the correction and discipline of the fathers ought to be
ruled after the word of GOD: that is to say, in all gentleness and love, for
to prove whether God will give them sometime repentance for to know the
truth, and that they may amend for to do the will of him: 2. Timo 2. d
being escaped from the snare of the Devil, wherein they were holden, 1. Cor.
5. b
that their spirits may be saved in the day of the LORD Jesus. 2. Cor. 7. e
To conclude, that they may be sorry with a godly sorrow which causes
amendment unto salvation, not to be repented off. Briefly, I desire that the
father, in all his life time: yea, unto the last breath of his days: that he
would regard as much as in him shall be possible, to keep his children in the
obedience and fear of the Lords law: Gens 49. a
the which the good patriarch Jacob does teach us: who not only in his life
time: but being nigh his death, exhorted his children to keep the law of the
Lord. And particulerly to declare and show unto every one of them their
faults, the which we do read of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. a
the conductour and leader of Gods people, and spiritual father of our souls:
who before he died, blessed the twelve tribes of Israel, declaring unto them
wherein they have varied and declined from the law of God. To be short, he
declared unto them the great benefits of the same Lord, for to assure them
more and more in his promises. I will recite the advertisement that David made
unto his son, 3, Re.g 2. ^
as follows. My son, I must walk by the way of all the world,
nevertheless, be thou strong, and quite thy self manfully. And see that thou
keep ye appointment of ye Lord thy God, that thou walk in his ways, and keep
his commandments, ordinances, laws, and testimonies, even as it is written
in the law of Moses: that thou may understand all ye thou ought to do, and
all that thou should meddell with. Shall I sorget that good and holy man
Tobiah, who besides that he instructed his son in all his life time, in the
fear of GOD: counseled him in his death to flee from Niniue, and to flee and
avoid the company of the wicked: Tobia^. 14.
also to keep the law and commandments of the Lord, and to be merciful
and righteous? Shall I speak of that virtuous woman the mother of the seven
Machebeans, 2. Macha. 7.
beeinge environed and compelled on every side, with tyrants and hangmen, and
nevertheless exhorted them with a manly and courageous heart, to lay all
things to the commandments of the Lord? I will end this matter with Jesus
Christ, head of ye church and chief shepherd of our souls: who before he
yielded his soul unto God his father: when he loved his which were in the
world, unto the end he loved them, John. 13. a.
admonished them also to keep and observe his commandments, and to keep like
humility as they have seen in him. By these examples we are taught that the
Father ought to have such an eye unto his children: yea, all his life time,
that they may have none occasion, if it be possible, to vary or decline
neither to the right hand, nor to the left hand, from the LORDS law.
Zenephon li. pedi.
I do speak unto those which in their life and at their death do make
accounte of nothing else unto their children, but of their inheritaunces,
possessions and dominions, and have no regard to declare and propounde unto
them the law of GOD, his love, and his fear. Cirus king of the Persians, and
very rich, has not done so: Cicero of his old age.
for he being nigh unto his death, spoke of none other thing unto his son,
then of the immortality of the soul, and of the resurrection of the blessed.
Of his body, he cared or set so little by, that he desired his son not to
regard it any longer then he has closed the eyes, and not to shut or lay it
in Marble, Aliblaster, or in any other precious sepulcher: but to yield it up
incontinently to the earth, which does bring forth and nourish all goodly
things, good and profitable. Wherefore let us not esteem that the principal
and chiefest duty of the fathers toward their children, is to heap up
treasure for their children, or to give them the means not to be poor: but
rather to admonish them that they put not their hope and trust in the
uncertainty of riches, but to put it in the living God, who does give unto us
all things abundantly for to use them and enjoy them, and that they do good,
and be rich in good works, and ready to give and distribute. Laying up in
store for themselves a good foundation against ye time to come, that they may
obtain eternal life, through the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be
glory for ever and ever, So be it. A Prayer which a christian father ought to
make for his child.

Ephesians. 6. a Ye fathers, bring up your children in the nourture and information
of the Lord. A Prayer.
O Lord God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Pro. 17. d.
and Father of all them that believe, which have said by the mouth of Solomon
the son of David, that an indiscreet son is a grief unto his Father, Pro.
5. ^
and an heaviness unto his Mother that bare him, and that the wise son
makes a glad father, but an indiscreet body shameth his mother. Luc. 2. f
That it would please thee so to conduct and guide this child in his way, yt
he may acknowledge and confess that thou art ye author of his life: that he
may serve and honor thee without fear, in all true and righteousness, and
growing in age, he may be mortefied in spirit, that he may be filled with
wisdom, and that thy grace be with him. Ephe. 6. a
To conclude, yt by that means, keeping thy precepts he may prolong his days
here upon earth, obeying those whom thou have chosen as instruments for to
place them in this world. pro. 30. ^.
Give unto him, O Lord such ease for the commodity of his life, yt under
color of poverty, he do not covet or steal other men's goods, and take thy
name in vain, or trusting upon his prosperity he deny thee, and say: what
fellow is the Lord? On the other side, grant him that grace, that he may
acknowledge, 1. Cor. 3. b. 6.
that he that planteth is nothing, neither he that waters: but thou Lord
which give the increase. Finally, when thou shall deprive and take him from
all the commodities of this present life, give unto him ye like constancy as
thou did give unto thy fathfull servant Job: who seeing himself afflicted
on every side, did never murmr against thee: but falling down upon the
ground worshipped thy majesty, Job. 1. d. 20.
and blessed thy name. For all which things we pray thee, in the favor of thy
well-beloved son: he I say who was obe^dent unto thee, even to the death of the
cross, our Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE CONCERNING the matters contained in this book.
A Brief advertisement wherein is showed that we ought not to abuse the holy
scripture, but to apply it to his proper use. Cap. 1. fol. 1. That the Lord in
the midst of afflictions does always reserve certain places of refuge for
his, and certain true Prophets to his church, yea, certain valiant men, for
to withstand the tyranny of the wicked. Cap. 2. fol. 10 That the christian
religion can not be tied and bound to any limits or bounds. Cap. 3. fol. 20. An
advertisement unto those which do cry daily that we must not suffer two
religions. Cap. 4. fol. 30. A brief advertisement unto those which do blame
the true christian religion, for the poorness and littleness of the same, or
do slander it for the evil conversation and abuse of those which do profess
it. Cap. 5. fol. 35. That none can hinder or stop the course of the religion,
by fire and sword, threatenings and bonds. Cap. 6. fol. 45. ^ brief
advertisement wherein is declared that the true christians ought to avoid
parcialities, and contencions, and to keep the unity of the spirit through the
band of peace. Cap. 7. fol. 56. That it is the duty of a christian prince, to
watch and take good heed, that the estate of the religion do abide and
continue undefiled, and impoluted as well in the true serving of God, as in the
dispensation of his word. Cap. 8. fol. 60. That it is the renown of a
christian prince to be beloved of his subjects. Cap. 9. fol. 96 That it is the
honor and renown of a prince and his subjects to cause the laws and politic
ordinances of his country to be kept inuiolated. Cap. 10. fol. 75. A brief
demonstration unto those which do make it no conscience to shed the innocent
blood, under pretense I know not of what foolish zeal: wherein is showed by
examples of the Scripture how odious before God such cruelties are Cap. 11.
fol. 84. A brief demonstration unto those which of a set purpose do turn
themselves from the known verity, without any force or compulsion. Cap. 12.
fol. 92. A brief demonstration unto those which have sustained even hitherto
the doing of the reformed religion, for to confirm them more and more, in
their first will. Cap. 13. fol. 98. A brief advertisement for to show that we
must simply obey the voice of the Lord without further enquiring of the
commandment: and to believe that even as he is just in all his works, he is
as puissaunt for to fulfill in us his will. Cap. 14. f^l. 113. A brief
demonstration unto those which do make profession of the true christian
religion, and nevertheless do refuse the ecclesiastical discipline, wherein is
described somewhat the use and fruit there off. Ca. 51. fol. 120. A brief
advertisement upon the commandment to love God. Cap. 16. fol. 127. A
christian aduertisment upon the commandment to love a man's neighbor. Cap.
17. fol. 144 A christian aduertisme^t upon the comau^deme^t to honor our father
and mother. Ca. 18 fol. 161. A brief aduertisment upon the duty of the
fathers toward their children. Ca. 19. fol. 174
FINIS.

