A true discourse vvherIN IS SET DOWN THE Wonderful mercy of God, showed
toward the Christians, on the two and twenty of June. 159^. against the
Turk, before Syssek in Croatia.

Truly translated out of the high Dutch Coppie. Printed at Vienna*

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, 1593.

A TRVE DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS set down the wonderful mercy of God, showed
toward the Christians, on the two and twenty of June. 1593. against the
Turk, before Syssek in Croatia.
Upon the 14. day of June, that Christian enemy, and Common violator of peace
Hassam Bassa of Bossna, with the rest of his Lords and soldiers, to the
number of thyrtie eight thousand and two hundred, surprised the castle and
tower of Trentschina, sometimes belonging to the Bishopric of Agram.

From thence, upon the 15. following, he marched before Syssek, and played
upon it with his artillery, until the eightenth day, with such force, that he
overthrew even to the ground, the tower thereof, and two pieces of ordinance,
together with the master gunners which were appointed, for among such field
pieces as he there used, he had three in chief, which shot bollets of forty,
four and forty, and five and forty pound weight.

Upon this the borderers of the Empire, drawn thereunto partly by necessity,
and partly through desire to relieve Syssek aforesaid, assembled their forces
together over against Agram as namely Rupertus Baron of Eckhenberg general of
the field: Andrea Awersperg chief commander in Croatia: Erdody Baan Lord of
Carlstat in Windismarke, the Lord of Graswein, Coronell of the horsemen of
Styria and Carniola, and Melchior of Roderne Chieftaine of the Ruitters of
Sylesia, to the number of five hundred the Kopprainitzers also, and the Estates
of Windismarke were present likewise: who leaving two hundred footmen for the
defense of Agram, and two hundred were for the Sconce (made upon the bridge),
marched forward in the name of God: and about midnight (being the eightenth of
June,) came before Syssek, to the number of four thousand five hundred men.

Upon the ninetenth following, the Turks assaulted it: but effectuated nothing,
only they lost some three score Turks: at which instant, our men behaved
themselves manfully.

Upon the 20. day Bassa sent out three hundred men, to see if they could
intercept any person, by whom they might be informed of the state of our Camp:
against whom the Baron of Ecke^berg made out some four hundred horses, who
presently put the Turks to flight, of whom, they slew some, some other were
taken prisoners, and brought home about some forty horse.

Upon the 21. day, there issued out again on the other side of the water, some
four hundred of the enemy, likewise to learn and harken of our preceedings,
who were in like manner beaten back, and forced to retire to their Camp.

Who because they could not pass the water, with convenient speed, lost many
of their company, viz: two shippefulls in the water, which were drowned, at
which time our men took two enseignes, and one Agga, or Coronell, (who had the
leading of seven enseignes).

Upon the two and twentieth of June, our men marched near Syssek and entered the
Islande, against whom, the enemy presently made head: whose great power and
force, when our men had perfectly viewed and examined, some were of opinion to
make a retraitte, esteeming it, no point of wisdom to put themselves into
such an apparent and manifest danger. But the Baron of Eckenberg, with
certain other of the Lords and Chief Commanders, were of a contrary advise,
and thought it more convenient (in Gods name) to try the fortune of the
Battle, especially, because the necessity urged, and they of Syssek were not
able one hour longer to endure the siege. Besides, it was to be feared, lest
the enemy, in making their retraicte, would undoubtedly set upon them. Which
advise allowed and approved of the rest, they put themselves in order of
battle. The enemy did the like. And as Hassam Bassa of Bossna made head
against our men, with some ten thousand horse and more, and was now entered the
Island and brought all his Ruitters before Syssek, he caused his Turkish
footmen to be placed upon the other side of the River (where a bridge was made
of ships) and the greater part of the Army kept it self close in a Troop.

The fight began about eleue^ or twelve of the clock: And the L. Baan with his
Hungarians, and the people of Windismarke gave the first assault: who through
the force and multitude of the enemy, and namely of the Ianizaries, who were
placed next the river, issued out upon them so forcibly, that they were feign
to retire, who nevertheless were rescued and relieved by the Lord Graffen of
Monte Kukulle, and the harquebusiers of Carniola.

Upon the other side the Koppreunitzers, they of Carlestat, the Stirians, and
Carniolans, to the number of three hundred horse, brake upon the enemy: emongst
whom was the L. General of Eckenberg, with the Lords of Roderne and Silesian
Ruitters, and the Chief Commanders of the horse, who likewise made their
fight.

Now as soon as the Turks espied them, and found them by their manner of
riding, to be of Carlstat, High Almaines, and of the Confines (for they were at
the first persuaded, that they had been, as in times past, but Boures and
Pesants) they took their flight toward the Bridge, right over against their
Leaguer on the other side of the River of Kulpa: amongst whom our people brake
in with a great fury. As soon as the Hassam Bassa espied this he ran in all
have to the Bridge made upon the River Kulpa, hoping there to make his people
(who were now in Flight) presently to return to the Fight, but all in vain:
for there were about two Ensigns, or five hundred Turks, which had already
past the Bridge, unto the Footmen there, and the rest endeavored to follow
with all their might and maine: who were intercepted by them of Carlstat and
the Koppreunitzers, and forced them to leave the Bridge: And the Turks, which
were on the other shore, labored in the mean while to break down the Bridge,
whom our people with their shot forced to retire.

When the Turks perceived, that the Bridge was taken from them, they took the
water, which at that time was great, and ran so still, as if it had been a
standing lake. In which many a stately, worthy and renowned Turk and horse,
lost his life; for they no sooner entered it, but were presently drowned.

Of all these Turks, very few or none escaped the water, by reason of the
shot which continually played upon them, all that day and night.

Hassam Bassa of Bossna, him self with certain other Beegen, Aggen, Spahyen,
Sayen, also other renowned Turks, were forced to take the water even under
Syssek, and were there drowned.

The high Almains would not take any Turk prisoner, but slew them all: but
they of Windesmarke, took some and brought them from thence.

The Turks which were on the other side of the water greatly lamented, and
entreated that if their Bassa were taken prisoner, they would not touch his
life, but rather honorably entertain him, for their Emperor would assuredly
ransom him.

The Turkish Emperoures sisters son, called Mehemet Beeg, stretched forth his
hand in the water (crauinge as it were to be relieved) but he was presently
slain with a shot.

The bodies of Bassa, Ernot Beeg: Rhustan Beeg: and Mehemet Beeg: who was
chief General of the Turkish Cauallerie, were taken out of the water, and the
said Mehemet had his head presently struck of.

The Almaine footmen, and such as were under the conduct and leading of
Ferdinand Werdners, were not present at this encounter: but were left behind
to guarde th'Artillery: who forced th'ennemie to leave eight Field pieces upon
carriages (which were under the charge of the Kazianerins, and taken from us by
th'ennemy Anno 33. before Essek) and also certain f^ conetes, with thirty
ships of Victual: they took spoil likewise of the whole Camp and riffled
(...) tyltes.

Thus has almighty God wonderfully protected the christian soldiers (which in
number were nothing comparable to those of the Turks.

ACCORDING TO THE REPORT of the Turks, which were taken prisoners, the Bassa
had then of his own soldiers, men and household people, as follows.
FIrst. In men. 4000 Rhamathon Beeg. 1000 Berth Beeg of Kliss. 3000 Zeiueri
Memy Beeg. 1500 Seffer Beeg of Zerink, brother to the Bassa in Bossna. 700 Beeg
of Hertzoguina, son to Achmat Bassa of the Ports. 3000 Kurth Beeg, son to
Ferhat Bassa. 1500 Rhustan Beeg, of Petrina. 500 Ibrohim Beeg, of Likaw. 2000
Captain of Gratischko. 1000 The number of the other Spahyen, Sayen and land
people were. 20000
FINIS.

