A CAVEAT for the Christians against the Archpapist.

Ioh, iii. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness more then light, because their deeds were evil.

Mat. xvi. Take heed and beware of the leven of the Pharisees.

1548

illustrated border

O English men, that run so
well, let no man you forspeake.
For God (no doubt) shall judge
the man, that you to stop shall seek.
Temper your selfs, 1. Cor. 14.
than run
the race, that ye may wyn ye crown.
And not the crown ye perissheth,
but that shall never down.
An admonition for all Christians to beware of the Pharisaicall leven, of the
Archepapist, Hereis not half his worthy style.
the gloriouse Hipocrite the subtle Sophester, and the fraudulent cou^
trefeyctour of Gods holy word: Where the absurditee of his late abused terms
of Consecratinge himself in remembrance of himself is merely well refelled,
confuted and audyded: And at the last the self words (through the conference
of tongues) restored to these old sincere and true meaning.
SVrely good Christian brether I can do no less of Christian charity tha^
toad monishe you of a certain notable Papist who (according to his accustomed
manner) did privily trust in to a great lump of dowe even a little leven but
truly no less than leuened the whole doughe. The confection and making of
the leven was after this sort, Consecrating himself in remembrance of him
self. Now you mayese the leven is a very little piece in quantitee but yet very
great in qualitte (I mean of sowernes. For it was dug up of the slimy
pyttes of man's doctrine, and seasoned not with the water of life but with
very poddel water which has been so long kept in the Popeg filthy cesternes
that now it stynketh again, not in the Papists noseg (who have ever be
brought up with it, and have seasoned even their most delycate wafrons
therewith) but in the christians sense that live on the new water of the
welsprynge that so swetely sauoureth of Christ. Therefore (I save) let us with
all endeavor go about to avoid this un sauerye leaven, for it is nothing
worth but to be eiecte and cast out and trodden down of men underfoot. For it
has in it no whit of the salt of true wisdom, but altogether smellyng of
carnal wit, worldely invention, and deuely she imaginacion. Pourge therefore
the old leven, that ye may be new dowe, as ye are sweet bread. But I pray
you where shall a man find such words or any equiua lent to those
leuenouse words of his, among all ye words of Christ spoken at his last
supper: And verily I would never have thought that a man being no less
polityke than learned would so pertly and so portely, so openly and so
opiniously utter his Phransye and disclose either his heresy or ignora^cie
after such sort as he did, and that before the chief in earth of Christ's
church, and before the eyes and wisdom of all the wholeroialme. But yet I
pray you hold the ma^cxcused for he needs must so do, else his perled mytre
should have maxed like a Christenmans cap: his pontifical majesty should have
been more ministerlyke, his holy crochear must have be more shepehoke like.
Else the God of the Altar should be remetamorphosed, vniuggled, and vnconiured
again into a wafron cake: The Iewyshe stony alter should have no longer stand
instead. The leuiticall dysguysed vestimentes with the Relics of the Hopysh
churches ceremonies, should clean have vanished away, and the whole flock of
popyshe secre (of whom he was the chief and surest leaning post) should have
fall down into a deadly swone: and all Eardiners guard should never be
regarded. But yet I say I would never have expected such new found terms
to have gushed out at his mouth being a man no less ware, than wyly, no less
wyly, than circomspecte, no less circomspecte than worldly wise: Sauinge
only the sacred Scripture must be true, and needs must be fulfilled which
says.

I will destroy the wisdom of the wise / and wilcast a way the understanding
of the prudent. Esa. xxix.


Therefore let us give thanks with our Lord Jesus unto God the father, that he
has hyd his divine inisteries from the wise and shows them unto babes:
verelye we se now that it so pleases his most druine maiestee. But to you
master Craftye (and pleases your consecration) me thinks ye were a little to
folyshe hardy to brag out your self before so courageous a Lion who could
dasihe, quayle, and hwisht al your bragginges with the lest rorynge of his
mouth. Prou. 20.
Me thinks, ye took a little to much pain, to go about to cast dust into
such men's eyes as there were: for they cold clearly forse whether tended your
dusty endeavor with out any foreign spectacles.

O syg (I am sorye for your chance) ye were a little over seen that ye would
play the Sophester so kyndly, before so many perfect Logicians (as there were)
who cold epsy out your solemn subtle sophesmes, and entryp you at their
will and pleasure.

But you knew well enough that ye should not be disputed nor resoned with
all, nor yet interrupted for ye while, and that by like made you so bold to
lashe out what soever came upon your tongues end. But syra shall I be sorye or
you and the Papists that ye spente so vaynely your Rhetorical colors? for
there were in that Auditorye to great a nombre that could espy through (for
all your fresh colors and dark shadowynges) the rotten posts of the
Romyshe church.

But I promise you master Sophester and ye had bestowed the saine goodly
ambiguouse sermon of yours, in any place else in England (both the
Universities excepted) you should have left your audyence in a great doubt
whether ye were an Archepapiste or a microchristian, and whether ye less
favored man's law or Gods law.

But in dead ye seemed than, rather to keep your self within the prescripte
bounds of man's law, than to lean to the sure posts of Gods law.

Yea it was wyttyly done of you to keep you still with in the reach of your
cauell, for thence you might safely snarre and snatche at whom you would, if
they did myslyke your lordshyppe: But I trust you will save one, if man's
pollecie can prevail. But alas I am sorye that dead men's boues (I do not
mean. Barnes moare than others) are now seen in your whyted sepulcher: Yet I
pray God (and his pleaser be not ye contrary) to auerte the vengeange of
Saynetes prayers from you, Apoea. 6.
and to direct yet your heart to cleave to the immaculate law of the Lord,
and receive the head corner stone into your building. I pray God even heartily
to make you a new Christian brother, of an old papistical Saul: I pray God that
we may have just occasion to praise God of your godly conversion. And I pray
God that ye have not the power to play the.ii. pyked staff no more. For ye
have dalyed to long, ye have dissimuled to long, ye have haulted on both sides
to long: I pray God that you may yet remember the common proverb that
affirms ever to be better than never: yet may you be Paul, if Christ will.
And I pray you to be no more offended with this my writing than ye would have
me to be offended with your sermon: I forgive you on my part and I pray God
forgive you also: and I pray you to do likewise unto me. For surely if ye be so
wise a man as ye are esteemed, ye woll rather covet to look in a true glass,
than in a flatteryng myrrour: But through your good patience I must go about to
pourge out that same little leaven that you hyd of late purposely in ye dowghy
lump of your pharasaicall sermon. Why do not you yourselfe know (but every
Christian knows) that it is a sower leuenouse doctrine to alter the
institution fo the Lords supper? And you knew well enough that all papists
and all the unlearned people take this word (consecratinge) for
transubstantiatyng, changing, or alteryng of the sacramental bread and wine
into the very natural body of Christ (and as they call it) flesh blood and
bone: But I pray you was this well done of you? or where found you ye word
(Consecrating) of yours. But I am sure ye will say that it counteruaileth
benedixit which signifies also in Englysh (he blessed.) Well I will grant all that: but why than did you wrest the blessing into consecration? Mary because
it was a more glad some euangeli for your disciples and a more to the some
swillig for your hoggy she Massers: but (thanks be to ye lord) ye triumph was
but short and the banquet but a dream. But paraduenture you will relent some
what, and yield so far (by cause ye can donone other) as to forgo this word
Consecratynge, so that ye may have blessing for it: Than ye will proceed and
say that (he blessed himself) which (after your mind) is all one in
effect, as the Evangelist, had said he consecrated himself: why than be it
so, for a while yet. But than from whence conveyed you in, that word
(himself) for there is no such word in ye text: but tha^ will you straight
way say there is panis bread in the text: That do I grant also
neue^rthelesse you spell to well, and put to gether to fast, if that ye will say
(he blessed the bread). I pray you of whence have you ye word (he blessed)
Mary of benedixit but I pray you farther (by cause ye be learned in the
tongues) tell me yet of whence had you that benedixit? you will say of eulogese
the Greek word which betokens in Engloshe he blessed, he praised, or he
spoke well of. Well in so much, that you told me what answered to benedixit in
the Greek text: I will likewise tell you what answers to it in the Hebrew.
For I am assured, ye will not deny but Matthew wrote his Gospel in hebrewe:
And writes ueieuarech for et benedirit and he blessed. How be it the Hebrew
verb barech betoke neth as well and as indifferentlye (gratias egit) he, gave
thanks, as he blessed: wha^ that soever ye place may suffer to be so
understand: And I pray you what place else in the whole scripture may better
suffer yea or rather does require (...) barech, to signify to give thanks
more than this same place does I pray you was not even ye same Jesus Christ
before this time of his last supper, accustomed to give thanks unto his
heavenly father at receyuyng of his bodily sustenaunce or not? you woll
paraduenture say nay: No, but than on what shall we ground our godly custom
of saying Grace or geuyng thanks unto God, at meat time? It seems to me that
that laudable and godly ceremouye (as an imitacion of Christ's own manner) came
up, among the Christians even from his time. For the Evangelist Matthew in
the.rxvi. cap, says Wcheshamer weth-tehillah, that is: when they had said
praise, wha^ they said grace, or when they had given thanks: erge, there were
more than Christ himself: And who should, they be but ye Apostles which (as
it be co^eth a disciple) followed their masters trade, and so successively ye
christians accustomed themselves after ye manner until this day. Ye but tha^
will you say ye there be.ii. kind of Graces, one said after meat named Gratias
actioru^ a thanks geuyng: and an other said before meat called Consecratio
mense the consecration of the table, the blessyng or halwyng of ye meat. Now by
all halowes it passes my brains to avoid this blyssynge and halowyng of
yours, onles I halowe out on the Angel of heaven who (and you will accept it)
shall answer you with the same words as he spoke to Peter wha^ he was of your
opinion, his words were these: what God has cleansed call not thou comun or
unclean. To the which Saint Paul subscribeth on this wise:

All the treatures of God are good: 1. Tim. iiii


Than if all manner of fourfoted beasts of the earth, and vermen, Actuu^.x.
and worms, and fowls of the air be clean: And if all the creatures of God
be good, what neade they than so much of our blessing and halowyng? but we
ought in very deed to render most highest thanks unto God for his bounteouse
lyberalitee of his creatures whom we have the fruitio^ not only in our daily
fode but in the rest of our sustentatio^. Again Matthew writes in the.xv.
chapter of his gospel. That Christ took seven loves in his hands and seven
fyshes and gave thanks: But here the Euangelyste ded not use uaiebarech
(which you expound always he blyssed) but uaiomer todha which is after the
hebrew phrase) and saying knowledge, (and after the English speech) and he
gave thanks: But paraduenture you will english it, that he was confessed
than, or said his confiteor. But what should I make so many words of the
hebrew phrase of barech? for have not we borrowed ye same phrase of the Hebrews
and do even use it right well in the common speech when we speak on this
sort: Now we have dyned blessed be God, or thus: My Lord Protectors grace
has had a fair day on our enemies (blessed be God) and send us still scoch
news. And what do we mean by this (blessed be God) but thanks be given unto
God for his benefits that he vouch saved to bestow them on us that so
unworthily have deserved them at his hand? And therefore we can do no less at
the rehearsal of so many benefits (seeing we acknowledge that that we received
them al together of him) as it were in a recompense but say, blessed be God, or
thanked be God, which is all one effect, saving the one is the phrase of the
Hebrews, and the other the very english phrase. And after this manner is the
word (blissed) take in the.xlvii. chapter of: Genesis: wheare it is written:

Joseph brought in / Jacob his father and set him before Pharao: and blessed
Pharao.

which was as who say in english, he thanked Pharao for so many benefits
showed unto his father. Like wise is it most evident that (bless) must be
taken for geuyng thanks in ye Psalm. C.iii. which begins.

Bless the lord (O my soul) and all that is with in me / bless his holy
name. Bless the Lord O my soul / and forget not all his benefits. which
forgeueth all thy sins / and heals al thine infirmites. Which saves thy
life from destruction / and crownethe the with mercy and loving kyndnes. which
satisfies thy desire with good things / making the young and lusty as an
Egle. etc.

Woe therefore be to all the wresters of the word of God. And twyse woe unto him
ye purposelye depraueth the same. I pray you why would you not call the
words of consecration, ye words of christifi eng? or the words of creatyng
of Christ? or ye words yt make christ a new? No, no: ye were wyser tha^ so for
than dame Hypocrisye could never so smothely have crepte in, nor so many
hundredth years have continued. And even like sleyght ye practysed when ye used
ye strange vocable Exorcizo te: for coniuro te, I conjure the etc. for we
should never have strayed so far (the coniuryng term known) as to say. A qua
benedicta sit nobis salus et uita. The holy water be our health and life. Alas
alas what seas of myschiefes have we run headlyng into by reason of your
strange terms? which if I should prosecute to rehearse one by one I should
rather be tediouse unto the reader than persuade you to take your pen and to
write for to redress ye same. Such stiff obstinacy (the more to be pytyed)
is so euidetly seen in you. I pray God yet of his tender clemencye to souple a
little ye Pharao hardness of your flynty heart. But away than with your
papistical co^ secratyng: away with your hypocritical Necromancia and
coniuryng? Away with all such colored holiness: God can not be mocked. Galat.
vt.
Therefore it will not prevail you to prattle to him saycnge.

Lord Lord have not we prophesied in thy name: have not we cast out deuiles
through thy name?

And done many miracles through thy name?

For than will he answer you, eue^ thus: For all your fantastical
preaching for all your holy consecratyng and for all your colored cuniuryng.
I never knew you depart from me, ye that work iniquity. But how long will
you de void of the Lords feare-how long will you defye his loving kyndnes?
And how long will you abuse his most holy word? But yet take heed, take bid,
in the mean while, lest an evil sprite say unto you

Jesus I know and Paul I know: but who are ye?

And with that (for deprauynge of their words) have power to run on you and
wound you. But to return to the propose. Now paraduenture for all this
spelling of the matter, the papists be scant yet wholly resolved: wherefore we
must divine by what means Christ words at his last supper, began to be
called, nerba consecrationis the works of consecration: And I say they might
well be called so if they were understand, meant, and construed, after the true
meaning of the Hebrew speech, that is: uerba consecrationis.i. uerba co^secrata
hoc est uerba sacra: the sacred words: And So ought all the words of the holy
scripture be named, as well as they. But now to confirm that the hebrews used
such manner of speech neadeth no probacion: But yet, for their sake that be not
much co^ ucrsant in reading of the holy scripture (which every where is eue^
full of such phr ases (we will add an example or two: Math. xxiiii.

When ye shall se the abomination of desolation.

Which should be englyshed when ye shall se the abominable desolacion. And
after the manner of the same language spoke Paul (though he wrote in an other
tongue) to the Romans. cap. vii.

O wretched man that I am (says he) who shall deliver me from this body of
death:

That is from this deadlye or mortal body.

So David has in the first verse of the.xv. Psalm.

Lord who shall be receined into thy pauilyon: or who shall dwell in the
mountain of thy holiness.

Where the English tongue would require it to be translated, in thy holy
mountain.

But yet in as much as every man (for whose behofe the holy scripture is
indifferently written and prea^ched) does not understand the same Hebrew
phrase: let us no more chop and change with speches: Let us no more make ye
vocables and terms of the high mysteries of our Religion more mystical and
and confuse than Christ hymsel ever made them. Let us neither add nor take
ought away from the word of God, lest we shall be accursed not of the Pope
(which is not wont to accurse for such mattiers) but of GOD. Therefore I
pray you for the reverence that ye owe unto the truth (I mean) unto Jesus
Christ the very truethe, that ye will no longer usurp nor practice the dark
terms and (as they be comenly taken) wicked, the terms I say of
consecratynge, (or as (you commenly call them) the words of consecration. I
pray you even for Jesus Christ's sake to forgo such popyshe termynge. And
call them when neade shall require to talk of them) whether soever ye will,
the holy words, or the words of holy scripture. And if ye must neade yet a
while name them by a diffuse and a strange term, call them the Sacred
words: and I am assured ye may away with Sacred because he seems to be nere
of kin to master Sacryng your good lord. The Popes own derely beloved
country papists who made and set fourth of late the Romyshe Constitutions
(called for the mean seasone) were even ashamed to usurp any longer the
terms of verba concecrationis in their book, Called Interim.
but the same have they (as it were) abholyshed and abrogated namynge them by
a new term, but more tolerable and less odible to christian men's ears. Yet
are not these popish priestlynges nothing abashed to term Christ's words as
they will them selfs. Therefore O ye al godli pry stes yt pretend to be of
Christ's congregation, do away such fond terms: Play no more the popish pry
stes with so many external blessing and crossing, and with your outward wassyng
and shauyng. Cesse of your mu^bling of strau^gelangages before ye congregation.
Play no more (I sai) Aarons priests with your dedicated temples, with severed
chau^cels, with your carnal frequented sacrifices: with your prescrpition of
vestures, of time, of meats, of fasting, and fasting days, Hebre. x.
for these were but shadows of good things to come which be also come
already: the cloudi night is past ye gladsom dai is sprung, John. xii.
let us walk in ye light while we have ye light among us, lest ye darkness
come on us. For he yt walks i^ darnes, woteth not whether he goes. And while
we have light, let us believe in the light, that we may be children of light.

And this is the condempnation that after the light has come into the world
men have yet still loved darkness rather than light. We be past chyldehod,
away than with childish phantasyes. For the hour, comes and now is, John.
iiii.
when the true worshippers worshipp the father in spirit, and in truth. For he
as a sprete: and therefore loves he no carnal things, nor outward things,
but spiritual things, and inward things. Therefore al you that be called and
chosen to be the ministers of Christ, and the Stewardes of his secrets: 1.
Cor. iiii.
when you shall ministre the Lords supper, you may teherse and allege
Christ's holy words unto them after this manner: Good Christen brethren this
godly Institucion of eating the Lords supper: came not up at the first of
man's inue^tion, nor was not maintened byma^nes policy nor continued so many
years (as diverse other blind cetemoniall customs did) without plain
authority of GODS most holy word. Therefore dare not I no more than Saint
Paul (for fear of being found an vnfaytheful steward, and a counterfayte
executour of the Lords new Testament and last will) allege and bring in, for
thastablyshment of receyuyng this most comfortable supper, any words ymagined
of man's brains, (appear never so eloquent, never so holylyke, or never so
gloriouse) but even the very pure and holy words spoken of Christ himself,
(the same night that he was betrayed) and afterward most faithfully written by
his own disciples and our Evangelists: and now at the last (by GODS grace)
by me pronounced word for word as the text of the Lord Jesus Christ's new
Testament declares them: Therefore good Christians, lift up your hearts to
Godwarde, that ye may hear his holy words with the ear of faith: and
that you may take them for the steadfast ground-werke of your buyldyng, for the
original authority, for the true report, the direct line yt just squiere,
the vndeceyuable compass and ye very lymites of the true understanding and
sincere meaning of the effectualll signification of eating the Lords supper.

But hearken now to the holy words of the authority, which ye shall find
written in the.xxvi. chapter of Matthewe, the.xiiii. of Mark: the.xxii. of
Luke, the.vi. of John and in the eleventh chapter of ye first epistle to ye
Corinthi, (...)

And as they did eat / Jesus took bread: and wha^ he had given thanks he
brake it / and gave it to the disciples / and said: Take / eat / this is my
body / which is given for you. This do / in the remembrance of me. Likewise
also wha^ he had supped / he took the cup and thanked / saying: drink ye all
of this. For this cup is the new testament in my blood / which is shed for
many / for the remission of sins. Verily I say unto you I will drink no more
of the fruit of the vine tree: until that day I drink it new in the kingdom
of God. Verily verily he that puts his trust in me / has everlasting
life. I am that bread of life / which came down from heaven: If any man eat
of this bread he shall not die / but shall have life for ever.

And the bread that I will give / is my flesh / which I will give for the
life of the world. Verily verily I say unto you / except ye eat the flesh
of the son of man / and drink his blood / ye have no life in you. whosoever
eats my flesh / and drynketh my blood / has eternal life / and I will raise
him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat in deed / and my blood is drink
in deed: He that eats my flesh / and drynketh my blood / dwells in me /
and I in him. Does this offend you? What and if ye se the son of man
ascend up thither where he was before? It is the sprete that quickens / the
flesh profyteth nothing. The words that I speak unto you / are spirit and
life. But there are some of you / that believe not.

Hitherto have I rehearsed unto you the very words of ye Lord, as for most
infallible principles of the chyefe Authore of ye Christians doctrine: as a
very testimonial of his inestimable love toward mankind: and as ye words
of C^hristes commission whereby we dare enterprise to approach to the Lords
table, and there to eat the Lords body as it was crucyfied on the cross: and
drink his very blood ye was shed for our redemption who were borne by nature
the children of wrath and his very enemies. This must we do for the
remembrance of his most beneficial death: and never cease until the Lord
come. For there is not a more odiouse, nor so hateful a thing: either unto God
or man, as the vice of ingratitude and beastely unkindness which is nothing else
but the forgetfulness of benefits employed? and the unthankfulness for good
tournes undeservedly showed. And as he that yet ba^keteth being not an ho^gred
happens some time to take surfeit until the death of his body: Eue^ so he that
eats this supper not driven to with spiritual hongre takes deadely surfeit
of his soul And contraryly as ye bodily meat eaten of our hongry stomachs is
sone disgested and norysheth our bodies: so the flesh and blood of Christ
eaten of us with a spiritual hongry desire norysheth our souls into
everlasting life. Amen.

Here have I treacted somewhat largier of the Lords supper than I had intended,
for I proposed nothing else but to touch a little even superficially of the
terms yt were so impudently and unshamefastly abused of the Archepapist, which
terms ye preacher at Paul's Cross (as I heard say) pretermitted to speak
of, though he (questionles) full entierly and pyththely handled and confounded
the rest of his sermon. But by like either the prescription of the accustomed
time being scarce for to repete in, the whole rablemente of that papistical
sermon and the same utterly to confute: either else ye childyshe and unlearned
rudenes of ye said terms made him (as he is verily a man so highly learned)
rather to wynke at them, and neglect them, than unworthily to spend any time
in disputyng about so gross, so plain, and so tryflynge a matter. Therefore I
pray God send us less acquayntance with such preachers as the fourther was:
and more familiaritee with all those that be of that christian crudition and
godly conversation as the later was Amen.

FINIS.
O ye folyshe Galathians / who hathbe witched yon / that ye should not believe
the truth: Gala. 3.5.
ye ran well / who was a let unto you / that ye should not obey the truth:
Such counsel is not of him that called you. A little leven sowreth the
wholelompe of dowe. I have trust toward the Lord that ye wylbe none
otherwise minded. But he that troubles you shall bear his judgment / what so
ever he be.

Whatsoever things are written before time / they are written for our learning.
Rome.xv.


Beware of false prophets / which come to you in shepes clothing / but in
wardli they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits.

Imprynted at London in Foster lane by John Wally.


