THE ESTATE OF CHRISTIANS, living under the subjection of the Turk.

And also the wars between the Christians and the Turk, beginning 1592. and
continuing till the end of 1593.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by JOHN WOLF. 1595.

The estate of Christians, living under the subjection of the great Turk.
Diverse Countries and Nations are in subjection of the Turk, and among the
rest, all Greece, save a very little part of it, which is under the Segnorie
of Venice: insomuch that there be many thousands of Christians subject to
Turkish tyranny. Whereof even the best and greatest are oppressed with great
toules and taxes, and pestered with infinite extortions and paimentes yearly.
All the male children of Christians are written up at the day of their birth,
and coming to ten or twelve years of their age, are presented to the Turks
officers, who take all such as they find well made, and like to prove fit men
for service in war, from their parents, and convey them to the Turks, to be
brought up in warlike exercises, and to become Turks, and enemies to God, and
their own fathers and mothers, and kinsfolk, standing the Turk in more sted
than his own natural people. And for each one of them that the Turks officers
leave at home, not thinking them fit for their turns, must be paid yearly as
good as eight shillinges English, by their parents, how poor so ever they
be, for they must find it or smart for it. If any christian chance in anger or
hastines, (as who is so patient as not to be moved being so stinged) having
received wrong, do strike a Turk, he is sure to be so punished, that if he do
live after, he lives to lament his life, and to wish death. When the Turks
officers come to any Christians house when they go in progress, and make
their visitations, there must be great store of cheer, and much cost provided
to welcome them withal, or they will be but ill come to the christians that
they come unto. If any Christian relieve, or give any succor, aid or
assistance to another Christian fugitive, he is taken prisoner, and besides the
loss of all his goods and possessions, kept in extreme misery, and most
barbarously handled till he pay for his ransom as much as they shall
appoint. Neither will the Turks oftentimes be brought to release them for any
ransom, but after a thousand martirdomes wrought upon them, they put them to
death. Their punishments are diverse, some Christians are tied hand and foot,
and laid on the ground, with a stone almost of insupportable weight on their
backs. Others are put in galleys, where they be galled in deed and used most
doggedly. Others they tie hand and foot and lay them on their backs, and let
a long rag of cipres or fine linen dipped in pickle or salt water, sink by
little and little into their throats, till it reach down to their stomachs,
and then they pluck it out again, and so put the poor Christians to
unspeakable pain and torment, When the Turks have taken any City or forte
of the Christians, or have overcome any great army, they lead all them that
they put not most cruelly to the swoorde, into most lamentable captivity,
tormenting them in the foresaid manner, and inflicting a thousand worse
martirdomes upon them, which I will omit, they requiring a longer discourse:
and I will rather pray unto Almighty God to have mercy upon us, and to
defend all good people from the like afflictions. And howbeit that it pleases
his divine majesty to punish our wickedness with such temporal torments, yet
that of his gracious mercifulnes he would not suffer so many poor innocent
children, being carried away by force to me their fathers offenses by loosing
their souls: with which cost many christians besides are dangerously menaced,
being partly mis-lead by the vanity of Turkish pomp and pride entising them,
and partly oppressed with poverty and misery, constraining them to forsake
the true fountain of life, to drink of the puddle of infidelity and
paganism, therefore to abide everlasting thirst. Wherefore we are bounden to
pray unto Almighty God, to turn away so much harm from his people, and not
only to keep them perpetually in the way of the truth, that are already brought
unto it, but also so to lighten the hearts and understanding of the blinded,
that seeing the light of the Gospel, they may embrace it, and know that
without the clear Sunshine of the same all light is but darkness.

A prayer unto GOD for the peace of Christendom, to defend and preserve it
from Turkish invasion, to the destruction and overthrow of all Infidels.
O God Almighty and most mercicifull Father, whose power and greatness is
known unto all men, and whose glory shines most brightly over the whole face
of the earth, as the beams of the Sun from the East to the West, cast down the
eyes of thy sovereign mercy on us poor wretched sinners, and howbeit we have
by our manifold wickednesses deserved not only temporal punishment, but also
everlasting damnation, yet we beseech thee o Lord, not to regard our
innumerable offenses, as in number, so also exceeding in greatness and
hainousnes, but to bestow on us thy most gracious and merciful pardon,
considering that our only mediator and thy only beloved son Jesus Christ
has redeemed us with his most precious blood, and made satisfaction by that
most acceptable sacrifice for all our sins and offenses. Grant us therefore
thy peace O Lord, and pour down from heaven on Christian Princes and the
rulers of thy people, thy grace to embrace concord and unity, that they being
by thee inspired with wisdom and heavenly counsels, may so govern the people
and maintain their callinges, that all may be surely defended from Turks,
Infidels, and other enemies of thy faith and most holy truth. Suffer not O
Lord, the prophanenes of thy sacred Gospel to enlarge their proud dominion
and tyrannical Empire, with the possessions and territories of thy people. Let
not Pagans, and such as seek to violate and to overthrow thy heavenly
constitutions and ordinances, to bedew the earth with Christian blood, for the
establishing of Idolatry, Superstition, and Atheism. Permit them not most
mer^ifull Father, to triumph over thy servants, whom they lead into
captivity, allot to the very worst manner of bondmanship and slavery, and
oppress with most barbarous and ineffable cruelty. O Lord, indue our Kings
and rulers with true feeling and understanding, to consider and perpend how
dangerously we are menaced and threatened by those that being worse than the
worst of badnes, esteem of thy servants as of dogs, and how like we are to
become the subjects of their wrath and fury, if by thy gracious mercifulnes
order be not taken to cross their desseignes and to destroy their purposes.
Give unto our Captains and men of Arms true valor and courage to contemn
and scorn the force, strength, and pride of their presumptuous enemies, and to
omit no opportunity of revenge which may be taken on the^, for their insulting
and perfidious bravery, their malicious rancor and cankred spite. Well do we
know O Lord, that our own pride, ambition, hatred, civil discord, and what
not? does cry up unto heaven for just punishment and abundance of wrath, and
worlds of vengeance to fall upon us for our detestable wickedness. But yet (o
God) whose mercy is greater than the sea is deep, or heaven high, or the
world wide, as being in deed infinite, if not for our sake, yet for thine own
glories sake pardon us, and take from our shoulders the heavy burden of thine
anger and indignation, we not being able to conceive the unmeasurable greatness
of the punishment which our sin deserves, much less to bear it. For thy
honors sake, and most glorious deserts of thy son our Lord, and the worlds
true son Jesus Christ, deface the enemies of his Gospel, eclipse their
vanting, overthrow their proud ostentations of worldly pomp and roialtie. Let
them know that thou art the God of heaven and earth, and art pleased with
nothing but with the true worship of thy only begotten son Jesus Christ,
that all pomp, pride and glory without him, is baseness and vain folly, yea,
wretchedness and misery. Defend thy Church (o Lord) and let thy people most
victoriously triumph over thy enemy, plant thy truth in all parts of the
world, that thy mercy and glory may ouershade the earth, and all the
inhabitants thereof sing praise and honor unto thy name among all nations and
countries from age to age world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
THE VVARRES BETWEEN THE Christians and the Turk.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by JOHN WOLF. 1595.

THE VVARRES BETWEEN THE Christians and the Turk.
THe year 1592, Hazan, Bassa of Bossena, being General of the Turks, going
out of Bossena into Croatia, suddenly besieged, and within a while took the
town and Castle of Wihitz, the which had now 150. years been a strong and
sure defense for the Christians in that Country against the Turks, who after
the taking thereof, in few days built a blocke-house and a bridge a little way
of, upon the river Calapis: which being done, they burned and spoiled all the
Country over between Calapis and Sauus. This soddaine assault of the Turk,
stroke great fear into the minds of the Austrians and Germans. But Thomas
Erdeud the Ban of Sclauonia, that he might defend his own Country Thuropoly
from these invasions, mustering his own forces, and getting certain aid of
the Austrians, and other his neighbors, encamped himself right over against
the forte of Patirnia, which (as erst I said) the Turks had lately builded
with the bridge. There he expected further supply of men and munition, from the
kingdoms of Sclauonia and Croatia. Which things Hazan Bassa being certified
of, by a trechour, a familiar of the Ban aforesaid, retired by the nearest
way, and suddenly assalted the christians, who as yet knew not well what the
number and furniture of the enemies were. He came on the rereward with a huge
power, and the horse men being put to flight, he slaughtered the infanterie,
and chiefly the Austrians, and so became master of their ordinance.

Then marched he forward without impeachment thorough all Thuropoly, and alonge
the most populous banks of Calapis and Sauus, where he gave unto death, and
unto bondage worse than death about four thousand men. He thought also to
have been master of the castle of Sissek, situate at the concurrent of the
two rivers Calapis and Sauus, because it was a fit place for passage into
Austria, Carinthia, and Carniota, a thing which had sometimes before been
attempted, but then he was nobly repulsed by the rare worth of Nicholas
Miccatius the governor, and the singular valor of the garrison soldiers, so
that after a few idle assaults, he was forced to give it over.

In Summer this present year 1593. Aazan Bassa, with certain of the
Sangiacbeges, whereof he has nine under his command, returning to the
besiege of Sissek, first razing Treschina, a castle of the Bishop of Zagabria,
came before it about the beginning of June, and having made many breaches by
continual battery night and day, there was now no hope of safety for the
beleaguered, unless God beyond all thought, had succored them. For although
Casars troops, which were now mustered of the Austrians, and the borderers
thereabouts, were much fewer than the Turks, yet the Ban of Sclauonia, and
Auers Pergius, and Rupertus Ekenberger, and diverse other nobles, amongst whom
was Melchior Reder, Baron of Silesia, a man famous both for learning and
martial affairs, having the leading of them.

When they beheld and saw the Christians besieged, and brought to such
distress, with heroike worth, and resolute courage, bringing first their army
into Sissec, they sallyed out on the Turks, who had made a bridge over
Calapis, and pitched their Tents both on this and that side of the River: they
put them to flight that were on this side of the river, and making themselves
masters of a part of the bridge, they cut it down, so that this part of the
Turks army could not retire to the other, they still perished, and drive the
retiring Turks even to the river, who rather committed themselves to the
mercy of the water, than to the mercy of the victours. The other that were on
the other side of the water, quite amazed by this slaughter of their fellows,
committed their safety to their feet. There were drowned in the river, Hazan
Bassa aforesaid, with his brother, and Sinam Beg or president of Clista, the
son of Amurathes the Turks sister, and Memy Beg or president of Hertzegouin,
which was the chief City of high Bossina, sometime a Dukedom, as Bagnia
Luca, the seat of Bassa, was the Metropolis of the kingdom of base Bossina.

Amurath the Turk was so grieved with this overthrow, wherein his sisters
son, and the Bassa of Bossinas self, with many other valiant men, were
either slain or drowned in Calapis, that partly through the woeful
lamentations of his sister, who at his feet desired revenge of her slain son,
and partly by the persuasion of Sinam, Bassa, and partly for the disdain and
grief of the aforesaid overthrow, he presently denounced open war upon
Rodolph the Emperor, and made Mahumet, Bassa of Temes war, Deputy of Bossena
and Croatia, with authority to prosecute the war, and caused the Deputy of
Greece to aid him with an army, and commanded the Bassa of Buda and the rest,
to put garrisons in the castells of the frontries, and to be at the command of
Sinam Basshau of Vesirian, whom he sent as his lieutenant general into
Hungary.

Now the Christians after the Turks overthrow at Sisek, taking respite for two
months, began at last, though too late, to besiege the castle Petrinia, near
to Hrastowiz upon Calapis, which the Turks had fortified the year before: for
hearing by a Turk a spy (who came voluntary unto them, and so at his pleasure
went a way) that the Deputy of Greece marched thither, though the Turks in
the Castle besieged were in great distress, wanting powder, and consulting to
come to a parlie of surrendering the hold, they raised their siege and
departed. When this fame of the Turkish war, renewed and proclaimed in
Constantinople and Buda, was bruited in Germany, the yearly pension which had
not been paid rwo years together, was without delay, the first day of
August, carried from Vienna to Gamorrha. But presently news came that Sinan
Basshau the General, marched into Hungary nere to Buda, and that the forces of
the deputy of Greece which were already come into Croatia, had not only
raised the siege at Petrinia, but had also won Sisck, and had cruelly
massacred and put to death all the garrison soldiers, among whom were some
Germans, and had thrown their carcases into the river Calapis, and that
afterward passing over Sauus, even to Sagabria, spoiling and burning as they
went, they had taken about five thousand men, whom they made their miserable
bond slaves, and that the siege of Sagabria was expected every hour.
Therefore they thought it best to take some other course to withdraw the
enemy, and to undertake a better courage of warlike defense. Therefore there
went post to Prage Frances Nadastus, the noble Duke of Hungary, and Deputy of
Iaurin, Ferdinard Earl of Hardec, and diverse others of Austria, Carniola,
Carinthia, and other places, who did aggrauate the greatness of the danger by
reason of the Turks, and complained that unless they had present aides, they
should of necessity be constrained to yield unto them. The Emperor therefore
gave commandment to muster the Bohemians, Siluesians, Moracians, Austrians,
and other of his hereditarie princes, for service on horseback and on foot, and
to augment the garrisons in the limitanie holds, and sent Ambassadors to the
electors of the Empire, for the holding of a parliament at Rauenspurg, for the
uniting of the forces of the Empire, to with-holde the Turkish cruelty from
Germany, and from other parts of Christendom. He hired also great forces of
horse and foot men against the next spring, because Basshaw Sinam having taken
Wespria and Palatta, threatened that he would without fail march into Vienna.

Ferdinand Samaria, and George Andrew of Hofkirchen were governors of Westpriu,
and had a garrison of twelve thousand soldiers. Sinam Bassa laid siege to it
the two and twentieth of September: he made three skonces upon the high ways to
Raba and Palatta, in the night he cast his trenches, and raised twelve
barricados on them, and began to batter the wall with the Canon, and slew the
master of the Ordenaunce of Westpriu with a shot. They did little that day,
and therefore the next day they entrenched themselves nearer to the wall, and
from six several places so thundered upon them, that almost no man could
stand in safety either on the walls or in the fortresses. Then after certain
assaults to scale the wall, they were at last repulsed with a large hail of
the musketeers. The next morning had no sooner given light to the fourth day
of the siege, but the Turks fiercely renewed the battrie, and having scaled the
walls, they began there to advance their colors, but our soldiers put them to
the foil. Being so defeated, they threw balls of wild fire on the gate, and
on the wooden houses adjoining, and razed the walls near to the gate, even unto
the ground: and giving fresh onsets against the gate and the castle, and other
places, they so discouraged the governor and the soldiers, that being now
desperate to defend the town any longer, because there appeared no hope of
succor from the governors of Raba and Pappa: the night following they secretly
issued out of the city, and soght to save themselves by flight: but the Turks
perceiving it, pursued them as they fled: many of them they slew, and took
Ferdinand Samaria the governor himself, and some other prisoners.

There escaped to Pappa in safety about forty Germans, and four and fifty
Hungarians. On Saint Michaels even the Turks besieged Palatta, where two
Hungarians that ran away to them, are recorded to have told them whence the
castle might best be battered. But whereas the Bashau having sent letters into
the castle, wherein he persuaded the garrison soldiers which were four
hundred to yield the Castle unto him, since it should be a bootlesse matter to
make resistance, and promised them life and safe conduit if they would departt
having voluntarily surrendered it, they had in deed safe conduite for one mil^,
but afterward at a sign given, they were almost all murdered, so that of
all, only four and twenty escaped.

The things which followed had better success. For when intelligence was
given by the captives and the spies which Basshau Sinam by reason of the winter
now approaching, had disposed his arms to their winteringes, and that himself
revoked by Amurath, was gone poast to Constantinople, because the Persians and
the Georgians had certain new complots in hand, Ferdinand Earl of Hardec,
General of the army of base Hungary, joining to his, the Armies of Peter
Husan governor of Pappa, and of Nadastus Earl of Serin, and of Palfius, and
other Captains, marched toward Albie-royall, having some hope to get the
suburbs thereof, and the house of the governor of the City, and the demaines.
He therefore sent Husar Peter to the further side of the City, with
commandment that at midnight he should assault the suburbs, at what time he
himself would give a sign, that he also made an assault on the other side,
that so they might more easily overcome them, whom they did assail in the
suburbs, their minds and forces being so distract, and Husar took and burnt
one of the suburbs, but the Turks defending the City, our men thought best,
being destitute both of victual and munition, to forsake it: and when as they
had scarce retired two miles, the next day word was brought, that the Turks
in great troops followed them, and were determined to set upon them as they
fled. Thereupon our men stay, pause upon the point, marshall the battle, and
beard the enemy to his teeth, fighting valiantly, and God striking amazement
into the enemies heart, they turn the Ianizaries into flight, and obtain a
noble victory the four and twentieth of October, according to the old style.
The Aga or Captain of the Ianizaries being taken prisoner, reported that the
Bassa of Buda dissuaded them from fight, but that at last he was constrained to
go out to fight by the importunity and threats of the soldiers. It is
thought that he having received three wounds with musket shot, died
afterward at Buda. There were in this skirmish besides the Basshau of Buda,
the Sanzach or governor of Albie-roiall, of Strigon, of Pestis, of Fiukirks,
of Moach, of Fillek, of Newstair, of Zeschen, of Copau, of Zolnock, of Zegedin,
etc. But I cannot tell whether any of them were kilde or no. Ferdinand Earl
of Hardec after this victory achieved, returned to Raba in Iaurin.

In high Hungary, Frederike Baron of Tieffenbach, by force won from the
Turks the castle of Zabacca, which they had fortified, where resting only one
day, he brought his army before Tillek a famous castle and town, the seat
of the Turks Deputy, and two miles from the place aforesaid. There on the
twelfth of November he put to flight the Turkish army, which was raised of the
Countries adjacent, and came thither to raise the siege. The next day they
raised their rampires against the town, and began to batter it, but the Turks
themselves burnt that, and abandoning the base skonce, the garrison soldiers
about eight hundred betook themselves to the guard of the high castle alone,
but at last with condition of their lives, they yielded it by composition. The
fame of this surrender, caused the Turks which held the castles of Diun and
Hamaske near thereto, to forsake their holds, and vnassalted to fly away.
Then was the army brought before the town and castle of Zetchen another hold
of the Sangiachag, and won it with certain of her castles adjoining, of
Holloc, Samos, and Plauesteine: which the garrisons willingly forsaking left,
to defend themselves against the approaching enemy. Toward the end of the
month, Nogard (so they commonly call it) and Sangiacaf, a famous town became
ours, and certain Turks of Albie-roiall bringing a new Deputy into the castle
of Palatte newly surprised, were in December by Huzar Peter valiantly put to
the worse. But since the time of the year was so unfit, and the continual
rain made the ways so deep, that their ordinance could not conveniently be
haled from place to place, and that the army could not endure to lie encamped
any longer, they were on both sides enforced to go to their wintering places.
In the mean time Sinam the Bassa of Vesirium was earnestly expected at Buda,
but he being gone to Constantinople, the deputy of Greece is recorded to have
come to Buda at last with a certain power not of greatest importance.

FINIS.

