The declaracyon and power of the Christen faith.

depiction of the scourging of Christ

He that believes on me, has everlasting life. John^.vj. Here works in the
beleuynge man faith through love, ye good works which God has ordained to ye
intent that we should walk therein. Ephe. ij. He yt loves his neighbor as
him self, keeps all the commandments of god. Mat. vij. Romans xiij. Gala. v.
This is the victory yt overcomes the world, our Believe.i. John^.v. For Christ
says, be of good chere I have overcome the world. John^.xvj. world.
All yt is in the world is the lust of the flesh the lust of the iyes, and
the pride of goods.i. John^.ii. and he that sows in his flesh, shall of
the flesh repe corrupcyon. Gala. vii. Flesh, blood.
Flesh and blood shall not inheryte the kyngedom of god.i. Cor. xv. Chap y.
For the flesh lusts contrary to the spyryte. Gala. Ca. Devil.
Your adversary the devil as a rorynge lion w^lketh about, seeking who^ he
may devour i. ^e. v. Ca. Christ has put down him that h^ fordeshyp over
death, that is to say the deu^^l. Heb. ii. Ca. C. FOr as much as the holy
Scripture / is a most precious Iuwell / and comes through grace, unto them
which receive it in faith, through ye holy ghost, the which does teach, and
lead us to that everlasting life, which word also is very Cihyst him self.
Now he that enters not in by this door into the sheep fold, but clymeth up
some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. I am says Christ, ye way, ye
truth, and the life, every one that believes on me, has everlasting life.
Thus must^ every true christen, spryng out of christ following his footsteps
in thy lyuinge or else it can not appear that Christ abides in the, and thou in
him, as ye brau^ch in the vine, or in ye good tree, for if that thou (like unto
the good tree Christ, brings not forth good fruit, and fo^^we him in
teaching, sufferynge, and to make short in all thy living, so can thou not
be of his flock, for all yt are in christ, does follow christ, in their living.

THe world says that they know god with their good works, ye which is none
other, but ye precepts of men, yt they teach, and observe, for that call they
gods seruys, but it is nothing so they understand not what they speak,
neither whereof they affirm, which are but me^nes fables, and with them turn
they men from the truth, but the kingdom of god stands not in words, but in
power. Why make ye your booste of me (says christ) and say, Lord, Lord, and
do not that which I command you, not one of you, that say unto me Lord / lord
shall come unto me, but they that do my fathers will which is in heaven, that
is what soever ye would that men should do to you, even so do to them, for this
is the laws and the prophets. He that he^^eth my word, and does not there
aft^^ is like unto a very fool. I am the vine, and ye are the branches, he
that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit? wylt thou
know man what manner of fruytes Christ means? Verily the fruytes of the
spryte, the which is love, joy, peace, long sufferynge, gentleness, all
goodness, faythfulnes, mekenes, temperancye, ryghtwysenes, and truth. Who
soever is void of these and follows not them, so is he no tree of the holy
spyryte, nor yet none of his pla^ttes, although he be bishop docter, parson.
etc. ye although he can preach, and teach, and prate never so goodly of the
scripture. For so long as he follows not these fruytes of ye spyryte with his
living dysceaueth him self, although he thinks and says that he believes
in Christ and is a chrystian, nevertheless he is not in Christ, but far wide
of from him, like unto those Jews which said they were the sede of Abra^am,
but Christ said that they were of thjeyr father ye devil, even so are all they
the children of the devil, and in darkness, and be yet in the old
vnfruytefull tree of Adam, so long as we bring not forth these true fruytes of
ye spryte, although we fast, pray, and do never so much it can not help us,
so long as we deny him with our deeds, and are abhomynable, and disobedyent to
god, and his holy word.

Therefore derely beloved, it is most needful for us, first with a repenting
heart to be converted to God and his word, and to edefy our selves with the
most holy faith that is in our lord Christ for the remyssyon of sins. And
seco^darely to love our brethren, for our heavenly fathers sake (because they
be created after his image) and for our lord and master Christ's sake, which
says love ye one another, like as I have loved you. And also because they be
ye price of his precious blood. And thyrdely (...) long and hope for the life
to come (...) cause this life can not be lead without syn^e. These three
points (I mean faith, love, and hope) are the profession and relygyon of a
christen man, the which god through his spyryte marketh all that be his
immediately, and as soon as they be joined to Christ, and made members of his
church, therefore says Christ to all faithful. Mat. v. Let your light so
shine before men, yt they may se your good works, and gloryfy your father
which is in heaven, like as you may se in the holy Scripture, how that faith
works through love ye works of mercy, which is the office of love, to power
out again the same goodness yt she has received of God upon her neighbor,
and to be to her, as she fealeth Christ to her self. The office of love is
only to have compassion, and to bear with his neighbor the burdayne of his
infyrmytyes, for he that loves his brother, abides in the light, and there is
none offe^dynge in him, (...) is ready always to help him, ye were it his
enemy. And those men be the true christen and most happy. Christ says.
Math. v. Blessed are the mercyful for they shall obtain mercy. Loo, here god
has made a covenant with us, to be mercyful unto us, if we will be merciful
one to another, so that the man which shows mercy unto his neighbor may be
bold to trust in God for mercy in all needs (for love holds all a like, the
rich and the poor, the friend and the foo, the thankful and unthankful,
the kynsemen and stranger.) So now if he that shows no mercy trust in God
for mercy, his faith is flesshely and worldely, for God has promised mercy
only to the mercyful. And therefore the mercyles shall have judgment without
mercy. wherefore if thine ennemy hunger, feed him, if he thruste give him
drink. etc. Roma. xij. Go to then and desire god to prynte this profession of
ye christen faith on thine heart, and to increase it daily more and more, that
thou may be fu^^ shapen like unto the image of Christ in knowledge and love,
for that is good and accepted in the sight of god our savior which will have
all men saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth. Now that all men
should the better understand all true christen, the which must first have a
steadfast faith an trust in almighty god to obtain all the mercy yt he has
promised us, through the deseruynge and merytes of Christ's blood only. And
secondarely must he for sake all evil, and turn to God to keep his ways,
and to fight against him self and his corrupt nature perpetually, that he may
do the will of god every day better and better. For faith in God the father
through our lord Jesus Christ according to the couenauntes and appoyntement
made between god and us is our salvation. Further ye may se, coming from God
unto the beleuynge man dy^ers fruytes of the holy spyryte, for you ^^st
understand yt we are borne a new, not of mortal sede, but of immortal by the
word of god, which is sent us from heaven. Iacobi.i. Every good gift, and
every perfyt gift is from above, and comes down from the father of light, with
whom is no veryablenes, neither is he changed unto darkness. And also. To. v.
saying the love of god is shed abroad in our hertes by the holy Ghost, for
the fruytes of the spyryte is in all goodness, rightwysnesse, and truth. Ephe.
v. Gal. v. and against such there is no law, for if we mortyfye the deeds of
our bodies by the help of the spyryte we shall live, and as many as are led by
the spryte of God, they are the sons of God. For we have not received ye
spryte of bondage to fere any more, but we have received the spyryte of
adopcyon, whereby we cry Abba father. The same spyryte certyfyeth our sprite yt
we are the sons of god. To. viij.

ANd aso as the holy scripture shows that faith, hope, pacye^ce, ry^^ wylnes,
peace, and love, yt be signs and tokens of the fruit that spryngeth of those
virtues, as faith a heart because the believe of the heart iustyfyeth. etc. To.
x. And God makes the heart pure through believe. Act. x. which believe works
always the will of God, for by grace are we made saufe, through faith, and
that not of our selves, for it is ye gift of god and comes not through
works, lest a^^ man should boste him self, for we are h^^ workemanshyp created
in Christ Ies^^ unto good works. Ephe. ij. For a good man out of ye good
treasure of his heart brings forth good things, for it is not possible to
please God without faith. Hebre. xj.

ALso Hope has heaven because that the chrystens hope is only in heaven,
lokynge and abiding pacyently after that thing that is promised to ^ome only
through the grace and mer^^ of god, as we hope after everlasting joy, which
Christ has promised unto all that believe and have steadfast hope in him
(saying) fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure, to give you
a kyngedome. Luc. xij. Therefore do we rejoice in hope. To. xij. which richesse
is Christ in you, the hope of glory. Col. j. For and we rejoice in the true
hope (which comes of faith) and do feel the promysse of gods mercy within
our hertes, then although ye law would us straytely condempe, and that hell
also would us devour, and all sin withal our enemies would fall upon us,
yet shall they all have no power over us, if that our perfyt hope and trust be
in god, and mark with strong faith, what Christ only through his bitter death
has deserved for us.

ALso Pacyence has a scourge, because the christen has always in the world
trybulacyons, afflyccyons, necessyte, anguysshe, strypes. etc. (...) which he
reioyseth greatly. To. v.(...) the father of mercy comfort them in all their
persecucyons, for unto you it is given that not only ye should believe on
christ, but also suffer for his sake. Phi. j. Thus all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus must suffer persecucyons. ij. Ti. iij. for trybulacyon brings
pacyence, pacyence brings experyence. To. v. let pacyence therefore have her
perfyt work yt ye may be perfyt and sound, for they that are Christ's have
crucyfyed the flesh with the appetytes and lusts. Ga. v. bi^ saint Peter
says.j.iiij. se that none of you suffer as a murderer, or a these, or an
evil doer, but if any man suffer as a christen man, let him not beshamed, but
let him gloryfye God on this behalf. Our lord says, in the world shall
ye have trybulacyon, but be of good chere I have overcome the world.
John^.xvj. Therefore can no man enter in to the fathers kyngedom, but through
manyfolde temptacyons, as our Lord with his ^postles be, that we following
them night be found unto laud, glory, and honor, at the aperynge of Jesus
Christ our Lord.i. Pet. i.

FVrther ryghtwysnes, yt is purchased by Christ, which also has promised it to
all his elect, through perfyte faith in his blood, saying, blessed ar they
which suffer persecucyo^ for ryghtwysenes ^^^e, for theyrs is ye kingdom of
heaven. ^^r christ only is our ryghtwysenesse, and the end of ye law, to
justify all that ^eleue.i. Co. i. To. ix.x. You must mark that there is two
manner of ryghtwyse^es, the which be works and faith. Now ^he ryghtwysenes of
works is, when a ^an without faith, through Ipocresy ^yll fulfill with his
works the law of ^od, like unto the Pharesies. Luc. xviii.

ALso ye Israelites had a fervent mind to godwarde, but it was not ac^^rdynge
to knowledge, for they were (ly^^ as the most part of us now are) v^ry
ygnorau^t of the ryghtwysnes of god and therefore are not obedient thereunto
because we seek it not by faith, but as it were by our good works, like unto
the learned of the scripture and the Pharisees. Luc. v. To whom Christ said,
I came not to call the ryghtwyse, but sinners to repentance. Therefore the holy
Ghost shall rebuke the world of ryghtwysnes. John^.xix. because ye world will
be made ryghtwyse by their good works, but except yt your ryghtwysnes excede
ye ryghtwysnes of the learned of the scryptures. Pharysies you can not enter in
to the kingdom of heaven. And secondarely, because yt men be not vpryght in all
their handelynge and living, for all men do corrupt their ways on the
earth, like as did man before the floude of Noe, for in what manner of byinge,
or selling is there now without deceyte, lyinge, and vnryghtwysnes, ye what
manner of people is there in the world, rich, or pore, spyrytuall, or
temporal, that does his office truly, and vpryghtely, do you think that the
holy Ghost will not rebuke you, yes be ye sure for all vnryghtwysnes is
sin.i. John^.v. God commands, saying, ye shall not steal, neytherlye,
neither deal falsely one with another, ye shall do no unrighteousness in
judgment, neither in meteyarde, weight, or measure. etc. Leuit. xix. For who
soever does not rightuous is not of god, but of the devil.i. John^.iii. Now
says christ ^lessyd are they which hunger and thurst for ryghtwysnes, for
they shall be filled. Therefore he that thinks to be made ryghtwyse by christ,
must have lust to live an vpryght life before god, and be poor in heart,
seeking most specially ye kingdom of heaven, and the ryghtwysnesse thereof,
for the ryghtwysnesse no doubt, which is good before god comes of the faith
of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all yt believe. To. iij. For no man through
his own good deeds can be made rightwyse. Gala. ij.

ALso to have peace, which overcomes and consumes wrath, envy and malice.
Therefore the devil our adversary (since that peace was made between God and man
through Christ) has no more power over our souls, for if the peace of God
rule in our hertes, the which passes all understanding. Phi. iiij. To the
which peace we are called. Col. iij. then is our conscience filled with great
joy, having abu^daunce of all spirytuall goodness, because our sauyoure
Christ has pacyfyed the father, and has made an atonement for us, and for all
our misdeeds. For he is our peace which has put away, through his flesh
the cause of hatred, and so making peace has reconcyled us to God through his
cross, and slew hatred thereby, and came and preached peace unto us, for
through him we have an open way in, in one spirit unto ye father. Ephe. ij.
peace I leave ^ith you (says Christ) my peace I give ^^to you. John^. xiij. Let
us therefore for low those things which make for peace, and things wherewith
one may edyfy another. To. xiiij. For these words have I spoken unto you
(says Christ) that in me ye might have peace. John^.xvj.

THe last and pryncypall is love, otherwise called charity, because love is a
great and a pryncypall virtue above all other. For though I did speak with the
tongues of men and angels, and yet had no love I were as a sou^dyng brass, or
as a tynklynge cymball, and though I could prophecye and understand all
secrets, and had all knowledge, and all faith, so that I could move mountains
out of their places, and yet had no love I were nothing. And though I
bestowed all my goods to feed the pore, and though I gave my body even that I
burned, and yet had no love, it profyteth me nothing. etc. i. Cor. xiij. For
he that has perfyt love, fulfylleth the hole law. To. xiij. also Christ
says. A new co^maundem^^^ give I unto you, that ye love together as I have
loved you, that even so ye love one another. By this shall all men know that
ye ar my disciples, if ye shall have love one to another. John^.xiij. He that
has my commandments and keeps them, the same is he that loves me, and he
that loved me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and we will
come unto him, and will dwell with him. For God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him.j. John^.iiij.

FOr as faith, hope, pacyence, right wysenes, peace, and love, be inseparable,
and that no man can have the one without the other, like as faith, comes of
the word of god, and hope comes of faith, and charity spryngeth of them
both. For the word of God is quycke and mighty in operacyon, and sharper then
any two edged sword, and enters through eue^ (...) the deuydynge a sounder of
the soul and the spyryte, and of the joints and the mary, and judges the
thoughts and the intentes of the heart, neither is there any creature invisible
in ye sight of him. Hebre.iiij. So that we can not do, nor yet obtain any
goodness without the will of God, in whom must be always our hope. Thus may
you mark, yt faith believes only in god, and in his word, hope trusts
after it that is promised by ye word, charity does good unto her neighbor,
through ye love that it has to God and his word. Now when you will take upon
you, to live after gods word, so have you tysynge against you many enemies
(to make you to forsake god) as ye world, the flesh, and the devil, but
faith looks to God and his word, hope looks unto his gift and reward,
charity looks on her neighbors profit. Therefore brethren if we be
stablysshed in the truth of gods word, it will make us, that we shall not be
idle, no^ unfruytefull.

Therefore (says Christ) be of good there, for if the world hate you, y^
know, that he hated me before he hated you. etc. John^. xv. The world is
nothing else, but the hole company of carnal men, which live after the
lusts of the flesh and blood, being dead in trespass and sin, as
natural children of the wrath of god, and be frembe from the testamentes of
promysse yt is in christ being without hope, ye and without god in this
world, which walk in vanyties of their own minds, blind in their
understanding through they ygnorancy, and being past repentance have given
themselves over unto wanto^nesse, for the ymagynacyon of man's heart, is evil
from the very youth of him contynually. Ge. vj. viij. What is more wicked, then
the thing that flesh and blood has ymagyned. Eccle. xvij. For (...) which
is hyghly estymed among men, i^ ^bhominable in ye sight of god. Lu. xvj. ^^t
god so loved the world, that he has given his only sone, that none that
believe in him should perysshe, but should have everlasting life. For god sent
not his sone in to the world to co^dempe ye world, but that the world
through him might be saved. He yt believes on him, shall not be condemned.
But he that believed not, is condemned all ready, because he believes not in the
name of the only sone of god. And this is the condempnation, that light is
come into the world and the men loved darkness more then light, because their
deeds were evil. etc. John^. iij. Se therefore that ye love not ye world,
neither the things that are in the world, if any man love the world, the
love of the father is not in him. For he that is in ye world (as the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the iyes, and the pride of goods) is not of the
father, but of the world. And ye world vanyssheth away, and ye lust thereof i.
John^. ij. Who soever will be a friend of ye world, is made the enemy of God.
Ia. iiij. For it cann^^ stand together, that a man may be a friend of God and
the world both, if a man will have friendship with the world, so must he
consent with the world in the wyckednes of the world, whose gift and reward
is none other, then sin, death, hell, and dampnacyon. Now when the righteous
knows all this, straight way flies he to god with all his heart soul, and
mind, and leueth the world^ saying: Adewe all yt has deceived me Adieu world
with all thy vain desires and pleasures. I went astraye as I the sought, I was
deceived as I the found, I was full blind, as I the loved, I was not right
minded, as I ye pleased, I was co^fortlesse, as I ye broked, I was fremb^ from
god, as I the served, I was in death when I with the lived, I was out of (...)
yet, as I yt saw, I was full of sorrow when thou rewardest me not, I was never
satysfyed of thy gifts, I was lead ^ut of ye way, with thy mirth and glad^^^.
Oh thy wisdom is folysshenes before god, thy glory is but a flower of the
feelde, or hay; thy laughing is deceyte, thy beauty is stynkynge, thy
richesse is not durable, thy counceyll brings unquietness, thy reward is death,
thy mirth ends with sorrow and pain, he that does the service, leaseth his
own soul, there came never good unto him that loved the, there was never
comfort to him, that sought any at the, he was never good that pleased the,
there was never done right merry, that reioysed in the, he was never well that
was servant to the, there came never good to him yt followed the, there was
never none that desired frendshyp with the that knew the well, thou bryngest
all them out of the right way that love the, thy love is not just nor vpryght,
thy dealing is all deceyte, Oh how happy is he that never sought the, but
blessed be he which has his lord god for his hope, and that seeks god with
all his heart, soul, and mind, for he comes out of death in to life.

ANother enemy is the flesh, whose deeds are these, aduoutry, fornycacyon,
uncleanness, wantonness, ydolatrye, wytchecraftes, hatred, variaunce, wrath,
strife, sedycyon, sects, enuyinge, murder, dronke^nes, gloteny, unnatural
lust, covetousness, and such like. Ga. v. Col. iij. which follows after
flesh, for we are all without understanding, rude, and vnhansom in matters
belonging to Gods glory, and our souls health, and be yet in ye old man of
Adam, and are all together flesh, as says Christ what that is borne of
flesh is flesh. If that we through ye holy Ghost be not borne a new.
Flesh is also called ye holy nature of man, as life, soul, reason,
understanding, frewyl, with the chief and highest powers that man has, if he
be without the holy Ghost, for such a man such a body of sin, which can
also do none other then syn^e, how goodly that he does shine, and name him
self, docter* ^^rson, or priest. etc. We know (says saint Paul) that the
flesshely mind is enmyte against god, for it is not obedyent to the law of
God neither can be, so that they which are given to the flesh, can not please
god, we know that every man is tempted, drawn away, and enticed of his own
concupycence, and when this concupycence and lust has conceived, she brings
forth sin, and sin when it is fynysshed brings forth death To. vij. Then
let us give our selves to prayer, calli^ge for ye holy spryte of God, yt this
co^cupyse^ce raygne not i^ our mortal bodies, ever knowleging with a meke heart
our iniquities to our father which is in heaven, for he is faithful and just to
remit us our sins, and to purge us from all euyls, by the blood of Jesus
christ his sone. Amen.

THe third enemy and pryncypall is the devil, which tempted, and begyled
Eve in Paradyse through his sucrelite.ij. Co. xj. Also the great dragon that
old serpent called the devil and s^thanas, which deceyueth all the world.
Re. xii. Thus our adversary the devil as a roryng lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour.i. Peter.v. He blyndeth the minds of them which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, which is the
image of God, should shine unto them.ii. Cor. iiij. He takes the word of god
out of their hertes, lest they should believe, and be saved Mat. xiii. Luc.
viii. He preuenteth them he corrupts their wits.ii. Cor. ii.^ He works in
the children of unbelief Ephe. ii. He accuses mankind before god, and the
power of his Christ, day and night. Reu. xii. He changes him self in to ye
fasshyon of an au^gel of light that is to say Satan has made him self, as
though he were the true me^senger, or preacher of gods word, who ^e
(nevertheless) can speak none other but lies, for he is a liar, and the
father thereof, and as many as be false preachers and teachers, are not better
the^ satan him self is. Therefore put on ye armor of God, yt ye may stand
steadfast against the crafty assautes of ye devil, and against the wyckednes of
your enemies. Take to you the shield of faith, wherewith ye may quench all
the fyry darts of the wicked. Withstand the devil, so shall he fly from you.
Iaco. iiii. For Christ has put down him that had lordeshyp over death, that
is to say the devil. Hebre. ii. Christ has delivered us from the law from
the devil, and from hell. Let us not give place to his te^ptatyo^, but keep
faythful^y our profession, for faith receives god, hope receives his reward,
charity lo^eth her neighbor with a glad heart. Let ^s therefore go boldly to ye
seat of grace ^^r faith perteyneth to god only, and chary^e to her neighbor,
yt we all may find grace and mercy of ye lord our god, to withstand the
te^ptacyous of the devil, yt w^ be not overcome with his fair flateryng which
brings eternal dampnacyon.

Imprynted by me Robert wyer.


