A CORDIAL OF COMFORT.

To preserve the Heart, from fainting with Grief or Fear: for our Friends, or
our own Visitation, by the Plague.

Also a Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for staying the Visitation in London,
and the Subvrbs thereof.

Both which may be of use to Christians in other places, that are clear,
visited, or recovered.

BY WILLIAM CHIBALD.

Printed at London by W. I. for Nic. Bourn^ and Edw. Brewster, and are to be
sold at the Royal Exchange, and at the Bible in Pauls-Church-yard. 1625.

TO The Right Worshipful; the Company of the Lether-Sellers: The Masters and
Wardens; The Assistants and Livery, with the rest of the Brethren, of that
worthy Society.
Right Worshipful, and Worthy:
THE DEdication of books unto persons of place and quality, is to manifest a
serviceable respect and reverence unto them; and to supplicate a favorable
aspect, and acceptance from them.

According to these fair ends, I have adventured to deuote this my Treatise,
which does need the one, to your Worships that are worthy of the other.

You are worthy of my Dedication in two respects (namely) as Citizens, and as
Lether-Sellers of London.

1. As Citizens, because I wrote it in the Visitation of the City; and for the
comfort of Citizens, in the Visitation thereof.

2. As Lether-sellers, because you are that Company, whereof my dear Father
was, Mr. James Chibald, (of sweet memory I hope among you) who about the year
1595. was Master, and head of your Body, even as his eldest Son, my loving
Brother, is a living member of the same at this day.

It remaynes, that your Worships would be pleased, by accepting the service of
this Dedication, to Patronize the Book: The rather, seeing the Authors aim in
dedicating it to you, is, but to honor you that are living, by my dear Parent
that is dead: and to honor the memory of him that is absent, by you that are
present, which as Brethren of one Company, and Parents of Children, you cannot
but approve.

That you may the more freely grant my request, I pray you to take unto your
consideration further, the subject matter of the Book: which is Spiritual
Physic. For it prescribes you, first, a Cordial: Secondly, a Diet.

The Cordial has a twofold nature. 1. To preserve your bodies from infection
or death by the Plague (if the Lord see it good for your souls, and as
Christians you should not desire it otherwise.) 2. To keep your souls from
fainting, with immoderate Grief or Fear for your Friends, or your own
Visitation by the Plague.

The Diet is, to teach you that survive, how to live to GODS glory, by learning
to be thankful to God for your own preservation, and for Gods wonderful and
merciful staying of the sickness amongst us. Both which as men, and Christian
men, you have reason to look after and learn.

In hope of your free favor herein, I humbly take my leave, with my hearty
prayer unto God, to bless the reading of my Treatise to your Corporal and
Spiritual health in Jesus Christ, in whom I am

Your Worships most bounden in all Christian service, WILLIAM CHIBALD.

To the Christian Reader, that needs Spiritual Physic from the Word, against
Grief, or Fear, by reason of the Plague.
IN the beginning of the Creation, Genesis 1.2.
when darkness was upon the deep, 2 Cor. 4.6.
the Lord commanded the light to shine out of darkness. As unlikely effect of
such a cause as the making one see, that was borne blind, Ioh. 9.11.
by anointing his eyes with clay and spittle; which was more likely to put them
out, if ever he had any sight.

Not long since, there was darkness and heaviness upon the face of my Family,
by reason of Gods Visitation, and (behold) out of the darkness of that sorrow,
Almighty GOD has brought forth this Light of Spiritual comfort.

After a sort, I may truly say, GOD has commanded it to shine forth, partly
by his special assistance, when J was (in my self) very unfit for study, and
partly by his providence in stirring up many to be very inquisitiue to seek
after it, and to be very importunate for the publishing thereof.

J never intended to put this Light under a Bushel wholly to cover it: Matt.
5.15
for J did set it upon a Candlestick to give light in one room (namely) to my
Parishioners, kindred, and friends to whom J gave some Copies: But now at the
instance of many, J have put it into a Lantern and hung it out, in the open
streets for the benefit of all passengers.

J confess the light is but small it gives, but J hope it will burn clear,
and sweet: the Treatise (J trust) will be free from error, and offense.

J acknowledge also, that it is hung out somewhat late in the Evening, when
many are at rest in their graves by the Visitation: but (the truth is) my
tynder was wet, J could not strike fire to light it sooner, and when it was
lighted, J could not get it hung up any sooner.

My meaning is, the heaviness of my heart for Gods visytation, on the City,
my Congregation, and my Family was some let to the penning of it: and the
difficulty of getting Work men to print it, was a great hinderance to the
publishing thereof any sooner.

Now that it is fynished, and published my request is to the Christian Reader,
that he would not close his eyes, Mat. 13.19
that he cannot see the light, but open them to walk by it, to the end he
may not stumble and fall, at immoderate Grief or Fear by reason of his own, or
his friends Visytation by the Plague.

And my humble Prayer is: That he, who is the true Light, Job. 1.9
that lighteneth every one which comes into ^he world, Revel. 1.13
and who walks in the midst of the ^euen golden Candlesticks: That he would
be graciously pleased to add further light and life to the ^eading and
perusing of my Treatise, for the glory of God, and the good of his Church; and
let all that read it for their comfort, say with me, Amen. Even as J will say
with all that find comfort by the reading of it, The Lord be praised

Yours in the service of your Faith W. C.

A Table showing the Contents of this Book.
WHen tears for sin prove godly page, 4. How to comfort our selves against
grief for the visitation of our families. page 7. How to comfort our selves
against grief for our visitation p. 12. The nature of the affliction of Gods
children. p. 12. The causes of their afflictions, efficient and moving. pa. 13.
14. 15. The Companion of it. p. 17. The end of it, intent and event. p. 18.
etc. How to hearten our selves against the fear of the plague. pa. 24. How you
may lawfully fear the plague. pa. 32, etc. How you may not fear the plague.
pa, 35. The plague is no sign of Gods eternal anger to the godly, p. 43. Six
means to prevent the infestiion of the plague. p. 48. The 1. means, p. 48.
the 2. in p. 50. the 3. p. 51. the 4. in p. 53. the 5 p. 55. the 6 p. 66. Six
means to keep us from dying of the plague. p. 57. The 1 means p. 58. the 2 in
pa. 59. the 3 in pa. 60. the 4 in pa. 64. the 5 in page 65. the 6 means in pa.
66. Cautions touching the efficacy of these means, to keep us frrm infection
or death by the plague. pa. 68. etc. Reasons to prove that the godly do die in
Gods favor though the die of the plague^ page 74. How that comes to pass page
81. What makes death blessed or accurssed to men. pa. 84. Rules to know how we
shall die in Gods favor, though we die of the plague. pa. 74. 86. The first pa.
86. The second pa. 92 The third pa. 96. The fourth page 99. The fifth p. 101.
The sixth pa. 102.
Seven holy virtues or acti^ns to be done by Christians, to assure them of Gods
favor and love in life and death. page 107 A distinction of the saving graces
of the Spirit wrought in the Elect. page What brings us into the estate of
grace, and what keeps us therein. p. 108. A farewell to them that have not been
visited. p. 118. A farewell to them that have been visited, and yet are escaped.
p. 118. A farewell to both sorts. page 119.
Dr. FEATLIES Approbation.
I Have perused this Treatise, and find it very sound for Doctrine, and
seasonable for the time; and having received much comfort by it my self, J
desire others may do the like by the further publishing thereof.

DANIEL FEATLY.

A SPIRITV all Cordial, against the Plague.
OF late it has pleased God to visit my Family with the sickness. Upon this
occasion (according to good order) I am Ier. 36.5
shut up in my Church yard: and by this means I may not (without offense) go
abroad, either to the house of God to teach my people, or to my friends houses,
to see how they do: but (blessed be God (that in judgment remembers mercy)
six of nine persons Abac. 3.2
remain escaped, as it is this day from death, Ezra, 9.15
and four of nine from infection.

Though God have imprisoned my body: yet has he enlarged my spirit, though he
has silenced my tongue, and thereby taken from me liberty to preach: yet has
he put my pen into my hand, and thereby given me an opportunity to write some
spiritual counsel, for the comfort of my dearly beloved and like loving
neighbors, and Parishioners, and my kindred and friends, that are affected and
afflicted with Gods visitation on us. As also for their consolation that have
been, are: or may be in heavines, by means of the like visitation.

That which I have now written unto you is that which will be best for you to
read, and that will be best for you to read at this time, which will best meet
with, and remove that, which does now most trouble you namely, Grief and fear.

That you are grieved for me and mine, and for our visitation, I assuredly
believe. And because I believe it, therefore have I written these few leaves
and lines, (...) 11 ^0
to assuage your sorrow: for it were hard, if my affliction should make a wound
of grief in your hearts, and I not endeavor to make a plaster of comfort to
heal it. Far be such ingratitude from me, and far be such a want from you.

Though, in some respects I am grived with your sorrow; yet in other regards I
rejoice. not simply, for the grief it self: but for that which (I know) is
the cause, and that which (I hope) will be the fruit, and that which (I pray)
may be the issue of it.

The cause of your grief for us is your love; for when the Jews saw, how
Christ wept for Lazarus, ^oh. 11.36
they said, behold how he loved him.

The fruit, is godly sorrow for sin; ^he^ ^eares ^or sin prove godly.
or repentance unto amendment of life and salvation: and indeed then sorrow or
tears prove godly, when they exercise a twofold nature they have, namely, 1. A
salt brackish or brinish quality. 2. A wet or moist quality. The salt or
brinish quality of sorrow or tears shows it self to be godly, 1. when it
Seasons the soul with grace, 2. When it eats out the corrupt humor of
wickedness that is in it, and 3 keeps the heart from putrifiyng in sin. The
moist and wet quality that is in tears: does show it self to be godly, when
1. it softens the heart that is hardened Heb. 3.13.
with the deceitefulnes of sin, and 2. when it Ier. 4.14
washes the heart from wickedness and Isa. 16.1^
cleanses it from the love of sensual pleasures.

The issue which (I pray) may come of your sorrow for me, is an assurance to
your souls, that you are living, and not dead members of the Christian body,
in that you g can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Heb. 4.1^
Romans 12.15
Weep with them that weep. Heb. 4.5
remember them that are in bonds, as if you were bound with them. Romans 12.^5
And pity your brethren when the hand of the Lord touches them. Heb. 13.3.
Job. 19 21
In these respects I hope I may say with the Apostle S. Paul, 2 Cor. 7.9.
Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry: but that ye sorrowed to
repentance for ye were made sorry after a godly manner, that ye might receive
damage by us in nothing.

But (to omit any longer preface,) and to come to the matter intended, which is
removing of your grief and fear.

Against your grief I will propound, 1. matter of content. 2. Meditations of
comfort, (the good Lord reach and apply it, by his Spirit, unto your Spirits,
according to the nature of the doctrine it self; and according to my desire
and mind in propounding it.)

That you may be contented with the hand of Gods visitation upon my Family, How
to content our selves with Gods visitaion on our f^amily.
I pray you take notice of, and consider seriously these five points.

1 That we are not able to resist the hand of God, for we are k not stronger
then he? We are in this respect but I as clay in the hands of the Potter: for
the 1. Cor. 10.22. Ier. 18.6. Dan. 4.35
Lord does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth and none can stay his hand.

2 That we have most justly deserved to drink of this cup with others b we
have accepted the punishment of our iniquity. For we have sinned against God
and therefore must we bear Micah 7
the hand of the Lord, we indeed justly receive the due reward of our deeds.
Yea, we must be anmbe and not open our mouths, because it is his doing, who
has not done without cause Levit. 26
all that he has done unto us. and therefore Luk 23.
the Lord is just for we have deserved to have been beneath for our sins.
Psalm. 39.
For who are we? And what is our Fathers house, that in such a common calamity
we should look to be free? Seeing 1. Pet. 4.
the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God.

3. That we are not alone in this affliction, for we have fellows enough (too
many if the Lord saw it good) 1 Cor. 10.13.
There has no tentation taken us: but such as is common to man. The Lord has
2. Sam. 7.14.
chastened us with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men:
yea, with the stripes of them that are his own children.

4. That all in our family have not bin smitten (as yet) but a few only; nor
are they all dead that were smitten, but some only, nor were they all smitten
together: but by degrees and successively only. First, our servants, and then
our children; nor with so heavy a stroke as some have bin, but gently and with
moderation, Ier. 30.11. and 10.24
with measure and judgment the Lord be praised therefore.

5. And lastly, consider, that none of us have wanted that which many (our
betters) have been without, namely, food and physic: helpers and keepers,
variety of rooms and chambers, with other conueniences: so that I may truly
say (to Gods glory, our benefit, and your content) of our selves, as Paul did
of himself and companions in affliction: We are 2 Cor. 6.9.
as dying, and behold we live, as chastened; but not killed: and in another
place, 2 Cor. 4.8.
We are troubled on every side: but not distressed. We are in doubt: but not
in despair. And with David, the n Lord has thrust sore at us, but has not
given us over unto death.

It is true, I have parted with a good servant and good child: and a good
Curate, My faithful fellow helper in the ministry, but it is content to us
they were not too good for him that gave them their goodness, and that had more
right to them then I, for God, in heaven was o master to the one, p Father to
the other, and q Arch-Pastor and Bishop to the other, and therefore might
command them. And it is a comfort to us, and so it may be to you, that r the
Lord is better to us then ten s^ns, ^2. Sam. 1 3.
as Elkanah said that himself was to his wife Annah.

Now least (happily) content may seem to some but a dry plaster for such a
running sore, not broad enough to cover it, or not sovereign enough to heal
it; therefore (to make a perfect cure) I have thought of another medicine for
the malady; and so I pass on to the second sort of meditatio^s that may give
you comfort (as well as content) against your heaviness for our visitation.

How to comfort our selves against grief for our visitation.
These comforts shall be taken from several considerations concerning our
affliction, as namely, 1. The Nature of it. 2. The Cause of it. 3. The Effect
of it. 4. The Companion of it. 5. And lastly, the End of it. For in all these
points there lies matter of comfort; from all these have the faithful raised
comfort to themselves in their afflictions, and withal these have we
comforted our selves in our visitation.

1. The Nature of this visitation is the same with the nature of all other
afflictions on the godly: The nature of the affliction of the godly.
which is, not to be a vengeance of God to wreake his fury on us to our utter
destruction: but to be a Heb. 12.5, 6, 7. 1. Cor. 11.32.
chatistment and correction, to make us repent more soundly of our past sins,
and to prevent with more watchfulness the committing of the same, or like sins
again, Reu. 3.19.
that Reu 2.29.
we may be zealous and amend. Indeed, it is in it self a punishment, and to
the wicked that repent not, it is a vengeance: but to the godly that amend, it
is not so, as shall be proved more at large hereafter. And therefore in this
respect may we all take comfort in it.

2 The cause of this our visitation is twofold, The causes of the afflictions
of the godly.
Efficient and impulsive. The Efficient Cause is the author or sender of it,
which is God, and herein God is d to be considered not simply, as God only:
but as God 2. Sam. 7 14.
our Father, or as merciful. For by this visitation we fall into Gods hands,
whose 2. Sam. 4 14
mercies are great: and herein GOD Heb 12.7
deals with us, as with his sons and daughters. Therefore we ought not to Heb.
16.
faint when we are rebuked of him: but consequently be comfortable therein.

The second cause is Impulsive, or that which moves God thus to afflict or
chasten us, which is his eternal love in Christ. For as many as the Lord loves
he rebukes and chastens. Reu. 3.19
The Lord may chasten us with the 2 Samuel 7.4, 15.
rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men but his mercy shall
not depart from us. So that, Phil. 2.1.
if there be any comfort in love, that is, in Gods love, then may we comfort
our selves in our affliction which proceeds from it.

It is true, the Isntrumental cause of this our visitation, has been Gods
Angel, or infection by men: but the supreme Efficient is GOD. It is true also,
that in respect of our sins, the h anger and fury of GOD may be said to be
an Impulsive or moving cause of it. 2 Samuel 24 1.
Ezekiel. 10 19
But it is but his temporary anger, which is but for a i moment: Isa. 54.8.
Which may and does well stand with his eternal love, and everlasting
compassion in Christ, with which we are to be comforted.

The effect of their affliction.
3 The effect and fruit that comes to the faithful by all their affl^^tions,
when they are exercised thereby, is very comfortable: it is the a peaceable
fruit of righteousness: Heb 5.8
(that is) increase of holiness, both in heart and life, which will bring
forth true qu^et and peace to the soul, though the body and outward man, Heb
6.9.
be disquieted and afflicted with the^ for the present it is to c learn
obedience by the things we suffer: Hos. 6.1.
it is to Heb. 12.12.
return to God that smites us, and be zealous and amend. Reu. 3.29.
So that we having in some measure (through Gods grace) found these fruits and
effects wrought in us by our affliction, and these being comfortable, because
they be such as e accompany salvation, therefore ought you not to sorrow f as
men without hope, 1 These. 4.18.
Mat. 2.18.
like Rachell that would not be comforted: but even in grief to remember
comfort, in him, as God has in judgment remembered mercy for us.

4 The Companion of the outward affliction of Gods children, The comdanion of
their affliction.
it is inward Spiritual consolation, at one time or other, in one kind or
other, or in one measure or other, wherein also we have had our share (blessed
be God.) For as the 1. Cor. 2.5.
sufferings of Christ abound in them: so their consolations also abound in
Christ. There Psalm 97.
is light sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. 1.5.
And that which is sown for them. Gal. 6 9
They shall reap in due time if they faint not: the Lord Jesus will not Ioh 14
18.
leave them comfortless: he will not 1. Cor 10 13.
suffer them to be tempted above that they be able to bear: he has Ioa.
16.33.
bidden them to be of good comfort, because, though they shall have
afflictions in the world: yet shall have peace in him. For though Psalm. 30.
heaviness may endure for a night: joy sh^l come in the morning. Hos. 6.2.
After two days he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and
we shall live in his sight.

The last thing to be considered in our affliction, is the end of it: which is
the same with the end of all the afflictions of the godly. And this end is
twofold. 1. Gods intent in sending of them. 2. The event of the^ when they are
sent. For both these minister comfort.

1. The end or intent of GOD in afflicting his children, is generally their
good. For even in them, i God is good to Israel. More especially God intends to
them therein these good things, namely, 1. In respect of himself, to make them
heb. 12.10.
partakers of his holiness. 2. In respect of Christ, that they may have Phil.
3.10
fellowship with his sufferings, and be made conformable to his death. 3. In
respect of the wicked, that 1 Cor. 11 33.
they may nor be condemned with the world. And fourthly, in respect of
themselves, Heb 12.
that they may live, namely in heaven, and there be glorified with Christ,
when first they have Romans 8.17
suffered with him.

2 The end or event likewise which according to Gods intent follows upon all
the afflictions of the godly, it is comfortable, for generally it is their
good, so David found it, when he said, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. More particularly, these good things ensue thereupon: namely, 1.
grace, Psalm. 119 7.
better to learn Gods Statutes and to keep his word. 2 Peace or comfort in
God and in conscience. Psalm. 119 71.61.
For mark the perfect man and behold the just the end of that man is peace.
Psalm. 37.37. 2 Cor. 4 17.
3, Glory. for Iam. 5.11.
our light affliction which is but for a moment works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The beginning and progress of Jobs
troubles, were very harsh and grievous: but S. James tells us that Ioh. 8.16
we have seen and theard what an end God made.

It is true the visitation of the plague is uncomfortable, because the fear of
infection makes friends afraid to see us: but it is content that we have had
some that have visited us; and it is comfort that though we had not had one to
come unto us, yet had we not been alone, for Mat. 18.20.
God our Father has been with us. x he has not forsaken us in our bondage,
for he has promised never to leave of, nor to forsake any of his. And Jesus
Christ has been with us, for y wheresoever two or three are gathered together,
in the name of Christ, he is in the midst of them, and we (according to our
need and duty) have often humbled our selves before him in private fasting,
praying, searching of our hearts, and confessing our sins, which is (in part)
to be gathered together in the name of Christ. It was Sampsons Riddle, that
Judge. 14 14.
out of the eater should come meat, and out of the strong should come
sweetness. And it is a Christians Riddle, That out of affliction should come
consolation: for of all the birds of the air few sing in winter; but the
Red-brest. And of all the trees of the garden, few are green but the Bay tree;
and of all sorts of men, few Romans 5.3
rejoice in tribulation, but the godly.

That they have cause to rejoice in tribulation, bath even now ben showed in
five several points. That they ought to do so, we are taught by the Apostle
Saint James who wills Christians Iam. 1.2.
to account it exceeding joy, when they fall into diverse tribulations. That
they do so may be seen by the exampl^s of Peter and the other Apostles, who
Act. 5.41 Col. 1.24
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer for Christ: how it comes to
pass shall be showed hereafter. In the mean while you that are made sorrowful
with our visitation, be joyful at our consolation: and so from asswaging your
grief, I come to compound your fear. Your fear is twofold, partly in respect
of us, and partly also in respect of your selves.

Your fear in respect of us, is, least the hand of God should still be
stretched out against our family, to strike more with the infection that is
amongst us, and to take away more by death of it.

To hearten you against this fear, How to hearten our selves against the feared
of the plague.
I pray you to take into your thought and consideration these three things.

1. Though the Lord be able to proceed against us still, and though he should
be just, if he did so: yet it may please the Lord to spare us 1. Sam. 12.22.
for his own Names sake, because, Ierem. 1.7.
it has pleased the Lord to make us his people: for the Lord Ephesians. 3.20
is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we are able to ask or
think. He deals not with his children according to their iniquities, for who
should remain in health or life? Ahac. 3.2.
Even in judgment the Lord remembers mercy, as the Prophet Abacuck tells us,
and as we see it proved in that great plague in Israel, for when the Angel of
the Lord had slain thereof 70000 in three days; 2 Samuel 24.19.
and he began to stretch out his hand against Jerusalem also, the Lord
repented him of the evil, and said to the Angel that had destroyed the people,
It is enough, stay now thy hand.

That all are not infected, or die not of the infection: It is not because he
is not able to do it, or if he did it, it were not just, and all did not
deserve it: Lament. 3.31.32.33.
but because the Lord will not cast off for ever, though he cause grief: yet
will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies for he does
not afflict willingly; Mica. 7.18
for who is a God like unto our God, that pardons iniquity, and passes by
the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, he retains not his anger
for ever, because he delights in mercy.

2. Though the Lord should smite us all with the stroke of this sickness, so
that we were all infected and sick of it: (as in some families better then
ours it is, and as justly he may deal with us for ought we are able to
resist, or can deserve to the contrary) yet may it please God to spare us that
we die not. ^sal. 38.1.5
Ezekiah was sick of the plague (as the learned judge) and the text says, he
was sick unto death, (that is) in his own apprehension, and in the opinion of
the Physicians, and in the violent and malignant nature of the disease: yet did
he recover and lived fifteen years after. The like is to be seen by daily
experience of many that do suruine: Jonah. 2.
Jonah was in the sea, but he was not drowned: Dan. 3.
The three children were in the fire, but were not burnt: Dan. 6.
Daniel was in the den of Lions, but was not devoured. And why may not we be
kept from dying of the plague, though we should be infected; with it (if the
Lord be so pleased in his free favor.) Seeing in general afflictions, Amos
4.11.
some are as firebrands plucked out of the burning: even as in harvest some
gleanings are scattered that are not gathered by the owner, and in the vintage
some clusters of grapes are left on the vine, that are not plucked off.

I write not this in security, as if I thought with Agag, 1 Samuel 15.32.
The bitterness of death was past, or in presumption, as if I were past all
fear: the conscience of mine own unworthiness, and the knowledge of Gods after
reckonings with some families do keep me from such folly. But because the
servants of God, may (with Abraham) Romans 4.18.
hope against hope. We do not confidently, assure our selves that it shall be
so, but comfortably we hope it will, in the free favor and mercy of God, which
is as great as is his Majesty, and who will have mercy on them, on whom he
will have mercy. 1 Romans 9.15.


3. What though all in our family, that are now in health and life should be
smitten, and that we Isai 21.14
could not be purged from our iniquity till we die: then for content, I
say, for us all (as Paul did for himself and his companions) Act. 22.
The will of of the Lord be done. And as Christ our blessed Savior has
taught us to say, Mat. 9.10
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. More particularly, I say for my
self, as David did for himself, l Here am I, 2 Samuel 15.24.
let him do to me as seems good to him. And for my self, and children, and
servants, I say, as good old Eli did for his sons. 1 Samuel 3, 18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And for comfort to my self
and you, I say, Heb. 4 9.
There remains a rest for Gods people. 1 Cor. 15 19.
We have hope in Christ, not in this life only: 1 Cor. 51
For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we
have a building of GOD, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. 2. Pet.
3 13.
We according to his promise look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. For we know that our Redeemer lives. Job. 19.25.
We know whom we have trusted, and we are persuaded that he is able to
keep that which we have committed unto him against that day. And therefore 2.
Tim 1.12.
though the Lord kill us, yet will we trust in him. Job 13.15.
And so I descend from your fear for us, to your fear for your selves.

Your fear for your selves and your own families is, that though hitherto the
Lord has spared your houses from the visitation: yet hereafter ere he make an
end he may, though not with the first, yet with the last, either soon, or Syne.

Concerning this your fear, I must first give you some instructions 2. Some
directions: And thirdly, some consolations.

The Instructions shall be How we may lawfully fear the Plague
in two points. 1. How far you may fear the plague lawfully. 2. How far,
and in what respects you may not fear the plague.

1. You may lawfully fear the plague in three respects. 1. In respect of it
self. 2. In respect of God. 3. In respect of your selves.

1. In respect of the plague it self, because it is 2 Chronicles. 20 9.
an evil of punishment: It is 1 Reg. 8.30
a plague or sickness, It is Deuteronomy. 28.21.
a consuming pestilence. And because it is a great plague, yea, one of the
four great plagues of God, with which he scourges his people when they rebel
against him, Ezekiel. 44.21.
namely, The Famine, the Sword, wild Beasts, and Pestilen^e.

2. In respect of God likewise it is to be feared, because it is his sword
wherewith he kills: whosoever is smitten with this sickness, he is said after
an extraordinary manner, and more immediately Ezekiel. 14 21
to fall into the hands of God, which is a 1. Chron 24.12.
fearful thing. When the Lord sends this punishment into a land, he is said
to 2 Samuel 24.14.
power out his fury upon it in blood, and to Heq. 10.31.
plead with it in blood.

3. In respect of your selves, you may warrantably fear the plague for two
causes.

1. Because you are but flesh and blood, and therefore subject to be infected
by the malignant quality of it, and to be corrupted in your blood with the
contagion of it. For you are not made of stones which it cannot pierce, ye are
as weak as water, and cannot resist the stroke of GODS Angel, you are Ier.
18.6.
as clay and cannot resist the Potter.

2. You may fear the plague in respect of your selves: because you are
sinners, and it is inflicted as a chastisement for 1 King 8 33.37.
sin. We have been partakers of the sins of this City, that moved God to
send it, Deu^r. 28, 15.22. 2 Samuel 24 17.
and therefore we may justly fear we shall be partakers in the visitation of
the City by the plague sooner or later, by infection, or by death, we our
selves, or ours. We that have deserved the worst, may war^antably fear the
worst; though God should be pleased beyond our expectation and desert, to spare
us as a Mal. 3.17
father does his own child which serves him.

2. How you may not fear the plague.
You may not lawfully fear the plague in other respects, as namely, 1. Not
foolishly. 2. Not profanely. 3. Not desperately.

1. You may not fear the plague foolishly or childishly out of a fond conceit,
That if you come near a person, or house infected, you must presently receive
the contagion of it. The plague is but GODS creature, whether it strike us
immediately by an Angel, or mediately by infection from men; therefore can he
countermand it, when he will. That he does countermand his Angel, that is sent
to destroy of this disease is plain; where the Lord says, 2 Samuel 24 16
Stay thy hand, it is enough: and that he can and does restrain the power of
infection that is in this disease, it is evident by those which visit them (as
Physicians and Surgeons) and by those which keep them that are sick of it, (as
Nurses and Keepers) that sweat them and dress their sores, and wash their
linen that coms from them, polluted with the filthy corruption that comes out
of their sores, yea which lie with them that have sores running on them, and
are continually in their breath, and drink after them in the same cup, who
notwithstanding are preserved from touch of infection.

I suppose it comes to pass, not because the plague is not in it self
infectious, (as some ignorantly and sens^esly have thought and spoken) but it
is effected by an extraordinary hand of God by his wisdom and sovereign
power, and namely, and of purpose to encourage people to be pitiful to them
that are diseased with it, and to hearten them in this deed of charity to
minister to them: for the Lord knows that without tending of them that are
thus visited, many would pinch miserably, and if all should be infected that
ca^e near them that were visited, there would be few or none to tend them.

Is not the fire of a burning nature in it self, because some one house in a
street, or one room in a house escaps burning, by the wise and powerful
providence of God; when the rest are burnt to ashes. Even so, the plague it
self, is in it own nature malignant and infectious, and (yet notwithstanding
the malignancy of it) the Lord can and does restrain it, and therefore it is
not to be feared foolishly, as if God could not keep us if we came near where
it is, but we must needs be infected by it.

2 You must not fear the Plague profanely, which they do that more fear the
punishing Angel the^ God, and the infection of it, more then to sin; as they
do that in this time of contagion run away from the City, and carry their
sins with them into the Country, namely, their security and impenitencie,
their pride and covetousnes, whereby it comes to pass, that they neither
repent of their own sins, nor be greived for the affliction of Joseph, Amos
6.6.
to co^misserate their brethren in misery.

I speak not of all that depart, for some do it warrantab y in a godly
manner, without diffidence in God for themselves, o^ negligence of their
afflicted brethren; but of such as manifest their impenitency, by going on in
their former sins, and spending this heavy time in pastime and merriment,
and show their unmercifulness by leaving nothing behind them for the poor and
sick when they went, nor have sent no thing to them since they went, nor have
a purpose to do it, when they shall return. Thus we may not fear the
plague, Mat. 10.28
for we must not fear them which can but kill the body, and can do no more,
but we must fear him and it, which can kill both soul and body (that is) God
and Sin. The plague can but infect the blood, and thereby fill the body with
putrified sores, that it die. But sin can kill both soul and body too, and
therefore we ought not so much to fear the plague, as we do to offend God.

We ought not to pray so to be kept from the plague, as to be kept from
sin: we ought not to be thankful so much for being kept from the plague, as
from sin, nor ought we to be so watchful over our selves, that we be not
infected with the plague, as that we be not corrupted by the deceitfulness of
si^; for the one is simply evil, so is not the other at all: the one is a
breach of GODS Law; the other is but a punishment of that breach.

3. You must not fear the plague desperately, so as to think that if you be
smitten with it, and die of it, That presently therefore you are none of Gods
children, and that you shall not die in Gods favor (as some sottishly and
blasphemously have given out. Dan. 3.23.
)

With this point, because I have occasion anon to meet, and to di^proue it,
therefore I will refer it to its proper place, in the last general point
concerning your fear, which is the consolations.

It is true, the stroke of the plague is a sign of Gods temporal anger, but
not of his eternal displeasure. 1. Because it is inflicted but on the body
only, and not on the soul. 2. Because it is in this life only inflicted and
not in the life to come, and therefore by it self (without spiritual
judgments) of blindness of mind, hardness of heart and impenitencie,) it is
no sign of Gods eternal wrath, because a all things come a like to all, there
is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, Eccle. 6.2
no man knows either love or hatred, by all that is before thee, of earthly
and worldly blessings, o^ punishments, accompanying it.

It is true, that in some familyes, God striks all with sickness, in others
none at a^l, Some infected persons are very sick, others ayle nothing at all.
This comes not to pass by chance, but by Gods Sovereign power. If he please,
he can arm his cre^tures so, as to kill whole households, as he armed the fire
to burn and slay those men that took up the three children, Dan. 3.23.
and putt them into the fiery Furnace, therefore you should fear it as I have
formerly ta^ght you to do, and as warrantablie you may. Again, he can
restrain and countermand his creature, so as not to kill one in a Family
though they be all infected, no, nor in in^ect any one, no, nor to make any one
ill at ease of it, though they be infected, as he restrained the heat of that
exceeding whott fire, that it had no power one their bodies, Dan 3.27.
an hair of their heads was not sindged, neither were their coats changed,
nor had the smell of fire passed one them, therefore you should not fear it as
some do, (whereof you have heard before) vnwarrantably.

If every one should die that were infected, some would say, God were not able
to keep alive him that were smitten with the plague: and if none should die of
it, many would set light by it, and not humble themselves before GOD when they
are smitten with it. Let us therefore in these two respects in this mortality,
walk before GOD with Fear and Faith. With Fear, because by sin we are
subject to the infection: for it is just with God, that we who do corrupt one
another souls with the eu^ll example of our words and works unto sin, should
also infect one another bodies with the contagion of this disease unto
punishment: and let us walk with Faith, because he can countermaund and
restrain it. And thus much for my Instructions concerning your fear of the
plague, namely, how far you may fear it, and how far you may not. The
directions concerning this your fear do follow.

My directions touching your fear of the plague, shall be given in two
particulars. 1. I will direct you how you may preserve your selves from being
infected with the plague. 2. I will direct you how you may keep your selves
from dying of the plague, though you be infected with it: and this will I do, not
as a friend, by requesting you to be wary into what house or company you come
(which I need not do.) Nor as a Physician, by prescribing unto you some rare
preservatives (which I cannot do) but as a Minister and Preacher of the Gospel,
by giving you some good counsel from the Word of God, which (being followed)
will (by Gods blessing) be better for these ends, (if the Lord see it good for
his glory and our salvation) then all the B^ez^rs stone, Unicorns horn, or
Mith^idate in the world.

Six means to preu^nt the infecti n of the plagu
For the first. The means to prevent the plague are in number six, and they are
of two kinds. 1. Such as concern God. 2. Such as concern our selves.

The means which concern God are three.

The first means to prevent the plague which concerns God is Faith, (that is)
trust or confidence in God, whereby we rest and rely on his power and goodness
for protection, and not on the broken reeds of any outward means, as good
air, refraining company, shift of rooms, and variety of perfumes, much less
on any exorcised preservatives and enchanted Tablets, or Amul^ts to wear about
our necks for that end.

To trust in God, In whom we live, move, Act 17.28
and have our being, is to make him our rock and our sortresse. And because
the righteous man makes the Lord his refuge, and the most high his habitation,
therefore there shall none evil befall him, Psa. 91.9.10.11.
neither shall the plague come nigh his dwelling, for he shall give his Angels
charge over him to keep him in all his ways. For by this faith or relying on
God, the Israelites, when they had no power in themselves overcame their
enemies the Hagarites, and for want of this faith, 1 Chro. 5.20.
or trusting in God his wrath fell upon them. Psalm. 78.21 The second.


The second means which concerns God, is seeking his face and favor, his mercy
and his love, whereby his anger may be appeased toward us, and his displeasure
removed, which prouokes him to send his pestilence among us.

To this seeking of Gods face, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
we are directed by the Spirit of God in the Word, and unto this is promised
likewise a blessing. For to have the Lord to lift up the light of his
countenance upon us, Psalm. 4.8.
is better then all the contents of worldlings, yea better then life it self.
The Lord says to us, seek ye my face, Psalm. 27, 8.
and we must say to to him, Thy face Lord will we seek, yea we must seek it
before health or life. For if we enjoy his favor we are happy, though we were
infected unto death; and if we want this, we are accursed, though we should
never be smitten or die of the plague.

The third means to prevent the plague, The third
which concerns God, is fervent and faithful prayer to God in the name of
Christ, according to his will.

2. Chron. 7.14.
This is likewise commanded in the Word, for this end; and to this is annexed a
promise to encourage us to the practice thereof.

By prayer Moses prevented the plague from falling generally on all the
Israelites, when some of them dyed by the plague before the Lord. Numb.
14.20.37.38. 1. Cor. 10.10.
And by prayer Moses prevented another great plague and utter destruction from
falling on the Israelites, and did thereby (as it were) bind the hands of the
Lord that he could not smite them: Exodus 32.
for the Lord said, Verse. 10.11
Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume
them. Verse. 14
And upon this prayer the Lord repented him of the evil which he thought to
do unto his people.

The means which concern our selves, and which are good to prevent the plague
from smiting us, are likewise three: but they are of two sorts. 1. Some which
concern our sins, and disobedience. 2. Some which concerns our duty and
obedience.

Those which concern our sins are two.

The first means to prevent the plague which concerns our selves and our
sins, The fourth.
is humbling our selves in soul and body before the Lord in a free confession
of our sins, and acknowledgement of our worthiness to be smitten by it.

This humiliation was commanded by the Lord to the people of Israel, and
consequently to us in them in the like case, 2 Chr. 7.14
and to it also is promised a blessing.

1 Chro. 21 15.16.17. 2 Samuel 24.17.
This David and the Elders of Israel did, being clothed in sackcloth and falling
on their faces. And by this they prevented the stroke of the Angel, when he
stood betwixt the earth and heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched
out over Jerusalem, namely, to destroy it also by the plague, as other parts of
the Country had even then been.

Amo 4.22.
By this humiliation we meet God to pacify his anger (as Jacob did his brother
Esau) and by this we hide our selves from the punishing hand of God, Genesis 32.
Pro. 22.3.
when we see it coming toward us. By this Josiah and the Ninevites prevented
the execution of GODS judgments threatened. 1 Chro. 34.28. Jonah. 3.


The second means which concerns our sins, The fifth.
and is effectual for the preventing of the plague, is zeal against sin in our
selves and others, for God and his sake. Number. 25.11.12.


This zeal against sin, is to be showed by us, either as Magistrates upon
Malefactors (notorious ones especially: Psalm. 106.30
) for by this Phinias stayed the plague, when four and twenty thousand had
dyed thereof. Or as Ministers or Masters of Families, by rebuking and
correcting sin in our people, servants and children. Or as Christians, 1 Cor.
11.31. 2 cor. 7.11
by judging our selves, and taking revenge on our selves. And this we do when
we deny to our sinful senses, the allurements and contents of sin, (which is
to pluck out the right eye, Mat. 23.19
and to cut off our right hand, and to cast it from us) and when we beat down
the body of sin, 1. cor. 9.27
by fasting and temperance. And this is a means to keep us from being judged
of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11 32.


The sixth The Sixth
and last means to keep us from the infection of the plague, concerns our
duty and obedience to God, and it is faithfulness and diligence in our
callings, with prudence to keep us within the compass of our own ways: for
the Lord has promised, that he will give his Angels charge over his children
to keep them in all their ways. Ps. 91.11.
And this Ezekiah found; for he walked before the Lord in truth and
uprightness, not only as an Israelite or Christian; but as a King and
Governor, and hereby he was preserved. For (as Solomon says) He that walks
uprightly, Pro. 28.18
walks safely.

For the second: Six means to keep us from dying of the plague.
The means to remove the plague, and to keep you from dying of it, though
you be infected with it, are likewise six, and they are of two sorts. 1.
Civil. 2. Religious.

The first.
The Civil means is the using of skillful and religious Physicians and
Surgeons, in obedience to Gods ordinance, and with trust in his power and
blessing. For by the commandment of the Prophet Esaias from the Lord, Ezekiah
was to take a lump of dry figs, and to lay it on the sore, 2 Reg. 20.7.
and by this means (through Gods blessing) he did recover.

The Religious means to keep us from dying of the plague, are five; and they
be of two kinds: for they concern either God, or our selves.

The means which concern GOD are two.

The first means to keep us from dying of the plague and which concerns God,
The Second.
is earnest and fervent prayer to God to keep us a live, either by his
blessing on the means if we have any, or without, if we have none.

By prayer, Number. 16.46.47.48.
the plague was stayed in Israel, when it was begun very hot. For incense was
offered up with prayers to God, and the offering up of incense Ceremonially did
signify and teach the putting up, and accepting of our fervent prayers, as is
plain by the Psalmist, where he says, Psalm. 141.2.
let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense and the lifting up of my
hands, be, as the evening Sacrifice. And of this Ezekiah had good experience
when the Lord said, I have heard thy prayer and seen thy tears, behold I will
add unto thy days fifteen years. Isay 38.5.
And besides, 2 chr. 6.29 1 Reg. 8.37.38.
the Lord promised to hear their prayer made by the Israelits when they were
visited by the Pestilence, and the Lord has promised Christians, that thy
prayer of faith shall preserve the sick. Iam. 1.15.


The third
The Second means which concerns God and that will keep us from dying of the
plague, is zeal and forwardnes in erecting and establishing (and consequently
in devout and religious frequenting and performing) of the pure worship of God,
according to his Word and Will.

We read that when God was about to stay his hand from slaying the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem by the plague, that the Lord (as a means thereunto) bids his
Angel to command his Prophet Gad to say to David, Go up, 1 Chronicles. 21.18.
and set up an Altar to the Lord in the threshing floor of Araunah the
Iebusite: Whereunto David obeying, the text says, that he went up at the
saying of Gad, Verse 19.
which he spoke in the name of the Lord: Then David said to Ornan grant me
the place of this threshing floor, Verse 22.
that I may build an Altar thereon unto the Lord (thou shall grant it me for
the full price) that the plague may be stayed from the people. Note 1 Samuel 24.
And when David had bought and paid for it, Verse 26.
then the Text says, David built there an Altar to the Lord, and offered burnt
offerings and peace offerings, and called upon the Lord. And to the end it
might appear, he accepted this worship for the appeasing of his wrath, and
staying of the plague: The Lord answered him from heaven by fire upon the Altar
of burnt offerings. For in the very next Verse it is said, verse. 37.
that the Lord commanded the Angel, Note.
and he put up his sword again into the sheath thereof.

We read also, that the people of Israel in Egypt made this a reason to
persuade Pharaoh to let them go three days journey, Exodus 5.3.
and sacrifice to the Lord their God, least (say they) he fall upon us with
the pestilence. Which shows, that if neglecting Gods worship be a means to
bring the plague: then zeal and devotion in erecting, countenancing, and
performing of Gods worship according to his will is a means to remove it, and
to keep us from dying of it. And we may very probably conjecture, not without
good warrant that the solemn worship of GOD, with fasting, praying, and
preaching, appointed by Authority, has been a means (not for the
worthiness of it: but by Gods blessing on his own Ordinance) to stay the
sickness, and to abate the multitudes that died thereof.

The means to prevent death of the plague which co^cern our selves, are three.

The first appertains to the judgment of the plague it self, The fourth.
and it is a sensible feeling when we are smitten with it in our own souls of
the heavy hand of God, by laying it close to our hearts. Which we do when we are
made to search out our sins which are the cause thereof, and when we consider
seriously of Gods heavy displeasure therein against our sins: 1 Reg. 8.37,
38. 2 Chronicles. 6.28, 29.
for to this is promised a blessing, and indeed this will make us pray humbly
and fervently for the pardon of our sins, the cause thereof that they being
pardoned, a way may be made for mercy unto us. And S. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 5.6.
that if we humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, he will exalt us
in due time. And the Apostle S. James says, Iam. 5.16.
that the prayer of the righteous man prevails much with God, if it be
fervent.

The second means which concerns our selves, The fifth.
and is good to keep us from dying of the plague belongs to our sins, and it
is a turning from them and leaving them. For when Gods people, 2 Chronicles. 7.13,
14.
on whom his Name is called, shall turn from their wicked ways, he has
promised to heal them of the pestilence. For by this we cause God to repent
of the evil. And by this we remove and put away the evil of our doing from
before the eye of the Lord which were the causes of it, Jonah. 3.10
Isai. 1.16.
and punish our selves for our sin, that we may not be punished of the Lord.

The sixth.
The third means which concerns our selves, and is auailable to prevent our
death of the plague appertains to the co^mandeme^ts of God, and it is
sincerity and vprightnes of heart, whereby we desire and endeavor to walk in
obedience to all Gods commandments, in the refraining of all known sins
(even our beloved ones) and in the practicing of all known duties, cheerfully,
conscionably, and constantly.

The Lord tells us by the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 14.17, 20.
that the righteous shall by his righteousness deliver his own life from the
pestilence, Prou. 10.2.
and Solomon says that Righteousness delivers from death.

An experiment of the sovereignty of this means and medicine we have in
Ezekiah, who to prevent (if it were possible) his death of this sickness with
which he was smitten (as the learned judge) he uses no better an argument to
persuade the Lord to hear him herein then this, Isay 38.3.
Remember me now (O Lord) how I have walked before thee in truth and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight, and behold what
the Lord said unto him by his Prophet Isai. 2 Reg. 20.6.
I have added to thy days fifteen years, and I will heal thee, and the
third day thou shall go up to the house of the Lord. Verse 5.
And according to this promise, was Gods performance, for the text says
plainly, Verse 7.
that he recovered.

Cautions touching the efficacy of these means to keep us from infection or
death of the plague.
But concerning these directions, I must give you some cautions, to teach you how
for you are to rely on them for the preventing of infectio^ by the plague, or
death by infection.

You are to know then: 1. That you are not to think to prevail with God to
these ends, by using some one of these means that is easiest to be done, or
which you like to choose: but by the using of them all with continuance
therein. 2. You are not to expect preservatio^, howeuer they be performed by
you, but then, when for manner, as well as for matter they are done according to
the Word.

3. You are not to imagine that you can merit preservation by these means,
for when you do them best, Lu. 17.10
you are unprofitable servants: for the efficacy of these exercises to their
several ends, depends not on our good performance: but on Gods institution and
blessing.

4. You must not look to obtain by these religious exercises preservation from
infection, or death, absolutely, but with condition and reservation only. For we
must use these means in faith and belief to receive good by them, else why
do we use them as Gods ordinances to this end? and we must by faith believe
to receive good by them, so far as God means and intends we shall, (for it
is in vain to look for it otherwise) and God means and intends we shall
receive good by these holy exercises, so far as he has revealed his will and
meaning, for thus speaks the Scripture which reveals Gods will and meaning
herein, 1 Ioh. 5.14
If we ask any thing according to Gods will, he hears us. And the spirit
makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of GOD. Romans 8.27


But you will ask me, what is this will of God, according to which we are to
pray? and what is asked according to Gods will? Surely, that which God does
will and mean to grant. What does God will and mean to grant? Surely that
which he has promised to give. What is that which God has promised to give?
Surely, good things: for so speaks the Scripture, Mat 7.11
Your Father which is in heaven will give good things to them that ask him.
They which Psalm. 34.9 10.
fear the Lord stall want nothing that is good. And no good Ps. 84.11
thing will he with hold from them that live uprightly. And what be those good
things? Surely those which are good for Gods glory and good for our salvation.
For what does God will more then his own glory, and the salvation of his Elect?
Seeing he has appointed their salvation by his own Son, Ephesians. 1.5.6.11.12.
according to the good pleasure of his will, for the praise of the glory of his
grace wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved. What is good, if these
be not: what is good without these? Is it not enough for us poor sinners,
that deserve not our health or life upon any conditions, to enjoy them upon
these terms; but we must have them without Gods good will, and whether or no
it be good for Gods glory and our own salvation, or else we are undone, and
God is not true of his word, nor careful of us? Far be such strange lust from
Christians (whose lot is the Lord, and whose portion is heaven) to desire to
live here to the dishonor of God, and the hinderance of their own salvation;
far be it from crauers to be caruers, and beggars choosers. And so I come to
the third thing which I propounded to deliver touching your fear, and it is
comfort and consolation.

The comfort is against your fear to die of the plague: and it is this. That
though you die of it, yet are you not accursed: but you shall die in the love
and favor of God, for you shall die Number. 23, 10.
the death of the righteous: you shall Reu. 14.13.
rest from your labors: ye shall Lu. 2.27. 1 These. 4.14.
depart in peace, and r sleep in Jesus; which whosoever does is blessed.

In handling this matter of comfort, I will observe this method.

1. I will prove that the fa^thfull do die in Gods love, though they die of
the plague. 2. I will show how it comes about to be so. 3. I will give you
some Rules, by which you may assure your selves that you shall die in GODS
love, though you die of the sickness.

1. That the godly die in the favor of God, though they die of the plague, I
will prove by two Reasons: of which this is the first.



The Reason is good, because nothing works to the spiritual and eternal good
of the wicked, that do not die in Gods love: for they have right to no
spiritual or eternal good thing, being out of Christ, Phi. 3.19
minding earthly things, and having their Ps. 17.14
portion in this life only.

And that the death of the godly, though it be of the sickness, works unto
their spiritual and eternal good; I prove by S. Paul, who affirms, That all
To. 8.28
things work together unto good, to them that love God, who are called
according to his purpose. Whence I thus argue: If the death of the godly by the
plague be something; then must it work to the good of them, for all things
work: and if unto their good, then unto their spiritual and eternal good. 1.
Because it is not likely that death should work unto any temporal good: for
all temporal good things leave them when they die. And secondly, because the
good, which by the text is said to be wrought, is good unto them that love God,
and are called of his purpose: therefore it is a spiritual and an eternal
good, in the eternal love of God to their souls.



The Reason is good, because they that are separated from the love of God in
Christ, do die in Gods eternal displeasure, because they die in their sins,
and go to hell. For if they that dye in the Lord are Reu. 14.13.
blessed, then they that die out of him are accursed.

And that the godly cannot be separated from the love of God in Christ, is
plain by the Apostle, who says of himself (and that which is true of one
that is truly godly, is true of all that partake of the Jude v. 3.
common salvation.) Neither To. 8.38.
life nor death, nor any other creature, can be able to separate me from the
love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. Whence I thus reason. 1. If
death cannot separate the godly from the love of God, then no death can: for
indefinite propositions are general, and, if no death can, then death of the
plague cannot. 2. If nothing can separate the godly from his love, then death
of the plague cannot, for that is something; and if death of the plague cannot
separate the faithful from Gods love in Christ: then must they needs die in his
love, though they die of the plague. For To. 14.8.
whether they live, or whether they die, they are the Lords, and therefore the
Lord is theirs. The state of Lazarus when he lay full of sores, and poverty
was (in the eye of the world) very wretched, yet was he blessed in his death:
for he b was carried to Abraham's bosom, Luc 16.22.
and therefore died in Gods love. Indeed death of the plague may seem to
separate the godly from the love of God: but it is a separation of them from
his love of them, as his creatures only, not as his children, because it is
not a separation of them from his love of them Romans 8.38.39.
in Christ. Death of the plague, is a sign of Gods displeasure: but it is a
sign of his temporary displeasure only, and not of his eternal. For though
God, in Isa. 58.7, 8.
a little wrath hide himself from his children, for a moment, yet with
everlasting kindness will he have mercy on them. Though God, by death of the
plague take our life and health from us: Psalm. 89.31, 32.
Yet will he not take his loving kindness from us utterly. Though our friends
depart from us, and death of this sickness part the parents from the children,
etc. Yet 2. Sa. 7.15
Gods mercy shall not depart from us. And so much of the first point, in the
doctrine of comfort, touching your fear to die of the plague.

The second point herein is to show how it comes to pass, that the faithful
die in Gods favor though they die of the plague.

This is effected by that which has been done, How it coms to pass, that
though the godly die of the plague, they die in Gods favor.
and suffered, by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whose righteousness we
Ephesians. 1.6.
are accepted and by whose Isa. 53.5.
stripes we are healed. For 1. He has Ioh. 16.33.
overcome the world (that is) the afflictions of it, (one whereof is death)
which the me^ of the world lay one them, so that the afflictions which his
children endure in this world, while they live here cannot hinder their
salvation in an other world. And therefore in this respect our Savior wills
them to be of good comfort, Ibid.
notwithstanding them.

2 Christ has given 1. Cor. 15 56.57.
us victory over the stinge of death: that it cannot now be unto us a passage
to eternal death and damnation, as by nature through sin it was, and is to
them that believe not in Christ, nor amend their lives. 3 Christ has Heb. 2.14
overcome him that had the power of death which is the Devil, by his own
death, so that he cannot carry our souls to hell when we die, Luc. 16.22.
as he did the soul of Dives, and as he has power to execute that punishment
on all those that are out of Christ. 4. Christ has Gal. 3.13.
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. And thereby
freed us from the curse of any kind of death or afflictions bodily whatsoever.
In which respect, S. Paul says that in Romans 8.35.36.37.
tribulation, in death in persecution, in famine, in nakedness, in peril, in
sword, (and why not then in 1. Chron. 11.12.
the sword of the Lord, even the pestilence) in all these things we are more
then Conquerours, through him that has loved us, the Lord Jesus Christ, 1.
cor. 1.30
who is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, Phil. 2.21.
sanctification, and redemption, and both in life and death advantage.

What makes death blessed or cursed.
It is not the kind of death in respect of the matter, that makes men blessed or
accurssed: For in this respect Ezekiel. 9.2
all things comes a like to all there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked. By this no man knows either love or hatred. But it is their graces,
or their sins, which they carry with the^ to t^eir deaths, and the reward
or punishment that follows after them when they are dead, that makes them
happy or miserable.

The godly carry their graces and virtues with the^ to death, Heb. 11.13
for they b die in faith, they Revel. 14.13.
die in the Lord, they Lu. 2.29.
depart in peace. But the wicked carry their sins to their death. John 8.21.24.
For they die in their sins, as Absolon in his treason, 2 Samuel 18. Number. 16.
Corah in his rebellion, and Herod in his pride, Act. 12.

That which follows after the godly, is heaven, for Heb. 4.9
there remains a rest for them, 1 Pet. 1.5
an inheritance and incorruptible reserved for the^ in heaven, Lazarus went to
Abraham's bosom, and the good Theife on the Cross, was with Christ in
Paradise, Luke 23.43
that very day he dyed. But that which follows the wicked after their Heb. 9.27
death is judgment, which is Reu. 6.8.
hell that follows death, and Romans 2.5
wrath against the day of wrath. As Judas that went to Act. 2.15.
his own place, and Dives to Luc. 16.22.
Hell when they died.

So that as long as ye die not in your sins nor go to hell, but live and dye
in the grace of God and go to heaven, which you shall certainly do, if you
live and dye in Gods fear and in the faith of Christ, you must needs dye in
Gods love though ye dye of the plague.

The third and last point in the doctrine of comfort, Rules to know how
christians shall die in Gods favor though they die of the plague.
against the fear to dye of the plague, is to give you some Rules, by which
you may assure your selves, you shall dye, in the love of God, and his eternal
favor, though you dye of the plague. To which I now address my self.

That you may assure your selves you shall dye in Gods love, It is requisite
that first you be sure you live in Gods love. (for he cannot dye in any sense
that never lived in the same.) And that you may know you live in Gods love, it
must appear unto you by the effects, and motions of this life, for Iam. 2.16
Job. 27.5.
the body without breath, is judged dead. Breathing and moving are signs of
life.

The effects and motions of your life in Gods love, will appear, by the use
and exercise of the graces of the Spirit of God, which in his love he works
in you, to Ephesians. 2.5, 6.
quicken and raise you from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness.
For this the Lord does in his rich mercy, Ibid. 4.
and for his great love wherewith he has loved us.

These graces are of two sorts. 1. Such as bring us into an actual communion of
Gods love and favor, and sets us in the state of grace. 2. Such as keep and
preserve in this state unto the end.

The first, Faith in Christ.
Of the graces of the first kind, namely, which bring us into the state of
grace, there is but one only, and it is a justifying Faith, called, Faith in
Christ, whereby a sinner, with a Matt. 11.28.
weary and heavy laden soul, that is, a repenting and relenting heart goes and
seeks to Christ for salvation, rests and trusts in the merits of his death
and righteousness for forgiveness of sins, Ioa 3.16.
and eternal life.

This faith does, not of it self: but by virtue of the object thereof, which
is Christ, to whom, by Gods appointment it does unite and ingraft us, in whom
we are accepted and Ephesians. 1.4.6.
beloved of God, and who dwells in your hearts by it. Now if Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ dwell in your hearts by faith, you shall be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth and length, v. 18
and depth and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.

If you live and die in this faith of Christ, then you may assure your selves
you live, and shall die in the love of God. For if ye believe in Christ, then
this will follow, that, first, you are 1. Ioh 5.1.
born of God: 2. ye are the Gal. 3.26.
children of God. 3. ye are Act 13 39.
justified from all your sins, and shall receive remission of them: Act.
10.43.
4. Ye are passed Job. 3.36
from death to life: 5. Ye shall be able to Ephesians. 6.16
quench all fiery darts of the devil. And sixthly, for the certainty of this,
ye are Ephesians. 1.13
sealed with the Spirit of promise.

The second sort of graces that may assure us we shall die in Gods favor, are
they which keep and continue us in the state of grace when we are set into it,
and they are of four kinds: The first, Sanctifying; The second, Comforting;
The third, Contenting; The fourth, Crowning graces: of which in order.

But first I would not be mistaken: for though, I say, faith in Christ does
set us into the state of grace, I would not be understood to speak
exclusiuely, as if it had no work in keeping us also in that state (for we
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5,
) But I have therefore assigned unto it, that work of bringing us into the
state of grace, and justifying us, because the primary and chief act of it is
this. viz. To ingraft us into Christ, and hereby to bring us into union and
communion with the love of God in him, and into the state of grace, to live by
faith. Romans 1.17.

The first kind of graces that keep us in the state of grace, are sanctifying
graces, so called, because they keep us from sin, and incite us to holiness.

These sanctifying graces are two: The first is the love of God. The 2. is the
fear of God: of each a little. And first of love unto God.

What the nature of this grace of our love to God is, The second, the Love of
God.
will appear by the nature of our love to any person like our selves, whom we
love unfeignedly: our love appear in two things. 1. In delighting in their
company and communion. 2. In a desire and endeavor to do them good. For so are
we affected to God, if we love him, for we delight to be in his presence and
company in his Temple, and to have communion with him in his Ordinances; the
Word, Sacrament, Prayer, Meditation and Thanksgiving. 2. We desire and will
endeavor to do the best we can, to honor and obey him; in refraining those
things that will displease him, which is sin; and in practicing all such
things as we know will plea^^ him, which are comprehend^d under faith and
obedience.

If we have this love of God, and live and die therein, we shall thereby be
assured that we shall die in the love of God to us. 1. Because it will assure us
of the love of God to us. 1 Ioh. 4.19
For we love God because he loved us first. 2. Because it will assure us, we
have the Spirit of God, for love is the Gal. 5.22
fruit of the Spirit, and they who have Gods Romans 8.9
Spirit are Christ's. 3. Because it will assure us our faith is sound. For Gal.
5.6.
faith is working and it works by love. 1 These. 1.3
4. Because it, will assure us that To. 8.28.
all things shall work together to good, namely, to the good of our salvation,
for so do they do to them that love God. 5. Because it will assure us we are
1 Cor. 8.3.
known of God, that is, acknowledged of him for his own, for so are they that
love God. 6. Because the Love of God will assure us of the crown Iam. 1.12 and
2, 5.
of life, and the kingdom of heaven; for it is promised, to them that love
God. 7. Because it will assure us, we 1 Ioh. 4.7.
are borne of God, and are his children, yea that we 1 Ioh. 4.19.
dwell in God, and that God dwells in us. In which case whosoever is, cannot but
die in Gods love and favor, the rather, because this love of GOD produces the
love of our neighbor also, yea of our enemies; which whosoever does for
conscience sake, in action, as well as affection, may know they are 1 John
3.16. Matt. 5 44.
translated from death to life, and that they are the children of their
heavenly Father.

The third, is the Fear of God.
The second sanctifiyng grace, is the fear of God, (that is) fear to offend
God, not only because he is just: but also and chiefly because he Psa. 130.2.
is merciful.

By this fear, Christians learn to Pro. 3.7.
depart from evil, and also to Deuteronomy. 6.2
keep Gods commandments: which whosoever do, 2 Ti 2.19.
the Lord knows that they are his, and they are the Ps. 112.1.
blessed of God.

If thus you fear God, you may be sure you shall die in Gods love and favor,
first, because Gods mercy is on all them that fear him. Luc. 1.50.
2. Because it is a sign to all such, that they are redeemed from their
spiritual enemies, Sin, Hell, Death, Satan. 3. Luc. 7.14.
Because such walk in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. 4. Act. 9.31.
Because such know they are redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ. 5.
1 Pet. 1.17 18, 19.
Because such work out their salvation (that is) the assurance of it to
themselves. Philip. 2.12
6. Because such are blessed. And so much for the sanctifying graces. Ps. 128.1.


I know faith in Christ is a sanctifying grace, as well as the love and fear
of God: for the Elect are sanctified by faith in Christ. Act. 26.18.
But I have named all these six graces, by the chief and most proper act of
each, which of faith is to justify and not to sanctify. It is true, faith
does sanctify as well as justify: but by a secondary act, not as it lays
hold on Christ, for so it iustifies: but as it incites to obedience and
restrains from sin: for which it produces the love and fear of God: for faith
sanctifies as it works, and faith works by love: Gal. 5.6.
which also is true of the fear of God: Ioh. 1.12.
for by faith we ^re Gods children, and he is ou^ adopted Father. And (...)
call on the Father b^ faith, then must we pass the time of our soiourning
here in fear, namely, in fear to offend God by sin. 1 Pet. 1.17
As obedient children, not fashioning our selves according to the former lusts
in our ignorance. v. 14.


Of the second kind of virtues and holy gifts which keep us in the state of
grace, The third, is Hope.
when we are set into it by faith there is but one, it is a comforting grace,
and it is Hope, 1. These. 4. vlt.
and Hope is a grace of God, whereby we comfort our selves against the
immoderate fear of death in our selves, or grief for the death of our
friends; and by it the faithful earnestly look, long, and will for the
second coming of Christ, Act. 23.6. Romans 5.2.
and a joyful resurrection from death, to eternal life thereby.

Whosoever has this Hope, may assure themselves they shall die in Gods favor.
1. Romans 5.5.
Because i^ will not make them ashamed (that is) they which by it look for a
joyful Resurrection, it will not deceive them of the thing hoped for; but will
bring them to the possession of it. 2. Because it is a sure sign, that the
love of GOD is shed abroad in their hearts by the holy Spirit. Romans 5.5.
1 These. 5.8
3. Because this hope is a helmet of salvation to cover the heads of the Saints
here one earth against Sin, Satan; and all spiritual enemies. 4. Because by
this hope the faithful assure themselves their bodies are at rest in the
grave, till the second coming of Christ. Act. 2.26.
5. Because they are saved by hope. Romans 8.24.
6. Because he that has this hope purges himself, 1. John 33,
viz. from sin and wickedness, and he that thus purges himself, 2 Ti.
2.21. Romans 9.21
is a vessel of honor, and he that is a vessel of honor, Ibid. 23.
is a vessel of mercy, and he that is a vessel of mercy, is a vessel before
prepared unto glory.

The third kind of holy virtues that keep us in the state of grace, The fifth,
is Patience.
is the contenting grace, and it is Patience. And by this patience, we first
quiet our selves in the will of God in all our afflictions, and meekely submit
our selves to endure them. 2. By patience we stay our selves on Gods pleasure,
patiently waiting his leisure for the performance of his promise of help and
deliverance.

If you have and do exercise this patience, you may be sure to die in Gods
favor. Luke 21.19
1. Because by it you possess your souls. Romans 2.7.
2. Because by it you shall gain eternal life. Heb. 6.12, 15.
3. By patience you shall inherit the promises of grace and glory. 4. By
patience we shall get experience, Romans 5.4.
namely, of the fatherly love of God toward his children. Romans 15.4.
5. By patience we shall nourish and confirm our hope. Iam. 1.4.
And 6th. Because, if patience have her perfect work, we shall be entire and
lack nothing.

The sixth, is Perseverance.
The fourth fort of virtues and holy gifts of the Spirit, that keep us in the
state of grace, when we are set into it by faith in Christ: It is a crowning
grace; and the grace that puts the crown of glory on our heads, is
perseverance to the end of our lives, in the number and measure of all our
Christian graces, together with all the holy fruits and effects that proceed
from them, in the use and exercise of them.

If you shall thus persevere in grace, you may be sure to die in Gods favor.
1. 1 Ioh. 2.24
Because you shall continue in the Son and in the Father. 2. Because you
shall be saved 3. Mat. 10.22
Because you shall receive the crown of life. 4. Reu. 2.10.
Because the Lord Jesus will present you unblameable and unreprovable in Gods
sight. 5. Col. 1.22.
Because when Christ shall appear, 1 Ioh. 2.28
you may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him a^ his coming. 6. If
ye fight a good fight, finish your course, and keep the faith, 2. Tim. 4.
then you may assure your selves that henceforth is laid up for you a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge will give you at that day.

There be other graces of God that are necessary to salvation, viz. a belief
of the Gospel, and repentance for past sins, (I do not mean amendment of
life or new obedience which in nature follow Faith in Christ) but these do not
set men into the state of grace: but only dispose them thereunto, and unto
faith which does set men therein, and therefore have I not mentioned them here,
because it is possible for a man to have these, and yet not dye in the state of
grace, if he die before he have faith in Christ, and the other be wrought in
him, and therefore can you not assure your selves, that you die in Gods favor
if you stay here, and have not the other six.

There be also besides, a belief of the gospel, and repentance for past
sins, some other graces that do follow it as effects and fruits thereof,
namely, peace of conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost; and these also are
helps to preserve us in the state of grace. For that peace of God which
passes all understanding (and consequently the joy of GOD, Phil. 4.7.
which is, 1 Pet. 1.8.
unspeakable and glorious (does keep our hearts and minds in Christ.

But these graces imply comfort more then duty, and I had rather that
Christians should endeavor to assure themselves they shall die in Gods favor,
by graces that import duty; then by them which import comfort: least some
Christians tender in conscience, not finding the graces of comfort, may
therefore think they have no grace, nor are in the state of grace, which is
vsua^l with such to think of themselves, specially in affliction, and violence
of temptation: whereas indeed as long as the dutiful graces exercise themselves
in them, they may assure themselves they shall die in Gods favor, though they
want the feeling of their joyful and comfortable graces for the time, so they
hunger for them, lament after them, and endeavor in the use of the means to get
them.

In like manner, besides all the forenamed graces and holy gifts of the Spirit,
there be some virtuous actions and Christian duties, Virtuous actions, that
will assure us to die in Gods favor.
to which the godly are stirred up continually by the Spirit, and by the means
of the six forenamed graces; and by the constant and conscionable practice
whereof, they may rather assure themselves they live in Gods favor, and
consequently shall dye therein. I will but only touch them.

Romans 10.9. Heb 10.23
1. A zealous profession of the Gospel, notwithstanding the slander and danger
accompanying it.

Heb. 6.6. Ier. 50.4.5 6. 2 Reg. 23.3
2. Often renewing our covenant with God of new obedience, by searching our
hearts and lives for our sins, and lamenting our backslidings.

3. Devout intention of mind, Psalm. 26.6.7.8.84.
and instant affection of heart in Gods service and worship, Col. 3.5.
in all the points and kinds of it, public, private, or secret, ordinary or
extraordinary.

Matt. 5.24.50.
4. Mortifying our sinful nature, and lessoning our will and power to sin, by
crossing our own wills, to the end we may do Gods, and denying to our selves
the occasions and opportunities of our beloved sins.

5. Growing in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18 and 5.10, 12
and increasing in the number and measure of our Christian virtues and holy
graces.

6. 1 Pet 5.7.8
A sober moderating of our affections about worldly profits, pleasures, and
honors, that our hearts be not set too much thereupon.

7. 1 Cor 7.31 30.39.
Diligent faithfulness and conscionablenesse, according to Justice, and
Equity in doing our duty in our ordinary callings: whether in Commonwealth, 1
Cor. 7.24
Church, Col. 3.18, ^^ 22.
or Family.

But all these are the fruits and effects of the six forenamed graces, and
they show the soundness and sincerity of them, and therefore are necessarily
implied in them: and for as much as they are not habits or virtues themselves,
but actions of those virtues and graces; and also, for because the forenamed
six (with their use and exercise) are sufficient to assure us that we shall
die in Gods favor; therefore have I forborne to speak of them at large, as I
have done of the other six. The rather because these six are sufficient to
free us from all evils, sin, affliction, death, hell, and the devil: and to
make us partakers of all good things; as grace, peace, glory, and God himself.

But to draw toward an end: We do all owe God a death; this debt is to be
paid when God will demand it. The Lord respects not (and therefore what need we
stand on it) in what coin we pay our debt, gold or silver, so it be his own
stamp, and be weight with the allowance (that is) what need we be troubled
what death we die, Number. 23.1
so it be the death of the rigtheous: which God himself sends, and not we our
selves pull upon our selves, through our own sins, and so it be in the faith,
Heb. 11.13
with trust and confidence for the allowance and acceptance, of the death and
obedience of Jesus Christ to our justification; for what ever our death be, we
shall be happy in it. Be it ordinary or extraordinary; of an Ague, or the
Plague, in the bed, or in the field, in the City or in the Country, a
natural or a violent death.

And thus much by occasion of your present Grief and Fear, to pacify the
one, and to satisfy the other; and further to sanctify and sweeten the^ both
to your future edification, by humiliation or consolation in Jesus Christ.

Of these Meditations, which God by his Spirit has ministered unto me, I may
say as Physicians do of their medicines, Probatum est (that is) They have been
proved, and approved by the servants of GOD, of who^ we read in the Word, out
of which they are taken by, and my Self in this present Visitation of my
servants, children, and loving Assistant, whom the Lord has taken to rest from
his labors in his Vineyard betimes, Math. 20.12.
and has given him his wages for his work (as it were) but one hour therein,
Matt. 20.12.

What remains, but that as I have made the potion, and sent it, so you take
and apply it. And because I have taken pains to write these Meditation for
you, that therefore you will take care to read and peruse them, to ponder and
consider of them seriously for your selves and your own good, to confer the
points with the proofs, and to compare your selves with the points, that you
may receive further direction and instruction, according as the nature of the
several points shall lead you, and your particular need require. To the end
you may (by laying your selves to the Rule) find iuster cause of humiliation in
your selves, or of consolation in Jesus Christ.

If you shall lay them close to your hearts, I doubt not, but as they have
ministered comfort and content to us, (for which we praise our good God) so
will they unto you, by his blessing. (For which I will not cease to pray.)

But (before I end,) I would take my leave of you by saying one thing more unto
you, according as your houses have been clear (all this while) or visited,
and your selves sound or infected, and that which I will say, shall be first
unto you all, of both sorts jointly, and then unto each sort of you in several.

That which concerns you altogether, is a watchword and a Request.

My watchword is to warn you, not to censure your brethren that have been
either infected when you were clear, or visited more heavily then your selves,
or taken away by the visitation when you surviue, as if they were greater
sinners, then you for this were to be miserable comforters, Luc. 13.2, 4 Job.
16.2.
when you should be comforters of them in misery. Yea, it is to trample on
them, whom God has cast down.

My request is, that you would (according to your abillitie) with your hands
releive their poverty, as well as in heart pity them. for that is charity.
Hereunto you are called, not only by the word, which bids you Love indeed, as
well as in word, 1 Ioa. 3.18
and affection only, but also by the extreme penury wherein too many have bin,
are, and will be cast; Luc. 2.16.
partly by sickness, partly by decay of trade, and partly by approaching winter.

That which shall be spoken of each sort o you in several, shall be first to
them that have not ben visited all this while, and the^ to them that are
recovered and escaped from death, though you were visited.

To you whose houses have yet been free, I would give an admonition, and an
exhortation.

My admonition is, That you would not be secure, as if God now could not smite
you: For there were first in this Visitation, that shall not be last, and there
shall be last that were not first.

And my exhortation is, That you never forget the free favor of God in your
protection and preservation: (least he repent him of the good he has done
unto you:) But that you study what you shall render to the Lord for^^^ his
benefits, Ps. 116.12
and endeavor to express your thankfulness for such a deliverance by serving
him, you and your household more constantly and conscionably. Josh. 24.15


To you whose houses have been visited, and yet your selves are escaped and
enjoy your lives so a pray, I would likewise give you a caution and a counsel.

My caution is, that you think not that any thing in your selves, or in your
means, has made the difference betwixt you that are alive, and other that are
dead; for this were to sacrifice to your selves, Abac. 1.16
and to your net and yarne. But that God his free favor, his power and
goodness: has made the difference; who will have merry on whom he will, and
who can preserve whom he pleases.

And my counsel is, That during the time of your lives hereafter, 2 Chronicles.
30.17.
you set your hearts to seek God, and make him your portion and inheritance,
Ps. 116.5.
walk within your houses with a perfect heart; Ps. 101.2.
Ioh. 5.14.
and sin no more least a worse thing come unto you.

2 The. 2.16
Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which has saved
us, and given us everlasting consolation; comfort your hearts, and stablish you
in every good word and work.

And Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
the Father of mercies, and the GOD of all comf^rt, who comfort us in all
our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God; Amen.

FINIS.
AN HVMBLE THANKSGIVING TO ALMIGHTY GOD:

For his so soon, so great, and so gracious staying of the Plague, in the
City of London, and Subvibs thereof.

BY WILLIAM CHIBALD.

PSALM. 36.1. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy
endures for ever.

Printed at London by W. I. for Nic. Bourne, and Edw. Br^wster, and are to be
sold at the Royal Exchange, and at the Bible in Pauls-Church-yard. 1625.

The Preface.
THE more deadly a disease is, the greater is the Cure; and the greater the
Cure is, the greater is the commendation of the Physician. Even so the greater
any danger is, the greater is GODs deliverance from it, the greater ought to
be our Thanksgiving unto his blessed Majesty for it.

On these, and the like grounds, J have formerly stirred up my self unto
secret, private, and public giving of thanks to our good God, for abating the
heat of the sickness, and the number of them that dye thereof. And since, J have
endeavored to forward others also to glorify God in this behalf, by penning
a form thereof, and publishing it, with this Treatise. The rather because J
have not seen nor heard of any thing in this kind set forth for public benefyt.

The time and means of grace considered, J think J may truly say (for the
generality) that sin did never so abound in quantity, quality, and
variety, as of late it has done in our City of London, and the Suburbs
thereof. And now (behold) answerable to the measure of our sins, is the
measure of Gods Visytation, for there was never such a plague sent among us.

Jn like manner the contagion and malignitie of this Plague considered, which
in so short a time, when so many were absent, killed so many thousands: J may
safely say there was never such a Deliverance in this kind wrought by
Almighty GOD for us: ^^d therefore answerable to Gods great goodness, ought to
be our great gratefulnes.

Now, consydering (Christian Reader) that the measure of our thankfulness to
GOD, ought to be so great, and that our power (as of our selves) to perform
it, is so small Let us all that want holy wisdom, Iam. 1.
for this purpose, 1 Ti. 1.17
ask of God only wise, that he would be pleased to give us in ability,
what he requires of us in duty, and that the meditations of my heart in
conceiving of this form, and the words of our mouths in uttering it, may
be directed by his blessed Spirit, and accepted in his beloved Son, Amen. 1
Reg. 1.36
And let the Lord God of our City, and our deliverance say so too.

The parts of the Thanksgiving for this Deliverance, are SIX.
I. BEmoning our Misery, caused by the Plague. II. Confessing our sins that
brought it. III. Acknowledging Gods Justice in sending the Plague. IV. Thanking
GODs goodness for staying it. V. Praying to GOD, wholly to remove the Plague.
VI. Professing our amendment upon the remoueall thereof.
A THANKESGIVING TO GOD, FOR STAYING the Plague.
O LORD GOD of Heaven and earth, by whose patience and providence it is, that
yet we live, and move, Act. 17.28
and have our being in this world: for our life drew nigh unto the grave, Ps.
88.3, 4
and we were counted with them that go down into the pit. Through thy
goodness (O Lord) we are a remnant escaped, Ezra 9.15.
as appears this day, reserved (as we trust) to glorify thy Name. But who
are we, dast and ashes, miserable sinners, that should be bold to glorify thy
goodness, that dese^^e not to confess our own vildenesse: being unworthy, as
of the Deliue^ance it self, so to give thee thanks for it.

I. Bemoning our misery, caused by the Plague.
Our vildenesse and unworthiness appears by our great and many sins, and the
haynousnes of our sins, by thy late dealing with us in heavy displeasure. Our
soul having in remembrance our affliction and misery, Lam. 3.19, 20.
the wormwood and the gaull is humbled in us: For thou have sent the plague
among us after the manner of Egypt, Amos 4.10
in most grievous manner, the like was never before among us. Thou have not
only visited us with Agues and Fevers, Eze. 14.21
but with one of thy four sore judgments; The Plague or Pestilence, a
consuming sickness, Deu. 23.21
by which thou have powered out thy fury in blood upon us. Eze. 14.19.
With it bane been infected all the Parishes of our City and Suburbs save one)
and of it have dyed and fallen thousands at our sides, Psalm. 91.7.
and ten thousands at our right hand: rich and poor, young and old, profane
and sincere, professors and preachers. The chief and Princes of the Cities of
our Nation, is solitary and sits as a widow: She that was full of People, is
empty of Inhabitants; the streets thereof mourn, and the high ways to it
lament; the public markets are not frequented, and the solemn Assemblies of
thy worship are much desolated and darkened, by the putting out of many worthy
Lights, his faithful Ministers. At home, o Lord, some have perished for want of
keeping, and abroad some have fallen down dead in the feilds and streets. One
of some houses (O Lord God) have dyed all and every one, Parents and children,
Masters and servants, and in other, all have bin sick at once, not one able to
help another. In some familyes might be heard, the outcry of the tender
mother, for her only child and in other, the lamentation of the careful
father, for the death of his son and heir, or the child, that was the
picture of his likeness. Yea, such and so great was our grief and fear (O
Lord) that when we went to bed well, we looked to be smitten ere morning,
and could take little rest for the noise of bells, towling and ringing out in
our ears. And when we arose in health in the morning, we expected to be cast
down ere night, and could not follow our callings cherefully for the sight of
our eyes, multituds of our dead brethren and sisters, carried up and down the
streets to burial. We do not (O Lord God) repeat these our calamityes to
inform thee, as if thou, who did bring them upon us, did not know of them,
or had forgotten them: but that we might not forget them, nor thy heavy
displeasure against our sins in them, that we might be made more sensible
of our great deliverance, by calling to mind our former danger and distress,
and thereby also the better prepared to a more free, and humble confession of
our sins, Eze. 12.16
that have brought these calamities upon us.

For we must needs confess (O Lord our God) to thy glory and our own shame,
II. Confessing our sins, that brought the Plague.
that we have practiced those sins, against which, in thy Word, this plague
is threatened, and upon the committers whereof, it has been executed, in
former Ages of the Church. For in all duties, concerning thy sacred Majesty,
our brethren, and our own selves, Ezekiel 14.13.19.
We have sinned by trespassing grievously, and therefore have thou sent the
plague, Eze. 38.22
and with the pestilence pleaded against us, in blood.

We have not (O Lord our GOD) sacrificed unto thee, Exodus 5.3.
nor worshipped thee so frequently, nor so devoutly as we should, therefore
have thou fallen upon us by the pestilence, and many of us have defiled thy
sanctuary, Ezekiel. 5.11
the place of thy worship, when we have resorted thereunto with our detestable
things, our abominable sins, impenitencie, and hypocrisy, and therefore a
great part of us have dyed by the pestilence in this visitation. Unto our
brethren we have been cruel, and have not proclaimed liberty to them that
were in our danger; Ier. 34.5.17.
therefore the Lord has proclaimed liberty to the pestilence for many of us.
Ier. 14.10.12.
And we our selves have delighted to wander in our own ways, Ier. 14.10.12.
and to take pleasure in sin for a season, and have not refrained our feet from
evil paths: Therefore the Lord has not accepted us, he has remembered our
iniquity, has visited our sins, and consumed us by the pestilence. With
Pharaoh we have hardened our hearts against thy mercies and judgments, Exodus 9.
and have not been reclaimed from our sins thereby, we have not let our
lusts go that we might serve thee; nor let our brethren go, that they might
serve thee. But have discouraged and cooled their Zeal in thy service,
therefore have thou smitten us by the pestilence, Ver. 18.
and cut off many from off the earth. We have with Israel murmured against
Moses and Aaron, Nu 16.21.
our Magistrates and Ministers, for their zeal in correcting and reproving our
unrighteous dealing, and inordinate walking, and there have dyed many thousands
of the plague, Nu 16.42
besides those that ^y of other diseases. With the Spies of the Land of Canaan,
Number. 14.37.36.
we have brought up an evil report upon thy holy Majesty, thy Church, and
holy Ordinances, Ps. 50.31.
as if thou were like the wicked, as if thy Church were a company of none but
Hypocrites and Rebels, and as if thy sacred Ordinances were unholy things, and
taught profaneness, and therefore by bringing up this slander upon thy Name,
through our looseness and unconscionable life many are dead of the plague
before the Lord. Nu. 14 37.
As Magistrates, and Ministers, Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, rich and poor, high and low, young and old, one with
another. We have not obeyed thy voice, Ier. 32.23 24.
nor walked in thy Law. We have done nothing at all, that thou have commanded
us to do: and therefore what thou have spoken in thy Word of the pestilence, it
is come to pass, and thou see it, and we have felt it. Deu. 25.21
Yea we would not observe to do all thy commandments and statutes, which
thou command us to do, but have broken them all in one kind and measure or
other. And therefore have thou made the pestilence cleave unto us till Ibid.
it has consumed us. We have not harkened unto thy words, Ier. 29.19.17.
which thou have sent unto us, by thy servants the Prophets or Pastors and
teachers, Leu. 26.23.
when they have called us unto repentance, nor have we been reformed by lesser
corrections but walked contrary unto thee, Iere. 29.18
therefore have thou persecuted us with the pestilence, Leu. 26.25
and sent it unto our Cities, where we have been gathered together. We do not
(O Lord our God) thus confess our sins unto thee, as if thou knew them not
who art greater then our consciences and know althings. 1 Ioh. 3.20
but that by the repetition and remembrance of them, we might be drawn, more
soundly to repent of them, and to have our eyes opened, more clearly to
discern thy justice, in punishing of us with this thy visitation, and thy
righteousness in afflicting us with many miseries thereby, Ps. 52.4.
that thou may be clear when thou art judged. Dan. 9.7.


For Righteousness belongs unto thee (O Lord) but unto us open shame as at
this day. All this is come upon us, III. Acknowledging Gods Justice in sending
the Plague.
for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses, and thou have punished us
less then our iniquities deserve, Ier 9.13.
therefore will we be dumb and not open our mouths. Psalm. 39.9.
Thou have not done without cause, Ezekiel. 14.28.
all that thou have done unto us, Lev. 26.43
and therefore will we accept the punishment of our iniquity. Though thou
have not punished us according to the greatness of our sins as they deserve
in measure, (which is thy mercy,) yet have thou punished us according to the
kind and manner of our sins (which is thy justice) for we have profaned thy
house and sanctuary, with our formal and hypocritical serving of thee,
without the inward parts both of our selves, and of thy worship, and therefore
have thou shut the doors of thy house upon us, when we were visited, and have
(by lawful authority and good order) shut us up in our own houses. Psa. 101.2
In our own houses we have not walked before thee, with a perfect heart, for
false weights and measures, false lights and bad wares, have been in many of
our shops and warehouses, and therefore it is just with thee to shutt up our
shopps for want of trading, and to infect other of our rooms, and chambers,
with a fearful contagion. Many of us that were wont, proudly to let and
strutt it out in the streets, in the vanity and variety of strange apparel,
and new fangled habits and attyres, have thou now clad with mourning weeds and
given us cause to put sackcloth on our backs, and ashes on our heads, for we
are baased even to the dunghill. The members of our bodies, we have abused as
weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, and therefore have thou (O Lord)
weakened and deformed the bodies of some with blanes and sores, boyles and
carbuncles, and filled the bodies of others with the Tokens of thy displeasure.
We have corrupted one another wirh the evil example of our works, and made
them sin; and therefore it is just (with thee) that we should be a means to
infect one another to sickness and death. Many of our Ministers, thy faithful
servants, we regarded not while they lived, and therefore have thou deprived
us of them: yea, many of us have defrauded them of their double honor, 1. Ti.
5.17.
reverend respect, and plentiful maintenance; and therefore have thou taken
from us the means of our maintenance, by commerce and traffic. We have been
hard-hearted, and close-fisted to the necessities of our poor neighbors
living amongst us; and therefore it is just, (in respect of thee) that our
neighbor countries round about us, did deny to bring us (that abode in the
City) food and victuals, and to bury those of us that did go out of it, with
comely burial. We have by our bad living and unjust dealing, caused thy
Gospel, thy truth (so plentifully preached 2. Pet. 2.2.
in this City) to be evil spoken of abroad, and therefore it is just with
thee, that we should be a mocking and hissing, a byword and a reproach unto
our neighbor countries about us. We do not (O Lord God) thus justify thy
proceeding against us, as if it needed our clearing: but to testify our desire
(as much as possible we can) to glorify thy justice by shaming our selves, to
the end we may be the better prepared to glorify thy mercy also (which is
above all thy works) in our wonderful deliverance. Psa. 145.9


IV. Thanking Gods goodness for staying Plague.
For (O Lord our God) In that when the sickness was so hot, and so many had
dyed thereof, thou should then stay it: It was not because the sword of
thine Angel was blunted with so many strokes; or because there were no more
people to dye, or no more graves in London: or because there was in us no more
desert of punishment, Exodus 14.11.
or in thee no more power to punish: But because thou were pleased in judgment
to remember mercy, Abac. 3.2.
and that thou delightest in mercy rather then judgment. Mica. 7.18.
That we are alive when others are dead, that we were in health when others
were sick. It was not because we were not within the compass of thy stroke,
or could defend our selves, or were able to heal the wound: But because thou
would have mercy on whom thou would: no goodness or power in us, but
merely greatness and goodness in thee, has made the difrence. And
therefore, as thou art worthy to receive glory, Rev. 4.11.
honor, and power: so salvation, and glory, and honor and power, (even glory
and honor for manifesting thy power in our salvation and preservation, 2. Chr.
7.14
) be unto thee, for ever. For in this our deliverance (O Lord our God) we see,
and therefore desire to glorify thy wisdom, in putting it into the mind of
our Governors to appoint thine own means of healing our City by humiliation
with Fasting and Prayer, and enabling thy Ministers and people understandingly
and feelingly, faithfully and fervently to use those means, and also in taking
opportunity in our greatest extremity to work this our deliverance, to the
end the work might the more clearly appear to be thine own. In this thy
deliverance we discern thy power, and therefore accordingly we desire to
praise thee, in that thou art able to countermand all thy creatures, even the
very Angels, those principalities and powers: for thou did on a sudden, and
in a short time work a great deliverance, notwithstanding the wonderful
increase of the contagion in so many places, the heat of the weather, the
multitude of the people, and heynousnesse of our sins, all which wrought toward
a contrary end. In this thy deliverance, we behold thy truth and faithfulness
(O Lord our God) in making good thy promises of healing thy people, 2. Chr.
7.15.
when they shall seek thy face with prayers, tears, humiliation, and turning
unto thee, in not keeping thine anger for ever, in not letting the rod of the
wicked rest for ever upon us all, Psa. 103.
Psa. 105.
nor suffering thy people to be tempted above their strength, but giving a
good issue of their trial. In this our deliverance we glorify thy patience,
in that thou have not dealt with us according to our sins, Psa. 103.11.
nor rewarded us after our iniquities; but have borne with us all this while,
and given us yet a longer time to repent, sparing us, as a father spares his
own son that serves him. Mat. 3.17.
In this thy deliverance (O heavenly Father) we see also thy pity, in that,
when our great sins had deserved the greatest and forest of thy four
plagues, even the sword; that yet notwithstanding thou did send but the
smallest of them: for hereby we are not fallen into the hands of men, Prou.
whose mercies are Cruelties; but, into thy hands, whose mercies are great: 2.
Sam. 24.
have already wonderfully lessened this thy hand, and have also given us good
hope (through grace) of quite removing the same. But above all, (O Lord our
God) In this our deliverance felt and expected, we clearly behold thy free
grace, and rich favor, with thy infinite mercy and unspeakable love, (and
accordingly we desire to be plentious in thanksgiving) for when there was no
goodness in us to move thee to it, nor power to procure it to our selves; Yea
when justice on thy part, and wickedness on ours, did withstand it, then thou
wast pleased to think thoughts of peace toward us, and to stay thy hand, to
say to us, Ezekiel. 16.6
when we were polluted in our blood, Live. When the furnace of thy displeasure
was heated, Dan. 3.
much hotter, then ever it was before, and the flame thereof, had consumed many
of our neighbors houses, yet on some of our houses the fire had no power at
all, nor was a hair of the heads of many of us synged; we ayled nothing all
the while, Psa. 115.1.
and therefore not unto us (O Lord) not unto us, but unto thy Name be given all
the praise. Not unto Physicians or Surgeons: Not unto Magistrates or Ministers;
Not to Watchmen or Keepers, not to antidotes or preservatives, not to house or
air, not to Signs or Planets, not to Saints or Angels, not to our selves or
others. Not thy works in us of nature or grace; no, not to our fasting and
prayers, to our humiliation and tears: But to thy wisdom and power, to thy
faithfulness and truth, to thy patience and pity, to thy free grace and rich
mercy, be given by us all, and by all means in all times, and in all places,
honor and glory, with thanksgiving and obedience, in Jesus Christ, from this
time forth and for ever.

V. Praying to God w^o^y ^remone the ^la^u^
And now (heavenly Father) seeing we that are but dust and Ashes, have taken
upon us to speak unto thee in thanksgiving, Genesis 1.18.
be not angry with us, if we speak once more in prayer and supplication also,
we rather hope thou will be pleased with us, Psa. 116.13.
if having taken the cup of salvation in thankfulness for staying the plague
so soon, and so much already we also call upon the Name of the Lord for the
quite remoueall thereof. P. 2.125.4
The rod of the wicked has long lain upon us; Oh let it not rest upon us that
are the lot of thine inheritance: for thou have said, 1. Reg. 11.^7. Esaias.
29.5.25.
Thou will not afflict the seed of David for ever. Thy hand is stretched out
still, Oh we pray thee pull it in, and put it into thy bosom, for we have
been consumed by the heaviness of it. Thou have formerly given us many great
deliverances, to this City in this kind, and to the whole Land in other
kinds, namely, from foreign invasion and privy conspiracy; The Spanish
Armado. 1588. The Gun-powder-Treason. 1605.
and we confess to thy glory, and and our own shame, that most of us have
almost forgotten to celebrate the memorial of them; and none of us have ever
since led our lives (which thou did preserve from the cruelty of those
intendments and attempts) in righteousness and holiness before thee. And in
this respect we are unworthy thou should proceed in mercy, as thou have
begun; and end in mercy, as thou have proceeded: But though we be unworthy of
more deliverance, yet art thou worthy of more honor, which accordingly thou
shall receive. For by how much the more we are unworthy, by so much the more
does the freeness and greatness of thy grace and mercy appear; and by how
much the more thy grace and mercy appears free and great, by so much the more
does the glory thereof appear for thine honor. And therefore (O Lord our God)
though our iniquities testify against us: Ier. 14.7. 1 Sa. 12.21
yet do it for thine own Names sake, forsake not thy people for thy great
names sake, because it has pleased thee to make us thy people. Thou art an
exquisite worke-man, leave not thy work half done as if thou could not
finish it, but end it in perfection. Thou art an absolute Physician, leave not
thy Patients crazy and sickly, till thou have made a perfect Cure. And that
thou may perfect the work of deliverance, which thou have begun amongst us,
we beseech thee perfect the works of grace and amendment, which thou have
begun within us. Thou have already said to thine Angel, Stay thy hand: for this
we praise thee, be pleased also to go on and to say, It is enough, for this
we pray thee command thine Angel also to put up his sword into the 2. Sam.
24.16.
1. Chron. 21.7
sheath thereof and to draw it out no more. Return, O Lord, how long? let it
repent thee concerning thy servants, Psa 90.13.15.
make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
months and weeks wherein we have seen evil. Lam. 5.21.
Renew our days as of old, Help us, Psa. 85.8.
O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name. Wherefore should Papists
say, It is for our religion that we are thus plagued: wherefore should Atheist
say, Thou wast not able to save us, etc. wherefore should carnal Gospellers
say, What profit is it that thy people have prayed unto thee, and walked
mournefully before thee, Job. 21.14 Mal. 3.15
and It is in vain to serve thee. And to the end thou may continue the work
of our deliverance, give us grace also to continue the work of our humiliation
before thee, until thou have repaired our Jerusalem, the praise of our Nation;
never letting thee go until thou have blessed us, nor giving thee rest till
thou have healed our City. Neither are we mindful of it only, but we
remember other parts of our Land, beseeching thee (good Lord) to stay thy hand
from spreading the sickness in other Towns and Cities, and to withdraw it where
it is dispersed, giving them all grace (according to their several conditions)
by seasonable amendment to prevent or remove the same; and in the mean time to
comfort al those that any where are visited with this or any other sickness, by
recovering the^ unto health, to live better to thy glory, or by fitting them
for death, to depart in peace to their salvation. Make an end of the trial,
(we pray thee) of other Churches by the sword, famine, or any other judgment,
and continue to ours the peace of the Gospel, and the Gospel of peace;
preserving all Estates and degrees amongst us, in Church and Commonwealth from
this and other plagues (if it be thy blessed will) to execute justice and to
show mercy, for the taking away of this, and the turning away of other heavy
judgments. Be thou exalted (Lord) in thine own strength, so will we sing and
praise thy power. Psa. 21.16.


VI. Professing our amendment upon our remouall of the Plague.
For we do not desire (O Lord our God) to have the plague of our sickness taken
away from amongst us, that the plague of our sins may remain within us, nor
that thou should turn thy heavy hand from us, that we might return to
our former wickedness, for the time past of our life is sufficient (and to much)
to have lived therein. 1. Pet. 4.3.
If thus again we should break thy commandments, Ezera. 9.14
would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us: but we beg
this further favor of thee, not to die, Psa. 118.17
but to live to declare thy works and to praise thy name. Ier. 50.4.5
For this end with mourning and weeping for our former many and greiuous
sins, we come unto thee and seek thee, and will join our selves unto thee
in a perpetual covenant never to be forgotten. We will make a covenant bef^^e
thee our God, to walk after thee, and to keep thy commandments, thy statutes
and thy testimonies with all our hearts, and with all our souls, nnd to
perform the words of the covenant, 2 Reg. 23.3
and to stand unto it, we will make a sure covenant and write it and seal
unto it, Neh. 9.38.
yea we will enter into a curse and into an oath to walee in Gods law, Neh.
10.29
and to observe and to do all the commandemnts of the Lord our God that we may
ty our loose hearts to the obedience of thy holy will for ever And let our houses
which thou have visited or kept clear from this contagion, and let our bodies,
which thou have healed or preserved from infection, and let our souls which
thou have humbled and comforted in any measure by and under this visitation,
bear witness to our sincerity in making this holy vow and covenant with thee.
Let them be a continual remembrance to put us in mind of often renewing it
before thee: and let them be as a threefold cord not easily broken faster to
bind us to the keeping of this oath and covenant with thee for ever. And now
(O Lord our God) since thou have by thy Spirit put into our hearts this desire
to give thee thanks, and directed us to this means of manifesting our
thankfulness we humbly beseech thee keep it for ever in the thoughts and
imaginations of the hearts of thy people, 1 Chr. 29 15.
and set our hearts unto thee, And give us such a heart that we may fear
thee, and keep thy commandments always, Deu. 5.29.
that it may be well with us and with our children for ever, so we thy people
and sheep of thy pasture will give thee praise for ever, and will always be
setting forth thy praise from generation to generation, Amen.

Now unto the King immortal, invisible and only true God, most mighty and
wise, faithful and true, patient and pitiful, gracious and merciful,
infinite in all perfection; The Father of mercy, in The Son of peace, through
The Holy Spirit of comfort, be yielded and given for all our former and later
deliverances in this or any other kind; and namely, for the present staying of
the Plague, (happily in great measure already begun and continued, and
hopefully in the end to be perfected and accomplished) From our belief and
trust; our love and fear; our hope and joy; our patience and obedience with
our bodies and soul, by our thoughts, words, and works in our lives and
deaths: all honor and glory, and all praise and thanks, from this time forth
and for ever. Ps. 106.48
And let all the people say, AMEN

FINIS.

