THere be many that speak much of Jesus Christ, and bear a fair show of his
holiness and virtue: but none are able to conceive (much less to declare) the
sweet comforts of his heavenly grace, saving such as hold faith in a good
conscience, without hypocrisy, pride, and covetousness, and be reformed in
their lives with charity, peace, and unity.

THE HEARTY CONFESSION OF A CHRISTIAN, Devised for his own comfort, written
for his remembrance, and now published for the use of M. H. and others his
faithful and private friends only.
1 Cor. 3. 18. Let no man deceive himself, if any man seem to be wise amongst
you in this world, let him be ( as) a fool: that he may be ( come) wise* 19.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishnes before God, etc.
The argument of the song. 1. COR. 1.
30. But you are of him in Christ Jesus, who was made unto us wisdom from
God, yea, and righteousness, and holiness, and redemption.

31. That, as it is written, he that boasts, or rejoices, let him boast, and
rejoice in the Lord.

A spiritual song of thanksgiving, with prayer unto God, containing the full
effect of true religion in a Christian.
The forespeech with the drift and substance of the Song.
THe sum of all the comforts, which I find
In holy writ to ease my troubled mind:
Is this, that God The uniting of two natures in the person of Christ, who is
our Emmanuell, that is, God with us, very man as we are sin excepted.
my nature did unite
Unto his Godhead full of grace, and might?
Iu Christ who stands between God and me
For ever more my Savior to be.
Ruling me, as my The annexing of three offices in the person of Chist, namely
of Prophet, Priest, and King, who is our full and perfect Savior.
Prophet, Priest, and King,
On me bestowing every needful thing.
Not only for my present consolation,
But also for my eternal salvation.
I will therefore sing of his wondrous praise
For his exceeding love to me always.
The Song.
Doctrine by way of example.
1. WHere I by nature Against our birth sin, commonly called original sin.
through my parents fall,
Am so distempered in my members all,
And bent to ill (which bears in me full sway)
As from all goodness draws me guite away
And thus in sin original am drowned:
Christ is my The proper remedy is, the uniting of two natures in Christ by
his incarnation upon earth.
perfect innocence sound:
Him, as that brazen snake, if I adore,
In me shall be no sickness nor no sore.
Application of the Doctrine prayer wise.
O Christ forgive my natural infection,
Which to thy law will not be in subjection,
And so provoke me to daily strife,
Whilst I am nousled in this noisome life,
And grant me thy That is divine substance, majesty, or godliness: as, Mat. 5.
48. Ioh. 13. 15. and 17. 20. 21. 22. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Ephe. 5. 1. Colos. 1. 10.
1. These. 2. 12. Heb. 1. 3. 1. Pet. 1. 15. 2. Pet. 1. 4. etc.
pure nature to express,
Henceforth in my behavior, more or less,
Til flesh and blood by death thou shall subdue,
My state in heaven for ever to renew.
Doctrine.
2. Against all our other sins, commonly called actual sins, the proper
remedy is the annexing of three offices in Christ by his heavenly
dispensation. And first of his Prophecy.
Where through my Against our ignorance, which is the mother of all sin and
mischief.
folly, and mine own ignorance,
I know not how Gods glory to advance,
Nor to dispose my self in any sort
For others help, nor for mine own comfort:
And thus am blind, and no truth I can see;
Christ is most The proper remedy is his wisdom, which is the root of all
grace, and welfare.
perfect wisdom unto me:
Him, as that faithful guide, if I attend,
I shall not need any way to offend.
Application.
O Christ forgive my judgment dark and weak,
Which causes me thy blessed Laws to break,
And so provoke me to daily strife,
Whilst I do wander in this wau'ring life,
And grant me thy deep knowledge to express
Henceforth in my behavior more or less,
Till flesh and blood by death thou shall subdue,
My state in heaven for ever to renew.
Doctrine.
3. Further of his Priesthood.
Where I Against our vnholines, and breach of the first table.
ungodly am, and superstitious,
Vnreuerent, profane, and irreligious,
Leading my life after a worldly fashion
Against the rule of my heavenly vocation,
And thus am set in an ilfauor'd case;
Christ is my The proper remedy, is his holiness.
perfect holiness, and grace:
Him, as that holy of holies, if I frequent,
My blottes, and blemishes shall soon be spent.
Application.
O Christ forgive my foul and ugly vice,
Which does my soul, and body both disguise,
And so provoke me to daily strife,
Whilst I am foiled in this filthy life.
And grant me thy fair beauty to express,
Henceforth in my behavior more or less,
Till flesh and blood by death thou shall subdue,
My state in heaven for ever to renew.
Doctrine.
4. Moreover of his Priesthood.
Where I am Against our unrighteousness, and breach of the second table.
toiled with care of earthly pelf,
And do not love my neighbor, as my self:
But hurt his state, life, bed, goods, and good name
In thought, word, deed, and lusting for the same,
And so am filled full of all iniquity:
Christ is my The proper remedy, is (...) righteousness.
perfect righteousness, and equity:
Him, as that upright judge, if I obey,
I cannot hurt my neighbor any way.
Application.
O Christ, forgive my violence and treachery,
Which makes me offer others mickle injury,
And so provoke me to daily strife,
Whilst I am carking in this careful life.
And grant me thy high justice to express
Henceforth in my behavior more or less,
Till flesh and blond, by death thou shall subdue.
My state in heaven for ever to renew.
Doctrine.
5. Lastly of his kingdo^^ (...).
Where I am Against our bondage and (...)sirie, which is the just pun(...)meant
of all our sins.
bond-slaue to al kind of misery,
Sold under sin, and subject to all infamy,
Falling down headlong to utter destruction,
By natural, and actual corruption,
And thus am feeble, frail, and transitory;
Christ my The proper remedy, is hi^ (...)demption and glory, wh(...) the due
reward of his e(...)ding mercy toward us.
redemption is, and perfect glory:
Him, as that Lord of hoasts, if I do serve,
From force of foes he will me sure preserve.
Application.
O Christ forgive my wretched imperfection,
Which pulls me from thine happy protection,
And so provoke me to daily strife,
Whilst I do warrefare in this weary life,
And grant me thy Namely by relieuing of the needy, after thy Royal example,
according to the power of thy grace in me. Io. 13. 14. 15. Romans 12. 16. Ephe.
5. 21. Phi 2 5. 6. 7. etc. 1. Pet. 1. 17. 18. 19. Ephe. 4. 7. 8. Iam. 2. 8. etc.
free ransom to express
Henceforth in my behavior more or less,
Till flesh and blood, by death thou shall subdue,
My state in heaven for ever to renew.
Amen.
FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by Thomas Orwin, for Christopher Hunt. 1593.


