The Christen rule or state of all the world from the highest to the lowest:
and how every man should live to please God in his calling.

Item, the Christian state of matrimony: and how man and wife should keep house
together with love.

Item, the manner oe saying grace after the holy scripture.

1. Cor. vii. Let every one abide in the calling wherein he is called. Unto the
Christian reader
FOr as much as all persons ca^ not have leyser to read many bok^s, nor yet
get all such as be necessary for the^ (so me for lack not being able to bye
the^, and some that ca^ not get them for their money) I have here gathered toge
there out of y^ most famous anthors of our English tongue, the whole office and
duty of every Christian man. And specially and above all things is here at
large declared the duty of subjects toward their princes* and of married
wifes toward their husbands* And truly never was it more need to be taught
tha^ now. For never had any prince so much need of hearty obedient subjects
which would give their goods and adventure their lives in his most just
qu^relle against his enemies, thn^ have our most dread souereyne lord king
Henry the eight. Here in shall you learn your duty toward his grace, and to
give your aids unto his grace, not as compelled there unto, but with a fre
heart* Considering that his graces wealth is all our welfares. Pray therefore
unto the lord that he will grant him victory over his enemies. And ye wyfes,
al though this little book has long continued among you (called the Christen
state of matrimony (yet are you never the better but continue still in your
dysobedience to the displeasure of god and your husbands great dysquietnesse.
The husband that has been a broad (either a boughte his matchaundise or at his
work (when he comes home would gladly be made of and cheryshed of his wife,
whom he so heartily loves, and the^ shall she neytheer give him a good
countenance, nor set any thing before him that might conforte him, the one
syttin ge so strangely and so far from the o there, as though they had never
one seane the other, more like straunges than frindes, yea more like enemies
tha^ man and wife. Therefore read not this book only, but mark what is therein
written and shut it up in your hearts and occupy it when need shall require.
For blessed are they that hears or readethe any thing that perteyneth to
their lives amendment and do thereafter The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be
with al the^ that love the lord unfeignedly.

Amen.
The Christen rule or state of the whole world. etc.
The first Chapter
Of the office and duty of sub^eetes, and how they should live toward their
Princes.

LEt every soul submyt him self unto the auctorite of the hyer powers. There
is no power but of God the powers that be are ordevned of Gog. Who so ever
therefore resysteth the power resysteth the ordinance of God. They that
resyste, shall receive them self dampnatio^. For tulers are not to be feared
for good worcester kes, but for evil. Will thou be with out fear of the power? Do
well and so shall thou be praised of the same. For he is the minister of god,
for thy wealth. But and if thou do evil, than fear. For he bears not a swerd
for naught. For he is the minister of God, to take vegeaunce of the^ that ^^
evil. Wherefore ye must needs obey, not for ^eate of ve^geaunce only: but also
because of co^scien ce. Even for this cause pay ye trybute For they are gods
ministers, seruinge for the same purpose.

Give to every man therefore his duetye: trybute to whom trybute belongs.
Custom to whom custo^ is due: fear to whom fear belongs Honor to who^
honor pertayneth. Owe nothing to any man: but to love one another. For he
that loves another fulfylleth the law. For these commandments. Thou shall
not commit* aduoutry. Thou shall not kill. Thou shalt not steal. Thou
shalt not bear false witness. Thou shall not desire, and so forth if there
be any other commandment, are all comprehended in this saying. Love thyn^
neighbor as thy self. Love hurts not his neighbor, therefore is love the
fulfyllyng of the law.

As a father over his chyldre is both Lord and judge, forbyddyng that one
brother avenge him self on a another, but (if any cause of strife be betwe ne
them) will have it brought unto him selte or his assigns, to be judged and
correct, so god forbyddeth all me^ to avenge the^ selves, and takes the
auc^orite and office of aue^gyng unto him self saye^g Vengeau^^e is mine and I
will reward. Deu* xxxii. Which text paul alegeth To xil. For it is impossyble
that a man should be a ryghteous, an egall, or an in dyfferente judge, in his
own cause, lusts, and apytytes so blind us. More over when thou auengeste
thy self thou make ste not peace, but sterest up more debate.

God therefore has given laws un to all na^yons and in all lands hatheput
kings governors and rulers in his own stead, to rule the world through
them. And has commanded all causes to be brought before them, as thou
read. Exodi. xxii. In all causes (says he) of injury or wrong, whether it
be ox, ass, sheep, or vesture, or any lost thing which an other
chalengeth, let the cause of both parties be brought unto the Gods, whom
the gods co^de^pne the same shall pay double unto his neighbor. Mark,
Judges are, called Gods.
the judges are called gods in y^ scriptures because they are in Gods rowme
and execute the commandments of God. And in an other place of the said
Chapter Moses charge saying: Se that thou rail not on the gods, neither
speak evil of the ruler of thy people. Who so ever therefore resists the^
resysteth God (for they are in the row me of God) and they that resists shall
receive their dampnation.

Such obedience unto father and mo there, master, husband, emperor, king,
lords, and rulers requyrith God of all nations, yea of the very turks and
infideles. The blessing and reward of them that keep the^, is the life of
this ^lessinge
world as thou read Leuiticum, xviii. keep my ordinances and laws, which
if a man keep he shall live, therein. Which text Paul reherseth. Roma. x x
^ouyng thereby that the ryghteousnes of the law is but worldly, and the reward
thereof is the life of this world. And the curse of the^ that breaks the^
Curse.
is the loss of this life: as thou see by the punishment appointed for them.

And who soever keeps the law (whether it be for fear, for vain glory, or
profit) though no man reward him, God rewards al obedience though no man
else do.
yet shall god bless him abundauntly and send him worldly prosperity, as thou
read Deuteronomion. xxviii. What good blessings accompanye the kepinge of
the law, and as we se the Turks far exceade us Christian men in worldly
prosperity for their just keeping of God aue^geth all disobedience though no
man else do.
their temporal laws. Likewise though no man punish the breakers of the law
yet shall God send his cu^ses upon them till they be utterly brought to
naught, as thou read most terrebly even in the said place.

Neither may the inferior person avenge himself upon the superior, or
v^ole^tly resyst him, for whatsoever wrong it be. If he do he is conde^pned in
the deed doing: in as much as he takes upon him that whyeh belongs to god
only, which says vengeance is mine Uengeaunce is gods.
and I will reward. Deute. xxxii. And Christ says Math. xxvi. All they that
take the swe^de shall peryshe with the sword. Take thou a sword to avenge
thy self: so gyuest thou no rowme unto god to aue^ge the, but robbest him of
his most hye honor, in that thou wylt not let him be judge over the.

If any man might have avenged him David.
self upon his superior, that might David most righteously have done upon hi^
ge Saul which so wrongfully pers^ru^^d David, even for none other cause* then
that God had anointed him king and promised him the kingdom. Yet when god had
delivered Saul in to the hands of David, that he might have done what he would
with him, as thou see in the first book of kings y^. xxiiii. chapter, how
Saul came in to the ^aue where David was. And David came to him secretly and
cut of a piece of his ga^ me^t. And as soon as he had done it his heart smote
him because he had done so much unto his lord. And when his men corraged him to
sle him he a^swered, the lord forbid it me, that I should lay mine hand on
him. Neither suffered he his men to ^urte him. When Saul was gone out David
followed and showed him the piece of his garment and said: why bel^ueste th^^ the
words of men that say, David goth about to do the harm: perc^^^^ and se that
there is neither evil nor wickedness in my hand, and that I have not
trespassed against the, and yet thou layest awayte for my life God judge
between the and me ^ aue^ge me of the, but mine hand be not upon the as the
old Proverb sayethe God de^^^oyeth one wicked by another*
(says David) out of the wicked shall wyckednes proceed, but mine hand be not
upon the meaning that God ever punyshed one wicked by another And again (said
David) God be judge, and judge between the and me, and behold and pl^at my
cause, and give me judgment or right of the.

And in ^he, xxvi. chaptre of the same book* when Saul persecuted David
again, David came to Saul by night, as he slepte, and al his me^, and took
away his s^^re, and a cup^e of water from his heed. Then said Abisay David's
scruau^t, God has delivered the thine enemy in to thine hand this day, let
me now therefore nail him to the ground God provides a means to
with my spear, and g^ue him but even one step and no more David forbad him
saie^g, ^yll him not: For who (said he) shall lay hands on the lords
anointed to take the evil out of y^ way wha^ they have fulfilled their
wickedness. Why Da uid s^ewe not Saul The king is in the rowme of God in this
world*
and be not gyltye? The Lord lives or by the Lords life (said he) he dy^th
not except the Lord smite him, or that his day become to dye, or else go to
batell, and there peryshe.

Why did not David slay Saul, saying he was so wicked, not in persecutinge
David only, but in disobeienge gods commandments, and in that he had
slain. lxxxv* of Gods prcistes wrongfully? Uerely for it was not lawful.
For if he had done it, he must have sinned against god. For god has made the
king in every realm judge over al, and over him is there no judge. He that
judges the king judges God, and he that lays hands on the king, lays
hand on God, and he that resysteth the king, resists god, and dampneth
gods law and ordinances. If the subjects sin, they must be brought to the
kings judgment. If the king syn, The king must be re served unto the ven
geaunce of God.
he must be reserved unto the iudgeme^te, wrath and vengeance of God. And as
it is to resyste the king, so is it to resyst his officer which is set or
sent to execute the kings commandment.

And in the first chapitre of the second book of kings. David commanded the
young man to be slain, which brought unto him the crown and bracelet of Saul,
and said to please David withal, that he him self had slain Saul. And in the
fourth chapter o^ the same book. David commanded those two to be slain, which
brought unto him the he^d of Isboseth Saul's son, by whose means yet the hole
kyngdo returned unto David according unto the promise of God.

And Luke. xiii* When they showed Christ of the Galilea^s, whose blood Pi late
myngled with their own sacrifice: he answered: suppose ye that these Galilea^s
were sinners above all other Ga leleans, because they suffered such
punishment? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall likewise peryshe.
Thus was told Christ (no doubt) of such an intent as they axed him mat. xxii
Whether it were lawful to give tribu It is not lawful for a christen subject
to re siste his Prince, though he be an Heathen man.
te unto Caesar. For they thought that it was no syn to resyst an Heathen
prince: as few of us would think (if we were under the Turk) that it were
sin to rise against him, and to rydde our selves from under his dominion, so
sore have our bishops robbed us of the true doctrine of Christ. But Christ
condemned their deeds, and also the secret thoughts of al other that
co^fe^ted there unto, saying: except ye repent ye shall likewise peryshe. As who
should say, I know that ye are within in your her tes, such as they were
outward in their deades, and are under the same dampdation: except therefore ye
repent betymes, ye shall break out at the last into like deades, and likewise
peryshe, as it came afterward to pass.

Hereby see thou that the king is in this world without law, and may at his
lust do right or wrong, and shall give accomptes, to God only.

Another co^clusio^ is this, that no person neither any degree, may be exempte
from his ordinance of God Neither can the profession of Monks and freres, or
any thing that the Bishop of Rome can lay for them selves, except them from
the swerd of the Empe rour or kiges, if they break the laws For it is
written, let every soul submit him self unto the auctorite of the hyer
powers. Here is no man except, but all souls must obey. The hyer powers ar
the temporal kings and princes, unto whom God has given the sword to
punyshe who so ever synneth The king has no power but to his da^pnacyo^ to
preuylege.
God has not given them swerdes to punyshe one and to let another go free and
to sin unpunished. More over with what face durst the spiritualtye which
ought to be the light and an example of good living unto all other, desire to
sin unpunished or to be excepted ^^ age the spiritualtye to sin unpunished.
from tribute, toll, or custom, that they would not bear pain with their
brethren, unto the mayntenaunce of kings and officers ordained of God to
punish sin? There is no power but of God (by power understand the auctorite
of kings and princes) The powers that be, are ordained of God Who soever
therefore resists god: yea though he be Bishop, monk or friar. They that
resist shall receive unto them selves da^pnatio^ Why? for gods word is
against them* which will ha ue all me^ under the power of the temporal sword.
For rulers are not to be feared for good works, but for evil. Hereby see
thou that they that resyst the powers or seek to be exempte from their
auctorite have evil consciences, and seek liberty to sin unpunished, and to
be fre from bearyng pain with their brethren. Wy^t you be without fear of the
power: So do well and thou shalt have laud of the same (that is to say, of
the ruler) With good living ought the spiritualtye to rydde the^ selves from
fear of the temporal sword, and not with craft and with blynding the kings,
and bringing the vengeance of God upon them, and purchasing lyce^ce to sin
unpunished.

For he is the minister of god for thy A king is a great benefyte though he be
never so evil
wealth, to defend the from a thousand inconuenie^tes, from thenes murderers,
and them that would defyle thy wife, thy daughter, and take from the all that
thou have. Yea life and all, if thou did resyste. Further more, though he be
the greatest tyrau^te in the world, yet is he unto the a great benefyte of
God, and a^thyng wherefore thou ought to thank God hylye. For it is better
to have somewhat tha^ to be clean stripte out of all together: it is better to
pay* the tenthe than to lose all. It is better to suffer one tyraunte than
many, and to suffer wrong of one tha^ of every man. Yea and it is better to
have a tyraunte unto thy king than ashaddowe. For a passive king does naught
him self, but suffer other to do with him what they will, ^ to lead him
whether they list. And atiraunte, though he do wrong unto the good, yet he
punysheth the evil and makes all men obey, neither suffers any man to
polle, but him self only. A king that is soft as sylke and effeminate, that
is to say, turned unto the nature of a woman, what with his own lusts, which
are as the longing of a woman with child, so that he can not resyste them,
and what with the wyill tyranny of them that ever rule him, shall be much
more grievous unto the realm than a right tyrau^te. Read the cronicles and
thou shall find it ever so

But and if thou do evil, than fear, Princes are ordained to punish evil
doers.
for he bears not a swerbe for naught. For he is the minister of God, to take
vengeance on them that do evil. If the office of princes, given them by God
be to take vengeance of evil do^rs: than by this text and Gods word, are
all princes dampened, even as many The da^pnacion of princes.
as give liberty or license unto the spirituality to sin unpunished. And not
only to syune unpunished them selves: but also to open sentuaries, priuileged
places, churchyardes, saint Johannes Sentuaries.
hold: yea and if they come to short unto all these, yet to set forth a
neckeuerse, to save all manner trespassers from the Neckeuers.
fear of the sword of the vengeance of God put in the hands of princes to
lie vengeance on all such.

God requires the law to be kept of all me^, let them keep it for what soever
purpose they will* Will they not keep the law: so vouchsaueth he not that Three
natures.
they enjoy this temporal life. Now are there three natures of me^, one all
together beastly, which in no wise receive the law in their hearts, but ^yse
against princes and rulers, when so ever they are able to make their party
good. The se are signified by them that worshypped the golden calfe. For Moses
brake the tables of there law yet he came at the^. The second are not so
beast^yt but receive the law, and unto the^ the law comes, but they ^oke
not May ses in the face. For his countenance is to brighte for the^, that is,
they vndersta^ de not that the law is spiritual, and requires the ^erte.
They look on the pleasure, profit, and promo^yo^ that fo loweth the keeping of
the law, and in respect of the reward keep they the la we outwardly with
works, but not in the heart. For if they might obtain ly ke honor, glory,
promocion, and digni te, and also avoid all in conuenientes, if they broke the
law, so would they al so break the law and follow their lu stes.

The third are spiritual and look Moses in the open face and are (as Paul
says the se^o^d to the Romans) a law unto them selves, and have the law
written in their hertes by the spirit of God. These neade neither of ky^n ge
nor officers to drive them, neither that any man profet the^ any reward for to
keep y^ law* for they do it naturally

The first work for fear of the swer de only. The second for reward. The
third work for love freely. They look on the exceeding mercy, love, and
kyndnes which God has showed them in Christ, and therefore love again and
work freely. Heaven they take ot the gy^ Heaven to meth by Christ
te of God through Christ's deseruynge and hope without all manner doubtyng that
God according to his promise will in this world also defend them / and do all
thing for them of his goodness and for Christ's sake / and not for any goodness
that is in them. They consen t^ unto the law that is holy and just and that
al me^ ought to do whatsoever god commands for none other cause but because
god commands it. And their great sorrow is because that there is no I
Christian man se^eth no more but Gods will.
strength in their me^bres to do that wh^ ^he their heart lusts to do / and
is a thur ste to do.

These of the last sort keep the law of their own accord and that in tyeyr
heart and have professed perpetual war against the lusts and appetytes of
y^ flesh, till they be utterly subdued: yet not through their own strength /
but knowinge and knowleginge their wekenes / cry ever for strength to. God
which has promised assiste^ce unto all that call upon him. These follow God and
are led of his spirit. The other two are led of lusts and appetytes

Lusts and appetytes are diverse and Lusts.
many, and that in one man: yea and one lust contrary to another and the gre
test lust carries a man all together away with him. We are also changed from
one lust unto another. Otherwise are we dysposed when we are children other
wise when we are young men and other wise when we are old otherwise over even /
and otherwise in the morning, yea ^o^tymes altered. vi. times in an hou re.
How fortuneth al this? Because yt Fre will
the will of man follows the wit and is subject unto the will / and as the
wit ^e ^rreth so does the will and as the wit te is in captyuyte / so is the
will neither is it possible that the will should be fre where the wit is in
bondage.

That thou maiste perceive and feale Worldly wit.
the thing in thine heart, and not be a vain sophister disputynge about worcester
des without perceyuinge mark this. The rote of all evil / the greatest damp
^acyon and most terryble wrath and vengeance of God that we are in / is
natural blyndnes. We are all out of the right way / every man his ways. One
judges this best / another that to be best. Now is, worldly wit no
thing else but craft / and soteltye to obtain that which we judge fall sely
to be best, As I err in my wit so The will is bond ^ led.
err I in my will. When I judge that to be evil, which in deed is good / then
hate I that which is good. And when I suppose that good which is evil in
ded^, then love I evil. As if I he persuaded and borne in hand that my most
friend is mine enemy, than hate I my best friend: and if I be brought in
believe that my most enemy is my friend, then love I my most enemy. Now
when we say, every man has his fre will, to do what him lusts. I say
verily that men do what they lust Not withstondinge to follow lusts is not
fredome, but captivity and bo^da gs. If God open any man's wits to make him
feale in his heart, that lusts and appetites are dampnable, and give him power
to hate and resyste then, Fredome
then is he fre even with the fredome where with Christ makes fre, and has
All is syn ne that sprengeth not o^ the spirit of Go^, and all that is not
done in the light of Gods word.
power to do the will of God.

Thou may her* by perceive that all that is done in the world (before the spi
rite of God come and gives us light) is damnable sin, and the more glorious
the more damnable: so that that which the world counts most glorious is
more damnable in the sight of God the^ that which the whore, y^ thief and the
morthe rer do. With blind reasons of worldly wis^^ may thou chan^ge the
minds of youth and make the^ give them selves to what thou will either for
fear, for praise or for profit: and yet do but change them from one vice
to a another so do our spiritualte in all their worcester kes.
As the persuasions of her fre^des made Lucrece chaste, Lucrece believed if she
we re a good huswyfe and chaste, that she should be most glor^ous, and that all
the world would give her honor, and praise her. She sought her own glory in
her chastity and not Gods. When she had lost her chastity, then counted she her
sell fe most abominable in the syghte of all me^, and for very pain and
thought which she had, not that she had dysplea sed god, but that she had lost
her honor slew her self. Look how great her pain and sorrow was for the
loss of her chastity, so great was her glory and reioysinge therein, and so
much despised she the^ that were otherwise: and petid the^ not. Which pride
God more abhors the^ the whoredom of any whore. Of like pride are all the
moral virtue es of Aristotell, Plato, and Socrates and all the doctrine of the
Philosophers the very Gods of our scole men.

In like manner is it for the most part of our most holy ^eligyo^. For they of
like imaginacio^ do things which they of Bedle^ may se, that they are but mad
True miracles are wrought to confirm the preaching and not the godh^^^ of
the preacher
nes. They look on the miracles which God did by the saints to move the un
beleuynge unto the faith, and to ^^^yr me the truth of his promises in Chri
ste, whereby all that believe are made sain tes: as thou see in the last
chayptre of Mark. They preached (says he) every where, the lord working with
the^ and confirmynge their preachinge with my racles that followed And in the
fourth of the ac^es, the disciples prayed that God would stretch forth his
hands to do miracles and wonders in the name of Jesus. And Paul ^. Corinth.
^iiii. says that the miracles of speaking with diverse tongues is but a sign
for unbelievers, and not for the^ that believe. These Our ypo ^rytes a^^ blyn^
miracles turn they unto another purpose saying ^^ their blind hertes Se
what miracles God has showed forthis saint, he must be verily great with
God. And at ones turn the^ selves from Gods word, and put their trust and
confidence in the saint and his me rites, and make an advocate or rather a God
of the saint, and of their blind ima ginacio^ make a testamente or bond be
twene the saint and them, the testament of Christ's blood clean forgotten,
they look on the saints g^rmentes and lives or rather lies which me^ lie on
the sain tes: and this wise ymagen in their hertes saying the saint for wering
such agar mente and for soch deades is become so glorious in heaven If I do
likewise, so shall I be also. They se not the faith and trust which the saints
had in Christ^ne there the word of god which the saints preached, neither the
entente of the saints. How that the saints did soch things to came their
bodies, and to be an ensample to the world, and to teach that soch things are
to be despised whi che the world most wo^dreth at, and mag nifieth. They se
not also that some lan des are so whote that a man can neither drink wine nor
eat flesh therein, nether consider they complexio^ of the sain tes, and a
thousand like things se they not. So when they have killed their bodies and
brought them in that case, that scace with any r^stauratyue they ca^ recover
their health again, yet had they lever dye the^ to eat flesh, why? for they
think, I have now this. xx* xxx. or. xl. years eaten no flesh and have
obteyne^ I doubt not by this time as hye a rowme as the best of the^: should I
now loose that? Nay I had lever dye and as ^ucrecia had lever have be^ slain
(if he had not be^ to strong for her) the^ to have lost her glory, even so had
these. They ascribe heaven unto their imagina cio^s and mad inue^cions, and
receive it not of the lyberalyte of God, by the me rytes and deservings of
Christ.

He now that is renewed in Christ, The spiri tuall man
keeps the law without any law wry The natu rall man.
ten, or compulsion of any ruler or officer, save by the ledinge of the spirit
only: but the natural man is entysed and inoued to keep the law carnally,
with carnal reasons and worldly perswasi ons, as for glory, honor, riches,
and dig Fear is the last remedy.
nite. But the last remede of all when all other fail, is fear. Beat one and
the rest will abstain for fear, as Moses ever puts in remembrance
saying: kill, stone, burn. So shall thou put evil from the, and all Israel
shall hear and fear and shall no more do so. If fear help not, then will
God that they Kings defend the false auctorite of the By shop of Rome their
office punisshinge of sin laid a part. Bisshoppes myni stre the Kings duty
their own laid a part: yea they persecute their own office
be taken out of this life.

Kings were ordained then, as I before said, and thy swerdes put in their
hands to take vengeance of evil doers, that other might fear, and were not
ordained to fight one against another, or to rise against the Emperor to
defend the false auctoryte of the Bishop of Rome that very Antechriste.
Bishops they only can my nystre the temporal sw^rd, their office the
preachinge of gods word laid aparte, which they will another do nor suffer
any man to do, bu^sle with the te^ porall sword (which they have gotten out of
the hand of all princes) the^ that would. The preachinge of Gods worcester de is
hateful and contrary unto them why? For it is impossible to preach Christ
except thou preach against An techryste. that is to say, them which with
their false doctrine and violence of sword enforce to que^che the true
doctrine of Christ. And as thou canste hea le no disease except thou begin
at the rote: eue^ so can y^ preach against no myschefe except thou begin
at the Bishops. Kings they are but Kings do but wait on the Bisshoppe of
romes pleasure The iugling of the Bishop of Rome.
shadows, vain names, and things ydele, having no thing to do in the
world, but when our holy father neadeth their help.

The Bishop of Rome contrary unto all conscience and against all the doctrine
of Christ, which says my kingdom is not of this world. Johan. xviii* has
usurped the right of y^ Emperor. And by polyey of the bishops of Almany, and
with corruptinge the electours or chosers of the emperor with money, brin geth
to pass that such a one is ever cho Bishops of almayne.
sen Emperor that is not able to make his party good with the Bishop of
Rome. To stop y^ Emperor that he come not at Rome, he brings the french
Mylayne
King up to Milayne, and on the other side brings he the venecia^s. If the ve
Bishops of France.
necians come to nigh, the Bishops of France must bring in the french kin
ge, And the Socheners are called and sent for to come and socour. And for their
labor A cappe of mayntenaunce Most ^^^ ^^^ king Defe^der of the bishopp^s of
Rom^s ^ayth The ^l^es^ so^e of the holy seat, Blasinge of arm^s The english
Bishops. The falssh^d of the Bishops
he gives to some a rose, to a no there a cappe of mayntenaunce. One is called
most christen king, another defender of the faith, another the eldest sone of
the most holy seat. He blaseth also the arms of other, and puts in the
holy cross, the crown of thorn or the nails, and so forth. If the french
king ^^ to ^ye, and crep^ up other to Bono nigh or Napels: then must our
english Bishops bring in our king. The craft of the Bishops is to
entytle one king with an others realm. He is called King of De^marke, and of
Eng land, he King of England and of frau^ ce. Then to blind the lords and
the com mones, the King must cale^ge his righ te. Then must the land be
tared and every man pay, and the treasure borne out of the realm, and the
land beggar de. How many a thousand men's lives has it cost? And how many an
ho^dred thousand pounds has it carried out O^ cruel and an ^bho minable
^nsample of tira^ny Judge the^ by their deades says Christ.
of the realm in our remembrance? Be sides how abominable an example of
gatheringe was there? Such ve^ely as never tyraunte syns the world began did,
yea such as was never before herd or thought on neither among Ie was,
Sarasens, Turks or hethe^ syns God created the son to shine: that a beast
should break up in the temple of God, that is to say, in to the heart and
consciences of men, and compel them to swear every man what he was worth to
le^de that should never be paid agay ne. How many thousands forsware them
selves? How many thousands set them selves above their a^ylytie, partly for
fear lest they should be forsworn and partly to save their cred^nce? When the
Bishop of Rome has his purpose then is peace made, no man woe teth how, and
our most enemy is our most friend.

Now because the Emperor is able Th^^ hoe re of Babylon.
to obtain his right, french, english, venecians, and all must upon him. O
great whore of Babylon, how abuses she the princes of the world, how
dronke^, has she made the^ with her wine? How shameful lycences does she
give the^ to use nychromancie, to hold whores, to deuorse the^ selves, to
break the faith and promises that one makes with an other: that the
confessors shall deliver unto the King the confession of whom Confession.
he will, and despenceth with them eue^ of the very law of God, which Christ
him self can not do.

Christ says unto Peter, put up they Ma. xxvi
sword in to his shethe. For all that lay hand upon the swerd / shall
perish with the sword / that is / who so ever without the commandment of y^
temporal officer to whom god has given the sword / lays hand on the
sword to take ve^geaunce / the same deserves death in Not Peter only but
christ also was under the te^porall sword.
the deed doing. God did not put peter only under that temporal sword / but
also Christ him self. As it appears in the fourth chapter to y^ Galathyens.

and Christ shith Mat, iii. Thus becomes it us to fulfill al ryghtwysenes that
is to say^ / all ordinances of / God. If the heed be then under the te^porall
sword how can the me^bres be excepted If Peter sinned in defending Christ
against the temporal sword whose auctorite and mynisters the Bishops the^
abused against Christ as ours do now, Who can excuse our prelates of sin
The Kings sin in geuinge exempcio^s, and the prelates in receyuinge them.
which will obey no man / neither king nor Emperor. Yea who ca^ excuse. him
self from synn either kings y^ ge ue either the Bishopps y^ receive such
exe^pcyons contrary to Gods ordina unces and Chr^hes doctrine.

And math. xvii. both Christ and also Peter pay tribute where the meaning of
Christ's questyon unto Peter is. y^ princes take trybute of straunge^s only
and not of their children then verily ought I to be fre which am the sone of
God whose servants and mynystres they are and of whom they have their
auctoryte Yet because they neither kne we that neither Christ came to use that
aucthorite / but to be our servant and to here / our burden and to obey all
ordinances / both in right and wron ge for our sakes / and to teach us there
fore said he to saint Peter* Pay for the and me lest we offend them More
over though that Christ and Peter (because they were poor / might have
escaped / yet would be not for fear of offendinge other) and hurtynge their
consciences. For he might, well have given occasion unto the tribute gathe
rers to have judged a^isse both of him and his doctrine: yea and the Ie was
might happily have been offended thereby / and have thought that it had not be
laufull for the^ to have paid tri bute unto hethen princes and ydolate^s
seeing yt he so great a Prophet paid not. Yea and what other thing causes
the lay so little to regard their princes as that they se them both despised
and When the spiritualite pays tribute
dysobeyed of that spiritualte? But our prelates which care for none offendin
ge of conscyences and less for Gods or dinaunces / will pay naught: but
when princes must fight in our most holy fa there is quarrel and against Christ
The^ are they ye first. There also is none to pore that the has not so^what
to give. Mark here how paste all shame our Shameless iugulers.
^^o^ doctors are as rochester is in his bo^^e against Marten. Luther which
of this text of Matthew dyspute yt Pe ter because he paid trybute, is greater
then the other Apostles and has more aucrori^e and power tha^ they and was head
unto them al contrary unto so ma ny clear textes where Christ rebukes them
saenge that is an hethenyshe thin ge that one should clyme above an other or
desire to be greatter. To be greatter in the kingdom of heaven is to be a ser
uaunte and he that most humbles him self and becomethe a servant unto
other, after the ensample of Christ I mean and his apostles and not of the
Bysshophe of Rome and his Apostles our Prestes and Bishops the same is greatest
in that kingdom If Peter in payenge trybute became greatest how comes it that
they will pay none at all? But to pay trybute is asygne of subieceyon verily,
and the cause why Christ paid was because he had an household and for the same
cause paid Peter also For he had an house a ship pe and nets as thou redest
in the gos pell. But let us go to. Paul again.

Wherefore ye must needs obey not for fear of vengeance only: but also
because of cons^yence. That is though They ma ke no con science at any evil
doing. They care for their ney bours as the wolf does for the sheep.
Theeuyll ensample of the spi ritualte causes the lay to believe that they are
not bound to obey.
thou be so* mighty as now many years our Bishop of Rome and Prelates every
where are that thou nedest not to obey the temporal sword for fear of
vengaunce yet must thou obey because of conscience. First because of thine
own conscience. For though thou be able to resyste (yet shalt, thou never ha
ue a good conscience as long as Gods word) law / and ordynauuce are again ste
the Seco^daryly for thy neighbors conscience. For though through craft and
violence thou myghtest escape and obtain liberty or pryuylege to be fre from
all manner duties / yet ought tho^ neither to sue or seek for any such
thing (niyther yet admite or accept if it were proffered lest thy fredome make
thy weak brother to grudge and rebel in that he seth the go empty and he him
self more lade) thy part also laid on his shulders See thou not if a man
fa uoure one so^nemorethe^ another, or one seruau^te more the^ a another, how all the There is no christian love in them.
rest gruoge and how love peace and unity is broken. What Christen love is in
ye to thy neighbor ward when y^ can find in thine heart to goo up and down
empty by him all day long and se him ouercharged, yea to fall under his bur
then / and yet will not ones set to thy ^e hand to help him. What good co^
science can there be among our spiri tualte to gather so great treasure toge
there and with ypocresye of their false lerninge to rob almost every man of
house and lands and yet not therewith content but with all craft and wylenes to
purchase so great lyberties and exempcions from ^llmaner braringe with their
brethren / sekinge in Christ no thing but lucre? I pass ouerwith syle^ ce
how they teach Princes in every lan de to lay new exaccions and tyranny on
their subjects more and more daily* neither for whate purpose they do it say
I. God I trust shall shortly disclose What purpose even ^o fla^er the Princes
that they may abu se their aucterite to sl^e who so ever believes in Chust and
to maintain the Bishop of Rome.
their luggelynge and bring their falshed to light and lay a medicine to the^
to make their scabbes break out. Nevertheless this I say that they have
robbed all realms, not of Gods worcester de only but also of all wealth and
prosperity, and have drive peace out of all lan des and withdrawn the^ selves
from all obedience to princes and have separated the^ selves from lay men,
countinge the^ vy ler then dogs, and have set up that great ydole the whore
of Babilo^. Antichri ste of Rome whom they call Bishop of Rome and have
conspired aganst all co^ moan wealths and have made the^ a seue tal kingdom
wherein it is lawful vnpu nyshed to work all abomination. In every parish
have they spyed* in every great man's house and in every ^ouerne and Alehouse
and through co^fessio^s know Confession
they all secrets so that no man may o pen his mouth to rebuke what so ever
they do but that he shall be shortly made Prelates know all men's secrets and no
man theyrs.
an hereti^. In all councels is one of the^ yea the most part and chief rulers
of the councels are of them: But of their council is no man.

Eue^ for this cause pay ye tribute that is to were for consciences sake, to
thy neyboure and for the cause that follows For they are gods ministers
serving for the same purpose. Because God will so have it we must obey. We do
not lo ue if we have Christ's spirit in us, what is good profitable glorious
and honorable for us neither on our own will but on gods will only. Give to
every man therefore his du^ye tribute to who^ tribute belongs custo^e to whom
custo me is due fear to whom fear belongs honor to who^e honor pertay
neth

That thou myghtest feale the worhin ge of the spirit of God in the and lest
y^ bewty of she deed should deceive the and make the think that the law of
God which is spiritual were content and fulfilled with the outward and
bodily dead it follows Owe nothing Love fulfylleth the law before god and not
the outward ded^.
to any man: but to love one another. For he y^ loves another fullfyleth the
law For these commandments: thou shalt not commytte adultery, thou shalt
not kill, thou shall not stele, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall
not desire and so forth, if there be any other commandment are all
comprehended or contained in this saying: love Against* work me^
thy neighbor: therefore is love ^he fulfyllyng of the law. Here have thou
sufficient against all the sophistres w^rke holy, and iustifiare in the world,
which so magnify their deades. The law is spiritual and requyrethe the
heart, and is never fulfilled with the deades in the syghte of God With the
dead The deed fulfylleth the law before the world
thou fulfillest the law before the world and lyuest thereby, that is, thou
enioyest thy^ present life and auoydeste the wrath and vengeance, the death
and punishment which the law threteneth to them that break it. But before
God thou kepest the law if thou love only Now what shall make us love? Merely
that shall faith do. If thou behold how Faith ma heth a man to love.
much god loves the in Christ, and from what vengeance he has delivered the
for his sake, and of what kingdom he has made the heir, the^ shall y^ se
cause enough to love thy very enemy with out respect of reward, either in
this life or in the life to come, but because that god will so have it and
Christ have deserved it, yea y^ should feale in thine heart that all thy
deeds to come, ar abu^ dauntly reco^pensed already in Christ.

Thou wylt say hapely, if love fulfill the law, the^ it justifies I say that,
that wherewith a man fulfylleth the law declares him justified, but that which
ge ueth him wherewith to fulfill the law, Iustifie^g.
justifies him. By iustie^eng understood the forgiveness of sins, and the
favor of God. Now says the text. To x. the end of y^ law or the cause
wherefore the law was made is, Christ to justify all that believe. That is, the
law is The offi ce or dutof the law
given to utter sin, to kill the co^scien ces, to da^pne our deeds, to bring
to repentance, and to drive unto Christ: is who^ God has premised his favor
and forgeuenes of sin unto all that ^epe^te and conse^te to the law that it
in good. If thou believe the promises then does gods truth instifye the, that
is The bele uynge of gods promises iustifyeth.
forgeueth the, and receives the to fauore for Christ's sake. In a suertye
whereof and to certify thine heart, he fealeth the with the sprite. Ephe. i.
and. iiii. And. ii, Corinth. v. says Paul. Which gave us his sprite in
ernest. Now the spirit is given us through Christ, read the ^yght chapter of
the pistle to the Roma^ns, and Gala. iii. and ii. Corin. iii. Nevertheless the
spirit and his fruits ^he spirit and the inward virtues are know ^n by the
ou^w^r^^ d. d^.
wherewith the heart is purified, as faith love, hope, pacyence, long
sufferynge, and obedience, could never be seen without outward experience.
For if thou were not brought sometime in to combraunce, whence God only could
del^uer the, thou should never se thy faith yea except thou foughteste
sometime against desperation, hell, death, sin and powers of this world, for
thy fayth^s sake, thou shuldeste never know true faith from a dream, except
thy brother now and then offended the, thou could^st not know whether thy
love were godly. For a turk is not an g^y till he be hurie and offended, but
if thou love him that does the evil, then is thy love of god, likewise if thy
rulers were always kind, thou shuldeste not know whether thine obedience were
pure or no, but and ^f thou canste patiently obey evil rulers in all things
that is not to the dishonor of God, and when thou hurtest not thy neighbors,
then art thou sure that Gods spyrite works in the, and that thy faith is
no dream nor any false ymaginacyon.

Therefore counceleth Paul. To. xii* recompense no man evil. And on your part
have peace with all men. Derely beloved avenge not your selves: but ge ue rowme
unto the wrath of god. For Over come thine enemy with well doing.
it is vrvtten, vengeance is mine, and I will reward, says the lord.
Therefore if thy enemy hongre, feed him, ^f he thyrst, give him drike. For in
so dorng thou shalt h^pe cooles of fire on his heed (that is thou shalt
kendle love in him. Be not overcome of ^uyll (that is let not another man's
wyckednes make the wicked also) But overcome evil with good, that is, with
softn^sse, kyndnesse, and al patience win him: eue^ as god with kyndnesse
wonn^ the.

The law was given in thunder, lyghtenyng, fire, smoke, and the voice o^ a
trumpet and terryble sight. Exodi The law
x^. So that the people quoke for fear, and stood a far of saying to Moses.
Speak thou to us and we will hear^: let not the lord speak unto us, lest we
dye No ear (if it be a waked and vndersta^ death the meaning) is able to abide
the ^oyce of the law: except the promyses of mercy be by. That horrible
tho^der except the rain of mercy ^e joined with it, destroys all and byldeth
not. The law is a witness against us, and testyfyeth that God abhor^eth the
sins that is in us, and us for out sins sake The king.


In like manner when god gave the peo ple of Israel a king, it thondred, and
^ay ned that the people feared so sore yt they cried to Samuel for to pray for
them, that they should not dye. 1 Regu^. xii. As the law is a terrible thing*
even so is the king. For he is ordained to take ve^geaunce, and has a sword
in his h^de and not p^^ockes fe^^ers* Fear hi^ there f^re and look on him as
thou woldeste look on a sharp swerd that hanged over they heed by an here.

Heads and gouerners are ordained of Rulers are gods gift.
god, and are eue^ the gift of god, whether they be good or bad* And
whatsoever is done unto us by the^, that does god, be it good or bad. If they
be evil, why are they evil? verily for our wickedness sake are they evil.
Because y^ Why the rulers are ^uyll.
when they were good we would not re^ey ue that goodness of the hand of god and
be tha^kful, submitting our selves unto his laws and ordinances, but abuse
the goodness of God unto our sensual and beastly lusts Therefore does god make
his scourge of the^, and turn them unto wild beasts, contrary to the nature
of their names and offices, eue^ in to lions, bears, foxes, and unclean swyne,
to aue^ge him self of our unnaturally blind unkindness, and of our rebellious
disobedyence.

In the. c. ^* vi. Psalm thou read, he destroyed the ryuers, and dried up
the springes of water, and turned the fruteful land in to bare^nesse, for the
wickedness of the inhabiters therein. When the chyl dren of Israel had
forgotten God in-Egipt, god moved the hearts of the E g^pcia^s to hate the^, ^
to subdue the^ with craft and vilynes, Psalm. C. iiii. And Deutero. i. i.
Moses reherseth saying. God was angry with me for your sakes: so that y^ wrath
of god fell on Mo ses* for the wickedness of the people. And in the second
chapter of the second book of kings, God was angry with the people, and moved
David to no^bre them when Ioab and the other lords wondered why he would have
them no^bred, and because they feared lest some evil should follow, diswaded the
king: yet it help not. God so hardened his heart in his purpose, to have an
occasion to sle the wicked people. Evil rulers are a sign that god is angry
with us.


Evil rulers the^ are a sign that god is angry and wrath with us. Is it not a
great wrath and vengeance that the father and mother should hate their
children, even their flesh and their blood? or that an husband should be
unkind unto his wife? or a master unto the seruau^te that wayteth on his
profit? or that lords and kings should be tyrauntes unto their subjects and
tenauntes which pay them tribute, toll custom, and re^te, laboring and
toylyng to find the^ in honor, and to maintain them in their estate? is not
this a fearful judgment of God and a cruel wrath, that the very prelates and
shepherdes o^ one soul which were wone to feed christ's flock with Christ's
doctrine and to walk before them in living thereafter, and to give their bodies
and lives for the^ and to strengthen their weak faythes, are now so sore
changed that if they smell that one of their flock (as they) now call them
and no longer Christ's) do but ones long or desire for the true knowledge of
Christ, they will sle him, and burn him with fire most cruelly. What is the
cause of this, and that they Why the prelates are so wic ked.
also teach false doctrine confyrmynge it with lies? verily it is the hand of
god to avenge the wickedness of the^ that ha ue no love nor lust unto ye truth
of god when it is preached: but rejoice in unrighteousness. As thou may se in
the second pistle of Paul to the Tessaloni. Where he speaks of the coming
of Antichriste. Whose coming shall be (says he) by the workynge of Satan with
all miracles, signs* and wonders which are but lies, and in all deceyuable
unrighteousness among them that peryshe, because they receyud not any love to
the truth to have been saved. Therefore shall God send them strong The cause
of false miracles is that we have no lust unto the truth.
delusyon, to believe lies. Mark how God to avenge his truth, sends to the
unthankful false doctrine, and also false miracles to confyrme them, and to
harden their hearts in the false way, that afterward it shall not be possible
for them to admytte the truth. As thou see in Erodi* vii. and* xiii. how God
suffered false miracles to be showed in the sight of Pharao to harden his
heart, that he should not believe the troth, for in as much as his forceters
turned their rods in to serpe^tes, and turned water in to blood, and made
frogs by their inchauntment, so thought he that Moses did all his miracles
by the same craft, and not by the power of god. And abode therefore in un believe
and perished in resistynge god. The right way to co me out of bondage.


Let us receive all things of God whether it be good or bad: let us humble our
selves under his mighty hand, and submit our selves unto his ^ourtoure and
chastysynge, and not wythdrawe our selves from his correction (read Hebr. xii.
for thy co^fortes and let us not take y^ stafe by the end or selie to avenge
our selves on his rod which are the evil rulers. The child as long as he
seeks to avenge him sell fe v^on the rodd^ has an evil heart, for he thinks
not that the correctyon is right or that he has deserved it, ney there
repe^teth, but reioyseth in his wyckednes. And so long shall he never be
without a rod: yea so long shall the rod be made sharper and sharper. If
he knowledge his fault and take the correction mekely and even kiss the rod,
and amend him self with the lernyng and norture of his father and mother,
then is the rod taken away and burnt.

So if we resyst evil rulers sekyng^ to set our selves at liberty, we shall
no doubt bring our selves into more cruel bondage, and wrappe our selves in
much more myserye and wretchedness, for if the hedes overcome, the^ lay they
more waighte on their backs, and tie them shorter. If they overcome their evil
rulers the^ make they way for a more cru ell nacyon or for some tyraunte of
their own nation which has no right unto the crown. If we submit our selves
unto the chastesyng of God, and mekely knowledge our sins for which we are
scourged, and kiss the rod, and amend our lyning: the^ will god take the rod
de away, that is, he will give the rulers a better heart. Or if they continue
their malice and persecut you forwel doing and because you put your trust in
god God is al way one always true, always* merciful and excludes no man
from his promi ses.
then will god deliver you out of their tyr^ny for his trouthes sake. It is the
same god now that was in the old time, and delivered the fathers and the
prophets, the apostles and other holy sain tes. And what soever he swore to
them he has sworue to us. And as he deliue red the^ out of all temptacio^,
co^braunce, and adversity, because they consented and submitted them selves
unto his will, and trusted in his goodness and truth: even so will he do us if
we do likewise.

When soever the children of Israel fell from the way which god commanded
them to walk in, he gave them up under one tyrant or a another. As soon as
they came to the knowledge of them selves, and repented cryenge for mercy and
leanyng unto the truth of his promises, he sent one to deliver the^, as the
hystories of the Bible make mention.

A Christen man in respect of God is A Christian man* does but suffer only.
but a passive thing, a thing that suffers only and does naught, as the
sick in respect of the surgeon orphisicia^ does but suffer only. The surgeon
last ^eth and cutteth out the deed flesh, sercheth the wou^des, thursteth in
^e^tes, se ^reth, bawneth, sows or sticheth, and lays to corsies to draw
out the corruption, and last of all lays the helyng playsters and makes
whole. The phisician likewise gives purgatio^s, and drynkes to drive out the
disease, and then with restauratiues brigeth health. Now if the sy^ke resyst the
raser, the serching iron, and so forth, does he not resyste his own health
and is cause of his own death. So likewise is it of us, Evil rulers are*
wholesome medici nes.
if we resyst evil rulers which are the rod and scourge wherwyth god
chastises us, the instruments wherwyth God sercheth our wounds, and bitter
drink to drive out the sin and to make appear, and corsyes to draw out by
the rotes the core of the Pore* of the soul that freteth inward. A Christen
man therefore receives all thing of the hand of god both good and bad, both
swe te and sour, both wealth and woe. If any person do me good, whether it be
father mother, and so forth, that receive I of God, and to God give thanks.
For he gave wherwyth* and gave a commandment, and moved his heart so to do.
Aduersite also receive I of the hand of god as an wholesome medicine How
profitable ad nersite is.
though it be somewhat bitter. Te^pta tacion and adnersite do both kill syn and
also utter it. For though a Christian man knows every thing how ti live: yet
is the flesh so weak that he can never take up his Cross him self to kill
and mortyfie the flesh. He must have another to lay it on his back. In many
also sin lies hyd wi^h in, and festereth and rotteth inward and is not
seen: so that they think how they are good and perfect, and keep the law. As
the young man. Mathe. xix. said he had observed al of a child and yet lied
falsely in his heart, as the text following well declares. When all is at
peace and no man troubles us, we think that we are pacie^t and love our
neighbors as our selves: but let our neighbor hurde us in word or deed and
then find we it otherwise. Then tume we, and rage and set up the brystles, and
bend our selves to do vengeance. If we loved with godly love for Christ's
kyndnes sake, we should desire no vengeance, but pytye him and desire god to
forgive and amend him, know inge well that no flesh can do otherwise then
sin, except that God preserve him. Thou wylt say what good does such
persecucion and tyranny unto the righteouse? First makes them feale the
workyng of gods sprite in the^, The grea test synn^^ is ryghteous in Christ
and the promy ses. And the perfertest and holiest is a sinner in the law and
the flethe*
and that their faith is unfeigned. Seco^ daryly I say no man is so great a
sinner, if he repent and believe, but that he is ryghteouse in Christ and in
the promises: yet if thou look on the flesh and law, th^re is no man so
perfect that is not found a sinner. Nor any man so pure, that has not
somewhat to be yet purged. This shall suffice at this time as concerning
obedience unto princes.

The second Chapter.
Of the office and duty of Princes toward their loving and natural
subjects.

LEt. kings (if they had rather be Christen in d^de then so to be call led)
give them selves all together to the wealth of their realms after the ensample
of Christ: remembrynge that the people are Gods and not theyrs: yea at
Christ's enheritau^ce and possession bought with his blood. The most despised
person in his realm is the kings brother and his fellow member with hrm, and
equal with him in the kingdom of God and of Christ Let him therefore not thike
him self to good to do the service* neither seek any other thing in the^, the^
a father seeks in his children: yea then Christ sought in us. Though that the
king in the temporal regiment be in the rowme of God, and represents god him
self, and is with out all comparison better then his subjects: yet let him
put of that and become a brother, doing and leauyng undone all things in
respect of the commone wealth, that all men may se that he seeks nothing but
the profit of his sub iectes. When a cause that requires ex ecution is
brought before him, then only let him take the person of god on him. Then let
him know no creature but here al in defferently, whether it be a stranger or
one of his own realm and the small as well as the great, and iud ge
ryghteously, for the judgment is the lords. Deu. i. In time of judgment he
is no minister in the kingdom of Christ: he preaches no Gospel but the sharp
law of vengeance. Let him take the holy judges of the old testamente for
Moses.
an example, and namely Moses which in executynge the law was mercylesse,
otherwise more the^ a mother unto the^ never euengyng his own wro^ges but
sufferyng all thing, bearing every ma^s weakness, teaching, warning,
exhortyng, and ever caring for them, and so te^derly loved them, that he
desired God either to forgive them or to da^pne him with them.

Let the judges also privately when they Iugdes.
have put of the person of a judge exhor te with good counsel and warn the
people and help that they come not at Gods judgment: but the causes that
are brought unto them, when they sit in gods s^ede, let them judge and
co^de^pne the trespasser under lawful witnesses, and not break up in to the
consciences O tyranny to com p^l a man to accuse him self.
of men, after the ensample of Antichrists disciples, and compel them either
to forswere them selves by the almighty god and by the holy gospel of his
merciful promises, or to t^stifie against them selves. Which abhominatio^ our
perlates learned of Cayphas Mat. xxv^ saying to Christ. I adjure or charg^ Our
prelates learned of Cayphas.
the in the name of the living God, ^ha^ thou tell us whether thou be Christ
the son of god. Let that which is secret^ to God only, whereof no proof can
b^ made nor lawful witness brought Secret sins pertayne unto God to
punish and open sins un to the kings.
abide unto the coming of the Lord which shall open all secrets. If any
malice break forth that let them iudg^ only. For further auctorite has God
not given them,

Moses Deutero. ^vii, warns judges to keep them vpryght and to look o^ no
man's person, that is, that they prefer not the high before thy low, the
great before the small, the rich before the poor, his acquayntaunce, friend
kynsman, contrema^, or one of his ow^ nacyon before a stranger, a fremde o^ an
alye^t, yea or one of their own fait^ before an infydell: but that they look
on the cause only to judge indifferently. For the rowme that they are in and
the law that they execute are gods why che as he has made all an^ is god
of all and all are his sons: even so is he judge over all, and will have all
judged by his law indifferently and to ha ue the right of his law, and will
auen ge the wrong done unto the turk or la razyn. For though they be not
under the, everlasting testamente of God in Christ, as of us which are called
Christen be, and even no mo then to whom God has sent his promyses and po
wred his spirit into their hearts to be leave them, and in their hearts to
fulfill the law of love, yet are they under the testament of the law natural,
which are the laws of every land made for the comen wealth there, and for
peace and unity that one may live by a another. In which laws the infydels
(if they keep the^) have promyses of world ly things. Who so ever therefore
hyndereth a very infydell from the right of that law, synneth against God,
and of him will God be avenged. More over Moses warns the^ that they receive
no gifts, rewards, or brybes. For those two points, fauorynge of one person
more then a another, and re ceyuinge rewards, peruerte all right and equity,
and is the only pestilence of all judges.

And the Kings warns he that they have not to many wives, lest their her t^s
turn a way: and that they read al way in the law of God, to learn to fe re
him, lest their hearts be lift up above their brethren. Which two poin tes,
women, and pride, the dispysynge of their subjects, which are in very deed
their own brethren, are the come^ pesti lence of all princes Read the storis
and se.

The sheryues, bailey arauntes, to^stables, and such like officiers may let no
man that hutteth his neygboure escape but that they bring the^ before the
judges, except they in the mean time agree with their neighbors and make them
amends.

Let kings defend their subjects from the wrongs of other nacyo^s, but pyke
no quarrels for every tryfle, no, let not our most holy father make them no
Uaynena mes.
more so dro^ke^ with vain names, with cappes of mayntenaunce, and like
bables, as it were popetry for children, to beggar their realms and to
mourther their people, for defending of our holy fathers tyranny If a lawful
peace that The holy father lowseth. peace and unite, true ce tronth and all
honest.
stondeth with Gods word be made between prince and prince, and the name of
God taken to record, and the body of our savior broken between them upon the
bond which they have made, that peace or bond can our holy father not
dispense with, neither loose it with all the keys he has: no verily Christ
ca^ not break it. For he came not to bre ache the law but to fulfill it. Math.
v.

If any man have broken the law, or a good ordinance, and repent and co me
to the right way again, then has Christ power to forgive him: but ly
cence to break the law can he not give, much more his disciples and vycars
(as they call them selves) can not do it. What the keys are and wh^ they are
so called.
The keys whereof they so greatly boste them selves are no carnal things but
spiritual, and no thing else save knowleage of the law, and of the promyses
or Gospel, if any man for lack of spiritu all fealynge desire auctorite of
men, let him read the old doctors, If any man desire auctorite of scriptures
Christ say the Luke. xi. Woo be to you law ar^, for ye have taken away ye keye
of know leage, ye enter not in your selves, and the^ that come in ye forvyd,
that is: they had blinded the scripture whose knowleage The keys are pro mysed.
(as it were a keye) lets i to god, with gloses and traditions. Likewise
fyndest thou Mat. xxiii. As Pater answered in the name of al, also christ
promised him the keys in the person of all. math. xvi And in the. xx. of
John^ he paid the^ say enge receive the holy Ghost, who soeuers sins ye
remitte they are remytted The keys are paid
or forgeuen and who soeuers synes ye retain they are retained or holden With
preaching the promises lose they as many as r^pente and believe. And for The
houde and lowsonynge
that Ioha^ says receive the holy ghost Luke in his last chapitre says: the^
open he their wits that they might under stand the scriptures and said unto
the^ thus it is written. And thus it behooved Repentance and fyrgyuen^s come by
preachinge
Christ to suffer and so to rise again the third day And that repentance
and re mission of sins should be preached in his name among all nacyo^s. At
y^ prea, ching of the law rep^nt men and at the preaching of y^ ^romyses do
they bele ue and are saved Peter in the second of the acts practiced his
keys and by pre Peter practices his keys
achinge the law brought the people in to the knowleage of them selves and
boun de their consciences, so that they were prycked in their hearts and said
unto Peter and to the other Apostles, what shall we do? Then brought they
forth the keye of the sweet promyses saying repent and be baptized every one
of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the re mission of sins and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy ghost. For the promise was made unto you and unto
your children, and to all that are a far, ^ue^ as many as the lord shall
call, Of like ensamples is the acts full and Peter's The Bisshoppe of Romes
auctorite is to prea che Gods word only
pistles, and Paues pystles, and all the scripture, neither has our holy
father any other auctorite of Christ or by the reason of his predecessor Peter
then to preach Gods word. As Christ co^pareth the understanding of
scripture unto a key, so compares he it to a net te, and unto leue^, and unto
many other things for certain properties. I mar uayle therefore that they
boste not them selves of their net and leven, as well as of their keys, for
they at al one thi^ ge. But as Christ byddeth us beware of the leven of the
pharisees, so beware of their co^terfayted keys and of their false net
(which are their tradicions and ceremonies, their ^pocrisy and fall se
doctrine) wherewith they get, not sou les unto Christ, but auctorite and riches
unto them selves.

Let Christen kings therefore keep Not with an heritike says the Bisshoppe of
Rome.
their faith and truth and all lawful promyses, and bonds, not one with an
other only, but even with the Turk or what infidel it be. For so it is r^ght
be fore God as the scriptures and examples of the Bible testifies. Who soeue^
vow an unlawful vow, promise an unlawful promise swear an unlawful oath
synneth against. God: and ought therefore to break it. He needs not to sue to
Rome for a license. For he has Gods word and not a license only: but also
a commandment to break it They therefore y^ are sworn to be true unto
Cardinals and Bishops that is to say false unto God the king and the realm
may brake their oaths law fully without grudge of conscience by the auctorite
of Gods word. In makyn ge them they sinned but in repenting and breaking them
they please God hyghly and receive forgyuenes in Christ.

Let kings take their duty of their subjects and that that is only
necessary unto the defense of the realm. Let the^ rule their realms the^
selves with the help of lay men that are sage, wise, learned and expert. Is
it not a shame above al shames and a monstrous thin ge that no man should be
found able to govern a worldely kingdom save Bis shoppes and prelates that
have forsa^e^ the world, and are taken out of the world and appointed to
preach the king dome of God? Christ says yt his king dome is not of this
world John^. xviii. And Luke, xii. unto the young man that desired him to bid
his brother to give him part of the enheritau^ce, he answered, who made me
judge or a deuyder a Behold the face of the Bis shops in this glass.
monge you. No man that layth his ha^ de to the ploughe and lokethe back is
apt for the kingdom of heaven. Luke. ix No man can serve two masters but he
must despise the one. Math. vi.

To preach Gods word is to much for half a man. And to mynistre a tem
porall kingdom is to much for half a man also* Either other requires an whole
man. One therefore cannot well do both. He that auengeth him self on eve ry
tryfle is not mere to preach the paci ence of Christ how that a man ought to
forgive and suffer all things, He that is over whelmed with all manner ry ches
and does but sike more daily, is not met to preach pouerte. He that will obey
no man is not me^e to preach how we ought to obey all me^. Peter says Act,
vi. It is not mete that we should lea ue the word of God and serve at the ta
bles. Paul says in the. ix chapitre of y^ first to the Cor. God sent me but to
pre ache. A terrible saying verily for Bis shopes and Prestes If he had said
woe be to me if I fight not and move not prin ces unto ware or if I e^crece not
saint Peter's pa^rimony, as they call it had been a more easy saying for them.

Christ forbyddeth his discyples and y^ often as thou may se Matthew. xviii.
and also. xx. Mark. ix. and also. x. Luke ix. and also. xxii. Even at his last
soper) not only to clyme a boue lords, kings and Emperors in wordly rule,
but al so to exalte the^ selves one above an other in the Kingdom of God. But
in vain: for the Bishop of Rome would not here it though he had commanded it
te^ thousand times. Gods word should Bishops have captiued gods word with
their own decrees.
rule only and not Bishops decrees, or the Bishop of Romes pleasure. That
ought they to preach purely and spiritually, and to fashion their lives
thereafter, and with all ensample of godly lyuinge and long sufferinge, to
draw al to christ: and not to expound the scrip tures carnally and wordly.

The third Chapter.
Of the office and duty of the children toward their parents.

GOd (which works all in all things) for a secret judgment and purpose
and for his godly pleasure, provided an hour that thy father and mother
should come together, to make the through them. He was present with the in thy
mothers womb and fashioned the and breathed life in to the, and for the great
love he had unto the, provided milk in thy mo there is breasts for the, against
thou were borne: moved also thy father and mother and all other, to love the,
to pyiye the, and to care for the.

And as he made the through the^, so Out fathers and mothers are to us in
gods stead.
has he cast the under the power and auttoryte of them, to obey and serve
them in his stead, saying, honor thy father and mother. Exodi xx. Which is
not to be understand in bowynge the kne, and putting of the cappe only, but
that thou love them with all thine heart, and fear and dread the^ and wait on
their commandments, and seek their worship, pleasure will and profit in
all things, and give thy life for them, counthinge them worthy of all honor
remembringe that thou art their god and possession, and that thou owe un to
them thine own self, and all that thou art able, yea and more than thou art
able to do.

Understande also that what soever What we do ^^ our fathers and mothers that
we do to god
thou doste unto the^ (be it good or badde) thou doste unto God. When thou
please the^ thou please God. When thou displeasest them thou displeasest
God. When they are angrye with the, God is angrye with the. Neither it is
possible for the to come unto the fauou re of God again (no though all the
aungles of heaven pray for the) until thou have submytted thy self unto thy
father and mother again.

If thou obey though it be but carnal The reward of obedience
ly, either for fere, for vain glory, or profit (thy blessing shall belong
life upon the earth. For he says, honor thy father and mother, that thou
may live long upon the earth. Exodi. xx. Contrarywyse if thou disobeye
them, thy life shall be shortened upon the earth The reward of dysobedience.
For it follows. Exodus xxi. He that smy teth his father or mother shall be put
to death for it. And he that curses (that is to say, rayleth or dishonors
his father or mother with opprobrious words (shall be slain for it. And
Deutero nomion. xxi. If any man have a son stubborn and disobedye^t which
hereth not the voice of his father and the voice of his mother so that they
have taught him nortoure, and he regards them not, than let his father and
mother take him and bring him for the unto the se nyours or elders of the
city and unto the gate of the same place. And let them say unto the senyours
of that cyti this our son is stubborn and disobedye^t He will not hear unto
our voice, he is a ryotter and a dronkerde. Than let all the men of that city
stone him with sto nes unto death, so shall ye put away wickedness from
among you and all Israel shall hear and shall fear.

And though that the temporal officers (to their own da^pnacion) be necli
gente in punyshinge such disobedience (as the spyrituall officers are to
teach it) and wynke at it or look upon it through God auegeth disobedience him
selfeh though the officer will not.
the fyngers: yet shall they not sea pe unpunished. For the vengeance of God
shall accompanye them (as thou maiste se Deuteronomion. xxviii.) with all
mysfortune and evil luck) and shall not depart from them until they
bemurdered, drounde, or hanged, either un till by one mischaunce or a another,
they be utterly brought to naught. Yea and the world often times hangs many a
man for that they never deserved, but God hangs them because they would not
obey and harken unto their elders as theconsciences of many will find when
they come unto the galowes, the re can they preach and teach other, that
which they them selves would not ler ne in season, Marriage


The marriage also of the childerne, per tayneth unto their elders, as thou may
ste se. i. Corinthiorum. vii and through out all the scripture by the
auctorite of the said commandment, child obey father and mother. Which
th^nge the he athe^ and gentyles have ever kept and to this day keep, unto the
great shame and rebuke of us Christen: in as much as weddynges of our vyrgyns
shame it is to speak it are more like unto the saw Covetous nes makes our
spirituality that they can not se.
te of a bytche than the marienge of a re asonable creature. Se not we daily.
iii or. iiii. calenging one woman before the Commyssary or official of which
not one has the consent of her father and mother. And yet he that has most
mo ney has best right and shall have her in the dispyte of all her fryndes
and in That which a Eurke is ashamed of.
diffyaunce of* Gods ordinances More over when, she is given by the judge
unto the one party and also mari ed even than often times shall the contrary
part sue before an hyer judge or an other that succedeth ye same and for money
deuorce her again. So sha^eful ly both the covetousness and a^bycyo^ of our
prelates, mock with the laws of God. I pass over with silence, how many
years they will prologe the sente^ ce with cauillacyons and subteltie, if they
be will moneyed on both parties And if a damsel promise. ii. how sha Get
herwith child say, they so shall thy cause be best.
mefull counsel they will give the secon de and also how the religious of
Satan do separat inseperable matrimo nigh. For after thou art laufully married
at the commandment of father and mo there and with the consent of all thy frin
des yet if thou wyke be disgysed like unto one of them and swear obedience unto
their tradicions thou maiste disobeye father and mother, break the oath Gods
commandementes break they through their own tradici ons.
which thou haste sworn to God befo re his holy congregation, and withdraw
love and charity the highest of gods commandments, and that due tie and
service which thou owe unto thy wife, whereof. Christ cannot dispe^ce with
the. For Christ is not against God but with God, and came not to brea ke Gods
ordinances, but to fulfill them. That is, he came to overcome the with
kyndnes, and to make the to do of very love the thing which the law
compels the to do. For love only and to do service unto thy neighbor* is
the fulfilling of the law in the sight of God. To be a monk or a friar, thou
may thus forsake thy wife before thou have line with her, but not to be a
seculer priest. And yet after thou art professed, Money makes marcha^s dyse
the Bishop of Rome for money will dispense with the, both for thy co te and
all thy obedience, and make a seculer, priest of the. Like wise as it is sy
monye to sell a benef^ce (as they call it) but to resygne upon a pencyon, and
than to redeem the same, is no symonye at all. Oh craf^ye iuglars and mock^ts
with the word of God.

The fourth Chapter.
Of the office and duty of the parents toward their children.

FAthers move not your children unto wrath: but bring them up in the nourture
and informacyon of the lord. Ephesiorum. vi. and Collos. iii. Fathers rate not
your children, lest they be of desperate mind, that is, left you discorage
them. For where the fathers and mothers are wey ward, hasty, and churlishe,
ever brawlinge and chydinge: there are the chylderne a none discoraged, and
hertelesse and apt for nothing, neither ca^ they do any thin The rygh te
bringin ge up of children.
ge a right. Bring them up in the nour toure and informacio^ of the lord.
Teach them to know Christ, and set gods or dinaunce before them saying:
Sone or daughter God has created the and ma de the through us thy father and
mother, and at his commandment have we so long thus kyndly brought the up
and kep te the from all perels: he has co^maun ded the also to obey us
saying: child obey thy father and mother. If thou me kely obey, so shalt
thou grow both in the favor of God and man, and know leage of our lord
Christ. If thou will not obey us at his commandment, then are we charged to
correct the, yea and if thou repent not and amend thy self, God shall slay
the by his officers or punish the euerlastyngely. Nourture the^ not worldly
and with worldly wisdom saying: Thou shalt come to honor The destruction
and marringe of childerne
dygnite: promocyon and riches thou shalt be better then soche and soche, thou
shall have. iii. or. iiii. benefices and be a great doctoure or a Bishop and
have so many men waytinge on the and do no thing but hawk and hunt and live
at pleasure, thou shalt not need toswete to labor, or to take any pain for
thy lyuinge and so forth, fyllynge the^ full of pride, dysdayne* and ambicion
and corruptinge their minds with worldly persuasions, Let the fathers and
mothers mark how they them selves were disposed at all ages, and by experience
of their own infirmitees help their children and keep the^ from occasyons.
Let them teach their children to a^e marriages of their fathers and mothers and
let their elders provide marriages for the^ in season: teachinge them also to
know that she is not his wife which the sone takes nor her husband which
the daughter takes without the consent and good will of their elders of the^
that have auctorite over the^ If their friends will not mary the^ then are they
not to blame if they mary the^ selves as is more spoken in the book of
matrimonye. Let the fathers and mothers always take the vttermoste of their
auctoryte of their children but at a time me suffer with them and be are their
we akenesse as Christ does ours. Sek chri ste in your chyldern, in your wives
ser, uauutes and subjects* Father mother sone daughter master servant Kyn
ge and subject be names in the worldly regyment. In Christ we are all one In
Christ we are al servants and he that has know lea ge is bound.
thing none better than other all brethren and must all seek Christ and our
brothers profit in Christ. And he that has the knowleage whether he be
lord or King is dounde to submit him self and serve his brethern and to
give him self for them to win them to Christ

The fyfth chapter.
Of the office and duty of servants toward their Masters,

Servants obey your carnal masters with fear and treblynge in singleness
of your hearts as unto Christ not with service in the eye sight as me^ pleasers
but as the servants of Christ doing the will of God from the heart with good
will even as though ye served y^ lord and not men* Ephe. vi. And. i. (...) i^.
Seruasites obey your masters with all fear not only if they be good and
courteous but also though they be froward. For it comes of grace if a man
for (...) science toward God endure grefe sufferinge wrongefully. For what
praise is it if when ye be buffetted for your fa^^ tes, ye take it patiently?
But and if when ye do well, ye suffce wrong and take it pacyentlye, than is
there thank with God, here unto verily were ye called. For Christ also
suffered for our sakes, leauinge us an example to fo^o we his steps. In what
soever ^ynde therefore thou art a servant, duringe the time of thy
couenauntes, thy master is unto the in the stead and rowme of God, and God
through him The master is unto the servant in Gods stead.
feadethe the clothethe the, ru^ethe and lernethe the his Commandments, are
Gods commandments, and thou oughteste to obey him as God, and in all
things to seek his pleasure and profit. For thou, art his good and
possessyon, as his ox or his horse in so much that whosoeuere does but desire
the in his heart from him with out his love and license is condemned of. God,
which sayethe. Exodi. xx. s^ thou ones couete not thy neighbors servants.
Paul the apostle sent home Onesymus unto his master (as thou read in the
pistle of. Saint. Paul to Philemon. In so much that though the said Philemon
with his seruante also was converted by paul, and owed unto Paul and to the
word y^ Paul prea ched, not his servant only, but also him self: yea and
though that Paul was in necessite and lacked mynisters to mynister unto him
in the bonds. which he suffered. For the* Gospels sake, yet would he, not
retain the ser uaunte necessary unto the furtheraunce of the gospel without
the consent of the master.

O how sore differreth the doctrine Christ's doctrine and the Bishop of
Romes differ
of Christ and his Apostles from the doctrine of the Bishop of Rome and of
his, Apostles. For if any man will obey neither father nor mother neither Lord
nor master, neither. King nor prince, the same neadethe but only to take the
mark of the beast, that is to shave him self a monk (a friar, or a To obey
no man is aspiritual thing.
priest, and is than, immediately fre and exempted from all service and obedyen
ce due unto man. He that will obey no man (as they will not (is most accepta
ble unto them. The more disobedient that thou art unto Gods ordinaun ces, y^
more apt and mete art thou for theyres. Neither is the professinge. vowinge
promising, and sweringe, obe dyence unto their laws and ordinances any other
thing, than the defyenge, denyenge, and forswerynge obedyence un to the
ordinances of God.

The sixte Chapter*
Of the office and duty of Masters to ward their servants.

Paul Ephe. vi. says ye masters do even the same things unto them that, is,
be master after the example and doctrine of christ, as he before taught the
servants to obey unto their masters as unto Christ (puttinge away
thretenynges (that is, give them fair words, and exhort them kyndly to do
their duty: Yea nurture them as thyn own sons with the lords nurture that
they may se in Christ a cause Teach thy servant to know christeand after.
Christ's doctrine dele with him.
why they ought louyngely to obey. and remember (says he ^ that your
master also is in heaven, Neythere is there any respect of parsons with him,
that is he is indyfferente and not per^yall: as great in sy^^te is a servant
as a master. And in the third cha pitre to the c^llo, says he ye masters do
unto your servants that which is just and equalle remembringe that ye also
have a maystere in heaven. Give your servants kind words food, raymente
and learning. Be not bitter unto them, ^ayle not on them, give them no cruele
countenance, but according to the ensample and doctrine of Christ, deal
with them. And when they labor sore, cheryshe them Do all thing with god
des word
again. When ye correct them, let Gods word be by, and do it with such
good manner that they may se how that ye do it to amend them only: and to
bring them unto the way which God byddeth us to walk in, and not to avenge
your selves, or to wreake your malice on the^. If at a time through hastynes ye
excede measure in punyshynge, recompense it another way and pardon them
another time.

The seventh Chapter.
Of the office and duty of Land lords.

LEt Christen Landlordes be content with their rentes and old customs, not
reysynge the rent or fynes, and bringing up new Customs to oppress their
tenauntes: neither lettinge. ii. Or. iii. tenauntryes unto one man. Let the^
not take in their commones, neither make Parkes nor pastures of hole Paryshes.
For God God gave the earth to me^
gave the earth to men to inhabyte, and not unto sheep and wild dear. Be as
Fathers unto your tenauntes: yea be unto them as Christ was unto us, and show
unto them al love and kyndnes. What soever busynes is among them be not
percyall favoring one more then a another. The complayntes* quarrels, and strife
that are among the^ count dyseases of sick people, and as a merciful
Physycian heal the^ with wisdom and good counseyle. Be pytyful and tender
herted unto them, and let not one of thy tenauntes tear out a nothers throat,
but judge their causes indyfferentlye and compel them to make their dyches,
hedges, gates, and ways. For even for such causes were ye made Landlordes,
and for such causes paid men rent at the beginning. For if such an order
were not, one should sle^ another and all should go to waste. If thy tenaunte
shall labor and toil all the year to pay the thy rent, and when he has
bestowed all his labor, his neighbors catell shall devour his fruytes, how
tedyous and bitter should his life be? Se therefore that ye do your duties
again and suffer no man to do them wrong, save the King only. If he do
wrong, then must they abide God des judgment.

The eight Chapter.
Of the office and duty of Bishops and Prestes, and of their sendinge.

GOd anointed his son Jesus with the holy ghost, and therefore called him
Christ, which is asmoche to say as anointed. Out wardly he dysgysed him not
but made him like other men and sent him in to the world to bless us, and to
offer him self for us a sac^rifyce of a sweet sauer, to kylle the stenche of
our sins that god hence for the should smell the^ no more nor think upon
the^ any more: and to Christ was neither shaue^ nor shorn nor yet an noynted
with ^oyle
make full and sufficient satisfacion or a mendes for all them that repe^te,
beleuynge the truth of God, and submittin ge the^ selves unto his ordinances
both for the sin that they do, have done, and shall do. For sin we through
fra gylyte never so often, yet as soon as we repent and come in to the right
way again, and unto the testamente which He that does ought to make
satisfaccion has lost his part of christ's blood.
God has made in Christ's, blood, our sins waste aware as smoke in the
wind, and as darkness at the coming of the light. In so much that who
soever goes about to make satysfacyon for his sins to God ward, saying in
his heart, this much have I sinned, this much will I do again, or this wise
will I syne to To our neighbor make we ame^ des.
make amends with all, or this will I do to get heaven wythall, the same is an
infydele, faythlesse, and dampened in his deed doing, and has lost his part
in Christ's blood, because he is dysobedyent unto Gods testamente, and
sets up a another of his own Imaginacyon, unto which he will compel God to
obey, If we love God we have a commaundent to love our neighbor also, as
says Ioha^ in his Epistle. And if we have offended him to make him amends, or
if we have not wherewith, to ask him forgyuenes and to do and suffer all
things for his sake to win him to God and to norishe peace and unity: but to
God war de Christ is an everlasting satisfaccyon, and for ever sufficient.

Christ when he had sulfylled his The Apo stles ware neither shaue^ nor shorn
nor anointed with oil.
course, anointed his Apostles and Discyples with the same spirit, and sent
them immendiately forth without all manner disgysynge like other men also, to
preach the atonement and peace which Christ had made between God and man,
as Paul boasts him self every where, Christ (says he) sent me to preach
the Gospel. i. Corint. i. And I received of the Lord, that which The Apo
stles ware sent of Christ with like auctoryte.
I delivered unto you. i. Co. xi. And Galathians. i. I certifye you brethren
that the Gospel which was preached of me, was not after the manner of men
(that is to say, carnal or fleshely) neither received I it of man, neither
was it taught me, but I received it by the reuelacion of Jesus Christ. And
Galathia^s. ii. He that was mighty in Peter in the Apostleshyp over the
circumcision, was mighty in me among the Gentyles. And also in John the
twentye Chapter. Christ sent them forth indifferently and gave them like
power. As my father sent me (says he) so send I you: that is to preach and
to suffer as I have done, and not to conquer Empyres and Kingdoms and to
subdue all temporal power under you with dysgysed ypocresye. He gave them the
holy ghost to bynd and to loose, as thou see: and afterward he sent for^he
Paul with the same auctorite, The office of prestes.
as thou seeste in the Acts. And in the last of Matthew says he: all power is
given me in heaven and in earth, go^ therefore and teach all nacyons
Baptizynge them in the name of the father and of the son and o^ the holy
ghost, teachinge them to observe whatsoever I commanded you. The auctorite
that Christ gave them was to preach, yet not what they would Image^, but what
he had commanded. And to the intent that they should be manful and not shrink
in their office for any persecutyon or trouble, no not for the death. Lo says
he, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. He said not I go
my way and here is Peter James or Johan in my stead (as our Bishops Parsons
and Uycars does now set their suffraganes and paryshe preistes) but sent them
every man to a sondrye country, whether so ever the spyrite carried them, and
went with them him self.

Thus after Christ had sent forth them, after the same sort the Apostles
dysgysed no man, but those men anointed with the same spirit: one to preach
the word of God, whom we call after the Greek tongue a Bishop or a preyste,
that is in English an ouerseer and an elder. How he was anointed you read.
i* Timoth. iii. The Bishop an ouerseer.
Bishop or preiste must be fautlesse, the husband of one wife (Many Jews
and also Gentiles that ware converted unto the faith, had at that time Those
preachers that the Apostles did chose ware not anointed with oil
diverse wives, yet ware not compelled to put any of them away, which Paul
because of ensample would not have preachers to do, for as much as in Christ we
return again unto the first ordinance of God, that one man and one whoman
should go to gether) he must besobre, of honest behauioure, honestely
appareled, herberous (that is ready to lodge strangers) apt to teach, no
dronkarde, no fyghter, not given to fylthy lucre, but gentle, abhorringe God
send this oil ones among our sheep herdes.
fyghtinge, abhorrynge coueteousnes, and one that rules his own hou should
honestely, having children under obedience with all honestye. For if a man can
not rule his own house, how can he care for the congregacyon of God? He may
not be young in the faith, or as a man would say an novyce, lest he swell and
fall into the judgment of the evil speaker, that is, he may not be unlearned
in the secrets of the faith. For such are at ones stob burn and
headstronge; and set not a little by the^ selves. But alas we have a boue a
thousand Prestes that know no more scripture then is written in their
portasses, so that among them is he counted very well learned that ca^ tur ne
to his service. He must be well repor ted of them that are without, lest he fall
in to rebuke and in to the snare of the evil speaker, that is, lest the
infydels which yet believe not, should be hurt by him and driven from the
faith, if a man that ware defamed were made head and ouerseer of the
congregatyo^. Prestes ought to have wives and why.


He must have a wife for. ii. causes one that it may thereby be known who is
mete for the rowm. He is unapt for so chargeable an office which had never
houshoulde to rule. A another cause is, that chastity is an exceadynge seldom
gift and vnchastite exceadynge pe^elou se for that degree. In asmoche as the peo
ple look as well unto the lyuinge as un to the preachinge and are offended at
ones if the living dysagre and straight way they fall from the faith and believe
not the word.

This ouerseer because he is taken What the Prestes duty is to do, and what to
have
from his own busynes and labor to preach Gods word unto the parysshe,
has right by the autoryte of the word to chal^nge an honest living of the
parryshe like unto one of the brethren, and there with ought he to be
content. As you may read in the Evangelists and also in Paul. For who will
have a servant and will not give him meat, drink, and raymente and all
things necessary? How they would pay him, whether in money or assygne him
so much re^te or in tithes as the manner is now in many countres was at their
lybertye. But as for su the Bishops and prestes as preach not or as preach
any other thing than the ^ure word of God, can by no right or title of the
Gospel chaleng any thin ge of their parysheners. Neither ar they sent of
Christ, nor yet chosen of his Apostles: but servants of the beast whose
mark they bear, whose word they preach, whose law they mayn tayne clean*
against Gods law, and with their false sophystrye give him greater power
than ever gave God to his son Jesus Christ, or Christ* to any of his,
derelye beloved Apostles. Deacon what it signifies and what is his office.


Likewise in every co^gregacyon cho se they a another after the same ensample
and eue^ so anointed, as it apereth in the said Chapter of Paul, and
Actum.vi. Whom after the Greek word we call Deacone, that is to say in*
English, a servant or a my nyster, whose office was to help and to gather
up his duty, and to gathere for the poor of the parish which wa^ destytute
of their friends and could not work. Wpon the saints days, namelye, such
as had suffered death for the word sake, came men together in to the church
and the Pressed preached unto them and exhorted them to cleue fast unto the
word* and to be strong in the faith, and to fight against the powers of the
world, with sufferinge for their faythes sake after the ensample of the
saints. And taught them Saints ware not yet Gods
not to believe in the saints and to trust in their merytes and to make Gods of
them: but took the saints for an exam ple only, and prayed God to give them
like faith and trust in his word and like strength and power to suffer
therefore, and to give them so sure hope of the life to come. And upon such
days as we now offer, so gave they every man his porcyon according to his a
bylyte and as God put it in his heart to the mayntenaunce of the Pressed, Deacon,
and other common mynisters and of the poor, and to find learned men to teach,
and so forth. And all was put in the hands of the Deacon, as thou mayeste see
in the Hystoryes. Why lan des were given unto spiritual officers before we
fell from the faith.
And for such purposes gave men lands after ward to ease the paryshes and
made hospytals, and also places to teach their children and to bring them up
and to nurtoure them in God des word, which lands our sturdy Chanons of
cathedral churches and Chauntrye Prestes does now deuo^ re. The lord grant
that they may ones be turned to their right use.

The nynthe Chapter.
An Antithelis, between the sen dinge of Christ's Apostles and the Bishop of
Rome and of both their doctrines.

ANtichriste of another manner h^ the sent forth his disciples, the se false
anointed of which Chri ste warns us before that they False anointed.
should come, and show false miracles and wonders, even to bring the very
elect out of the way, if it we re possible. He anointeth them after the manner
of the Jews, and shaueth them and shoreth them after the manner of the heythen
Prestes which served the Ido les He sends them forth not with fall se oil
only, but with false names also For compare their names unto their de False
names.
des and thou shall find them false. He se^deth them forth as Paul prophesyed
of them.ii. Thessalonien.ii. with lyeng signs and wonders. What sign is the
anoynting^? that they be full of the holy ghost. Compare them to y^ signs of
the holy ghost which Paul rekeneth and thou shall find it a false sign. A
Bishope must be fau^leness, the husband of one wife. Nay says the Bishope of
No wife but an whore.
Rome the husband of no wife, but the holder of as many whores as he lists
God command all degrees (if they burn and can not live chaste (to mary, The
Bishop of Rome says if theyburne let them take a license for a whore and put
her away when they are old else as our lawears say, si non cast tamen
caute, that is if ye, live not Oh knavery.
chaste, se ye carry clenely and play the knave secretly. Herberous, yea to who
res and baudes, for a poor man shall as sone break his neck as his fast
with them but of the scrappes and with the dogs, when dinner is, done Apt
to teach and as Peter says.i. Peter.ii. redye always to give an swear to
euery^ man that askethe you a reason of the hope that ye have Boots
and that with mekenes. Which thing is sygnyfied by the boots which
doctors of divinity are created in, because they should be ready all ways to
go through thycke, and thynne to preach* Gods word, and by thebyshoppes
Miters
two horned myter, which betokenethe the absolute and perfect Cite the^.
knowleage that they ought to have in the new testament and the old. Be not
these falsesygnes? For they bear only and teach not.

Yea says the Bishop of Rome Pose the^
if they will not be ruled cite the^ to ap pereand pose them sharply, what
they hold of the ceremonies, of confession, of prayenge to saints, of the
mass for the quycke and the dead, and such like creaturs of our most holy
fathers. Make them heretics.
If they myss^ in any point, make heretics of them, and burn them. If they
be of mine anointed and bear my mark disgrasse them, I would say
disgraduate them and (after the example of noble Antiochus. ii. Match. vii.)
pare the crowns and the fyngers of the^, and torm^nte them craftily, and for
very pain make them deny the truth. But now say our Bishops, because the
truth is come so far abroad and the lay people begin to smell our wyles,
it is best to oppress them with craft secr^tely and tame them in prison: yea
let us find the means to have them in the kings prison and to make treason
of soch doctrine: yea we must stere up some war one where or a another to
bring the people in to a another ymaginacyon. If they be gentle men abjure
them secretly.

On the holy days which were ordained to preach Gods word, set up long
ceremonies, long matenses, long masses, and long euensonges, All in latyne
Roll them.
and all in laten that they understand not, and roll them in derken^, that ye
may led them whether ye will And lest such things should be tedyouse,
sing some, say some, pype some ring the belles, and lulle them, and Sing
Ring
rock them a sleep. And yet Paul.ii. Corinthi.xiiii. forbyddedth to speak in
the Church or congregacyon save in the tongue that all understand. For the
lay man thereby is not edyfied or taught. How shall the lay man say amen
(says Paul) to thy blessing or thanks geuynge, when he wotethe not what
thou seyest? He woteth not whether thou bless or curse.

What then says the Bishop of Rome, what care I for Paul. I command by
the virtue of obedyence to read the Gospel in Latin. Let them Say the^ a
gospel
not pray but in Latyne, no not their Pater noster. But thanks be to God that
is well amended here in England If any be sick, goo also and say them a
Gospel and all in Latyne: yea to the very corn and fruits of the field in the
processyon weak, preach the Gospel in Latyne. Make the people believe that it
shall grow the better etc. Oh most wretched ypocrytes? It is verily as good
to preach it to swyne as to men (if thou preach it in a tongue they understand
not. How shall I pre pare my self to Gods commandments? How shall I be
thankful to Christ for his kyndnes? How shall I believe the truth and
promyses which God has sworn, while thou tellest them unto me in a tongue
which I What quod my lord of cauntor bury
understand not? What then said my Lord of Cantorbury to a preiste that
would have had the new Testament gone forth in English. What (said he)
woldeste thou that the lay people should wete what we do?

No fyghter, which I suppose is sygnyfyed by the Cross that is borne before
the hye Prelares, and borne before them in processyon. Is that also not a false
sign? What realm can be in peace for such turmoylers? What so little a
Paryshe is it, but they will pycke one quarrel or another with the^ other for
some syrples, cresome, or can dell, other for one tryfle or other, and cite
them to the arches? Traitors they are to all creatures and have a secret
conspyratyon between them selves. One craft they have to make many Kingdoms
and small, and to noryshe old tytles or quarrels that they may ever move them
to war at their The craf te of the prelates
pleasure, And if much lands by any chance, fall to one man, ever to cast a
bone in the way, that he shall never be able to obtain it, as we now se in
the Emperor. Why? For as long as the kings be small, if God would open the
eyes of any to set a reformacyon in his realm, then should the Bishop of
Rome interdicte his Interdite
land and send in other Princes to co^ quere it.

Not given to fylthy lucre, but abhorrynge covetousness. And as Peter says. i.
Petri. v. Taking the ouerfyghte of them not as though ye were compelled
thereunto: but willingly. Not for desire of fylthy lucre, but of a good mind:
not as though ye were lords over the Paryshes. etc. O Peter Peter thou waste
to long a Fyssher, thou waste never brought up at the arches, neither waste
master of the rolls, nor yet Chaunceler of England But they are not content
to follow the, but will raygne over King and Emperor, and the hole earth: and
calenge auctoryte also in Heaven and in Hell. It is not enough for them to raig
ne over all that are quycke, but have created them a Purgatory, to raygne also
over the deed and to have one kingdom more then God him self had. Sheringe
what it signify eth.
This abhorring of covetousness is syg nyfied as I suppose by shauynge and
shearynge of their hear, that they have no superfluyte But is not this also a
false sign? Yea verily it is to the^ a remembrance to shere and shave, to
hepe benefyce upon benefyce, promocyon upon promocyon dygnite upon dygnite.

Thus they as insatiable beasts not vnmyndful why they were shaven and shoren,
because they will stand at no man's grace, or be in any man's danger, have
gotten in to their own hands, first the tyte or tenthe of all the realm.

Mark well how many personages or vycarages are there in the realm which at
the least have a ploughe land a piece. Then not the lauds of Bishops,
cathedral churches, sump tuous Coleges, Chauntryes, and frechapels. Frechapell.


Besides all this, how many chaplaynes do Gentylmen find at their own cost
in their houses? How many sing for souls by testame^tes. The^ the proving
of testamentes, the praysynge of goods, the Bishop of Cantorburies Testame^tes.
prerogative. Is that not much through the realm in a yerer Four offering
days, and preuy tithes. There Offerynges.
is no servant but that he shall pay somewhat of his wages. None shall
receive the body of Christ at Ester, be he never so poor a beggar, or never
so young a lad or maid, but they must pay somewhat for it. And yet what
parsone or vycare is there that will for get to have a pygyn house to pecke up
some what both at sowyng time and at herueste when corn is ripe. They will
forget nothing. No man shall dye in their debt, or if any man do, he shall
pay it when he is deed. They will lose nothing. Why? It is Gods, it is not
theyrs. Then bedrolles, then crysome, chyrchynges, banes, weddynges, offering
at wedding, offering at buryenges, offering to images, offering of wax and
lyghtes which come to their vauntage against the kings co^mau^demente, beside
the supersti cious waste of wax in torches and tapers through out all the
land. Then Confession.
brotherhedes and such other like. What get they also by confession? Yea and
many enjoy penance to give a certain for to have so many Masses said, and
desire to provide a chapplayne the^ selves. Soul masses, diriges,
monethmyndes, year minds, alsoulday, and trentales. The mother church and
the hye altar must have somewhat in every testamente. Offeringes at preistes
first masses. The halowenge or rather conjuring of churches, chapels, altares,
charnell houses, super altares, chalice, vestimentes and belles. The book bell,
candelstycke, organes, chalice. vestimentes, copes, altar clothes, syrpleses,
towels, bascens, ^uars shypsenser, and all manner orname^tes must be found them
freely, they will not give amyte Person ^ycare Paryshe Priest.
thereunto. The person shereth, the vycare shaueth, the paryshe preiste polleth
scrapeth, and pareth, we lack but a bo there to pull of the skin.

What get they by their law in a year at the arches? What get the com
myssaries and Officials with their so^ners and appareters by bawdry in a year?
Besides this, many of the paryshe preistes who to please their commyssaries and
officials do open unto them the confession of the richest of their parishes.
Whom the cite preuely and lay to their charges secretlye. When they desire to
know their accusers, nay (say they) come and lay your hand upon the book,
and we shall find proves enough, and see that ye fors were not your self,
for if ye do we will handle you to the example of all other. Lay your hand
upon the book.
By this means do they wrynge their purses and make them to drop so long as
there is a peany in them.

What other thing are these in a realm save horsleches and even very
magottes, cancres and caterpyllers, which devour no more but all that is
grene, and those wolves which Paul rophecyed should come and should not spare
the flock. God a mende them

Finis.

