THE STATE OF THE NOW-ROMANE CHVRCH.

Discussed By way of vindication of the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Bishop of EXCETER, From the weak cauills of HENRY BVRTON.

By H. C.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter.

1629.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in GOD, JOSEPH, by the providence of God Lord
Bishop of Exeter, Grace, mercy, and peace, be multiplied.
Right Reverend and Honorable,
MY very good Lord; It was well said of old, Let Baal plead Judge. 6. 31.
for himself: And it may be said as well now, Let Babel plead for her self: yea
let him be blessed that dasheth Psalm 137. 9.
her little ones against the stones; And let it be done to her as she has
done to others; And let all Revel. 18. 6.
the people of God say Amen.

Nevertheless, herein (if in any thing in the world) great art and skill is
to be used: For it is not for every fresh water soldier to fight against
Babel. The Poet says,

In vitium ducil culpae fuga si caret art. The want of skill to shun a shame,
Does bring a man to mickle blame.


And it is a true saying that God loves Aduerbs better then Adjectives, so as
if a man do good things, and do them not well, he is an offender
notwithstanding; so is it in this case: he that will make war against Babel,
and will not do more hurt then good, had need to be well provided, and
advised. Plutarch makes report of one, who unadvisedly casting a stone at a
dog, hit and hurt his own mother; and so many there are who ignorantly and
inconsiderately contending against Babel, do grievously wound the Church of
God, and (as your Lordship says truly) do more wrong to their cause, then to
their adversaries: If any man be ignorant how this may be, and be willing to
learn, you have well informed him in your last Book of the Old Religion;
wherein you make it plain, that though Rome be Babel; yet so long as she is
Babel, she shall have a people Revel. 18. 4.
of God in her: so that as Saint Paul said, They are not all Israel that Romans
9. 6.
are of Israel; so may we in this case, They are not all Babel, that are in
Babel, and communicate with Babel. If then a man have not a spiritual eye, to
distinguish between Babel, and the people of God in Babel; how much mischief
may he do in quarelling with Babel? I would we had not too much experience
hereof in some, who make good your Lordships too just censure, that Zeal
transports them to such a detestation of the Roman Church, as if it were all
error, no Church, and so that no soul can be saved therein: A fearful and
heavy doom; of which a man may say, as Saint Bernard said in another case,
Solo auditu contremisco: I tremble at the very hearing of it.

Now your Lordship (as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, and one of the Colonels
of the spiritual Army of the Lord of hoasts) endeavoring amongst other errors
to reform this, and to bring all into right and perfect order; that is, to
train all the soldiers under your regiment according to the old discipline;
which is, to entend to cure Babel, and not to destroy her before the time,
(that it may truly be said of them, as well as of others, We would have cured
Babel, Ier. 51. 45.
but she would not be cured, the time of curing being not past, so long as it
is called to day.) Heb. 3. 13.
There are risen up, I know not what hot-spurres, and bold Braggadochioes in
the Camp, who mutinouslie do turn their weapons from Babel against you; as
if you were therefore become their enemy because you tell them Gal. 4 16.
the truth. And amongst others, one Master, Henry Burton, has publicly taken
the quarrel upon himself in the name of all the rest; who being otherwise a
man of good parts (as it should seem) and having a good meaning to do Gods
Church some service, yet ouerweening himself, and forgetting his place, has
given the common adversary too much advantage against us all. For being
defective in Logic (our best engine, after the word of God) and trusting to
nothing but mere sophistry, and failing in the truth, or true meaning of all
his allegations; he has not only shamed himself, but put us all out of
order, hindered our good proceedings, weakened our own forces by division, and
strengthened the enemy.

Whereupon (it being not any way convenient that your Lordship should enter
into the lists with him;) upon an incident occasion of speech about this matter
in the beginning of September, it pleased you to accept an offer of my service
in this business; although upon beare-say only at that time, and not
otherwise, I had notice of his misbehauiour.

Here therefore, I tender unto your Lordship some testimony, not so much of the
old innocent familiarity, which almost from the cradle has been between us;
as of my readiness to perform all parts of that Canonical obedience, which
being due to all my Diocesans; I am most joyful to yield unto you above, and
before all the men in the world.

Accept then (I beseech you) and protect, this unworthy seven days defense of
your worthy cause; protect it (I say) though not as your own (being unworthy)
yet for your own, in respect of the worthy cause which is your own; And so I
shall be encouraged to perform all offices not only to my ancientest,
nearest, dearest, and greatest friend; but also to my Bishop, Lord, and
Governor: and ever rest,

Your Lordships Chaplain in all humility to be commanded, Hugh Cholmeley.

TO M. HENRY BVRTON Rector of St. Mathewes in Friday^^^^^ in London; H. C.
Rector of the portion of Clare in the Parish of Tyverton in Devon, sends
greeting.
MAster Burton, as you are a man I altogether unknown to me, but only by your
writings, so I am not desirous to be your adversary in any the least point of
truth; I love you in the truth; and I oppose you in love of the truth; And if
you can soundly and substantially convince me of untruth; I profess before God
and the world, that I will yield unto you without any more ado: being already
willing to be overcome of the truth in this cause: You need not disclaim the
match; I suppose my self your equal for time, studies, or labor; and if your
desire be sincere, only to find out the truth; Lo, I am as you are: Pass by
our Reverend Diocesan; and let me bear the brunt of this skirmish: Your
victory shall be great enough; and your foil far more easy and tolerable.

Your loving friend, and fellow Labourer in the work of the LORD, H. C.

THE STATE OF the Now -- Roman CHVRCH.
THere can be no more evident sign of a bad cause, then if it be handled
falsely and sophistically: for (as Euripides says)

(...)
(...),
(...).
The truth is sound, her words are plain,
Falsehood is sick; she needs must feign.
Which being so, we may soon perceive what we are to think of Mr. Burtons
cause; who having taken upon himself to oppose men every way better then
himself, about the truth, and true visibilitie of the Church of Rome; uses
all kind of sophistry and deceit: as may appear both by the whole Discourse,
and by every part and parcel thereof.

In the whole you shall perceive two points of notable sophistry common to him
with all those that maintain bad causes: One is Beggary, commonly called of
the Logitians, Petitio principij, which proves one obscure or uncertain thing
by another; or would have that to be granted which reason denies: Another is
Disorder, which is Horaces Humano capiti, etc. and Ouids Rudis indigestaque
moles. A confused heap of independencies, like a Lotterers pitcher, full of
scrowles shuffled together, without any reference one to another.

His Beggary will soon appear, if we resolve this dispute into that
Enthymeme, whereof it wholly consists; which is this: S. John says, The
second Angel poured out his vial upon the S^a, and it became as the blood of
a dead man; and every living soul dyed in the sea: Ergo, the Church of Rome is
neither a true Church, nor a true visible Church. To which I may say far
better then Bishop said to Perkins: Apply John Barber, and thou shall have a
new pair of Sizors. Whether I wrong him or no, I refer my self to the
censure of every judicious Reader: And if I wrong him not, every man may see,
that he beggeth two things which no good Divine may yield unto him: One is,
that an Allegorical Prophecy (such as this is) may be laid for a good
foundation, whereon to frame an Argument to decide a Controversy in Divinity;
contrary to the old Maxim, Theologia symbolica non est argumentatiua:
Allegories in divinity afford no good arguments. Especially if they be
Prophecies, whereof there may be doubt whether they be fulfilled or no: in
which case the trial is, to examine the perspicuitie thereof: for a Prophecy,
as of all Scriptures it is most obscure, before it be fulfilled; so when it is
fulfilled it is of all other most clear, and easy: This therefore being an
Allegory, and prophetical, and retaining the aenigmaticall darkness which it
had originally (as appears by the various interpretations of the Learned,
every day renewed) I for my part cannot suppose it to be yet accomplished; and
so (to me) it is unfit for that use to which he has employed it.

The other point of his Beggerie is, That his own private interpretation of
these words may be allowed as the true meaning of the holy Ghost: which is,
That by the Sea we are to understand the Doctrines of the Council of Trent* by
the blood, the abominable corruptions thereof: by the Angel, Chemnitius, and
other learned men of that time that examined it: and by the pouring out of the
vial, their preachings and writings. All which he has borrowed from
Brightman, whom notwithstanding elsewhere he forsakes. But now what if we deny
him this interpretation; and require some proof hereof, what will he say then:
Surely he is utterly disappointed, and all his building falls to the ground.
If he say we must show some reason for our denial; besides that we have showed
some already, it would be known, why we may not as well deny, as he affirm
without reason: If this course be good, every man's private fantasy
(especially if he can make some show of probability) must be (...), the
Revelations Revelation: And then why may not Bellarmines interpretation of the
ninth cap. (Oratione in Scholis habita) wherein he turns all upon Luther and
the Lutherans) pass for current? But lest I may seem to seek euasions; I
will do that against him, which he cannot, or at least has not yet done for
himself: I will show some reason for my denial; and leave it to the judgment
of the Learned: And because the ground of all is that the Council of Trent, or
the doctrines thereof, are that bloody sea: I suppose it sufficient (if I prove
it to be otherwise) to turn up all his fantastical Cauillation.

First therefore I prove it ex praeconcessis; for he grants, that the same
Sea whereof cap. 8. r. the third part was turned into blood, is here wholly
turned thereinto. Now Brightman, (whom in this point he follows) will have
that third part of the Sea, to be the doctrine of Europe, the third part of
the Christian world: And then (...): the whole sea is the doctrine of the whole
Christian world: But the doctrine of the Council of Trent, is not the doctrine
of the whole Christian world: Ergo it is not the Sea here mentioned by S. John.

Secondly, upon the pouring out of this second Vial; this sea is turned into
congealed and putrified blood, which (by his interpretation) signifies that by
the conclusions of the Council of Trent, Romes doctrines are become mortal
and damnable: and this puts a difference between the state of Romes doctrines
before the Council of Trent (while as yet they were in their growing) and after
it: Before there was some fresh water, etc. but after none at all. So says he:
But I say that the Council of Trent has not a whit corrupted Romes Doctrines
more than they were along time before: Ergo the Council of Trents conclusions
are not here to be understood. I need not take pains in the proof hereof;
because the learned do not accuse it of this fault; but that (whereas it
promised reformation, and that it was expected there from) it cosened the world;
and in stead of reforming confirmed the foul corruptions of the religion and
doctrine of the Church which formerly had prevailed: Indeed Master Crashaw
(whose memory for old acquaintance is precious to me) notes one, (and but one)
point of doctrine (for the other is only for practice) wherein the Council of
Trent has added some thing to the former corruptions, which is, the equalizing
of the Apocrypha with the Canonical books of Scripture: But if we consider how
he interprets himself (that no Council before had done the like) it will
appear, that he denies not, but that even that corruption also was
inueterate before the Council of Trent.

Thirdly, I say that the Council of Trent has reformed Romes doctrine, and
made it (at least in one point) better then it was before: Ergo it is not here
to be understood. The point is this, that there is no natural ability in a
man, to prepare himself for grace, and so no merit of congruity, in which
regard Stapleton says, Meritum ex congruo explosum est: a point of no small
moment in these days.

Fourthly, I say that there is as much fresh water in Romes doctrines since the
Council of Trent, as there was before: Ergo it is not here to be understood.
This I prove, by the doctrine of the Tridentine Catechism, in every part
whereof there is sufficient quantity of saving doctrine for those that (to use
your own words) can search and find it out: separating the good from the bad,
and truth from error: as may appear to them that will take the pains to
read it: yea I dare be bold to say, the Church of Rome had not for many
hundred years before the Council of Trent, so good a form of doctrine, as
that Catechism contains: which I speak not to justify the Council, or the
Catechism, in any error comprehended therein; but only to show the beggary of
the adversary: of which this shall be sufficient.

His disorder shows it self in three things; First, in not setting the state
of the question: Secondly, in misplacing his own arguments: Thirdly, in idle
repetitions. For the first: There cannot be a greater fault in a Disputant,
then either to leave the question altogether vnstated; or else to state it
amiss; for by this means it ordinarily falls out, that the contention is
nothing else but Andabatarum pugna, the fight at blind man buffe (as we say,)
so as a man may miss ten times, before he hit once: But of the two the former
is the worse, wherein this our adversary offends: If he say, he took it as
he found it; it will not excuse: For I dare say his pretended adversaries
intended not a combat; if they had, they would have deprived him of the
occasion of much babbling: And yet, had he not listed to be contentious, he
might have picked such a state of the question out of the defenders writings,
as might have d^^led the edge of his quarrelsome humor: for the state being set
aright, and with perspicuity, it will easily appear to which side the truth
inclines: wherefore that I offend not in that wherein I find him to be
faulty; I will do that which he has left unperformed. First then we are to
know, that the words whereof the question consists are full of ambiguity: For
both the Church of Rome, and a true Church, and a Church truly visible, have
many senses, and significations: The Church of Rome has at least eight
several acceptions: For sometimes it notes the particular Diocese of the
Roman territory, commonly called the particular Roman Church: Sometimes (and
most usually) it comprehends all the national Churches which communicate with
Rome in the same faith, and under the same head, the Pope, commonly called the
Catholic Roman Church: Sometimes the Clergy of that Church is only
understood by that title, commonly called the Church representative: Sometimes
the people only, commonly called the Laity, and of some the popular Church of
Rome: Sometimes the whole body of Clergy and Laity: Sometimes the Papacy, or
Apostasy in that Church, which is S. John's Babylon: Sometimes the Elect in that
Church, still communicating with the Papacy, which S. John calls Gods people:
And sometimes the hidden Church which is in the Roman Church, and yet
communicates not with her abominations; which some call the Church in the
wilderness. Again, A Church is said to be true, diverse ways: As first
materially, in that it consists of a people comprehended within the compass
of Gods Covenant of life, and salvation: Secondly, formally, in regard of
frame, and constitution: Thirdly, accidentally, in regard of soundnes, and
outward communion. Thirdly, a Church is said to be truly visible for the true
marks of a Church which it has; either in regard of it self within it self;
in which respect, the Churches in persecution are truly visible, though their
enemies and others which are not of their number see them not: Or in regard of
the world abroad: whether Christians or Infidels which know her assemblies: And
in this latter sense again, it is said to be visible, either strictly and
properly, when the whole Church is visible at once, and all together (which is
only true of particular Congregations) or largely and Synechdochically, when
the whole cannot be visible together, and at once, but by pe^cemeale, and
succession: and so the Catholic Church here on earth may truly be said to be
visible. Thus you see how great ambiguity there is in the sense of these few
words, The Church of Rome is a true and truly visible Church.

Now in the second place, to apply all this to our present purpose. Although
diverse men do set the state of this question diversely, as may best serve for
their own private ends and purposes: yet I will take it in the largest extent,
and as it may be most favorable for the Church of Rome: Thus; Whether the
Catholic Church of Rome (as it is called in opposition to the Dioces) in
regard of the whole body thereof compounded of Clergy and Laity, be still
within the covenant of Gods saving grace: and have such marks of that covenant
still abiding in it, that though properly at once, and all together it cannot
be visible, yet by peece-meale, and successively, it may truly be said so to
be. And so much for the state of the question and his first disorder. His
second point of disorder is in misplacing his own arguments; which I take not
as if it were done ignorantly, as not knowing what he should have done; (for
he excuses himself for it, supposing it superfluous to do it) but
artificially for his best advantage; It seems he trusted more to the
gentleness of his adversaries, and to his own ability in opposing them; then
to the strength of his own, and his power to maintain them; and so brings
them in as it were by way of ambu^^. But howsoever it has pleased him to
proceed; I may not pass them over in this place without trial; unless I would
incur the same suspicion: Let us see therefore how he proves the negative.

His first argument, (wherein he places his greatest confidence) is briefly
propounded page 24. but more at large page 90. of his Advertisement, and it
lies thus. That Church which denies, yea accurseth, the saving faith of Jesus
Christ unto Justification; allowing only such a faith which can never save a
man, but is a graceless faith, separable from grace, and which a man may carry
with him into Hell; that is an Apostatized Church; utterly fallen away from
Christ, wherein no salvation is to be found, or hoped for:

But the Church of Rome does all this: Ergo.



To which I answer; by denying all: I deny the proposition, because it is
sophistical: The assumption, because it is false: and I need not then doubt to
deny the conclusion. The proposition is sick of that Sophisme, which the
Logicians call secundum plures interrogationes, or propositiones: that is, when
many Propositions are joined together in one, whereof some are true, some
false: as here are at least three. One, that the Church (so bablingly
described) is an apostatised Church: another, that it is utterly fallen away
from Christ: a third, that no salvation is to be found or hoped for therein. Of
which the first only is true, and the rest notoriously false, and against the
Scripture: for first, to deny, yea to accurse saving Faith, and to allow the
contrary, is not a point of total and final Apostasy, unless it be joined
with malice and obstinacy; and be the sin against the holy Ghost, to which
repentance is utterly denied. Else what shall we say of S. Peter who both
denied and cursed the knowledge of Christ in himself. Secondly, if this be
true, (as it is) then may salvation be found, and hoped for, notwithstanding
that de^iall, cursing, and approbation. Thirdly, it must be remembered, that our
question is of the whole body of the Church, that i^* neither of the popular
part only, nor of the representative only, but of both together: if then the
one part only shall do as he says, and not the whole body, who can say that
there is no salvation to be found therein, or that it is utterly fallen away
from Christ. So much for the Proposition.

In the next place I say the Assumption is evidently false, if not more then
slanderous: For first the Church of Rome (whether partially, or wholly
understood) never denied, never accursed saving and justifying Faith, nor ever
allowed a graceless faith only which cannot save, etc. Look upon all the
Canons of the Council of Trent, and see whether any such thing be to be
found therein, or gathered therefrom: does it not distinguish between a living
and a dead faith? And does it not say that the living Faith only justifies,
and not the dead? what is it then that it denies and accurseth? It is this,
first, the form and manner of Justification by Faith: when it is said to
justify as the very form of Justification, and not as a mere disposition
thereto. Secondly this assertion, that a dead faith separate from grace is not
a true faith; though it cannot justify: this is that which the Counsel
denies and accurseth in this case, and no more; yet you say boldly if not
impudently, page 25. If any dare deny this he will but bewray his shameless
ignorance in this point. In what point M. Burton? That the Council of Trent
admits of no other faith then that which the Devils and damned in hell have?
O mouth! O forehead! Have they a living Faith; which is fruitful in good
works? Such a Faith as S. ^ames commends? And does not the Council admit of
this Faith? yea of this only for Justification? Read the latter part of the
seventh Chapter of the sixth Session, and be ashamed. Secondly, say the
Counsel had done so indeed; Does the whole Church of Rome do it? Does the
popular part thereof do it? By your own words, page 25. they deny it. Yea but
they believe as the Church believes. True, but with a secret condition, If the
Church believe well, and in that only wherein it believes aright: Being
deceived in nothing, but that they trust the Church too much; for if they could
be persuaded she believes amiss in any thing, therein they would not believe
as she does. But you will prove that Romes justifying faith is different in
kind from the true saving Faith of Christ. How? Can you tell? Marry thus. That
faith which Christ commends for the only true saving faith, does so justify
a man that he shall never come into condemnation, but pass from death unto
life:

But the only faith which the Church of Rome allows does not so.

Ergo, Advertisement. page 91.



I answer: A Papist, or Arminian would deny the Proposition; but I grant it,
and deny the Assumption: for let the Church of Rome confess what she will in
her own wrong; I say, that that faith which the Church of Rome only allows
for justification (viz a living faith fruitful in good works) does so save,
and justify a man, that he cannot go with it into condemnation: and dare you
say the contrary? This is his first Argument.

The second is this: That Church which cleaves to Antichrist as her head,
whence she receives all her spiritual life, is no true Church; nor has any
salvation to be found, or hoped for in her.

But the Church of Rome does so.

Ergo. Advertisement. page 91. 92.



I deny the Assumption; Not for that I deny the Pope to be Antichrist, or for
that I would support the church of Rome in any of her abominations: but first,
because the church of Rome does not acknowledge the Pope to be Antichrist, and
so cleaves not to him as her head in that name: Secondly, because, although
some Popes have antichristianly said, that all spiritual grace and life is
derived from the Pope, and that some of their Parasites have flatteringly
acknowledged it, yet neither the representative church of Rome by it self, nor
the popular by it self, much less the whole and entire body did ever yield
unto it; but have from time to time opposed themselves against it: especially
if the question be of an absolute, foueraigne, and supreme head; and not of a
subordinate and ministerial head, as you propound it: Thirdly, because in
these spiritual things there is such a conjunction of good and evil in this
life, that though the one cannot be separated from the other, yet the one is
not confounded with the other; so as each of them receives its life severally
from its own head, and not from the head of the other: As it is in the
regenerate man, in whom the flesh and the spirit are always companions in this
life; yet so, as the flesh receives nothing from the holy Ghost, nor the
spirit from Adams transgression. And so is it in the case we have in hand: for
in the church of Rome there is an inseparable conjunction of Babylon and the
people of God, yet so as Babylon receives no grace from Christ, nor the people
of GOD apostafie from the Pope, for being members of both in diverse respects,
they have grace from the one, and apostasy from the other, which in them are
indeed nothing but flesh and spirit: And so much for his second Argument. The
third, page 34. hereof, is thus framed: A true visible Church has the true
marks of a true visible Church:

But the Church of Rome has not those true marks. Ergo.



The Assumption whereof being to be denied, he proves it partly from the
doctrine of the Church of England, and partly from Bellarmine the mouth of the
Church of Rome. For the Church of England, the Homily for Whitsunday says: The
true Church of Christ has always three notes or marks whereby it is known:
Pure and sound doctrine, etc. Now if you would compare this with the Church of
Rome, etc. To which I answer, That these words must receive a favorable
construction; or else they make as much against him, as against us; and with
such construction they make more for us, then for him. And what is this
construction? First, they must be understood of the accidental truth of the
Church in regard of soundness, (as the words do expressly import) and not of
essential truth in regard of Gods Covenant: Secondly, they must be understood
even of soundness comparatively, and not simply, that is, in regard of the
Primitive Church, and not otherwise. Else he must grant, that the Church of
Rome has not been a true visible Church these nine hundred years: where as
he allows it to have been so till the Council of Trent, as appears in all
this Discourse.

Now for Bellarmine* I am sorry such a superficial. Reader should meddle with
him, to the shame of our whole Nation: Mark how he reasons; Bellarmine
disclaimeth these three as proper marks of the Church: Ergo the Church of Rome
has them not. I pray what consequence is here? First may not a man disclaim
that which he has, for some si^ister respects best known to himself? as
pride, and presumption in meddling in causes, and with persons too high for him,
and the like? Secondly, does Bellarmine disclaim them simply, and not only in
comparison of mere proper marks? Thirdly, may not the Church of Rome have
them as marks common to all Churches, true and false; though not as proper to
the true Church? Fourthly, does not Bellarmine De Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 2..
Nostra autem sententia (contradicting himself) put these three into the
definition of the Church? and does he not by them distinguish the Church from
all other sorts of men whatsoever? Professione verae fidei, Sacramentorum
communione, subiectione ad proprium Rastorem? Fifthly, is it not a Maxim of
Bellarmines, lib. 1. de Sacrament. in genere cap. 26.. Respondeo, Sacramenta,
that the Sacraments and the word of God, and the rest, semper solius esse
Ecclesie, etiamsi interdum extra Ecclesia in inueniantur? what dealing then is
this, to play the Sophister so palpably a dicto secundum quid, ad (...)? This
is his third Argument. The fourth you shall find page 35. to this purpose: If
the Church of Rome cannot demonstrate it self to be a true Church, then it is
no true Church:

But it cannot: Ergo(...)



To this many things are to be answered; because both propositions are to be
denied: The former, because it is inconsequent: First, because want of
demonstration takes not away the truth and true being of any thing; if it did,
there are infinite things in the world, which should have no being, or not be
that which they are; even the Scripture it self should not be the word of God,
because it cannot be demonstrated so to be, to a natural man. Secondly,
because want of ability to make demonstration, especially of the parties own
being, is much less able to do it: for how many millions of men and women are
there in the world, which should cease to be that they are, if that were true?
being utterly unable to demonstrate themselves so to be? The latter proposition
is to be denied, because it is untrue: for if by demonstration, you mean, the
proof of those three marks mentioned in the Homily; the church of Rome can by
them demonstrate her self to be a true Church (according to the kind and
proportion of truth) as well as any other Church: And all that will acknowledge
her to be a true Church, will and must acknowledge her to have the true marks
of the true Church, in the same degree of truth, wherein she is acknowledged to
be a true Church.

But you can prove by two arguments, that she cannot do it: First, because
Bellarmine is constrained to confess, that all his 15. marks cannot make it
evidently true, but only evidently credible that it is a true Church: I
answer, First this is not true; Bellarmine says no such thing: he has not
the word Only: but thus he speaks; Though they make it not evidently true,
yet do they make it evidently credible: yea he distinguishes between
Heathens which admit not the Scriptures, and Christians which do; and says,
that to them it makes them evidently credible; but to these evidently true as
well as evidently credible: Lib. 4. de not is Eccles. cap. 3.. Dicimus ergo.
This therefore is not good dealing. Secondly, this is the same fallacy of
arguing a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter, wherein you offended
before: He cannot do it by these his fifteen marks (say you:)

Ergo, he cannot do it at all.

Is this a good kind of reasoning? Indeed it argues his folly, or rather
madness in forsaking those marks, which can demonstrate it, and cleaning to
those which cannot do it; but it does not prove that he cannot do it by any
other means.

In the second place therefore you endeavor to prove it by Romes own
doctrine, and confession: about her baptism, (the only relic (say you)
which some suppose is sufficient to prove her a true Church) which is this,
That the efficacy of baptism depends upon the Priests intention: whereof
because no man can be certain, therefore no man can be certain whether he
were rightly baptized; and so cannot be certain that he is a true member of
the Church: From which confession you reason thus: That which no one Papist can
demonstrate, all of them put together cannot demonstrate:

But no one of them can demonstrate himself to be a true member of the Church:
Ergo, not all together.

And what the? That Church whose members either severally or together cannot
demonstrate themselves to be members of the true Church, cannot demonstrate
her self to be a true Church:

But the members of the Church of Rome, neither severally, nor together can do
it:

Ergo, She her self cannot do it.

That I may give a full and sufficient answer to this large argument, which is
taken from Romes own doctrine and confession: I must signify unto him; that
it seems to me that he knows not what Romes doctrine and confession in this
point is: First therefore he must know, that the Church of Rome has not yet
determined fully what the intention of the Priest in baptising, or of the
Bishop in ordaining is: They say indeed, that a virtuall intention is
sufficient, without the actual, or habitual: But what is that virtuall
intention? Some say, that the very pronouneing of the words, I baptize thee,
etc. are sufficient thereto; Nec aliud requiri ex part ministri, and that
there is no more required on the behalf of the Minister: So Thomas, Part. 3.
de Sacr. qu. 64. art. 8. ad 2. and so Catharine the Bishop of Minori in the
Council of Trent, held and affirmed: And Bellarmine himself though of the
contrary opinion, (viz. that the inward intention of the Priest is required)
yet is constrained to distinguish de perfectione Sacramenti; simpliciter, and
absolute; and de perfectione eiusdem coram hominibus: and so agrees, that if
we respect the perfection of the Sacrament before men, the outward prolation
of the words is sufficient. Lib. 1. de Sacr. in genere, cap. 28.. Ad locum
obiectum.

Secondly, he must know what certainty it is which the Church of Rome means,
when she confesses that no man can be certain of the intention of the Priest:
for she distinguishes of certainty in this case: One is certainty of faith,
which is infallible; another humane, and moral; the former she confesses
cannot ordinarily be had: but the latter may: which she accounts to be
sufficient; and this comes full to Vega; who denies infallible certainty of
salvation; because no man can have infallible certainty of the truth of his
baptism, for want of the like certainty of the Priests intention: but on the
contrary, for moral and coniecturall certainty, he acknowledges that a man
may and ought to have it of the Priests intention, (unless he declare his
naughty mind by some outward sign) and so of the truth of his baptism; and
lastly of his own salvation. For which distinction see Bellarmine vbi supra..
Respondeo, non debere hominem.

These things premised, his Arguments are easily answered. First therefore the
Assumption of the last is denied: for they profess themselves able to
demonstrate both severally and together that they are true members of the true
Church; because they have sufficient certainty of the truth of their Baptism;
because they have a like sufficient certainty of the Priests intent on;
leaning secrets unto God; and so all that is builded hereon, that the Church
cannot demonstrate her self to be a true Church, falls flat to the ground;
which may also be said of the intention of the Bishop in ordaining. Secondly,
how can he prove the Assumption, unless he go through all the Church of Rome
from man to man, and from woman to woman, and examine what they can say for the
truth of their Baptism. It is twenty to one, but some one or other can show a
Revelation, that the Priest had an actual intention to do as the Church does
in baptising him: Thirdly, they say they can say as much to assure them of the
Priests intention in their Baptism, as we which are baptized in our infancy,
can say to assure us that we were baptized: which is only the Church book,
and testimony of our Parents, Godfathers, Godmothers and other friends, which
is only humane, moral and coniecturall assurance, and not divine and
infallible, See Bellarmine vbi supra. Et Nota. So much for the fourth.

The last Argument page 32. is this: That Church which wants the ordinary
means of salvation, is no true Church:

But the Church of Rome wants the ordinary means of salvation, the preaching,
and hearing of the Gospel: yea it teaches hers, to hate and abhor it, and
to call it heresy.

Ergo.



I answer they want it, and they want it not: They hate it, and they hate it
not: They want and hate the soundnes, and purity thereof, as it is enjoyed in
the Reformed Churches; but they neither want nor hate it, as it is corrupted by
their own traditions; which cannot wholly deprive it of all saving virtue, as
has been already proved. And why (I pray) should we not be content in
common commiseration to bear with them in this case; as we do with those
people which dwell in fenny, foggy and marish grounds, and countries, who
coming into places of fresh air, and healthy diet, do complain that it is
not good nor wholesome, because it agrees not with their more gross
constitution? If another man live by poisoned meats, I will not envy him, so
long as I feed on that which is sound, and man's meat (as we say.) And so
much for his Arguments.

Thus have I showed Mr. Burtons second point of disorder in misplacing his
Arguments; and have (as well as I can) righted it, and answered them. The third
and last follows, which are his idle Repetitions, and Tautologies; which if
they were taken out of his book, it would be by the one half, less then it
is: as will appear by the answer to the particulars.

Now here I must crave favor of the Christian Reader, that (being constrained
by the misbehauiour of our adversary, to lay open his foul ouer-sights, in
charging the Church of Rome, the Council of Trent, and Bellarmine with
untruths, which he ought not to have done) he would not suppose me to be any
whit inclining or addicted to Popery (as the manner of the world is nowa
days.) No: I praise God I am as far from Popery, as M. Burton himself is or
can be. But I would not have men either to maintain bad causes against the
Church of Rome, or to maintain good causes with bad arguments, and least of
all to maintain bad causes with worse arguments, (as I know too many have done
to our no little disadvantage). It is an excellent point of manhood to let the
enemy have his utmost due; and not to ^eelie to overcome him by base and
cowardly means. This I desire, and have always endeoured; and this is all
which hitherto I have done in this Treatise, or purpose to do hereafter. And
if the good Reader will be placed to believe me, and to grant me this
reasonable motion; I hope he shall perceive that I have not abused either him,
or mine adversary, or my cause, or my Lord, (whose cause I have undertaken) or
my self in undertaking it: and so I proceed.

BVRTON.
Before we proceed to the third Vial, for the fuller confirmation of what
has been said of the estate of the church of Rome, whose Sea of doctrines is
all turned into mortal blood in the second vial: it will be very requisite
here to discuss one question:

Whether the Church of Rome be either a true Church, or a true visible Church?

Answer.
Here is a long Exordium to a short Cause: of which it may truly be said,
Causaanceps, Exordium vitiosum: Such a Cause, such an Exordium; Such a Cup,
such a Cover In which (containing a whole lease) he craves favor and
attention, after the manner of the Orators, from three Rhetorical arguments;
The quality of the question His own good handling there of and The condition
of his own person, The question affords him two favorable arguments: One, for
that it is requisite to be discussed in this place: Another, for that it is
weighty and of great moment. The necessity of the discussion is for the
fuller confirmation of that he has said of the Church of Rome. And indeed it
is very necessary that he prove, and that very substantially and soundly (as
he says in the words following) That the Church of Rome is neither a true,
nor a true visible Church; or else all he has said is nor worth a rush. For
if it be, then is not her Sea of Doctrines turned into mortal blood in this
second Vial: nor the Council of Trent this Sea of mortal blood, nor
Chemnitius the Angel, nor any thing so as he has said. But mark here (I
pray) his Circulation: Before, he proved the Church of Rome to be no true
Church, because all her doctrines are mortal: and now he proves all her
doctrines to be mortal, because (...) is no true Church, which manner of
reasoning goes for current with him, (...) all this part of his Treatise. But
let that pass. Now if his answers prove no better then his arguments have done
(as I doubt they will not,) it had been far more requisite for him to have
left this question altogether indiscussed in this place, and to have proceeded
directly to the third Vial without any more ado; for so both he and his
followers might have fallen into the ditch without any observation; whereas now
all the world must take notice thereof to their shame and discredit.

BVRTON.
A question of so much the greater moment, by how much some, by their ^o small
authority, and no less renowned opinion in the Church, do so sway the
balance on that side, that many ill affected, and of the adverse party, taking
the advantage, are apt to catch the word out of their mouth, and to say, Thy
mother Church of Rome, etc.

Answer.
This is the second Argument by which the Question begs him some fauou^^ for
indeed it cannot be d^^yed to be very weighty, tending either to the admission
or expulsion of many millions of souls either into, or out of the Church of
Christ. But both his comparatiue amplification, and his Rhetorical
anticipation (by the one whereof he would breed envy to his adversaries, not
only for oppressing the truth with their authority, and estimation in the
Church; but also for giving a perilous, and unseasonable advantage to the
Papists, and popishly affected: and by the other would free himself and his
from fault) I say both of these do admit many, and those very just exceptions.
For first, who are those some in authority in the Church, of whom he speaks?
I doubt not but he means his elect adversaries, and other reverend Fathers,
and Ministers of our Church, who are of a contrary opinion to him: But our
worthy fellow, and friend, M. William Bedle (now Rector of the College and
University of Dubline) in his Letters to Waddesworth, page 75. tells him, and
that in truth, That this opinion is not only favored of many great Scholars
in England, but is the common opinion of all the best Divines of the Reformed
Churches that are, or have been in the world. And it is so well known to the
common Adversaries, that Brierley in his Apology of the Roman Church, Tract.
1. Sect. 6. Subdivis. 3. And Smith in his book of the Author and essence of
the Protestant Church and Religion, Lib. 1. cap. 2. have made whole Catalogues
of them; wherein you shall find truly billed, The Augustane Confession,
Luther, Calvin, Iunius, Zanchius, Plessaeus, Bucanus, Polanus, Saravia,
Boysseul, Vorstius, and Martyr: And of our own, King James, Andrews, Hooker,
Covell, Whitaker, Moreton, Field, Powel, Reinolds, White, and Hall our reverend
Diocesan, our joy and crown, and your meek, and sweet spirited adversary, as
you truly call him, page 52. To whom they add by necessary consequence many
more, as Beza, Melancthon, Pappus, Schusselburge, Ioannes Regius, Leonardus
Crentremius, Whitgift, Lubbertus, Brentius, Magdeburgenses, Da^aeus, Iuel,
Fulk, Bale, Zuinglius, Bucer, Molinaeus, Bell, Mason, Sadeel, yea and Perkins
himself, who of all the rest seems to be furthest off from this opinion; but
these they add, because they allow them the Covenant, the calling of Pastors,
the holding of all the necessary points of the foundation, and salvation it
self, which being granted, the true Church cannot be denied unto them.

Lo these are the some, which sway the balance on the contrary side to you,
being indeed of no small authority, and ^o less renownd opinion in the church;
And not some few in our Church of note and authority, as you would insinuate.

Secondly, who are those many ill affected, and of the adverse party, who take
advantage hereof? and when did they do it? you would make the world believe
that this were a new thing occasioned by these some in authority, whom you have
made your adversaries: But they are no less then the whole Church of Rome, and
that even from our first separation from her; as may appear by the Apologies
of all the reformed Churches; and by Bellarmine: thirteenth note of the Church
de Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 16. Sect. Idem de Haereticis, herein therefore you are
greatly to be blamed.

Thirdly, what is the advantage which they take? and what is the peril
thereof? doubtless some extraordinary thing (I warrant you) never heard of,
before these men gave it in these lukewarm, indifferent, neutralizing days;
Thy Mother Church of Rome; forsooth: A perilous advantage, I promise you; To
acknowledge that truth in lukewarm times, which was always openly known and
professed: For whoeuer denied, but we were sometimes members of that Church?
and with what face can it be denied? of which I may well say, (as Saint Paul
said in another case) if it be perilous, it is perilous to them that perish, in
whom the god of this world has blinded their eyes that they should believe
lies, because they never entertained the truth in love; and if to them it be
perilous, let it be perilous; their blood be upon their own heads: If we
testifying our love and good opinion of them in the bowels of Christ Jesus;
they turn it to their own perdition; we are not under bondage in this case:
But if any advantage be to be taken in this respect, undoubtedly (says worthy
Bedel, vbi supra) we have it of them, and not they of us, in that what we do,
we do it of charity; but they of ignorance, or malice, or both.

BVRTON.
Popery has learned to get over the style again fast enough without our
help.

Answer.
Master Burton; do we help Popery (as it were an old dog) over the style
again, in acknowledging this truth? No, this is Non causa pro causa: If this
would have helped, the style had never been made; that which helps it over
is the just judgment of God for our sins; and especially for the contempt of
the sincere truth of the Gospel: and not the maintaining of any truth: let us
truly repent of them, and I dare be bold to say in the name of God, that, This
shall never help Popery more either now, or hereafter, then it has done
always heretofore.

BVRTON.
Though it were true that the church of Rome were a true Church yet the
countenancing or pressing of it in these times might very well be spared.

Answer.
Indeed you are the only religious Politician of these times, and know better
what is to be done in these cases, then they that sit at the stern: There is
no man so senseless (I suppose) but he knows, that all truths are not either
to be published, urged, or countenanced at all times. There is a time for all
things, (says Solomon) A time to keep silence, and a time to speak: But when
these times are, it were far better for you, and me, and all private persons
to leave to the wisdom of our Governors, then to prescribe any thing to them
therein: But now a days all men will be Privy Counselors; and he is a very
dolt, that cannot govern the whole State, Church, and Kingdom, far better then
now it is governed. So much for the amplification.

BVRTON.
But why then (say they) do others cry down the Church of Rome for no true
Church at all (...) Surely, this was a fault, if it were an untruth: For give
the devil his due (as we say.) It is good therefore that all men be well
advised in this point, in speaking of the Church of Rome Pro or contra, as a
true church or no; it being a matter not to be maintained by finenesse of wit,
or quaint rhetorical discourse, but upon sound ground, and substantial
demonstration.

Answer.
This is your anticipation; wherein you answer a supposed objection, thereby to
free your self from fault in crying down the truth, and true visibility of
the Church of Rome; It is no fault (say you) because it is no untruth: But you
know that is the question: And besides, have you so soon forgotten your own
policy? That though it were true, yet the countenancing, or pressing of it in
these times might very well be spared? Can you imagine that in these
lukewarm, indifferent, neutralizing days, you shall not find enough that will
take up the bucklers against you? will you give the onset, and be faultlesse?
and shall they only that oppose you be the offenders? there is no reason at all
for that; In a mutiny it is hard but both sides will be found faulty: well
then; Let the Devil have his due (say you; and so say I too) yet it is good
(say you) that all men be well advised in this point, etc. Let this word stand:
Only I crave that it may not be taken for granted (which you rhetorically beg
of your friends,) that you have the sound grounds, and substantial
demonstrations; and that we have nothing but finenesse of wit, and quaint
rhetorical discourses: and upon these terms let the cause be determined: And
so much for the quality of the question.

BVRTON.
Now for the more clear and full, yet brief discussion of the point, it shall
suffice only to answer such arguments as are used for it; whereupon the
positive truth will easily be concluded.

Answer.
Now you come to the second argument of your Exordium, by which you scrape
acquaintance with your Readers; which is, a promise to handle this question
well; that is, clearly, fully, and briefly; to which end you think it
sufficient to answer such arguments as are used against you: But how you offend
herein I have showed already.

BVRTON.
Wherein I must crave pardon, having to deal in so weighty a cause, and with
such mighty Authors, as have already tanquam e Cathedra defined it. But God
forbid that the try all of truth should depend upon the opinion of any man's
person; though never so great, or esteemed in the opinion of the learned. My
brethren (says Saint James) have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Lord of glory, with respect of persons: And (...) Saint Augustine against
Maximinus an Arrian Bishop, said) Nec ^u mihi Ariminense, nec ego tibi Nicenum
Concilium objiciam, etc.

Answer.
This is the third argument taken from the condition of your person, being so
weak and unworthy to deal in such a cause, and with such Authors: wherein
first you crave pardon of your boldness, and after clear your self of such
imputations, as may be laid to your charge: For the former; it is counted the
part of an unwise man to crave pardon of a fault, when it is in his own power
not to offend: If it be a fault, why would you run into it? if it be none,
why do you crave pardon? But indeed it cannot be denied to be a great fault for
any man to meddle in matters too high, and with persons too great for him, if
David, Psalm. 131. 1. and Siracides, Ecclus, 8. 1. say true: For as Py^^acus
counseled his friend in the case of marriage to do as the ^^ies playing with
top and scourge, said one to another, (...): T^ tibi su(...)rem: Take to thy
self thy peer(...) is it good (...) every man to contend with his match, and
not to meddle with his betters, unless he will befoole himself in the end But
it is the trial of truth (you say) and God forbid that should depend upon the
opinion of any man's person: True: But first a man must be sure of a warrant for
his doing; for every man may not contend with his betters in trial of truth
upon his own head. Secondly, he must not behave himself lawe^ly (as you do
here) saying they have defined the contrary, tanquam e Cathedra: Else it may
fall out (as you say to the Papists, page 24.) that God forbid will not serve
the turn: neither will S. James (who would not have many mast(...)s) speak
for you: nor Saint Augustine (who contended with his fellow Bishop) plead for
you. And so much for your petition.

BVRTON.
Nor let any man here impute presumption to the weakness or unworthiness of my
person, as though I took a pride to be (...)edling with such high matters,
and wherein great ones are interessed: Alas, God knows, I take so little pride
herein, etc.

Answer.
Come we now to your purgation, wherein you clear your self of pride and
presumption by way of anticipation: Some man perhaps would say, Vbi dolor, ibi
digitus; and that where men are guilty of greatest weakness, there they make
greatest preparation; and that when a man cleares himself without an accuser,
Aliquid latet, quod non patet: But seeing you call God to witness, I had rather
believe you, then suspect you; yet give me leave to tell you what I could say
against you, if I were disposed; notwithstanding all you can say for your self
to the contrary. First, David, vbi supra, makes it an infallible note of pride
to be exercised in matters and with persons of this quality. Secondly, many
passages in this your second Vial (to go no further) do send forth a rank
savor of some such thing: as first, those words, Though it were true, that the
Church of Rome were a true Church, yet the countenanting, or pressing it in
these times, might very well be spared; which are very high: So those; It is
good for all men to be well advised in this point, it being a matter not to be
maintained by finenesse of wit, etc. wherein you covertly praise your self,
and dispraise your adversaries intollerably. So those, I must crave pardon,
having to deal with such Authors, as have already tanquam (...) Cathedra
defined the cause. Insolent words. Then those, Cucullus non facit Monachum;
which is as much as if you had said, A Rochet makes not a Bishop. And those,
What a strange doctrine is this for a learned Doctor (and more then so) of the
Church of England) to teach? Does he not deserve to be the Popes white son
for it? which are words of reproach. Finally those, Now let the Reverend Author
judge indifferently, having well waighed the former reasons, whether we do
ill or no in taking this his saying ill; or whether we had not reason to have
expected an ingenuous Palinodie, or Augustine like retraction, rather then such
an Apology; which whether it be rather to be pitied, then any
uncharitableness in the reader in taking such a saying ill; let judicious
charity it self judge: where may a man find pride, if here be none? yet for
all this, you profess many things to the contrary; as first that

BVRTON.
My heart is even torn in sunder, to see the rufull rents of the Church of
God, and the truth so opposed, so oppressed.

Answer.
But Jeremy tells you, the heart is deceitful above measure; and the learned
say, that it is not so deceitful in any thing as in pride; in so much as if it
were possible to be without pride, yet would it be proud that it is not proud:
and so even while your heart is torn in sunder with sorrow, you may be proud
in exercising your self in things, and with persons that be too high,
notwithstanding.

BVRTON.
And when Gods glory suffers, pardon me, if I profess my self a poor
defendent.

Answer.
What? without a calling? might not Vzza put forth his hand to stay the shaking
of the Arc, and may you do it? But wherein (I pray) does Gods glory suffer
any thing in our case? Is it any dishonor to God to be faithful in keeping
his covenant for ever, even with his enemies? Is not this the highest point of
his glory, wherein of all the rest he most glories? O Master Burton, pretend
not the glory of God, against the glory of God, there is nothing more easy,
more usual, more dangerous.

BVRTON.
Yea, my profession, not only as a Christian, but much more as a Minister of
the Gospel, binds me to it.

Answer.
Then let all Christendom go together by the ears, and let Ministers be the
Ringleaders and Boutefewes.

BVRTON.
And I know that God regards no man's person.

Answer.
True: But he will have all men to be sure of a warrant for their doings.

BVRTON.
And as the proverb is, Cucullus non facit Monachum.

Answer.
Neither does the wearing of a Lions skin, make a Lion.

BVRTON.
And were it not a matter so nearly concerning the glory of God, and the
salvation of Men's souls, I had far rather sit me down in safe and sweet
silence, wherein I should have the more opportunity to pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, then any way stand up to contend.

Answer.
Indeed this is the thing which of all other you had most need to purge your
self of. This contentious humor which (some say) is predominant in you: for
(if Solomon say true) a man so qualified must needs be presumptuous: And how
do you do it? You pretend again the glory of God. But you have heard that
that may be but a color. Next, the salvation of men's souls: But how can that
be, when you damn all Papists to the Devil? Thirdly, your choice of private
retiredness: But that is questionable. Lastly, your devotion: But Quid verba
audiam, cum facta vidiam?

BVRTON.
But it is Gods quarrel, and that against Babylon.

Answer.
First, let that be proved: then let God be a God of order, and not of
confusion.

BVRTON.
Peace is beautiful indeed; but there is a what peace? In which regard Christ
the Prince of peace said, I came not to send peace into the earth, but a sword.
As fair as peace is, we must not make an Idol of it, we must keep Christ's
peace.

Answer.
God forbid else: But we must know then of what spirit we are. We have had
late experience of the too (...) desire of many forward spirits to break our
peace, and to vnsheathe the sword, but I cannot be persuaded, that either this
is Christ's sword, o^ that that was not Christ's p^^be.

BVRTON.
And in these perilous days it being almost as dangerous to be ignorant of
the mystery of iniquity; as of the mystery of Godliness; let no man think it
labor superfluous, or presumptuous, to search out the true mystery of Popery.

Answer.
You say well: But first you must not do it like Skogan, as well where it is
not, as where^^ is: Then, you must not do it so, that you take away all the
mystery thereof at one blow, by denying the Roman Church to be a true, or
true visible Church of Christ: ^or where then is any mystery? Is there any
mystery in Iudaisme, ^urcisme, or Paganism.

BVRTON.
But (I say) in this (...) kind of (...) upon (...).

Answer.
(...) (...) (...) est Necessity, with a great N. has imposed this task upon
you, and woe be to you if you do it not: If you had said so much a first, it
had been enough. This is that I expected all this while: but I hope I shall
make it appear, that this Necessity was never of Gods imposition. And so much
for your Preface: Let us now examine your sound and substantial Answers.

But here I must admonish the Reader, that he deals with three several
Authors: with two he contendeth very briefly, and with a kind of neglect,
about salvation in the Church of Rome: with the third (being a Reverend
Antistes of the Church of England) he finds himself more to do: and that
(as I suppose) because a kind of Necessity has imposed this task upon him.

BVRTON.
The first maine Argument, which would conclude the Church of Rome to be a true
Church, is, because (say they) a man in that Church may be saved: for out of
the Church no salvation; Therefore the Church of Rome must be a true Church.

Answer.
These words, (as should seem by the words say they) are common to both the
former Authors: who (if they have framed their maine argument no better) are
worthy to be blamed; unless it were done popularly without suspicion of
opposition; as it may very well be supposed: The argument is this. Out of the
true Church of Christ there is no salvation: In the Church of Rome there is
salvation Ergo, The Church of Rome is not out of the true Church of Christ.


BVRTON.
Who are they that may be saved in the Church of Rome? My Author expresses,
An bonest ignorant Papist, or some ignorant silly souls etc. yea, and this is
delivered in the name of our Church, or at least of all those, that being
affected to the Church of Rome in some good measure, would seem to be the
Church of England.

Answer.
Whether you deal well with your Authors or no I know not: for you do not
sever them so well as you should; and indeed we shall find in the end, that
you might well have joined them together as one man; for any disagreement that
can be found between them: It seems here you have to do with one only: for I
must go by guess; not knowing well what to make of your answer: you seem to
deny the Assumption of the Argument, by demanding who may be saved in the
Church of Rome? and then bring in your author answering in the name of the
Church of England: and indeed (taking the words you have related, in a good
sense, as I doubt not but the Author meant them, and not as you misconstrue
them) they may well be delivered, not only in the name of our Church; but of
all the reformed Churches in the world.

Author.
We acknowledge an honest ignorant Papist may be saved; and we have not so
learned Christ, as to deny salvation to some ignorant silly souls, whose
humble peaceable obedience makes them safe among any part of men, that profess
the foundation Christ.

BVRTON.
This makes well for Popish ignorance when all fails. This also gives liberty
to any Religion, so it profess the foundation Christ, that therein a man may
be saved.

Answer.
First, here is a good beginning with a notable point of sophistry, ex
compositione dividendorum: for he confounds two kinds of ignorance, which are
as different one from another, as membra diuidentia can be: for better
understanding whereof, we are to remember, that there are two kinds of
ignorance: one negative, another privative, (as the Schoolmen speak) The
former is the ignorance of that which was never revealed; or not revealed
sufficiently to procure distinct knowledge: The latter is the ignorance of that
which a man might have known distinctly if he would. These two are commonly
called simple, and affected ignorance: Simple because a man is always ready
to embrace the knowledge of the truth, when it shall please God to reveal it:
Affected, because a man delights in darkness more then light, that his evil
deeds may not be reproved: and both of these may befall the learnedest man in
the world: As the former did Saint Paul before his conversion; and some of the
Rulers of the Jews, as Saint Peter testifies, Acts 3. 17. and as the latter
did other of those Rulers who closed their eyes that they might not see, Mat.
13. 15. Now of these, the Author means the former only, which is protestant
ignorance as well as popish; and the Answerer abuses him in understanding him
of the latter; which indeed is true popish ignorance, and no other; for then a
man is popishly ignorant, when he pleases himself in his ignorance, and is
taught so to do; and not when he is willing to know, if he had the means:
and who doubts but there are many millions of such in the Church of Rome,
which are those ignorant ^illy souls of whom the Author speaks.

Secondly, he changes the state of the question; for whereas the Author says
such ignorants may be saved among any part of mankind that profess the
foundation Christ; that is, in any Christian Church; he turns it into any
Religion professing Christ; which is not the question: for the question is of
the Church, and not of the Religion: and from hence he proceeds cunningly to
his first question: Whether any ^apist may be saved by his religion: But here
let it be acknowledged, that we agree with S. Augustiue, lib. 1. de Baptis*
contra Donatistas: That the societies of all Heretics, so far as they
retain the profession of saving truth, and the ministration of the Sacrament
of Baptism, are so far forth still conjoined with the Catholic Church of
God; which in and by them brings forth children unto God: Mark his words,
Ecclesia Orthodoxa (says he) non Haeresis per Christi Baptismum generat, qui
generantur filij Dei etiam inter Haereticos.

BVRTON.
But here two questions would be resolved: First whether any Papist by his
religion may be saved.

Answer.
Here he divides one question into two, and makes two Authors differ in
opinion, which agree in one: And for the first question, it was never moved by
any thing I can perceive from his Authors. The question is, Whether any man
living and dying a Papist, or member of the Church of Rome may be saved; and
not, Whether any Papist may be saved by his religion. This therefore is a trick
of Leigerdumaine, worthy such as pretend Gods glory in hypocrifie.

BVRTON.
For resolution, The Author ranks all Papists into two sorts; either learned,
or silly ignorants. For the learned, he confesses it is very hard for them to
be saved; but if ignorant more easy.

Answer.
If his Author do as he says; he marres a good cause in the handling; but I
doubt he belies him, especially if this which he has related be all that he
says. For these word^ do not imply a division of all Papists into learned and
silly ignorants; but of ignorant Papists into simple, and wilful ignorants;
and for the wilful, he confesses it impossible for them to be saved, (if they
so abide,) whether they be learned or unlearned; but the simple, whether
learned or unlearned (in his opinion) may be saved: and so think I too.

BVRTON.
So then if a Papist be saved, he may thank his ignorance.

Answer.
Was there ever any man in the world which would make such an inference? Saint
Paul was a persecutor, blasphemer, and wrong doer, but he obtained mercy
because he did it ignorantly in unbelief: So then that Saint Paul obtain
(...), he may thank his ignorance and unbelief. Apage. No, this is all that
can be inferred there from; that such ignorance as this, (...) not
ponereobice^ (as the Schoolmen speak) that is, lay a block in the way to
salvation, as the other does; he may be saved, notwithstanding this ignorance,
though not for this ignorance, because it excuses a tanto though not a totp:
from the degree of sin, though not from all sin.

BVRTON.
But Christ the foundation is there prosessed well: but how with popish
ignorance teach a man to be saved by Christ? Faith comes by (...)ting, and
without faith no salvation by Christ: But all Papists are taught to hate and
abhor (...) preaching of the word; how then is it possible they should be
saved? be they never so humble and peaceable Men.

Answer.
The farther, the worse: does it follow upon any thing that has been said,
that Popish ignorance will teach a man to be saved by Christ, when it has bin
reno^nced as damnable? Nay we should show our selves idiots, if we should
say, simple ignorance can do it: But how then are these ignorants saved by
Christ? why by faith (man) which comes by hearing the word preached: yea but
they have it not, nor can have it; yea they abhor it, and are taught so to
do. Fie for shame, that a man so well studied in the mystery of iniquity,
should be either so ignorant therein, or so ill affected to affirm so gross
an untruth: Read the Council of Trent, Sess. 5. cap. 2. and 24. cap. 4. and
see whether this be true which he faith: It seems he has not been beholden
to any of those many Cart-loads of Homilies, Sermons, Postills, Meditations,
Hiemals and Aestiualls, which are so diligently preached in the Church of Rome,
and far better, more soundly, and diligently since that Council, then
before: To which many of our: ordinary Preachers are much beholden: And I would
they were not better taught there in some places, then ours are (dole^s dico)
in many Churches in England, Wales, and Ireland: Indeed they are taught to hate
our Preachers as heretics, and our preaching as heresy; but if he say thereof
that they have none at all, or hate all, he deceiues himself, and others with
his old fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter: And if he say
their preaching cannot breed true saving faith, I pity him.

BVRTON.
As if a Papist though never so simple could be humble; there can be no greater
pride, then that which he takes in his ignorance; and can he be peaceable,
whose chief article of his Creed is to believe the Pope to be supreme ^uer all
Kings and princes, etc.

Answer.
If the think all Papists to be such as he speaks of, he is not only
uncharitable, but foolish. Those simple and silly ignorants, of which the
Author speaks, both may be, and (...) humble, and peaceable, notwithstanding
the pride and rebellion of the Po(...) orants, and besides, how does their
(...)perie hinder them from humility and peaceablenesse, when their Kings and
Princes themselves will have them so to believe and hold?

BVRTON.
This is the beasts mark, which who so receives shall drink of the wine of
the wrath of God, Revel. 14. 9. No Papist then as a Papist can be saved.

Answer.
That the belief of the Popes supremacy in all spiritual things and causes,
is the Beasts mark, is Petitio principij. And that all Papists do receive the
Beasts mark is false; unless he will say none of them all are written in the
Lambs book of life, A Revel. 13. 8. Which I (...) not say. The Conclusion i^
altogether without premisse (...) if he will-conclude any thing (...) That
(...) apist can be saved and not that No Papist (...) Papistoan be saved? For
the Ang(...) (...) No (...) mark: Ergo, No papist can be saved.

BVRTON.
And of Babylon (says God) Come out of her my people, left ye be partakers of
her sins, Revel. 18. Babylon the dominion, and religion of the beast, of
Antichrist; Nothing then therein to be expected, but the punishment of Babels
sins.

Answer.
Babylon does not always signify the dominion, and religion of the beast:
sometimes it is taken (...), for the very City, that is, the seat of his
dominion, the City of Rome, and so is it to be understood, Revel. 18. And for
the Conclusion, I say the same I said of the former; that it has no premises
for all that can well be concluded is this; That God calls his people out of
the ^itie of Rome, when (...) is upon the point of destrsction, that they may
not bodily perish with the wicked* (...) I hope he will noisay that Gods
people may (...) ingly pelish with them, though for a time they pa(...) with
them (...) (...) sins, and temporal punishments, as often, and ordinarily
they do. So much for the first question, and for the first Author.

The second question and Author.
May not a simple Papist miss-led by education or long custom, or ouer-valuing
the sovereignty of the Roman Church, and Io in the simplicity of his heart
embracing them, find mercy at Gods hands, by a general repentance, and faith in
the merit of Christ, attended with charity, and other virtues?

BVRTON.
Here the state of the former question is quite altered: by Faith, and
Repontance no doubt, not only an ignorant Papist, but even an Infidel may
find mercy, etc.

Answer.
It is not true, the state it still the same, for the humble and (...)able
obedience of the former question implies the Faith and Repentence required in
this question for without true faith and repentance, there can be no humble and
peaceable obedience: And so it is true which I said before, that he divides
one question into two, and makes his Authors differ, which agree in one.
Besides, I would desire him to tell, why there he denied humility and
peaceable behavior to all Papists, and yet here affords them Faith and
Repentance to salvation? To this he answers.

BVRTON.
But withal this silly Papist believing and repenting, must necessarily repent
him of all his Idolatry, as well as of all his other sins: yes (says the
Author) by a general repentance and faith: what a strange doctrine is this for
a learned Doctor to teach? Surely Bellarmine himself, with the whole rabble of
Pontificians could do no more, etc.

Answer.
See here how Sarcastically he writes of the most wholesome, and Catholic
doctrine of general Faith and Repentance; and of the Author for teaching it:
who if he be a Doctor of the Church of England, his fault is the greater: for
why should this be Popish doctrine in his mouth, which in Perkinses is sound
and orthodoxe? Does not he say plainly in his Treatise of Repentance, cap. 1.
Neither is this to trouble any; That as God requires particular repentance for
known sins, so he accepts a general repentance for such as be unknown? And
does he not say also in the same place, That sound Repentance for one special
sin, brings with it Repentance for all sins? And does he not say
elsewhere, (Book of Cases, lib. 1. cap. 2. Sect. 3. paragraph, But some may
say) That, The greater this simple ignorance is, the lesser is the sin? and
that if we be careful to obey God according to our knowledge, having withal a
care and desire to increase in the knowledge of God, and his will, God will
have us excused. And is not this the selfsame (mutatis mutandis) which this
Author or Doctor has delivered? If the Pope and Bellarmine, and the whole
rabble of Pontificians would say no worse then so, it would be the best days
work we did these seventy years to be reconciled.

BVRTON.
But does this general repentance include Idolatry, with all popish trumpery,
as things to be repented of? If not, such repentance shall never bring him to
salvation.

Answer.
We grant all: This Repentance includes all unknown sins; and so all
Idolatry, and all other popish trumperie.

BVRTON.
If it do include them, then by faith in Christ's merits he comes to be saved,
not as a Papist, but as a true believer, renouncing Popery, and then no
Godamercy to his popery, or to his silly ignorance.

Answer.
Loc here is the vpshot of all; this is his strong hold, wherein he puts his
whole trust in this question: And yet (God knows) it is but a mere starting
hole; as poor a shift, and evasion, as ever man can use. Here then let it be
observed, that he uses two points of Sophistry, and one of Folly: of
Sophistry, first in the word Papist; secondly, in the word renouncing. The word
Papist is ambiguous, sometime it is used sensu composito, (as the Schoolmen
speak) or largely: sometimes sensu diviso, or strictly. In the compound sense
it signifies (to inuert the words of Perkins) an unreformed Catholic, that
is, one that holds the same necessary heads of Religion with the Protestant
Churches; yet so as he retains all errors in doctrine, whereby the said
religion is corrupted in the Church of Rome, ignorantly supposing them to be
the truth of God. In the divided sense it fignifies one that holds the errors
of the Church of Rome, without respect to the orthodoxe truth maintained
therein. Now to apply this to our purpose; when we say a papist may be saved,
we understand it in the former and more large sense. And when the says; a
papist cannot be faued, he understands it in the latter, and more strict sense,
and so we are all agreed: for as a thief, or a murderer, or any other
malefactor cannot be saved, as he is such a one; no more can a Papist as he
holds his errors: for no unclean thing shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven: this is the former point of his sophistry.

The other is in the word renouncing: For there are two kinds of renouncing:
One actual and express; another virtuall, and infolded. The actual is when a
man does both in word and practice separate himself from the religion of the
Church of Rome. The virtuall is, when in preparation of mind, a man is ready
to doc it, so soon as it shall appear to him to be sinful and damnable: when
therefore he requires that a Papist that must be saved should renounce his
popery; if he understand the actual renouncing thereof, we acknowledge that it
is necessary so soon as he shall know, and be convicted of the evil of
Popery: but if he never be convicted thereof so long as he lives; then we say
the virtuall is sufficient, which is included in general repentance:
otherwise, we must confound sins known with unknown, and general
repentance with particular: This being considered, a man may easily perceive
how a simple ignorant Papist, whether learned or unlearned, may be said to
renounce his popery, and to be saved; though he live and die in the communion
of that faith and religion. So much for Sophistry.

Now his folly appears in this, that he would have us to hold, that a Papist
(which we say, may be iaued by a general faith and repentance) is saved as a
Papist by virtue of his Popish ignorance, idolatry, and other trumpery, and not
as a true believer by faith in Christ's merits: And that we would have some
Godamercy to be given to Popery, or silly ignorance for his salvation; which
ought to be so far from the conceit of any well disposed Christian, that all
of us must acknowledge, that no Protestant, as a Protestant (communicating with
the corruptions of several Churches, Dutch, French, Germane, or the rest; none
of which are free from some enormities) No Protestant (I say) as a Protestant,
can be saved, without this general faith and repentance, so as there can be
no God amercy given to our Protestancy, but only to faith in Christ's merits,
by which we come to be saved, not as Protestants, but as true believers,
renouncing the corruptions of several Churches: And so a Protestant living and
dying a Protestant, may be damned; and a Papist living and dying a Papist may
be saved.

BVRTON.
My conclusion is (to be brief,) No Papist, as a Papist whether learned or
ignorant can be saved; My reason is, because Popery denies the saving faith of
Christ: and they want the means of faith; therefore if they be saved, it must
be extraordinarily, etc.

Answer.
All this which follows in this Section, is nothing but an idle repetition of
those things which have been formerly urged, and answered at large: and
therefore with reference thereto, I pass it over: The same also I say to the
next, wherein he takes it for granted, that he speaks the truth; and that his
adversaries do divorce themselves from sound judgment, and right reason; and
have no right charity but such as calls evil good: Because they say, It is
an hard sentence, yea malicious, and rash, to say, That in the Church of Rome
there is no salvation: All which I leave to the discretion of the Reader. So
much for the two questions, and the two former Authors.

BVRTON.
But others would not have it denied, that the Church of Rome is a true visible
Church, though not a true believing Church.

Answer.
Having rid his hands of his two former Authors with a kind of neglect (as I
said before) he comes now to his meek, and sweet spirited Author, a Reverend
Antistes of the Church of England, our divine Seneca, etc. against whom he
bends all his forces; and yet like Judas (as you see) betrayeth him with
kissing: May not I say to him, as Horace to Lydia in another case?

-- Lydia dic per omnes
Te deos oro, Sybarim cur properas amande
Perdere? -- So
Burton, for Gods sake tell me, I thee pray,
Why thou so lovingly do Exon flay?
I acknowledge my poetry may be blamed, but the conceit may be pretty and
tolerable, (though I say it my self) for to say the truth, he labors to
kill him with kindness; in that (as much as in him lies) he blemisheth his
well deserved, Reverend, and Honorable name in the Church with his flattering
opposition: But he must be pardoned, for he has done it to the glory of God
and the confusion of Babylon: which if it might prove to be true, I dare be
bold to say, his Author would not only be ready to make an humble and ingenuous
palinody, or retractation, (as he sawcily requires) but even to sacrifice his
goods, good name, soul and body for ever: But I doubt he has done Gods glory
more hurt, and Babylon more good, then any Babylonian Papist has done these
many years.

Author.
That which Laertius speaks of Menodemus, that in disputing his very eyes
would sparkle, is true of many of ours; whose zeal transports them to such a
detestation of the Roman Church, as if it were all error, no Church;
affecting nothing more then an utter opposition to their doctrine, and
ceremonies, because theirs.

BVRTON.
What if we should deny this, that the Church of Rome is a true visible Church?
Must we at the first dash be censured as men transported with zeal out of the
detestation of the Church of Rome, as if it were all error, no Church, etc?

Answer.
How are you not ashamed to abuse your Reverend Author, does he censure all of
them that deny the Church of Rome to be a true visible Church in this sort, and
manner? are not his express words, that it is true of many of them, not of
all? Master Burton, this dealing beseemes not one that contends for the glory
of God, and confusion of Babylon: In my conscience, no truly religious wise man
will deny, but many of them do well deserve this censure; and you for one.

BVRTON.
Because theirs? that's not it, but because wholly Antichristian; therefore we
detest the whore.

Answer.
Is not that it? M. Burton? why then said you before in the depth of your
policy, that though it were true that the Church of Rome were a true Church,
yet the countenancing or pressing of it in these times might very well be
spared? have you so soon forgotten your self? and are the doctrine and
ceremonies of that Church wholly Antichristian? when you have proved it, say
so; but till then lay your hand upon your mouth, and suspend.

BVRTON.
And for my part, I had rather some fire-sparkling zeal, yet guided with right
judgment should even transport me with a detestation of the Church of Rome, as
a false Church; then that I wot not what charity without Zeal, without sound
judgment, should so far possess me, as to acknowledge the Church of Rome
for a true Church, yea or yet for a true, or truly visible Church.

Answer.
Your zeal (though transporting you) is guided with right judgment: your
Author (though Reverend) is possessed with a charity without zeal, without
sound judgment; of the two you prefer your own: it seems you dwell by bad
neighbors, Mr. Burton; Else you fall within the compass of Catoes Hoc faciunt
stulti, etc.

BVRTON.
And yet, under correction, I see no such difference between these two, but
that if we yield the church of Rome to be a true, o^ truly visible Church; we
may as well call it a true Church.

Answer.
If this will give you content we will not strive with you: though it may be,
we might puzzle you: And for the next Section it is already answered.

Author.
Neither for the chafe do we leave the floor of God, neither for the badd
fishes do we break his nets.

BVRTON.
Whether that floor, and those nets, be Antichrists only, and not Gods, shall
appear more fully anon.

Answer.
Where? can you tell? you promise it, but you never perform it.

Author.
All truth is Gods, wheresoever it is found; not ours: as the Kings coin is
current, though it be found in any unclean channel.

BVRTON.
True: but when the truth of God is turned into a lie, and the Kings coin
beaten into a thin leaf, etc. the case is altered: And so it is in the
Church of Rome.

Answer.
It is untrue, and contrary to the Apologies of all the Reformed Churches, who
stand upon it, that they have not made an innovation, or renouation, but only
a reformation, which could not be, if all Gods truth in the Church of Rome were
turned into a lie, and that Gods coin (the Scripture) were utterly defaced:
your self have acknowledged it was not so before the Council of Trent, and I
have proved that it is no worse now (if so ill) as it was before. And if some
of those Churches, which yet abide in the unity of the Church of Rome, would
depart from her, and embrace the truth, they would do no otherwise, then the
Reformed Churches have done already.

Author.
Fundamental truth is like the Meronean wine, which if it be mixed with twenty
times so much water holds its strength.

BVRTON.
The comparison is pretty if it did hold water: but what if into the Maronaean
wine twenty times so much poison be put? Again, take the Maronaean wine and
extract the spirits out of it, what is it then but a dead vappa? such is that
truth, which is now in the Church of Romes keeping, etc.

Answer.
Here his zeal transports him almost to blasphemy, for it is impossible that
the fundamental truth of Gods church should either be so poisoned, or the
spirits thereof so extracted, as he affirms; if it were otherwise, the gates
of hell might prevail against it: but Zanchius says a great deal better in
his Preface before his Book De natura Dei, Non potuit Satan (says he) vel in
ipsae Roman^ ecclesia quacunque voluit efficere, sicut in Orientals fecer at:
Invite enim S(...) ecclesia illa praecipua fidei fundamenta quanquam humanis
doctrinis labefactata: and this he said since the Council of Trent: Now let
every wise man judge, whether Zanchius or Burton be rather to be credited:
Although I cannot dissemble my dissent also from Zanchy himself in this point:
for he yields too much in my conceit, That Satan has effected what he
would in the Oriental Church in abolishing fundamental truth: which (under
correction) I suppose to be untrue; for that Church even to this day holds
the fundamental truths of Christianity as well as the Church of Rome: But it
may be he speaks of defection to Mahometry; which is not the Oriental Church.

Author.
The Sepulcher of Christ was overwhelmed by the Pagans with earth, and rubbish,
etc. yet still there was the Sepulcher of Christ: And it is a ruled case of
Papini^n, that a sacred place loses not the holiness with the demolished
walls: No more does the Roman Church lose the claim of a true visible Church
through her manifold and deplorable corruptions.

BVRTON.
How the Church of Rome may be proved to be a true visible Church, because
once it was so, by this comparison I see not; and how a sound Christian may
edify his faith upon a comparison from Papinians ruled case I cannot savor:
All sound Divines know, that places are not further, nor longer sacred, then
the use remains whereupon at first they began to be sacred.

Answer.
Here is much ado to small purpose; he had little to do to spend his time in
confuting similitudes; which were used of the Reverend Author for no other
purpose then that for which they were originally ordained; which is not to
prove, but to illustrate: which if he had showed they do not, he had said
somewhat to the purpose; but that he could not, for they are as apt and fit for
the purpose as can be: As for edification of any man's faith upon these, or
other comparisons, I am sure be neue^ intended: The very point we have it hand
is no matter of faith, but of fact: I^ places remain sacred so far, and so
long as the use remains whereupon at first they began to be sacred, it
(...) all we desire; for so answerably Rome must still be a true visible
Church, because the covenant between God and her still holds, which was the
thing which first made her to be a true visible Church: for it follows.

Author.
If the Church of Rome were once the Spouse of Christ, and her adulteries are
known; yet the divorce is not sued out.

BVRTON.
Is not the divorce sued out? Perhaps not in a legal formality; but what if
this once spouse of Christ, not only play the open whore, but professes her
self to be the married wife of another man? Is this woman still the spouse of
her former husband? though she have not sued out a legal divorce? Thus stands
the case with the Church of Rome. But what if Christ the first husband come and
challenge his spouse again? seeing this second marriage was a nullity? Indeed
the Lord is very merciful. Ier. 3. 1

Answer.
Now Mr. Burton (as if he had seen the head of Medusa) seems to be deprived
of his senses; Is it not? (says he) Perhaps not: But what if this? Is that?
But what if that? Indeed then, etc. What staggering is this? It seems this
argument has so choked him, that he cannot speak without coughing: If he
could, he should have done well to have left the allegory, and to have proved
in plain terms, that the Covenant between Christ and the Church of Rome, is
utterly abrogated, and abolished, which I suppose he^ will never be able to do.

BVRTON.
But if the divorce be sued out, then you will say she cease to be a spouse
to her former husband; well; and is nor that divorce between the Church of
Rome and Christ yet sued forth? yet certainly, and that on both parties: First
on the Church of Romes part. When? (say you?) In the Council of Trent (say
we.) It is the duty and pr^perty of Christ's spouse, to hearken to her husbands
voice only, and to honor him. Psalm. 45. 11. Luke 9. 35. But the Church of
Rome in the Council of Trent has taken out a bill of divorce, and has
emancipated her self wholly to the Pope, as her husband, to hear him in all
things from that time forwards: And this divorce is ratified by the Bull of
Pope Pius 4. super forma iuramenti professionis fidei, in the end of the
Council.

Answer.
If I were disposed to pick quarrels, I might have excepted against many of
your absurd phrases since I began to deal with you, and against one here; of
a wives emancipating her self to another husband: But I aim at the maine
point: I make no doubt then, but the church of Rome has long agone (even many
hundred years before the Council of Trent) broken the Covenant of her God; and
still abides in that transgression; and so deserves well enough to be
divorced from Christ for ever: But that it was ever her desire to separate her
self from Christ, it will never be proved: Nay rather it has ever bin her
cunning to make him a cover and cloak of all her whoredoms and abominations,
(as a subtle adultresse deals with her long suffering and patient husband)
that so she may seem to be a Matrone, though she be indeed a notable
Strumpet: and this is the highest point of the mystery of iniquity.

Now how you prove the contrary by the form of oath of Obedience to the Bishop
of Rome, and of the Profession of the Roman faith, (decreed Sess. 24. cap. 12.
of the Council, to be administered, and taken, (and accordingly performed)
only of such Clergy men as are to be preferred to Ecclesiastical dignities or
benefices with cure of souls) do you your self (at your farther leisure)
consider: As if a Schismatic should argue by the oaths of Supremacy,
Allegiance, and Canonical Obedience, and by the subscription which are to be
performed in the same case of all that are to be made Ministers, or admitted to
any preferment in the Church of England; that the Church of England also has
sued out a divorce from Christ, and so is no true: visible Church: (which God
forbid;) As the fanaticall Brownists and Anabaptists say upon the self same
reason.

BVRTON.
Now if any will require a proof on Christ's part, that he has also publicly
given the Church of Rome a bill of divorce; let him but search in Gods records:
Does not Christ Revel. 17. openly declare the Church of Rome to be the Whore of
Babylon? and is there not a plain bill of Divorce, Revel. 18? and that by a
voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, etc? does not Christ here
separate his own people, his own spouse out of Babylon? And this divorce on
Christ's part, came to be of force upon the Council of Trent; when the Church
of Romes second marriage was solemnly concluded, and Christ excluded: what need
be said more; to prove this Divorce, and that on both sides?

Answer.
What need be said more? (quoth you?) marry much more then either you have
said yet, or ever will be able to say, I trow: what is it (I pray) you have
said now, that you need to say no more? Is it this? That Rome, and the Roman
Church is the whore of Babylon? We allow it: Or that Christ would have his
people to separate from her? we grant it: But that the Church of Rome was
married to a second husband in the Council of Trent, and Christ excluded; or
that those words, Come out of her my people, are a bill of divorce; or that
Christ by them separateth his Spouse from her, we utterly deny. To the first
enough has been said in the last answer. To the second we say, first that
(if Brightman your best master say true,) this place must not be understood
spiritually, but literally, of the local departure of Gods people out of Rome,
and Gods calling them thereto at the last overthrow and destruction thereof, as
he called Lot out of Sodom, and the Jews out of the Eastern Babylon in the
same words, and the Church out of Jerusalem when it was to be utterly
destroyed; so that as Mice (I use his own similitude) perceiving the house
will fall, do leave it, and run away; so the people of God warned by the
Angel will leave Rome, and shift for themselves: which being so, this
Prophecy is not yet fulfilled. Secondly, if it be taken spiritually, it is so
far from proving a divorce, that it proves the quite contrary: for first, so
long as Babylon has a being, this euocation will be of use and force, because
so long God shall have a people in Babylon; and so long there can be no
divorce, because God begets not children of any, but of his Spouse the Church:
Secondly, these words declare not what Christ himself either does or will do,
but what he would have his people to do: Now a Divorce is not a separation of
the Family from the Mother, or Mistress, but of the husband from the wife;
Ergo, here is no Divorce intended. To the third, we say, that seeing the wife
is the whore, and the whore is Babylon; Christ intends not here to separate
his Wife or Spouse from Babylon; because in so doing he should separate his
wife from his wife, and Babylon from Babylon, which implies a contradiction.

Author.
As it is a visible Church we have not detracted to hold communion with it; as
Babylon, we can have nothing to do with it.

BVRTON.
This distinction comes too late, after the sentence of the divorce is given on
both sides: Christ has disclaimed her for his Spouse: bidding his Spouse to
come from her: therefore whom God separateth, let no man join together: yea in
this case no distinction* will serve to join us together again in one
communion: Herein we must not hearken to the voice of any man be he never so
Reverend, before, or against the voice of Christ: By what distinction (I pray)
can an honest and chaste Matrone salve her credit by keeping company, or having
communion with a notorious Strumpet? Would it not seem a strange distinction to
say, The Devil in his essence being good, we detract not to hold communion
with him; but as a Devil, we can have nothing to do with him?

Answer.
You abuse your self and the Reader too bad, and that in two things: First, in
blaming the distinction: Secondly, in scandalizing your Author. The distinction
(you say) comes too late, and is not useful to join us together again in one
communion. The former whereof is false, as has been showed in the former
answers. The latter depends upon the scandals of the Author; for the better
understanding whereof we are to know, That the reformed Churches never made a
full, and total separation from the Church of Rome; but only partial, from
her corruptions; Non tam ab ea, quam ab eius erroribus discessimus, says Jewel
in his Apology, which is the common voice of all, even of Perkins himself in
his Reformed Catholic, who sh^wes in every head of doctrine how far we may
and must hold communion with that Church: and to this and no more has the
Reverend Author respect in this assertion: Now this Calumniator would make the
world believe, that his intent is to use a means by help of this distinction
to join us together again in one communion in those things wherein we are
already separated: which as it was far from his heart and meaning (for his
whole Treatise tends to the contrary) so indeed it were a vain thing for him
to endeavor it by this distinction. For it would be all one as if he should
say, As she is a visible Church, we may communicate with her in her
corruptions; But as she is Babylon we may not. Which is indeed the folly which
he illustrateth by his two similitudes of society with a strumpet and the
devil. Thus you see the honesty, and wisdom of the man; and by this you may
judge of his zeal for the glory of God.

Author.
They have not well heeded the charitable profession of zealous Luther, Nos
fatemur, etc. We profess (says he) that under the Papacy, there is much
Christian good, yea all, etc. I say moreover that under the Papacy is true
Christianity, ^^a, the very kernel of Christianity, etc.

BVRTON.
Luthers speech then was true: But ever distingue tempora; Luther wrote that
before the Council of Trent, till which the Church of Rome had not altered the
rule of Faith: But now we that live after that Council cannot say so: for in
that Council the nut was cracked, the kernel rejected, yea anathematized, and
now they have retained no more, but the broken shell of a Church.

Answer.
It is a strange thing to see how men are enamoured of their own conceits, Qui
amant, ipsi sibi somnia singunt (says the Poet) I warrant you if M. Burton
were braied in a mortar, yet would not these toys depart from him. Huartus in
his Trial of wits, reports of a Noble-mans Page in Spain, that (being
distracted of his wits) imagined himself to be a King, in which conceit he so
pleased himself, that when he was cured, he was displeased with the
Physician that restored him to his right mind: and so I doubt M. Burton will
be with those that show him the vanities of these his imaginations. Well,
howsoever it be, we must be content, and suffer him to abound in his own
sense, till Time the Mother of Truth reveal his gross mistakings: and in the
mean while let it be sufficient answer to this long discourse, that here is
nothing but idle repetition of those things which have been already answered.
And h^^herto we have answered what he has objected to what was said in the
Book of The old Religion concerning this argument.

Author.
Nothing can be so well said, or done, but may be ill taken.

BVRTON.
Now God forbid: But is it well said, or done, to affirm that the Church of
Rome is yet a true, or a true visible Church? Now let the Reverend Author judge
indifferently (having well weighed the former reasons) whether we do ill or no
in taking his saying ill, or whether we had not reason to have expected an
ingenuous Palinodie or Augustine-like Retractation, rather then such an
Apology: which whether it be rather to be pitied, then any uncharitableness
in the Reader in taking such a saying ill, let indicious charity it self
judge: Nor need we stretch the saying to imply, that the Church of Rome is a
true believing Church: Suffice it we except against any being, yea or
visibility of a true Church in the Synagogue of Rome.

Answer.
Some men are like Nettles, which if a man handle softly, they sting him; but
if hardly and roughly, they are not felt. Our Reverend Antistes having but
glanced at the zeal of some, transported to such a detestation of the Roman
church, as if it were all error, no church; is deeply censured, as if
preferment had changed his note, and taught him to speak more plausible
language of the Church of Rome, then either he did, or ought. Hereupon he
frames an Apologeticall, mild, and Christian Advertisement, to rectify their
judgment, lest their prejudice may turn more to their sin, then to his
wrong: What Is the issue? Nothing but scorn: for sooth they expected that the
Reverend Author, (well weighing the former reasons,) would have made a
pitiful Retractation, and not such an Augustine-like Apology. Nay, they will
not acknowledge any the least mistaking in the matter; yea, those words
(Nothing can be so well said or done, but may be ill taken, which are the
ordinary preamble to reconciliation) are taken amiss: and so prove themselves
to be true through their frowardness. What then is to be done? Haec non
succedit, alia ineunda est via: The Reverend Author must use them like hounds;
which the more a man beats, the better they love him: or like the wild
Irish; which are most serviceable when they are most slauishly used. And so
they shall have their desire; a Palinodie, or Retractation; which is, That is
repents him, that he has dealt so favorably with them. For as for their
reasons, (if they were not as bold and blind as Bayard himself) they would be
ashamed to commend them to the judgment of judicious Charity.

Author.
Who sees not that [visible] referres to outward profession, [true] to some
essential principles of Christianity? neither of them to soundness of belief?

BVRTON.
Is outward profession a sufficient mark of visibilitie for a Church? This is
none of those marks which the Church of England takes notice of a Church by.

Answer.
No? Are not they the preaching of the word, administration of sacraments and
Ecclesiastical discipline? And what outward profession of Christianity, can
any visible church make without these? Outward profession therefore,
comprehends them all; and so is a sufficient mark of visibilitie for a
Church.

BVRTON.
Again, the Scripture calls them the Synagogue of Satan, which call themselves
Jews and are not.

Answer.
True; yet were they true Jews in the flesh, and outwardly, Romans 2. ^8. 29.
and so may a true visible Church of Christians be also.

BVRTON.
The Samaritanes sometimes professed themselves to be of the Jews religion,
and professed the worship of the Lord, were they therefore a visible Church?

Answer.
The reason is not like; because they never were in the Covenant of Gods grace;
but were aliens from the Common wealth of Israel.

BVRTON.
And for the essential principles of Christianity, the Jews at this day hold
the Old Testament; and if it be said, They deny Christ expressly, the Papists
do so too implicitly; and by their own express doctrines of Trent, have no
more communion with Christ then the Jews have: Nay Papists do expressly abjure
the doctrine of Christ, as we showed before in the Popes own Bull.

Answer.
The tongue that lies, slays the soul: Such comparisons are not only
odious, but damnable. If this zeal do not transport you to sin, I doubt not
but euill-speakers, raylers, and slanderers may find an easy passage into the
kingdom of heaven.

Author.
Grant the Romanists to be but Christians, how corrupt soever; and we cannot
deny them the name of a Church.

BVRTON.
But why should we grant them that which never a Papist is able to demonstrate
to us, or yet undoubtedly to persuade himself of?

Answer.
This fond conceit is sufficiently answered already.

BVRTON.
Although for the bare name of Christians and of a Church, we will not much
stand with them; so they do not hereupon, or any for them, incroach and
challenge the being and realitie, yea or the very visibility of a true Church.

Answer.
You are very liberal of that which is none of your own: Can you be content
to afford the precious name of a Christian and of a Church of Christ to them
which in man's judgment not partially affected, are not so? The Jews would
never do it; neither will the Papists do it; neither will the Reformed
Churches do it; neither will any well informed Christian do it: But you will
not much stand upon it.

Author.
We are all the same Church, by virtue of our outward vocation, whosoever all
the world over worship Jesus Christ the only Son of God, the Savior of the
world; and profess the same common Creed.

BVRTON.
Does the Church of Rome worship Jesus Christ, who for Christ worship the Beast
and his Image, bearing his mark?

Answer.
Do all in the Church of Rome do so? what they whose names are written in the
Lambs book of life? Reu. 13. 8. or are you sure that none of the Church of
Rome living and dying professed members thereof are written therein?

BVRTON.
Doc they hold the same Creed, that deny the faith, without which they cannot
say the first words of the Creed, I believe in God?

Answer.
And dare you say that all and every one in the Church of Rome does so?

Author.
Rome does both hold the foundation, and destroy it; she holds it directly,
destroys it by consequent.

BVRTON.
What foundation do they hold directly with us? we showed before, that they
have nothing of Christ, but the shell, the shadow, the Pope is the kernel, if
any.

Answer.
You said so indeed, but you showed it not: yet if they have the shell, that is
the outward profession of the foundation directly, it is enough to make them be
said to hold the foundation directly.

BVRTON.
Nay do they h^ld more of Christ directly, then the very society of Devils
do? yea or so much as they?

Answer.
They do, if your self say true: for you say, that To hold the foundation
directly, is to hold Jesus Christ so to be come in the slesh, as therein to
suffer and satisfy for our salvation; becoming our Christ, our Jesus,
redeeming us from our sins by imputing his merits to us, that our sins might
not be imputed to us which were imputed to him: by whose stripes we are
healed, by whose righteousness imputed we are perfectly justified in the
sight of God: And all, and every point of this, the Church of Rome directly
holds.

BVRTON.
Nothing less: yea she directly, not by consequence only; directly (I say)
she denies and destroys this foundation: How? and where? in the Council of
Trent, Sess. 6. Can. 10. Siquis dixerit homines per ipsam Christi iustitiam
formaliter iustos esse, Anathema sit: Is not this a direct, and flat express
denial of the foundation?

Answer.
Is this an express, flat, and direct denial of the foundation? then
Melancthon, Calvin, Illyricus, and all sound and good Protestants do expressly,
flatly, and directly deny the Foundation: for all of them do, and must hold
this doctrine for accursed: and all the Ministers of the Church of England have
cause to be ashamed of your ignorance and boldness (Mr. Burton) who dare
challenge the Church of Rome to deny the foundation directly in that wherein
she holds and confirms the truth of the Gospel: you must know therefore
that in these words is condemned the damnable doctrine of Andrew Osiander, and
his followers; who taught and held, that a man is formally justified by the
very Righteousness by which Christ himself is essentially just and righteous,
being partakers thereof by inhabitation: This allegation therefore is a notable
abuse not only of the Council, but of your self and the Reader. See Bellarmine
de Iustif. lib. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 2. His verbis: though himself offend therein
also afterward.

BVRTON
And in the 11th Canon; If any shall say, that men are justified by the sole
imputation of Christ's righteousness, or by sole remission of sins, (otherwise
then by, See the 7. Chap. of the same Sess.
inherent righteousness by us obtained thereby) or also that the grace of God
whereby we are justified, is only the favor of God, let him be accursed:
What more direct denial of the foundation?

Answer.
I might here challenge you for altering, and changing the words of the
Council; but I will not take all advantages: I answer therefore, that it seems
you know not the true meaning of the Council; for taking the word
Justification in the Councels own sense, this Canon contains very sound and
Christian doctrine. What then does it mean by Justification? A compound of
Protestant Justification, and Sanctification: for so it defines Justification,
cap. 7. of this Session in the first words: Iustificatia est, non sola
peccatorum remissio, sed and sanctificatio, and renouatio interioris hominis
per voluntariam susceptionem gratiae and donorum: and so the true sense and
meaning of the Canon is this: If any man shall say, that men are so justified
by the sole imputation of Christ's righteousness, or by sole remission of
sins, that they are also sanctified thereby without inherent grace and
charity; or also that the grace whereby we are so justified is only the
favor of God, Let him be accursed: and let him be so indeed for me. You will
say this is nothing but mere iugling: I grant it; but it is not direct denial
of the foundation: for here (as Chemnitius acknowledges) is both remission of
sins, and imputation of Christ's righteousness included; which though it be
sufficient to justification in the Protestant sense, yet in the popish sense
(wherein sanctification is also required) it is not sufficient.

BVRTON.
Is not this the foundation, That Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners? and how? who his own self bare our sins in his own body on the
tree; that we being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness; by whose
stripes we are healed: Nay (says the Council of Trent directly) we are
justified by our inherent righteousness, and so our stripes are healed, and not
by the righteousness of Christ simply imputed: Thefore come out of her my
people.

Answer.
How the Council is to be understood, I have showed already: and being so
understood, there is no direct denial of the foundation: Therefore although
Gods people must come out of Babylon; yet not upon this ground: And so I
conclude as I began, Apply John Barber, and thou shall have a new pair of
sizors. For mark the argument: The foundation is, Jesus Christ came to save
sinners, etc. But the Council of Trent says, We are so justified that we are
also sanctified by inherent righteousness: Ergo, Come out of her my people.

Author.
Thus I wrote well near twenty years agone without clamor, without censure:
If any of you be otherwise minded; I dare boldly say, he shall do more wrong
to his cause, then to his adversary. I differ not from the judgment of our
best, Orthodoxe, and approuedly Classical Divines.

BVRTON.
Let not antiquity in the holding of an opinion, prescribe against truth
Opinions Ancient. O that S. Ambrose his words alleged by our Reverend Author
might here take place; Nullus pud or est ad meliora transire: then I hope he
will be otherwise minded then to say, He that denies the Church of Rome to be
a true Church, or a true visible Church, shall do more wrong to his cause then
to his adversary; Then he will no longer stand upon the judgment of
particular persons in a point wherein our Reverend Mother Church of England
has in her public doctrine resolved the contrary: So shall our divine Seneca
partake also of great Saint Augustines praise, while by an humble and ingenuous
Retractation, he shall both purge away the stain, and put a more glorious
luster to his most sweet, pious, and for their kind unparalleled works; And
for me a poor unworthy Minister, I hope his meek and sweet spirit (having
well weighed my reasons, and pitied my weaknesses) will be pleased to excuse me
of any transportation of zeal, unless herein I have exceeded the bounds, in
presuming so far upon the patience of such a Reverend Antistes of our Church:
But I trust he will not impute this to any arrogance of spirit, when it shall
appear, it is to vindicate Christ's truth and glory, against the Synagogue of
the proud Antichrist.

Answer.
It is well observed, that this fellow has a notable dexterity in dedicating
Epistles before his Books, and in Prefaces, Digressions, Epilogues, and the
like; but that in his Tracts, Discourses, and Disputations, he is as hungry and
dry as Famine it self: This as it is true in all his writings, so especially
in this; as I hope I have in good measure made it appear by the premises. And
for this his conclusion; All the glozing thereof ^ends to obtain two requests:
One that the Reverend Author would be brought to humble himself to him in an
ingenuous Retractation; And the other, that he would hold him excused for his
presumption: Both are unreasonable: unless he will take that for a
Retractation which before has been tendered; and for an excuse, that he
supposes it ignorant arrogance, rather then zeal that has transported him:
He would strike an impression into the innocent soul of the Reverend Author,
that he has contracted some stain by this assertion, That the Church of Rome
is a true, or truly visible Church: And indeed it is too well known that such
companions as he is have for a long time taken upon them to be the Censors of
all men's doings, and to cry up and down every man's credit and reputation at
their pleasure: But (God be praised) he is (...), out of their gunshot: for it
is well known to God and man, that all his courses from the cradle have been
such, that Fame her self may lay her hand upon her mouth, so as he need not
endeavor to purge away any stain, which they shall impute unto him. The close
of his Advertisement, will so possess the souls of all good and honest men,
that the strife of tongues shall never be able to molest him.

Thus (says he) in a desire to stand but so right as I am, in all honest
judgments, I have made this speedy and true Apology; beseeching all Readers in
the fear of God (before whose bar we shall once give an account of all our
ouerlashings) to judge wisely, and uprightly of what I have written: In a word,
to do me but justice in their opinions; and when I beg it, favor.

FINIS.

