Votiuae Lachrymae. A VOVV OF TEARS, For the loss of Prince HENRY. IN A
SERMON PREACHED in the City of Bristol December 7. 1612. being the day of his
Funeral.

By E. C. Batchelar in Divinity, and public Preacher to that City.

2. Chron. 35. 25. And Jeremiah lamented Josiah, and all Singing men and
Singing women mourned for Josiah in their Lamentations to this day, and made
the same for an ordinance unto Israel: and behold they are written in the
LAMENTATIONS.

AT LONDON, Printed by W. H. for William Welby, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Church yard at the sign of the Swanne.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCES; The most illustrious and hopeful Prince
CHARLES, Duke of York; the most renowned and virtuous Princess the Lady
ELIZABETH her Grace; together with her espoused happy Husband, the thrice-noble
and worthy Prince FREDERIKE, Count Palatine of Rheine, and Prince Elector.
TO whom, under God, should these vowed tears humbly address themselves? but
unto you three (thrice excellent Princes) the nearest partakers, and most
hopeful repairers of the great and common loss that caused them.

A loss indeed, common to us the members of this State and Church, with all
the faithful inhabitants of the Christian world: But to express the
greatness of it, What shall we take to witness for it? what shall we
compare to it? Lamen. 2. 13
Whereto shall we liken it? A breach great like the sea: who can heal it? who
can comfort us in it?

But blessed be the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, that has not
only preserved unto us of this age, the royal root and stem: but also in
you the princely branches, reserved a treasury of hope and comfort for the
generations ensuing.

Only, being taught by so heavy an hand, Ierem. 3 23
that the hope of the hills, and multitude of mountains is but vain, except
the Lord be sought unto as the only health of Israel. What shall we say? but
the Lord give us hearts so to repay unto your Excellencies, the arrerages of
prayers and thanks, wherein we are behind hand to your Princely Brother; that
God may be pleased to repair by you, the loss that in him we have sustained.

So may we hope, that the God of mercy the strength of Israel will answer us
with words of peace and truth, Ester 9. 30
saying:

Unto our Sovereign your royal father, Psalm. 89. 19.
I have laid help upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of the
people, etc.

Unto you illustrious Prince Charles, 2. Sam. 23. 3
Thou sbalt bear rule over men, being just and ruling in the fear of God.

Unto you gracious Lady, I will bless thee, Genesis 17. 16
and thou shall be the mother of Nations, Kings also of people shall come of
thee.

Finally, unto you happy Prince, and sent of God to increase our happiness,
Come in thou blessed of the Lord, Genesis 24. 31
for whom the choicest pearl in the Christian world is by God himself
prepared. Ruth. 4. 11
The Lord make her like Leah and like Rahel, which two builded the house of
Israel. Let her grow into thousand thousands, Genesis 24. 60
and let her seed possess the gate of his Enemies.

What remains, most gracious Princes? but that, with humble suite, for pardon
of this boldness, and acceptance of this poor service, offered (in the name of
this famous and loiall City) unto the honorable memory of your triumphant
Brother, and patronage of your Princely Graces: I tender unto your Highnesses
two requests, of an heart zealously devoted, both to your present honor, and
everlasting bliss.

The first, that you would always set before your eyes, the Princely pattern
of virtue and piety, so happily expressed in the example of that blessod
Soul, whom the world was no longer worthy to enjoy: who beginning as Josiah
did, 2. Chro. 34. 3.
from his tender years, to seek after the God of his fathers, has now left a
sweet (though mournful) memory, of his graces amongst us, (Ecclus 49. 1)
like the composition of the perfume made by the art of the Apothecary.

The second, that you would often and seriously meditate upon that hoauenly
counsel, given by the holiest King that ever reigned, that man after Gods own
heart, unto his son the wisest Prince that ever lived; and therefore well be
fitting your graces Greatness: And thou Solomon, 1. Chro. 28. 9
my son, know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart,
and with a willing mind: for the Lord searches all hearts, and understands
all the imaginations of thoughts: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee,
but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

Which, if your Graces shall please to apply, as spoken by God himself to each
of you, I have all which my soul herein affects; which shall never cease to
call upon the Lord for the continuance of the sure mercies of David, upon our
dread Sovereign with our gracious Queen your royal Parents, and upon your
excellent Highnesses, that you may long remain the comfort of their roial
Majesty's, and crown of us their well affected subjects.

Your excellent Graces in all Christian service, most humbly devoted, EDWARD
CHETVVIND.

To the Christian Reader.
IT was an old complaint uttered by a Prophet, Thou haste smitten them, Ierem.
5. 3.
but they have not lorrowed: would to God it were not verified in us, or that
we had learned, to listen to that other Prophets counsel, Mica. 6. 9.
Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.

Then, might our endeavor for reviving sorrow, seem at this present needless
and impertinent; were our hearts wrought to awful fear at the lions roaring,
and not rather hardened as the Adamant stone, against both the voice and rod of
the Almighty.

But as on the one side, the terrors of the Lord enforce; so on the other
side, the love of Christ and of his Church, constrains us to be instant in
season and out of season, upon this secure and senseless generation. Amos 3. 8.
The Lord has spoken; who can but prophecy? yea the Lord has begun to
strike, who when he begins, will make an end, 1. Sam 3. 12.
and bring forth judgment unto victory; whose ears can now but tingle? or
whose heart but tremble?

This may be defense enough for a man, otherwise well pleased to live amongst
his own people, 2 King. 4. 13.
to put the trumpet to his mouth, and (if it may be) to awaken such as sleep
secure in Sion, of whom it cannot now be said, because they have no changes,
Psalm. 55. 19.
therefore they fear not God: but rather, as of the desperate Jews, in vain,
says God, have I smitten your children, Ierem. 2. 30.
they have received no correction.

To speak plainly, an heavy stroke of Gods hand is now upon us for our
sins: but that which gives cause to fear, that the same hand is stretched
out still, is, that to our many other sins, we add this above all, not to take
to heart so grievous a visitation.

A maine proppe and limme is rent from the body of this Church and state: who
considers it? Our sins have undoubtedly brought this maime upon us: who,
finding the plague in his own heart acknowledges it? that which the Lord
seeks at our hands, is, that we come down, and humble our selves at his
footstool: who goes about it? The only remedy of our wou^d, is our true
repentance and conversion to him that has smitten us: how few that mind it?

To reduce to feeling our benumbed hearts, God alone is able: but to show the
only good and right way, I have endeavored, as by preaching at first to those
that heard it, so now by writing to so many as God shall direct to read it. The
Lord grant, that the woeful effect, may address us to the wo-worthy cause, and
both of them to the sour, but sovereign medicine of repentance not to be
repented of.

ISAI. 57. 1 The righteous perishes, and no man considers it in heart: and
merciful men are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is
taken away from the cuill to come.

VOTIVAE LACHRIMAE A VOW OF TEARS, For the loss of Prince HENRY.
LAMENTAT. 5. verse. 15. 16. The joy of our heart is gone: our dance is turned
into mourning.

The crown of our head is fallen: woe now unto us that we have sinned.


What was, vowed in secret before the Lord, in the day when first ill tidings,
as a winged: messenger, came with the sharp sword of sorrow, to pearce through
our souls [The public bewailing, namely of our so great and general Losse]
that, now at length through Gods ouer-ruling providence, in the most fitting
opportunity, are we met in this holy and great assembly, purposely gathered,
on this day of solemn sorrow, religiously to perform.

And for this purpose, to move our hearts, (otherwise inclinable enough to
follow the fashion of the Court,) to join at this time in this occasion of
public sorrow: behold, what choice it pleased God, at that very first, to
suggest unto mine heart, that, and none other, make I bold to offer.

A text indeed befitting, as I conceive it, if any other, this mournful
accident, and which I doubt not but you also, Fathers and Brethren, all here
present, will so esteem; shall ye not only mark the words, like to Ezekiels
role, Ezekiel. 2. 10.
all full of Lamentations, Mourning, and Woe: but withal, take notice of the
special cause moving that holy Prophet Jeremy (a man living if ever any of
the Prophets, in times of misery) so to complain.

For howsoever it be manifest, that in this book he more generally lamenteth
the distressed state of the Church of God, the overthrow of the City Jerusalem,
and burning of the Temple, the spoil and slavery of the whole nation; al which
he lived to behold: yet that this his so bitter wailing was in part at least,
and that a chief part, for the death of that Prince of so great proof and
hopes, Josiah; witness what is recorded. verse 25.
2. Chron. 35. And Jeremiah lamented Josiah, and all singing men and singing
women mourned for Josiah, in their Lamentations, to this day, and made the same
for an ordinance unto Israel, and behold they are written in the Lamentations:
that is, in this book; (...)
which howsoever in the Hebrew original, it be without any name, save only
that it is styled, by the first word of the book (as are also the 5. Books of
Moses) yet is it in the Hebrew Commentaries, as Jerome notes, so called, and
accordingly by the 70. Interpreters; (...).
Lamentations. The Lamentations of Jeremy.

Wherein, as it is generally agreed, that he expressly mourns for King
Iosiahs loss, (that being the beginning and presage of all their ensuing
sorrows) the best Expositors hereto referring, that complaint, Chap. 4. 20.
The breath of our nostrels, the anointed of the Lord, was taken: of whom we
said, under his shadow we shall be preserved alive, among the heathen. So, in
more particular, touching the very words of my text, I see not, why we should
not take them also, as a part of the Lamentation, if not wholly, yet chiefly,
for that loss; the phrase of the falling down of the Crown, so rightly
fitting.

Since, howsoever I am not ignorant, that some Interpreters understand to be
meant hereby, the defacing and decay of the Temple, and service of God, with
other things wherein that people gloried, as in their crown; and others, as if
hereby were signified only, that the garlands, and other ornaments of delight,
used in their nuptials, and other times of joy, were now laid aside; as if the
Prophets purpose were hereby only to express their wailing and woeful state:
yet is there no interpretation that can be given, coming nearer to the nature
of the Metaphor here used, then to understand it of that, which he had before
under other terms lamented, the fall of their Sovereign Prince wearing the
Diadem; according as of the setting up of such an one, is else where spoken in
the like phrase: Psalm. 21. 3.
Thou did prevent him with liberal blessings, and did set a crown of pure
gold upon his head.

Against which Exposition if any shall except, that here the Prophet speaks
of the fall, not of the Kings crown, but of the peoples rather; The Crown of
our head is fallen; which may seem more generally to signify, the decay and
fall of all their honor, wealth, and beauty, all the glory of both their
Church and Commonwealth: we will not stick to grant that more general
extent, so this particular of the Princes fall be therein especially
conceived; As it needs must be, Prou. 14. 28.
since as the wise Solomon has told us, that in the multitude of the people is
the honor of a King: so is it certain on the other side, that the peoples
crown and honor is in their Prince or King, especially if a good Prince, such
as Josiah was.

For the sal of whom therefore, how well might they lament, as for the falling
down of their crown unto the ground, crying out, as here, in bitter grief,
The crown of our head is fallen: especially, since this fall of the Prince did
presage (if they did not with speed prevent it) Gods farther judgment upon the
people, whose sins had doubtless provoked him thus far already: as
therefore the humbled Prophet in their name acknowledges with a prefixed note
of sorrow in the last words, Woe now unto us that we have sinned.

Upon which subordinate causes of sin and judgment, depend those two
consequents mentioned in the former verse; First the inward sorrow affecting
their hearts whereof he complains, (...)
The joy of our heart is gone, or [ceased.]

Secondly, their Lamentation or humiliation outwardly expressing that inward
sorrow, and used for remedy to prevent farther judgments, which he thus
Emphatically expresses, Our dance is turned into Mourning.

And in this order, observing first the causes, and then the consequents; The
meaning of the whole complaint being a part of the Prophets prayer in the
behalf of the Church afflicted, and by affliction now humbled, what is it in
effect and sum, but this briefly, That alas! now they see by lamentable
proof, by the fall of their Crown, the taking away of their Prince, that they
have by sinning procured their own woe, and moved God to wrath and indignation
against them: and therefore how can it be but that their joy should be quite
gone, and insteede thereof bitter grief possess their souls; yea therefore
high time for them to exile and put away their mirth and dauncings, and on the
contrary betake themselves with speed to mourning and repentant prayer, thereby
to stay Gods anger, and so to keep off from their heads all farther evil.

And this being, so far as I can reach, the true sense and substance of these
words; we see, not only the sorrowful estate of those distressed people
therein expressed, but also our own present condition plainly exemplified,
and our solues for an holy use thereof directed, to a sourefold consideration.
First, what has been our loss: Secondly, what we may reckon the cause of this
loss: Thirdly, how we should be affected with this loss: Fourthly and
finally, how we may best prevent all farther loss. The first and second are
offered from verse 16. for, the crawne of our head is fallen, there is our
loss; and, Woe unto us that we have sinned, that is the cause. To the other
two we are pointed var. 15. The joy of our heart is gone, thus should we be
here with affected: yea farther, Our dance is turned in to nigurning, lo
this the means to have all fears for the future prevented. Of which therefore
in order, beginning with the consideration of our loss, from the first branch
of the latter verse. The Crown of our head is fallen.

What the special crown of their heads was, from whom we borrow this
complaint, you have already heard, to wit, their worthy and good King Josiah;
and whose death no marvel if they reckoned none other, then the falling of
their Crown down from their head, the loss and spoil to them of all their
glory, with presage of farther woe and ensuing misery.

But what? is our Crown (to make application) so fallen from our heads unto
the ground? Oh, God forbid; No, blessed be the God of Iaacob, the royal
Crown, and Diadem Imperial, set by God upon our heads, it still remains
flowrishing, Great Britains glory. And long, and long, so may our Hezekiah live
and reign, and wretched, thrice wretched may they be, that ever so much as
wish in heart, to see his fall.

But it is the Princely Coronet of hope and future expectation, only looked
on, and with the luster daze ling our sight, that we have lost; our good
Josiah, herein only differing, in that before we needed to have him set as a
crown upon our head, it has pleased his God and ours, to take him hence, to
crown him with an everlasting diadem in heaven. Howbeit though he have
thereby gained rather, yet we have lost, alas, far more then ever we
enioied, except in hopes, and down our crown is fallen, as well we may
complain with mournful hearts, before that ever by Gods hand it was fastened
on our heads.

Our Crown, our Diadem. Oh, why should we not so reckon him? who was not
only borne a Prince, but created also our Prince, and acknowledged to the
world by his royal Father, long agone (as the beginning of his might, Gen 49.
3.
the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power) to be his dearest
son, Basilic dor. in epistola nuncupstor.
and natural successor; the rightful heir to the imperial crown and
diadem of all his kingdoms. In whose untimely loss (as we may count it, but
that God the king of Kings, who reserueth times to his own prerogative, was
pleased so to order it) behold, what we have suffered, all the true subjects
of this Realm, the fall of our very Crown; our second diadem now in present,
and chiefest in future hope: a loss inualuable nor of a Prince only, but of
such a Prince, adorned with so rich graces, in tender years yielding such
hopes; that (excepting only that paragon of, otherwise matchless, price,
Edward the sixth) I presume we may without wrong to any speak it, never yet
had this Realm every way the like.

Touching whom, if any yet shall doubt, whether we have reason to reckon him
so, as to esteem his loss the downe-falling of our Crown: let us for proof
first consider, whether he were not as the people sometimes spoke of David, 2.
Sam. 18. 3
worth ten thousand of us. Surely if but in regard of his blood and place,
which made us in reason to conceive of him, as of an Izhak, an heir of
promise, in whom we hoped for a blessing: or as of a Noah borne in an happy
hour to be our comfort; on whom, howsoever not for the present, yet for the
hopes of future generations, was set, as Samuel sometimes spoke, 1. Sam. 9. 20.
all the desire of Israel, as on a rising sun, hoped to be hereafter, what
David is entitled, 2. Sam. 21. 17.
The light of Israel.

Neither was this the hope of us subjects only, but the endeavor and
expectation also of his Royal Father, whose Princely care (no way better
approved to God and his Church) for the welfare of more then one generation; as
it made him more then a Kenophon, In Cyro. paed.
even a David, laboring the religious institution of this Solomon, both by his
own treasury of Kingly counsels, In Basilic. dor.
and the emploiment for that service of men of cheifest ability and trust: so
would it no doubt have been fully satisfied, had God so pleased, that he might
have left the fruit of these hopeful seeds, as a ioifull harvest to be
reaped by the ensuing ages.

For our parts, we saw the blooming, and reioiced in the sweet sent of this
goodly growing plant; yea not we only, but Strangers also were so affected
with the fragrant odor of the same, that it was doubtful, whether our hope in
him, or their admiration of him, were the greater. They, like to Hiram, such as
did but hear of him, with reioicing blessed God for him, 1. King. 5. 7.
as for a Wise son, appointed to succeed his victorious father over this
mighty nation: and how much more with the Queen of Sheba, 2. Chron. 9. 3.
such as came to behold and see his religious carriage in the worship of God,
both in public and private; his prudent care for the well ordering of his
Court, and that rare temper of magnificence and frugality, in the managing of
his Princely estate.

But as for us, whom the hopeful appearances of his piety and virtue did more
nearly and properly concern, how could we, as many as are true hearted to the
Religion and state; but seriously rejoice, to foresee an English Josiah,
beginning in his tender years to seek after the God of his Fathers? 2. Chro.
34. 3.
Insomuch that now, looking back to that hope we had too confidently embraced,
we may even seem to speak (borrowing to an inferior sense that phrase of the
two Disciples travailing to Emaus) but we trusted, Luke 24 21.
that it had been he, that should have delivered Israel.

One, who we hoped, and wished, as David in his prayer for Solomon, Psalm. 72. 6
might come down like the rain upon the mowen grass, verse. 7.
and as the showers that water the earth: in whose days the righteous should
flourish and abundance of peace be happily established: of whom, we promised
our selves, that he should be Isaiahs good King, Isai. 32. 2.
reigning in justice, and ruling in judgment, as an hiding place from the
wind, and as a refuge for the tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, and
as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary land: finally, one of whom we hoped
(what the Adversary more then feared) that, treading in the steps of his
religious Father, our present gracious Sovereign, and going on where he should
leave (as Ioshuah after Moses in subduing of the Canaanites) he would Josiah
like compel all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord. 2. Chro. 34. 33


Behold, beloved, these, and many more not mentioned, the conceived hopes that
we had in him, who was expected in the succeeding age, not without just reason,
to become our Crown. The unexpected loss of whom so suddenly (Oh that we
should need so lamentable a document; to make us give care to the Psalmists
counsel, Psalm. 146. 3.
Not to put trust in Princes etc.) Alas! how has it cast us down from the
hopes, which in him we conceived, and forcibly brought us to acknowledge, as in
our text, The crown of our head to be fallen?

Surely not a great man only in Israel, 2. Sam. 3. 38.
as David sometimes spoke of Abner, but the very crown and glory of our
Israel; who, howsoever he be taken away in Gods great mercy and love to him
(no doubt,) as Enoch, of whom is chronicled, Genesis 5. 24.
that he walked with God, and was no more seen; for God took him away; or as
Josiah, to Whom was promised as a special favor from the Lord, that he should
be: gathered to his fathers, and be put into the grave in peace, 2. Chro. 34. 28
that his eyes might not see the evils, which God purposed to bring upon that
place and people: yet for ourselves, well may we dread, lest this his taking
away, has been in Gods displeasure rather toward us, who were neither worthy
of, nor yet truly thankful for, such and so great a blessing.

Whom therefore God, according to that threat in Ezelkiel, of taking away the
Diadem and the Crown, Ezekiel. 21. 26.
has taken away from us; by the loss and miss, to bring us to conceive more
rightly of the worth of such a gift. The Lord grant we may take it to heart,
to make a right use of it. Since for the cause procuring (so far as it
concerns ourselves) alas! what may we reckon it, but our sins deserving
justly so great, yea a greater judgment? as in detestation of our selves
therefore, we truly may, and will redily, if once thoroughly humbled,
acknowledge in our Prophets wailing words, Woe unto us that we have sinned.
Since if we also shall more question of the cause, or say in our heart,
wherefore are these things thus come upon us? leremy our Prophet has long
agone made us heereto answer, Ierem. 13. 22. For the multitude of thine
iniquities, are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare.

For surely so, as it is generally sin, that brings shame and judgment upon
any people, as on the old world, on Sodom, and the Canaanites, etc. to the
very rooting out of them from the earth: so more particularly and for the
purpose, that it is for the peoples sins that princes are taken away, witness
that testimony, Prou. 28. 2. For the transgression of a land there are many
Princes thereof; often changes of the Crown, being evermore dangerous to a
Commonweal; as we may see for instance. 1. King. 16. In the disioynted state
of Israel.

Yea farther, not to urge many proofs to this purpose, look but in Isaiah 3.
How as a maine judgment, Verse 1.
the Lord of Hosts threatens to take away from Jerusalem and Judah, Verse. 2
the stay and strength, the strong man, and the man of War, the Ruler, and
the Prophet, the Prudent, and the Aged. Appointing children to be their
Princes, verse. 4
and babes to rule over them. But what may be imagined the cause of all this
ruin? It follows after, Doubtless lerusalem is fallen, verse. 3.
and Judah is fallen down; because their tongues and works are against the
Lord, to provoke the eyes of his glory. Yea the trial of their countenance
testisieth against them, verse. 9.
they declare their sins as Sodom, they hide them not; and therefore, Woe
now unto their souls, for they have rewarded evil unto themselves, ver. 14.
16.
And he instanceth after in the end of the Chapter, in two chief evils, the
tyrannous oppression of their governors, and their women's want onnesse and
pride. The fruit of which and all the rest, redounding to the ruin and
subversion of the state, we may read concluded in the last verse. verse 26.
Therefore shall her gares lament, and mourn, and she being desolate shall
sit upon the ground.

To bring no more for confirmation of this general truth, that it is the sin
of the people that moves God to take away their Princes; a thing which both
Nehemiah and Daniel, and here and elsewhere our Jeremy, and all the faithful
in such cases truly humbled have acknowledged: have not we reason in this case
to suspect our selves, yea to conclude that for our sins, God Almighty in his
displeasure, has sent this loss of losses, and made this breach upon us?

It may be (to make conjecture) for our great unthankfulness; in that God
having affoorded us heretofore many great and marvelous, if not miraculous,
Deliverances; as to name but two most memorable, from the invasion of our
professed enemies, and their invincible Armado in 88; and since from that
hellish design (worthy a lasting monument for detestation) of the Popish
pioners: we have not rendered according to the reward bestowed on us, 2. Chr.
32. 25.
but have had our hearts lift up: for which therefore we may justly fear,
that this wrath is come upon us.

Or may it not be, for yet a farther degree of foul ingratitude, that having
been blessed by God, as much as ever any Nation, with abundance of long peace
in a fruitful Country, we have given him cause to complain of us, as in
that song of Moses Deuteronomy 32. Verse 15.
against his people, that we that should have been upright, when we waxed fat
have spurned with the heel; yea being fat and gross and laden with
fatness, have either quite forsaken God that made us, or not as we should
regarded the strong God of our salvation, Verse 16.
but have provoked him to anger, if not with strange Gods, yet certainclie,
with many foul abominations and crying sins? So that as the widow of
Sarephath, when she saw her child breathless, cried out in a passion unto
Elijab 1. King. Verse 16.
17: O thou man of God, art thou come to me, to call my sin to remembrance,
and to stay my son? So may we acknowledge, with humiliation under his hand,
that God is come unto us, to call our sins unto remembrance, and therefore
has taken away our Prince. And whether farther yet, his purpose be to proceed
against us, except by speedy turning from sin we stay his hand, we have
cause to fear.

But surely by this already done, the Lord God has more then manifested, that
his are upon us, (as of old he threatened Israel) as upon a sinful kingdom,
Amos 9. 8.
with whom he has already entered action, Leuit. 26 25.
as meaning to avenge the quarrel of his covenant: and to maintain his
controversy against us; the same verily and none other, Hosea 4. 1.
which in Hosea he prosessed to have with the inhabitants of the Land of
Israel, viz. for the crying sins of our Land provoking the eyes of his glory.

For howsoever by the mercy of God, we have wherewith to stop the mouth of the
blasphemous Adversary, both in regard of our profession after the way which
they call Heresy, Acts 24. 14.
worshipping the God of our Fathers, believing all things which are written in
the Law and in the Prophets; and in regard of practice, Romans 6. 17.
not being destitute of those, who from the heart have obeyed unto the form of
Doctrine, whereunto they have been delivered: yet so few in comparison are
they that join these two together, or willingly brook the Narrow way to life,
The strait gate etc. upon Luk 13 13. 24
(as has been showed in the treatise formerly written touching that
Argument,) that upon the body of our professors may justly light that
exprobration of the Propher Jeremy, Ierem. 7. 8
viz that they do but trust in lying words when they cry so loud, The Temple
of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, etc.

For alas show can it secure or profit us before the Lord, that we have the
undoubted marks of a true visible church, in soundness of Doctrine, and form
of worship, whiles the matter of cortroucrsie between God and us remains, no
truth, Hosca 4. 1.
nor mercy, nor found knowledge of God in the lands No, but instead there of
for all the Lords care of his Vinoyard and our paineful preaching (and what,
then think you would be if the Lord should let fall his care, if there were no
preaching, no planting of the best plants. no plucking up of the evil weeds?)
A plentiful Vintage of those wild and sour grapes, of impiety and
unmercifulness, wherewith in Esaies time his teeth were set on edge; Isai. 5. 4.
and which by his Prophet Hosea he casts in the teeth of the wicked
Israelites, Hos. 4. 2.
who by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, are said
to break out and blood to touch blood. verse. 3
And therefore no marvel if the land mourns, etc.

And yet behold, we are by the same Prophet immediately after directed, to take
knowledge of a sin of louder cry in the Lords ears, then any of the
forementioned, where he says, yet let none rebuke nor reprove another, verse
4
as if he should say, it is but lost labor, for thy people are as those that
rebuke the Priest. Amos 5. 13
An evil time indeed when the prudent shall be advised to keep silence, 1.
King. 22. 8.
because, as Ahab could not away with Micaiah, so, men hate him that rebukes
in the gate, verse 10
and abhor him that speaks uprightly. So evil a time, that where this
sin prevails it may be feared the time of vengeance is not far of; as
the Lord himself shows, justifying his severe proceeding against his people
in the captivity of Babylon, 2. Chr. 36. 16.
because they mocked his messengers, despised his words, misused his Prophets,
until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, and till there was no
remedy, (...)
or (as the word imports) no farther [healing.]

What shall I seek for more particulars? for those crying sins that pulled
fire from heaven upon Sodom, even those four Cardinal crimes which the
Prophet Ezekiel: Ezekiel. 16. 49. expressly mentions, viz. Pride, Fullness of
bread, Abundance of idleness, Cruelty in not strengthening the hand of the
poor and needy: Oh! that we could say our land were free from them! But alas,
we cannot.

For first, who sees not that Pride, that sets it self out to every eic in
their outward habit, proportionable neither to the body that wears it, nor to
the estate that should maintain it, nor to the sober liking of those that
should approve it? in all which regards, it falls under the same condemnation
with the strange and disguised attire, Isa. ^^. ^5. Zeph. 1. 3.
by the old Prophets so long ago severely censured. But there is yet another
Pride, that keeps it self more out of view, surking secretly in the heart;
yet not so secretly, but, either by the trial of the countenance and gesture,
or by words, especially when there is occasion of boasting and contention, or
by port and affecting of high place; or lastly by intruding into Gods office,
rashly passing censure upon another servants, it does more or less discover
it self to be that Pride of heart that God abhors.

Secondly for fulness of bread, comprehending not only gluttonous eating, but
also that fowler abuse, now a days, and more universal deluge of excessive
drinking: are not these the times which our Savior said should parallel the
days of Noah? and we of this nation the persons of whom nothing is to be
storied, but that we are found as it were [at rack and manger] eating and
drinking as if we had no other care, Math. 24. 38. (...)
but to nourish our hearts as in a day of slanghter? Iam 55.
and God grant it be not against the day of our own slaughter. So fearfully
are we ouerslowne with the inundation especially of the sin of drunkenness,
that it is hardly believed that excess in drinking and quassing is a sin, in
such as can bear it away or stand upright with it: although the Prophet Esaias
has left a special woe against them that are mighty to drink wine, Isai 5. 22.
and strong to pour in strong drink. 1. Pet. 4. 3.
And The appostle Peter among the lusts of the gentiles (of all that truly
profess Christ to be abandoned) reckons even those [drinkings] and
carrowsings; (...)
the shameful sin of our nation. Oh! if some part of those huge healths,
that have been heaued up as a supposed honor to our late renowned Prince, had
been converted into humble and fervent prayers to God for his preservation: we
might possibly have had him now living amongst us, and God surely less
offended at us.

Thirdly, that there is no want among us of Abundant idleness, witness the very
lives, that all men look upon, of base vagarants; who like those afflicted and
assamished wretches spoken of by the Prophet, Isai 8. 21.
are suffered too much every where (not for want of good laws, but of due
execution) to go to and fro the country, wandering about in swarms to do
mischief, and ready when they be hungry to freat themselves, and curese both
their King and God; whiles they wilfully remain in want because their hands
refuse to work, Prou. 21. 25.
having nothing but what they get by spoil or beggary from others, to the
shame of our christian common wealth, and contrary to the provision made by
that old statute law in Moses; Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
That there should be no beggar in Isruel; renewed and confirmed by Saint Paul
as by a latter act of Parliament under the Gospel, where he tells the
Thessalonians, 2. These. 3. 10.
how he had warned them here of before, that if any would not work being able,
hoe should not eat.

Howbeit, I would to God there were not others guilty of this Sodomsinne of
Idleness, that would be accounted as their place requires, of far better
reckoning; yea even of the greater ones, the Nobles and gentry of our Land,
especially younger brothers, living without any calling carelessly, Amos 6. 1
not a few, who as those in Amos, against whom God denounces a fearful woe,
ver. 3
living at ease in Sion, and therefore putting away far from them the evil
day, ver. 4
do stretch themselves on beds of Iuory, eating the lambs of the flock, and
the Calves out of the stall, singing to the sound of the Violl, etc. and
drinking wine in bowls, no man being sorry for the affliction of Joseph. As
if they had been placed by God on earth to do nothing else, but what
Leuiathan is made to do in the sea, Psalm. 104. 26
even to play and sport themselves; as those rich ones in James, Iam. 5. 5
against whom we read that indicement, enough in the last day if there were
none other to condemn them, ye have lived in pleasure upon the earth.

Fourthly that there is amongst us (notwithstanding many wholesome laws, better
then which no kingdom ever had in that behalf) cruelty and miserable
oppression of the poorer sort, instead of strengthening their hands, practiced
for maintenance of riot and Idleness in the rich (for idleness must have
maintenance from others labors) as in those idlers in Saint James, Iam. 5. 4
that are noted to have kept back the Laborers hire, ver 6
and to have condemned and killed the righteous, that were not able to make
their party good against them: let the racking of rents, and raising of fines,
turning out of Tenants, and decay of titlage by enclosures, the greedines of
hard-hearted Usurers etc. with the tears of many an oppressed fatherless and
widow, bear witness; who if they be not heard, and their wrongs redressed,
God that always has an ear open to such complaints, Isa. 5. 9
will come near in judgment, and be himself a swift witness, Mal. 3. 5.
against such wrong doers, Col. 3. 25.
who shall receive for the wrong that they have done, of him with whom there is
no respect of persons.

Add hereto finally, that luke-warmnes both in profession and in practice,
ouer-spreading our Church, sometimes reproved in Laodicea, Reu. 3. 16.
whiles we conceit but too well of our own perfections: and that conniuence
and suffering too much, as in Thyatira, of the woman lezabel, Reu. 2. 20
and her seducing shauelings: together with the little reckoning and light
regard, that most make, not only, as Manasses in his prosperity, 2. Chro. 33 10
of instructions from the word of God, but also, as those in Isaiah, of the
corrections and rod of God, that God may now despair of us, and say as to his
people, Wherefore should ye be smitten any more, Isai 1. 5
for ye fall away yet more and more? So dangerously are we over grown with
that root, bringing forth gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18
that whether we hear the words of Gods curse, we bless our selves in our
he iris, verse 19.
saying we shall have peace though we walk after the stubbornes of our own
hearts, thus adding drunkenness to thirst, till the Lord statly refuse to be any
longer merciful: verse 20
or whether we feel the stroke of his hand smiting us, as he has done, with
pestilence, famine, inundations, drought, tempestuous weather, and the ravening
teeth of those wild beasts, pernicious Pirates I mean, who have gathered head,
so that the seas are at this day, like tho high ways of Israel, Judge. 5. 6
in the days of Shamgar and Iael, unoccupied in manner; and Trauailers forced
to seek out by-waies for their safety, we are so far from returning to him
that has smitten us, Isai 9. 13
that we rather seek to enter covenant with death and with hell, Isai 28. 15
that under the refuge of falsehood we may avoid the scourge; or howsoever,
persisting with branded Ahaz in the time of tribulation to trespass yet more, 3.
Chro. 28. 22
against the Lord.

All these laid now together upon the heap, alas, men and brethren, what
think you that we may judge of our selves? or think you that it is not high
time for us, 1. Cor. 11. 31
as the Corinthians are advised by the Appostle, to judge our selves, that we
be not yet farther judged of the Lord? yes verily, neither shall we need,
Josh. 7. 14.
as Joshua brought the tribes, families and households of Israel, so to bring
forth and as it were cast lots upon these our sins to find out the Achan that
has troubled Israel: since all these sins, where ever they house or harbor,
within the wauy confines of this I Will, they be the wretched Achans, every kind
and one of them, that have by provoking against us Gods displeasure been thus
far troublers and quenchers of the light of this our Israel.

Neither yet, Iam 3. 21.
were it not for the Never. failing, compassions and faithfulness of the Lord,
might we hope for future peace or safety; 2 King. 9. 22.
whiles these witchcrafts and whoredoms of that Iezabel of natural
corruption, are yet in so great number, Prou. 30. 20
that if we as the adulterous woman, should wipe our mouth and say we have done
none iniquity, yet could the Lord of heaven and earth, even the Judge himself,
bear witness and reprove us, Amos 5. 1 a
saying as in Amos, I know your manifold tra^sgressions, and your mighty sins:
To which therefore (to conclude at length this second point) let us, without
either blaming supposed second causes, or accusing God of too strict justice in
this behalf, learn in true humility to refer all our loss, crying as here
our humbled Prophet, Woe now unto us, for we have sinned, and therefore lo the
Crown of our head fallen. With which fall if ye desire to hear how we ought
to be affected, it comes now to be considered from the first words of the
15. ver. The joy of our heart is ceased.

For, this being an undoubted consequent, of the feeling apprehension of their
present calamity, accompanied with fear of farther misery; hence (to (...)
enlarging) may we take direction, how we also with our loss should be
affected: how? but as the holy Virgiue to whom the many sorrows for her
blessed son were (as old Simcon compared the^) a sword that should pearce
through her soul. Luke 2. 35.
A dangerous wound, and deadly, if not to the life, yet to the joy and comfort
of the heart. For verily those hearts must needs be armed with stony, yea
adamantine hardness; which are not pierced with this sword of sorrow: which
melt not, 2. Chro. 34. 28
as Josiah his heart, at the apprehension of Gods judgment: yea which, with
Jeremy, wish not the head a cesterne of water, Ierem. 9. 1.
and the eyes as fountains of teures, to weep day and night for the fall of
their crown.

The greatest cause of sorrow, and most important loss, excepting that one (if
that were greater, which was so soon and graciously by God himself repaired)
of our last renowned Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, that ever in our age befell
this flourishing state and kingdom: able to make all true hearted Subjects to
weep, til with David and his followers at Ziklag, 1. Sam. 30 4
we be able to weep noe more. If not for him so much, who was taken from our
head to be translated into bliss, yet, as our Savior said to the daughters of
Jerusalem, Luke 23. 28
for our selves and for our children, who feel all the loss.

Whereat howsoever we have just cause to grieve, and so much the more because
we may easily conceive how Gath and Ashkelon and the uncircumcised hollow
hearted Philistines within our selves, 2. Sam. 1. 20
if not happily Moab, Ammon, and Edom, some of our bordering evil neighbors
also do rejoice (to whom we have to answer with the Church in Micah, Mica. 7.
8.
Rejoice not against me, Lam. 4. 21
o mine enemy, though I fall, etc. For, may not the cup also pass through unto
thee?) yet are we not left destitute of most Princely hopes, in those royal
branches, more the^ one, springing from the same blessed roots; and now a
third, in lieu of that fallen off, we trust by Gods own hand, for the increase
of strength and honor to this kingdom, happily into the same stock to be
inserted. So happy a Match, howsoever the il willers to Sio^ may malign it,
that hardly could the Christian world, for purity and parity of true Religion,
in all points fundamental, agreeing with our Church (witness that worthy
Palatine Catechism, expounded by learned Vrsinits) affoard the like.

That yet we may have good hope, 1. Sam. 4, 21
that Ichabod is not borne, Number, 24, 23
nor the glory to depart from Israel (for, who shall live when God does this?)
nor we to be left, 1. King. 22, 17
as Israel in Micaiahs vision scattered upon the mountains, as sheep without
any Shepherd: unless as our unthankfulness has already defeated our first
hope, Isa. 9. 12.
so the want of feeling of this heavy stroke cause the hand of God to be
still stretched out against us, Lam. 3. 65.
till, maugre our dullness and obstinacy, he have given us sorrow of heart,
even his curse upon us. but, oh let it thus befall thine enemies and ours, O
Lord! and such as rejoice in our sorrow, or refuse to sorrow with us, give them
sorrow in due time; but without us. As for us, whose names the Almighty has
changed from Naomi to Marah, Ruth 1. 20.
teaching us, not only by nature to lament the sorrowful effect, but also by
grace to be humbled for the sinful cause, let us in the fourth and last
place learn how to express and testify our repentant sorrow, as the means
to turn away Gods anger and prcuent our farther danger, from the practice of
this holy Prophet, and people of God, professed in the last words of the 15
verse, our dance is turned into mourning.

How could they, yea how can we better suite our selves, to the hand and mind
of God, (who calling to mourning, charge men to be no more mockers, Isai 28.
22
lest their bands increase) then when all joy is darkened, Isai. 24. 11
and the mirth of the world is gone away, to turn our Harpes into mourning,
Job 30. 31
and our Organs into the voice of them that weep? For, howsoever the Lord
delights not in the affliction and sorrow of his creatures, being therefore
to be ever magnified, Psalm, 35. 27
because he loves the prosperity of his servants; yet knowing best what is for
our good, and providing mercifully that by timely sorrow for sin, we may have
peace in our latter end: he does not cease both by voice and hand, to enforce
this duty of humiliation upon us. One while with loud threatening he cries out
as by our Prophet Jeremy 13. 15. 16. Hear and give ear, and be not proud, for
the Lord has spoken it: give glory to the Lord your God, before he bring
darkness, and or ever your feet stumble in the dark mountains, etc. Yea,
verse 18. Say unto all [high and low] humble your selves, sit down, for the
crown of your glory shall come down from your heads. Another while, the
former not predailing, he undertakes by strong hand to create a day, or
rather night, of mourning: In that day, says he by the Prophet Amos, Amos 8. 9
I will even cause the Sun to go down at noone, and I will darken the earth
in the clear day, etc. And I will turn your feasts into mourning, Verse 10.
and all your songs into Lamentations, and I will bring sackloth upon all
loins, and baldness upon every head, and will make it as the mourning of an
only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day. One while he informs us how
we must sit our selves so to draw near unto him, that he may draw near to
us: Iam. 4. 9.
[Afflict your selues] and sorrow and weep; (...)
yea, let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into [a sad
looked] heaviness. (...)
Another while, he lets us understand, how indignely he takes it, that when he
calls to mourning, men should give themselves to mirth and feasting: It was
declared (says the Prophet) in the cares of the Lord of Hosts. Isai. 22. 14.
But what follows? Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye
die, says the Lord of Hosts.

A doom sufficient, if there were nothing else, to awake and rouse us up to
sorrowing, Zach. 12. 11.
to send us to Iladadrimmon, and make us all to fall down weeping and wailing
as in the valley of Megiddon; yea to present our selves before the Lord, that
merciful great King of Israel, 1 Kings 20. 32
like Benhadads servants, with ropes about our necks, acknowledging what we
have demerited. For lo this the ready way to find compassion and abundant
kindness with the Lord; who has himself, in Joel 2. 12. directed us unto this
course, of renting our hearts, ver. 13.
and with fasting, weeping and mourning, to turn unto him, that is gracious,
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, repenting of the evil.
For, verse 14
as it follows, who knows, if hereupon he will repent, and return and
leave a blessing behind him? especially, shall we to this noise of mourning,
adioine the voice of fervent and humble crying (as verse 17. they were
directed) both priest and people, weeping between the porch and the altar, and
saying, spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thy heritage unto reproach, for
wherefore should they say among the people, where is their God? for surely
being thus once truly humbled before the Lord, we shall find, as there is
added ver. 18. that the Lord he will be jealous over his land and spare his
people, he will not give his heritage unto reproach, not suffer the enemy to
say, where is their God?

No, for seeing the kingdom is the Lords, who howsoever mortal Princes
perish, Lamen. 5. 19
yet rein lineth for ever, having prepared his throne in heaven, Psalm. 103. 19
and by his kingdom ruling over all, being he only by whom Kings do reign,
Prou 8. 15
and to whom, as Hannah sung, belong the pillars of the earth, 1. Sam. 2. 8
who will preserve the feet of his Saints, verse 9
when the wicked shall be put to silence in the dark; who dwells among us as
a King in the army, Job 29. 25
and as he that comfort the mourners, saying, Isai 51. 12
I, even I am he that comfort you; who are we that we should fear any
mortal man, or the son of man who shall be made as grass? verse 13
forgetting the Lord our maker that has spread out the heavens, and laid the
foundation of the earth, etc. Doubtless there is none like God, Deuteronomy. 33. 20
O Iesehurun, which rides upon the heavens for thine help, and on the clouds
in his glory, nor any like unto thee o people saved by the Lord who is the
shield of thine help, verse 29
and the sword of thy glory.

Only let our Asae, with all Judah and Benjamin hear the condition of amity
long ago proclaimed by the Lords prophet; 2. Chro. 15. 2
The Lord is with you, while you be with him; and if ye seek him he will be
found of you: Isai 62. 5
Then shall we be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and as a royal
Diadem in the hand of our God: yea, he himself, the Lord of hosts shall be
unto us for a crown of glory, Isai 28. 5.
and for a diadem of beauty: and to our King especially, as to his servant
David, 2. Sam. 22 51
a tower of salvation showing mercy to his anointed, even to his servant James
our Sovereign, and to his seed after him for ever.

Wherefore, for conclusion, to apply our selves both to that ancient counsel,
and the present hand of God; (this being as the Philosopher told the Roman
Emperor, Herodian l. 1 Non hoc, Iudorum tempus, o Commode, etc.
no fit time for sporting, when as not the sword of Perennius, or any mortal
enemy, but the glittering sword of the immortal God, may seem to be
unsheathed and shaken at us,) let us, as many as desire to see the welfare of
Jerusalem, and peace upon Israel, so address our selves to mourning, Amos 4. 12
that we may prepare to meet our God coming out against us, who will no doubt
be pacified toward us, and repenting of the evil, 2. Sam. 24. 16
will say to the destroying Angel, it is sufficient, hold now thine hand; when
he shall behold us humbling our selves before him in unfeigned repentance, and
hearty prayer.

First, in repentance. For seeing the Lord has himself begun to search us,
as he did this people, and that we suffer doubtless for our forenamed sins;
Lament. 3. 40
what should we, but (after their example) search and try our ways, and turn
again unto the Lord? who now assuredly hearkneth whether any speak aright,
Ierem. 8. 6
repenting him of his wickedness, and saying, what have I done? which if he may
hear, behold a book of remembrance, Malach. 3. 16
shall be written before him for them that fear the Lord, and think upon his
name. Oh the^, let us for our parts, write our book of Remembrance, and
because of all this, Nehe. 9. 38
make a sure covenant with the Lord, and we our Princes and our Priests, put
hand and seal unto it. Into which whosoever shall refuse to enter, and to say
with us, woe now unto us that we have sinned, Ierem. 4. 13
shall certainly one day be forced to cry out, woe and alas unto us, for we
are destroyed.

Yea further for a special proof of our sincere and serious Repentance, let
us with Asa and the people under him upon the forementioned admonition ioifully
enter into a league and oath of association, 2. Chr. 15. 22
not only our selves to seek the Lord God of our fathers, with all our heart,
and with all our soul: but also whosoever will not seek the Lord God of
Israel (but will cleave to, verse 13
or plead for Baal, and either become themselves, or approve of that accursed
Iesuited generation, that account it merit orious, to undermine and blow up
Parliament houses, to murder and massacre sacred Princes, yea to kill young and
old, nocents, as they reck on them, and innocents all together, their friends
for company so their foes may perish) shall I say according to the justice of
that law, let them be stain, whether great or small, whether man or woman? nay
rather in charity, I wish first for their good, that they might be compelled to
serve the Lord: 2. Chro. 34. 33
or otherwise for our Churches peace, and kingdoms safety, that either they
were exiled quite from among us, that they might infect no longer, or so curbed
at least, that their number and strength might not increase, to endanger us
farther.

For surely (to speak plainly) howsoever it be good to repose our confidence
alone in God, of whose careful goodness this land has had so plentiful
experience; yet shall we, as behooves us, consider the continual machinations,
and attempts of these Iesuitish Locusts possessed with the spirit of their
Prince Abaddon, Revel 9. 11
or but look upon the wound that freshly bleeding in our neighbors sides (the
reward which that redoubted French King Henry the fourth, received for taking
down the statue of reproach, and admitting aagaine this viperous brood into
the heart of his kingdom) how can we judge it less then a tempting of God to
rely still upon miraculous deliverances, if we suffer mean while to the
prejudice of our head, the tail of the false Prophet, Isai 9. 15
and popery, to spread it self, as a contagion thorough our land? Surely if the
swarms of those Locusts fill every corner, and take liberty secretly to poison
and infect both the mother and the children, (if not to pack them over sea to
Rome or Rhemes etc. to be farther corrupted) we are in danger never to want
pricks in our eyes, and thorns in our sides, Numb. 33. 55
to vexvs in the good land, where we dwell; or cruel Esaus that gape but for a
mournful day, Genesis 27. 41
to take advantage against their more blessed and therefore hated brethren. The
God of counsel work in the hearts, of them who are in chiefest place and
power, carefully to provide for the welfare and safety of this Church and
state, especially of that light that makes great Britain glorious, that all the
smoke of the bottomless pit may never dazzle or eclipse his shining brightness.

For us, the best part of our armor against these, and al both enemies and
evils, what is it, but (which before was noted as necessary to be adioined to
our Repentance) to pour forth earnest and seruent prayer unto the Lord, with
who^ having power, Genesis 31. 28
we shall undoubtedly prevail with men.

First, for our selves and land in general, that our crying sins, the causes
of judgment, upon our true Repentance being pardoned, there may be an end put
to the Lords controversy; that the peace being renewed beween God and us, Job
22. 21
we may have all prosperity; or if the Lord shall see that we stand in need of
farther chastisement, he would be pleased yet to allow us David's choice, that
we may fall into his hands with who^ is mercy, 2. Sam. 24. 14
and not into the hands of unreasonable and ruthlesse men.

Secondly and principally, let our prayer be unto God for his royal Majesty,
as to preserve his Princely person, making, (Baruch 1. 11)
his days upon earth as the days of Heaven, that under him we may lead a
quiet peaceable life, 1. Tim. 2, 2
in all honesty and godliness, wishing him what the ancient Christians did unto
their Emperors, Tertul. in apologet, cap. 30. vitam prolixam, Imperium securum,
etc.
that God would grant him a long life, etc. so to fill his heart with grace to
make a right and holy use of this great and heavy loss, that drawing nearer in
humble submission and obedience unto his God, he may be pleased to cheer up
his humbled soul with the inward sense and sweet feeling of his fatherly love,
and with assurance of his mercy toward himself, his gracious Queen, and their
royal seed; that, both their elder years may be crowned with long lasting
happiness in themselves, and their seed after them continue as lights in our
Jerusalem, to wear the Diadem, 1. King. 11. 36
yea to be the crown of these Christian Kingdoms, until Shiloh his second
coming in glory.

And even so let the Lord live, Psalm. 18. 46
and praised be our strength, and the God of our salvation be exalted. Psalm.
21. 1
Yea, let the King rejoice in thy strength o Lord, and be greatly glad in thy
salvation. Give him his hearts desire, and deny him not therequest of his
lips. Prevent himwith liberal blessings, and keep the crown of pure gold upon
his head. Yea, o Lord, that he may long continue our crown, Add to his years
as to the days of Hezekiah, and let his glory be great in thy salvation,
increase of honor and dignity now in his elder years being laid upon him.
Finally, let him remain in himself, and his Progeny to us and ours, as
blessings for ever; Thou, o Lord, making him glad with the joy of thy loving
countenance. For why? The King trusts in the Lord, and therefore in the mercy
of the most high he shall not miscarry. For behold, Gods hand shall find out
all his enemies, etc.

Amen, holy Father great King of glory, as thou did deal with gracious
Queen Elizabeth, whiles semper cade^ she trusted in thee, and would not
yield, maugre so many mischievous attempts against her sacred person, one jot
to Antichrist, and as thou have hitherto also dealt miraculously in preserving
thine anointed servant James our gracious Sovereign; so deal with him, we
beseech thee, still, and still; Psalm. 132. 10.
let all his enemies be clothed with shame, but upon himself and his, let the
crown of these Kingdoms flourish, that happy he may be for ever, Psalm. 146. 5.
having thee the God of Iaacob for his aid, and we thy people happy, and our
land, having thee for our God, and thy Christ for our Sovereign king, and our
Princes under him, maintaining thy truth, Eccles. 10. 17.
the sons of Nobles, and our glorious Crown.

HOS. 6. 1: Come, and let us return unto the Lord: for he has spoiled, and
he will heal us; he has wounded us, and he will bind us up.


