THE GHOSTS OF THE DECEASED SIEVRS, de VILLEMOR, and de FONTAINES.

A most necessary Discourse of DVELLS: Wherein is showed the means to root
them out quite.

WITH THE DISCOVRSE of VALOVR.

By the Sieur de CHEVALIER.

To the KING.

The third, Edition reviewed, corrected, and augmented in French, and
translated by THO. HEIGHAM, Esquire.

Printed by Cantrell Leg, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1624.

TO MY THRICE-HONOVRED KINSMEN, THE TWO WORTHY KNIGHTS, Sir WILLIAM HARVY, of
Ickworth. and Sir EDWARD SVLYARD, of 6Hauley.
NOBLE Knights: When I had read over this Discourse, and waighed the sincerity
of the Author, and how justly in taxing his own Country, he has laid open the
errors of Ours; and not only searched the bottom of our corruptions, but
prescribed a diet and a remedy, both to prevent and cure their contagions. And
seeing how custom and evil example has misled all sorts, even of the most
peaceable natures, to such impatience, that almost every man thinks himself
out of fashion, if he be not incompatible; I thought I could not better employ
my idle hours for the general good, then to make this Directory of Honor and
Well-liuing, a freedenizon, and to speak our Country Dialect. If I undergo
the censure of a Fool in Print, I care not, my intent is honest: I took the
pains partly to please my self, and to avoid worse occupations: And I am sure
that all virtuous and good dispositions will make true use of it. For the rest,
none can wish them more good, then they will work themselves hurt.

Now hoping (my most entirely honored Knights) that you are both of this
first, and best Rank; as also true votaries to all other nobleness of mind, I
thought it fitting in many respects, to address it to you: And among other
good causes, for that you are both Linguists, and can judge of my endeavors;
you are in an age, and of an age, fitting to run or be thrown upon these
disastrous rocks: you live at ease, with plenty and pleasure, which may
produce effects of hot blood. Be pleased to behold from the Port of your
felicities, the storms, shipwracks, torments, and precipitations of them, that
had more false courage then good conscience; and I doubt not, but it will make
you both good husbands of your Honors, Lives, and Souls: which I thought my
self obliged to advertise you of, as a testimony of the serviceable and
sincere good wishes of

Your most affectionate kinsman and servant, Thomas Heigham.

To the Generous and Wel-disposed Reader.
GEntle Reader, the greatest Command or Sovereignty that a man can have, is
to be Monarch of his own Mind: And he that is not so, runs from error to
obstinacy, to ruin, and to destruction. This Author has not done like him,
who seeing his friends house on a fire; because he would not be the messenger
of evil news, let the house burn down: but does (as you may see)
ingenuously and ingeniously, piously and passionately (without fear or
flattery) reprove and instruct both the King and Nobility. By which also all
that are wise, and honest, and have any propension to gain this power over
themselves, may attain unto it, by learning (in this Book) what true Honor,
Valor, Magnanimity, and Martyrdom is. You may perceive that ignorance, envy,
pride, and ambition, which are all offsprings of idleness, were the absolute
motives to all these murders. And some will think that God, by the Kings
bloody end, did show his anger against him for his remissness in these
preuentions. Give me leave then, out of my affection to all that would do
well, to admonish them to shun by all means, this devouring monster
Idleness, so odious to God and good men. It was one of the sins of Sodom,
it is the mother and nurse of all sins and iniquities. No man can express
the infinite mischiefs that it has produced. But because I think, the false
opinions of many (who hold all employments unworthy a Gentleman, but gaming,
and sporting) do much hurt, I will set you down examples, and reasons to the
contrary. I have read of a Nobleman, that did so much hate Idleness, that when
he had nothing to do of greater moment, he would make Butchers-pricks, saying,
they might happily be useful to some; at the least (says he) they will in the
making withdraw me from vain thoughts, idle words, and wicked actions.

There was a Baron of this Realm, a very excellent Goldsmiths: my self have
scene a fair silver standish of his making. A Knight I knew of an ancient
family, that made it his daily exercise to make nets.

Some worthy Gentlemen there are, that are excellent Painters, some grauers,
some perfumers, and the like: all expressing generous spirits, and divine
dispositions. For the soul of man is always in action, still imagining or
contriuing good or evil; and every action that is honest is profitable and
laudable, and far from baseness or dishonor. There is no man so noble or free
borne, but ought to do somewhat to the service of God, his Prince, or
Country; and he that can make that his pastime, pleasure, and delight, is
infinitely more blessed then other men.

These considerations did prick me forward to translate this Book, who being
not bred, nor advanced to any vocation of doing good, nor naturally inclined to
the faculties above mentioned, or the like; did think this my best remedy
against that contagious disease of Idleness.

It may be, that Critticks as well as Christians will read this Book, and as
they do the holiest books of all, will deride and traduce both that and the
Author: But Solomon says, It is no sin, but a glory for a man to suffer
injury, and that such are to be answered with silence. I do publish it for
the good of others, to serve as a Pilot to conduct honest men with honor, and
safety to their iourneyes end; as also upon the importunity of some especial
friends of mine. And if I may find that it does pass with good acceptance, I
shall be encouraged to make further trial hereafter. If not, I will make my
future endeauours only to content my self, and remain

Your wel-wishing friend, THO. HEIGHAM.

TO MY LORD DE SVLLY, Duke and Peer of FRANCE, etc.
My Lord,
THis Treatise of Duells, is not dedicated to your Fortune, but to your Virtue,
which is the principal cause thereof. The most part do run after
prosperity, I am none of the great number. My eyes are only set upon your
rare merit, by which you shine, by which you govern. It is accompanied with
felicity, and favor. For this regard, the present Discourse (made for the
Public) has need of your Fortune: Seeing that the King testifies so
expressly, that he esteems your Prudence and Probity (ornaments so known,
so admired) you may make it of Validity. Your humor is wholly carried
thereunto, by the knowledge, by the sensible apprehension of so great a
mischief. It shall be a Christian work, worthy of your zeal to the service
of his Majesty, and good of the Estate. You shall anew oblige France, do not
frustrate it (if it please you) of the help which it expects from your
Virtue in so fair an occasion. You are invited thereunto, a man may say
obliged, seeing that you are one of the eyes of our great Monarch: You shall
get Honor in this affair. Fair actions ought to be produced without design
of glory in time to come: But in doing for the Common good, it is not
unlawful to increase the reputation of his Name. Let your excellent spirit
judge if this action which is hoped for, will not be a relief of all the
others, whereof France has had a true feeling. Whereupon I remain

MY LORD, Your most humble, and most obedient servant, CHEVALIER.

To the Nobility of FRANCE.
IT is long since this Discourse of Duells was made. The Publication has been
hindered for important causes: they cease now, and here it is come into the
light. One of the occasions that brought it forth, was the death of two
Gentlemen of the Court, who were killed in single Combat, the 3. of January
1602. That ravished me with impatience to this work. They were both full of
merit, of Honor, of reputation. I lamented their loss, especially of Sieur de
VILLEMOR, whom I knew, whom I honored for his virtue. He feared God, was
courteous, wise, charitable, adorned with all Christian Virtues, especially
with those, which are altogether repugnant to the last act of his life. The
occasion of their Quarrel was feeble, and very little suitable to so many fair
qualities, as all those of this time be. Their ruin is to be lamented, it is
deplorable, the Commonwealth has lost thereby. They were able to do a great
service by their Valor, whereof they had rendered so many good testimonies, in
just occasions. Their courage was worthy to have been reserved to some better
service, then that which rooted them up. Now my intention in this work is
altogether Christian, without ostentation, without vanity. The end propounded
is, that it may serve. It is indifferent to me whether it be pleasing or not:
That is not my reach. If it be profitable to France it will be an unspeakable
contentment unto me, it is my only desire. It was made for you. I speak unto
you with all freeness. This shall testify my zeal, and my affection, to your
good. Receive it with a good heart, if you think good: I do not regard your
taste which is sick, but your profit. There is nothing in all the world, for
this regard, so rash, so blinded, so transported, as the Nobility of France.
He that does not know it, let him come see here the picture. The design, is
the ruin of soul, body, and goods: the action is inconsiderate ambition: the
proportions impatience: the lineaments rashness: the shadows false judgment:
the shortnings presumption: the lively colors do shine by fury, and by
despair. Take heed of it, none have so much hurt by it, as you: If you know
it not, I advertise you of it. They do in every place deride your frensies.
They which have charges and gouernements are protected, and play the Romans
with your furies, do as they do, be wise: they fight not, and yet have never
the less courage. If you think to receive Honor thereby, to be the sooner
Dukes, and Peers, Officers of the Crown, Knights du St Esprit, Ambassadors,
or governors of places. I tell you that you are very far from your account;
you know not why you run so lightly to death. At what good leisure you are,
to precipitate your selves to so many mischeifes, without receiving any
advantage, Honor, or profit thereby: either death, the ruin of your houses,
or a perpetual quarrel, be the ordinary fruits which hang over your heads.
There is all the glory you have thereby: See if you be not in great heat:
Though you be not ashamed of your rages, at the least pity the loss of your
souls, you cannot do better. To conclude, imitate them which do not fight,
you shall be the more perfect. God be with you.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader, there are some faults escaped this (...) Book; thou art not
to impute the cause thereof to (...) Author, whose care and diligence both in
translating (...) writing may justly deserve commendations; but rather (...)
the negligence in reading and correcting, the Printe^ that time being drawn
away by urgent occasions fr^^ his more usual diligence. Thus hoping thy love
will me these faults as thou meetest with them in reading, I (...)

Page 11. lin. I. it is lost put out it. p. 17. l. 4. for Parevine read Poite^^
(...) l. 24. for prickings read pricking. p. 29. l. 19. for fare read fair. ^
l. 2 ^. for his read this. p. 32. l. 12. for garden read great garden. p. 35.
l. for duly read daily. p. 39. l. 18. for whose frail read who is frail. p.
41. for have read have had. p. 48 l. 25. for mention of read mention made of. ^
l. 19. for none at all read not any. ibid. i 22. for geate read go^t. p. 54. l.
^ and read that ibid. l. 16. for heart and read heart, into. p. 58 l. 20. for
co^read courages. p. 68. l. 10. for the read his. ibid. l 14. for is damnable
read damnable. p. 72. l. 15. for laire read fairer. ibid. l. 27. for a throug
read the the p. 73. l. 4. for would read should. p. 7^. l. 23. put out the. p.
81. l. 3. for him read thinking. p. 94. l. 20. for phillip read fillip. p. 118
l. 8. for workman workewoman. p. 120. l. 2. for to their read to all their. p.
122 l. 13. for a serable read the miserable. ibid for irresotions read
irresolutions. p. 12 ^. for this the hand read this has the hand. p. 124. l.
^. for and contempt read the contempt. p. 126. l. 15. for inuit read
inuitehim. p 127. l. 17 for evil evils. p 123. l 20. for pleasure read
pleasures. ibid l. 23. for oues read ^ p. 129. l. 27. for be clear read be the
cleate. p. 136. l. 8. for toyling read ^iings. p. 1 38. l. 8. for her lustice
read her Judgment. Justice. p. 143. l. 23 belonging read belongs. p. 147. l.
11. for daaw read draw. p. 149. l. 5 they like read they likeit.

THE GHOSTS OF VILLEMOR and FONTAINES.
To the KING.
WOnder of the World, Mars of Christendom, Great Monarch, whose invincible
Heart never found Equal, whose Arm is a Thunderbolt, his Diligence
Lightnings, his High Deeds Thunder-cracks; that thunder, which astonish
Fortune; You will have no apprehension of our Shadows, seeing you never had
any of Death it self, amidst the horror, the terror of Arms; amongst the
sulphur, the most thick smoakes of Canons and Harquebuzes: These obscure
apparances, and these dimensions confusedly dilated, will bring you no fear.
This is the second time that we do appear; having quitted our repose to come
to procure yours, and by the means of our particular harms, to represent
those of France in general for this Subject.

You are a King, the light of Kings; an excellent Title, a holy Title. Seeing
that Kings be the lively Images of the greatness of God, and that Truth (an
incorruptible Virgin) ought to be their eldest daughter; we do promise our
selves that your Majesty (who have always entirely cherished it, and who in
that condition, and a thousand others, have made your self admirable) will not
reject it. Give then (if it please you) some time from your employments to our
holy remonstrances, to our advise, to our plaints, for the common safety.
Permit us to speak truly, you are obliged thereunto, by this fair quality
of King, and by Magnanimity, the capital enemy of untruth. The Subject is of
the most important and most notable of the Realm, but yet which regards that,
more properly then all the rest.

Your Majesty gives every day pardons for murders committed in Duel. If we
did respire again in mortal bodies, we would crave one of you, which without
doubt you would judge equitable, that is, to pardon us, speaking freely
thereupon. It is a liberty not insolent, animated only with zeal to the good
of the State, and whose motions, do carry nothing but Obedience and Justice.

In the time of Tiberius, they held their finger on their mouths: but Augustus
permitted them to tell him his faults. He thanked the Censors, did them good,
and which is more, he corrected himself. This Crown has had no Tiberiusses,
but many Augustusses. He which has begun to make the most magnanimious
Branch of Bourbon to wax green, and flourish, will succeed as well in
goodness, and justice, as in the Scepter. A man cannot speak more mildely of
so great a mischief. Some have said of old, that Kings must have words of
silk: But in this matter there must be words of gall, of wormwood, tart,
pricking. And what can be said too sharply, too boldly thereupon. Every one
knows, that your Majesty has found this miserable disorder of Duells, and
have gone about to remedy it by holy Ordinances, as your Majesty's
Predecessors Henry 2. Charles the 9. Henry 3. have done. Every one knows how
your Majesty is displeased at it: Every one knows that this violence is
produced by the liberty which so long, and so woeful civil wars (as have been
these forty years in this Kingdom) has brought, which have been spunges
sucking all sorts of confusions, especially in these last times, the very sink
of times past, and of all humane malice. So we do assure our selves, that
your Majesty will take in good part what we shall present unto you in this
behalf, seeing that your Majesty does desire withal your affection and power
to redress it.

Sir, when any man offends you, he is accused of high Treason, and presently
punished, and there is nothing more reasonable. If any Prince of your Realm,
or Stranger, would be so presumptuous to give pardons, he had need be stronger
to usurp that Jurisdiction upon your Majesty, and so he should be a Tyrant.
If he were weaker he would be mocked. Yet that is not all, he should be
rigorously punished for it. You would be loath, neither were it just, that any
should encroach upon your Authority: why? because you are the Image of God,
that does represent his greatness and justice. The symmetries of his Image, and
of his principal Type, ought to be observed. In the mean time, you give
pardons against the Law of GOD, and Man: against the Divine Law, for the
Commandments do expressly forbid them; against the humane Law, for as much
as it cuts the knot of public society, and is quite contrary to the order of
all the Estates of Christendom.

We speak that, which your Magistrates, your Confessors, and all the pillars
of the Catholic -- romish -- Church, are bound especially to admonish you of.
It is for your service, it is for the common good, it is for the safety of
your soul. Pardon, great King, give us leave (if it be your pleasure) to tell
you, Your Pardons are grounded neither upon Reason, Example, nor Authority.

Upon Reason not at all; nay on the contrary, they do destroy, and demolish
the magnificent edifice, built by divine Justice, in all her proportions and
dimensions.

Upon example? In no wise: for no Kingdoms, no Commonwealths, do suffer
these bloody and horrible acts, fitter for the most barbarous heathen, then for
them that vaunt themselves to be the most Christian Christians.

Upon Authority? No: all the Civil and Canonical Laws are directly
repugnant thereunto; and these were established for the common good.

Let us look into the profit of this spiritual madness. Let us enquire of
experience what commodity comes of it to the Commonweal. So many houses
desolated, wholly ruinated; so many widows, so many orphans, so many suits,
so many quarrels, or rather an eternity of Quarrels. These are the fruits of
this mortal tree, most bitter fruits, and a lamentable tree, which grows
continually by his loss, flourishes in his winter, and whose greenness will
dry up his roots.

There is not almost any house in France, where this mark of the wrath of God
is not read in great Characters, in Characters of blood. Nothing but tears,
mournful lights, sighs and tombs. In what time? even when all the Kingdom
else are at quiet. In what age? even in the most flourishing age of life. For
what subject? For false imaginations, for fantasies. Every thing is sufficient
to make these quarrellers go into the field, be the occasion great or small.
They be like the Naphta of Babylon, which takes fire as far off as it is
presented. They have their hearts and spirits full of blood. For a glass of
water, for gloves, for silk stockins, for a feather, for a crabbed look, for
a thing of nothing, they are ready to cut throats. They which have received
great hurts, are moved upon the least change of the time: and these wretches
be provoked by the least occasion, to go loose their bodies and souls, not
knowing how, nor why. Do they not go about to kill one another, for that
which is not yet in nature, and which they as little know as the day of
judgment? It is an exorbitant frenzy. Whosoever would consider all, should
enter into a profound depth; one folly has so begotten others, what vanity,
what presumption, what brabling language, what brauadoes of ostentation?
wherefore is all this good? The words are foolish, and the effects prodigious,
we are ashamed to speak it. There have been some, who having their enemy
under them, have held their weapon at their throat, and with execrable
blasphemies, bidding them pray to God, have therewithal killed them: what
Christian virtue is this? call you this Gentilitie? count you this to be above
the common sort?

The most eager are lost by these light occasions, many times the most valiant,
and almost at all times, the most happy, and most at hearts ease. What pity?
what desolation is this? After so much care had to bring them up, even when
they begin to know the light, and then become more worthy, being made fit to
serve their Prince and Country, they root themselves out from the breast
thereof, rashly, cruelly, detestably. Men dare marry no more, and they which
have children, will not vouchsafe to bring them up carefully as they were wont,
to make them capable to serve you. They dare send them no more to your Court,
that is the Scylla and Charybdis, where they perish miserably; the Altar where
they be sacrificed continually; the mournful School, where they find death,
instead of learning ability to defend the life of the Prince, for the
maintenance of the Estate. France soyled with the blood of her own children a
furious parricide, all horrible with wounds cries out, casts her self at
your feet, tearing her hair, and craves mercy of you: will you deny it to your
Subjects, to your servants, having been so frank of it to your enemies?

Then are you well grounded, Sir: The Pardons which your Majesty does so often
give, or to speak more properly, which are snatched from you by such
importunity, be against the Laws of GOD and Men; against the universal
order of Kingdoms and Commonweals. We say so often, and not without cause,
that is too well known. We will add in so great a quantity: For in one day
only in the voyage of Savoy, your Majesty dispatched sixscore, which is
monstrous. It is not simply to tolerate the evil, but to approve, nourish,
and command it.

All Divines with a general accord, and consent, do say, that they which die
in these miserable combats are damned: a fearful sentence, and yet true.
Your self do say, Sir, and promise that you will make laws; you do make
them, and renew the old ones; but to what end serve they, if they be not
observed? There be many springs which play upon this work, many that have the
honor to approach your Majesty, do detest quarrels in word, and afterward
oftentimes are the cause of them, taxing them that they do think are not
valiant (we say are valiant) for these follies, for these friensies, extreme
friensies. Is there any thing so ridiculous as the subject of quarrels? But
alas! there is nothing so deplorable as their events.

Here is a strange mystery. This injustice is acknowledged, and condemned of
the most part, and yet if a Gentleman do not go to Duel, he is despised, he is
reproached. If he goes, and escapes the iron, he falls upon the pen, he must
pass through justice. What a perplexity is this? What shall become of this
miserable man? He has cut off one head, and out of that arised seven others.
Such a man is much troubled. There is yet more, and that is, that although they
know your Majesty will take order for it, and do make edicts, yet the report
runs, that your Majesty do blame them which do not fight. This is it, that
pricks most. The Judgments of Kings be Oracles, they excite the furics of
Orestes; no patience but it is lost, no consideration retained. What is all
this? light and darkness, hot and cold. The mischeife is, that upon the rocks
of these contrarieties, many do rush, and are miserably lost.

There is not any in the world, that knows what Honor, and Valor is, like
you, Sir; none, that makes them better understood, better tasted by discourse,
not any that for his own particular, has so well practiced them, nor so
exactly observed, and so diligently and gloriously acquired the first rank;
and none that makes them less observed, and practiced by others in these
times. You must of necessity know the efficient cause of so many disasters.
And this it is; the two rare pieces, so exquisite and so precious whereof we
come to speak, Honor, and Valor. By the one your Nobility will get the
other, which being evil understood, does bring so much desolation, by the
means of Valor so ill known, and so brutishly practiced. All the world
knows, that the number of your trophies, do exceed the number of your years.
They are excellent tokens of the greatness of your courage, which has made you
put down the statues of Caesar by so many great exploites. There is nothing
that your Majesty can better understand, then these two points, whereof it has
rendered so famous testimonies, and such extraordinary proofs. It belongs then
to your Majesty to reform the disorder caused by them, since it knows them so
perfectly. You have both will and power, the one from your clemency and
justice, the other from your Authority. Your Majesty is moved thereunto by
the knowledge of these iniust acts, invited, pressed, and as it were reproached
by these fit subjects. Your inimitable clemency, has produced inimitable
effects: but who doubts of that, which has made you the most famous Prince of
the world, and of that which has saved this Estate, having made you expose
your life, so often, and so freely, for the conservation thereof. In the mean
time here is a bloody disorder, which continues and increases daily. By
dispersing these clouds which will obscure the brightness of your glory,
bought with so many hazardes, you shall conserve and augment that which you
have worthily gained. The continuance, and perseverance, in doing well, be the
sinews, and reflections of reputation. It is that which mooues it, it is that
which increases it. And the Tomb only ought to be the last line of virtuous
actions: what can be imagined more exquisite, more triumphant?

Let us see the error of men of this time: rashness put on by all the most
brutish passions, concupiscence, vanity, pride, revenge, enuic, and other
furies, natural to men, they call courage; these are the lime, and sand, but
the workman, and subtle Architect is the evil spirit. That this is true, do
but consider that even they, who hardly do believe a Paradise, who are so well
pleased in the world, not knowing any other, and have such occasion to abide in
it, do cast away themselves without cause, against their own knowledge,
against their judgment, depriving themselves of the world, with the
blindnesses whereof, they are struck as with the falling sickness. And how? by
a loose vanity, by frivolous considerations, without reason, without
foundation. It is a high secret: we must return to that which we have said,
that it is the evil spirit which forgeth all these miseries. Do we not also
see, these killers early, or late, end their days with a violent death? Blood
is in the end expiated by blood, sin punished by the same sin.

It is strange, that making the delights of the earth their heaven, respiring
nothing but all sorts of pleasures, not testifying in their fashions, in their
speech, in their effects, any apprehension of the estate of souls after this
frail life (we say the most part) are notwithstanding so forward, so resolute,
to hazard that which they hold so dear. But if they do believe a more happy
life, after this mortal, judge what their end is, what their judgment, to
quit their part thereof, so without purpose. Some say, there is great cunning
among these people, that they make subtle shows, but it falls out commonly
that they are countermined by a just judgment of God.

Let a man well and wisely weigh the quarrels of these times, he shall see
that pride and vanity, are the two great supporters thereof. Are not these
excellent marks of a magnanimious courage? The most part do avowe, that that
which they do, is to advantage themselves at an other man's cost: a weakness of
judgment; for if they whom they offend be not in reputation, there is no
glory. If they be naughty fellows (as they say) a man incurres a danger to
continue in it. After death there is no more speech of that action; if a man
lives, the advantage is not very great, as we will show hereafter.

They are of opinion, that if they escape they shall be in better estimation
with the Prince, and with all others. This false imagination, is one of the
mortal poisons which venometh, which bewitcheth their souls, and rauisheth
them to this despair. Here is a wonderful consideration: Vanity blinds
them, and carries them to Injustice, feeding them most daintily with a hot
throat: this is vanity indeed. If the Prince in the most noble assemblies would
blame and despise them, they would stay the torrent of their follies: but it
happens, that in the presence of him, and others of the greatest, they praise
such actions, tell stories of them, they extol them, with applause, with
admiration. See, say they, how handsomely he has challenged him, how freely
the other iumped with him, and being hindered, after they had given their faith
not to fight (an heroical prowess) see how gallantly they broke it, to go
pierce their carcasses with joy of heart, without any occasion of quarrel; so
they do magnify a thousand ways a beastly barbarism, baptizing it with the
most specious names of virtue. It is a wind that sounds within these empty
heads, and fills them with false imaginations, which takes away their wits. To
be esteemed of the Sovereign Prince, and of the great ones, is a charming
flash of lightening which does penetrate their souls. It is a magic which
surpasses all the characters of the Cabalists, which dazeleth and decays
their eyes, and judgments, and teareth a man violently from himself.

We have called these effects Despair, and not greatness of Courage. What will
you say of them which do hang themselves, precipitate themselves, poison
themselves, run themselves through with a rapier, starve themselves? Do they
it not in despite of death? It cannot be denied, some will answer, that all
this, is imbecility, blindness, rage, because the punishment does not make
the Martyr, but the cause of the punishment. It is well said, what difference
put you between those desperate men, and the others which kill one another
without just cause? you cannot find any in the least appearance.

That it is a rage, proceeding from feeblenes of judgment; it may be proved
by a thousand arguments, and especially by the combat of two new Pateuine
Amazones, who six or seven years since, did fight in a list or place railed
in for a combat: Oh what an unnatural accident? It should be the Crysis of
quarrels of this time; Crysis sent from Heaven, if France would make it self
worthy of such a blessing. This History is a shame for both Sexes; but it is a
discourse by it self. If it be Courage, it is very common, being practiced by
imbecilitie it self: if Desperation, it is come by example, and that example
is reprooueable and punishable.

Yet there are found amongst the Jews, the Egyptians, the Persians, the
Greeks, the Romans, and the French, women of quality generous, bred above
the infirmity of the sex, equal to men, by the favor of nature, and of
nourture. But to show how vile and abject this desperate action is, it is
known that base Porters have been in the field, with the same ceremonies,
using like courtesy as they do, that think themselves Samsons. This does much
extenuate the glory of these actions, which the ignorant do so unworthily
exalt.

The Lord de la Noue, in one of his discourses, blames Amadis for decyphering
with a lofty, and as it were a magic style, a false Valor, and Chymera's of
Valor. And some which be near your Majesty, and elsewhere, do put forward
(upon this matter) things more extravagant and fantastical, then the tales of
Melusina, and of the Roman of the Rose. In the mean time, all the dispersion
falls upon the Nobility, which is the basis of the Estate.

Your Majesty, by your excellent Virtue have saved your Kingdom, raised it
again, and remitted it by the very same: and now that it is in the harbor,
your Majesty lets them suffer shipwreck, who have helped your invincible
courage to take land. All the rest of the Kingdom do enjoy the benefit of
peace even to the beasts: It is one of the praises that Strangers do give,
with admiration to your Majesty's virtue and fortune: And the Nobility, who
have so great a share in so fair a Conquest, (at least the greatest number)
are only deprived of this good, covered with blood, enwrapped in a war more
then civil, or rather in many intestine wars.

There is more mischief and injustice in these Combats, then in civil
wars. Because that in civil wars, they fly, they save themselves, they
retire into the forts: in the other, to shun occasions is cowardice, to seek
out the least is extraordinary Honor. All is open, all is sure, to them that
say, They bear not a word but like a Caualier. That which is done most
commonly in civil wars by chance, is done in these combats of set purpose:
likewise the ruin thereby is almost always inevitable. Civil wars be
against enemies, the other against friends, neighbors, near kinsfolks,
brothers. In brief, in civil wars there is always some honor for the
particular; some profit for the general: In the other, there is neither honor
nor profit, for one or other.

When there be any quarrels, all the world runs to hinder the mischief,
the King is disquieted with it, his Guard are much troubled. What is all this?
It is a very stage play: for to hinder all these furies, there needs no more
but an Edict well observed. To say that they do but counterfeit to hinder
them, is against experience. To say likewise that the King does not desire it,
is repugnant to his good nature. What is it then? a sencelesnesse, a madness,
which has seized, and transported the Frenchmen. A sencelesnesse, not to be
moved by the consequence of these follies: a madness, to follow with so much
fury that lamentable way of misery. From whence comes so great a disaster?

From Pardons, without which all the World judges that this wildfire would
soon be extinguished.

The birth of these Monsters, and their increase, be from the exquisite works
of flatterers, which having finely slid, and as it were melted themselves into
the souls of Kings, since Henry the 2. have persuaded them, that it is a mark
of Sovereignty to give Pardons. It is so without doubt, but they must be
conformable to the Justice of God, who has established Laws therein, as is
seen by the Towns of Refuge, which were aunciently amongst the Israelites;
which were for accidents proceeding of ignorance, chance-medley, and other
notable circumstances; following which, all Sovereign Princes may justly, and
with good conscience give life. But for the Pardons which are forged now a
days, there can be found no example, either in holy Books, or in profane.

But if they take that for a mark of Sovereignty, the Assyrian Monarchs,
Persians, Greeks, and Romans, were by that reckoning no Sovereigns. The
Kings of England, of Spain, Swede, Denmark, etc. be then no Sovereigns; they
have for all that the marks of Sovereignty common with our Kings. To give
letters of Nobility, of Naturalitie, to mint money, to create new Estates, to
confirm them, to levy impositions, etc. Be not these fair marks, and well
raised? There is no speech of giving Pardons of this quality. It follows,
that Sovereignty is not founded upon that. What is then her foundation? that
the Sovereign do depend upon God only, and not to acknowledge any man living
for his Superior. So he is inferior to God only. But how say you to this,
Sir? He does absolutely forbid that, which you permit. God will be angry: we
speak it for the health of your soul. And (if we did converse still among
men, we would beseech you, with knees to the ground, to weigh these words) if
you take not a better order, God will be angry.

We will not speak of Strangers from Spain, Italy, Almanie, England,
Poland, Denmark, who hold the French for madmen, and possessed with devils;
and do speak of the Kings of France, (for this occasion very strangely) and
which is worse, with too great truth. We allege only your Ancestors
Clouis, Charlemagne, Sr. Louis, and so many other excellent Princes. A man
shall not find, that they have permitted these combats of the Nobility so
ill grounded. And if they have permitted them, it has been twice, or thrice,
in a thousand years, and for very important considerations, only capable of
offense, and to make a distinction of great and small things. The Subject
touched,

1. The honor of God. 2. The honor and service of the Prince, and
consequently of the Commonwealth. 3. The honor, the conscience, and the life
of every particular man.
It was also a Gordion knot, a quarrel without any means of atonement, and a
mischief without any remedy but extremity, which ariueth very sieldome: for
there is not almost any offense, but may be reconciled. These principal points
are so pertinently deduced, by a Discourse entitled, of Quarrels, and of
Honor, that the Author deserves much glory thereby, as a man that has set
down the true, and solid foundations of Honor.

If they say, that it is an inueterate fury, because that quarrels have
Honor for their foundation: we answer first of all, that until King Francis
the 1. they knew not what quarrels were, in the manner used now adays; and
that France before that time, was all heaped with honor, bowed under the
burden of glorious victories gotten upon strangers; when as there was no
speech at all, of this mortal contagion, nor any imagination thereof. It had
as many magnificent Trophies, as Captains; as many triumphant Palms as
Gentlemen; and as many crowns of Oak, as simple soldiers; we will mark
only one of those times. When Charles the 8. as a wind, a torrent, a thunder,
tempestious, furious, pierceing; overthrew, spoiled, vanquished Italy, with so
great and fearful a swiftnes; was there in all the earth a Nobility like to
the French? was there any thing so generous? so virtuous? and then there was no
speech of Duel. We forbear to speak of all the other ages past, which have
had valiant men, Demy-Gods, so renowned, so redoubted, through all the world,
who never knew this folly. Secondly, we say, let there be means found to tie
up fools, and desperate men. There has been no fault but in your modern
Predecessors; there will be no fault but in your Majesty: you have the cables,
and the chains to stay these frantickes: and how? We have already told you,

Not to give any more Pardons.

Yet that is not all. You must make known, and publish throughout the Realm
your Majesty's intention: make a solemn Oath before God, never to give any,
unless they be conformable to the Laws of God, as we have remarked; and let
it be a perpetual Edict irreuocable, and another Law Salicke for your
Successors. There is yet more, and that is the knot of the matter. It must be
made known wherein true Honor does consist, and Laws established therein,
and that they which shall violate them be punished, without remission, without
exception. Believe, it will be very easy to stay the most ticklish; or to
speak better, the most hairebraind. Others will be bridled by apprehension of
the confiscations, and mulcts, which waighes them so down, that they be
constrained to say, That they which die in Duel, are in better case then the
vanquishers. It is a Cadmean victory, a lamentable victory, lamentable for all
Christendom; a fearful mark of the anger of God, and an infallible presage
of his vengeances near at hand.

There are not any, how evil soever they be, but would be very well content,
that there were Laws for the point of Honor; and that there might be no
cutting of throats continually for a flies foot. They dare not speak for
fear to be reputed cowards, or that they are provident for themselves; they
incline to the corruption of the time: notwithstanding not any of good
judgment, and truly generous do esteem, or fear them the more. It is
justly a worthy recompense for Hypocrites, and evil Christians.

Surely, we must particularly cull out, what Honor is, seeing it is the spring
of so many mischeifes. Amongst a hundred that fight for this fair quality,
there will not be found two that know what it is. An argument of their
ignorance, and beastlines, a worthy basis of such a pillar. They are killed
they know not why. We say then that Honor is a quality raised up, attributed
to persons according to the knowledge that is had of their merit. Place is
given to Authority, and to few, merit to all sorts of persons that have it.
Honor is enclosed (as we have said) with these sour terms; God, the
Sovereign Prince, the Country, and Virtue: all the rest is but smoke. Let us
see, if in the Duells which be so ordinary in France, we can find these four
lights, which should conduct the actions of men. There is not one of them. For
the three first it is most evident, that such actions are wholly repugnant
thereunto: God is thereby grievously offended; the Prince loses his Subjects;
the Country her children. Let us examine Virtue by her kinds, it may be we
shall find it there. Is Prudence there? not at all: Has it been her custom
to cast men into infinite mischeifes? Is Temperance there? in no sort: cannot
she suffer the least prickings, nor command passion? Justice will not be found
there; is it not injustice to take away another man's goods? To take away his
life, is it not infinitely more? Magnanimity, and greatness of courage is in no
sort there. Is not that voluntary, with knowledge, for a good cause for a just
end? Nevertheless there is not any, how gross, and brutish soever, but would
have us believe, that in these actions there is virtue, at the least the virtue
of magnanimity. We have showed the contrary, and will prove it by and by, more
amply. In general terms we maintain, that in these unworthy actions there
is not any virtue; and do prove it by an infallible argument.

And that is, That virtuous actions be worthy of praise and recompense, and
have no need of Pardons.

Oh! Ambitious, that slay your selves not knowing why: let us make a dissection
of Honor: you dare not deny but it is acquired by Virtue: and that it is her
flowers, fruits, and creature. In these Duells there is not so much as one
sparkle of Virtue, consequently no Honor: notwithstanding let us grant to the
grief of these sick minded, that there is Honor. You say, that you gain it
by peril, that having nothing ordinary, you carry away this advantage above
the common sort. You are very hot. There be a hundred thousand soldiers in
France that be not known, and of whom there is no talk, who have been at it,
and are still in a readiness to go to it: So this Honor is very common. If
you say it is their miserable condition, or rashness, that makes them scorn the
peril: they will answer you, that it is ambition, pride, envy, revenge, and
other blind passions that transports you. By consequence, it is not a virtuous
action, which is always voluntary, and is her self, her own center, and
circumference. We will enforce this matter no further, least we recite that
which has been treated of, by a discourse of Valor, made by the Author of
the Ghosts, it is worthy to be scene: we only represent unto you, that you do
altogether abuse your selves, to place courage in so high a degree, (we say,
that brutish impatient courage, which distinguishes not, which suffers
nothing) seeing it is common with beasts. But Prudence, Justice, and the other
divine virtues which be absolutely necessary, be proper to none but to men,
which doc surpass the common sort. True it is, that this courage, ruled, and
limited by the knowledge, and reason, which makes peril despised, is
infinitely more rare, then the quarrels be ordinary.

For one more familiar and sensible proof that these Combats be no effects of
Virtue, we must consider, that a man never comes by these means to great
charges. Though a man has fought an hundred times in single Combat, he shall
be never the sooner Marshall of France, or great Master of the Artillery. The
degrees to mount to the holy Temple of Honor, be these. To be faithful to the
Prince, zealous to the Common weal, and for that to hazard ones self, upon
all just occasions to present his life to a breach, to a battle, to an
enterprise; to show his good judgment, his prudence, his diligence, his
vigilance, and to have no other end, but this magnificent ambition, to do
well. It is this that makes a man worthy of fare and great charges. This is a
Maiesticall-golden-building, raised with all his symmetries, which does dazzle,
overcome, deiect, the eyes, the forces, the darts of Envy, Time, and Death.
Whatsoever be more then these, do proceed of evil humors, that remain of
the disorder of Civil wars, as from a mischievous quartane ague, which has
so long shaken his Estate. This short breath yet remains of it, this dullness
is a remainder of the shaking. The conclusion of all this Discourse is, that
there is neither pleasure, nor honor, nor profit, in these so evil founded
Combats. Alas! what is the cause that the savage plants be not rooted up.

When a man sees one toil much, he judges presently, that it is for some
profit, and for a good end. The Nobility of France casts it self out of the
windows, pierces the walls, swimmeth over rivers, violateth her faith given,
and breaks her guards, without respect of the Royal Authority. If a man ask
why: it will be said, It is to loose her goods, her life, her honor; to make
her self miserable, to damn her self. None would foretell this madness but a
Frenchman.

Thereupon it is said, That the humor of the Frenchman is so composed. Behold
a choleric, and an extrauagant humor. We ask how long since? It has been
so but 45. years, or there abouts. It must be reduced to good sense, and a
little Helebore given to these offended brains: what means is there to correct
these Moons? Thou that art so boiling hot, cause three saucers of thy blood to
be drawn; (amongst the ancient Romans it was the punishment of the rash
soldier:) if that be not enough, draw six. If thou find thy self still in
a heat, fast, or else go into Canada to temper this heat of liver; go into
Hungary to satisfy this fantastical appetite of a woman with child, and
trouble not the feast amongst thy friends.

What shall we do? Answer they, there is no more speech of Canada, Peace is
throughout all Christendom. How do our neighbors? Some take their rest;
others do repair the ruins of their houses; others spend their time to make
themselves fit to serve in the time of necessity; others do travel: What
shall we do? That your Ancestors did when they were in quiet: There is
wherewith to employ the time, both for poor and rich.

You are so absolute, Great King, so admired, so redoubted: It will be very
easy for you, to make your just ordinances to be observed, and maintained
exactly (for this regard) so important for the Commonwealth, so Christian, so
necessary: seeing they dare not kill Partridge nor Hare without your
permission. If this obedience do proceed for fear of your displeasure, you
love your subjects so much, as they should expect it much more toward them,
then toward sensible creatures. If to be in such a matter carefully, and
faithfully served of your Officers; may not a man yet hope for the more care in
that which is of so great weight, and of such consequence.

The Nobility is the invincible Rampire of the Kingdom: you are the Head, the
other chief members, which cannot be cut or maimed without your notable loss.
If you do not speedily feel it, it is to be feared that your Successors will
feel it. Storms, and strange floods, will arise, ouerslow: and this great
body of France will find it self so feeble by these cruel bleedings, that it
will have no means to defend it self, no, not to stretch out the arm; yet
for all that, it is the Nobility that is the right arm.

You tell no news, will every one say. No man doubts of that, they know well
but for the Nobility that France would be griped in the claws of the
Spaniards, and of other nations, wiser then we. Then is it a great impiety not
to remedy it. It is as if a man drownes himself; he is plunged in the water,
defends himself, with feet and hands, has already drunk much, but no man
runs after. Though they would remedy it, if they do not have speedily, it
will be too late. Whilst they consult at Rome, Sagunta perishes.

It has been remarked, that in the only March of Limosin, and thereabouts,
five years since, there were dead in Duel, sixescore Gentlemen, in six or
seven months only. How many are there dead since, even in the same place,
which is but a flower of this garden? How many through all the Provinces? How
many to this fatal meadow, to this shameful and lamentable scaffold for
France? The list is not seen, without tears. There have passed more then six
thousand pardons within ten years. The number is incredible: A sufficient
number to gain many battles upon the Infidells. An irrepaireable loss, for
a whole age; a brutish blindness, a deuillish madness, that all ages past have
not seen; a transport of vanity, which is not known, which is not practiced,
which is not tolerated, but in this Realm: which has been so long the light
of Christians, now the obscurity, the evil example, the scandal.

Likewise strange Nations do give to the Frenchmen, more unworthy titles, then
they do attribute to all people in particular; whereas the Ancients did tax
them only of lightness.

This blame is very due unto them: yet for all that, blinded with their
presumption and vanity, they persuade themselves that perfection has abandoned
all Christendom besides, to dwell with them; wherein there is no likelihood;
or else other Nations are altogether deprived of wisdom, which is repugnant
to the fair order that maintains the greatness of their estates: or else they
have no Honor, which is absurd: or else they do not know what Valor, and
greatness of courage is, like the French: which may be seen by the discourse
following. Let us rest upon this branch, which is for our subject.

The English do declare, that they have held all Spain in awe; that by sea
and land, they have left glorious marks of their Prudence, Valor, and
Ambition; that having but a foot of land, in comparison of the Castillian
Monarch, they have constrained them to beg peace: and they do not fight in
single combat.

The Spaniards in Africa against the Heathen, and many others, do testify
their high enterprises, and their lofty courages, which carries them to the end
of the world; and they kill not one another in single combat.

The Almanes are continually at handyblowes against the Turks, at whose hands
they do sustain horrible mischeifes, with an invincible resolution, as the
firm bull-workes of Christendom; and they do not kill one another in single
combat.

The Polonians, and the Transiluanians be all red with the blood of the same
Infidells, whom they do duly combat, and overcome worthy Champions of the
Christian faith: and they do not kill one another in single combat.

For what (say they with a common consent) are the French men good, but to
ruin themselves by civil wars? But to loose themselves by lamentable and
fearful conspiracies? But to kill one another cruelly against all divine, and
humane right? But to cast themselves into infinite pains, and calamities, by
lewd, unworthy, and shameful quarrels? Now all that is contrary to wisdom,
to true Honor, and to Magnanimity. So that the French be constrained to yield
unto them this triumphant palm, which they may by good right claim, as having
better deserved it, then they. But how? Frenchmen, you have your selves rooted
it out of your own hands, by the furies of the devil that transports you. You
have wrought your shame, and forged the arms, which have taken from you so
many rare advantages. You should have a sensible apprehension of these
prickings, and despise the rest.

It is toward you, Sir, that all France turns the eyes. It is to you, that it
stretches out the hands. It is upon you, that all the hope is grounded. Take
order, that a sage prudence, a firm resolution, a just execution, do grant
unto it, that which is seen amongst all other Christians, good order, and the
observation of it. Be pleased to establish Laws,

That they that shall offend exorbitantly, be punished with banishment; or make
sufficient reparation, according to the case.

For these actions are directly repugnant to Christian charity, to humane
society, and particularly to the most gentile and agreeable virtue that is seen
among men; which is courtesy, whereof the noble minds do make a Trophe. To
offend another, without cause, of set purpose, is a testimony of brutishnes, or
of weakness of spirit: as the one is worthy of punishment, the other should have
need of a severe correction: without doubt, if insolency were rigorously
punished, it would bury quarrels, for as much as they do proceed from
injuries, which be most commonly flowers and fruits of insolency and
presumption. This is daily seen. There be some that have courage, and have
been in good businesses, for the service of your Majesty, or elsewhere. But,
they be so proud, that they despise young men, that have never been in
occasions, or that do not bear the marks thereof. It is the time that has
denied them this glory, and it does not follow, but that they may have as much
courage, as every honest man may have, that is faithful to his King, and a
friend of virtue. For this cause is this contempt to be blamed, yea, worthy to
be punished,

That no man may be dishonored, though he do not fight by way of challenge,
having been offended; or believing it, until the governors of Provinces,
Seneschalls, or others, have been advertised thereof, and have sought all the
ways to make them accord.

Some will say thereupon, How? will you have the Challenger go and complain,
having been offended, and demand reparation of the injury, after the fashion
of the vulgar? To what do you bring him? If you think that new, represent to
your self, that when Duells began to be practiced, they were new too, and
brought to a custom by the tolleration of Princes. So we must accustom our
selves to this law, seeing it is most just, most necessary, and that it is the
Sovereign that commands it, who is the Head of Justice and Policy: without
doubt, if the first point be well observed, they will be wiser, and few will
go to the second. But if we meet with insolent people, such as are altogether
insupportable, against such, we should be permitted to help our selves with
all: for they are not worthy to converse with men, there is neither Sea-card,
nor North, can conduct them. Some will say, there be wranglers, who taking
advantages, will ask in what rank we do put them. We answer, that if the
contention do touch the good manners, the conscience, or the Honor of a Body,
it ought to be put in the first point. If it be honest, and that it does not
regard these three heads, we must laugh as others do, learn to talk, or to
be patient: and he that is too weak, shall take some refrigeratiue drugs, or
else he must deprive himself of the society of men.

Let them that shall challenge be condemned to die, and let their goods be
confiscate.

They are a thousand times more punishable, then those that are troubled,
being invenomed by the imagination of the offense. For these there is some
feeble shadow of excuse, but none for the other: whether they fight or no, they
be always the principal instruments of the disaster. The first motives be not
in the power of man, whose frail choler and blood, do soueraignly command
him. Being out of himself full of blindness, he swears his own ruin, and
uses himself like a stranger, as an enemy, as being no more his own; but his
furious passions, and almost always depending more of an others opinion, then
of his own knowledge, and least of all of reason. He is for that time, in some
sort excusable. Let men that are wronged, or do believe they are wronged, upon
heat run to their sword, be possessed, be transported with fury, and go
about to hurt themselves; that is humane, and practiced every where. But if
they go to their death, after they have had time to digest their choler, upon
cold blood, against their own conscience, knowing that they do cuill, that is
deuillish, and not practiced in any place of the World but in this Realm. From
this let us draw a consequence. The parties offended, are not without blame,
and without crime, when they come to such effects less then ought they to be
so, who do execute them not being wronged. This consideration has made, that
since the last Edict of Fountaine-blean, no man has fought with a second; at
least, very few: for they have been ashamed to put in hazard the life of their
friend, without any occasion. In fight it is necessary that the blood be
troubled. Now this is a beginning to take the Duel quite away: the reason,
because that heretofore it would have been suspected, yea a shame, to sight
without a second. So your Edict, and the knowledge of this folly have corrected
this abuse. The seconds then are taken away as a barbarous thing. The
conclusion of this speech is notable. Even as it has been a custom not to
employ a man's friend in a matter of injustice and impiety; so may a man
accustom himself to demand reason of wrongs, as we have said. Time brings
all, order corrects all, and mischiefs go up and down by degrees.

Let every servant that shall carry a Bill or Challenge of defiance be hanged.

When they have been ashamed to lead their friends into the Churchyard, and to
employ them, they have recourse to the bill of defiance. If the remedy that
we propound be not sufficient, there is no need to seek any other.

Let them that shall fight in Duel be degraded from Nobility, and them and
their posterity declared infamous: let their houses be rased, and their goods
confiscate. They that shall die, let them not be buried, but drawn through the
streets, and then cast upon the lay-stall, the common dunghill of a Town.

There must be these strong sluices to stay the ouerflowing of these violent
torrents. For extreme mischiefs, extreme remedies. The example will bring
fear to generous souls; and apprehension of the ignominy for their name, and
for their houses, will prevail more with them then death. So in a certain
town of Greece, the women transported with a deuillish madness, did hang
themselves so strangely, that they knew not how to remedy it. They devised to
make them be drawn after their death stark naked through the Town. This
villainous and infamous spectacle, stayed the despair of others.

It were very fitting that Fencing were forbidden.

It is the mother of pride, of rashness, of vanity, for them that have more
force, or disposition then others, or both; and makes them (with hope of grace)
more outrageous, and more insolent. For ought else it is unprofitable; for a
man is never helped thereby in Combats, in troop either against strangers or
his own. Yet it may be used for an exercise as Tennis, and such like, and
would do no great hurt, if the order which we propound were observed.

It is well enough known, what mischief this exercise has brought. The
Fencers at Rome, desperate men, condemned men, made the people sport with the
loss of their lives. These new Fencers make the enemies of the Estate merry,
and make the people of France to weep. They are full of wind and smoke with
these great words, to ward, to shift away, to enter, to plunge, or thrust far
into, to incartade upon the left foot, to dig into, to freeboote. They think
all the world are indebted to them. Can there be any thing more weak, more
impertinent?

These, Sir, are directions that we think fit, to smother quite this wicked
monster, if they be well observed, with denying of pardon, and other laws
necessary, which your Majesty can much better establish, assisted with the
Officers of her Crown, and other Lords of her Counsel.

They that dwell near the violent fall of waters from the river Nile, do not
hear the noise; and the wife of the Tyrant of Syracusa, perceived not the
default of her husband: the one is an effect of custom, the other of
ignorance. And a pernicious habit, for want of judgment, has made the French
deaf, and obstructed, without reason, without sense, like frantickes, like
them that have the Lethargy; not willing to understand, not able to comprehend
the deplorable estate that vanity has brought them unto.

The Frenchmen be worse then the Heathen in time past. They sacrificed every
year to their gods some humane creature: these do sacrifice many every day,
to their blindness, and to their furies, which they hold for their god. They did
it to appease their anger: these do it to kindle it more. They did it for the
conservation of the public: these for the ruin of it.

They are more savage then the savages of America. They eat men, but they are
either strangers, or their enemies: these kill themselves among themselves,
kindred, neighbors, friends, conuersing together; and then are eaten by
confiscations and mulcts. They do it, not knowing the mischief; these do it,
knowing and reproouing it. They do it upon some cause; these do it for the
wind, for a shadow, for imagination.

They that do wickedness, hide themselves, seek darkness: and the French
committing execrable murders, for which there is neither Divine nor Humane
ground, do run upon the Theater, in the sight of the Sun, before the house
of the Flower de Luce to sacrifice themselves, to the end that the wicked fact
being more manifest, more exemplary, may be more scandalous, and consequently,
less pardonable before God and Men. This is to cut a purse before the Provost,
to coin money in open market, and to serve as a false witness before the
Magistrate. In a word, it is properly to mock God and their King.

Who be they that precipitate themselves by these mischievous occasions? The
cream, the quintessence, the flower, the subtle of the subtle; they that
term themselves of the race of Jupiter, who despise all the rest as the lees
and the mire; and discourse so hotly of Honor, of Virtue, of Reputation. But
yet such as are the most firm, and most necessary pillars of the Estate. This
is extrauagant. Yet they are oftentimes those, who have reason to content
themselves with the reputation which they have bought by a thousand hazards, in
just and lawful occasions. Yet for all that, they cast themselves with bowed
heads, upon these which they embrace with passion, as if they were famished for
Honor; whereas they should enjoy that which they have acquired with so good
assurance. They do like Aesop his dog, they leave the body for the shadow, the
solid glory for that which is fantastical. They likewise run the fortune of
Ixion, who in stead of Juno, had to do with a cloud. In the end, all these
proud vanities be reduced into clouds of vanity, and most commonly the
miserable wheel of shame and loss remains with them for a full recompense.

We are simple shadows, and clouds, that have no disguise. Your Majesty will
not be displeased, Sir, that we speak without flattery; you never loved it.
They do not often tell Kings the truth. It is with that, as it was ere while
with your treasure, when as fifty came to five. They disguise it. They plaster
it, before it has passed so many hands, so many conuerts, with a lie, with
passion, with cunning; you have nothing but the shadow. Flattery is a mortal
plague, cheifely in a man of state, that is in credit with his Master; such a
one never speaks true. A coozening of greatest consequence, and worthy of
punishment. These parasites, are very pernicious. We then that have nothing but
simplicity will speak truly.

They call the Kings of France most Christian; o excellent, o venerable title!
It surpasses the magnificence of all the Diadems, and Thyaras of the world.
This Divine title has been attributed, for some great causes, to your
ancient predecessors. They had well deserved it. But the disorders, the
Eclipses of civil wars, have much shaken, and much obscured the foundations
and light thereof. Among such a prodigious multitude of arguments, as strangers
aleadge, this holds the first rank, that the Nobility is abandoned to butchery
by the Prince. It is true (as we have said) that your Majesty have found this
disorder, and many others, which it desires to take away: It is your Majesty's
greatest ambition. What mark is it (say they) of most Christian, to suffer
such impieties? This is the shameful reproach, they give to all France.

They be miserable sacrifices, that you offer daily so freely to death. Is it
not because you are more ashamed of the censure of mad men, who have put
dreams and giddy conceits, for principles of Honor, then for fear to be
rebels to God? You would not do that for his glory, which you do for the
opinion of braine-sickemen. You would not for that suffer a scratch. And you
are paid according to your deserts: For after your death, the most part of your
inward friends, and even those, who in appearance do favor so wicked a
custom, do make a conscience to assist at your funerals, to lament you, to
speak of you: yea those, who the next day after, would hazard themselves for
as feeble an occasion. They lift up the shoulders, turn the eyes, knock with
hands, and feet, grieuing and deploring this end. You are to feel eternal
punishment, and you make your memory also infamous to posterity. Had it not
been better never to have seen light? You are far from your account, if you
believe that your name is thereby more famous, or more illustrious. If you
knew the judgment that they make of your end, you would die yet an other
time. Some do attribute these effects to envy, others to revenge, others to a
foul and furious passion of love: the most part, to the hope to remain
victorious, by the advantages of natural force, or dexterity: some to the
hope to be hindered. There is no mention of virtue in these actions. How abject,
how shameful a thing it is? And all men generally speaks of them, as it were
of dogs and bears that should strangle one an other. Is it not a triumphant
Epitaph to celebrate the last effects of men? what men? Such as think
themselves above other men, by brutish comparisons? Proud souls, mad souls.
If you could again reuest your bodies, how you would despise these actions,
how you would be offended with your selves, how you would hate your false
judgments, and your abominable resolutions. No man praises you after your
death, no man esteems you, few bewailes you, if it be not in consideration of
the loss of your salvation; and then you are always blamed, for being so
irreligious. If such an action were virtuous, the Historiographers would make
volumes thereof, would praise you, would exalt you; you should find Homers,
and Virgils. But alas! your history is, as of people lost. If any bewail you,
it is as of damned souls. (These words should be an earthquake, for these
miserable quarrellers.) If any write your accident, it is for an example of
terror in time to come; a mirror of temerity, and of the corruption of the
age; a testimony of the wrath of God, and not to approve, much less to exalt
so execrable a folly.

You that be upon the bloody Theater of France: in danger every moment, to
represent pitiful tragedies of your selves, consider this: Every thing is
done to some end; every end is profitable, delectable, or honorable. Let us
see for your contentment, what end they propound to themselves, that hazard
themselves, without just cause in Duel. If both remain there, men presently
play upon this great string. It is for their sins; it is a just judgment of
God. If the one die, and the other remain conqueror, let us exactly
calculate, the honor and profit that they reap thereby. For him that is dead,
there is none of these three ends: Let us enquire of the conqueror, if he do
better his condition thereby? He answers, that he is forthwith in danger of his
life, executed if they take him; in the mean time condemned, proclaimed,
hanged in picture. What a hard thing is this to digest? he must have recourse
to his Sovereign; the only remedy is a Pardon. He must have it whatsoever it
cost, with so much toil, with so many submissions begging the favor of great
ones. He must pass it with so much fear, with so much disquiet, with so many
difficulties; it is the true image of hell. They that have passed through the
examination of Father-Confessors of the redoubtable Selletta, would sound you
out a lofty word thereupon. This is not all; he must have wherewithal to pass
it. There be the greifes: For this effect, the costs, and the mulcts, be
another kind of Duel, another cut-throate. From thence proceeds the total
ruin of houses. With all these punishments, there were yet some form of
respite, if the root of the mischeife were pulled up. But for a heap of
glory, and felicity, there he is all his life time, with a quarrel upon his
arms, against the kindred of him that died, a mortal and irreconciliable
quarrel. For all this, by tract of time, there is some remedy. For that which
is the most important, there is none at all. The cruel torture that bursteth
his soul, by the continual representation of his offense, receives no
condition. What Goblins? what tortures? what goat? what Minotaure?

But if such a one be puffed up with vaineglory, for that he believes that men
do hold him for a man of courage, they shall tell him, that that advantage is
very common (as we have showed.) But how feeble is it, how shameful, having
regard to the foundation, which is nothing Christian? Notwithstanding he that
would yield some thing to his opinion, a man might tell him that it is a glory
dearly bought, and as it were to take up at interest, a hundred for a hundred.
There is then the pleasure, there is the profit, there is the honor that he
reapeth of his hazardes, and unbridled ambitions.

For him that is dead (as has been said) there remains to him no shadow of
good; his reputation is extinguished with his life. It continues but to be
odious, stinking, and execrable. Ah! how this is to be considered: For he that
dies for a fair subject, has comfort for himself, and leaves comfort to his
posterity: why? because his memory has a sweet savor. They be more
excellent and durable images, then those of Phydias. Oh! how precious be these
old sayings; oh! how rare they be! They say he was an honest man, a virtuous
man, fearing God, loving his Prince, and the Commonwealth; that he died in the
bed of Honor. Such a one lives in the tomb in despite of death; his Virtue
speaks within the dumb silence, exalts him, glorifies him in the midst of
forgetfulness, even in the cold dust. They hold another manner of language, of
them that are lost in Duel. What blindness! (says every one) what rage! how
impious a thing it is? how detestable? A notable consequence arises from this
Discourse; that is, That there is some honorable death, that a man ought not
to shun although he could.

To understand this, we must consider the speech following, in presupposing
this maxim: If they which fight in Duel, did believe they should die there, a
man might well say, they would not go thither. Imagine then, that two men of
great courage be in presence, their weapons in their hands kindled with fury,
respiring nothing but blood; that a man whom they both know to be an excellent
Soothsayer comes in the way, and says unto them, You shall die both at this
conflict, and the profit that shall redound thereby, is, that the Commonwealth
shall loose much, your houses shall be desolate, your memory detestable. There
is likelihood that they believing these words, would be appeased, and shake
hands. But if these magnanimious men, were in an army near Henry the 4. the
glory of Kings, and great Thunder of War; and that he himself should come
say unto them; My friends, think with your selves this day must be the end of
your days. But in truth, it shall be the saving of your Prince; on whose life
depends the conservation of this great Estate. No man doubts, but that
generous men would be the more enflamed; but they would be all possessed with
a laudable impatience to be grapling, to produce such an action, so virtuous,
so glorious. Moments would be ages unto them. They would be like Antheus,
touching the earth; they would take new forces: they would be all trasformed,
body and soul, into heart and ambition; and the fear of death would have much
less power over them, then the desire to make themselves famous to future
ages, invited, forced, by the consideration of this act, pleasing to God and
men. They would think themselves very happy: it would be Scepters, and Crowns
unto them; for as much as the end is holy, and profitable, and consequently
honorable, as being a perfect work of Virtue. They will say, that there will
be found no plenty of these fair souls. It is true. But there would be found
amongst the Nobility of France, some that have Horaces, Scevolaes, and
Curtiusses, as well as the ancient Rome. So we conclude, that there is some
death very honorable; that is to say, That which serves to the glory of God,
to the honor and profit of the Prince, and of the Commonwealth. Now the end
of them which go to Duel, without lawful cause, is simply to satisfy their
passion, to revenge their particular injuries, to content themselves. It
follows, that that is not only blameable, but also worthy of rigorous
punishment.

In this the Prince should know, that such combats do absolutely derogate
from his Authority, for as much as it belongs to Him, or to his Magistrates,
to do reason for offenses; for which, the violent satisfaction is not
permitted to particular persons in any Commonwealth well polliced.

They follow these steps, and the mischief grows insensibly, and of such a
fashion, that in the end, all Divine and Humane Laws shall be banished out
of France. They fight in Duel for the seeking of marriage, for homages, for
suits, for precedence in Churches, in politic Assemblies; in the end, for all
sorts of differences. This is daily seen. So did in old time the Scytes, so
did the Tartarians, people without faith, without God, without humanity. If
this continue, we must speak no more of Justice nor of Piety. All France
shall be a Chaos, a den of thieves. So we see a general subversion of all
Orders. No man contains himself in his own jurisdiction, the storms whereof
has overthrown all. They be so execrable before God, that since they have
been tolerated, there have bin seen nothing but prodigies in France. Before the
Duells, was there ever seen blood so horribly shed as has been since? The
Sun hid it self thereat, the Earth moved at it, and the Sea stayed the
course thereupon. Was it ever heard that a great King, most great, most
magnificent had been driven out of his house, and afterward murdered by one of
them that daily preachet peace? Weigh this well, From the Duel they come to
the contempt of Laws, and Orders; from this, to contemn the Sovereign; then
to conspire against the Estate; and after that, to attempt the sacred person of
the Prince. The reason is, because ambition, accustomed to blood, becomes a
savage beast, which has neither bounds nor limits, having no other moving but
it own extrauagant desire; and then soon or late, God does chasten the
Princes which do suffer such mischief among their people. This consideration
ought to be graued in letters of gold, in the hearts of Kings.

That it is true, that Duells do thrust the French to conspire against the
State, we will allege (among so many lamentable examples) but only the last
complot, which constrained your Majesty to go take order therein. Is it not
better (say they) to die in a Civil war, going about to advance and dignifie
a man's self, then to kill one an other foolishly every day, without any hope
of a better condition? So likewise, all the rest do enjoy the benefit of
peace, but we. Ah, wretched men! you spit against heaven, you enterprise
against yout natural Prince, to whom you do owe all. Ye perturbers of the
public rest, where is your judgment? To contend with this excellent Monarch,
so long a time in possession to destroy his enemies, there wants nothing but
his presence, to put all at his feet. It is the fable of the Pigmies and
Hercules. Who be the chief of your side? what be your means? The Duke of
Sauoy says, Lukewarm water to a scalded cat. The Archduke has a suit in
hearing, which is not ready to be decided. The King of Spain with his
faithful Counsel, takes the height of the Astrolabe, and attends an other
season. The wise and magnanimious King of England, holds his finger on his
mouth: who should be then your Captains? And put the case, that they that call
themselves friends of France, would put themselves in collar, what should be
your means? what Towns, what Comminalties would assist you? They will tell
you with a common consent, that they will not eat of it. They sweat, and pant
yet with travels past. Likewise your designs have had as much vanity, as
injustice, and presumption. Now all these pestilent feauers be grown, by the
iniquity of Duells, which makes their courage barbarous, and accustoming them
to blood, makes them enemies of humane society, and consequently of all piety.

Doubtless your Majesty, may very easily take away these pernicious and
deplorable confusions. Would your Majesty make it self culpable of so much
blood shed, for want of making obedience? They meddle with an imaginary
Honor: Is it not in the Sovereign Prince to make this error known, and to
take the Honor of his upon himself? Belongs it not to the head to guide the
body, when as from the conduct of the other members, a man can expect nothing
but miserable falls. When as the resolution of your Majesty, to give no more
Pardons shall be known, and published, (we say a zealous resolution, with a
solemn Oath before God) there is no man will dare to importune it: when you
are displeased, they dare not look upon your cabinet door, they dare not
breath within your Chamber, they dare not so much as imagine that there is any
thing to say to you although it concerns you. From whence comes this humble
respect? From the Honor that they bear to your Virtue, which they reverence,
acknowledging it, for that it has conquered, saved, and relieved this Estate.
Behold the sweet fruits that Virtue brings, that fair tree of life: But after
that your Majesty has made Laws, they go and humble themselves, they cast
themselves at your Majesty's feet, they press your Majesty, and your Majesty's
nature which is gentle, (not regarding the consequence) is very often carried
away, at the prayers of such a one as is sheltered from blows, and hazard. So
your Majesty do break the precious tables of your just decrees, or rather of
the decrees of heaven. To let ones self be vanquished, at the particular
importunity of iniust supplications, which absolutely do import the
Commonwealth, and to have the magnanimity, and clemency of Henry the 4. who
has subdued, and restored this Estate, is incompatible. That cannot agree. To
derogate from ones own ordinances, is like Penelopes web, and the Castles of
sand, which they feign to be done, and undone, upon the sea shore by little
children. It is to be always beginning. So the authority of the Prince is
despised, and all good government trodden under feet; likewise they say aloude
when they publish them, that it is for four days. The importance is, that the
King must answer for all: and that should awaken them that are most drowsy.

What must he do then? let him be firm and inflexible in these ordinances.
There must be none, if they be not just and equitable. If they be so, they must
observe them exactly. Two or three examples after the publication of them, will
stay, will extinguish these spoils, these fires which have overthrown, which
have consumed the fair polices, and the good customs of this Realm. A work
worthy to blot out a multitude of sins; a ladder to climb heaven, a triumph
which will make all your fore-passed Victories to shine, will readuance them,
and be as it were a second birth unto them.

Two months after a rigorous observation of your Edicts, there will be no more
speech of quarrels. It was seen by experience, after the publication of that
which was made at Fontaine-bleau, that they stayed four months throughout the
whole Realm, and not a man budged. Not one durst sound the forde, for fear
he should be lost, and serve for an example. They kept sentinel, to see what
would be the crackes of this threatening thunder. Folly slept: what a notable
thing is this. The first desperate man that hazarded the packet, having
obtained his pardon, opened the door of the Temple of Ianus, which had been
shut four months; whereby entered greater disorder, and more fearful then
before: on the contrary this example alone, this only bleeding, so seasonably,
would have kept all this great body from a pluresie.

Quarrels being taken away, your Majesty should be at rest, and not in
disquiet, as it is so often for furious folks. Strange Princes have a great
advantage over your Majesty: They be daily busied to know what victories their
subjects have had upon the common enemy of the faith, or against the particular
enemies out of their Dominions: And your Majesty is in a continual alarm with
your own subjects, who are always ready to fight, at feasts, at dauncings, at
play, at hunting, yea even in the holy places, presently after they have
received their Sacraments. O malediction! and wherefore? for spiders webs.

Your Majesty is brought to a marvelous servitude: it may redeem it self, by
making her ordinances to be punctually executed. The apprehension of
punishments will stay them, and there will be none so desperate, to put
themselves into an infinite Labyrinth of miseries for a fantasy of honor. If
there be any (as has been said) he shall serve for an example. Is it not
better to cut off an arm, then to let all the Body perish? That shall not be
rigor, it shall be clemency; it shall be the most high, and most profitable
Justice that can be imagined. The great ones (whose counsel you shall have
taken to make good laws) seeing this holy resolution, will be ashamed to sue
unto you, to destroy that which you shall have built by their own judgment.
If they do importune you, they shall be worthy to be denied, and that denial
shall deserve the glory due to your virtue. But how? would they dare to press
you to do that within your Realm, which they would not suffer in their own
houses?

Knowing and detesting the malediction of this custom, if we could return,
how happy should we be, to offer our selves in sacrifice for all France; and
that your Majesty would put us to death upon condition, that that which we
propound might be exactly observed! How glorious would this curse be? to give
two lives, to save so great a body. It would surpass all renowned deeds, both
ancient and modern.

But if the death of some few seem cruel, we say it is reasonable, that a
small number should be sacrificed for an infinite: some must necessarily
suffer for the public. It is to prevent a thousand inconveniences. Your
Nobility is wholly divided by means of quarrels. If your Majesty had
occasion to raise armies (as it may ariue) let men judge what mischiefs would
come thereby. At the meeting of the friends, kinsfolks, and allies of them
which be daily killed with the homicides. What coyles? what outrages? what
furies would there be? By this counterpoise, a man might know, that it would
be a very Christian pity, to cause so great a gain by a little loss. If
your Majesty do not redress these disorders, we must never hope for it. This
work with many others, is reserved for your goodness and good fortune. Alas!
for so many Gentlemen as die in France, there are made so many bone-fires in
Spain, and amongst the other enemies of the French name. They set up their
Trophies with your blood, they build with your ruins, and make themselves
great with your losses.

We know with all the world, that you are not a Nero; you have pardoned even
those, that have attempted your own person. It is certain that you never
loose any one of yours, but you have great sense of it, above all you are
sensible of the loss of them that have hazarded their lives to defend yours,
and to maintain your Laws. That is not enough, you must not stay in so fair a
way. What is to be done more? to make it appear by the effects, which do
speak of themselves.

There be certain laughers that fight not, who lets escape this saying, that
there is no hurt to draw blood from a body full of evil humors. It is the
most caniball and bleeding maxim of the world. Which savors with a full
throat the Democrasie of the Switzers, an impious maxim, and full of
ignorance. Impious, for it is against all Laws, divine, and humane. Full of
ignorance, for as much as it is not only the choler, and sleame that goes out,
it is the good blood, let us say the best oftentimes. They answer, that
quarrels arise commonly from the rash, and insolent; and that modest men who
usually are most valiant, do not begin them. It is a worthy objection. Is not
the world fuller of fools then of wise men? The French Nobility who accounts
Valor her summum bonum, is she not as ready as a flash of lightning? It comes
to pass then that the peaceable, by being in company, either for that they
are friends, kinsfolks, allies, or neighbors, be wrapped in these disorders:
not of their own motion, but by the instigation of others. So the ^ood blood,
is mingled with the evil. It were a high secret to know how to separate them.
No Alchimist is capable of it. See, how France is wounded, and torn with her
own hands; behold how she fills her self with desolations; in such sort, that
there is not a house in this kingdom, exempt from one of these two miserable
scourges, or from both together; from suite, or bloodshed. A lamentable thing
worthy of commiseration. But who craves the remedy, which is denied him by an
evil destiny; what means is there to abate these fumes, to temper these dog
days? We have said it so often: good Laws, and well observed, to busy and
content great minds, and to employ them. There be many just occasions, and
fair means enough.

Let us now consider the event of our misery, and let us weigh the good that
comes of it. Ah! how remarkable it is: the fair school, the fearful
example, God has showed in this prodigious effect, two things worthy to be
noted. The one, that he is just, and true, in that which he has said: Who
kills, shall be killed. Alas! we had rooted out the souls of others, from
their bodies, with an unmerciful iron, against the Law of God; and we have
been punished by our selves, by the same ways. Judges, and parties,
executioners, and criminalls, infringers of men's repose, and in danger to be
deprived of the heavenly rest. The other point remarkable is, that it must be
a vowed by force, that nothing is so detestable before the Majesty of God, as
the Duel, as it is practiced in this Realm. Oh just, oh admirable, oh
redoubtable judgments!

Do not you enter into this consideration? Yes, you do Sir: it penetrates all
your soul. Though you did not, yet should you cast your eyes, upon this
lamentable vessel your Nobility, peirced from ribbe to rib, which takes water
at all sides, which perishes by little and little, in all men's sight, ready to
make a pitiful strip wrack. The heart cannot fail, but the other members
must be without force, and all the world knows, the invincible heart of this
great Body cannot be subdued, but by it self. You are the Head, you are the
eyes, succor this noble part, which being weakened by so many conclusions, by
so much loss of blood, you can have neither moving, nor light, nor conduct,
nor vigor against the mischeifes, which grow so often within the entralls of
this Realm, nor against them, which may ariue from without.

Whosoever will narrowly mark to what a brutishnes the furies of the French
are mounted, he will tremble in the soul, he will find himself turned topsie
turuy, quite out of himself. When they speak of causes, which do engage to
Duel, they confess that according to God it is damnable wickedness, and yet
for all that they go to it. So as to practice Honor, as they do in these
days, it is just not to be a Christian: to make a glory of homicide is to love
Virtue, to heap up whole families with misery, with desolation, it is to be a
light of men: to conclude, it is to be the image of all gentleness, to know
well, how to efface, without cause, from the world the image of God.

They that have the dropsy of pride, that are puffed up with vanity, and
ignorance, will say this is spoken like Divines. In the estimation of this age,
it is an ill argument, to allege God, or to be a Christian. That is too
stale. Supporting our selves then with the reasons of the world, we say (to
them which had rather be beasts then men) that such combats are not only
against the Laws of God, but against all Humane laws; not only of
Christians, but of Infidells, which are now, or ever have been. Assyrians,
Egyptians, Persians, Medes, Greeks, Romans, and French. We go further, and
maintain, that this confession (that that which they do is evil according to
God) is not only impious and execrable for Christianity; but is also agreeable
to the ancient Roman heathen, who had mystically made two Temples; the one of
Honor, the other of Virtue; with such industry, that they could not enter into
the Temple of Honor, but by this last. Now among them, the principal, the
highest, and most triumphant Virtue, was, the reverence of their gods. Is not
this then a blasphemy, worthy of all sorts of punishments. For the
consideration of God being taken away may there be had any Virtue among men?
It is as if a man should boast of his soundness, and confess himself a
leper. From all this does arise a necessary consequent:

That true Honor cannot subsist without Virtue, which is his sprout, his root,
his body; as the other his branches, his flowers, and his fruit.

Our pitiful accident deserves to be culled out by particularities. Envy,
revenge, and other loose passions, whereof we have spoken in the beginning,
natural to man, and borne in his own Territory, were not the principal
organes of our mischief. There was no envy; we were neither companions, nor
neighbors, neither were we acquainted: desire of revenge there could not be,
choler must be first exhaled, there were blows given on both sides. What is it
then? I his effect is worthy to be digested. We were both of us peaceable,
shunning quarrels, detesting them, bearing both of us a perpetual remorse, a
worm of conscience, for those we had formerly had, knowing the evil we had
done, and repenting of it. Yet for all that, a choler, not of set purpose, but
by chance-medley, has caused our death. How?

By the consideration of Laws, of a false Honor, against our knowledge,
against our conscience.

It is then this weak imagination that has deprived us of the light. Here is
the great secret which vpholdeth so many calamities.

The circumstance following, is to be considered: The play at Tennis makes a
man impatient, and rash; an ordinary choler should be excused almost in all
persons, in such exercises. We should also pardon a choler, which is usual
with all them that be wronged; or that do persuade themselves they are so. The
one thought he had judged well, the other believed the contrary: the one in
passion with the play; the other (though without passion) yet deceived it may
be, by his ear. This was accordable: The foundation thereof was so feeble: It
was for a thing of nothing. Let us examine this. A third, which should have
brought a plaster, brought a sword. This is the second piece of our misfortune.

Which concludes; That the office of Challengers, is a most wicked and damnable
introduction.

Our choler met with this fatal commodity; without which, we had presently
bin at peace. For this first motion it is most common: they do use it every
where. They be miserable characters, and imperfect seals of humane weakness.
But this being appeased, and the first brunt qualified; to have a third, which
should have brought water, to cast brimstone into the fire; to have a third,
which should have served as a bar, to be a furtherer of the mischief; to
have a third, which should have bin the rampire, to be the key to open the
gates of death? being not wronged, neither having any part in the accident: it
surpasses all the impieties of the heathen. This blindness is followed with an
other. A man dares not hinder his friend, for fear to do him wrong; to what
end will a man reserve the testimonies of a good will? to what fair occasion?
But all these edifices built upon foundations of error and vanity, what can
they be but pure folly?

They say, We must not judge of right or wrong by the events. They are most
commonly as letters sealed up for the spirit of man; notwithstanding in this,
the judgment of God is very manifest. There is a man, charitable, discreet,
sincere in all his actions; in a word, the very model of all Christian
virtues: The general blindness, as a throng in a fair of insolent people,
thrusts him forward, and carries him to the combat, against his intent and
desire; he himself blames and condemns his own action: Heaven sees his
heart; a man would think that such an one would carry away the victory. There
is he destroyed, there rooted out from amongst men, as the most depraved. Ye
curious folks, that go diuing into the Center of most profound secrets; seek
not the cause any where else but in the Justice of God, who hates and detesteth
these wicked ambitions. Our example should make the hairs of all them that are
possessed with devils, to stand upright, who cast themselves upon death so
desperately. This lightning should dazzle, astonish, and overthrow, the eyes,
the hearts, and the designs of the most enraged. For seeing that the best do
die there, what should they expect, whole life is wholly infected with malice
and impurity?

God said to David, Thou shall not build my Temple, thou art a man of blood.
Strangers (oh great King) some years since, do accuse the Kings of France to
be such, because they do suffer these accursed combats. They speak it aloud
in public, they aggrauate this tolleration some pitying it, some laughing at
it. These judgments, these motives cannot be prevented, but by taking the
cause from the effect. Be pleased then to efface and root out this opprobry,
this scandal: disperse these fearful Comets, hanging and flaming with
horror over the heads of your subjects, and threatening your Estate with total
ruin. There is not any that has so much hurt by these mortal exhalations, as
your Majesty. So shall she surpass her Predecessors, in good and holy policy,
as she has done in greatness of courage, and in happy success. There had need
be a speedy remedy, and order given, to have the Governors of Provinces, the
Kings Lieftenants, the Seneshalls, and others, to strangle these infernal
Hydra's.

This pestilentiall fever, does run through all the Provinces of the Realm.
It is a contagious malady, but it is ordinarily most violent in Guyenne. They
fight there, ten against ten, twenty against twenty, as if they were in the
strength of the war. They force them which be at peace in their houses, to be
of the match, as if they were injured, and wronged in their Honor. The
Arabians are more like Christians, then these people. Who did ever see, in the
life of a conquering Monarch, victorious, absolute, in an age full of vigor,
and in a time of peace, men to make such combats? The consequence is great for
this province. This Bulwark, so near a neighbor to the retrograde aspect of
the Saturn of Castile, must not be suffered to be undermined. In the space of
four months, there were killed fifty Gentlemen in single combat, and
abundance were hurt. The Nobility of this Country, being so Martial, deserves
well to be husbanded with care.

Sir, you are the common Father of all your Subjects; principally, of your
Nobility: what can you do more Maiesticall or more magnificent, then to
prevent the loss of so many souls, who would serve you in honorable
occasions, and do destroy themselves in unworthy, and ridiculous actions?

For our parts, we do not bewail the loss of our life; a life, full of
trouble, of fraud, of misery in an age so corrupt. There is no way, but has an
issue, soon or late; we must have been let down to the haven. We lament only
for the offense we have committed against God, our King, and Country. If it had
been for the glory of God, against the Mahomets, that we had brought thither
our ardors, stretched out our arms, planted our feet: that our hands, and our
courages, had employed their forces, and their ambitions to defend the
Christian faith, and that we had remained in the throng, peirced with blows,
covered with blood and with dust, we should have thought our selves very happy.
So many blows, so many drops of blood, would have been so many Palms, so
many Laurells in heaven. There it is, where magnanimity should thunder, and
fulminate; it is there, that a man should surmount all the infirmities of man.
If it had been for the service of your Majesty, and of the Country, against
the sworn enemies of the Estate, we should have ended our course with
contentment. We knew we were not borne only for our selves. The end of every
thing is the good of it: we were destinated for these causes: If any of these
had ended the last act of the tragedy, we should have had wherewithal to
comfort and glorify our selves. But alas, it was for a light and weak
occasion, from which patience, and good judgment should have defended us.
After we had escaped from so many great combats, from so many hazards, in a
peaceable time for all the rest: knowing the fault was heinous which we did,
and against our own conscience: obscuring (oh miserable blindness) the former
good actions, by the last, which should have crowned the work: we accused, we
condemned our selves, as witnesses, and judges of our crime, being bewitched,
and enchaunted, by the foolish opinion of mad men, and fearing more their
reproaches, then the divine justice: o profound, o redoubtable judgment of God!

Be pleased then to think upon an order: do this chief work (magnanimious
King) as you have brought many others to an end, though never any more notable,
more necessary, more glorious. For the rest it did particularly concern your
Majesty: Fortune, necessity and shame, were mingled therewith, they were
vapors, and clouds before the sun, in this it shall be all radiant, there
shall be nothing but the shining of your Virtue: all the work shall be your
Majesty's, all the glory hers. What glory? to be triumphant over fortune, time,
and death. But what can be imagined more exquisite, then to take away this
pernicious custom brought forth by hell? to remit the Nobility, as it was
before, to reserve these lofty and heroyicke spirits for the service of your
Majesty, and the Commonwealth? They be not borne for themselves only. If that
were so, they should have no more privilege then the common sort: but the end
of their advantages, and of their greatness, is the good of their Country: and
these advantages have never been acquired by Duel. Who knows it better, or so
well as your Majesty? Who knows it like your Majesty? who have a thousand
times hazarded your life to save this Kingdom; who have run so many
miserable Fortunes to make happy this Estate? who have forgotten her self,
only to be mindful of the good of France? a generous oblivion, and truly
Royal. Why? because she has fetched back her name from the gulphes of
forgetfulness. This consideration enclines too much to the vain man: it was
common with the ancient Greeks and Romans. There is another more Christian
consideration that is, That she has redeemed so many thousand persons from all
sorts of calamities, and from despair. The end of the government of Kings, and
the mark of their weighty charges, is, to conserve the people, and to make
them happy; that is likewise the end of them, who are ordained to execute their
just commandments for the maintenance of the Estate; and which is more, it is
the obligation of them both.

It now concerns your Majesty by her Prudence, and Wisdom, to establish
good and holy Laws upon this subject. How? Are they not published thoroughout
all France? It belongs then to her Authority, to make them to be observed from
point to point, as we have said. All depend of her: they expect and hope for it
from her goodness and justice.

A fair Order, and the execution of it.

From these two, will proceed a remedy, a profit, and a glory. The first, for
all the Estate; the last, for your Majesty; but the profit will be the
Common. This can no way be compared but to it self, considered in the
conservation of the most excellent Kingdom of Christendom; and the glory that
You shall get thereby, shall be measured by the space of all the ages to come.

So (invincible King) if you do conserve your Nobility for your service, and
for the common good, you shall banish the scandal of the Realm, you shall
take away this evil example, of a stinking smell to all Christendom, yea even
to the Mahomet Infidells. You shall cleanse it from abundance of blood, so
barbarously shed continually, you shall efface in part her ill reputation, you
shall turn back the fury of heaven, and keep your self from blame before
God, which is of greatest importance for the salvation of your Majesty. What
trophies, what triumphs for one only effect! What effect? an effect as easy
to execute, as to speak of. For it, the World will give you Crowns of Palm,
but Heaven will reserve for you Crowns of Cedar, which are incorruptible.

Mark what the Ghosts do say to the greatest and most Magnanimious of Kings.
If they have spoken with any defect, as obscure, they are excusable. If they
have given any holy advise, it ought to be received and embraced, but chiefly
to be executed. And be it known, that the highest knowledge of mortal men,
(above all of great ones) is, (hinking of the end) to exercise Piety and
Justice: for they be heavenly buildings, by proof of time and death, which do
abide firm and stable. The rest, even to the Septers and Crowns, is a Shadow.

FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE OF VALOVR: WHEREIN IS EXACTLY showed in what it consists.

By the Sieur de CHEVALIER.

DEDICATED TO THE FRENCH KING HENRY IIII.

And translated by THO. HEIGHAM, Esquire,

Printed by Cantrell Leg. 1624.

To the KING.
SIR,
TO the most Just, the Balance; to the most Valiant, the Sword. To whom may
this Discourse of Valor be more lawfully dedicated, then to your Majesty?
Kings and People give Her place. They all with one consent do give Her this
advantage without envy, knowing that She has well deserved it. It was
dedicated to your Majesty eleven years since; since which time, there has
not one year passed, but I have given your Majesty some thing, and you have
not given me any thing. This disproportion did put me back: your Majesty
having done me the honor to say often, That I was one of the old servants of
her house, and an honest man. At this second Edition I would address it to
some other. I looked among Srangers, among (...): In the end, I found it
behooued not to change the North. Strangers do atttribute this glory unto You,
to be the perfect model of Valor; Your own do confess, that that which
they know of this excellent Virtue, has been learned under the lightnings and
invincible force of your Arms: they be Triumphs unto them, to have profited
in so famous a School. So I do cansecrate it to your Majesty, for the second
time. The Worlds eyes are upon your Majesty for Valor: The World looks upon
you for Justice. Men do attend to see how your Majesty will effect the
solemn Oath you made, to take away the horrible confusion of Quarrels. They
hope for the execution of it, and then the complaint which I make for my
particular, (whereof I do attribute the cause rather to my self, then to your
inclination, absolutely Royal and Heroical) and that which Christendom makes
for the general, shall be effaced, by the most rare Trophy that ever was
erected to any Prince of the earth. Even as you are the Greatest, I pray God
prosper your Majesty for ever: remaining

SIR, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject, and servant:
CHEVALIER.

A DISCOVRSE of VALOVR.
THe Ignorance of the Time, is the first cause of all Mischiefs: It is
admired, because it pleases, followed as a Law; a testimony of the
brutishness of the Age: entertained by obstinacy, an infallible argument of
her continuance, as also of the blindness of souls. To drive away the false
appearance of Virtue, and to bring in the true knowledge of it: to please ones
self with that which is only worthy of admiration: to resolve to a firmness
of the knowledge, which wholly lighteneth the understanding; were very hard, in
a time wherein violence only reigns with hypocrisy; wherein that above all
is perfect which contents the weak, and wherein error is defended by passion
only, and reverenced as an Oracle. Yet we must not forbear to take away the
veil, to show the way, and to give light to these darkenesses. For him that
does enterprise it, there can nothing happen worse: For the others, they that
will not vnblindfold themselves, nor enter into a good course, nor follow the
true ship-lanterne, though they remain confused, though they go astray,
though they fall through this darkness; yet will it be a pleasure to them,
whose sovereign good is blindness and error.

Among all the false opinions that have slid into us, and that this beast
without eyes Ignorance, has brought in with so much authority; there is not
any one, either more remarkable, or more important, then this that they have
now of Valor, of this Virtue the Queen of Virtues; of this stable basis of
souls, of this rampire from mischiefs, of this scourge of fortune, of this
contempt of death. There is nothing more common amongst us, then these words,
of Valiant and Valor; so many people are honored with this venerable title,
and so few deserve it. This is the Philosophers stone which men seek no more:
But which has been found by many thousands. If this conquest be so easy, let
fair souls, firm, and full of judgment, speak their opinion thereof, when
I shall have traced out the ground-plot of it.

There be three necessary pillars to this Virtue, and builded with such
symmetrie and proportion, that if you take but one of them away, you shall have
ruin in stead of building. For her accomplishment, and entire perfection, the
pieces required be comprised in this divine number, wherewith heaven is so well
pleased, they be matter, form, compass, and the rule of this excellent
Palace of Wonders. There be three principles necessary to the action of all
Virtues, and more particularly to this, then to all the rest; that is to say
knowledge, will, and habitude. Magnanimity, greatness of courage, or Valor, as
men do commonly call it, has for her subject, things which bring fear: that
is, her jurisdiction: there is the extent of her dominion. He then that goes
in danger must first know it, or else the effect that follows shall be a
work of Fortune, or of rashness. Will comes after, which is the first issue of
our affections, and of our designs. The third part, is Habitude (that is to
say) an action done many times. These circumstances must be waighed, to see, in
what principally consists, a Virtue so divine. Knowledge, which is the eye of
the understanding, as this is of the soul; this radiant light is first
required, as the guide which shows the way, and the just Sunne-dyall, which
conducteth by the true way with certain knowledge. Ignorance of the peril,
makes an infinite number hazard, by want of Judgment, and experience; that
happneth to young men, that are transported with passion, who give themselves
no time to consider of that they enterprise. It comes also to others, for
that they do not comprehend how hot a business it is. Let us leave the first
branch, to represent the second in all the parts.

It is requisite that he that goes to a danger, which he knows, which he
has well waighed; that he do it willingly, and not be forced thereunto, by
any strange, and foreign cause, that no other consideration, but only the
virtuous action do put him forward. Then Will (the beginner of our actions)
comes after Knowledge. This inflaming of our soul, this violent love to
laudable things; this first wheel which turns all the parts of the soul; it
must be simple and pure, not moved but of it self. It must not enterprise
upon that which is out of her government, that is, it must follow that which
is most perfect: It must contain it self within her own bounds, and
jurisdiction: Virtue only, must be her sacred and inviolable Law, she knows
no other way but that. If the intention to make a man's self immortal by
renown; if desperate necessity, if the defense of his life, and of his
liberty; if the hope of gain, if love, if jealousy, if ambition, if despair,
if obstinacy, if envy, if the presence of the Prince, and other foreign
causes, do make a man go into a perilous action: this is no action purely
virtuous, and worthy of praise. Now Virtue is content with her self, she has
all at her own home, she borrows not; is infinitely rich with that which
grows in her own territory, her rents do suffice her to operate according
to her flight, although in certain things she may have need of Fortune. Yet I
do not say, that she is in perfection, or that she may be; for then a man
should put off his humanity, and that were to seek a Valor in the air, as
the Commonwealth of Plato, or the perfect Orator of Cicero. But I say, that
the first and principal end of him that does virtuously, ought to be an action
simple and purely virtuous. That should be the end of it. Let not the first
intention of him that goes to an exploit of danger (knowing it well) be the
hope of immortality; but let him go thereto, although he should know, that
that effect would remain in the grave; that his birth, and death, should be
both at a time: that he should have his reward with the worms, and sad
silence; let him not forbear to do well, because it is his duty.

Among the heathen, they were persuaded, that they ought to die for the
Commonwealth, and that that voluntary sacrifice of their lives for the public
(which they did in a moment) brought unto them a perpetual sacrifice among
men, who put such men in the rank of the gods. It was not only a provocation;
it was a furious transportation, a desperate madness, which rapt them to all
sorts of dangers, by the hope of immortality. It was a sweet usury. So Curtius
cast himself into the fearful gulf of Rome, to make the inundation cease,
which (following the answer of the Oracle) could not be stayed but by that
means. So Sceuola went into the Camp of Porsena to kill him, thinking by the
death of this King to make the Romans victorious: So Horace, who was called
one eyed, since that remarkable effect, stayed alone upon the bridge of the
town of Rome, and sustained the violent assault of enemies, with astonishment
of all: So the three twinbrothers, did fight against three puissant Frenchmen,
to decide the difference between them, and the people of Rome, by the mutual
consent of both armies. It was the hope to make themselves immortal, by a
famous renown. It was the statues, and temples of Honor, which were promised
them, that caused in them the contempt of death. If a man should have come and
said, to the first poor Roman Knight; When thou shall be cast into this
horrible gulf, which threateneth all thy town with shipwreck; there shall be
no more remembrance of thee; thou shall have no other oblation, but those of
thy self and thy horse: And thou Sceuola, thou deceiuest thy self, to think
that the Romans do erect statues and altars to thy Virtue. Horace, if thou
die to defend thy Country, the earth, the common Sepulture, or Tiber, shall
be thy proud monuments, and the only trumpets of thy glory. You twin-brothers,
who run to death, for the Commonwealth of Rome, all the Laurells that shall
remain unto you, shall be the complaints of your kindred, and the tears of
your wives. It is to be presumed that Curtius upon the brimme of that fearful
gulf would have given a musroll to his horse. The second being ready to root
out this barbarous Kings soul from his body, would have told him the secret in
his care; so far would he have been from putting his hand in the fire with so
incredible a constancy. The third would not have lost his eye as he did, he
would have bin troubled with a phillip as a man would say, not caring otherwise
for the iournall of Land, which he should have had in recompense of so
admirable a prowess. He would have cast himself at the beginning into the
water all whole, as he did at the end all peirced with blows. The three
brothers would have all eadged their wives, their children, and the
unmeasurable greatness of those French-bodies to be exempt from fightings, or
rather would have feigned themselves sick: But the desire to make themselves
as gods to posterity, made them hazard their lives, by a foolish hope, and a
vain opinion of immortality. It was then a false Valor. In that case, the
Honorable desire to serve the Commonwealth, should only have put them
forward; the desire to do well, and not to get a famous name after death, or
recompense after victory. Yet, notwithstanding that is the least imperfect
Valor which is built upon the belief of a perpetual renown, a work of
fair laudable hope, and worthy of reward, because of the example, and of the
profit that may come thereby to Commonwealths. The Turks, who are so
courageous, and make no account of their lives; do not deserve by this means,
in any fashion whatsoever, the name of Valiant; because they hazard themselves,
upon the hope that they have to taste the agreeable delights, which are promised
them, in that pleasant Paradise of Mahomet. They be works of faith, the strong
wings of a false persuasion, that has so charmed them; and having plucked out
the eyes of their soul, do cover also the eyes of their body, to make a
bloody sacrifice of all. Should they have the apples, and the fair maids of
the Alcoron taken from them; they would have much more affection to life, then
now they have of brutish resolution to death.

If the desire to gain glory, and to perpetuate a man's name, do not deserve a
perfect praise, coming alone in consideration; much less is the effect which
proceeds from a desperate necessity worthy of Honor. The banished men at
Antwerp being but six thousand did wonders, because they knew well, that by
the military Laws of Spain, they should never find mercy with their Prince,
no more then the English with the Spaniards at Sea; who for that cause have
recourse to the cruel element of fire. But if pardon might be for the one, and
courtesy for the other, it is to be supposed they would not make so good
reckoning of their skins. There be a thousand considerations in this deed,
which would be too long to deduce, of which we must weigh some only.

Ambition, Love, and Covetousness, do produce great effects, cheifely Ambition
at the Courts of great ones. It is fury, that carries away the soul, that
troubles the brain, that bewitcheth; a strange Magitian, which overthrows
all, and sometimes gives the lions courage to Hearts. To enter into credit, to
be honored, and esteemed of great Ones, and likewise of the Prince; to attain
to gouernements. There be some that do despise death, and oftentimes these
three causes, that I have named, do concur to end the tragedy the sooner.
All these effects, be false Valors, because they be forced; and if not
altogether, at the least somewhat like those of pyoners. It ariueth also unto
them, as to those that play upon Theaters, who have the headbands royal, and
the clubbe of Hercules; but this is neither so heavy, nor so massy, as that of
this great man's was; neither do these Purple-robes, and these Scepters, make
them Kings that do wear them. At the Court near the shining lights of the
world, there be foolish and blind souls, which do swell, move, lift
themselves up, and being thrust forward with vanity, so natural to man, and
so familiar at the Courts of Princes, do enterprise with hazard. See what the
desire is to be greater then others, and to go before them, not in laudable and
virtuous actions, but rather in dignities. Mark this chase to pride. Ambition
and envy be the weak ladders by which some do ascend to reputation. This is
to take Honor by a Scalado. Sometimes the ladder breaks, and so they escape
it; there are they in a litter for ever, an undoubted testimony of a base and
artificious soul; resembling the woman, that in old time gave the Oracles;
being animated by the devil she prophesied; and as as soon as he had
forsaken her, the gate was shut against her, for things to come. It is a
deuillish Valor, which does neither move, nor breath, but by the most blind
and furious passions. If by these ways, being raised on high, they can catch
Honor, and some government, according to their mind; they make knots like
reeds: they rest themselves, begin to play Doctors with the furred gown, and
cast themselves upon discourse; saying, That there is a time to get; a time to
keep the thing gotten, that a man must play the good husband, and not be
always thus, that they know, that the excellent aeconomie of a generous and
noble soul, is to be always prepared, in the duty of a man of honesty and
Honor, which cannot be justly rejected of any age, of any, quality, nor of any
rank. There be no letters of Chancery can help therein.

Love also, does admirably whet the courage, it does animate it, and while the
fever continues, it puts on violently; the fit being past, there remains
nothing but a shadow. Paris loosing himself with contemplation of the rare
beauties of his Helen, admiring so many marvelous things in this chief work,
so soon as she represents unto him the reputation of Menelaus, the highness
of his courage (showing him thereby that generous women are not friends of
cowards) enterpriseth a combat against him. The sweet words that love, and
beauty made slide down from her lips; happy Arabia that respired nothing but
heavenly Manna, slid into his soul with such force, that he found himself
wholly moved, quite altered, and returning as from a swound, resolves (to
make himself worthy of the love of so fair a Mistress) to assault this
excellent champion: He thinks long to be at handy blows, remembers no more
Cipres powder, nor the curling iron for his hair; he has nothing in his
understanding but the ruin of his enemy; he burieth him already by hope, he
gives him the mortal blow, rids himself at one time, of a troublesome man;
and gets for ever a pleasing shefriend. This inspiration of Love, being
vanished away; and the fumes of the altar of Venus being past, he remembers
himself of his Helen, not to be pleasing unto her, and to make himself worthy
of so rare a possession, but indeed to make himself sure of her. He has
recourse to flight, and has great need to be covered with the cloud of Venus,
in which he shows, that the Carpet-Knights, are not such friends of the
sword, as of perfumes. This is a false Valor, that makes this spruce ado to
assault one of the strongest and most redoubted men in the world. He gained no
Honor thereby, because the fear of death had more power over him, then either
the desire of immortalizing his name, or the consideration of his duty.

Jealousy, and Envy, which be two deuillish instruments, have no less power;
and there have been some found, who (thrust on by their rages) have done
miracles. The covetousness of all times, has held a great rank among men; and
more in this corrupt age then ever it did. It has showed notable effects, in
times past, and does daily produce extraordinary ones. Notwithstanding, there
is not any of sound judgment, that does call the actions of such as are
mastered, with these monsters of vice, Valor.

Despair has also a great share thereof, and the desire to die; whether it
comes of Love, or of any other malady, corporal or spiritual, from which a
man cannot be delivered. The example of the Soldier of Cyrus, is as notable
as well known: Near that same great King, who made the second Monarchy, whom
the heaven had enriched with so many graces, who was accompanied with so many
virtues; whose luster was both the wonder and astonishment of the World. There
was a simple Soldier, who amongst all was remarked to have an vndauntable
courage, and to be so resolute in the most dangerous encounters, that it seemed
he was a Faerie, like Achilles; so as the opinion to be invulnerable; made him
contemn the hazard. The admiration of this so rare a Valor, gave a desire to
this great Monarch to enquire more particularly of this man, whom he found to
be afflicted with a strange malady, whereof he made him to be dressed so
carefully, that in the end he was healed. After that, he was never seen to
hazard himself as he used before: he was not the man he was wont to be. Cyrus
asking him the reason, he answered, That he that caused him to be healed was
the only cause thereof; and confessed unto him, that the malady which he had
before was so insupportable, that to rid himself of it, he sought his end in
that manner. The health of his body made his spirit sick. He ran after a
common evil, to shun a thousand extraordinary: he sought one death, to rid
himself of many. It was despair, which proceeds only from weakness. You
shall not see any of these vulgar spirits, and which are not debonaire, but at
the first grief grow faint, and desire their last end to be delivered thereof.

So there be a thousand passions which do animate, and do not doubt but
outward things do serve thereunto. Flutes were in use amongst the ancient
Lacedaemonians when they went to fight, as at this day trumpets and drums: but
without doubt it is more for courages which are not firm, and for irresolute
spirits, then for the generous, which have no need of sauce to get them a
stomach. Amongst all that moves so much, the presence of great Ones, and
chiefly of the Prince is one. He that is advanced upon the Theater, abutted
near the Sun, and the Stars, illuminated with the great lights of the
Kingdom; though he were a pusillanimious Adon, he would become a Roger; a Lark
there would play the Eagle, a Hare the Lion; especially when there is a
magnanimious King, such an one as Ours, the light of all Christian Princes, the
admirable and inimitable example of Valor; a thundering tempest in combats,
whose heart is so high, that no mortal thing can shake it. He that shall come
before so excellent a Prince, that shall be seen of Jupiter, and shall not be
as hardy as Theseus and Samson, has a courage lower then the Center of the
earth, and is unworthy ever to lift up his head, and to behold the Sun. Let
this wretch that shall come and play such a cowardly trick before this great
Warrior, bury himself alive for a just punishment: let him pull out his eyes,
as in old time the Emperors of Constantinople did one to another; or let him
go and be a dead pay in Hungary all his life; pierce there the arms of those
Infidels, pass upon the point of their pikes and of their swords, to repair
such a fault.

Truly, Death is a terrible and fearful image: there is no spirit so high,
so resolute, so disdainefull of peril, but does apprehend some shadow of the
grave: but a man must not put himself to this trade, if he do not know that he
is of a good stamp. Virtues be not natural; we have indeed some disposition,
some more, some less, to receive them. Valor being a Virtue, ought to be
considered in that manner; her birth is feeble, she is not in perfection,
blood is not capable alone to draw this picture to the life, this picture so
rare, so excellent, so divine. The lively colors must be taken from example
and meditation. If Valor were natural, all men should have it from their
birth, as also the other Virtues: but it is acquired by knowledge and habitude.
We must not find it strange, if for the punishment of pride and presumption,
the strongest cords of courage be sometimes loosed, and men admired for this
Virtue do commit notable faults; and besides, men are not disposed at all
times alike. I will recount the memorable history of the Lord D'Aussun, as it
was represented unto me by a Gentleman of Honor and Quality, who was at the
battle of Dreux, because it serves to this purpose. This generous Caualier,
who had acquired so fair a name, that in a commendation of excellency, they
would say, The stoutnesse of d'Aussun, in this battle fled with the rest:
returning to himself, (as a Lion, who passing through the Forest, hearing the
noise of the branches, flies until he be out, then turning his head, strikes
himself with his tail to enter into fury, and returns to the same place from
whence he came) this hardy Lion returned to the combat, where in the midst
of the throng, he showed that he did not bear so honorable a Title
unworthily; he appeared like thunder, made himself to be felt like a tempest
that overthrows all; made himself redoubtable to his enemies, and admirable
to both the armies. The combat being ended, and he as full of honor, as mad
with despite, extolled of his friends and enemies, went to bed, and resolved
to die for the displeasure he took for his flying. Monsieur de Guise that then
was, went to see and comfort him, and attributed much glory to him in the
presence of all. To which he answered: How (Sir) you that are the most
Valorous Prince that lives at this day, have you taken pains to visit the most
cowardly and base that ever was borne, a man unworthy to see the light? No, no:
I am worthy of a cruel punishment, and not of the praise that you give me,
which I do justly reject because I do not merit it, and will make another man
of my self, because I have too well deserved it. He died a while after for
want of eating. A man could not Christianly praise this excess: but the rest
testified a soul truly virtuous, and a courage without doubt magnanimious. It
is to be considered, that in this exploit almost all the Army-royall, were put
to flight. To retire, seemed rather wisdom then cowardlinesse: and if there
had been a fault in it, he repaired it again, if it be true as I have said,
that he returned to the Combat. If not (as some believe the contrary) yet his
fault was common and well accompanied. He was ravished with this confused
disorder, and carried away by the multitude of flyers. So many honest men,
courageous, resolute, and full of reputation, did fall into the same
inconvenience, that he might have attributed it to the good fortune of the
enemies, have supported it with patience as others did, have comforted himself
in the representation of so many notable proofs, which he had given of his
Valor, and upon the common opinion, that arms are uncertain. But his
conscience served him as a thousand witnesses, his heart was the great
comptroller, he found he was a stranger to himself, not having been accustomed
to fall into such defaults. This change of his courage, shaken with a wind of
feeble humanity, which fears death, had afflicted him; being one that had a
sense so exquisite, and so tickle in things of Honor, and in actions of
Virtue. An Heroique spirit, and jealous of it self, who chose an extraordinary
and unjust death, not for any fault committed, but for omitting the custom of
doing well, and according to the measure of that stoutnesse so much esteemed.
He would content himself, and not an other; in his manner, not to the mind of
others; according to his own rule, not to the rule of strangers; it was the
fear to have done amiss, which is a pricking provocation to do well. There
have been found some at Court, who having given good proofs of their Valor in
a day of battle, and made others bear the marks of their courage, and
invincible resolution; because they escaped the business, and did not die with
their friends, feared that they did ill. We must avow, that such persons be well
borne to Virtue, which is not fed either with public smoke, or with another
man's opinion, but with her own knowledge, being balanced, and knowing her
self, her weight, and her price. There be not amongst a hundred such fair
souls.

Now the fear not to do well, is the first motive that carries away the
generous spirit, and which moves it with more force, then the crowns of
Oak, and the triumphs did the ancient Romans. They that go about to
content themselves first, though they were in dens, in the grave (if it were
possible) will never fail in their duty. When they have exploited effects,
admired of all; they do not rest upon the general voice, the common judgment
does not fill them, they believe assuredly, that this action is not exactly
accomplished. Phidias for his works, was in an incredible reputation; and not
any thing of that he did most perfectly did content him. His house being on a
fire, he cried to save the Satyr, which was an admirable piece, not that he
esteemed it perfect, but rather imperfect in his fantasy. I will say, that
those spirits have Ide'as of forms, and proportions, which do ravish all the
rest, in some scantling of their beauty. But for their contentment, it is not
sufficient, they have remaining yet a great hunger.

Obstinacy also, which is a terrible wild beast, that no reason can appease;
has done strange things, which do approach the magnificent works of Virtue,
and be but shadows, idols, and fantasies. There be a thousand examples in
histories of the obstinacy of the Jews. This great Town of Paris would
furnish out one, not only extraordinary, but fearful. They be hellish rages
bringing forth prodigious effects; which for that respect, are neither laudable
nor immitable, because they are without Virtue. A thousand Aposted-manslayers,
have despised death, and knowing well that they could never escape, yet have
not forborne to execute their designs. They be in the Chronicles for an
example of abomination, and not of imitation: But Judith, and Debora, who did
hazard themselves for their people, whose end was good and holy; have left
their memory glorious, with as much astonishment at the greatness of their
courage, as a laudable envy to follow them in so laudable a careere.

There is yet a moving cause, which is called Emulation, which may be defined;
a desire to do better then others, or in despite of others. Emulation is the
leaven of all fair deeds, if it be married with the fear to fail, as we have
already said. It is the heavenly seed of Actions, truly worthy of praise, and
of perpetual memory. It is the sacreed seed, which thrusts out the Palms, the
Laurells, and the Cedars; but for that it was not well ruled, nor understood,
it has often been an instrument of shame, and ruin. Alarm of the most
sleepie, quicksilver of young and old, rauishment of the most unmanly. If thy
beauty were not painted, if thy Nectar were not poisoned, if thou were not
gisguised and apparelled with borrowed garments, how excellent should thou
be Divine Princess, lively, light of souls: but thou art quite changed, and
through the ignorance of men; more of an other, then of thy self. The fear of
failing, must accompany this moving: Into which whosoever will narrowly look,
will judge, that the good will to do better then others, has been the Viper,
which being borne, does devour that which did beget it. Emulation the
efficient cause of Virtue has devoured her part; has destroyed Virtue it
self: they have put to this drink venomous ingredients, they have troubled
the clear spring, they have covered with a cloud, a fair Sun. Emulation
should give a desire to a man to do perfectly well, according to Virtue; so as
no man may do better (at least in will) with knowledge of the cause; and only
because it must be so, and not because others do it. Although he only should
remain in this action, that no other should travel with this wind, that no
other should run at this tilt; moreover that there should no advantage come to
him thereby, either of greatness or profit: yet notwithstanding let him not
leave to seek it with as much passion and vehemence. This shining flame of
Virtue has been spoiled by ignorance, and by pride, deuillish serpent, so
natural to man, this first resort of sin; this father of death which has
mingled all the cards. Envy is entered with it into this Province, these
monsters have foraged all: Men run into hazards, they go thereunto hanging
down their heads, they precipitate themselves thereby, being not able to
serve the Commonwealth; carried with rage they find nothing too hot; to exceed
others they would have wings, or feet of wind, as Achilles had. To him that
asks to what this transport tends; every one will say (masking his
intention) that it is a desire to do well. Vice never accuses it self. See
the end which judges of all. It was against a wall, at the shadow of smoakes
of the Canon, and of the Harquebuzes, in a place where they could not annoy the
enemies, where the hazard was all of rash men, to the detriment of the Prince,
and of the Commonwealth. From whence come these storms? It is pride, it is
ambition, violent passions, which do bear such fruit. The desire to see a man's
self in greater esteem by fools, thinking that therein consists the true
glory, and the point of Honor. Valor is no fool, she regards the
beginning, the midst, and the end. This fair triangle, is the rule of her
motions and steps; she knows the danger, she goes thereto by the good way;
her end is, to profit her King, or her Country, in doing her duty. She mockes
at them, that makes themselves be peirced for pleasure, without being able to
be profitable: she says, that they have too much blood, (which they drew in
old time from the Roman soldier that had been rash) she vaunts that she
will sell her self very dear; that they shall not have her cheap, and that
her Cypres trees shall not be alone, nor without fruit. If these furious
courages, as I have said were corrected by judgment; they would be without
doubt, fit for all high and hard executions. They do employ themselves most
commonly in that which is least necessary: and this gallant, and active humor
is unfitly lost, with actions which are neither fair nor profitable.

These are the principal outward causes, which do thrust the souls, guide
the eyes, carry the hands to great executions, and makes them see false actions
of Virtue. There remains one, and the mother of all the artificial Valors.
It is the Honor, the Lantern of the ship, the Pilot, and the Port. I say the
appearing Honor, and not the true Honor. The appearing, or vulgar Honor is
by force, to content others: the true Honor is voluntary to content ones
self: the one, will only shun blame and reproach; the other leads to
dangers, not only not to fail, but to do well: the one lets himself be
drawn thereunto by fear of reproach, or else by this so martial a zeal of a
Gentleman: the other runs thereunto by a laudable and gallant will, to profit
the Commonwealth, and to do virtuously. In which there is a notable
difference. But if a man could read within their hearts, there be many that do
run the fortune of their life (defending their bodies) that would have no
will to be at such banquets, if they were not afraid, that they should be
afterward made blush with shame. When such people do light upon so hot work,
how they loose their judgment, how they go all astray, how their heart does
pant, and their blood is all icie. They should make imprecations in their soul
against that heretic, which invented these fair titles of duty and Virtue.
Such men should be dispensed withal for wearing of swords, seeing they be so
ill fitting thereunto, and Kings and Commonwealths should also be dispensed
with, for not giving them any advantage above other men. In which,
notwithstanding it must be considered, that there is a difference of those, and
the like actions of Virtue, as of white to black, and of the day to the night.
He that is pricked forward only with a desire not to fall into reproach and
infamy, does a laudable act, with some little beam of Virtue, and a feeble
color. The life whereof is kept by the apprehension of the blame. These be
souls half lightened. There be many that do thus meet with hazards, being
therein engaged, either for their rank, or by reason of their places, or by
some other occasions they encounter-with, who go to blows gallantly in show,
yet would be glad to be out of it, what advantage soever might come unto them
thereby. Be it, that they be borne great enough of themselves, and happy
without aspiring further; or that their inclination does not agree with this
troublesome trade. They watch perpetually, that their play may not be
discovered. What a miserable life is this? It is to give a great advantage to
fortune over them, making themselves subect to a thousand troublesome
accidents, in which men truly virtuous, and desirous to do well, have no
share. For mark you how they work. They believe they are borne to do well,
not to be of the common sort of men, to serve their Prince, and their Country;
to assist the weak, to punish the wicked, to maintain justice. They know that
they are obliged thereunto, by divine and humane Laws, as also by the Laws of
nature. What they do is voluntary, having no other end but to do well,
expecting no recompense, carrying this incorruptible model of true Honor in
their understanding, which lifts them up, inflames them, and transports them,
with all the gracious inchauntments, with all the amarous bates of Virtue,
which is the most rauishing figure that can be imagined. They go to death
without fear, and without apprehension, so much as humane nature can permit,
not only because duty does oblige them (that is too common) but because they
will produce a fair action. Others do keep themselves from failing and doing
evil, by carrying themselves virtuously, because duty does constrain, and
straightly bind them thereunto; and these do not expose so precious a gage as
life, only for the consideration of that effect; but for the desire they have
to profit others, and to approach the nearer by such actions to the divinity.
Not to fail in things of great importance, not to fall into shame, and to
keep themselves from reproach, is a common thing with the most part. But to
make himself remarkable by doing well, to go about to make himself famous
by fair actions; is not proper, but to them only, that are wholly Virtuous.
Those souls girt about with the divine beam, can bring forth nothing that is
common, base, or unworthy. Great things do appertain unto them, and it is
for them that the Cedars be planted.

The third pillar that sustaineth the holy work, of the most worthy Virtue
that is amongst men, is Habitude, that is to say, An action repeated, and done
many times, which ought to be considered, as the true touch of arms, and the
Sovereign Judge, which judges in the last resort of all fair actions. It is
not all to know the danger, and to go thereto willingly, as I have said, with
all the circumstances; but a man must go many times one masters trick only:
how bold soever he be, makes not a good artizan, neither does one only act of
Virtue make a man virtuous. It is this Sovereign sounding plummet of hearts,
that makes a man sweat blood, and water. It is it that culleth out most
curiously, it is the expert workman which ends this triumphant portall, with
all the dimensions. There be an infinite number, who for that they have not
balanced this high consideration; or (to speak better) not having conceived,
or imagined it, after one virtuous action only, have sounded the retreat, and
so contented themselves. There be others, after two or three fair actions,
besides their own particular contentment, have come to a presumption,
measuring themselves by their shadow, full of pride: for the opinion they have
that they are of a good stamp, not knowing that the end judges of all our
life, and that there is no time limited to virtuous effects, but that which
comes with the coffin, and the burning torches. Not that I will say, that they
which are heaped up with Honor, and by a thousand sufficient testimonies of
their Valor, have been made famous, shall seek all occasions, and hazard
themselves like young men, or such as have done no great extraordinary matter.
But when occasion shall be offered, and that the loss which they may make of
themselves shall not be so prejudicial, as the profit of the Commonwealth
shall be thereby great; they must do like other men. This Carreere of Glory is
infinite; a man must find no end of it, but by the last end; nor ever be weary
or filled therewith, so long as his hand can furnish his courage. We must not,
for all that, come to such unmeasurable passions, and unruly motions of such a
blind and mad ambition, as Marius had; who ouerloaden with many years, as
well as with victories; and buried (as a man would say) with the multitude of
his Triumphs, did notwithstanding bear envy to young men. Too much is always
to be blamed. Habitude then is the last piece in order, and in perfection, it
is one of the principal. There be some, that once in their lives before their
Prince have done wonderfully. They were prepared for that blow: They would die,
or go out of the mire of their ancestors; enrich, and put themselves to ease.
The artifice was not evil, if they saved themselves, and reaped the fruit of
hope; unless death had fastened a nail to their designs, from which being
escaped, they had yet at the least this pleasure, to have once in their lives
done well, and to hold that in common with the most honest men. Those people
fly at nothing but the Lark. They should have been in danger many times,
furnished with all things requisite, with all the arms of understanding and
courage; heavenly arms of the proof of shots of death, despising the grave,
and not esteeming any thing equal to the desire of doing well, if they would
have been honored with the triumphant Crown, which is given to the virtuous.
Among the musk of Canon-powder, all covered with the Aromatique perfumes,
which the smoke of Harquebuzes does cast upon the points of swords and pikes,
the generous spirit does exercise it self; there she takes her measure; at
this rigorous school she learnes a divine Mistrisship: there she gets her
durable orders, not once, nor thrice, nor four times, but a thousand times;
even as often as need is for the Common good. They which do not measure
themselves by this ell, are frivolous shadows, and (if I may say so) fantasies
of true Virtue, whereof they have but a vain appearance. That likewise does
not endure.

All these things being exactly waighed, I am of opinion, that the
cleare-sighted will pronounce a sentence which cannot be retracted: that is,
That there be very few men adorned with this incomparable virtue in perfection.
Notwithstanding some do approach thereunto more then others, and an infinite
number may have some seeds and sprigs thereof, like weak beams from so
supernatural a light. Thou that go, seeking by the constellation of
stars, by the composition of humors, by the quality of the blood, so rare a
treasure, know thou art an Heretic. This sparkling Planet of Mars does not
influe vigor enough. The four elementary qualities do not know what it is to
go to blows; they hate them, the blood cannot understand so high a lesson,
quite contrary to his being. This apprentiship does come from elsewhere. It is
true (as I have said) that there be some souls better disposed to Virtue,
then others; and likewise some bodies more fit to receive the fair influences
of the soul.

Yet for all that, all men generally and naturally do fear death. It is a
grievous thing to forsake this pleasing light of the day, and to go with
worms, whatsoever is imagined. This default comes from sin, this weakness
has drawn from thence her beginning. It brought death, which is irksome to
man, because it was not so at the first creation. Without going any higher in
Theology, I will follow my point. The fear of death, man's perpetual
Hostess, whose efficient cause, matter and form, be within the bones, the
blood, and the arteries, is a miserable worker of all the irresotions which do
ariue for this subject. Fear to die, the hereditary malady, the domestical
weakness, the natural falling-sickenesse to man, is the beginner of all
infirmities, to them that do not think to live well. Now to live well, a man
must cast his eyes upon his carriage, he must think of the end, he must
meditate upon this common and last passage of men. It was all the Philosophy of
the Ancients, which in truth is a good part of perfection, though not the
principal. To meditate upon death, to imagine that after this short and
painful life, there is an eternal and blessed life, is to enter into the way
of Virtue, though not to go to the end. This answers to that divine
sentence, Know thy self, represent thy self that thou art a clear beam of
God, that thy house is heaven, that the divine essences do pertain to thee of
proximitie, that thou art a passenger in this miserable life, that Virtue is
the only image, whereof thou must be an Idolater, and which must wholly
govern thee. These considerations do open the bar to fair actions, but the
gate is yet shut. This Virtue is excellent without doubt, which prepares the
souls to good, and lifts up thy understanding to all high and worthy things.
It is not enough for all that: To command a man's self is more then all that.
The other has the tongue, this the hand; one the word, the other the effect;
the one prepares the soul to the diet, the other is the diet it self; the
one mooues humors, the other purges them; the one guides, the other executes:
To conclude, the one begins, and the other ends the work. To know a man's
self, answers to the meditation of death: to command a man's self, answers
to the contempt of death. The ancients made their Philosophy and love of
wisdom, meditation of death only, whereas they should have said, that it was
the meditation and contempt both together. For these two be sister-germanes,
and inseparable, to conduct to the sacred Temple of Sapience. But what is this
attracting brightness? what is this charmious figure? what is this divine
ladder, which when in has enlightened by the discourse of reason, and by the
knowledge of our selves, and burned by the pleasing flames of the love of it,
does make us enter into heaven? It is Magnanimity, which is the contempt of
death. What is the end of it? to do always well. If they ask, what Temples,
what Sacrifices she desires? She will answer, that she is all that, that she
has all in her self. If they do press her, to tell what moves her; she
will say, That it is only her affection to carry her self in all things
virtuously. Why she does not fear death? Because she fears her self more.
Why she does not desire the conversation of life, so sweet? Because to live
without Virtue, is to be dead, without any hope to live again. Let them
question her every manner of way, she shall be as ready and wise to answer, as
firm and courageous to resist. Now as you see, to know a man's self goes not
so forward as to command a man's self: so it must be said, that to meditate
upon death is not so much as to despise it. Many do know their own
infirmities, they have even drawn the very picture of them with all the lively
colors, there wants nothing. They know that they are subject to a thousand
loose passions; they resolve to combat these domestical enemies; they prepare
themselves thereunto; and even in the very instant that they are ready to come
to handy-blowes, they do as Dolon did in Homer, who cast away his Buckler in
the chief time of the skirmish; or like to him, who after he had made proud
marches cries out against his follies; I see the best and like it, and do
follow the worst. It is cowardice, they have not force enough to resist, having
but one feeble obscure spark of Virtue, which has not the power to heat,
though it give light. They which command themselves, do show that they have
been longer exercised in this fair Academy, that they have been upon the
iusting, or fencing place: that they have wrestled against the prodiges of
vice, and thrown them to the ground: which makes them worthy of praise, and to
have their names graued in letters of gold in the holy Temple of Honor. This
then answers to the contempt of death, which cannot be familiar with a man
but by Valor, which does not consist only in marshall actions, neither is
enclosed with those walls alone; because there be a thousand other
instruments of this cruel enemy of nature, besides those of war. Socrates
who swallowed hemlocke, did as much contemn death, as Alexander in the midst
of his combats. The one was, as it were transported with marshall fury; and
the other was no more moved, seeing his death prepared, then if they had come
to inuit to run at the plays of Olympus: The one was almost out of himself
with choler: the other was altogether in himself, and quite out of the
frailty of man, through a firm and constant resolution to this last step. Both
of them did it through greatness of courage; Valor was in them both, all the
work was hers. Notwithstanding, the one of them was inflamed with the ardour
of young blood, with ambition and with the desire to make himself venerable to
posterity: the other was not stupide, nor insensible, but he had a constant
coldness, a firm resolution, with discourse, judgment, and meditation, having
no other end, but manfully to resist fortune, and death, without being thrust
on by consideration of worldly vanities. Wherein is to be noted, that these
latter parts be even as necessary as the others; and that the great and unheard
of effects of Virtue, do proceed cheifely from the understanding, and
intelligence. Truly, they which have not learned this magnificent Science, but
amongst Pistolls, and Pikes, have a Valor, more brutish, less considering,
and less wise. They which have exercised their forces only in Plato his
walk, in the study, have a more soft spirit, and which does not seem so
vigorous against evil (because experience assures weakness, and is ordinarily
seen, among the blood and the sword) it makes the courages more cowardly, and
supporteth the most imbecill; for as much as custom is another nature. The
contempt of death for them is by imagination in the air, not meeting as others
do, among them that are hurt, slain, and daily at blows. True it is that
Socrates had married his spirit with his hand, the greatness of his courage
with his sword, and his high imaginations with execution and proof. After he
had meditated and laid the foundations of this fair Pyramides, by the divine
Idea's of his understanding, and by that proud project which carried him away
in his thought, he put his hand to the work. We must not marvel, if by this
band which is not common, he brought forth no common thing.

Now, I have said that it is not at the War only that magnanimity is
exercised; a long imprisonment, poverty, maladies, the loss of friends, and
other accidents, be proofs of a courage manly, and oftentimes more assured
then of death it self. In the mean time, a man must well consider what
contempt of death is. A man does not fear death, only for the griefs that it
brings us, which are soon passed; but for the pleasure whereof it depriueth
us, and for the delights of life; which comes of folly, ignorance, and want of
meditation. That which ones leaves, gives more pain, then that which one
feels; and whosoever would take away the apprehension of this bitterness,
should but only taste it. The evil comes from the fantasy, which has most
force where there is least reason. Death is made so redoubtable, because it
takes from us the joys of life, and for that we are tied to that which does
least appertain unto us. For feeble pleasures, the long use whereof should be
odious unto us: For lewd desires which have found our taste sick, to the end to
gain yet some days, and to have a miserable delay, and a shameful respite; a
man would lengthen the parchment, and defer the matter; so loath is a man to
ariue. All that proceeds from want of judgment, for as much as we have lodged
our Sovereign good where it is not, and that we seek it for the most part by
his contrary. To have then the contempt of death, we must rather have knowledge
of the life that is truly worthy of man. Neither could the lot of Africa, nor
Circes, nor the Sirens, nor all the attracting delights of the nymph Calypso,
retain the wise Greek. His designs were more lofty, he was tied with more
strong bonds; the knowledge which he had of a greater bless, made him enter
into an extraordinary disdain of these unworthy pleasures. Contraries one
near the other do shine most: So the discourses of reason, be clear Lamps,
which show the way in the darkness of our blindness; it is by them that we
understand what to follow, and to take our resolution to do that which does
most carry a man beyond man. There is no Virtue that can lead through these
thorns, through these rugged rocks, and through these fearful
solitarinesses to perfection; but magnanimity. She is without ignorance
knowing all things, having digested all doubts, chased all clouds, taken away
all scruples, by the fair and agreeable Theorique meditation, which would have
been unfruitful, if it had not been put in use, by this Queen of Virtues.
This heavenly Queen then, having carried her intelligence, upon all that
concerns man, and having sported her self through all this great Theater of
the world, after she had waighed, ^ounded, and calculated all: She knew that
well-doing was the highest point at which humane nature could ariue. Glad of
this knowledge, and wholly transported with admiration of her own divine
essence; she has made choice of this golden sleece, and there erected her
conquests. She is so resolved. This is not all, she is gone into action. She
is in the conflict, she remains glittering with victorious glory over her
enemies. To this beginning a thousand difficulties are opposed to her designs.
Feeble nature, in a trance with fear, so sensible, open to all sorts of
evils, perfumed soft lascivious pleasures, covered with amber and musk, with
bodies without arms, and legs, with maimed shapes, with sad goings, in some,
joys, and griefs, pell-mell, will violently pull the arms out of her hands.
She has overthrown all, she has vanquished all, she remains Mistress of
the field. Let them cut, slash, burn, let all the world come together to fall;
a man accompanied with this incomparable Virtue, remains without loosening,
stiff, and firm, as marble. Admirable rampire against misfortunes, and most
strange events; how divine thou art fair Virtue, seeing thou do draw men
from the government of humanity, how high and elevated thou art, seeing thou
do root from the center of the earth, the earth it self; how strong thou
art, seeing thou do give the forces of Sampson, to the imbecility of humane
nature, which is weakness it self; how above humane thou art, seeing thou do
make our senses leap over the bars of sense; and how rare thou art, seeing
thou art so difficill. If I did think to be exempt from the blame of
presumption for enterprizing to speak of so high a subject; I would produce
for an example, a spirit wholly royal, (that is to say) fully perfect. Let a
man behold it on all sides, he will judge it such as I desire it in this
Discourse.

Sir, You that are a man, and above men, (as such an one) give me leave to be
so bold to speak of this Virtue, which is admired and reverenced in you, with
many others which have adjudged you the prize, above all Princes of the World.
As a man suffer me to speak of your Virtue. As above men, for that you are
glittering with so many perfections above humane. Pardon my presumption, in
consideration of the zeal which I have to honor that which deserves it. As a
King permit me to speak the truth. Let a man look on all sides, with the eyes
of envy, and evil speaking that spares nothing; and with the eyes of
judgment, which do weigh all things as is meet, taking away those domestique
sorceresses of Kings Courts, flattery and passion; he shall see, that the
magnanimity of our great Henry is incomparable, and such as a man would desire
in perfection. The desire to make himself immortal, by the renown which
preaches the fair deeds after the Tomb, has not made him produce so many
famous military acts. For he that has his understanding as clear, as his
courage heroical, knows right well that Princes may make themselves so by a
thousand other effects of Virtue. Adrian, Traiane, Seuerus, and many other the
most famous Emperors, without giving one blow with a sword, by justice,
sweetness, magnificence, prudence, and liberality have gotten to themselves,
offerings and sacrifices in the Temple of Memory. Neither has ambition and
covetousness given him so many hats of triumphs. These are the three strongest
and violentest passions, which do most rule men. After that God had called him
to this Estate by a lawful succession, what along time were all his actions
rauishments to all the World, and monstrous works? His hand, and his
understanding did every day miracles. The desire to reign could never shake
his soul: when all were banded against him, and that (because he would not be
sprinkled with holy water) all swore his ruin in the most part of
Christendom. During these storms, and thunderbolts, he made a
counter-battery, he thundered, he stormed by the invincible force of his
courage, which could not be vanquished, but by his own force. Forsaken of
strangers, betrayed of his own, deprived of means, he sustained a weight
which was not to be borne but by him. He surmounted all mortal accidents, he
trod time and fortune under his feet, he executed that which was judged of all
most impossible. He relied upon few, but his lofty spirit, which thought it
should fail in forsaking his first way, held it self immovable among the
torrents. It was Magnanimity, which as a celestial anchor did ward so many sea
blows, in so horrible and sudden a seatempest. That very thing, by a more high
consideration, made him obedient to reason, to gain by a just change the
reputation to be equal and judicious; and to take away the imagination, to be
vnpitifull and obstinate. Behold two notable victories, he has surmounted his
friends, and his enemies, he has vanquished himself. If these two frenzies of
men that I have spoken of, Ambition and the desire of riches, had had advantage
over him; he would from the first day (to avoid so many troubles, to destroy
wholly so many cruel Hydraes, against which he was forced to contest so long)
have yielded: but he believed he should have done wrong to his Virtue.

Not any of the other accidental causes alleged, did make him persevere in
that high resolution but one only, which is, the presence of the King. He was
always with him. This continual representation, increased his courage, raised
up his spirit, and strengthened his arms. He did fear to do any thing
unworthy of the King, he would always be like himself. Because I have
discoursed at length, of this particularity, in the treatise which I made upon
the conversation of his Majesty, I will speak no more of it. After that this
excellent Prince had the Flower de Luce assured, and the Crown well fastened
upon his head, let a man mark all his actions; he shall see that he has
always been the same man he was before, with the same greatness of courage,
having no other aim, but to do well, nor other end but the safety of his
people. It would require many Volumes, to describe worthily the high and
incredible executions of this great Captain. With what industry, with what
inventions has this admirable King, raised so many fair Pyramides, erected so
many Colosses, built so many Theaters, and Amphi-theatres of his glory? with
the magnanimity, which has not carried, but wrapped him to infinite perils, made
his body of marble with continual toyling, his spirit always watching in the
ambushes of fortune, his heart infatigable to all sorts of trauells, and as
unconquerable by his enemies, as by the infinite pains which he suffered in
this perpetual torment. Among so many miseries, as envy, fortune, the
corruption of the age, the unheard of obstinacy of his subjects, who would have
buried themselves alive have showed, with so much co^fusio^: let us a little
behold the incomparable greatness of the virtue of this Christian Hercules. At
these earthquaks, at these ouertures of the deeps, at these inundations, at
these furious and enraged winds, he continued firm as a rock. By his Prudence
he has brought a sleep the waking Dragons; by his force he has put in pieces
the most strong; by his liberality, he has trodden under foot the most
insatiable, to chase them as Harpyes, to the comfort of his people; by his
sweetness he has hazarded his life a thousand times, to keep it for his
own; and by his mercy, he has exposed himself as a sacrifice, to redeem
his Kingdom from the captivity of Egypt.

Valourous King, and gentle Father: Among so many troubles, the last care that
he had was of himself, whom he had forgotten for others. Whosoever shall well
behold all without passion, will be amazed, as if he had seen the face of
Medusa, and will not believe his eyes, much less his ears, and his fantasy;
and will be constrained to swoone with admiration. In this Table, there is not
so much as a figure, or lineament, not so much as a shadow, either of Ambition
or Covetousness: All is Virtue.

This last proof, so notable, and so important to the Estate, has of new
showed by good tokens, that this holy fire of Virtue, and of the desire to do
well, which kindled him with so much ardour, has lost nothing of his
gallantnes and extraordinary vigor. He ran to that fearful and unexpected
blow, and of Amious, which had shaken this Estate, filled with astonishment
both strangers and all the Realm, which were but newly recovered from so long
a sickness. He had seen at Rouen the Anatomic of France, so lean, that it had
nothing but skin and bone, having the body all covered with ulcers, afflicted
with a lingering ague, which the continual ague had left her, all in a
gangrene, full of miseries, and as it were desperate of remedy, with a general
subversion of her Justice and Piety. At this time then, our King, knowing
better then any other so much necessity, without men, without money, not seeing
almost any means to remedy this high mischief, which had seized this Estate in
a time so dangerous, put on with the zeal to succor his people, jealous of
the glory of his subjects, as desirous both of their conservation, and of their
felicity, went speedily to besiege this great and strong Town; where to
speak better he besieged himself. His spirit and courage did never find any
thing difficil. There was means to recover this fair piece, the way thereto
was open. He was called by the repose whereof he had need, to breath a little
after so long trauells. The necessity and poverty of the Realm enuited him.
They offered conditions that he might accept, as others have done in like case
without reproach. But because he would not leave so much as a shadow of want
of faith to strangers, nor of affection to the dignity and splendour of his
Name, and honor of the Kingdom, he chose rather to pass through the
mountain, then through the plain. Being there, he was furnished at all
points, exposing himself to a thousand dangers to save the Commonwealth.
Judgment guided him. It was to assure his people; he showed himself as he
is; it was needful for the small number that he had. For the space of four
months, they within took more then those without, which they knew well. The
presence of this French Caesar served for a mighty army, he found himself
sufficient. His incomparable zeal to the public good, the necessity of the
times, and his divine courage would have it so. All went therein according to
the compass of Virtue. There was but one unequal motion, (I put one knee to
the ground) too much courage was the most dangerous enemy, both of himself and
of France. These high spirits, wholly divine, which do act by some celestial
inspiration, do despise with disdain the most dangerous accidents, and do
believe that no mortal thing has power over them. The Commonwealth cries, let
there be regard had to the particular conservation, for the general. This is
in this admirable Prince a defect which testifies a rare perfection, and a
figure of humanity, which surpasses man.

I have said here before; that Magnamity was the Queen of Virtues: I say, she
is their Mother, and has engendered them all in our King. It is by her, that
the spirit making no account of vulgar, and common things, penetrating the
obscurities of ignorance, and dispersing them, can discern the day from the
night, the good from the evil, to be armed against all sorts of events, with
the light of prudence. It is she, that makes a man forgive his enemies, by
setting his foot upon the throat of that despitefull saluage beast revenge; so
natural to man, a Virtue very extraordinary, as being quite contrary to
nature; a triumph, which surpasses all the triumphs of Marius, a glorious
victory, as rare as dificill. It is she, who burying that deformed and
insatiable fury covetousness, renders to every one, that which is his due, not
retaining the least displeasure for having the goods of another man; being
content with her self, and not knowing any thing that may equal her. It is
she that drives away Vanity, despising all the smoakes which the pusilanimious
do adore. She flies at the Kite, and at the River, meddles with subjects that
are most solid, and thinks that they which stay themselves at petty things,
be not capable of great ones. Which is weakness, either they do not know them,
which is ignorance; or do despise them which is folly. It is she which makes
no account of the flowers, and fruits of fortune, which be the riches, that
she holds as one of her instruments, wherewith she distributes magnificently,
thinking that to do good to others, and to make many happy, makes a man
approach nearest to God. It is she, that banisheth cruelty, presumption, pride,
and all the other deformities, which makes the soul unknown to it self. It
is she that mockes at Fortune that afflicts by her perseverance the
afflictions themselves, that braueth necessity, that laughes among hurts, in
the gulphes of death, in the midst of blood, fire, sulphur, the ship-pitch,
and the harquebusses. In insupportable maladies, she makes her self
insupportable to the sickness it self, which cannot suffer her, she finds her
self invincible throughout: why? because she being not accustomed to be
subdued, does not know any thing in the world higher then her self, she
aspireth to heaven, from whence she believes she is come, she makes envy,
and all other follies of men, to burst with despite, which she contemns, and
drives far from her. In good fortunes, and happy successes, which
oftentimes, makes the most temperate disordered, she shows her self modest.
So is she the Mother of courtesy, and of mercy. In the greatest crosses, and
most furious blows, of mischeifes, she is inconquerable, high elevated, by
her constant resolution. She gives place to none, either in bounty or force,
always in the same balance, that is to say, always like her self. It is no
marvel, if few men be endued with this so perfect a Virtue, seeing that all
that is within and without in man, is bent against it, whole man is repugnant
unto it. Nature, (as I have said) does learn the quite contrary, to that she
shows; flesh and blood be her mortal enemies; imagination, and apprehension,
her capital enemies. She passes further, and makes her self place, offering a
terrible drink of gall to the natural distaste of man. That is the reason, the
Ancients did make Altars, erect statues, build Temples, judge of triumphs,
eleuate Pyramedes to the memory of them which had employed their lives for the
Commonwealth. The Scepters, the Crowns, and all the orders of Honor which be
in the world, were invented for this end, to give courage to men to loose
themselves for others. These be the dazelings and the magic inchauntments,
that humane weakness has need of, not only to incite, but to transport them
to dificill, and perilous actions, so troublesome is this lesson to man. Yet
all this preparation, is only for courages least noble, and for spirits least
accomplished: for Virtue regards nothing but her own action, she sees no
further, she is her self the bounds of her partition, no other thing
belonging to her, she gives over her part to weakness, neither hope of reward,
nor the apprehension of any blame, nor the fear of punishment, nor any other
common, or ordinary considerations do move her. One thing only commands her
with a wand, the desire to do well. Yet my meaning is not, that a virtuous man
should refuse the just Honors that are done unto him, as did the ancient
Cato, who would never suffer any Statues to be erected for him: but I say,
that should not be his intention, but the consideration only of the virtuous
action. The most magnanimious themselves have need of some provocation, to
awaken their spirits, which otherwise would be more sleepie, and more soft.
They be men It is a default of humanity. Man that is wholly borne to misery,
has need of outward objects to move his stupidity, and to warm his ice. He
has need of a wheel, with a great spring and a very sharp fire. But if
there may be found any spirits of this divine stamp, it must be in this
Kingdom: Although ambition, and anarice, have almost corrupted all. There
remains yet of these incorruptible Virgins, which be all of fire in laudable
actions. Among this fair Nobility of France, there may be seen some, who have
this Virtue within a little, even as I do represent it; and abundance that do
approach unto it. It is also the light of the world, the quintescence of men,
the admiration of the earth, the firm foundation of this puissant Estate, the
soul of the Royalty, and the glistering day of this great Court. She is borne
wholly to Virtue: She of whom I speak is her familiar. She has but too much
transport in peril, she would cast her self into the deep, she should
rather be dejected, she flies with gallantnesse, which carries her too often
to timerity, and to quarrels. These be two maimes, which do hinder the
perfection of this Virtue, which is neither foolish nor quarrelsome; which
intruth cannot suffer an injury, but does well weigh it, before she be
provoked; which has no pride, and will not take any advantage upon another,
but by worthy actions; which is neither a swaggerer, nor contemptuous. Because
she contents her self with effects, and mockes at the rest. If these two
defaults were cut off, what great persons would France bring forth? What
excellent pollitiques? What worthy Captains? Our King is happy to have so many
fair lights to lighten this Estate; so many immovable vaults to sustain it,
so many strong bastions to defend it. And you Nobility, how you are favored of
heaven to have such a Head, so shining with a thousand Suns of Honor, and so
covered with Crowns of glory. It is the greatness of Kings, to have near
them a multitude of persons famous by excellent marks. The glory of Jupiter
had been small, if he had reigned over the Cyclops, the Centaures, and the
Satyrs only. The invincible Mars, the venerable Saturn, and those other
gods, made his Empire redoubtable. One Lion had rather obey another, then to
have no commandment, but over the Foynes of Alexandria, and the Apes of the
great Caire.

If any man think, that I do set out an imaginary Virtue, and which cannot be
in man, in that fashion that I describe it, but by divine inspiration; let him
know (if he please) that extraordinary actions also, do not come but from
heaven. In truth I confess, it is very hard in this so perverse a time,
wherein the foundations of all Virtues, be turned topsie-turuie. But let a man
behold the ancient Romans, the Lacedaemonians, and the Athenians, they shall
there mark out Scipio's, Epaminondase's, and Aristide's, who have had this
Virtue of Magnanimity, with all the conditions and circumstances alleged. Why
shall not the Frenchmen be as capable, seeing they have inherited by their
great Virtues, to those of the ancients? I will not speak of Charlemayne, and
of the worthies. During the reign of King Francis the 1. how many notable, and
admirable personages did honor France? In that time there was the most
magnificent, and triumphant College of Honor, that was under the heavens, to
make Virtue be beloved, to daaw a man from the Center, and to make him a
demygod among men. It was the order of the King. This temple of glory, and of
Virtue, was so sacred, that at that time, there were found in all the Realm
but thirteen, that were worthy to enter therein. It is another discourse,
which I will leave for this time, and will say only, that this high, excellent,
and divine mother of Virtues, Magnanimity, may be acquired by discourse, and by
use, and that a man may make himself capable of it. Ignorance, for that it
knows her not in all her parts, is one of the strongest bars, that does
hinder the laudable designs of them, which do aspire to effects, which do
draw out of the mire, and out of the ordinary highway. Pride mingles it self
there among, with other defects which do strangle the fairest actions at their
birth, and makes abortiues thereof instead of perfect forms. The most part
have an opinion that it must be so, others are persuaded thereunto because they
are brought up in that error. A long custom has made them so sick of the
Lethargy. It is but want of curiosity, to seek out wherein lies cheifely
the point, which raises a man most high. If that were very exactly waighed,
one should root out all the evil roots, one should cut off all the rotten
branches, one should cleanse this fair tree of life, which makes a man despise
death, beat fortune and time to the ground, and triumph over all humane
things. There is nothing impossible to a generous spirit. If it be guided by a
solid judgment, it will always choose the best. All the circumstances
aboue-said, are to be nearly considered in this Virtue so rare, and dificill,
that her name is profaned, which I will paint out, as it ought and may be, and
as it must be apprehended.

Let them then, that are in the heat of the skirmish, covered with blood,
earth and smoke, pressed of all sides, thrust, struck, and peirced, say in
their consciences how they do there, how they like: let them sound themselves,
let them not flatter, nor pardon themselves any fault: let them behold
themselves, in all their looks, if their hearts remain assured, firm, and
without fear; if they keep their judgment; if they be neither transported
with fury, nor rage; if all their steps be compassed according to the time,
the occasion, and the place; if the eye do accompany the hand, the hand the
foot, the understanding, and the courage, all three, without doubt they may be
called Gentle companions. These be good testimonies, but yet a man may reject
them, if they be not accompanied with other proofs. If the desire of Virtue
only, and the consideration, of the service of the Prince, of the good of the
Commonwealth, of the protection of the weak, or other very just causes, do
lead them to these tragic feasts, they are worthy of Laurel. But if they
have many times rendered such proofs, and that the end be altogether for the
fair action, and neither ignorance, ambition, nor vanities, have part in the
work; they must Crown them with palm, and consecrate statues unto them. Let
not them that have not yet attained, the third step of this fair ladder, by
which men do climb to immortality, be out of heart, and let them know, that
the discourse of reason, meditation, and experience, will bring unto them with
the time, if they will employ their understanding, and take pains therein,
that which the first have acquired. Let others that shall have but some weak
tract of this fair table, and simple mouldes of so rare a building, reverence
the first, honor the second, and endeavor to imitate them. or make their
vows to some other Saint, that may be more favorable unto them. Also let not
the first think that there be certain regular limits in doing well. Let them
believe, that Virtue never waxes old, to the end that their last act may
answer to the former. Let not them that do second the Virtue of the most
excellent, be ravished with joy, for that they have given some good testimony
of their Valor; neither let them be rejected because they have not in
perfection the ornaments of others. Let not the last despair in this rough
road, because they know themselves a little hindered therein. So the most
virtuous following their way, shall continue to the end, which Crowns the
work; the others shall endeavor with the time to succeed them in fair
actions as in will, and knowledge: And the last shall change their designs by
despair, or their condition by their amendment.

FINIS.

