A TRIAL OF FAITH: BY THE TOVCH-STONE OF THE GOSPEL, THE WORD OF FAITH.

WHEREBY CHRISTIANS MAY discern whether or no, they have a saving FAITH.

First preached in the Parish Church of St Nic. Col. Abbey London, by WILLIAM
CHIBALD Pastor there; and now published for the further benefit of that his
Congregation, and all other that confess with their mouth the LORD JESUS, and
with their heart believe on him unto Salvation.

1. THESE. 5.21. Try all things: hold fast that which is good.

LONDON, Printed by G.P. for John Teage: and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Golden Ball. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, D. LANGTON, D. of Divinity, and President of
Magdalen College in Oxford; and to all the Fellows and Students of that
worthy SOCIETY.
Right Worshipful and worthy,
TO dedicate Books, Luke 1.1, 2, 3, 4
specially such as concern the Gospel, is both ancient, common, and
commendable, in the Churches of Christ. The ends thereof are, the Authors
showing respect to the Patron, and the Patrons giving countenance to the
Authors Work: and the mean to attain unto both these ends, is relation in
some kind or degree betwixt them both. In which respect, having penned a
Treatise concerning the Faith of the Gospel, and upon request printed it, I
made bold to dedicate it unto your Worships, as being the fittest persons to
be Patrons thereof; not only because you were the first in my consultation,
and the last in my resolution about the dedicating of it; but also, and
chiefly, in respect of some relation betwixt your Worships, and the matter and
Author of the Book. In respect of the matter, I presumed you would countenance
it, because the Subject thereof, is generally a point of Divinity, whereof
some of you are Doctors, many Batchelors, most Preachers, and all Students (I
hope) more or less, specially it is that point of Divinity that is Faith in
Christ, which (as Protestants) you all profess; and more particularly it
concerns that point of Faith that is Trial, which (as Christians) I trust you
do all practice. In regard of the Author likewise, I thought you would protect
it, because as he is now a Minister of the Church, so was he once a Student
and member of your House. Vouchsafe therefore, I pray you the Head and
Superior members, to look down upon an inferior part of your body, bending
it self to do you reverence and obeisance. Amongst you I received the first
seeds of Divinity; unto you therefore I offer the first fruits of my
Ministry for the Press, not doubting but that you will taste, relish, and
well digest the same. My purpose herein is, not to read you a Lecture of what
you know not: but to render you some account of that little I know in this
point, which may be a Remembrancer unto you of what you have already learned.
Neither yet do I tender it, because I think, it does in it self deserve, to
be a Present, but that it may in time serve to be a President unto others, who
may testify the like duty, upon the like occasion. In hope of your free favor
herein, I humbly submit my Trial of Faith, to your Trial and Censure; and
heartily commit your persons, and studies, to the protection, and direction of
God, who give unto you all, the comforts of a saving Faith in this life, and
the end thereof, at the end of this life, by Jesus Christ.

From my house in Old-Fish-street, London. April 20. 1622. Your Worship in all
Christian duty at your service, W. C.

TO ALL MY LOVING NEIGHBOVRS, THE Inhabitants of the Parish of St Nic. Col.
Abbey in Old-Fish-street, London: W. C. their Pastor wishes that they may be
kept, by the power of GOD, through faith unto Salvation, by JESUS CHRIST.
Beloved in CHRIST:
OVT of the second Epistle to the Corinthians, the thirteenth Chapter and fifth
Verse, I have taught you to try your Faith, by Reasons I have exhorted you unto
it, and by Rules I have directed you in it; many things were propounded for
that end, and it is some time since they were delivered: wherefore fearing the
frailety of your memories to retain many things long, and foreseeing the hurt
that might ensue by the forgetting of them; I have thought good to add unto
the preaching of the point in your ears, the presenting of it printed before
your eyes, to the end you may more readily remember that you have heard, more
clearly understand that which you do remember, and more conscionably practice
that which you understand in this point. I desire no requital, but love,
pains, and conscience: Your love in accepting, for mine in giving; your pains
in reading, for mine in writing; and your conscience in practicing, for mine in
teaching; that you may have profit by me, and I comfort in you. The Lord bless
the reading of this Treatise, and hearing of my Sermons, and your partaking in
all other my ministerial duties, so to his glory, Heb. 13.17.
and your good, that I may be able to give up my account of you to God with
joy and not with grief, 2. Cor. 11.2.
and to present you a chaste Virgin unto your Spouse Jesus Christ, in whom, I
rest

Yours, and the Lords unworthy servant, W. C.

THE PREFACE.
The Preface containing chiefly an opening of one Text of Scripture, that gave
occasion to the writing of this Treatise, and which is also one of the
principal grounds of the doctrine taught therein.

BEcause men are loath to be deceived in the things of the world, therefore do
they try before they trust: For they try their Gold by weight and touch,
before they take it, because all is not Gold that glisters. Now if in civil
things, trial be so good, to prevent loss by being deceived; then in
spiritual matters it is most needful, because in them it is both most easy,
and also most dangerous to be deceived.

Among other spiritual things the gifts and graces of the Spirit are to be
tried, because every gift is not a saving grace; and amongst other gifts and
graces of the Spirit, our faith is to be tried; because every faith is not a
saving faith, as shall be proved hereafter. For Satan, who by his fall, 2. Cor.
11.14.
is become an angel of darkness, can transform himself into an Angel of
light; not to be one, but to seem to be one, to the end he may deceive:
therefore much more can he by the same his subtle power, transform that
faith, which is but an historical faith, and which every member of the Church
militant has; yea, which himself has, Iam. 2.19.
into a saving faith; not to be it, but to make it seem to be it, to the end
he may deceive them that have it, with a presumption of salvation without any
true ground.

For this, and other like causes, I thought it needful and profitable to teach
my Congregation to try their faith: and because the Gospel, Romans 8.8. 1. Ioh.
3.23.
which is the Word of faith, and which does command it, is the best means, to
direct us in this trial, and to persuade the conscience thereunto. Therefore
did I make choice of a Text, that is a part of the Gospel, to preach on, that
does earnestly exhort unto it: and it is written in 2. Cor. 13.5. in these
words: Examine your selves whether you be in the faith; prove your own selves.

In handling of this portion of Scripture, I propounded these four things: 1.
I showed the coherence of the words, which we call the Context: 2. I declared
the sum and parts, with the circumstances of the same, which is termed the
Analysis: 3. I delivered the sense, by interpreting the words and phrases. And
lastly, I propounded and prosecuted the doctrines.

Touching the first, I take the coherence twofold, general, and special.
General, as it agrees with the matter handled in the three Chapters immediately
going before, and it is thus: Because the reports of the meandness of a
Preachers calling and gifts, are a likely means to disgrace his preaching, and
the doctrine he delivers: therefore S. Paul having by his preaching converted
many to the faith in Corinth; the Devil labors to hinder the progress of his
Ministry, by raising up some to report of him, either that he was not an
Apostle of Jesus Christ, because he was not called by him immediately while he
lived on the earth, as the other twelve were; or that he was no scholar,
because he used no vain ostentation of humane learning in his Sermons, or that
he was but a mean man, because he lived in no outward port and pomp in the
world, as did the Scribes and Pharisees: by these or the like slanders many
weak Christians being seduced, and Paul's Ministry also traduced by the same:
upon the hearing of it, he does by many arguments in the 10, 11, and 12.
Chapters maintain his Apostleship, and having at large formerly proceeded in
his just defense, he does in this 13. Chapter conclude his whole discourse of
it.

The special dependence is after this manner: Many of the Corinthian
Christians being by false suggestions brought to think meanly of Paul, and to
doubt of the efficacy of his Apostleship, they are so bold with him, as to
demand a proof of Christ speaking in him, chap. 13. verse. 3. For answer
hereunto, first in the 3. and 4. verses, he does peremptorily affirm, that
Christ's power was not weak in him, but mighty toward them, viz. by his
Ministry. Secondly, he shows them how they may find a direct proof of
Christ's power in his Ministry, viz. if they do but examine themselves,
whether they be in the Faith or no, verse. 5. intimating thereby, that if they
do but examine themselves, whether they be in the Faith, they shall find
themselves to be in the Faith; and by finding themselves to be in the Faith,,
they shall find Christ to have been in him, because by Christ's power on his
Ministry, they had been begotten thereunto. And so much of the Coherence of
the words, by which the Reader may discern the drift of the Apostle in them;
from whence (besides the principal Doctrine of the Text, which I reserve to be
handled at large in the Treatise following) I think it proper to observe two
several duties both for Preachers and Hearers.

1. Doctrines from the Coherence. Preachers Duty.
Preachers are hence taught from the Coherence, not to stagger, if they hear
their Ministry censured, to be weak and fruitles; yea happily questioned,
whether a lawful Ministry or not, even by them, whom (through Gods blessing)
they have begotten to the Faith, or confirmed therein, seeing Paul an Apostle,
was no better used of the Corinthians, his Hearers, especially if they shall
withal well consider, that Hearers now, are men as well as the Corinthans then,
and that the devil now desires to hinder the success of the Gospel, as much
as ever he did, and has still as good hope to disgrace preaching, by the
disgrace of Preachers as ever he had.

2. If it be their lot, to have their Ministry, and Sermons so censured, and
thereby themselves so disgraced; then to learn by S. Paul's example, to be
able, and ready to maintain the same by a just defense. And for that end to
direct their Hearers, how they may find some arguments to justify the
sufficiency of their Ministry, by the work of knowledge, belief, saving
Faith, repentance, love, patience, and the like in themselves or others: to the
end, that they may thereby, either be fully satisfied, or left without excuse
if they shall wittingly shut their mouths, and not confess, or their eyes and
not see, the power of Gods ordinance among them.

These points, if they were well known and marked by many Ministers, they would
not he so soon weary of painful preaching, nor so forward to leave their
pastoral charge, upon such discontentments, especially if they did well lay to
heart, not only the example of Paul, who was not moved upon this disgrace to
leave the Corinthians: but also the commandment of God delivered by the
Apostle, which is, 2. Tim. 2.25.
That the servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient in meeknes, instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth.

Hearers also, and ordinary Christians may hence learn their duty:

Hearers Duty.
1. To examine themselves of the fruit and effect of the Sermons of their own
Pastors and Preachers, and to try themselves, if thereby happily, knowledge,
and belief, repentance and faith in Christ, with other graces, have been
wrought in them, that so they may either justify Gods ordinance in its
sufficiency, for their present comfort, or condemn themselves for their own
slacknesse and vnproficiencie for their future amendment.

2. If by examination they shall find the Ministry of their Preachers to have
been effectual among them, by the work of the forenamed, and other like
Christian graces: then thereupon to conclude infallibly, that the Lord Jesus
has been in their Preachers; his power has been seen in their weakness,
his blessing has been upon their Sermons, whereby they may safely conclude,
that God has set his seal to their calling and gifts, 1. Cor. 9.2.
and thereby approved them, not only as a lawful, but as a powerful Ministry.

These points, had they been well understood, and weighed by our brethren and
Countrymen that are gone from England to the Low Countries; from London to
Amsterdam, for a lawful Ministry, (as they pretend) they might have saved
themselves a great deal of trouble and expense in their remove. For if Paul
in his time, by willing the Corinthians to examine themselves, whether they
were in the Faith, did purpose, they should by that examination, find
themselves to be in the Faith, to the end he might thereby allege a good
argument, to prove the efficacy of his Ministry by Christ's power, working
through it, Faith in them: then in these days those Christians, that by
examination find, that the Ministry of the Church of England has wrought
Faith in them, (I say) they may see, and they must acknowledge it, a sound
argument to prove the lawfulness and efficacy of our Ministry here; or else
the Apostles direction and exhortation were to no purpose.

There be many that are gone on pilgrimage from England to Amsterdam, to look
for Christ's Church, I wonder, whether or no, they had a saving Faith, when they
went from us to them, and what they will answer to this question: will they
say, no? then (say I) it is well they are gone, and that we are fairly rid of
them. But it is impossible they should deny it: for how can they, who pretend
such zeal for Gods glory, in leaving their Country, calling and friends, to
enjoy Christ's kingdom, (as they use to speak) and to live under a lawful
Ministry, to judge and speak so meanly of themselves, that they have not a
saving Faith? What will they say then? will they affirm, they had a saving
Faith when they departed? then (say I) it was very ill done, to go away from
their Mother Church, the Ministry whereof had begotten them to the Faith. For
if they had the Faith, then was it wrought in them by the Ministry of the
Church of England; if so, then was that Ministry powerful in them; and then
was Christ's power in it; then was it Christ's own ordinance, and why then did
they go from hence thither for it? And so much briefly for the coherence of the
words, and the collecting and applying of that which is obserueable out of the
same for our instruction.

The second thing propounded in opening of the Text, was, to show the sum and
parts thereof.

The sum is an exhortation; and in the exhortation, an argument, to prove
the power and efficacy of Paul's Ministry among the Corinthians, namely,
because by Gods blessing thereon, they had been turned from Heathenisme and
infidelity, to the Christian Faith; which (says he) they shall easily
discern, if they do but examine themselves whether they be in the Faith.

The parts of the exhortation are three: 1. The person exhorting Paul. 2. The
persons exhorted, the believing Corinthians. 3. The duty or action to which
they are exhorted; set down by two words, examine and prove; amplified by the
Object, their Faith, or whether they were in the Faith, or no.


Come we now to expound and interpret the Text, which was the third thing
promised, and shall be done, by answering certain questions; and the questions
shall be propounded first touching the simple words of the Text. 2. Concerning
the compound phrases that are framed of two or more words together, by my
answer whereunto the sense and meaning may appear, and may easily be
understood.

The simple words are three, namely, examine, prove, Faith, which are to be
distinguished into three questions, whereof the first is this:

What it is to examine here?

For answer whereunto I say, that though it be not hard for Englishmen to
conceive what is meant by this word examine, namely, to make proof or trial of
our selves in some thing: yet because the Original Greek word is not always
in the New Testament so translated, nor used in the same sense for the same
kind of Trial; therefore do I think it needful to say a little more of the
propriety of the word, because it will serve for the better understanding not
only of this Text, but of other also in the New Testament where it is used.

(...).
I would have the Reader therefore to know, that the word in the Original, is
sometimes taken in the best sense, for a good trial, and sometimes in the
worst, for a bad one, according to the circumstances of the Text where it is
used, and the good or bad means and end of that trial.

In the worst, when it is used for a bad trial, it is in our English Tongue
properly called tempting; and tempting, is an using of some evil means, to
effect an evil end, (that is) to try if thereby men will be persuaded to do
that which is evil: and so was Christ led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
to be tempted of the Devil, that is, Mat. 4.1.
to be tried by those means he then used, if happily he might be persuaded
to sin, and do that which is evil. Now this kind of trial is not used in this
text, because trial by temptation is always exercised about that which is
evil on the tempters part, and is forbidden in the Word; but trial by
examination mentioned in the Text, is occupied about that which is good,
namely, their Faith, and it is commanded therein.

In a good sense, when it is understood of a lawful trial, it is an using of
some lawful means, to effect a good purpose, namely, to try if by those
means we may know the nature and condition of the persons, or things that we
try, whether they be or no, or be good or no, or be so good as we expect or no;
to the end we may accordingly approve or disallow them: and so the Angel or
Pastor of the Church of Ephesus is said to try or examine those that said they
were Apostles, Revel. 2.2.
and were not, namely, by examining through the Word, their Doctrine they
preached, and the lives which they led; Mat. 7.20.
that by these fruits he might know them, and discern them, not to be
Apostles indeed. And such a trial was this in the Text, because it was an
using of good means to a good end, namely, that thoroughly they might know
themselves to be in the Faith; and consequently, know, that Christ's power had
been in him, and in his Ministry among them, which was the thing they seemed
doubtful of: and for clearing whereof, he wills them to try and examine
themselves, whether they were in the Faith.

What it is to prove in this Text.

The second word to be opened follows, which is prove; concerning which, the
questions shall be three: viz. 1. What is meant by prooving. 2. Why he adds
this word to the former, and 3. why he says, Prove your own selves.

(...).
The word in the Original Greek has many meanings, but most usually it does
signify to prove; but not to prove by Arguments, as the word in English is
often used, but to prove by trial and experiment. So we prove or try oxen,
Luke 14.19. 1. Pet. 1.7. 1. Tim. 3.10.
to see whether they will bear the yoke and draw; we prove or try gold in the
fire, to know whether it be pure; and Ministers are to be prooved or tried,
whether they have gifts competent for that calling: and in this sense the
Corinthians were to prove themselves, whether they be in the Faith, namely, by
experiment and trial.

And as touching the second branch of this Question, which is, why he uses two
words to express one action: I say, that he adds prove to examine, for one
or more of these reasons, (as I suppose) either because it is his manner to use
variety of words, to express the sense of one by another, Hebr. 6.9.
the former by the latter; or because both words do signify but one duty or
action, in regard of the thing, which is Faith, to which they are jointly
applied, namely, trial: or in regard of the duty it self, to show the
necessity of examining our selves, whether we be in the Faith; or in regard of
Paul, to manifest his desire to have them practice it; or lastly, in regard of
the Corinthians, to teach them the great care, diligence, and conscience that
they ought to use in practicing of this Duty.

And concerning the reason why he says, Prove your own selves, (which is the
3. branch of this Question) I say, he adds those words, either because
themselves principally were the parties, by examining whereof they might best
find a proof by the efficacy of his Ministry, for their own satisfaction:
or because thereby he would give them a close, (but withal a mild reproof)
for being so eager and forward in seeking a proof of him, and of Christ
speaking in him: as if he would say, Turn the edge from me to your selves,
cease seeking proof of me any further, and begin to examine and prove your
selves, whether you be in the Faith, and you shall easily discern the faith of
Christ in your selves, and the power of Christ in me.

Now follows the last of the simple words, which is Faith; and of it the
question shall be, what manner of Faith it was whereof they were to examine
themselves.

What is the Faith here spoken of?

For answer to this question, I say, that by Faith in this Text, is to be
understood, any kind of Faith, which in those days was usually given to the
members of any Church, and consequently to any of the members of the Church of
Corinth, whether a saving faith, an historical, or a miraculous faith; for all
the members of the Church of Corinth had an historical faith, which was a
belief of the Doctrine of the Gospel: and in the judgment of charity, (for
ought that can be proved to the contrary) every member thereof also had a
saving faith, and (at least) many members of that Church at that time had a
miraculous faith. 1. Cor. 12.9.10. and 13.1.2.
The reasons of my opinion are two, both taken from my Text: 1. Because they
were to examine themselves of any kind of faith; by the finding whereof in
themselves, they might find Christ to be in them; for so he says, Know ye not
your selves, verse. 5.
how that Christ is in you? Now by the finding of an historical and a
miraculous faith, (as well, though not so much) as by finding of a saving
Faith, the believing Corinthians might find Christ to be in them; for by an
historical Faith Christ was in them by his wisdom, making them to understand
and believe the Gospel, 1. Cor. 1.23.
though it were once foolishness unto them: by a miraculous Faith Christ was
in them by his power, causing some of them to do strange and miraculous works,
though they were weak men; even as by a saving Faith Christ was in them by his
grace and goodness unto salvation.

The second Reason to prove, that by Faith in this Text is meant any kind of
Faith, is this; because the Corinthians were to examine themselves of any
Faith, by the finding whereof in them they might find a proof of the
efficacy of his Ministry: for that is the end wherefore Paul wills them to
examine themselves, whether they were in the faith, viz. because thereby they
might find it to have bin wrought in them by his Ministry, Romans 1.16. 1. Cor.
3.5. and 4.15.
for the proof of Christ's power in it. Now not only a saving Faith, and an
historical Faith were wrought in the Corinthians by the preaching of the
Gospel, but a miraculous Faith also, as is plain by the Epistle to the
Galathians, where doing of miracles, (which were done by a miraculous Faith) is
said to be wrought in them, (and therefore it was accordingly wrought in the
Corinthians) by the hearing of the Gospel, Gal. 3.2.5.
or by the hearing of Faith preached. So that Christ being in the Corinthians
by an historical, and a miraculous Faith, as well as by a saving, though not
in the same manner, nor to the same end; and the finding of an historical
Faith and a miraculous, being a good argument to prove the efficacy of Paul's
Ministry among them; therefore do J think, (saving other men's better
judgments, upon better proofs) that the Faith whereof the Corinthian
Christians were to examine themselves, was any kind of Faith, an historical,
and miraculous, as well as a saving Faith; and the rather, because by all three
kinds a greater proof will be gained for Christ's power in Paul, and for the
efficacy of his Apostleship thereby, then by any one alone, though it were a
saving faith. And thus much for opening and interpreting the simple words of
the Text, I descend now to expound the phrases thereof, which are two, namely,
1. What it is to be in the Faith: and 2. why he says, Whether you be in the
Faith: and first of the first.

What is meant by the Corinthians being in the Faith?

It seems at first sight, Answer.
a strange manner of speaking, as if Faith were some local thing that did
comprehend in it all believers; as the place does contain in it the thing that
is placed there; the house, the inhabitant; but we may learn, that to be in
the Faith, is nothing else, but to have Faith to be in them; and the
exhortation is in effect no more, then if the Apostle had said, Examine your
selves whether Faith be in you, or whether God has wrought Faith in you: and
I prove my exposition,

1. By other Scripture phrases, namely, because to be in the Spirit, is to have
the Spirit in them; so to be in Christ,, Romans 8.9. Romans 8.1. Ephesians. 3.17.
is to have Christ to be in them, namely, by Faith: to dwell in love, is to
have the love of God, 1. John 4.16.
and our neighbor dwelling in them: Romans 8.8.
to be in the flesh, is to have the corruption of nature dwelling, and reigning
in them.

2. I prove it by other phrases commonly used in our English tongue, as when a
man loves a maid, we say he is in love; when he hates his neighbor, we say,
he is in malice; when a man is drunk, we say, he is in drink: so that the
being of the Corinthians in the Faith, is the being of Faith in the
Corinthians, or the having of Faith in them: the reason of which manner of
speech, I take to be one of these; either because he had before spoken of
Christ being in him, and answerable to that would speak of their being in the
Faith; or else, because he would intimate to us the certainty of the
Corinthians being believers, and of their having of Faith; even so surely, as
if they had bin in the faith it self.

whether seems to imply a doubting, and making some question, whether they had
the Faith or no?

Answer. (...).
I answer: in the Original, the words are, If you be in the Faith, of you be
in the Faith, is all one in sense with Whether you be in the Faith: and neither
if you be in the Faith, nor whether you be in the faith, do imply any
doubting of their saving Faith. J grant, that in some places it may, but in all
it does not: and therefore it is not necessary it should in this, except the
circumstances of the places did manifestly show it; which they do not here.
That neither whether, nor if, do in all places of the New Testament imply
Doubting, I prove by one, where Paul says, he wrote to the Corinthians, that
he might know the proof of them, and whether they would be obedient in all
things, yet did he not write this, as if he doubted they would not be obedient
in all things, 2. Cor. 2.9.
because in the third verse of the same Chapter, (which he could not forget)
he says he was confident in them, that his joy was the joy of them all; 2.
Cor. 2.3.
which he would never have said, if he had not been confident of their
obedience. And that the circumstances of this Text do give no light to
intimate, that whether or if did imply my doubting, I prove thus: If they did,
then this doubting must either be in Paul, or in the Corinthians; but Paul
could not doubt, whether the Corinthians had the Faith, because he could not
forget what he had written of them in the first Epistle, where he says, that
in Jesus Christ he had begotten them through the Gospel: 1. Cor. 4.15. 1.
Cor. 3.5.
neither could the Corinthians doubt thereof, because after he had said,
Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, he adds in the very next
words, Know you not your selves? that is, Know you not your selves to be in the
Faith; implying, that Paul was sure they could not choose but know themselves
to be in the Faith. 2. Because the end of this examination was, that they might
more clearly discern themselves to have it, that so they might thereby find
an evident proof of Christ's power in the efficacy of his Ministry, for the
justifying of the same; which they could not do, if they had not known
themselves to be in the faith, but had doubted of it.

By my answer to these five Questions, the interpretation of these words and
phrases may be gathered; by the interpretation, the scope and sense of the
Scripture collected; and by both, the Doctrines may be better raised, which was
the fourth and last thing propounded in handling this Text.

The points observeable out of the coherence and drift of the Apostle, have
already been touched. That which is to be collected out of the words as they
stand by themselves, is but one sentence, or proposition, and consequently but
one Doctrine; for it is but an exhortation to one Duty; and that one Duty is
examining and trying themselves concerning their Faith; whence the Doctrine of
the Text, (speaking according to the Hypothesis, and particular both persons
and matter) is properly thus: The Corinthian Christians must examine and prove
themselves, whether they be in the Faith.

But forasmuch as the Exhortation was not written for them only, although it
were written to them only, therefore from the Hypothesis to the Thesis, from
the particular to the general, I raise and propound the Doctrine thus: It is
the Duty of all Christians to try and examine themselves, whether they be in the
Faith, or whether they have a saving Faith.

This Doctrine shall be the Subject of the ensuing Treatise, whereunto J have
added this Preface, even this Discourse upon the opening of that Text, upon
which it is mainly founded, not only for an Introduction unto the Treatise;
but for a maine pillar and proof of the Doctrine, to which I persuade in the
Book it self.

Now (for a conclusion of my Preface) I humbly pray the Christian and judicious
Reader, as to peruse with patience the whole, and with brotherly kindness to
cover or correct all faults escaped the Author, or Printer, in any part
thereof: so by the spirit of meekness to inform me, of whatsoever by the
spirit of discerning he shall observe, to be insufficiently prooved, or
unsoundly propounded, upon a sincere purpose, and faithful promise, (the Lord
knows) to altar any thing in that kind, at the next Impression: (if ever in
the judgment of the Church it be thought worthy of it) if I shall not be able
to satisfy them, by bringing better reasons for the proof of that I have
written, then they for the reproof thereof.

A TRIAL OF FAITH. THE FIRST BOOK.
It is the Duty of Christians, to try their Faith: or to examine themselves,
whether they have a saving Faith.

GOld is a precious Metal; the world esteems it so: therefore do men dig deep
into the Mine where it is, to find it; and they labor much in the fire, to
purify and refine it: even so, a saving Faith is a precious thing; the Apostle
Peter calls it so: 2. Pet. 1.1.
therefore ought Christians, by examination (as it were) to dig into their
hearts to find it there, and by the Word, as by fire, to try whether it be a
saving Faith or no: 1. Pet. 1.7.
that so the trial of their Faith, which is much more precious then Gold that
perishes, (though it be tried in the fire) may be found unto their praise, and
honor, and glory, at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To teach some Christians this Trial, and to persuade them to the practice
thereof, I have heretofore preached the point, for the private good of a few,
and because the preaching of it was well accepted, to the profit of many that
heard it: therefore have I written a Treatise of it, for the common good of all
that can read.

Now, forasmuch as Method is both a good ornament to a Book, and a great light
thereunto: not only for the directing of the Author to write more orderly: but
also for the teaching of the Reader to understand and remember more readily:
therefore have I thought good also, before I go on to the handling of the
point intended, to make known that manner, and order of handling the point in
proof, which I propounded to my self in the prosecuting thereof: and my
Method (by Gods assistance) shall be this:

The whole Treatise contains, a declaration of the Reasons, and Rules, of the
Trial of Faith.

This Declaration shall be comprehended in two Books.

The first Book shall be an Exhortation to the Trial of Faith: and the second
a Direction thereunto.

To exhort men to try their Faith, I will allege certain Reasons, grounded on
the Word, which may persuade them thereunto: and answer some Objections, that
may be brought, to dissuade them from it.

The Reasons to persuade Christians to try their Faith, shall be referred to
three heads. First, the Necessity, secondly, the Equity, and thirdly, the
Utility or benefit of this Trial.

The Necessity of the trial of our Faith, shall be showed in the first Chapter
by seven Reasons: and each Reason shall be distinguished into a several Section
in the same Chapter.

The Equity shall be declared in the second Chapter, by two Reasons: which
shall be divided likewise into two Sections.

The Utility, or profit of this Trial of Faith, shall be manifested in the
third Chapter, by three Reasons: which shall be severed likewise, by three
particular Sections.

The Objections that may be brought, to dissuade Christians from the trial of
their Faith, shall be reduced to three Heads likewise: first, the Needlesnesse:
secondly, the Inconveniency: and thirdly, the Impossibility of this trial of
Faith.

The supposed Needlesnesse shall be answered in the fourth Chapter: wherein
shall be contained three Objections: each Objection, with the answer thereunto,
being distinguished into several Sections.

The deemed Inconveniencie of it shall be answered in the fifth Chapter:
wherein shall be comprehended two Objections, with the answer thereunto in two
Sections.

The imagined Impossibility also, that Christians shall ever be able to try
their Faith, shall be answered in the sixth Chapter: wherein shall be placed
two Objections; each, with the answer thereunto, being severed likewise by two
particular Sections.

Of the particular disposition of the second Book, I will speak distinctly,
when I come unto it.

In the mean while, let me crave, and obtain pardon of the learned Reader,
for more then ordinary plainness, in handling the points contained in the
first Book: and of the Reader that is not so learned, for some difficulty,
that he shall find, to understand the Contents of the second Book. I would
have neither of them discouraged, from reading the whole; because the fault
that may be supposed to be committed in the one, is amended in the other. And
the rather am I bold to crave this favor, because my manner of handling,
followed the nature of the matter handled in both: so that as I could not be
plain, where the matter is difficult; so neither was it needful I should be
difficult, where the matter was plain.

CHAPTER I. Of the Necessity of the trial and examination of our Faith.
REASON 1.


THE reason is good, because though we discern not the reason why God should
command, or exhort us, unto any duty: yet must we perform simple obedience to
all his precepts, Gal. 1.15.
without consulting with flesh and blood, Heb. 11.8.
like Paul; and as Abraham did, who when he was called, obeyed God, and went,
not knowing whether he went.

And that the Lord in his Word exhorts Christians to try their Faith, and to
examine themselves concerning it, is plain. First, by the words of Christ,
when he says to his Disciples, Where is your Faith? Luke 8.25.
Secondly, and more clearly, by the words of Saint Paul (the Text at large
expounded in the Preface) Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, 2.
Cor. 13.5.
prove your own selves: For why should not Christians now examine themselves
whether they be in the Faith; as well as Christ's Disciples, and the Christian
Corinthians did in those days?

If any object against the first proof, Object.
that it is not pertinent, because it speaks of a miraculous Faith, whereas
the point to be proved by it, is touching a saving Faith:

I answer, though that be true: yet seeing by that question of our Savior
Christ, Answer.
his Disciples were to examine themselves where their miraculous faith was,
therefore by necessary consequence must Christians examine themselves where
their saving Faith is; because a saving Faith is more necessary for
Christians, then a miraculous Faith could be to the Disciples: in as much as
the Disciples for not having, or not using their miraculous faith, could have
bin but drowned in the Sea, which is but a bodily destruction: But Christians
for not having or not using a saving faith, shall be drowned in perdition and
everlasting destruction both of Soul and Body for ever, which is the second
death.

Or if any chance to reply upon the latter proof, out of the Epistle to the
Corinthians, that it is not sufficient, either because it is not a command: but
an exhortation only; or if it be a commandment, yet it is but a particular
precept to the Corinthians only, and given to them but upon a special
occasion.

I answer: First there is no difference in respect of obedience betwixt an
exhortation to a Moral religious Christian Duty, (such as this is) and a flat
precept, that directly commands the practice of it, as appears by this
instance. Where Paul says, 2. These. 3.12.
We command that are such, and exhort them by the Lord Jesus, that with
quietness they work and eat their own bread. Secondly, because Christians
ought to obey such exhortations, as well as precepts, as is plain by another
place of the same Apostle, 1. These. 4.2.
where he says, We beseech you Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus,
that as you have received of us how you ought to walk, and to please God, so
you would abound more and more: for you know what commandments we gave you by
the Lord Jesus. Thirdly, because the mildness of the Apostle in exhorting to
the Duty, namely by request, rather then by Precept, should rather gain
obedience; in as much as it is to be conceived, that therefore Paul does
exhort, and not command; not because he had not authority (as an Apostle) to
command: but because he hoped, 2. Cor. 10.8.
by that kind manner of exhorting, he should the sooner persuade them to obey
the matter of the exhortation.

Secondly, I answer, touching the second part of the objection, that it is to
as little purpose as, the former; because though the exhortation were written
to them: yet was it not written for them only, which I prove; first, because it
was not written to them as they were Corinthians, but as they were Christians:
therefore may the duty concern all other people, that are Christians like
themselves. Secondly, because the Apostle speaking of the writings of the Old
Testament, says, Romans 15.4.
that whatsoever was written afore-time, was written for the learning of the
Churches in the Apostles time; therefore whatsoever was written by the Apostles
and Evangelists in the New Testament, was written for the learning of
Christians in these days: and therefore Paul's commandment, or exhortation, to
will the Corinthians to examine themselves whether they were in the Faith, does
bind us, who are Christians now, as they were (and consequently all Christians
to the worlds end) to the practice of the same duty of examining our selves
whether we be in the Faith.

3. And as concerning the third part of the objection, which is, that therefore
the exhortation in the place alleged, should not bind us now, because it was
given to the Corinthians, upon a particular occasion, which is not every man's
case, in these days: I answer, It is to no purpose, because the exhortation
of the same Apostle Paul to the same Corinthians, where he wills them to
examine themselves before they come to eat of the bread, 1. Cor. 11.28.
and drink of the Cup of the Lords Table, was given upon a particular occasion
of their unreverend, unbrotherly, and profane coming to the Lords Table then,
as appears by comparing the 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 33, 34 Verses of the
eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Corinthians: and yet for all that, it
ought to be a general precept to all Christians in these days, to examine
themselves before they come to the Communion now; lest they be guilty of
profaning the Lords Table in some kind: though not in the same manner of
profanation, of which the Corinthians were. And so much for the first Reason of
this Doctrine, and the Confirmation thereof. The second follows.

REASON 2.
It is necessary for Christians, to examine themselves, whether they be in the
Faith:

The reason is good. Because without this Trial, any faith may be taken for a
saving faith: an Historical, for a saving faith; yea, a false faith, for a
true. Indeed if every faith were a saving, then were it sufficient to salvation
to have some faith, for in having some faith, he must be accounted to have
the saving faith; and therefore for a man to examine himself, whether he had a
saving faith, were needless: as long as he had any faith; but because every
faith is not a saving faith (as shall be proved God willing by and by)
therefore it is necessary for Christians to examine themselves whether they
have a saving Faith.

And that every faith is not a saving faith, I prove thus:

First, because a saving faith will Ephesians. 2.8.
save them that have it, for by it they are 1. Pet. 1.5.
kept by the power of GOD through faith unto salvation: but every faith will
not save them that have it. For there is a faith of Iam. 2.19.
Devils, who believe and tremble: and yet will not their faith save them,
because notwithstanding they are Iud. ver. 6.
reserved in everlasting chains of darkness, unto the Judgment of the great
Day.

Secondly, a saving faith never fails, for Christ has Luke 22.32. Job. 11.22.
prayed for it that it might not fail, and they that have it, do not draw
backward unto perdition; but Heb. 10.39.
follow faith to the salvation of their souls: but there is a temporary faith
in some, who Luke 8.13.
for a time believe, and afterward in temptation fall away: and none that fall
away can be saved, because it is Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
impossible they should be renewed by repentance.

Thirdly, a saving faith, is a lively faith, making those that have it to live
the life of grace, for Gal. 3.11.
the just do live by their faith: and a saving Gal. 5.6.
faith works by love, namely, to God first, and then for Gods sake to our
Brethren, yea, to our enemies; but the Apostle James speaks of a Iam. ^.20, 26.
dead faith, that is not lively: but is without works, and so is not a saving
faith.

Fourthly, there was in the Churches of Christ in the Apostles time a
miraculous faith, which many had, that never were saved. For the Holy Ghost
affirms, that the Lord at the Day of Judgment will say to many of the^, who
by a miraculous faith have cast out devils and done greatworks: Mat. 7.22.23
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not: which he will never
say to any of them that shall be saved; for to them he will say being his
children by faith in him. Mat. 25.34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world.

Fifthly and lastly, the Apostle Paul speaks twice of an unfeigned 1. Tim. 1.5.
2. Tim. 1.5. Tit. 2.2.
faith; and of some that are sound in the faith, from whence we may easily and
safely conclude: that there is in some members of the Church a fained or
counterfeit faith, and that there are some which are unsound in the faith. Even
as it is easy to conclude, that there is in some Christians a fained love,
because he speaks of an 2. Cor. 6.6.
unfeigned love in others; and exhorts the Romans that their love may be
without Romans 12.9.
dissimulation. Now not a counterfeit, but an unfeigned; not a rotten: but a
sound faith will save us, and is a justifying faith.

But though there were no more kinds of faith then one, and that faith were
only a saving faith: yet if every man had a saving faith, or were sure to have
it, before he dyed: they might shift well enough as they think; let us
therefore take uiew of another reason, that will prove the necessity of this
trial of Faith, and it is this.

REASON 3.


The reason is good: because without this trial, a man may be one of those,
that have not a saving faith, nor ever shall have it, and yet presume he has
it. Indeed if it were true, that every man or woman that comes into the world,
shall have a saving faith wrought in him before he dye: then were this
examination needless, because though he had it not at one time, yet he might
be sure to have it at another: and therefore were this trial needless, as
long as he were sure to have it, at some time: but because every one that comes
into the world, has not a saving Faith, (as shall be proved by and by with
Gods help) therefore it is necessary to examine our selves whether we have a
saving faith.

And that every one has not a saving faith, I prove: First, because the
Apostle says, 2. These. 3.2.
All men have not faith: and no marvel, seeing all men have not that which is
inferior to a saving faith, and more common then it, viz. an historical
faith, or a belief of the Gospel. Witness many of the Jews, to whom it was
a 1. Cor. 1.23.
stumbling block. How shall we then think they can have a saving faith, which
is more excellent and more peculiar to the Elect of God?

Secondly, all men have not a saving faith, because very few have it; for so
says our Savior Christ, Luke 18.8.
When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? He says not,
when Christ comes again, that he shall find no faith at all on the earth:
for he shall find as many kinds of faiths as there be kinds of Religions
in the world; nor does Christ mean that he shall find when he comes to
Judgment, no saving faith at all in men, for he shall find it in many that
shall be alive at Christ's coming, who shall be caught up in the clouds with
them 1. These. 4.15, 16.
that have dyed in the faith of Jesus, to be ever with the Lord; which could
not be, if when Christ came, he should not find faith in them: but his
meaning is, that when he comes to judgment, he shall find few in earth that
have a saving faith, in comparison of them that have it not.

Thirdly, all men have not a saving faith, because a saving is the faith of the
Tit. 1.1.
Elect only, and all men are not Elect, for then how could there be any
Reprobates at all?

Fourthly, all men have not a saving faith, because all men shall not be
saved; for as many as are saved, are saved by faith, and those are but a few,
in comparison of the Reprobate; for Rom 9.27.
though the number of the children of Israel were as the sand of the Sea: yet
shall there but a remnant be saved; because Mat. 7.13.
wide is the way, and broad is the gate, that leads to destruction, and many
there be that go in thereat: but streite is the gate, and narrow is the way,
that leads unto life, and few there be that find it.

Fifthly, and lastly, all men have not a saving faith; because the Apostle
speaks of some that make 1. Tim. 1.19.
shipwreck of faith, 1. Tim. 1.19. of some that 1. Tim. 4.1.
depart from the faith, of some that 1. Tim. 5.8.
deny the faith, 1. Tim. 5.8. of some that 1. Tim. 5.12.
cast off their first faith: of some that 1. Tim. 6.10.
err from the faith: and of some that are 2. Tim. 3.8.
reprobate concerning the faith, which cannot be verified of any that has a
saving faith, because they are founded on the Rock Jesus Christ, who never Heb.
13.5.
fails those, that by faith put their trust in him, and because their 1. These.
5.23.
whole spirit, soul and body, are preserved blameless, unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ. So that the consideration of this, that every one has
not a saving faith, does easily prove it necessary for us, to examine our
selves whether we have a saving faith; seeing that without this trial we may
be Reprobates for ought we know or can give evidence to the contrary. And thus
much for the third Reason, the fourth follows.

REASON 4.
It is necessary that Christians try their faith,

The reason is good, because Man himself has more cause to try his own
faith, then God has: in regard he has more need of that trial. God has
not, because God knows their faith without trial, seeing he is the Author of
it: but man cannot know it without trial; Ephesians. 2.8.
as also in regard man is to have more benefit by it, then God can be imagined
to have.

That Christians have need to try their faith, has been showed in part
before, and shall hereafter be further declared: and that this trial will be
beneficial to them will be proved hereafter likewise: but that God himself
does need, or shall have benefit by the trial, can be proved by no reason: so
that because it is for our need and benefit, that God tryes our faith, it is
worth our pains, that after his example we try our own faith.

Indeed God is pleased (speaking in the Word after the manner of men for our
capacity) to take notice of the truth of our faith, upon the trial thereof,
as appears in the book of Genesis, where, after Abraham had obeyed Gods
commandment in offering to kill his Son (which commandment he gave him for
the Trial of his faith) he says, Heb. 11.17.
Now I know that thou fear God, Genesis 22.12.
seeing thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me: but God
does not speak this, as if he were before ignorant, or not so well certified
of the truth of his faith: Heb. 4.13.
for all things are naked and open before God, who is the searcher of the
heart, Heb. 4.13 but to teach us to try our faith, and also to instruct us,
that upon trial we shall certainly know, whether we have a saving faith or no.

And that God tryes the faith of Christians, I prove; because he tried the
faith of Abraham. Heb. 11.17.
For so faith the Apostle, that by faith, Abraham, when he was tried, offered
up Isaac: and how can ordinary Christians think to be free for Gods trial of
their faith, one way or other: seeing the faith of him that was the father of
the faithful, was tried by him?

I do not think, nor teach, that God does, or will try the faith of all
Christians with so great a trial as was Abraham's: for the faith of every
Christian is not so great as was Abraham's, and therefore neither can it need,
nor will it endure so great a trial: But this I say, that he tryes the one as
well as the other: the faith of the weakest, as well as the strongest, because
though in degree of excellency, and in measure, Abraham's faith was far stronger
then theirs: yet is the faith of the weakest Christians the same in nature with
Abraham's. And though he tryes no man's faith above his strength, 1. Cor. 10.13.
but will with the trial make a way to escape, that they may be able to bear
it. Yet does he try the faith of all his children, because he knows, both
that they need the trial, as also that they shall reap benefit by it: and
therefore ought Christians to try their own faith for the same end: to
persuade whereunto, this shall be the fifth Reason.

REASON. 5.


The reason is good, because in love to their own souls, and care of their
salvation, they should try their Faith: to the end they may approve and
strengthen it, and thereby take comfort in it, as Satan, in hatred of their
souls, and envy of their salvation, desires earnestly to try it, to the end
he may ouerturne it. Simil.
For has not an householder reason to shut and make fast his doors, when he
knows a thief will break them open? and a rightful King, to fortify his
Realm, when he hears an enemy would invade it wrongfully? Surely as in these
cases they will, so in this they ought: considering the danger that comes by
the one, is by odds greater, then possibly can come by the other.

And that Satan tryes the Faith of Christians, to the end he may make their
Faith to fail, and them fail of their salvation, (if it were possible) I
prove, not only because he tryes their continency, Genesis 39.7. 1. Cor. 7.5.
to the end they might fall into uncleanness: and their patience, to the end
they might murmr against God, (therefore much more their Faith being a more
excellent and necessary grace then they) but I prove it most plainly by the
words of our Savior Christ to Peter, where he says, Simon, Luke 22.32.
Satan has desired to winnow you as wheat, but I have prayed, that thy Faith
may not fail. And by the words of Peter to all Christians, where he exhorts
them to be sober and watch, because their enemy the devil, goes about like a
roaring Lion, 1. Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may devour, whom resist steadfastly in the Faith. For Satan
knows, that by Faith we stand; and that Faith is the victory whereby we
overcome the world: 2. Cor. 1.24. 1. Ioh. 5.4. Ephesians. 2.8. Gal. 3.11.
he remembers, that by Faith we live and are saved: he understands, that by
Faith, 2. Tim. 2.25.26. Act. 13.39.
we recover our selves out of the snares of the devil, and that by it we are
justified from all things, from which we cannot be justified by the Law of
Moses: and therefore does he try us, to see if he can persuade us, either not
to believe at all, by causing us to stumble at the difficulty of the points of
Christian Religion that are to be believed; or if he cannot prevail with us so
far: then will he try, if by any means he can make our Faith, only to
swim in our brain, and no way work upon the hearts and affections any love
unto our salvation, or any care to use the means prescribed for that end: for
which purpose he will endeavor to fill our hearts with the love of earthly
pleasures, profits, and honors, that there may be no room for the desire and
care of salvation: or if he cannot deceive us this way, then will he terrify
us another way, to make us deny our Faith, and to make shipwreck of it, for
fear of persecution and loss of worldly things. Or, if by neither of these
can he make our Faith to fail, then will he buffet us with terrors of
conscience, by reason of the multitude, and magnitude of our sins, and that
we have no Faith at all, because we do not so sensibly feel in our hearts,
the comforts of Faith, which are peace of Conscience, and joy in the holy
Ghost, and thereby assurance of salvation.

Indeed it is true, (be it written to the glory of the free grace of God,
whose gifts and calling are without repentance, Romans 11.29.
and to the sure comfort of the faithful, Ioh. 13.1.
whom the Lord loves to the end, having once loved them) that Satan neither by
these, nor by any other means, can ouerturne the Faith of Gods children, Romans
9.33. Luke 22.32.
because it is founded on the Rock Jesus Christ, who has also prayed that
their Faith might not fail, and God heard him in all his prayers; Ioh. 11.22.
but yet Satan desires to make our Faith to fail; and for that end he sifts
and tryes it: and therefore we ought to try our own Faith much more; to the
end that finding it weak upon any occasion, we may labor in the use of the
means to strengthen, and confirm it; to the practice of which, that
Christians may be the rather exhorted, this shall be another Reason.

REASON 6.
It is necessary, that Christians examine themselves,

The Reason is good, because charity begins at home, and every man ought every
way to have as much care of his own Faith and salvation, as any other
particular man whatsoever. Therefore if another man, for my good, try my Faith,
and examine me concerning my Religion, why should I not try my self, and mine
own Faith, for mine own good?

Secondly, the Reason is good, because if another man try my faith, and examine
me concerning the same, it will be either great shame, or small credit to me,
according as after trial, I am found to have it, or to be without it, to be
able to render a reason of it, or not to be able: to the end then that we may
have credit, by being able to render a reason of our faith, we must try our
selves, whether we have faith, and are able to render a reason of it, for our
own comfort, and the good of others.

And that Christians ought to be ready to make answer to them, that examine
them concerning their faith, is plain by the Apostle Peter; where he wills the
Christian Jews that had received the faith, 1. Pet. 3.15.
to be always ready to give an answer to every man that asked them a reason,
of the hope that is in them. Whence I thus argue:

1. Christians in S. Peter's days, were asked a reason of their faith;
therefore in these days, they may be asked the same question: Parishioners of
their Ministers, children of their parents, servants of their masters, scholars
of their Tutors, yea one Christian neighbor of another, when they meet
together for Christian conference.

2. Christians in those days, being asked a reason of their faith, were to be
ready to render a reason of it: therefore in these days also, they must be
ready to render a reason of their faith, when it is asked them.

3. Christians then, could not be ready to render a reason of their faith,
except they first knew themselves able to do it: therefore Christians now
cannot be ready, to render a reason of their faith, except they first know
themselves able to do it.

4. In the last place, Christians then, could not know, they were able to
render a reason of their faith, except first they examined themselves
concerning their faith, and their ability to render a reason thereof: no more
can Christians now. So that the faith, and hope of Christians, being the same
now, which then it was, the causes of rendering a reason of our faith and hope
now, remaining the same which then they were; (namely, the glory of God, the
profit and encouragement of others, and the comfort of our own souls) and
there being an impossibility, that they should ever be able to render a reason
of their faith, except they try it, and examine themselves, whether they have
it or no: therefore (me thinks) the sixth Reason must needs be good, and
powerful to persuade Christians to the trial of their faith: namely, that
therefore Christians must try their faith, because they must be ready to render
a reason of it: and so I proceed to the last Reason, which prooves the
necessity of this Trial.

REASON 7.


The Reason is good, because Christians should have as much care, to try their
own faith, for the good of it, as false teachers for the hurt of it;
Christians for the establishing of it, as Heretics for the perverting, and
(if it were possible) for the subverting of it. For if we try not our faith,
how shall we be sure we have the true faith? we may easily be seduced so a
false faith, by false prophets, that may set upon us, whereof there be many,
of many kinds in these days.

And that it is true, that there have been, in these days, and ever will be
many Heretics that do try the faith of Christians, and by trial labor to
seduce them from the true Faith; is plain, not only by the prophesies of
these times, by Paul, Act. 20.29.30, 31. 1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. 2. Pet. 3.1, 2, 3.
1. Ioh. 4.1.
by Peter, and John: but also by lamentable experience; which teaches us that
even now there be some Jewish Heretics that would seduce the world to become
Jews again, to make difference of meats for conscience sake; and that would
have us to put our necks once again under the yoke of the Ceremonial Law,
from which Christ has set us free. And by these Jewish Heretics many in these
days have been dangerously seduced, and I am afraid that the instruments
thereof have hardly yet made amends for the harm they have done in that kind.

Secondly, in these days, there be many Popish Heretics, multitudes of
Jesuits, and Priests, that swarm like Locusts in every corner, that would
have us to turn back again to the Egypt of Rome, to revolt to Popery, to
turn Catholics, and to defile our garments, that have been washed from these
filthy abominations. It was once said of false prophets, that they go in
sheep clothing; Mat. 7.15.
but now it may be said that they go in Silke-wormes clothing; not in Cloth,
but in Silks and Velvets, like Gallants and Courtiers, to the end they may
with less suspicion vent their Doctrines, and with more advantage insinuate
themselves into the minds of the simple: concerning whom my exhortation is,
that as they labor to try the faith of Christians, and by trial to seduce
them: so Christians would try their doctrine and life; to the end they may see
how unsound and unsavory it is, and how unlike it is to the doctrine and
conversation of the Prophets and Apostles of the Lord Jesus: and to try their
own faith also, to the end they may never be seduced to the false faith, which
these false prophets teach. So then, it being dangerous to be seduced from the
true faith, to a false: the trial of Heretics by teaching false doctrine,
being a means to seduce, and the trial of our own faith, by examining our
selves concerning it, being a means to keep us from being seduced: what
remains, but that Christians labor to try their faith, to the end they may
not be seduced to a false faith? And so much for those Reasons that prove it
necessary for Christians to try their faith. Now follows the proof of the
Equity of this trial.

CHAP. 2. Of the Equity of the trial of Faith.
REASON. 1.


THE reason is good, because there is in the Word, as much direction, to try
our faith, as to try any other grace whatsoever. And Christians have as much
reason to examine themselves, concerning their faith, as concerning any other
grace of God in them: in as much as a saving faith is both the most excellent
grace, that God works in his children, for their use and benefit: and of them
all, it is the most necessary for them, and their salvation; (as shall be
proved by and by) and therefore does most deserve the care and labor that is
to be taken about it.

That Christians must examine themselves concerning other graces of God in
them, I prove by two particulars chiefly: namely, Repentance, and Love.

Of Repentance they are to try themselves; because as there is a true
repentance, when in the truth of heart, men resolve and purpose to forsake
their sins: they cease to do evil; and learn to do well, and return to
God in a new life: Pro 28.13. Isay 1.16. Lam. 3.40.
So there is a false repentance, when men only confess their sins, and
profess sorrow for them, as did Judas: Math. 27 3.
show outward humiliation, as Abab did; yea, 1. Reg. 21.29.
and in some things begin to amend, and to do many duties, as Herod did: Mar.
6.20.
But yet do not heartily, resolutely and constantly, for conscience sake to
God and his Word, forsake the practice of all their pleasurable and profitable
sins, rejecting the Devils suggestions in the beginning, and avoiding all
occasions of returning to their former sins.

Christians likewise are to try themselves concerning their love: because as
there is a true and unfeigned love, 2. Cor. 6 6. 1. Ioh. 3.18.
when men love in deed and in truth: so is there a flattering and fained love
in some; else the Apostle Paul would never have exhorted the Christian Romans,
Romans 12.9.
that their love might be without dissimulation; neither would the Apostle
Saint John have exhorted the Christians to whom he wrote, 1. Ioh. 3.18.
that they would not love in word and in tongue only. The like may be said of
patience and the rest, so that other graces of God in us, requiring and
deserving our trial of them; it must needs follow, that much more is our
saving faith worthy of it: and the rather, for the excellency, and necessity of
it, above any other grace, as shall be plainly proved by and by, in two
distinct Propositions, for the further confirmation of this second Reason. Of
these two Propositions, the first is this:

The excellent use of faith in Christ.
No grace is so excellent as a saving faith. I prove it:

First, because no grace has so excellent an office, and work in the Covenant
of Grace, as Faith has. For it only is the condition of the Covenant; Ioh.
3.16. and 6.29.
and it is so the condition, that every one that has faith, shall be saved by
it, and none of them that have it not, shall be saved.

I know, God Almighty works many other Graces in them that shall be saved
besides faith; as namely, a belief of the Gospel, and repentance, love,
patience, and new obedience; and he requires the use, increase, and continuance
of them: yet he requires none of them all severally, or jointly, as conditions
of the Covenant by which we claim title and interest to the good things
promised therein, which are chiefly Justification, and Glorification; for that
is only faith, Romans 3.28. and 10.34. Phil. 3.9, 10.
or faith without works. But they are required either as preparations
afore-going to dispose them to faith in Christ, or as fruits and effects
following the same, the better to try and approve the truth of their faith, and
the more to assure them of the certainty of their salvation by faith.

Secondly: No grace is excellent, as a saving faith, because to none is there
given so excellent a privilege as unto it. Ioh. 1.12. 1. Ioh. 3.1.
For by Faith we have this prerogative to be the sons of God.

Indeed, by obedience to the Law, we might have been Gods servants, which is
some privilege: but through faith in Christ (the son of God by Nature) we
are made the children of God; namely, by grace and Adoption, Gal. 3.26.
then which there can be no greater privilege: in as much as by it (that is)
by being sons, we are made heirs, Romans 8.16, 17. Gal. 3.26.29.
and heirs with Christ of the heavenly inheritance.

Thirdly, No grace is so excellent, as a saving faith; because to no other is
there promised, so excellent a reward, as unto it: for to faith in Christ,
(that is) to them that have a lively faith, is promised eternal life in
Heaven, Ioh. 3.16.17.20* 25.
to behold the glory of God, and of Jesus Christ, and to be one with him in the
same glory.

Indeed if Adam had continued in innocence, and obedience to God, and had never
sinned; he had also continued in life, and immortality, and had never dyed.
For the Tree of Life in the midst of the Garden, Genesis 3 22.29.
was a Sacrament to assure him of it: But the life he had lived by that
obedience, could not have been so excellent, as that which is promised to faith
in Christ, because Believers shall by their faith live in Heaven; and Adam by
his obedience to God, could have lived but here on earth, and enjoyed an
earthly Paradise. Genesis 2.15.


In like manner, if Adams posterity since the Fall, could possibly fulfill the
Law of Moses, Gal. 3.21. Romans 8 3.
(which yet is impossible) they should certainly live by it, for the Lord
directly said so; Deu. 18.8.
yet is not that life, the life of glory with Christ, because the Apostle
plainly says, that the Law cannot give it, Romans 4.14. Gal. 3.18.
in as much as it is an inheritance.

I grant that the Word of God promises Heaven to Love, Charity, and
Righteousness: but it is not because our Love, Charity, Psalm. 15.1.2. and
24.3, 4.
or Righteousness that we perform, can procure it. (For that which the Law
requires, is absolutely perfect, but ours is wholly imperfect. Psalm. 130.3.
Psalm. 143.3.
) Nor yet is it because they are the condition of the Covenant of grace, either
without faith in Christ, or together with it, and as well as faith. (For there
is but one condition of the New Covenant, and that is faith in Christ, or faith
without works:) that is, Romans 3.28. Ioh. 3.16. Gal. 3.11.
faith only in Christ alone. (For faith only unites us to Christ, and only by
our being united to Christ, we are capeable of his glory:) but Heaven is
promised to these graces: either because they are properties of those persons
that shall go to Heaven, that is, the faithful; the better to assure them
thereof, or because they are effects and fruits of the faith it self, by which
they shall live in Heaven, the rather to assure them that their faith is not a
false and dead faith; but a true and a lively faith. Iac. 2.27.


If any chance to object that Paul speaking of Faith, Hope and Love, Object.
concludes that the chiefest of them is Love. 1. Cor. 13.13.
Which being true, then cannot faith be most excellent, but (at least) Love
will be as excellent as Faith, if not more excellent.

Answer.
I answer. This objection overthrowes not my assertion.

First, because the faith which I commend above other graces (and consequently
above Love) is a saving Faith: but it is uery probable, by the context of the
same place, that the faith before which Saint Paul commends Love, was a
miraculous faith: as appears: First, in that he speaks of that faith, the
use and power whereof was to remoove Mountains, verse 2. Secondly, in that it
is joined with other miraculous gifts, as with the gift of knowing all secrets,
with the gift of tongues, and of prophecy in the same Verse, which every
justified Believer in those days had not; and therefore were they
extraordinary. Now a miraculous faith may well be inferior to Love, seeing a
Reprobate may have such a faith: but cannot have that love he speaks of;
because it is the effect of a saving faith, which is peculiar to the Elect
only. Gal. 5.6. Tit. 1.1.


Secondly, the Objection overthrowes not my Position, because though S. Paul in
the place alleged, had spoken of a saving faith, as well as of a miraculous
faith; yet cannot he be thought to commend Love above Faith, but in one respect
only; namely, in regard of continuance, Calvin's Commentary on this place.

Joan. a Lapide in hunc locum Mar. Flac. Illyricus in hunc locum.


because (as it is imagined) Love continues longer then Faith, namely, after
this life, which Faith does not, (as is thought) whereas I have given three
Reasons, why faith is more excellent then love; and three to one is great odds.

Thirdly, in respect of continuance, Love is not simply more excellent then a
saving Faith, because (as I suppose) it does not utterly cease after this life,
but continues as well as Love; which I will make (at least) very probable by
this reason, viz. because the body must be saved as well as the soul; but
until the Day of Judgment, the body cannot be saved; for till then it lies
under the dominion of death in the grave; therefore at least till then, the
soul does trust in Christ, for that part of salvation, which is the redemption
of the body, though it self be in heaven. Romans 8.23.
For the act of Faith, which is trust in Christ that he will save the soul,
does cease with this life; for there is no use of it any more, Eccles. 12.7.
Luk 23.45. Psalm. 16.
when once the soul is in actual possession of heaven: (which it is
immediately, as soon as it is divided from the body by death) yet for all that,
forasmuch as the body, though it rest in hope, yet is it not in actual
possession of heaven, nor can be, till the Day of judgment: therefore do I
think (saving other men's better judgments upon better reasons) that faith
does abide still in the soul after this life; because the act of faith
abides, whereby the soul even in heaven trusts in Christ, and waits for
the resurrection of the body, whereby it may be joined together to the soul
again, and be perfectly glorified together with it in heaven.

4. Though there had been no use at all of a saving faith after this life, in
respect of attaining to the resurrection of the body: yet were not Love a more
excellent grace then Faith, both because the love that we shall have in heaven,
is but a fruit of the saving Faith, Gal. 5.6. 1. These. 1.3.
we had while we lived here on earth; and the fruit is not more excellent then
the tree, nor the effect then the cause: and also, because Love is not that
grace, whereby we hold possession of heaven, for that is Faith: (for we hold
possession of heaven by that right, whereby we claim it as an inheritance,
we claim our inheritance as heirs, we are heirs as adopted sons, and we
are adopted sons by faith only) but Love is only our rent, suit, and service
that we owe to God, in all duty of thankfulness for the glory of heaven,
which in this life we believed by faith in Christ.

But because some care not for pearls, and many esteem not a thing for the
dignity of it, or because it is excellent; but for the need thereof, because
they cannot be without it: therefore let us take a little view of the necessity
of a faving faith, that thereby we may discern how useful and profitable it
will be for us, to have a saving faith, and consequently to try it, to the end
I may make good also the second Proposition, which is, that

No grace of God is so necessary, as a saving Faith.

I prove it, 1. because no grace is acceptable to God, namely, The necessary
use of a saving faith. Hebr. 11.6, 1.
unto salvation, without a saving faith; for without faith it is impossible to
please God, in any thing we have or do.

2. Because no grace is so necessary for this life, and the life to come; by
reason, that all good things whereof we stand in need, both for this life, and
for the life to come, are ours by the promise only; and the promise is made
ours by faith only; and faith only lays hold on Jesus Christ, in whom they
are made, 2. Cor. 1.20.
and in whom they are all, yea and Amen, and for whose sake the good things
contained in the promise, are bestowed upon us, and sanctified to our comfort.

3. No grace of God is so necessary as a saving faith, because it is to be
desired and used above all other graces. For the Apostle speaking of many
graces of God, necessary to Christians for their spiritual warfare, exhorts
the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.16.
(and in them all Christians) above all to take the shield of faith, whereby
they may quench all the fiery darts of the devil* which words above all, and
quench all, what do they else imply, but that a saving faith is more needful
then all the rest? For although by some other graces, Christians might happily
quench some of Satan's fiery darts: yet by a saving faith, they may quench them
all: according to that of S. John to the same purpose in other word, ^ Ioh.
5.4, 5.
All that is borne of God overcommeth the world, and this is the victory that
overcommeth the world, even our faith.

So that I may safely conclude, that as of all the lights that God created, and
set in the Firmament of Heaven, for the benefit of men upon earth, none was so
excellent as the Sun, none so necessary as it: so of all the graces and
virtuous qualities, which the holy Ghost breaths into the souls of Christians
here on earth, to prepare them for happiness in heaven, none is so excellent
as a saving faith, none so necessary as it.

And thus much have I thought good to add of the dignity, and necessity of a
saving faith, above other graces; not to take from them any thing that is their
due: (for they all are excellent, and necessary in their several kinds,
according to their several ends, and uses, appointed them by God, the author
of them) nor yet to give unto faith, any right that is not due unto it; as to
attribute to the act of faith, which is believing in Christ, any merit of
salvation. But I have written it, because it has pleased God to crown this
his own work, and in his Word so far to grace it, above all other graces, as
to make it the only condition of the Covenant of grace that is required to be
had of al those that are capable of salvation; as also, because there being
good cause, why they should try other graces that are not so excellent and
necessary as faith in Christ, they might thence learn, that it is equity they
should try that which is more excellent and necessary then they.

REASON 2.


The Reason is good: First, because faith is more precious then gold, or all
the things in the world. 1. Pet. 1.5.


Secondly, because to be deceived in our faith, is a greater loss, then to
be deceived in any worldly thing whatsoever: even as to be deceived in gold
and silver, is a greater loss, then to be deceived in Brass and Iron:
therefore we ought to try our faith, to the end we may not be deceived, in
mistaking a false faith for a true; and a temporary faith, for a saving faith.

Thirdly, because upon this ground, Ioh. 6.26. Matt. 6.33.
Christ wills his Disciples to labor for the meat that does not perish, and
first to seek the kingdom of God: whereas worldlings first labor for the
food that perishes, and for earthly kingdoms that vanish away.

And that worldlings do take care, and use diligence in making trial of
earthly and worldly things, is plain, not only by that excuse of those men in
the Gospel, who allege for their absence from the Kings great Supper, that
is, for their negligence of spiritual and heavenly things; that they had
purchased a piece of Land, that they must needs go and see it, namely, Luke
14.18, 19.
whether it were worth their money they paid for it, and were as good land as
it was commended to be; and the other of them had bought five yoke of oxen,
and that therefore they must go prove them, to see if they will draw well in
the yoke, or no: but also it is made plain by ordinary experience, and common
practice of men, who weigh their gold, to see if it be current; taste their
wines, to prove if they be pleasant; smell to their meats, to try if it be not
tainted; and try colors, to see if they be in grain, and the like. So that a
saving faith being more precious then these, or any other worldly things; there
being as great a possibility to be deceived in matters of faith, as in matters
of the world, by means of our own natural ignorance, and Satan's subtlety;
there being greater loss by being deceived in matters of faith, then in
things of this world; and trial being the only means to prevent our being
deceived in holy and spiritual matters, as well as in worldly; it must be
equal and just, that Christians learn to try their faith, and to examine
themselves whether they be in the faith. And thus much of the equity of this
duty. The utility or benefit follows, to be considered in the last place, in
the third Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the benefit and profit of the Trial of Faith.
REASON 1.
It is profitable for Christians to examine

THE Reason is good, because it is an excellent comfortable thing, to find
that the Gospel has been powerful and effectual in us unto our salvation,
not only because they, Act. 13.48.
in whom it is effectual are ordained to eternal life, and are Gods sheep,
Ioh. 10.27.
because they hear his voice; but also because they, to whom it is not
effectual, do therefore not believe and obey, Ioh. 8.47.
because they are not of God: but it is a sign they shall perish, because the
Gospel is hid unto them: 2. Cor. 4.3.
namely, if they live and dye in this estate. So that if to be assured of the
power and efficacy of the Gospel in us unto salvation, be a benefit, then
ought Christians to make conscience to try and examine their faith; because
hereby, this benefit among other comes unto them.

And that by examination of our selves whether we be in the faith, we shall
come to find that the preaching of the Gospel has been effectual unto
salvation, is plain. First, because the preaching of the Gospel is the power
of God unto salvation to them that believe. Romans 1.16.
Secondly, because it pleased God, 1. Cor. 1.21.
by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe. Thirdly, because
Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.14.17.
and hearing by the preaching of the Word of God, which is the Gospel. Lastly,
because the Apostle Paul upon this ground exhorts the Corinthian Christians, 2.
Cor. 13.5.
to examine themselves whether they were in the faith; because by examining
themselves whether they be in the Faith, they should find themselves to be in
the faith, and by finding themselves to be in the faith, they should find it to
have bin effected by his Ministry, to the end it might appear to them that
his ministry had bin effectual in the^ to their salvation, 2. Cor. 13.3, 4, 5,
6.
and consequently, that Christ had been powerful in his Ministry among them.

So that examining our selves whether we have faith, being a means to find
we have it; finding we have it, being also a means to know that the
preaching of the Gospel has been effectual in us to salvation, and the
knowledge of the efficacy of the preaching of the Gospel unto salvation,
being profitable to us, because it is a notable means to assure us of our
salvation; it must needs be good reason to persuade Christians to examine
themselves whether they have a saving faith: namely, because they shall find
through examination, that the preaching of the Gospel has been powerful in
them to their salvation.

REASON 2.
It is profitable for Christians to examine themselves whether they have a
saving faith, because hereby they shall certainly know that Jesus Christ is in
them unto salvation.

The reason is good: because it is a very comfortable thing to the Soul, to
know that Christ is in us, by his saving grace, as appears by this; because
hereby we may know that we are Christ's, and Gods children, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
and consequently heirs of salvation: for if Christ be in us, then are we
united to Christ; and if we be united to him by the bond of the spirit, then
shall we never be divided from him, but dye in him, and rise by him, 1. These.
4.16, 17.
and reign with him in eternal glory.

And that by examining our selves whether we be in the faith, we shall come
certainly to know that Christ is in us, namely, unto salvation, is plain. 1.
Because the Apostle says plainly in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.17.
that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith* And secondly, because upon this
ground, the same Apostle exhorts the Corinthians to examine themselves whether
they be in the faith, because by examining themselves whether they be in the
faith, they shall find themselves to be in the faith, and by finding
themselves to be in the faith, they shall find Christ to be in them, as is
plain by the Apostle, where having said, Examine your selves whether you be in
the faith, prove your selves: he adds, 2. Cor. 13.5.
Know you not how that Jesus Christ is in you; intimating, that by performing
this duty of examination, they should find Christ to be in themselves, to the
end, they may discern a clear proof of Christ in him, that is, in his
Ministry, for the credit and justification of it among them, to the full
satisfaction of all that seemed to make doubt of it.

REASON 3.
It is profitable for Christians to examine

The reason is good; because men are bound to use all good means to preserve
their bodily health: Exodus 20.13. Ephesians. 5.29. Heb. 3.13.
much more the welfare of their souls. Yea, they are bound to use all good
means, to further others in the way of salvation: much more themselves,
inasmuch as their souls ought to be dearer to them, then their bodies, and
their own souls, then another man's.

And that this examination will be beneficial to their salvation, will
apppeare, by the knowledge they shall reap by their examination, and by the
profit they shall reap by their knowledge, in furthering them in the way to
Heaven.

First, there is knowledge to be gotten, by examining of our selves, whether
we be in the faith or no: because both they that have faith, shall by this
trial know, and be assured they have it, and they also that have it not
indeed, shall as evidently perceive they want it: and the ground of this I
fetch not from the Apostles words only cited in my former reason, (when after
his exhortation to the Corinthians to examine themselves whether they be in
the Faith; he adds in the next words, Know you not your selves, etc?
intimating that knowledge comes by examination:) but from the general use and
end of all trial, which is more certainly to know the nature, and quality of
the thing we try.

Secondly, there is benefit to be gotten by knowing our selves whether we be
in the faith or no: because both they that find they have a saving faith,
shall thereby be moved to comfort themselves in it, in the midst of the
afflictions of this life, and to use all good means to strengthen and confirm
the same: and they that find they have it not, shall hereby (considering the
danger of wanting it) be persuaded carefully to use the means to attain it.

Now then if the getting and strengthening of our faith be a great benefit to
Christians: as appears by this, because else the Devil would not so labor to
hinder both, lest they should understand with their hearts, and be converted,
Act. 28.3.
and God should heal them: then the knowledge that we have faith, or have it
not, must needs be beneficial to our souls, because by this means we are
moved to strengthen it, if we have it; or to get it, if we want it.

2. If the knowledge that we have faith, or have it not, be beneficial to our
souls (as has been said) because hereby we shall be encouraged in the use of
the means, either to get it, or increase it, as our need is: then must the
examination of our selves whether we be in the faith, be beneficial to our
souls likewise; because hereby we come to know that we have it, or have it
not, as has been showed.

So that furthering Christians in the way of salvation, being beneficial to
their souls, knowing that they have faith or have it not, being a furthering
of Christians in the way of salvation; and examining themselves whether they be
in the faith, being a means to make them know whether they have a saving faith
or no; me thinks this reason is good: That Christians must therefore examine
themselves whether they be in the faith: because this examination will be
profitable to them, to further them in the way of salvation.

CHAP. IIII. An answer to some objections, against the former doctrine.
BEcause always there have been, and still there will be gaine-sayers of the
truth of God, and the evil neighbor will sow Tares, Math. 13.25.
where the good Husbandman has sowed good Wheat; and because the Devil
being an enemy to the practice of all good duties in general, will in all
likelihood suggest into the minds of men, some opposition against the doing of
this duty in special: therefore do I think it meet to produce and answer
all such objections as I can imagine, he, or his instruments will make and
urge, to dissuade Christians from the trial of their Faith: to the end they
may be wholly careless, or very slack and remiss in the doing of it.

The objections are taken either from a supposed needlesnes of this trial, as
the first, second and third; or from an imagined inconvenience of the same, as
the fourth and fifth; or lastly, from a persuasion of unlikelihood, or
impossibility to try their faith, as the sixth and seventh; whereof though
none of them be so difficult, that they deserve or require much labor to
answer them: yet because they are perswasiue, by their seeming truth, to
deceive many that are willing to be deceived; therefore do I think it
needful to answer them; for the stopping of the mouths of ignorant
Cavillers, and for the better settling of the minds of conscionable learners,
in the knowledge of the truth of God in this point. And first, of the
objections of the first kind; namely, that it is needless for Christians to
try their faith. And of them this the first.

1. OBJECTION answered.
What need we to examine our selves, whether

I answer, Answer.
that all Christians now living in England, cannot certainly know, that their
forefathers lived in the faith we now profess in England: for the ancestors of
many that are now Protestants in England, were undoubtedly Papists, and
Recusants: now to be a Papist, and to be a Protestant, is to be of contrary
Religions, and of different faiths.

2. Though they certainly knew, that their forefathers lived in the faith we
now profess in England, yet can they not certainly know, that they died in the
same faith, (otherwise then by the judgment of charity, which hops all
things, 1. Cor. 13.7.
and judges the best, because it knows not the worst,) forasmuch as common
experience teaches, that many who have lived in profession Protestants, have
died Papists; and many also that have lived Papists, have died Protestants.

Thirdly, though they knew certainly, that their Ancestors and Predecessors
lived and died in the faith professed in England, (which only is the true
faith) and that they came of those believing Parents, yet will this do them no
good unto salvation, except themselves profess the same faith, as well as
their forefathers, for what good did it to the Jews in Christ's time, that they
came of the Patriarchs in former ages, to whom the promises were made, and who
by faith believed those promises, and trusted in God for the performance of
them, seeing for all that, Christ says of the Jews in his time, Ioh. 8.44.
that they were of their father the devil. For though a man come of never so
religious parents, yet is he not borne a Christian by natural generation of
them, but is made a Christian by supernatural regeneration from the Spirit of
God: for that which is borne of the flesh is flesh, Ioh. 3.3, 5.
and that which is borne of the Spirit is spirit, and except we be borne again
of water and of the Spirit, we cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

We are indeed begotten unbeleevers, or mis-beleevers, of our natural parents,
by the means of the sin of Adam and Eve, the common parents of us all: and
therefore if we be ever made true believers in Christ, Iam. 1.18.
we must be begotten again hereunto by our heavenly Father: if ever we be
begotten again to a lively hope, 1. Pet. 1.3.
it must be by the immortal seed of the Word of God, which is the Gospel. 1.
Pet. 1.23.


Let such men therefore consider, that it will not serve their turn unto
salvation, to come of believing parents, because Paul says, that all Israel
are not therefore the children of Abraham, Romans 9.7.
because they are of the seed of Abraham: but they are the children of Abraham,
that are the children of promise; Romans 9.8. Gal. 3.7. Romans 4.12.
and they are the children of promise, that are of the faith of Abraham; even
that walk in the steps of the faith of their father Abraham.

I grant, it is a privilege, to come of believing parents, Ephesians. 6.4.
if parents make conscience to bring up their children in the fear and nurture
of the Lord; and, if children will be taught to know the Scriptures from their
childhood, 2. Tim. 3.15.
that are able to make them wise unto salvation: otherwise, it is so far from
being a blessing to them, that it shall rise up in judgment against them, if
they profit not by the means affoorded to them of their new birth unto
regeneration and salvation.

4. Lastly, though those that make this objection, be professors of the true
faith only, (as all the Protestants in England are) yet will not this serve
their turn unto salvation, except they proceed further; for not every one that
says, Lord, Matthew. 7.21.
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: Romans 10.9.
for God requires of them, not only that they confess with their mouths the
Lord Jesus, but that they believe on him with their hearts: Iam. 2.18. Tit. 3.8.
that they show forth their faith by their works: that they make proof of
their belief by a good life: 1. Tim. 2 15. Revel. 20.10.
yea, that they continue in the faith; and be faithful to the death, that they
may receive the crown of life.

For many there be that profess the true faith, which have it not, as Judas,
and Simon Magus, even as many that make themselves rich in show, Prove. 13.7.
are poor in substance: many profess it for a while, but forsake it as Demas:
2. Tim. 4.10.
and many profess the faith, that walk not worthy of it: which profess they
know God, Tit. 1.16. 2. Tim. 3.5.
but by their works deny him: having a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof.

Indeed the profession of the only true faith, makes us the members of the
true Church of Christ: which a man may be, and yet be a damned reprobate, as
was Judas: but it is needful for Christians, to the end they may be saved, not
only to be members of the Church; but that they be members of his mystical
body. Now, profession of the true faith will not make a man a member of Christ,
but the having and using of faith, by continual resting on Christ for
salvation, the showing forth of the fruits of it, and laboring for the comfort
of the same, with patience under the cross, be the means that will effect it.

So that for all this Objection, Christians are bound, and have great reason to
try their faith, lest their faith prove but profession; their fruit but leaves,
and themselves such, as for a time believe unto profession, to make them the
members of the Church, but not unto righteousness, to make them the members of
Christ, Luke 8.13. Matthew. 24.13.
that for awhile believe, and after in temptation fall away; which who so does,
never shall be saved, notwithstanding he come of never so religious parents,
and were himself in profession never so forward and zealous, without cleaving
to the Lord in conscionable and constant obedience in his whole man. But let us
see what may be further objected against this truth.

2. OBJECTION answered.


Answer.
I answer: 1. Though the Creed contain the Articles of a saving faith: yet I
fear me, all that make this Objection, cannot say their Creed perfectly, if
they were well examined, and put to it at the baptizing of their children, or in
any public assembly: it is to be doubted, that many who boast they can say
their Creed, will be found either afraid to say it, or unable to say it, or
ashamed to say it: so that if the having of a saving faith consisted (as they
seemed to imagine) in being able to rehearse the Articles of their Creed, I
fear, many would come short of having a saving faith.

2. Though they could say the Creed without book, and miss not a word: yet if
many that make this Objection, were well catechized, it is like they would be
found unable to understand it; and the saying of it by heart (as they call it)
will do them no good unto salvation, except they can say it by art, (that is)
truly understand the meaning of the several Articles therein contained. For by
the repeating of it, without conceiving the sense thereof, little profit or
comfort will arise to their souls; for (for all this) they may prove no better
believers then little children of three or four years old, who can say it as
readily as they, and yet for all that cannot be prooved to have a saving faith.

3. Though they could perfectly say and understand their Creed, as they
pretend, yet were not this sufficient for their salvation. First, because all
this proves no more, but that they have an historical faith, which only
resides in the mind and understanding, whereas the saving faith, whereof they
are to examine themselves, is seated in the heart and affections, as it is
plain by the Apostle, Romans 10.10. Ephesians. 3.17.
where he says, With the heart man believes unto righteousness: and Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith. Secondly, to say the Creed, though with never so
good understanding, is but to profess the faith, and God requires more of them
that shall be saved, then that they profess the faith, though it be the true
faith, as has been showed in answer to the first Objection.

4. Though we could say the Creed, and understand it, yet were not that enough
to salvation. First, because neither the saying nor the understanding of it,
are the act of faith whereby we are saved; but only a relying, or resting
upon, and trusting unto Christ (that is) to the merits of his death, and
obedience for salvation. Secondly, because with the most it is taken for no
more then believing, that there is forgivenes of sins to be had, and life
everlasting, which the very devils know and believe.

I grant, that to say the Creed is good, and to understand it is better; the
one is a help to the other, and both are furtherances to a saving faith: but
yet with the heart to believe in Christ, is to have a saving faith; and not to
say with the tongue, I believe in Christ. for what though a man did with his
lips say never so confidently, (which out of a man's understanding, judgment,
and memory being well catechized, and taught to say so, he may do) With all my
heart, and soul, I rest upon the Lord Jesus Christ, for grace and glory; to
him I trust for the remission of my sins, the resurrection of my body, and
for eternal life in heaven: yet though he say all this with his lips, and
understand what he says, yet if he do not so indeed, with his heart, and in
truth before God, (his conscience bearing him witness in the holy Ghost, that
he does really, actually, and sincerely from a broken heart, and heavy laden
sovle out of feeling of his need of Christ's merits, and out of an hunger and
thirst for salvation by them;) for all his profession with his tongue, he has
not as yet a saving Faith: nor is he yet in Gods sight a true Believer in
Christ.

Indeed if we hear a Christian say so, and profess so, we are bound in
Christian charity to believe him, and to persuade our selves that he has a
saving Faith indeed, and is one of Gods dear children, and a member of Jesus
Christ; for we can know nothing to the contrary; especially, if his life and
conversation be answerable to his belief, and profession: but for all this
profession with the tongue, and saying the Creed with the lips, it is not
impossible but that such a man (not meaning it of any one particular person,
but indefinitely of any such man) I say, it is not impossible; but for all this
such a man may before the Lord, and in his sight be no true believer indeed,
nor have a true saving Faith: except it were true, that there were no
hypocrites in the Church, who like the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 23.3.
say and do not, which cannot be as long as we find it written in the Word,
that many shall say, Lord, Lord, Math. 7.21.
who shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Tit. 1.16.
and who profess they know God, but by their works deny him. So that this
Objection is to no purpose; therefore let us hear another.

3. OBJECTION answered.
It is needless for Christians to examine themselves

I answer; first, it is true, Answer.
that all Ministers should try and examine their Parishioners concerning their
Faith and Religion, and labor to know it, 1. These. 3.5.
especially before they come to the Communion; and I would to God all Ministers
would make conscience of this duty: but it is as true, that al Ministers will
not take this pains with their people, and so those people that are destitute
of such Ministers, must take the pains to examine themselves, if they will
have benefit by it.

Secondly, many of these obiectors, that with such colors would cover their
naked carelessness of their own salvation, live under Ministers that would
feign take the pains to examine them in matters of Religion, and in the points
of their Christian Faith: but they will not suffer them, they will count them
busy fellows for it, and will them to let them alone. For ordinarily the
younger sort will be afraid to be catechized, and the elder sort ashamed: though
I have been an eyewitness where both young and old, men and women, mean and
Right Worshipful, Masters and Servants, Parents and Children, have in the open
Congregation been catechized, and questioned of their Christian Faith, where
they have answered readily and discreetly, to the great comfort of their
Minister, their own great credit, and the encouragement of the hearers.

Thirdly, though it were true, that all Ministers were willing and able,
cheerful and painful, in trying their people, and examining them concerning
the Grounds of Christian Religion; yet will it not follow thereupon, that
therefore Christians need not to examine themselves. First, because it is
evident by the exhortation of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.28.
that every man must examine himself before he eat of the Bread, and drink
of the Wine of the Lords Table; whether his Minister do examine him or no. For
there is no such caution or limitation intended or expressed. So that because
it must absolutely be done, then at least; therefore is it needful he should
try his faith at other times also. Secondly, though it be the duty of every
Minister to pray for his people, and to edify them: yet it is the duty of
every Christian to pray for himself, Jude 20. ver.
and to edify himself in his most holy Faith. Thirdly, because we are better
able to know and feel the weakness or strength of our own faith, then the
Minister can: and therefore being more privy to it, we are more fit to
search, and try our own faith, then he can be. Fourthly, because by our
private and secret trial of our own faith, and communing with our own hearts
about it, we may be made the more ready to answer the Minister when he shall
try our faith, and examine us concerning it. Fifthly and lastly, because in
other cases we will not be satisfied with other men's trials, of things
concerning the world. For though when one pays us money in gold, and we see
him weigh it before our faces: yet will we usually take the Scales in our own
hands, and weigh it our selves; which because we do, if not out of distrust of
another man: yet at least out of more trust in our selves then another, and out
of care that we be not beguiled: therefore should we our selves, use trial of
our selves, and of our own faith, though not out of distrust of the Ministers
care, yet at least out of care of our own salvation. And so much of the
objections raised out of the consideration of the needlesnesse of the trial of
our Faith, to dissuade us from the practice of it. Now to the second sort of
objections, taken from some inconvenience that may be supposed to follow upon
this trial. Whereof this is the first.

CHAP. V. Of imagined inconveniences in trying of our Faith.
1. OBJECTION answered.
It is inconvenient and dangerous for

I Answer: First, though it be true, Answer.
that they which have not a saving faith, may by examination come to find that
they have it not: (for the intent and event of trial is knowledge) yet it is
not true, that their finding of themselves not to have faith, will do them any
hurt in general, or that supposed hurt in special, which is to drive them to
despair. In general it will do them no harm, but good; because by
considering the danger of wanting faith, and the benefit of having it, they may
be persuaded to be careful in the use of the means to get it. In special it
will not do them that harm that is pretended, namely, to drive them to
despair; because despair properly taken, is of two sorts, neither of which
they need to fear.

The first kind of despair is of those, who having once had a saving faith,
and felt the comforts thereof, which are peace, Romans 5.2, 3.
and joy* and thereby hope of salvation, have afterward despaired ^ (that is)
fallen from hope, and for a time lost the feeling of that measure of the hope
of their salvation, which once they had, namely, through the sting of
conscience, pricking, and piercing them with fear and terror for the
committing of some foul sin, not soundly repented of, Psalm. 51.8, 9, 10, 11.
and 77.7.
which was the case of David.

Now this kind of despair the obiectors need not fear, because it is of
those that have a saving faith; whereas the objection, is of those that have it
not, and are found not to have it. and besides, neither does it befall all the
Elect, but such only, as through security are overtaken with some grievous
sin, after their effectual calling; nor (if it did befall them all) do they
live and dye in it; because before they dye, they are comforted again with the
Helmet of the hope of their salvation, 1. These. 5.13.
as in the example of Job and David.

The second kind of despair properly taken, is a persuasion that some have,
whereby they are assured that they are Reprobates, and cast away from Gods
favor: that there is no way with them but one, which is Hell, nor any mercy
with God for them: to which persuasion they come through Satan's malice, to whom
they are given over by God in this life, to be tormented in soul for the sin
against the Holy Ghost, or some other grievous sins fearfully committed, and
not ^epented of.

This kind of despair the obiectors need not so much to fear: first, because
^t is peculiar to reprobates only, such as were Cain, Judas and Saul: but to
want a saving faith, or to be found without it, is not peculiar to Reprobates,
because there was a time when the elect themselves had not a saving Faith;
namely, before they were effectually called. Secondly, they need not so much to
fear this kind of despair, because of one Reprobate that dies in this
despair and torment of conscience, there be millions that dye in presumption
of mercy, without sense of sin, or punishment: the reason whereof is, because
Satan (who knows he has time little enough in this life to draw men to sin,
and long enough after this life to torment them for it) does therefore
ordinarily reserve the tormenting of sinners till the Day of Judgment, and
till they be in Hell; lest if he should deal so roughly with all sinners in
this world, they might being so pincht with terrors, seek after the means of
salvation, Act. 16. and 31.2.38.
as did the Iaylor, and the Jews, and the rather, because the presumption of
Gods mercy, without the work of Gods grace in our hearts, is a fit means to
feed men fat to the day of slaughter, in as much as it is a means to make men
careless of repenting and believing in Christ, whereby they may come to be
saved.

Indeed those that make this objection, may by examination find they want a
saving Faith, and the knowledge of this want, may be a means to bring them to
a twofold kind of despair, improperly so called; for they may be brought to
some anguish of mind, and trouble of conscience, because they have been so
long without so necessary a grace, and so long careless of getting it; yea,
they may be brought to a distrust in themselves that ever they shall be able,
by any goodness or righteousness in themselves, to save themselves, to which
when men are brought, they may be said in some sense to despair, (speaking
after the manner of men.) But they need not fear either of these kinds of
despair; because every sinner must thus despair in himself, before he can
be fit to trust in Christ for salvation, or to hunger and thirst after
righteousness by him, as shall be showed hereafter.

2. To this Objection, I answer, that though it were true, which they object,
namely, that if they should examine themselves, whether they had a saving
faith; by examination find they had it not, and by finding they had it not, be
driven to despair: yet are they no whit in worse case before God, nor are they
nearer to damnation, for finding themselves not to have a saving faith, then
for not having faith, though they know not that they want it. For though they
come not in this life to despair, because they are so blinded in their minds,
that they know not that they want a saving faith, and so hardened in their
hearts, that they feel not the danger of that want, and so feared in their
consciences, that are affected with neither: yet in another life shall they
certainly come to despair utterly, and for ever of salvation: yea, they shall
come to that which is worse then despair, namely, Damnation it self, for not
having faith, and for being careless to get it: specially if they have lived
in the clear light of the Gospel, which these cavillers, and most people have
done, that now live in these days, and in the Church of England; so that there
is no reason in the world, why Christians should put off the practice of so
necessary a duty, as is the trial of our faith, upon a needless fear of I
know not what despair.

For is it not a foolish thing, Simil.
for a sick man that is ready to die, to be of so pettish, and froward a mind,
that by no means the Phisicians must look on his water, nor feel his Pulses?
lest he discern thereby, that there is no way with him but one, which is
death? nor must he tell him how deadly sick he is, lest he be troubled, and
offended at it; and so he dies suddenly, without setting his heart in order
unto God, by faith and repentance; or putting his house in order to the world
by making his Will? even it is as foolish, yea a more foolish thing it is for a
Christian, to have a persuasion he has a saving faith, when indeed he has it
not; but he will not suffer his Minister to examine him, nor will he examine
himself whether he have it or no, lest happily it might be found he had it
not indeed: nor will he have his Minister or his own conscience to tell him he
has it not; lest (forsooth) he be troubled in conscience about it; and so on
a sudden he dies securely in presumption of faith and salvation, and is cast
into condemnation. Wherefore such Obiectors should learn to fear Hell, rather
then Despair, infidelity, and carelessness of salvation, that are sins
themselves more then Despair, which is but a punishment of sin: and then
they need fear neither Despair nor Hell; if by feeling the want of faith,
they labor diligently in the use of the means to get it, as they would do
for a worldly commodity of pleasure, profit, or honor, that they delighted in,
and had not to enjoy.

2. OBJECTION answered.
It is inconvenient for Christians to try their

I answer: 1. Seeing I have already proved, that God commands Christians to
try their faith: therefore must they not be affrighted from obedience thereunto,
by any scarcrows of supposed inconveniencie: so that the reason can be of no
force, to dissuade us from the practice of this trial, though such an
inconvenience might be likely to fall therein.

2. More directly and plainly I say, that no such inconvenience (as is
pretended) can of it self fall, upon the trial of our faith, because it could
not fall upon the Corinthians trial of their faith; to which Paul exhorted
them, 2. Cor. 13.5.
whereof we have heard before. If it would have fallen thereon, surely Saint
Paul by the wisdom of the Spirit which he had, could have discerned it; and
if he had discerned it, he would never have exhorted them to the trial of
their faith: for he knew well enough, 1. Ioh. 5.20.
that those that have a saving faith indeed, do know they have it: and he
himself (speaking of himself as a believer in Christ) says of himself; 2.
Tim. 1.12.
I know whom I have trusted, and therefore would Paul by no means teach those
that had a saving faith indeed, to doubt whether they had it or no; and to be
persuaded that they can never tell when they had it. Indeed every one that is a
Christian by name and profession has not a saving faith; every one that has a
belief of the Gospel, has not faith in Christ; neither does every one in his
heart believe in Christ, that thinks and says he does; Romans 9.6.
For all are not Israel, that are of Israel, neither shall every one that says,
Matthew. 7.22.
Lord, Lord, enter into the kingdom of heaven: and therefore though those
Christians that are so, but by name and profession, and that have a belief of
the Gospels verity, and do but presume they have a saving faith, may by trial
come to doubt, whether ever they had a saving faith or no; yea to know
certainly they never had it: yet will it not follow, that he who has a saving
faith indeed, (for of such a one is the objection to be understood, else it is
to no purpose) can come by the trial of it, to doubt whether ever he had it or
no: for he shall thereby rather come to know he certainly had it; witness the
Apostle, who after he had exhorted the Corinthians to try their faith, 2. Cor.
13.5.
says in the next words, Know ye not your selves? intimating, that by this
trial, they could not choose but find, and know they were in the faith.

So that as long as the fault is not in the trial it self, but in the person
that tryes his faith, namely, that he has not that which he thought he had:
therefore need not true Christians that have this faith indeed, be disheartened
from this trial, upon a supposition of this inconvenience.

Neither in truth need those Christians that have not a saving faith, for that
reason fear to examine themselves concerning it, because the doubting whether
or no, they have faith; and the knowledge that they have not this faith, whereof
they try themselves, that may come to them by their trial, shall be no
inconvenience to them, but rather a benefit and conveniencie; because knowing
the want of it, and feeling the danger of that want, they may thereby be moved
to seek for it, in the use of the means, and to obtain it.

That which I have said of the unlikelihood that any such inconvenience shall
ensue upon the trial of the faith of true Christians, namely, that they shall
not come thereby to doubt they had it not, or not to know they ever had it,
shall be amplified by a familiar comparison.

There is a piece of Land, Simil.
unto which two men lay claim, the one has a true title by Law, as appears
by his ancient Deeds, and Evidences; and the other thinks he has a good
title, because he is in possession, or because some body has told him so: if
the title of the land be called in question to be tried before the Judge of
Assise, and to be determined whose it is of right, and by Law: it may come to
pass upon trial and judgment, that he who thought he had a good Title (but
had it not in deed) may easily come to doubt of the Title he thought he had;
yea, certainly to know that it was stark naught: and therefore no marvel if
he be loath to have his Title questioned: but it cannot fall out upon trial
and judgment, that he, who had trve right thereunto by his Deeds and
Evidences, should come to doubt whether his claim were good: for he shall
rather thereby come to know and be assured that it was good in deed.

In like manner there is a heavenly inheritance, to which all that are in the
Church do lay claim; some think they have a good title to it, because by
name they are Christians, by profession they are Believers, and by Baptism they
are members of the Church; because they have a belief of the Gospel, they
have been at the Lords Table, and are in possession of a presumption at least
of salvation: And there be other, that by the evidence of the Word and Spirit
do know, that they are sons, and heirs with Christ, namely, by the witness
of the Spirit, in their Adoption; and by the work of the Spirit in their
Regeneration. If each of these try their title to Heaven; it may come to pass
upon the trial, that he who had but a belief of the Gospel, and thereupon
presumed he had a saving Faith, and interest to Heaven, may not only come to
doubt whether ever he had a saving faith or no; but also come certainly to
know he never had it, nor never had any just cause to persuade himself of
salvation, and therefore no marvel if such a one be loath to try his faith.
Whereas on the other side, he that had a saving faith indeed, cannot be
brought by that trial, to doubt whether his faith were a saving Faith indeed
or not; but rather certainly to know he had it; and therefore no marvel if he
be willing and ready to try his faith. So that notwithstanding this colorable
pretense all Christians have reason to try their faith, those that think they
have it, but have it not indeed; to the end they may know they have it not, and
so labor to get it: and those that have it, to the end they may more certainly
know they have it, and so labor more to strengthen it, and to take more comfort
in it. And so I pass on to the third and last kind of objections, taken from
an unabilitie, or impossibility that Christians can ever be able to try their
Faith: and they are two. Whereof the first is this.

CHAP. VI. Of a conceited impossibility, that ordinary Christians should ever
be able to try their Faith.
1. OBJECTION answered.
Ordinary Christians art the Lay people,

TO this I answer: 1. that though it be true that many Lay people, and the
most of ordinary Christians are simple and ignorant (the more is the pity) yet
are not all so: and therefore this objection (if there were any sound reason in
it) can but excuse such only, whereas under color of it, all Lay People, and
ordinary Christians, may seem to be freed from trying their faith, and
examining themselves whither they have a saving Faith.

2. Though all were so ignorant and simple, as it is pretended in the
objection, yet if they would use the means with that little wit and
understanding they have, and beat their brains to learn to try their Faith,
as well as they do to try the goodness or badnesse of worldly commodities, and
to understand which are wares vendible, or refuse, and out of sale: they might
in time, by Gods blessing upon the use of the means, come to sight and
knowledge in the one, as well as in the other; and thereby to try the one, as
well as the other.

3. But put case they could not by the using their natural wit, come to know
how to try their Faith, yet might they learn by the light of the Word which
God has given them, to be a Lantern to their ways, Psalm. 119.9.
and a light unto their paths, to know how to try their faith, because God
has sufficiently and at large described the Nature, use, and end, fruits and
effects of this saving faith; as shall be showed in the second book: by which
they may try their faith, and examine whether their faith be a saving Faith, by
studying and meditating on these Rules, and applying themselves to those
means, for the trying of themselves and their Faith thereby.

4. Suppose they should allege that the Word of God, and the Gospel were hard
and dark, and themselves blind and ignorant, to understand the Rules which it
does propound to Christians for that end, to try their faith thereby, yet has
God in his wisdom, bounty and goodness, given us many learned and godly
Ministers, to whom they may have recourse to instruct and direct them, in this
trial of their Faith, either by public preaching, or private conference: and
the rather, seeing in case they have not skill enough to know the goodness of
their Gold, they will not stick to go to the Goldsmiths to tell them whether
it want of the purity or weight thereof.

5. Lastly, suppose they lived under Ministers, that neither were able, nor
willing to direct them in this trial: yet in these latter days, God has
caused to shine such a clear light of this and other truths in books written
in the English tongue, that by them this duty might be learned: and lest it
should be objected, that they never read any book made to this end, I have
penned this Treatise for their direction and instruction herein: in the second
Book whereof, they shall find certain Rules to examine themselves by; and
interrogatories upon which they may question themselves touching a saving
faith, by which they may easily discern (if they will, and if they lay
themselves to the rule) whether they have any faith at all; or if they have
some faith, whether it be a false faith, or a true; or if they have a trve
faith, whether an Historical faith only, or a saving faith; that accordingly
they may use the means to get or increase the same. Now follows the last
objection, which is this.

2. OBJECTION answered.
Ordinary Christians have trades and occupations

I answer: First, that it may be, some who make this objection, or approve it,
have no Callings at all or Trades to follow, as they that live only upon
Usury, and therefore they can make no such plea for themselves for having no
business in any occupation to take up their time; they may have time enough to
employ in trying their faith, and examining it whether it be a saving Faith.

Secondly, others there be that have bad trades and courses of life to be
employed in; as Players and Gamesters, therefore they cannot share in the
excuse pretended in this objection, to shift off the trial of their faith: for
they are to spend no time at all in evil Callings, and therefore must they give
them over, which when they do, then they shall have time enough, to try their
faith.

Thirdly, those that have lawful Callings and Trades to follow, to maintain
themselves by, are not so straightned in time: but that notwithstanding them,
they may spare some, for the trying of their fairh. First, because they spare
some time for sleep, for eating and drinking, and for recreations,
notwithstanding all the imploiments of their Trades; and why then should they
not spare some time from them, as willingly, for so holy a work as the trial
of our faith? 2. Because they do not spend all their time in buying and selling
of ware, in receiving and paying of money; but some time they take to cast up
their debt-bookes, and the wares in their shoppes, to the end they may see how
they thrive, or go backward; and why then may they not spend some time to cast
up the book of their consciences, and their reckonings with God, to see how
they grow, or thrive in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ?

Fourthly, grant that Tradesmen, were unwilling and loath to spare from their
trades any time for holy and spiritual businesses; yet must they spare it by
reason of the necessity of the duty, and benefit that comes by the practice
thereof, as well as they can and will spare time from their sleep and food,
when they be young; to lay up against a rainy day (as they say) and to keep
them when they are old: and if they do not, they cannot be excused before God
by this plea of their calling: no more then they were excused from coming to
the wedding of the Kings Son by pleading that they had Farms to see, Math.
22.5.
and Oxen to try, nor can they be justified herein upon this ground, any more
then Martha was justified for not hearing Christ's Sermon, Luke 10.41, 42.
by pleading that she was employed at the same time, in dressing Christ's
dinner.

Fifthly and lastly, though Christians could have no time, all the week long
in the working days of it, to try their faith, yet has God appointed a
Sabbath day every week that must be spared from common business of our
ordinary calling, and must be spent in religious and holy works (such as is
the trial of our faith) and therefore let Christians set apart some time of
that day, for the examining themselves touching their faith and repentance, and
to commune with their own hearts of these things by meditation, and with God by
Prayer, for direction from his Spirit in this examination.

By this which has been briefly said touching the objections against the
practice of this duty, and answers thereunto, two things may be observed. 1.
That howsoever many strong arguments are hardly able to persuade Christians to
the practice of this duty of examining themselves whether they be in the Faith
or no: yet slender pretenses and colors of truth are able to dissuade them
from the doing of it, and they will suffer themselves to be seduced by them.
2. We may observe, that notwithstanding all the objections, which ignorant and
carnal men may devise, to nouzle them in carelessness of trying their faith,
and to keep them from diligence in this trial: yet this remains a firm
truth of God, and a necessary Christian duty; that all Christians, men and
women of years and discretion, must try their faith, and examine themselves,
whether they have a saving faith, or no. What remains but that with so much
the more diligence and conscience, they address themselves to do it
accordingly; seeing there be so many sound arguments to persuade them to it:
and not one sound reason to dissuade them from it?

And so I proceed to the second Book of this Treatise, and therein to set down
directions for this trial: From the proof of this, that Christians are to try
their Faith, to show how they are to try it. From this, that they must: to this
how they may: from the matter to the manner; and from the Reasons to the Rules
of Trial.

THE SECOND BOOK.
IN the first Book I have given Reasons, why Christians should try their faith:
and if I should not also prescribe them some Rules, to direct them how they
might learn to try it: I might peradventure be blamed with the Scribes and
Pharisees, Matthew. 28.4.
for laying heavy burdens upon the shoulders of Christian consciences, and for
not putting to my little finger, to help them to bear the same.

To the end therefore I may avoid this censure, I will in this second Book not
only put to my little finger, but my whole hand, heart, and head, to devise and
set down directions in this matter; whereby I may make the Lords yoke easy,
and his burden light, unto his people. Matthew. 11.30.


And indeed it is very needful, I should teach them, how they may try their
faith, as well as show them why they must; because if they understand never so
clearly, and believe never so steadfastly, that it is their duty; yet except
they may learn how to do it, they are never awhit the nearer: for (for all
this) they may complain with the Israelites, that they were commanded to make
Brick, but they were not told, Exodus 5.7.
where to have straw, and stuff to make it.

For this purpose, I will cite Christians into the Court of conscience, and
propound unto them certain questions, and interrogatories, concerning a saving
faith: upon which examining themselves diligently and impartially; they may
discover this truth, whether or no they have a saving faith.

The interrogatories I purpose to propound, are certain Rules and directions,
grounded on the Word of God, and appertaining to the nature and use, properties
and effects of a saving faith; and they are these eight in number:

1. Examine thy self, whether or no thou understand, what faith in Christ is,
and wherein the nature thereof does consist, namely, as it does justify.

2. When thou understandest what manner of grace it is, then enquire whether or
no thou know, and beleevest the use, and end of it, namely, that it is
ordained by God, to save, and justify sinners.

3. If thou understand the use and end of faith in Christ; then try whether or
no thou conceive rightly, of the manner how faith does save and justify.

4. After this, make proof whether thou did get this faith in Christ by the
ordinary means, by which God usually works it in his children.

5. This being done, enquire whether or no thou were ever rightly fitted, and
duly prepared to believe in Christ, namely, by the work of other gifts of the
Spirit, that go before it.

6. When thou have found this, make trial, whether or no thou find in thy self
thy faith to be lively, and effectual, to the sanctifying of thy heart, and
reforming of thy life more and more; and to the causing of thee to bring forth
fruits beseeming new obedience.

7. Examine thy self whether or no, thou labor in the use of the means, for
the comforts of a saving faith, namely, to feel them in thy self, and to to
be affected with them.

8. In the last place make trial, whether or no, thou use the means, to
strengthen thy faith, and to grow in a greater measure thereof.

All these Rules shall be comprehended and handled in this second Book,
according to their number and order.

In handling of the first Part, I will take this course. First, I will propound
and confirm, the true Definition of a saving faith, to the end they may know
what manner of grace it is: and this shall be done in the first Chapter.
Secondly, I will confute two false Definitions thereof; which shall be
comprehended in the two next chapters, namely, the second and the third.
Thirdly, I will make particular use of that I have delivered, in the
confirmation of the true, and confutation of the false definitions of faith;
and direct Christians, how to apply themselves to the Rule, for the trial of
their faith, and for the examining of themselves, whether they have a saving
faith.

THE FIRST RULE.
Examine thy self, whether or no thou understand, what faith in Christ is; and
wherein the nature thereof does consist, namely, as it saves and iustifies
sinners.

OF all the Rules and Interrogatories, I make this the first, because it is the
foundation of all the rest: for except we understand this, how should we be
able to know, whether we have a saving faith or no?

The means to know what a saving faith is, is to understand the nature
thereof; and the way to understand this, is to know the Definition that truly
describes the nature thereof: therefore will I deliver such a Definition, as
shall describe the nature of faith in Christ, and it is this.

Chap. 1.
CHAP. I. Of the Definition of a saving faith, or of faith in Christ.
Faith is a grace of God, whereby a sinner does trust unto Jesus Christ, for
heavenly and eternal blessedness, according to the Gospel.

IN this definition, or description, two things generally are to be observed:

First, the thing that is defined or described in the nature of it, namely, a
saving faith, or faith in Christ, contained in the first word of the
Definition, which is Faith.

Secondly, that which is said of this faith, or that whereby the nature of this
faith is described, in the rest of the words following, namely, a grace of God
whereby a sinner trusts unto Jesus Christ, for heavenly and eternal
blessedness, according to the Gospel.

By these words, Rule 1.
the nature of faith in Christ, is described two ways: generally, and
specially: for as all other things are defined by a description of their
nature; and their nature consists in two points: First, in that part of it,
which it has in common with other things, (as to be a living creature is the
genus, matter, or common nature of a man, which he has in common with birds,
beasts, fishes, which are living creatures as well as he.) Secondly, in that
part of their nature, which they have proper and peculiar to themselves,
whereby they are distinguished from all other creatures, (as to have a
reasonable soul, is the Species, form, and particular nature by which man is
differenced from all other creatures living on earth, none whereof are
reasonable creatures but himself.) So is it in my Definition: for in these
words, is a grace of God, is set down the general nature, or matter of a
saving faith, which it has in common with all other graces of God, namely,
hope, love, patience, and repentance, which are all graces of God, as well as
faith in Christ. And the other words of the Definition, whereby a sinner trusts
unto Christ, for heavenly and eternal blessedness, according to the Gospel,
do declare the form or special nature of a saving faith, whereby it is
distinguished from all other graces of God whatsoever; by none whereof we trust
in Christ for this blessedness, but by faith only; wherein we may further
discover, 1. the subject person that trusts for this blessedness, namely, a
sinner: 2. the action of this habit of faith, namely, trust unto: Thirdly, the
object of that action, or the person in whom faith trusts, namely, Jesus
Christ: 4. the end of this faith or trusting, namely, blessedness; described
by two adjuncts, heavenly and eternal: and lastly, the ground or warrant of
this trusting in Christ for this blessedness, namely, the Gospel.

This Definition I will propound and confirm, to the end I may both be
understood in the meaning, as also believed in the truth thereof. And that
which I shall deliver touching the exposition, and confirmation thereof, shall
be distinguished into several Sections, according to the several words thereof.

. 1. Faith
The first word of the Definition is faith, which shows, what it is, that is
spoken of in the Definition; and what is described: now concerning the word
faith, or the faith I do define therein, I would have the Reader to know and
remember two things:

First, I do not define every faith: for I do not define that which is a
belief of the Word in general, or of the Gospel in special, called an
historical faith, whereby men assent to the truth of all the written Word; for
this will not save them that have it: Iam. 2.19. Mar. 1.24. Luke 8.13.
but the faith that I define, is a saving faith, because it will save them that
have it: Ephesians. 2.8. Gal. 3.11.
nor yet do I define here, that faith that was in Adam, while for a time he
stood in innocence, and whereby he was to rest upon God for continuance in
that state: for that was but a gift belonging to his nature, to make him meet
to abide in happiness here on earth: but this is a supernatural grace given
to men, to make them fit for eternal happiness in heaven. Neither do I here
define the faith, that is commanded in the Law of Moses, Levit.
which is a trust in God as Sovereign Lord, Creator and preserver of mankind,
for the obtaining of that life, that is promised to them that can perfectly
obey it. For that is trust in God without a Mediator, but this is with and by
one: that is a condition of the covenant of works, and but a branch of it too;
but this is the sole and whole condition of the Covenant of grace.

Secondly, in my Definition I do not describe the whole nature of a saving
faith, in all the particulars thereof, and in every respect, namely, as it
sanctifies our hearts, and stirs us up to new obedience; or as it pacifies
our consciences, and works in us spiritual comforts in the greatest
calamities: but in this Definition I so far only describe the nature of
faith in Christ, namely, as it saves and iustifies us, and as it is the
condition, required on our part, to make us persons capable of salvation, by
Jesus Christ.

2. is a grace of God,
The next words of the Definition to be expounded are these, is a grace of God:
by which words, I mean not only that it is God that works this faith in those
that are saved: Hebr. 12.2. Philip. 1.29.
for he is the author of it, and he is the giver of it: Thanks is to be given
to God for the work thereof; and prayers are to be made to him for the
increase thereof: 1. These. 1.3. Luke 17.5.
but also that the Lord in mercy, grace, and favor, does work it in those in
whom it is, because Christians are said to believe through grace: and Paul
says, Act. 18.27. Ephesians. 2.8.
that by grace we are saved through faith; and that not of our selves, it is
the gift of God: for our Savior Christ does not only say, that none can come
to him, that is, believe in him, Ioh. 6.45. Ioh. 6.44.
except he be taught of God, but also that none can believe in him, except the
Father draw him; and except it be given him of the Father; Ioh. 6.55. Ioh. 6.45.
and except he have learned it of the Father.

In the third Section follow to be expounded these words, whereby a sinner: 3.
whereby a sinner
by which I do not mean indefinitly any sinner or every sinner. For Devils are
sinners, yet can they not have a saving faith: because they have no saving
promise. Secondly, Reprobates are sinners, yet cannot they have a saving faith;
because it is peculiar to the Elect. Thirdly, Infants are sinners, yet (for
ought that God has revealed in the Word) they have not a saving faith, because
it is wrought by the hearing of the Gospel, which is never preached to
infants. Romans 10.14.
By sinners therefore I understand, not only such as are so in themselves,
(that is) both by nature, and by life, Romans 3.23.26. and 5.3.16.17.
in Adam and in themselves. But also such as know, believe, and feel
themselves to be sinners, and to have need of Christ, and Gods mercy to save
them: for such are weary and laden, Math. 11.28.
and they are called and invited to come to Christ; such are sick in sovle,
Math. 9.12. Luke 18.13.
and feel their need of Christ to be their spiritual Physicion, and such
will go to him: Luke 7.47.
such will love God for his mercy, when he has forgiven them: Act. 2.37, 38.
and 16.31. Luke 19.10. Math. 9.13. Does trust unto
such will enquire after the way and means of salvation; and such Christ came
to save.

Now follows the act of Faith, whereby we are justified in these words, does
trust unto: for the opening and proving whereof, it will be needful to show
four things. First, what is meant by this word, trusting. Secondly, that the
act of faith whereby we are justified, is described by this word trusting; or
by other words that signify trusting. Thirdly, that God requires trust in
Christ of all those that shall be saved. And fourthly, that he will accept of
trust or faith in Christ unto Justification of them that have it, and do
perform it.

1. For the first. To trust one, or to trust unto one, or to put trust in one,
are well understood of English people: they are described by other words and
phrases, well known among us, as by putting one in trust with a thing, or
putting confidence in a man, for doing some thing; our English language
likewise affords us other words of the same sense, viz. to rest, or rely upon a
man, to build upon him, to depend or cast a man's self upon one for something.

To trust one ordinarily, implies three things, that will agree with our
present purpose. 1. A knowledge of the party whom we trust, and of his promise
to do us some good turn, else we had no reason to trust him. 2. A belief,
that he did mean as he said, when he made the promise, and that he was both
able and willing to perform it: else we would never trust him. 3. A not using
of means, or a forbearing to take some course, by our selves, or others, to
effect that for which we trust to another to do it. (For example) I may trust
a man, Simil.
that has promised to pay me so much money by such a day, if I know him: and
if he have promised me to pay it then, and if I believe him to be sufficient
and honest, and if I trust him, I shall be careless to go abroad elsewhere,
to get in money to serve my turn; because I builded on his word, who I
persuaded my self would not fail me. In like manner, all these three are
necessarily employed in a saving Faith, and are supposed to concur thereunto,
before a man can be said to trust in Christ for salvation. First, he must know
and believe, that God has promised salvation to them that trust in Christ: and
that whosoever trusts in him, shall be saved. 2. he must steadfastly believe,
that God is both willing, and able to perform it. 3. he must deny to trust to
himself, or to any goodness in himself, or any other save only Christ for
salvation, before he can rely, rest upon, or put trust and confidence in Christ
for it.

I know many Divines use other words to express the nature of the Act of Faith
in Christ, whereby we are justified; as namely, to apply Christ, to apprehend
Christ, or to lay hold upon Christ, and his benefits, and they are not unfit,
because (as I suppose) by them they understand an action of the soul, whereby
sinners intend to honor Christ by seeking for salvation to him alone. But
(reserving reverence to their Judgments) I think the word trusting, is both
more easy to be understood of Englishmen; and also it does better express
the nature of that act of Faith, whereby we are justified; namely, a resting
or relying upon, a depending or building upon, a putting trust or confidence in
Christ for salvation, upon a knowledge and belief that there is no means in
our selves, or any other, to trust unto for it, but in him only.

2. The second point propounded in the opening of this word, trust, was to show
that the act of Faith, whereby we are justified, is in Scripture often
described by the word, trusting, or by other words that signify as much.

First, by trusting, as where Paul says of Abraham, that he trusted God, and
it was counted to him for Righteousness, Romans 4.3.
which was more then bare believing God said trve, when he promised to bless
him in his seed, as shall be prooved hereafter; and where he says of
himself, that he knew whom he had trusted, 2. Tim. 1.12.
namely, to bring him to Heaven: and likewise where he says of all the
faithful, that if they be dead with Christ, Romans 6.8.
they trust that they shall live with him.

Secondly, the act of faith whereby we are justified, is described by other
words and phrases, (...). Romans 4.3.5. Act 16.31.
that signify trusting as namely, by believing upon Christ: by believing into
Christ: and by believing in Christ; (...). Ioh. 1.12. Romans 10.14. (...). Ephesians.
1.12.13. 1. Cor. 15.19.
which must needs signify more then bare believing, that there was a Christ,
or that the Son of the Virgin Mary was the Christ, or that the doctrine
concerning the way of salvation which he preached, was trve: and therefore must
needs signify trusting in him; as may further be made plain by the known
distinction of Credere Christo, credere Christum, and credere in Christum. I
know, the Holy Ghost uses other words besides trusting in Christ, Joh. 1.12.
to express the act of our faith, whereby we are justified; as namely,
receiving Christ: namely, with the hands or arms of faith; Ioh. 6.40.
and seeking or looking upon Christ, namely, as with the eyes of faith, and
going or coming to Christ, Math. 11.28.
namely, as with the feet of Faith: but all these are expounded by believing in
Christ. The two former in the very Verses and Chapter quoted: and the latter,
which is coming or going to Christ, in Job. 6.35. compared with Matthew. 11.28.
so that, by that which I have said, it may evidently appear, that in the New
Testament especially, the act of Faith, whereby we are justified, is signified
and expressed by trusting in Christ, or by such words as do plainly express
as much.

But though we understand never so well what were meant by trusting to Christ;
yet if it were not commanded of God, and accepted of him to salvation, all this
were in vain: therefore for the further opening and prooving of this part of
my definition, I must make good these two points, which are the two last
branches propounded to be opened.

3. The third point is, that trusting in Christ is commanded of God, to be
performed of all those that shall be saved; and this shall evidently appear,
because Christ says, Ioh. 6.29.
This is the work of God, that we believe in him whom he has sent: And the
Apostle John says, 1. Ioh. 3.23.
that this is the commandment of God, that we believe in the name of his
Son Jesus Christ. And answerable to both; Paul affirms that the Apostles
received Commission to preach the Gospel to all Nations, for the obedience of
Faith; that is, Romans 6.26. and 1.5.
that they might obey God, by believing in Christ for salvation, according to
the Gospel.

4. Now follows the fourth and last point propounded to be opened in the word
Trust; which is, that trusting in Christ, is accepted of God unto justification
of all that perform it truly; which may evidently appear, by the many
promises of God made thereunto in the Gospel; as namely, where it is promised,
that they who believe in Christ, shall not Ioh. 3.16.
perish, shall not be Romans 9.33.
confounded, shall Ioh. 5.24.
not come into condemnation; yea Mark. 16.16. Act. 16.31.
they shall be saved, they shall receive Act. 10.43.
forgiveness of sins, and they shall be Act. 13.39.
justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law
of Moses; and no marvel, seeing by faith in Christ they are made the Ioh. 1.12.
Gal. 3.26.
sons of God by grace, and by being sons, made Romans 8.16, 17 Gal. 3.26.29.
heirs by Jesus Christ of eternal glory. So that trusting to Christ, being
words well understood of Englishmen, and in Scripture used to describe the
nature of a saving faith, trusting in Christ, being commanded of God, and by
him promised to be accepted to our justification; I hope it will hence
evidently appear, that I had good reason to use them in my definition, rather
then other, to describe the act of faith, whereby we are justified. And so I
pass on from the act of faith, which is trusting, to the object thereof, which
is Jesus Christ.

In these words Jesus Christ, is set down the worthy Person in whom we trust
for salvation:. 5. Jesus Christ
For the object of our faith is not God only, or simply; but God in Christ, 2.
Cor. 5.19. 1. Tim. 2.5. 1. Ioh. 1.1, 2.
in whom he reconciled the world; who is the Mediator betwixt God and Man; who
is our Advocate with the Father, and who is the propitiation for our sins: 2.
Cor. 1.20.
for in him all the promises of God are yea, and Amen: and in him are hid all
the treasures of Gods wisdom and mercy; Col. 2.3.
for he is both willing to save us, being Man, and able, being God, if we
rest upon him.

I know, we must trust in God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost, as well as in
Jesus Christ, but in neither of them as Mediator, for that only is the Man
Christ Jesus: 1. Tim. 2.5.
but we trust in God the Father for Reconciliation and Adoption, and in God the
Holy Ghost for sanctification and consolation, by the means and merit of Jesus
Christ, in whom only we are predestinate to the Adoption of his children,
Ephesians. 3.5.
and blessed with spiritual blessings in heavenly things; 1. Pet. 1.18, 19.
(because he only paid a price to God his Father for them, and purchased them
for us by his precious blood) all which are understood in one word,
blessedness, which is the next word to be opened.

6. for heavenly and eternal blessedness,
In the sixth place is set down the end of our trusting in Christ; and that is
for heavenly and eternal blessedness: which consists in our full deliverance
from all hellish and eternal punishments, and in the enjoying of all heavenly
and everlasting happiness, both of grace and glory, in soul and body; for all
these are in few words called the salvation of our souls; and the salvation of
our souls is called the end of our faith: 1. Pet. 1.9. 1. Pet. 1.5.
for we are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. I call it
blessedness, because this word comprehends all that can make a man perfectly
happy; Psalm. 1.1.
as also because it is used by the holy Ghost to express that, for which we
trust in Christ, and which we hope to receive by trusting, as appears by
comparing Genesis 12.3. Gal. 3.14. Romans 4.6, 7, 8, 9.
. I call it heavenly blessedness, because it is chiefly to be had in heaven;
and I call it eternal, because it shall never have an end, as all worldly
blessings have. I grant, that temporal blessings are promised to the
faithful; for godliness has the promises of this life, and the life to come:
1. Tim. 4.8. Romans 8 32.
and he that has given us Jesus Christ, will with him give us all things
also. But only spiritual blessings in heavenly things, are the treasures of
the Covenant of grace; and as for temporal things, Matthew. 6.33.
they are but as an advantage to the bargain, and consectaries thereupon; as
appears by this, in that they are not absolutely promised in the Covenant; and
secondly, because they are not to be enjoyed perfectly here on earth, where
only we stand in need of temporal things.

Now in the last branch,. 7. according to the Gospel.
I come to the end of my Definition, wherein is laid down the foundation of
our faith in Christ, or the warrant that we have to believe in Christ, for this
blessedness, namely, the Gospel for the Gospel only does promise this
blessedness to all that believe in Christ. Now by Gospel, I do not mean the
writing of any one, or all the Evangelists, but the promise of perfect
happiness in soul and body, made to believers in Christ, wheresoever we find
it in the Old or New Testament, in the Gospels, or Epistles expressly set
down, or by necessary consequence implied.

And I add these words, according to the Gospel, unto my Definition of a
saving faith: First, because the Gospel only is the proppe and ground of our
faith, by which we are called to believe in Christ; without which it were
great presumption to seek for pardon, and trust in Christ for salvation, had
not God in the Gospel commanded us so to do; and promised us salvation, if we
do so; and with which it is Christian boldness, and holy confidence, to draw
near to the throne of Grace, having Gods Word for our warrant, and
encouragement to seek for salvation by believing in Christ, seeing the duty
is so easy that is required of us, the thing so excellent that is to be
attained unto by believing, and the person so worthy and able to procure it, in
whom we trust for it.

I grant, the Law of God, and the whole Bible, are to be believed as well as
the Gospel; and the Law commands faith in God, as well as the Gospel: (though
not the same faith which the Gospel does, as has been showed before) but no
Word is the Gospel, but the Word of faith; and no Word is the Word of faith,
but the promise, because it only teaches doctrine, concerning the way and
means of salvation; as namely, who shall save, viz. Jesus Christ; and how,
viz. by his death; and whom, viz. believers in him.

For the Gospel only commands men to believe in Christ; 1. Ioh. 3.23.
Ioh. 3.16.
the Gospel only promises salvation to them that believe in him; and the
Gospel only works this faith in men, Romans 10.14.17.
to make them capable of salvation. And thus much for the opening and
confirming of the true Definition of a saving faith, which (I hope) is
sufficient for that end. For the further proof whereof, I will add but one
word more, namely this; that therefore my Definition of a saving faith is good,
not only because it observes the rules of a good Definition, as has been
showed before; but also, because it contains in it all the causes thereof;
namely, the efficient, God; the material, a sinner; the formal, trusting in
Christ, and the final, heavenly, and eternal blessedness, together with the
foundation and ground thereof, which is the Gospel.

My Definition then containing the true nature of a saving faith; and therefore
being true, it must follow, that all definitions, that describe the nature of
it otherwise, (that is, not in other words, but in another sense, and to
another end) must needs be false and erroneous.

Of this kind there be two definitions that are unsound: the one, of the
Papists in Rome, who require less faith to the justifying of a sinner, then I
have said: and the other is, of some Lutherans in Germany, who require more, as
shall be showed in order: and both these I will address my self to confute by
the Word of God, to the end the Christian Reader may be the better established,
in the true definition of a saving faith.

CHAP. II. Of the Definition of faith required to salvation, among the Papists.
BY the Doctrine of the Papists, it shall evidently appear, that all the
faith, which they require, to the justifying of a sinner, is, that he firmly
assent to the truth of the Word of God; provided, he believe it to be true,
not because by evidence of reason he discernes it is true, and understands well
enough how it may be true; but upon the bare authority of God only, who has
revealed and written it.

Now because I will do them no wrong, therefore will I cite their own words;
and because it will be tedious to allege many testimonies, therefore will I
content my self with one, which is the Definition of Bellarmine, a learned
Clarke, a valiant Champion, and a Cardinal Pillar of the Church of Rome: his
words are these:

Faith is only a firm and certain assent Bellar. tom. 4. lib. 1. cap. 5. de
Iustificatione.


And lest this might be thought to be but one Doctors opinion; therefore let us
hear what a Popish Council of Doctors say of the point. The Council of Trent
requires no more, but To believe to be true, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 6.
all things which are from God revealed and promised: by which words, All
things that God has propounded to be believed, and that are revealed and
promised, are meant, not only all things which are contained in the written
Word, called the holy Scriptures, as Bellarmine expounds himself in the book
before named, page 742. and 731. but more, even all things which are preserved
in the Church, by universal, apostolical Traditions, and which are determined
in general and particular Councels, being confirmed by the Sea-apostolike; and
which are defined or concluded by the Bishop of Rome, as he is Bishop, as it is
expounded by another Jesuit. T^lle^. Instru^t^^ Sacerdot. (...)* ^ cap. 1.


For the confutation of this Popish opinion, of the nature of their justifying

I. ARGUMENT.
All the faith required of Christians to justification, is not only an assent
to the truth of all his Word, because God requires more of them then this;
namely, to believe in Christ, or to trust to the merits of his death and
obedience.

The Reason is good, if I can make good these three Propositions whereon it is
grounded, namely, First, that belief or trust in Christ is faith. Secondly,
that God requires this trust in Christ, of those that are to be justified. And
thirdly, that trust in Christ for salvation, is more, then only an assent to
the truth of the Word of God, yea though it be the Gospel.

1. That belief in Christ is faith, is plain, not only by the notation of
the word, in that to believe, (...), comes of (...), which is Faith; but also,
because to believe, or trust in, or upon Christ, is called Faith, Romans 4.5.
Gal. 2.16. and 3.6, 7.22. Act. 15.9, 11.

2. That God requires trust in Christ, which is, resting and relying on his
merits for salvation of them that shall be saved, needs no proof here;
because it has been largely declared, in the exposition of my Definition of a
saving faith, to which I refer you.

3. And that trusting in Christ, or trusting to him, or putting trust and
confidence in him, is more then assenting to the truth of the Gospel, I prove
thus: Trusting to a man is more, then believing that he says true; therefore
trusting to Christ, is more then believing the truth of Gods Word delivered by
Christ. The reason is good, because trusting, is one and the same action in
nature, whatsoever the object of our trust be; and believing the truth of any
saying, is one and the same in kind, whatsoever the saying be, that is believed.

And that trusting a man, is more then believing he says true, shall be
evident by this reason; namely, because to assent to the truth of a man's word,
or to believe he says true, is a faith that is common to any speech he
utters, be it a truth, or a lie; a promise or a threatening: but to trust a man,
is a faith that is proper to that speech which is a promise only. For example:
if I tell my neighbor, that I went from London to Dover in one day; and
returned home to London again the next; he may believe I said true, and assent
to the truth of my speech with one kind of faith, and he may persuade himself
I said truly, and that I did as I said: But if I say to him, that to morrow
(God willing) I will give you a piece of gold of twenty shillings, to buy you a
Bible: in this case he may do more, then only believe I said true, or barely
assent to the truth of my promise; for he may trust unto me, and expect to
receive it from me, and come to me the day appointed, to demand it, according
to my promise. So that trusting in Christ being required to justification, as
well as believing the truth of the Word; and trusting in Christ being more then
assenting to the truth of Gods Word; it must follow then, that the Popish
Definition of faith is unsound; which requires no trust in Christ at all, but
only an assent of the truth of all things contained in the Word of God. For the
further confutation whereof, this shall be my second Argument.

II. ARGUMENT.
All the faith that God requires of Christians, unto justification, is not
only an assent to the truth of Gods Word, because all the faith that he
required of his people Israel for the obtaining of lesser benefits, even
temporal deliverances, and blessings, was not only an assent to the truth of
Gods promise, but a trusting in Gods power, goodness, truth, and mercy, for
the obtaining of good things promised.

The Reason is good, because greater benefits, viz. heavenly and spiritual,
are more excellent then lesser, viz. earthly and temporal: therefore are they
not so easily obtained as they; and therefore for the obtaining of them, the
Lord requires at least as much (if not more) faith, as for the obtaining of the
other.

And that all the faith which God required of the Israelites, for the obtaining
of temporal blessings and deliverances, was not only an assent to the truth
of his Word, is plain, because he required of them a trust in his power,
truth, goodness, and mercy, as may easily appear by the 1 Chro 20.20. where
Iehosaphat exhorts the people, not only to believe the Prophets of the Lord;
that is, not only to assent to the truth of the doctrine of their Prophesies,
but also, to trust in the Lord their God, that so they may be established and
prosper: as also by 1. Chron. 5.20 where the Lord renders the reason, why his
people Israel were not overcome in battle of the Hagarites and others, but that
they rather were delivered into the Israelites hands; and the reason is,
because they prayed to God, and put trust in him: which yet may be further
cleared, in that where the Lord renders a reason, why his wrath fell upon his
people Israel; the reason was, because they believed not in God, and trusted
not in his salvation. Psalm. 78.21, 22.
So that trusting in God, and believing in him, being required of his people,
for the obtaining of temporal blessings, as well as believing the truth of his
Word; spiritual and heavenly blessings, requiring as much faith for the
obtaining of them, as temporal; and trusting in God or Christ being more
faith, then believing the truth of the Word: It must needs follow, that the
Popish definition of faith must needs be unsound, which requires not to the
obtaining of justification, that faith which is trust in Christ, but only an
assent to the truth of the Word of God, which is an historical faith.

This I think is enough to have alleged in confutation of the Definition of a
saving faith, as it is taught in the Church of Rome. Other reasons I could
bring against others, (if any other but Papists were in this point of this
opinion with them) to prove, that a saving faith is not only an assent to the
truth of the Word of God; as namely, because if it were, then 1. reprobates and
devils, Luke 8.13. Iam. 2.19. Mark 1.24.
that never shall be saved, may have a saving faith; for they may assent to the
truth of the Word, and believe the Gospel. 2. Then an historical faith, and a
saving faith, should be all one, which has been contradicted by many
Divines, ancient, and modern, that have distinguished faith into 3. kinds; an
historical, a miraculous, and a saving Faith: but because I intend here a
confutation of the Papists only; and I know these reasons would not be
sufficient to confute them, who think, that reprobates may have any faith, and
yet be damned; and who will yield no such distinctions: therefore will I omit
the further proof and prosecution of those Arguments, and only content my
self with the two, that I have formerly produced, as being sufficient (in my
judgment) to confute the Popish opinion, concerning the nature of their faith,
which they require of all Catholics to salvation.

But because they endeavor to maintain their opinion by color of Scripture,
which seems to countenance it, therefore will it not be needless altogether,
to say a little in answer of their Arguments, specially the chiefest of them,
and the rather, because hereby the truth of that I have said, will be further
cleared, the Reader more fully satisfied, and the Adversary (if he will read
and believe) more soundly convinced.

The Arguments alleged by the Papists in defense of their Definition of their
saving faith, are many: but the chiefest of them are these four: which being
fully answered, the rest will not deserve any labor about the confuting of
them.

A saving faith, or all the faith that God requires to justification, is only
an assent to the truth of the Word. 1. Arguments of the Papists.
because it is only in the understanding, Heb. 11.1. 2. Because Abraham's faith
was this assent, Romans 4.1. 3. Because everlasting life is promised to this
faith, Ioh. 21.31. 4. and lastly, because the miracles which Christ and the
Apostles did, were all wrought for the confirmation of this faith, Mar. 16.16.
to the 20.

To these Arguments I mean to answer generally and particularly: but briefly
in both kinds.

The general answer to the objections.
The general answer is this: that neither of the four Arguments do prove
that for which they are alleged. For the point to be prooved is, that all the
faith that God requires of men to justification, is only an assent to the
truth of the Word: but the proof only is, that God requires of them that are
to be justified, that they believe his Word, or assent to the truth thereof,
which I never denied. Now who knows not that there is a maine difference,
betwixt these two sayings? God requires assent, and all that God requires is
assent? If any man can or will directly conclude out of any of the places
alleged, or any other the point in question, I will yield the cause: in the
mean time they are insufficient. For though it be true that the faith spoken
of in the four Texts alleged, be a saving faith, and that the believing there
spoken of, were only an assent to the truth of the Word: Yet all is to little
purpose for them, as long as God requires more faith then this, in other places
of Scripture; namely, believing in Christ; which I have proved to be faith, as
well as assent to the truth of the Word of God, and to be more faith then it,
except we shall say, that that which God requires in one place of Scripture, is
not as necessary to justification, as that which he requires in another, or
that God is bound to set down in every place of Scripture, where he speaks of
the duties requisire to justification, all the duties, and all the faith
thereunto requisite; which no reasonable man can imagine to be true.

1. OBJECTION answered, particularly taken from Heb. 11.1, 3.
Touching the particular answer, to Particular answers to the objection.
that the 1. is insufficient; because in the Text alleged, he does neither
speak of the whole nature of faith, fully in every kind, and of every act
thereof, requisite to justification: neither does he say that every kind of
faith, or every act, of every kind of faith, is in the understanding only.
That the Text alleged, speaks not fully of the whole nature of faith in every
kind, and of every act of faith requisite to justification, is plain by this:
because it mentions not, trust or belief in Christ, which I have formerly
proved to be faith, and to be required of all those that shall be justified.

Indeed in other places of the Chapter, he speaks of it by implication, as
verse 5, 6, 8, 9, 10. but not in the Text alleged; because the Text speaks
only of that faith which is in the understanding, namely, an historical faith,
whereby we believe the truth of the Word, concerning the Creation of the world
of nothing, ver. 3. and of that faith which convinces our understanding of the
truth of those things, of which we can see no reason how they should be so, ver.
1. But the act of faith, which is trust in Christ, is in the heart, will, and
affections. Which I prove by these texts of Scripture, and Reasons.

1. Because that faith must needs be in our hearts, whereby Christ dwells in
our hearts: Ephe. 3.17.
but Christ dwells in our hearts by faith in him.

2. That faith must needs be in our hearts, by which with our hearts we
believe unto righteousness; but with our hearts we believe in him unto
righteousness. Romans 10.9.10.


3. That faith must needs be in our hearts, by which we draw near with a true
heart, to the throne of grace: but by full assurance of Faith, we draw near
with a true heart to the Throne of grace. Heb. 10.22.


4. To believe in Christ, is to go to Christ, or to seek to him for
salvation: Math. 11.28. Ioh. 6.35. Act. 15.17.
but to go to Christ, or to seek to him to be saved, belongs to the heart,
will and affections, by reason of the goodness of the thing, which is
salvation, which draws our hearts and affections to desire and seek for it.

5. Because to believe in Christ for salvation, is fiducia in Christo, or
Christum, that is, a trusting in Christ, or putting confidence in him, a
resting or relying upon him with all our hearts for salvation, as has been
showed in the opening of my Definition of a saving faith: but fiducia in
Christo, or Christum: that is, trust in Christ, is in the heart, will, and
affections, Bell. de iustific. l. 1. c. 5. p. 733. c. d.
by the confession of Bellarmine himself.

And that the Apostle in the Text alleged, does not affirm that every kind of
faith, and every act of every kind of faith, is in the understanding only, as
is plain; because the word, only, is neither in the Letter, nor sense of the
Text. Indeed one kind of faith, and one act of faith whereof he speaks, verse
3.1. is in the understanding only; but neither is that all the faith which God
requires to justification, as has been showed by two Arguments before (for
that is but an Historical faith, and God requires more then an Historical
faith to justification) nor will it follow, that therefore all and every kind
of faith, and every act of faith, must be in the understanding only, because
that is. For though that faith which only has truth for the object of it, and
which only looks to the truth of the Word, (which assent to the truth of the
Word as an Historical faith does) be only in the understanding; because the
faculty of judging, and after judgment, of assenting to the truth of any word
or speech of God or man, belongs to the understanding only: yet that faith
which has for the object of it, not only the truth of the promise of the
Gospel, but the person of the Son of God to rest upon, for so good and
excellent a thing as is grace and glory: (Which faith in Christ, or a saving
faith has) may for all that be, and doubtless is, in the heart, will and
affections: so that, either the Papists must deny fiduciam in Christo, that is,
trust in Christ, to be a kind of faith, (which I have formerly disproved:) and
to be in the will (which is confessed by Bellarmine himself) or they must
acknowledge that S. Paul speaks not of all, Heb. 11.1, 3.
and every kind of faith, and of every act of faith, requisite to
justification; which to do, is in effect to profess plainly, that they cannot
soundly conclude from the Text in the Hebrews, that all the faith which God
requires unto justification, is only an assent to the truth of the Word,
because all and every kind of faith is not in the understanding only. For
though that faith, which is an assent to the truth, be in the understanding
only, because every assent to the truth is the understanding only: Yet that
faith which is more, then an assent to the truth, namely, a trusting, resting,
and relying upon Christ, with all the heart for salvation, may be, and
certainly is in the will, heart and affections, because trusting, resting,
reying and depending on God, is in the heart, will and affections. And so much
for a more particular answer to the first Argument of the Papists, whereby they
would prove, that all the faith required of Christians to justification, is
only an assent to the truth of the Word. The second follows.

2. OBJECTION answered. From Romans 4.3.
The second Argument likewise does not prove the point in question; because
though Abraham were the father of the faithful; and Paul say, Abraham credidit
Deo, which they translate, Abraham believed God, as if his faith were nothing
else, but an assenting to the truth of his promise: Yet will not their
translation prove the point, namely, that all the faith which God requires of
those that shall be saved, is only an assent to the truth of the Word; because
those words, Abraham credidit Deo, are to be understood not only of his
believing the truth of Gods promise: but of his trusting to God for the
performance of his promise, though he saw no likelihood thereof.

This I prove: first, because those words, Abraham credidit Deo, are expounded
in the fifth verse, by believing or trusting upon him that justifies the
ungodly, and trusting upon God, is more then bare believing the truth of his
Word, as has been proved before. Secondly, because the same Apostle speaking
of Abraham's faith in the same Chapter, says, that he was strong in the faith,
and gave glory to God, being fully assured that what he had promised, he was
able to perform, 20.21. yea, that he believed in hope against hope, verse 18.
Thirdly, because in the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Apostle speaking of
Abraham's faith, Heb. 6.15.12.
says, when he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise, and by faith
and patience inherited them. All which show plainly, that Abraham's faith was
more then a bare believing that God said true, or an assenting to the truth of
Gods promise.

And that the exposition of the words, credidit Deo, that is, trusted God, or
rested upon him, with waiting patiently for the obtaining of the blessing
promised, may not seem strange, I prove it, not only by the same sense of the
same word in Heathen Authors, Phocylides verse 90. (...). Populo ne fide,
mutabile est vulgus.
as where the Poet says: Trust not the common people, the multitude is
variable or uncertain, that is, not to be trusted, but also by the use
thereof in the same sense, of trusting, or putting one in trust in the Holy
Scriptures, as where Paul says, I know whom I have trusted, 2. Tim. 1.12.
and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto
him against that day.

I acknowledge the same word or Verb, with the same Case, namely, the Dative
does signify to believe, one says true; as Mar. 16.13. Ioh. 2.22. and 5.46.47.
Act. 8.12. and 24.14. Romans 10.16. but it does not always signify that, and no
more: for it sometimes signifies to trust one, or put one in trust, or to
commit to ones trust, as To. 3.3. 1. Tim. 1.11. 2. Tim. 3.14. which is more
then only believing, one says true, or assenting to the truth of his saying.

So that Abraham's saving faith being a trusting, resting, or relying on Gods
power, truth and goodness for a blessing in his seed, and trusting, resting
or relying on God, being more then bare believing, he says true; therefore
cannot that Text in the Epistle to the Romans prove a saving Faith, to be
only a believing, GOD says true in all his Word, or an assent to the truth of
his Word.

3. OBJECTION answered: From
In the third, place where they urge that all the Faith which God requires of
Christians to salvation, is only an assent to the truth of the Word, because
eternal life is promised to this faith, I say the reason is not good. 1. Ioh.
3.16.
Because eternal life is promised to faith in Christ; and faith in Christ, is
more then assent to the truth of the Word, as has been proved before. 2.
Because eternal life is promised to the knowing of Christ; yet can no man
thence conclude, Joh. 17.3.
that all the faith which God requires of Christians, is only knowing of
Christ; for then what should become of acknowledging Christ, or assenting to
the truth of his Doctrine, which is more then knowing him or his Doctrine?
Thirdly, the end of the believing spoken of in the Text, is to have life in
Christ's name, and the means to attain life by Christ's name or merits, is to
believe in it, Ioh. 1.12.
or to rest upon them: therefore do I think that the believing there spoken
off, may as well be applied to the name of Christ, as to the word written: to
the end, that by believing the Word written, we may come to believe in the
name of Christ; and by believing in his name, or trusting in his merits, we may
have life thereby.

4. OBJECTION answered.
The last Argument, whereby the Papists would prove, that all the faith
required of Christians to salvation, is only an assent to the truth of the
Word, (...) believing the truth of the Word, is, because all the miracles which
Christ and his Apostles did, were done for the confirmation of this faith.

This is to as little purpose, as the former; except it could be prooved, that
miracles were only wrought, for the confirmation of that faith, which is a
belief of the truth of the Gospel; and not at all, of that, which is trust in
Christ: which is contradicted evidently by these places of Scripture, Mar.
16.16.20. Ioh. 2.23. and 7.31. and 10.37, 38, 42. and 12.37.

I acknowledge that miracles were wrought, to the end men might be the more
settled in their persuasion of the truth of the doctrine of the Gospel: but I
deny that they were wrought, for the confirmation of that faith only. And my
reason is, not only because the former places gainesay it; but also because
even reason does contradict it. For if a saving faith, or faith in Christ, be
more excellent and necessary, then an historical faith, which is a belief of
the Gospel, as has been proved before: If the one have need to be confirmed
as well as the other, and miracles were able to confirm one, as well as
another; I see no reason, why miracles should not be wrought, for the
strengthening of the one, as well as of the other; 1. Tim. 2.15. Revel. 2.10.
seeing strengthening of our faith is the way to continuance in it; and
continuance in it, the way to obtain the crown of it.

To conclude then my answer to these objections; I pray it may be considered
and remembered, that I acknowledge that in some places of Scripture, a saving
faith is called knowing of God or Christ; Ioh. 17.3. ephesians. 4.13. 1. Tim. 4.3.
sometimes it is expressed by knowing and believing the truth; sometime by
acknowledging the truth; yea sometime it is described by bare believing, 2.
Tim. 2.25.
as John 1.7. compared with Acts 19.4. yet this is not therefore done, because
every one of these phrases do of themselves, in Grammar-Construction,
sufficiently and fully declare the whole nature of a saving faith: for then
what should become of believing in Christ; into, and upon Christ, or trusting
to him for salvation, which are often spoken of in the Scripture, as well as
they, and do signify more then bare believing, knowing or acknowledging the
truth of the Gospel.

But I take the reason hereof to be, either because the circumstances of the
place, where a saving faith is described, by such phrases, do evidently show,
that the holy Ghost in a Theological sense speaks of it, and of those that
have it: or because they who have a saving faith, must know God and Christ;
they must believe and acknowledge the truth of the Word, as well as believe in
Christ, if ever they will be saved; yea, they must first know God and Christ,
they must first believe and acknowledge the truth of the Gospel, before they
will believe in Christ to salvation, according to the Gospel: or else because
it was a great matter in those days, to believe the Gospel, which was a
stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the gentiles. 1. Cor. 1.28.


For the doctrine of the Gospel was a new doctrine, and therefore it was a
strange matter, in those days, Act. 17.19, 20.
for people to believe that, of which there was no ground at all in nature. And
therefore no marvel, if the holy Ghost do sometime describe a saving faith by
these; namely, bare knowing, believing, and acknowledging Christ and the
Gospel; specially, seeing all they that are to be saved, are to have this
faith, as well as the other; and this faith which is but an assent to the truth
of the Word, before that faith which is a trust in Christ for salvation;
wherein notwithstanding there can be no inconvenience, nor untruth, seeing (as
has been said often) the holy Scripture, that speaks but so much of the
nature of faith in some places, does say more of it in other, to the end no man
may be deceived in the understanding of the nature of it, if he take pains to
compare one place with another.

CHAP. III. Of the Definition of a saving faith, given by some Lutherans.
HAving confuted the first Error, concerning the Definition of a saving faith,
namely, that of the Papists; it remains, that I proceed to the opening and
confuting of the second: because it also as well as the former, agrees not with
the true nature of faith in Christ, as it iustifies us. For as the former
opinion of the Papists requires less faith to justification, then God does
require; so this of the Lutherans requires more.

The sum of the opinion is this, That a saving faith is a full assurance, and
certain persuasion of salvation by Christ; and that to believe in Christ, is
to be fully assured, and persuaded of salvation by him: and because it will be
superfluous to allege many testimonies, therefore I will content my self with
two, that were otherwise famous, and learned men in their times, namely,
Chemnitius and Melancthon.

The words of Chemnitius are these: Faith is a particular assent, whereby every
Chemnit. ex Council. Trid. in 8. Francofurt. 1590. page 380.
that the general promise pertaines unto him, and that he is included, and
comprehended in it.

Melancthons words are these: To believe in Christ, is to believe, Melanct.
Exam. Theol. Neostad anno 1587. in 8. De vocabulo fidei, page 583.
that forgiveness of sin is given not to others only, but even to them in
particular: with which agrees a Definition well known in the English tongue,
viz. Faith is a full persuasion of the heart, grounded upon the promises of
god, that whatsoever Christ has done for the salvation of others, he has
done it for me, as well as for any other.

In this Definition, two things are considerable: First, the nature of the
action of faith, or of believing, which consists in persuasion or assurance.
Secondly, the things to be believed, or the object of this action, which are
forgiveness of sins, and eternal life.

Now though I might except against both these parts* the latter (as well as the
former) that makes the nature of the act of believing, to be persuasion, or
assurance; (...) the latter that makes the object of their assurance,
persuasion, or believing, to be salvation, whereas it is Christ only, or
Christ for salvation: yet I will not labor in that, but direct my discourse
against the former part of it, which makes the nature of the act of believing,
to consist only in assurance or persuasion.

But before I come to the confutation of the opinion, I will first show the
occasion of this opinion. Secondly, I will declare in what sense I write
against it, viz. against that part of their Definition, that makes faith, (as
it iustifies) to be assurance of salvation, to the end I may not be mistaken.

The occasion that was given, to some Divines, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 9.
Bellar. de Iustificat. lib. 3. cap. 2. page 851. c. d. 852. e.
to be of opinion, that a saving faith is a full assurance, or persuasion of
salvation, I take it to be this: The Papists deliver for truth, That none can
be assured of his salvation: but that every one ought rather to doubt thereof.

Now to the end this Popish doctrine might be opposed, many Divines amongst
them have taught, that faith it self is an assurance of salvation, and a full
persuasion, that our sins are forgiven us; namely, because some texts of
Scripture make show of such a point. But (by their leave, and saving reverence
to their great learning, and sound judgment in other points of Divinity) it
was not good to oppose one untruth with another: for whilst they intended to
overthrow the Popish faith, which is joined with doubting, they have (ere they
were aware of it) shaken the faith of many weak Christians; who reading, that
a saving faith is an assurance of salvation; and that to believe in Christ, is
to be fully persuaded of the forgiveness of sins by Christ; and withal,
finding in themselves, either no assurance at all, or (at least) not so full an
assurance and persuasion of their salvation, have hereupon concluded (to the
great discomfort, as well they might, if their Definition of a saving faith
were true,) that they have not a saving faith, though in deed, and in truth
they had, as long as they believed in Christ, trusted to him, and rested on the
merits of his death and righteousness for salvation, in that manner as shall
be showed.

Touching the second point, I would have the Reader observe diligently, that I
am so far from denying Faith to be the root, and foundation of assurance and
persuasion, of the forgiveness of sins, and salvation: that I plainly
confess, that it does bring assurance, and persuasion thereof, to the
faithful: namely, in that measure, and at that time, that the Lord of his
wisdom and goodness sees fit, for each of his children.

But this I deny. Faith (as it iustifies) is not formally an assurance or
persuasion of salvation; and this I will endeavor to make good, by alleging
some Arguments in defense of my opinion; and by answering the Reasons that may
be brought in proof of theirs. And of my Arguments, this is the first.

REASON. 1.
A saving faith (as it iustifies us) is not rightly

The reason cannot justly be denied, because it is true; that therefore the
cause cannot be the effect, nor the root the fruit, because the one follows
the other in nature; the effect, the cause; and the fruit, the root: and
therefore if assurance of salvation follow faith in Christ, as the effect and
fruit of it: then cannot faith in Christ be the assurance it self, or full
persuasion of salvation.

And that assurance, or full persuasion of salvation, and justification
follows faith in Christ: I prove by these Reasons.

First, because assurance of salvation, or justification comes to us
efficiciently, by the testimony of the Holy Ghost, that bears witness with
our spirits, that God is our Father, and we his children, Romans 8.15, 16.
and the Spirit bears witness that we are Gods children, when we are
believers in Christ, and not before, as is plain by Saint Paul to the
Ephesians, where he says plainly, Ephesians. 1.13.
that the Ephesians were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, after they had
believed in Christ: And in the Epistle to the Galathians, where having said of
himself and them, Gal 4 6.
We are all the children of God by faith in Jesus Christ: he adds in the
fourth Chapter; And because we are sons, Gal. 3.26.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying Abba
Father. So that the assurance of salvation, following the testimony of Gods
Spirit, that we are his children; the testimony of Gods Spirit, that we are
his children, following our being Gods children; and our being Gods children,
following our believing in Christ, or our saving faith; therefore assurance of
salvation or justification, must needs follow a saving faith, as an effect or
fruit of it.

2. Assurance of salvation follows faith in Christ; because assurance of
salvation, or justification, comes to us by feeling certain graces, wrought in
us by faith, namely, peace of conscience, and joy in the hope of the glory of
God.

That peace of conscience, and joy in the hope of the glory of God, are means
to assurance of our salvation, it is evident by this, that they are the first
fruits of our salvation, and of the joys of Heaven; and that this peace and
joy, are wrought in us, by the means of Faith, is as plain by two places of
Paul, where he says, Now then being justified by Faith, Romans 3.5.
we have peace toward God, and not so only, but we rejoice under the hope of
the glory of GOD: Romans 15.13.
And Romans 15.13. Now the GOD of hope fill you with all joy and peace, by
believing that you may abound in hope, by the power of the Holy Ghost.

So that assurance of salvation, following peace of conscience, and joy in the
hope of the glory of God, and peace of conscience, and rejoicing in the hope of
Heaven, following faith; I may safely conclude upon these grounds, that
therefore assurance of salvation does follow faith: And that therefore
consequently, a saving faith in the nature of it as it iustifies us, cannot be
a full assurance or persuasion of our salvation. For proof whereof, this shall
be my second Reason.

REASON 2.
A saving Faith is not an assurance of salvation,

The reason is good; because a thing cannot go before it self, there must be
some other thing that must go before it. Therefore if a saving faith go
before the assurance of salvation, (as needs it must if a man must have Faith
in Christ, before he can be assured of his salvation:) then cannot faith in
Christ, nor saving faith, be the assurance it self of salvation.

To say, a saving faith is an assurance of salvation; implies that a saving
faith, and assurance of salvation, are all one and the same thing: but to say,
we must first have a saving faith, before we can be assured of our salvation;
implies, that the one goes before the other, and that therefore they are two
distinct things; so that assurance of salvation cannot be affirmed, or
predicated of a saving faith, in the Definition of it; because it is not proper
to the nature of it, nor is convertible with it.

And that we must have a saving faith and believe in Christ for salvation,
before we can have any assurance of salvation, I prove by these three Reasons.

First, a man must be saved, before he can be assured of his salvation, (for
he cannot be assured of that which is not) and a man must have a saving faith,
before he can be saved by faith (for he can not be saved, by that which he
has not:) therefore he must have a saving faith, before he can be assured of
his salvation.

Secondly, a man must have a saving faith, before he can be assured of
salvation; because salvation is promised in the Covenant of Grace, under a
Condition, and the Condition is faith in Christ, and faith in Christ, is a
saving faith: So that he must first perform the condition of the Covenant, by
believing in Christ, before he can obtain the thing promised in the Covenant,
which is salvation: For as it is true, that he which believes in Christ by a
saving faith, is justified, as soon as he believes: so is it as true, that
before he believes, he is not justified. For till then, he has no reason to
lay hold on the Tree of Life, or to lay claim unto salvation, or the assurance
of it.

Thirdly, we must have a saving faith, before we can be assured of salvation,
because we must be united and graffed into Christ, that is our Savior, before
we can be saved, or have assurance of salvation by him. Now it is faith
only, or belief in Christ, that unites us to Christ and ingrafts into him, as
appears by the phrases of believing in, into, and upon Christ, spoken of
before, and also by this, Ephe. 3.17. Romans 8.1.
that Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith; and we are said to be in Christ;
namely, by faith.

So that Christ Jesus being the meritorious cause of salvation, to procure it;
and faith in Christ the isntrumental cause, to assure it us; it must needs
follow, that we must first have a saving faith, before we can have salvation,
or any assurance of it. But let us pass on to another Reason.

REASON. 3.


The reason is undeniable: because a saving faith, and that whereby we are
saved, are all one; and so are our assurance of salvation, and our being
assured thereof. Whence I thus argue: If a saving faith justify us, (as
themselves confess) and a saving faith be an assurance of our salvation, as
it iustifies us (as their Definition imports) then must it needs follow, that
we are justified by being assured of salvation; which cannot be for these
four Reasons:

1. We are not justified by being assured of justification, because then would
it follow, that we are assured of our justification, before we are justified
indeed. (For that whereby we are assured of any thing, must needs go before
our being assured of it, inasmuch as it is the means and cause of it.) But we
are not assured of our justification, before we are justified indeed; because
that whereby we are justified, must needs go before our being justified, in
as much as it is the means and cause of it: and we must first be actually
justified in Gods sight, before we can be assured of our justification,
(because we cannot be truly assured of that which is not;) wherefore either
assurance of salvation must go before salvation it self (which is as
impossible as for a man to be assured of Land, before there be Land to be
assured of;) or it cannot be true, that we are justified, by being assured of
our justification.

2. We are not justified by being assured of our justification; because then
would it follow, that whosoever has a saving faith, must presently, and
continually have an assurance of his salvation: (for he that once had a saving
faith, shall always have it; and never lose it) and also he that is not
assured of his salvation, is not justified, nor has a saving faith, which is
most untrue, seeing many of Gods dear children may want the assurance of their
salvation, and that for a long while in some cases, and yet for all that trust
in Christ, and hang upon him for salvation.

3. We are not justified by being assured of salvation, because then would it
follow, that the condition of the Gospel required on our part instrumentally,
for receiving of salvation, should be a comfort, and not a duty: (for that
whereby we are justified, is the condition of the Gospel, required on our part
to make us capable of salvation, and assurance of salvation is certainly a
comfort.) But we are justified by faith, which is the condition of the
Gospel; not as it is a comfort, but a duty, both because it is called a work,
and a duty of obedience, Ioh. 6.29. Act 6.7. Romans 16.26. 1 Ioh. 3.23.
and a duty commanded; and also, because the comfort that comes by faith to the
soul, is after the act of believing in Christ, which is the duty of faith; for
the comfort of faith, is assurance of salvation; and assurance of salvation,
arises from peace of conscience, and joy in the hope of Heaven; both which
follow faith in Christ, or our being justified by faith in Christ, as has been
showed before, out of Romans 5.3, 4. and 15.13.

4 Lastly, we are not justified by being assured of our salvation, because then
would it follow, that the meaning of the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace, which
is this; He that believes shall be saved, and shall not be damned: Ioh. 3.16.
Mar. 16.16.
the (meaning (I say) of this should be: He that is assured of his salvation,
and is fully persuaded he shall not be damned, shall be saved, and not damned
(for to have a saving faith, to believe in Christ, and to be assured of
salvation by Christ, is all one with them, if a saving faith be an assurance of
salvation.)

But this interpretation is absurd, not only, because there is no good sense
in such an exposition, but also because it may come to pass, that some man may
be saved by believing an untruth: for if justification follow believing in
Christ (as it is plain it does, because believing in Christ, is the condition
required on our part to justify us, and therefore must go before it) then if
I persuade my self I am justified before I believe in Christ, I am persuaded
of an untruth, and consequently am justified by believing an untruth. If I
persuade my self my sins are forgiven me, which indeed are not forgiven,
before I have this persuasion; then must I believe that which is false, and
consequently be justified by believing that which is false. For who knows not,
that there be many carnal Gospellers, that in their persuasion are verily
assured of their salvation: (for they would not doubt of it, they say, for all
the world, and well they might, if a saving faith were nothing else but an
assurance of salvation) who yet can indeed have no sure ground of any such
assurance, because they are not borne anew of the Spirit, unto repentance from
dead works, and faith in Christ? Wherefore either these Lutherans must say, we
are not justified by faith in Christ, which is heretical; or affirm that the
meaning of the Covenant of Grace is, that he which is assured of salvation,
shall be saved, and not damned, which is senseless, or else it cannot be true,
that we are justified by being assured of our justification, and consequently
that neither is it true, that a saving faith is an assurance of salvation, as
they persuade themselves. For confutation whereof, this shall be my fourth
Reason.

REASON 4.
The Lutherans Definition of a saving faith,

The reason must needs be good, because the nature, use, and end of a saving
faith, is to comfort those, that have it, in as much as it gives them title to
Christ, and all his benefits; therefore the Definition of this faith should
minister comfort to the souls of Christians: if therefore the Lutherans
Definition do not minister comfort, but rather needless fears and
discomforts, (as shall be proved by and by) then cannot it be a good definition
of a saving faith; for God will not have by any doctrine of his Word, the
bruized reed broken, nor the smoking flax quenched; Mat. 12.20.
Mat. 11.28. Isa. 61.2, 3.
but rather by all means the weary and heavy laden soul to be eased; and
them that mourn after the Lord to be comforted.

And that this Definition of a saving faith given by some Lutherans, does cause
fearful, and needless discomforts, in them that are afflicted in conscience,
I prove; because it teaches them, who indeed have a saving faith, to doubt
whether they have it or no; and consequently, whether they be in the state of
grace, and salvation or no; viz. because they feel they have not such a faith,
as the Definition imports.

For what will such be ready to say against themselves, through the accusation
of their own consciences, and the suggestion of Satan? I am not a child of
God, because I have not a saving faith; and I have not a saving faith, because
I have not an assurance of salvation; for (will they say) I have read in
Treatises and Catechismes, yea I have heard, and been taught in Sermons, that
to believe in Christ, is to be assured of salvation by Christ, and that a
saving faith, is a full persuasion of the heart, grounded upon the promises of
God; that whatsoever Christ has done for the salvation of man, he has done
it as well for me as for any other. Now (alas) I know well enough to my grief,
that I have not this assurance; for because I want it, I am thus afflicted in
my mind.

Wherefore either they must confess, that God will have those that have a
saving faith, and are tender, or tormented in conscience, to be more deeply
wounded, and more cruelly tortured, which is against the Word of God; Luke 4.18.
or they must grant that this their Definition of a saving faith is a naughty
Definition; because it does so as has been said.

I grant, if their Definition of a saving faith were true and warrantable by
the Word of God, it were to be born withal, if it did minister by occasion,
accidentally some grief to them that were tender in conscience: but when it is
both unsound, as has been proved by other reasons; and uncomfortable too, as
has been showed by this; and that not by occasion or accident only, but
because it ministers just cause of more doubts, and fears, to wound the
consciences of those, whom God would have healed; therefore it is not likely to
be true: and so I come to my last reason, which is not to be despised; and it
is this.

REASON 5.
is not good, because it nuzzels up profane men, and carnal professors of the
Gospel, in a strong persuasion, that they have a saving faith, and in a vain
presumption of salvation.

The Reason is very probable, because the nature, use, and end of faith, is to
overcame the world: therefore to beat down all prophanenes, and no way to
countenance carnal Gospellers therein; therefore should the definition of a
saving Faith, 1. Ioh. 5.4.
do so too; if therefore the Definition of a saving faith, do nouzle men in
profanesse, and formal profession, though they have not true faith indeed,
then cannot it be a good definition. Now that this Definition of theirs does
nouzle up men in profanesse, in a strong persuasion they have a saving faith,
and in a vain presumption of their salvation, I prove; because it makes them,
who indeed have not a saving faith, to persuade themselves they have it, and
them who as yet are not justified, that they are.

For when such men do read in books, and are taught what a saving faith is,
namely, an assurance of salvation; and what it is to believe in Christ, namely,
(as they say) to be assured of forgiveness of sins by Christ; and withal,
do know and feel, that they have an assurance, yea a full assurance (as they
persuade themselves) of their salvation; (for they would not doubt of it say
they for all the world;) how can it be, but this definition of a saving faith,
through the deceitfulnes of their proud hearts, and Satan's craft, must needs
nouzle them up in this strong persuasion, that they have a saving faith;
especially when they can allege for themselves, that they have learned it so,
by the Ministry of the Word, of their Pastors? for if a saving faith be an
assurance of salvation, (as their Definition imports) then an assurance of
salvation, is a saving faith; and if an assurance of salvation be a saving
faith, then why should not their assurance of salvation be a saving faith, as
they think?

If they reply, because the assurance of salvation that is in such carnal
Gospellers, cannot be a true assurance upon good grounds, but a counterfeit one:

I answer, that for ought their definition of a saving faith says, it may be a
true assurance; for it gives no direction to try which is a true assurance, and
which is a counterfeit: so that if a saving faith be nothing else, but an
assurance of salvation; and to believe in Christ, be nothing else, but to be
fully assured of salvation by Christ; and to be certainly persuaded, that
whatsoever Christ has done for the salvation of others, he has done the same
for them in particular, and for their salvation; then must it follow, that he
which has this particular assurance of his salvation, must needs have a saving
faith.

If any chance to make the like objection against my Definition, because
carnal Gospellers may easily persuade themselves, they trust in Christ for
salvation, and that their sins are forgiven them for his sake.

I answer, that justly they cannot; because both in the opening of my
Definition already, as also in the Rules hereafter following, I have showed
what be those gifts and graces of the Spirit, which he works in Christians,
namely, to prepare them thereunto, before they do or can believe in Christ; so
that by these they may know, whether their trust in Christ, be a true trust in
Christ or no, and upon good grounds or counterfeit. Whereas by the doctrine of
their definition, and nature of a saving faith, they give no such Rules, to try
whether their assurance of salvation be true or no, in as much as they teach
that faith in Christ, (that is, if their exposition of the nature of a saving
faith be true, a full assurance of salvation by Christ) is the first grace that
is wrought in Christians; so that there is no means lest to try whether their
assurance of salvation be true or coun^fet; or whether they have any sound
grounds in them, of this their assurance of salvation.

So that there being by their Doctrine, no graces of the Spirit, wrought in
them, to prepare them to this faith or assurance, it must needs follow, that
they have no grounds of this assurance; and consequently, that this assurance
and persuasion of salvation, is not a saving faith; and that therefore their
Definition of a saving faith, must for all this, nouzle up carnal Gospellers
in their profaneness.

By these five reasons, I hope it may appear to the understanding, and
judicious Reader, that a saving faith in the nature of it, (as it iustifies us)
is not an assurance of salvation; and that to believe in Christ for salvation,
is not to be fully persuaded of salvation by Christ; and that therefore
consequently, the Definition of a saving faith, that is made by some Lutherans,
and which describes the nature of it, to consist in assurance and persuasion of
salvation, is not good.



Arguments of the Lutherans
The Arguments that may be alleged in their defense, are taken from such places
of Scripture chiefly, as attribute to faith; and the faithful, either assured
persuasion, as Romans 8.38. 2. Tim. 1.12. or certain knowledge, as 1. Ioh. 4.16.
or full assurance, as Heb. 10.22. from whence they would infer, that faith in
Christ, is an assurance, or assured persuasion, or certain knowledge of
salvation by Christ.

To all these three Objections I purpose to make one general answer; and the
rather, because it will agree fitly to them all, and it will fully answer them
all.

My answer is this, That neither any of the Reasons severally, 8. The general
answer to the objections.
nor all of them jointly considered, nor their proofs do make good that, for
which they are alleged. For the point to be prooved is, That faith (as it
iustifies us) is an assurance, or certain persuasion of salvation; but the
Texts alleged, prove this only, That faith does bring a full assurance, and
certain persuasion of salvation to them that have it; as being the effect and
consequent of faith in Christ, as shall appear by and by in the particulars.

Now who knows not what great difference there is betwixt these two sayings;
To believe in Christ for salvation, is to be assured of salvation by Christ;
and this, To believe in Christ, will bring assurance of salvation to them that
believe, who cannot see a clear distinction between these two Propositions?
Faith is assurance of salvation, namely, in the nature of it, as it iustifies
us, and faith will bring assurance of salvation to them that have it, namely,
as an effect of it, which I have often affirmed, and which is all that can be
concluded, out of the Texts alleged.

If any can and will directly conclude more, namely, that the persuasion, or
the assurance, or the knowledge that is there attributed to faith, do show the
very nature, and form of faith, as it iustifies a sinner, I will yield the
cause; in the mean time, they are all insufficient, because they speak of
persuasion, assurance, and knowledge in faith, as the effects thereof only.

And that the Texts alleged, do speak of persuasion, assurance, and
knowledge, not as if they were the acts of faith, whereby those persons were
justified, or were to be justified, to whom they are applied, but only as the
effects of the faith of those, who were already justified, shall be made
plain in the particulars.

1. OBJECTION answered: From Romans 8.38. 2. Tim. 1.12.
9. Particular answers to the objection.
The first Text concerns Paul the Apostle, who though he say of himself, that
he is certainly persuaded, that nothing shall be able to separate him from
Christ, yet cannot this prove, that this certain persuasion of salvation was
the act of faith, whereby he was justified in Gods sight: 1. because then Paul
should have been justified, by being assured of justification, or salvation,
which I have proved impossible before.

2. Because the persuasion, or assurance of salvation that was in Paul, was
such a thing in nature, and was so wrought, as it is in all the rest of Gods
children; but their assurance of salvation, is an effect or consequent of their
faith in Christ, as has been prooved by two Arguments before, and therefore
must Paul's assured persuasion of his salvation be the like.

2. OBJECTION answered from 1. Ioh. 4.16.
The like may be said of the second John, wherein though he say of himself,
and the rest of the faithful, to whom he writes, that they did know, and
believe the love of God toward them, viz. in their salvation, and therefore
were assuredly persuaded thereof; yet will it not thence follow, that this
knowledge and belief of theirs, was the act of faith, whereby they were
justified, because those words do not set down their first knowing, or
believing their salvation, which is the point to be proved. For the first act
of their saving faith, was trusting to Christ's merits for salvation: and this
they had done long ago, namely, at their first conversion, as appears, because
he wrote this Epistle for the confirmation thereof. But the act of their faith,
which the Apostle mentions in the place quoted, was but an effect of that
trust, as is evident by this, in that it is caused by their feeling of their
love to God and their brethren, as is plain by the context; now the feeling of
our love to God, and our brethren, must needs proceed from the feeling of Gods
love to us; and the feeling of Gods love to us, must proceed from faith in
Christ, in whom God has loved and redeemed us; Gal. 5.6.
because faith works by love.

I confess, that knowing of Christ, is sometimes put for believing in Christ,
Ioh. 17.3.
yet this is not; because to believe in Christ, is certainly to know, and to
be fully assured of salvation by Christ: (for then would it follow, that every
one that knows Christ, should be fully assured of salvation, which is evident
to the contrary, in tender consciences) but either, because a certain
knowledge, and persuasion of the power and truth of God, begets faith in
Christ, and makes us trust to him for salvation; or because faith in Christ
brings in time and measure, assurance and persuasion of salvation, to them that
have it.

I acknowledge, Job 19.15.
that Job knew his Redeemer lived, but this knowledge only, justified him not:
first, because he was justified before, chap. 1.1. 2. because it was knowledge
but of Christ's Resurrection, and his own; whereas a saving faith, is first a
belief in the death of Christ, Romans 8.34.
and afterward in his Resurrection. Thirdly, because if this knowledge only
justified him, then his trust in Christ did not justify him at all; which is
impossible, seeing it is the chief act of faith, whereby we are justified.

3. OBJECTION answered: From Heb. 10.22.
The third Text of Scripture, wherein Paul exhorts the Christian Hebrews to
draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, is to as little
purpose as the former.

First, because though he attribute Plerophory, or full assurance to faith:
yet will not this prove, that faith in the form, nature, and being of it, as
it iustifies, is a full assurance or Plerophorie of salvation, because the
Apostle attributes full assurance to faith, not as meaning to define a saving
faith, in the nature of it, as it iustifies us (for then he would have said,
Let us draw near in faith, or full assurance,) but he describes it by the
fruit; and therefore he says in full assurance of faith; as noting, full
assurance, to be but the effect of faith, which I contend for. So that no man
can hence conclude, that a saving faith (as it iustifies us) is a full
assurance of salvation, which is the point to be prooved; no more then they
can prove, that faith in Christ (as it iustifies) is joy; because the Apostle
attributes joy to faith, and speaks of the joy of the faith of the
Philippians. Philip. 1.25.


They may indeed conclude from thence, that a saving faith is a cause of joy,
Romans 5.1. and 15.13.
to the hearts of Christians; which is also plainly confirmed in other places,
even as they may indeed conclude from Heb. 10.22. that a saving faith is a
cause of full assurance of salvation: but they cannot prove, that a saving
faith (as it saves us) is an assurance of salvation, which is the point to be
prooved.

Secondly, because if the Text alleged out of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
could prove the point in question, then should the words, Let us draw near in
full assurance of faith, be an exhortation to the Hebrews, that were not
already justified, to teach them, how they might be justified, viz. by drawing
near in full assurance of faith; that is, by being fully assured and persuaded
of salvation by Christ; (for that is the point to be proved, viz. that a saving
faith (as it iustifies us) is a full assurance of salvation, and that to
believe in Christ, is to be fully assured of justification by Christ;) but the
words are an exhortation to the Hebrews, that were already justified, as
appears by the next words, verse. 23. where he exhorts them in general to hold
fast the profession of their faith without wavering, part of which was a saving
faith; which implies, they had faith already, and therefore were already
justified: (for they could not hold fast that they had not:) so that the
Apostle speaking not of the nature of faith as it iustifies, but of the effect
of faith only in them that are justified, nor speaking to them that are not
justified, to teach them how they might be justified: but to them that are
justified, to teach them how they may with more boldness, continually crave the
pardon of new sins in weakness committed, and get more assurance of the
forgiveness of the old: I cannot for my part see, how the place alleged can
prove faith to be a full assurance of salvation.

There be many other Texts of Scripture, Heb. 11.1.
besides these, that attribute persuasion, assurance and certain knowledge of
salvation, unto Faith: but (I suppose) they may all be satisfied by some of the
answers that I have already made to the place before alleged.

To conclude then, though it be most sure, that Heaven and eternal life shall
in the event most certainly be attained by all those for whom it is provided.
First, because they are ordained to it by God, Ephesians. 1.1.
and he cannot fail of his purposes. 1. Pet. 1.18.
Secondly, because it is purchased for them by Christ, and his blood cannot be
shead for them in vain. Thirdly, because they are fitted to it, 1. Pet. 1.5.
and kept for it. Fourthly, because the possession thereof is already taken,
and kept by Christ their elder Brother: yet neither do the faithful for whom
it is prepared, come to be sure of it presently, Ioh. 14.2, 3.
and as soon as ever they have faith in Christ (which they needs must, if faith
in Christ for salvation, were in the nature and form of it an assurance of
salvation) nor are they always alike sure of it; nor are they continually so
sure thereof, as that they can never at any time (after they have believed in
Christ) come to doubt thereof; nor yet does the assurance of their salvation
depend on the nature of their faith, as it iustifies them,) or on their faith
simply, but chiefly on the truth, goodness, and power of God, that has made
this Covenant with mankind, Ioh. 3.16.
that whosoever believes in Christ shall be saved; and upon the worthiness and
perfection of Christ, for whose sake it is freely given us: Romans 6.21.
but assurance of salvation depends upon faith, only as it is the condition of
the Gospel, required of us, and wrought in us, to make us capable of the same;
and this assurance of salvation is increased in us, by faith, as it is a grace
of God in us, producing many holy effects of the continual fear and love of
God and our brethren; and many comfortable effects of peace with God, and joy
in the Holy Ghost, the first fruits of the Spirit, and the earnest penny of our
heavenly inheritance.

I grant, the faithful shall have assurance of salvation before they dye, and
they shall have it by faith; but they have it not by faith simply, as if the
promise of the Gospel were, Note.
either, that he that is assured of salvation, shall be saved, or he that
believes in Christ, shall be assured of salvation; but because the promise of
salvation is made to faith in Christ; and so they that have this faith, are
persons to whom salvation belongs, God being by his righteousness, true of his
promise, by his greatness, able to perform it, and by his goodness willing.

That men shall certainly be saved, and that they are sure they shall be
certainly saved, are two different things, the former implying a certainty in
respect of GOD, and of his Word, that because he has promised salvation to
them that believe in Christ, therefore they shall certainly be saved in the
event; and this certainty of salvation shall be attained, though in this life
men never come to be sure thereof in their souls, as in the case of infants,
who being elected of God, shall certainly be saved, though they were never
sure of it in their souls: and the latter implying a certainty, in respect of
the persons that are to be saved, that they have an assured persuasion that
will not deceive them, which they may want for a time, after they have believed
in Christ: and yet be beloved of God, and be believers in Christ and in the
end be certainly saved notwithstanding: and therefore the nature of faith as
it iustifies, cannot consist in assurance of salvation, nor the nature of
believing in Christ to salvation, in our being assured in our souls, that we
are saved, as is supposed.

CHAP. IIII. Of the use and application of this first Rule.
AFter the explication and confirmation of the trve Definition of a saving
faith, and the confutation of the false; it remains that for the closing up of
this Chapter, I make some application thereof, by way of exhortation,
admonition, and consolation; My exhortation shall be to Protestants, Papists,
and Lutherans: the admonition to Atheists, Papists, and carnal Gospellers: and
the Consolation to all trve believing and sincere Christians.

1. Exhortation.
My Exhortation to Protestants is, that they would examine themselves; first,
whether ever they knew what it is to believe in Christ, and understood wherein
the nature of faith (as it iustifies) does consist: namely, as I have delivered
it, that accordingly I may advise them.

It may be, by trial many shall find that this was all they understood of a
saving faith, that it was a belief, that there was once such a one as Christ,
that came into the world to save sinners, and that to believe in him, is to
have a good hope, that he shall speed as well as others, and be saved by him,
as well as they. Now if by examination they find themselves only to be
believers in this fashion, and to be wholly ignorant of the nature of faith,
as I have declared it; then have they great cause, first, to be ashamed of
themselves, in that they have been so long ignorant of the nature of so
precious and necessary a grace of God as faith is. Secondly, to fear that as
yet they have not a saving faith. For I know not how they can have it, and be
wholly ignorant of the nature of it, what it is; seeing it is only wrought, in
men and women of understanding; ordinarily, by the preaching of the Gospel:
and that preaching is made effectual to the working of it in them, by
enlightening of their minds, with the knowledge and understanding of the
points of the Gospel; one whereof is the Doctrine of a saving faith, which is
the condition of the Gospel required of all those that shall be saved by
Christ. Thirdly, to use all good means, for time to come, to gain the
knowledge of this point, to the end they may know they are on a sure ground for
their faith and salvation.

But if by examination they find, that they rightly and clearly understand
what a saving faith is, and what it is to believe in Christ for salvation; then
have they cause to be thankful to God for inlightening their minds with this
knowledge, Math. 16.17.
which flesh and blood, nature and the world has not revealed to them, but the
Spirit of God, who has left others in the darkness of ignorance and
infidelity; they have reason likewise to settle their judgments in the truth
thereof, by arguments from the Word of God, such as these be, that I have
alleged, to the end they may continue therein, and may not be perverted, and
corrupted, with the other two false opinions of the nature of a saving faith.
Yea, they are not to content theselves herewith, namely, with the knowledge of
the nature of a saving faith, and with this, that they understand what faith in
Christ is, or what it is to believe in Christ for salvation: but that they
never give over, till they get the grace of faith it self, to the end they may
take the benefit by the knowledge hereof, while they live, and receive the end
of their faith when they dye. 1. Pet. 1.9.


2. Secondly, my exhortation is to Protestants, to examine themselves whether
they steadfastly believe, that faith will indeed justify all those sinners that
have it: and consequently that it will justify them, if they believe in
Christ; for except we more then know the nature of a saving faith, and except
we more then think or guess that faith will save us: viz. except also we
steadfastly believe this, for an undoubted truth of God, that every one that
believes in Christ, shall be saved, we shall not have encouragement enough
thereunto. For except our souls be satisfied touching this truth we may still
doubt, whether it may not come to pass, that for all our faith in Christ, we
may be damned; which whosoever does, has little encouragement to believe in
Christ for salvation, specially if withal it come into our minds (which it may
easily do by Satan's suggestion, and the accusation of our consciences) that
we are sinners by original corruption, and actual transgression, and
therefore liable to all Gods curses: and that therefore it is unlikely that one
grace of God, namely, faith, should be sufficient to save us. To settle us
therefore in this belief of this point, that faith in Christ will save us, we
are to meditate:

First, on these places of Scripture, Act. 13.39. Act. 13.39. Romans 1.17. and
3.28. Gal. 2.16. and 3.1.
Gal. 3.11. Romans 1.17. Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.16. and 3 11. the effect whereof is,
that though we be sinners in our selves, yet shall we be justified by faith in
Christ. Not that we shall be pronounced to be just in ourselves, formally, and
properly: for so they only are that never broke Gods Law, as all justified
sins still do, Iam. 3.2. Iam. 3.2.
but that our sinne^s shall be forgiven us, and we accepted as righteous in
Gods sight, by faith, in the death and righteousness of Christ, and shall
hereby be as capable of Heaven, through Gods merciful promise, and Christ's
precious merits, as if we had never sinned.

Secondly, we are to consider, that God having in his wisdom, and goodness,
devised and set down a course, and way of salvation, which is faith in Christ,
and appointed it, to be the condition on our part, requisite to salvation, and
in his Word promised, to accept of it to that end, will surely give power to
his own ordinance, to effect that for which he has appointed it. So that
nothing shall let, but that they who have this faith in Christ, shall
undoubtedly attain to salvation by it, according to Gods purpose, and promise.

And let all Protestants assure themselves, 2. Reg. 5.10. to the 15.
that as Naaman whilst he doubted, whether his washing seven times in Jordan
would cure him of his Leprosy, he would never use the means: but afterward,
when he was persuaded of the truth of the Prophet Elisha's word, and went, and
washed himself accordingly, he was cleansed of his Leprosy: even so, as long
as Christians either do not know, or not steadfastly believe this for a truth,
that God will save them, if they believe in Christ, they will have little heart
to go unto him: Heb. 11.6. Romans 3.26.
but when they believe that Christ is, and that he is a iustifier of them that
believe in him, then will they willingly seek unto him for salvation. And so
much of the first exhortation.

My second exhortation is to Papists, or such as are popishly minded (if any
chance to read this Treatise:) First, that they would take notice, not only
how palpably erroneous their Priests and Jesuits are in their doctrine of a
saving faith: but also how dangerously injurious they are to the poor and
simple Catholics, in that they conceal from them the doctrine of the true
faith, that must and will save them, viz. trust in Christ: and only teach them
that, which neither can, nor will justify them, namely, a belief of the truth
of the Word.

Herein they show themselves either grossly ignorant, in not being able to
understand so clear a point, and then what becomes of the blind that lead
the blind, Math. 15.14.
but that they both fall into the pit? or else enuiously impudent, in not
teaching them a duty so necessary to their salvation: and then may you see they
are the right heirs of the Scribes and Pharisees, Luke 11.52.
that keep from men the key of knowledge, and shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
from them, neither entering in themselves, nor suffering them that would, to
enter in: that is, neither believing in Christ themselves, nor suffering you to
believe in him, that you might be saved.

If the harm that comes hereby, were to themselves alone, it were the less;
but because it redounds to the endangering of the salvation of so many millions
as are herein seduced by them, you had need look about you, and provide for
your own salvation, when they have no regard of it: except you care not to go
to hell, so it be with the company of your Priests.

I pray you therefore consider (and the Lord open your minds and hearts to
regard:) If God have in his Word commanded all Christians (if they will be
saved) to believe in Christ, as well as to believe the truth of his Word, See
Rhemish Translation.
as is plain by Ioh. 3.16, 18. 1. Ioh. 3.23. Will you Catholics think to be
saved, only by believing the truth of the Word? without believing in Christ?
Can you think to be saved by any other way, (that is) by any more, or fewer
kinds of faith, then he commands? Does God say, that a belief of the truth
of the Word, is not all the faith which he requires of men to salvation; and
will you believe your Priests which teach you it is all? Will you therefore not
believe in Christ, and so be condemned, because your Priests do not teach you
this faith, but only a belief of the truth of the Word? What will it do you
good, Ezekiel 3.18. Luke 12.46.
that your blood must be required at their hands, when you your selves
notwithstanding shall dye in your infidelity? But you will say, you do
believe in Christ.

It may be you believe there was such a man as Christ, and that he dyed and
rose again, and that the Son of the Virg^n Mary was he: (all which the
Devils do believe) but you do not believe in Him, that is, trust unto him for
salvation; and I prove it thus: You trust not in Christ, except you be taught
it by your Priests; your Priests do not teach you to trust in Christ, because
they teach you that God requires it not; and they teach you that God requires
not trust in Christ unto salvation, because they teach you that all the faith
which he requires to salvation, is only that they believe the truth of the
Word, (as has been prooved out of their own Doctors) and it has been
evidently prooved, that a belief of the truth of the Word is not faith in
Christ: for faith in Christ, is a more excellent kind of faith, then a belief
of the truth of the Word.

In the second place I would exhort Catholics, not to content themselves with
their Romish faith, Jam. 2.19. Mar. 1.24.
(which is no better then the Devils faith) nor think that an assent to the
truth of the Word will be faith enough to save them. Will they be saved? they
must be saved by Christ: will they be saved by Christ? 1. Tim. 1.15. Ioh. 3.16.
it must be by trusting in him: will they trust in him? Ephe. 2.8. Romans
10.14.17.
it must be wrought in them by God. Is trust in CHRIST wrought in them? it
must be by teaching or preaching: and they preach no such doctrine in the
Popish church (or if they do in some place, and upon some occasion, they
contradict again in, (...) upon another) for they teach that God only requires
that faith, which is a belief of the truth of the Word; wherefore they must
come out from the Church that teaches not truly the way of salvation, and
join themselves to that which does: for though they believe the whole Word of
God never so steadfastly, and that upon Gods own authority, yet if (over and
above this faith which the Church of Rome counts needless, because it does not
teach it as required by God) they trust not in Christ, they cannot possibly be
saved.

For as the Jews could not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 5.10.
except their righteousness exceeded the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees: no more shall Papists enter into Heaven, except their faith exceed the
faith taught by their Scribes and Pharisees, I mean the Priests, and Jesuits
of Rome; and as the Lord will one day say to those Preachers that plead, Have
not we prophesied in thy name, and done great works? Math. 7.22.
Depart, I know you not: so will he say to such as plead, Have we not honored
thee, by believing thy Word, upon thine own authority, without evidence of
reason? Depart I know you not.

I grant, indeed, that such as assent to the truth of the Word, and believe the
Gospel, are not far from the Kingdom of God: but are well prepared to
believe in Christ, because they have in them that which is the root of a
saving faith. For by believing the Gospel, which promises salvation to them
that believe in Christ, men are persuaded to believe in Christ for salvation,
according to the Gospel: Simil.
and yet as he that is set out, onward of his journey, and is gone a good way,
shall never come to the end of his journey, if he sit down and stay half way:
So those Catholics that are going toward Heaven by an historical faith, if
they stay there, and content themselves therewith, and never labor for faith
in Christ, shall never come to heaven; namely, because they come far short of
that faith, which God requires of all those that come thither. For their
Historical faith shall be so far from saving them, that it shall rise up in
judgment against them; because being so forward toward heaven, by an
historical faith, or a belief of the Gospel, they notwithstanding stay
there, live, and dye therein, without trust in Christ, which only is a saving
faith.

That which I have said in confutation of the Popish and Lutheran Definitions,
of a saving faith,. 2. Admonition.
may be a ground of admonition:

First, to Atheists (if any such will read this Treatise) that they learn to
fear and tremble, because of their Infidelity: for if they who have some
faith (as the Papists) that come so near to a saving faith, that they believe
the Gospel, may yet be without a saving faith, and be damned; if they live,
and dye in this faith only, without faith in Christ; then what shall become of
them, and where shall they appear, that have not so much as a belief of the
Gospel, or that the Bible is the Book of God. Surely Antichrist himself, Iam.
2.14. Mark 1.24.
and the Devils of hell shall rise up in judgment against such Atheists,
seeing these believe, and so do not they.

Secondly, my admonition is to carnal Gospellers, that they be not
presumptuous, to think they have a saving faith, viz. because they say they
are sure they shall be saved; and they are fully persuaded they are Gods
children, and that they would no way doubt of it, for all the world; let such
(I say) fear, lest their hope make them ashamed: for this is not the witness
of the Spirit of God, but a delusion of Satan: it is not to comfort them, but
to feed them fat to the day of slaughter; for as, except Christ be the Rock of
the faith of Christians, whereon it is built, their faith will fail them in
temptation: so except faith in Christ be the foundation of the assurance of
salvation, their assurance will fail them also.

3. To all Protestants, that they take heed both of the Popish, as also of the
Lutheran Def^nition of a saving faith, which I have confuted: if happily they
may light upon either of them, in books translated into English. If my Book
had been written in Latin, so that it might have come to the hands of the
Learned in the Lutheran Churches, I would have entreated them, in consideration
of my Reasons against it, to have expunged, and put out of their Catechismes,
and Treatises of Divinity, such Definitions; and not to have inserted the like
into their Sermons to their people. But because I am out of hope, to prevail
in that kind with them, I will only content my self to have admonished my
own Countrymen, to take heed of such Definitions in any of their books,
translated into English, when they read them, for fear of the dangerous
consequences thereof.

In the last place, 3. Consolation.
that which I have said touching the confutation of the Lutherans opinion of
the nature of a saving faith, may be a sure ground of consolation to them, that
having a saving faith, are yet afflicted in conscience, because they want
assurance of their salvation. For such have no cause of despair, or of
discouragement, as long as with a heavy laden soul, hungring for mercy, they
trust in Christ, and cast themselves wholly upon his merits, for salvation,
according to the Gospel; for (as has been said) the condition of the Gospel
required of sinners to salvation, is not a comfort, but a duty; not an
assurance that they are saved, but a trust in Christ that they shall be saved.
So that, as long as they rest on Christ's merits, seek to no other means, but
with such a heart, as has been said, seek to Christ for salvation; as soon as
they have believed in Christ, they are in Gods sight justified sinners, though
they do not presently feel by the witness of the Spirit, a full assurance,
that they are saved.

Besides, what an absurd thing were this, to say, that the meaning of these
words of the Gospel, Christ died for all those that believe in him, should be
this: Christ died for all those that persuade themselves fully he died for
them; and that the meaning of this Proposition, He that believes in Christ
shall be saved, should be this, He that is fully persuaded and assured of the
forgiveness of his sins by Christ, shall be saved?

On Gods name let Christians labor continually, by the use of the means
prescribed to that end, to feel the comforts of faith, and for more assurance
every day then other of their salvation, or that they shall be saved: but let
them not therefore judge themselves to be no good Christians, nor to have a
saving faith, viz. because they have not a full assurance of salvation; for
assurance of salvation is more faith, then God requires of Christians to
justification; and it is not of the nature of faith, as it iustifies.

For as a tree may be a good fruitetree, Simil.
though in Winter it have no fruit on it: so a Christian may be a true
believer in Christ, though at some time of temptation he want the fruit of his
faith, I mean, the feeling of the heavenly comforts thereof; whereof, more
hereafter, God willing.

Wherefore comfort your selves, O ye, that are tenderhearted, and
troubled-minded Christians, because you feel not the assurance of your
salvation, in as much as the condition of the Gospel is not, That he that
believes in Christ shall be assured of salvation, but that he shall be
saved: so that, though thou never have in thine own soul a feeling of assured
persuasion, that thou art saved, yet as long as with a heart mourning after
Christ, and gasping for him, Psalm. 143.6.
as the barren land for water; thou cast thy self upon him, and hang on him
still for salvation, with trust unto the merits of his death and obedience,
thou shall in the end and event certainly be saved; because God that has made
promise, (that he that believes in Christ shall be saved) is faithful and
true, merciful and good, mighty and able to perform it.

Build therefore thy comfort on thy faith, and thy faith on Christ, and fear
not; and build the assurance of thy salvation, not on thine own feeling, which
may deceive thee; but on the truth, goodness, and power of God, which cannot
fail thee. And thus much of the first Rule, or Interrogatorie, by which
Christians may examine themselves, whether they have a saving faith, namely, by
trying themselves, whether they understand what manner of Grace a saving Faith
is; in opening whereof, I have been the larger, because the difficulty of the
point required it: for it was necessary, that I should at large make plain
this point; because the true understanding hereof, will make all the rest of
the Treatise the plainer. I come now to the second Rule which is this. Rule 2.


THE SECOND RULE.
CHAP. V. Whether do thou understand the use, and end of faith in Christ?
I Will be briefer in the handling of this second Rule, then I was in the
first, because it will not need so long a Discourse; and the rather, for that
the former will give light to the latter. For those words of the Definition,
(whereby a sinner trusts in Christ for spiritual and eternal blessedness) do
evidently show, that the end of faith, is to bring us unto salvation, and
perfect blessedness; in which respect the Divines generally with one consent,
call it a saving faith.

Howbeit, because it will not happily so clearly be discerned of all;
therefore for the making of it plainer, I will handle the point in a distinct
Rule, and I will handle it thus: First, by showing how needful it is to
enquire after this point. Secondly, by declaring, that it is possible for us,
by inquiry to find, whether we understand the point or no. And thirdly, by
making it manifest, that it will be profitable, by enquiry to find out, whether
we understand, what the use and end is of a saving faith.

1. It will be needful to enquire, whether we understand the end and use of
a saving faith, because else, we cannot tell directly, whether we understand
it or no; for without this trial we may mistake it, and think it was
appointed for some other use and end, then indeed it was; by reason, we are by
nature not only ignorant of these spiritual graces, but also well enough
content to be nouzled up in the ignorance of them. For we may imagine with the
Jews, that the use of our faith is only to procure us temporal blessings, as
they believed in the Messiah for a temporal kingdom only.

To the end therefore, that we may know, whether we understand it or no; and
accordingly be affected with it, it is needful that we make inquiry, whether
we know the use and end of it to be this, namely, to save our souls; that is,
to procure unto them forgiveness of sins, and eternal life in heaven,
(concerning the manner whereof, and how it saves us, and is a means to that
end, shall be considered in the next Rule, God willing) only in this place I
thought good to speak of the use, and end of it, in general.

2. But although it be needful to search for the understanding of this point;
yet if it were impossible by search to find it out, we were never the nearer;
therefore will I make it plain, that by inquiry we may find it out. For if we
search the Scriptures, (particularly those that speak of the Gospel, or the
Covenant of grace) they will evidently show, this to be the end thereof; as
shall appear by the good things promised unto it. For unto faith in Christ,
(that is) to them that trust in him, is promised, that they shall not perish,
Ioh. 3.16. Ioh. 5.24.
but have everlasting life; that they are translated from death to life; Act.
10.43.
that they shall obtain remission of sins, and be justified from all things,
from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses: Act. 13.39.
which the Apostle Peter also does plainly show, where speaking of the true
faithful, he says, they shall receive the end of their faith, which is the
salvation of their souls. 1. Pet. 1.5.9.
So that by these and the like places of Scripture, if we commune with our own
hearts, and ask our consciences concerning these promises, we may easily tell,
whether we know the right use and end of a saving faith, or faith in Christ.

3. But though it were easy for us, to find out the use and end of faith in
Christ, and whether we know, and understand it or no, yet if this were not
profitable for us, we should have little encouragement to go about this
examination. It is therefore fit to show the profit of this examination, which
consists in this; that knowing by the Scriptures the excellent use and end of
it, we may labor to get it, if we have it not, or to increase it, and
strengthen it, if we have it; yea to use and exercise it every day, by
believing in Christ, for the pardon of the sins of every day, in faith
craving pardon of them.

Simil.
For as in Playsters and medicinal Receipts, though we have those that be
never so good, for special purposes, in their several kinds; yet if we know
not their several uses and ends, and the sicknesses, or sores, to which they
are properly to be applied; we shall have little heart to use them, and
therefore they will do us no good at all, nor any other; nay, they may do
much hurt when they are misapplyed: whereas on the other side, when we have a
Plaster or Medicine, that we know is good for such a disease, or sore, we will
willingly use it in our need, because we know the right use of it, and so it
becomes profitable unto us. Even so, if we know not the good that will come
unto us by a saving faith, (as we cannot, except we understand the right use
and end thereof) we will never care to get it. But after the knowledge thereof,
we shall be careful to use it, for that end to heal our leprous, and diseased
souls, that have been stung of Satan, even unto death.

Now then, good Reader, try and examine thy self, whether thou know this to
be the end of faith in Christ or no; and if thou find thou did not know it,
then be ashamed of thy ignorance, justly fearing that as yet thou have not
believed in Christ: for will a man believe in Christ to no end? or can he
believe in Christ to any purpose, if not to be saved by him? No, no, it is
impossible: wherefore being ashamed of thy former ignorance and infidelity,
redeem the time, and now learn the right and true use, and end of it. Thou
may know it, if thou will search; for God has revealed it in his Word: it
will be needful for thee to enquire, because without it, thou can not tell,
whether thou understand it or no, and it will be profitable for thee to know
the right use and end of it; because hereby thou knowing the excellency
thereof, thou shall be moved by Gods grace, both to labor in the use of the
means to get it, as also to increase it, for thy unspeakable comfort and
salvation: for what will all the world profit thee, if thou be not saved?
Matthew. 16.26.
how can thou be saved without Christ? how can Christ save thee, if thou have
no faith? and how can thou get faith, if thou do not know the right use
and end of it, namely, the benefit thou shall receive by thy believing in
Christ, which is the end of thy faith, even the salvation of thy soul?

THE THIRD RULE. Rule 3.

CHAP. VI. Whether do thou know and understand, how faith in Christ does
save and justify us?
THe knowledge and belief of the two former Rules, are very necessary, yet are
not these sufficient; except withal we know the manner, how faith in Christ
does save us: for except we be enlightened with the knowledge hereof, we may
err, by thinking we are justified by it, otherwise then indeed we are. Thou
art therefore to know and learn:

1. That we are not justified by the habit, quality, or virtue of faith, but by
the use of it, or by the act of faith, which is a believing in Christ; for so
runs the tenure of the Scripture. Ioh. 3.16. act. 10.43.


2. Thou must know, that the act of faith, which is believing in Christ, is not
one act only, once for all done, and no more; but that it passes through the
whole course of our lives, and is renewed and continued every day. For seeing
we must crave pardon of sins every day, Mat. 6.11, 12.
as well as beg daily bread; and we may not crave pardon without faith in
Christ, therefore must we believe in Christ every day.

3. Thou must know, that the act of faith, which is believing, or trusting to,
or in Christ, does not justify us, for any merit or virtue that is in it, but
for the merit and the worthiness of the person in whom faith trusts, or in
whom we trust by faith, which is Jesus Christ, the Son of God, and of the
Virgin Mary, who is the only proper, and immediate Object of our saving faith.

Simil.
For even as it is not the hand, that lays on the Plaster upon a sore, that
cures and heales it; but the Plaster it self, and the healing virtue that is
in the Plaster, laid on by the hand; so is it not faith, (whereby we lay hold
on Christ) that cures and saves our souls, but Christ who is laid hold on, by
the hand of faith that cures us.

We are to know therefore, and to believe, that faith iustifies us only, as
the condition appointed by God, and required on our part, to make us capable of
salvation, in this sense;

Whereas by the first Covenant, which was the Covenant of the Law, and of
Works, no man could attain eternal life, because they are breakers of it;
and therefore without the righteousness required in it. And whereas God
notwithstanding will have some to live eternally, and yet not without
righteousness, therefore has it pleased God, who as Sovereign Lord of all,
can appoint what means he will, to make us capable of life; to appoint in the
second Covenant (which is the Covenant of Grace) that faith shall be our
righteousness; that is, that he will accept of our faith in Christ's
righteousness and death, instead of the righteousness of the Law; and that
we shall by faith in Christ, be as capable of eternal life, as if we had in
our persons actually and fully kept the whole Law, and had never sinned. So
that faith in Christ iustifies us not of merit, but of favor; not of it self,
but by Gods appointment; not as it is in us, but as it rests on Christ; because
now by the second Covenant, God requires no more at our hands, to give us
interest to eternal life, then that we should honor his Son, by trusting to
him alone for salvation: for God will accept of this on our part, in stead of
the righteousness of the Law, and by faith in Christ's perfect obedience unto
all Gods secret and revealed will, all our imperfect obedience shall be
accepted of him, and crowned by him in the kingdom of heaven.

If any chance to ask, why faith in Christ, above all other Graces, should be
the righteousness, which God requires in the New Covenant, to make us capable
of eternal life, and which he appoints and accepts to our justification?

I answer, Though we could give no reason, yet must we believe it to be true,
because God has so revealed it. But the Apostle gives one reason, where he
says, Romans 4.16.
that the inheritance of Heaven comes by faith, that it might be by Grace, to
the end the promise might be sure to all the seed: that is, the promise of
salvation was made to faith, or to them that have faith in Christ, that the
salvation promised, might come to men, by the free grace and mercy of God, and
it might be sure to them, which it could never have been, if it had come by
the works of the Law, because none ever could do them.

And (if I may be bold, according to Analogy of Scripture, to give another
reason) I conjecture, that therefore faith in Christ does justify us, and that
we are accepted as righteous by faith in Christ's righteousness and sufferings,
rather then by any other grace of God; because faith in Christ does (more then
any other grace) both most abase man's worthiness, to whom the Covenant is
made, to the end he may go out of himself, and empty himself wholly of all
trust and confidence, in any means within himself for salvation; and also
because it does most magnify Gods free and rich mercy, and the worthiness,
and al-sufficiencie of the death and obedience of Christ, in whom the Covenant
is made, to the end they may honor him only, Romans 4.20. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. Ioh.
3.33.
by trusting to him so much the more confidently for salvation.

And yet lest thou should collect from hence, that if thou have faith in
Christ, thou shall be saved, though thou had no charity, or obedience in thy
life: I say, for the present (till I come to the sixth Chapter) that though
faith alone do justify before God, yet does it not before men; though faith
alone does justify, in the act of Justification; and when it does justify,
yet is it not alone in the party that is justified: but works do accompany
the same, to testify the verity of the Justification, and the truth of the
faith it self.

Now then (good Reader) examine thy self concerning thy knowledge and
understanding, of the manner how faith does justify; and if thou have thought
that it does justify, as a part of inherent righteousness, (as the Papists
do) or as having any virtue in it self to procure it, as Libertines may
imagine, (that have no good works) then have thou been deceived all this
while: and therefore now learn to know the true manner, as I have said, to the
end thou may know both when thou beleevest to Justification, and that thou
beleevest truly, and effectually thereunto: assuring thy self, that though God
has ordained faith to justify us, yet shall it not be effectual to that end,
except thou use it to that end, in that order, and after that manner as
himself has appointed; persuading thy self, that thou shall not attain
salvation by faith, for the worthiness of the grace it self; but of the object
of the grace, which is Christ; who is the Person, in whose merit faith rests
and trusts for salvation: neither that thou shall obtain salvation by thy
faith, if it be not lively, to stir (...) thee to holiness both in heart and
life before God and men.

Rule 4.
THE FOVRTH RULE.
CHAP. VII. Whether did thou get thy Faith by the ordinary means, by which
God usually works Faith in the hearts of his children?
THough we believe, faith will justify us, and understand how it does save us,
yet is not this sufficient, except we know how we came by it; and therefore is
it necessary that we show by what means we attained unto it. For except we
can tell this, it is in vain for us to boast of our faith.

Simil.
For as when the title, and tenure of Land we hold, is called in question, it is
not enough to say it is ours and we will hold it, except we show how we hold
it, and that by Deeds of conueyance good in Law, from them that had power to
give, let, or sell the same. Even so, when God or Satan shall try our faith, it
is not enough to say we have a saving faith, except we can prove how we came
by it: viz. how it was wrought in us by him, that had right and might to work
it, and by the right means whereby he usually works it.

For as it is not wrought by the means, or isntrumental cause, without the
efficient, 1. Cor. 3.6.
(because Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God must give the
increase:) So neither in the established Church of Christ, is it wrought by the
efficient, without the isntrumental; because faith comes by hearing. Romans
10.14.
Now the efficient cause, is God only; and the isntrumental cause, is the
preaching of the Gospel.

That God is the Author of a saving faith, and the worker of it in his
children, I prove, not only because it is generally attributed to the whole
Deity, Ephe. 2.8.
where it is expressly said to be the gift of God: but also, because in the New
Testament it is particularly attributed to each person in the Trinity: to the
Father, as where our Savior Christ says, No man can come to me, except my
Father draw him, Ioh. 6.44, 65. Ioh. 6.44. Verse 65.
or except it be given him of my Father: To God the Son, where Paul calls him,
the Author and finisher of our faith: Heb. 12.3.
and To God the Holy Ghost; 1. Cor. 12.9.
where Paul says, To one is given faith by the same spirit: and therefore it
is called the spirit of faith; because it is given by the Spirit; 2. Cor. 4.13.
there being a different work of each Person, in the giving of faith: because
God the Father gives faith, for his Sons sake, by the operation of the holy
Spirit.

And indeed how can it choose but be the work of God, seeing it is a work
above Nature; I mean not only above Nature corrupted, to which it is
foolishness: but even above the nature of man, 1. Cor. 1.21.
before his fall; for though Adam in his innocence had a faith wrought in him,
whereby he might trust in God (if he would) to keep him, in that estate of
innocence, wherein he was created: yet had he not then this faith in Christ;
because faith in Christ, is faith in a Savior or Mediator. Faith in a Savior,
supposes need of a Savior: Need of a Savior, supposes sin committed; and
Adam committed no sin, as long as he continued in his innocence.

If any chance to ask me how faith can be the gift of God, and why it should
not be in our power to believe in Christ, when we are called to it, seeing God
does exhort and command men thereunto:

I answer, that the Lord does therefore use such exhortations to persuade men
to believe in Christ (though of themselves they be not able to believe) because
the power of God does so accompany such commandments of his, that by, and
together with them, he does move, and incline their hearts to believe in
Christ, and thereby works it in them. The practice and experience whereof, we
may evidently see in the Acts, where when Paul and Barnabas preached the Lord
Jesus, and exhorted them to believe in him: the Text says, Act. 11.20, 21.
that the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed, and
turned to the Lord: so that it can no more truly be collected, because Christ
bids and exhorts them to believe in him, that therefore they have power of
themselves to believe, then it can be inferred, that Lazarus had power of
himself to reviue, and come out of the grave; because Christ bid him come
forth; Ioh. 11.43.
in as much as the power of Christ, accompanying his own commandment, was the
efficient cause of making him come forth.

As touching the means or instrument, by which God works faith in Christ,
which is the second point: I say, it is the preaching of the Word of God; for
so says Paul, Romans 10.17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God: (that is) faith comes
by hearing the Word of God preached.

For the clearing of which point, two things must be distinctly handled and
confirmed, First, what doctrine of the Word it is, that must work faith in
Christ, namely, the Gospel. Secondly, how that doctrine is made effectual to
the begetting of Faith? namely, by preaching.

The doctrine to be delivered, for the begetting of faith in Christ, must be
the Word of faith: Romans 10.8. Gal. 38.18. To. 10.8.15, 16. Act. 11.20, 21. Romans
16.26.
the Word of Faith, is the Word of promise: the Word of promise, is the Gospel;
and the Gospel, is the preaching of Jesus Christ crucified: (that is) the
preaching of that doctrine that promises salvation to them that beleeye ih
Christ. Act. 13.39.
For through Christ is preached forgiveness of sins, and by him, all that
believe, shall be justified from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses: For although all the Word of God be good, and to
be believed; and though other parts of the Word of God (besides the Gospel)
being preached, may by Gods blessing work in us faith in God, for temporal
blessings: yet can no part of the Word work in us faith in Gods mercy by a
Mediator, or faith in Christ for spiritual and eternal blessings in heavenly
things: but the Gospel only, Romans 1.16.
which is the power of God to salvation to them that believe.

Indeed the Law may be a Schoolmasters to drive us unto Christ: for the
Moral Law may drive us to Christ, by convincing us of sin, Romans 3.20. Romans
4.15.
and of condemnation, the just desert of sin; yea, the Ceremonial Law may
draw us to Christ, Romans 10.4.
by telling us that Christ was the end of the Law; because all the sacrifices,
and offerings thereof pointed at him, that was to come to be the trve Paschal
Lamb, or Passover, 1. Cor. 5.7.
that was to be sacrificed for our sins; and all the washings and purifyings
of the Law taught us, 1. Ioh. 2.7. Heb. 9.14.
that the blood of Christ should cleanse us from all sin: and yet for all
this, cannot the Law work in men, a saving faith; because it does not so much
as command it, and the Law does not command it, because it presupposes perfect
obedience to it, which whosoever does perform, Levit. 18.5.
shall live without faith in a Mediator.

The second point considerable, in the working of faith by the Word, is
touching the manner how the doctrine of the Gospel becomes effectual to the
working of a saving faith, and this is to be showed in two particulars. First,
in respect of the Ministers and preachers of it. Secondly, in regard of the
hearers.

That faith may be wrought in men by the Word, two things must be done. First,
Ministers must preach the Gospel (that is) expound and make plain to the
capacity of the people, that there is mercy with God for sinners; and that he
has made a Covenant with mankind, that though they be lost in Adam, Luke
19.10.
yet shall they be sought, and found again in Christ: though damned in
themselves, yet shall they be saved in him; and for this end they are to
publish, and expound, how fit a person Christ is to save them, being wholly
righteous, and without spot; and how able, being the Son of God, in whom God
is well pleased; Math. 3.17.
as also what he has already done for them and their salvation: namely, that
he dyed a bitter, and a shameful death on the Cross, that by his death, he
might overcome him that had the power of Death, Heb. 2.14.
which is the Devil, and reconcile them perfectly unto his Father.

These points (I say) and such points as these, are to be propounded, and
expounded to the people, by the Ministers of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 5.19.
to whom is committed the Ministry of Reconciliation: for how shall the
people hear without a Preacher? Romans 10.14.


But though Preachers teach never so painefully, and lay open these things
never so plainly; yet except the people hear these points preached: how shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14.


Now if any man be desirous to know more particularly, how God works a saving
faith by the Ministers preaching, and the peoples hearing, (I suppose) the
course is this:

First of all, when the Gospel is preached, (that commands us to believe in
Christ, and promises salvation to them that trust in him:) and when people
come to hear, the Spirit of God does move those that hear it, to attend to
the Doctrine of salvation preached. For so we read he did to Lydia, whose
heart the Lord opened, Act. 26.14.
that she attended to Paul's preaching. For except they diligently mark the
doctrine, how should it do them good?

Secondly, upon this diligent attention, and together with it, GOD inlightens
the mind to conceive, and understand the way of salvation taught by the
Gospel; Act. 1^.18.
He turns them from darkness to light: that the eyes of their understanding
being enlightened, Ephe. 1.18.
they may know what is the hope of Gods calling, and the riches of the glory of
his inheritance in the Saints.

Thirdly, upon the enlightening of the mind, with some knowledge, and
understanding of the Gospel, the Lord by his Spirit also persuades the minds
of Hearers to believe the Gospel, and to assent to the truth thereof. For so
we read, that the Lord chose Peter, that the Gentiles by his mouth should
hear the Word of the Gospel, Act. 15.7.
and believe: yea, Paul and Apollos were Ministers of Christ, by whom the
Corinthians believed. 1. Cor. 3.4.


Fourthly, after God has wrought in men, a belief of the truth of the
Gospel, he inclines their heart also, to be affected with the goodness of
the thing promised therein, which is salvation, Math. 6.33.
and thereupon to hunger and thirst after it, that is, earnestly to desire it.

Lastly, the Lord persuades the heart, to trust in Christ for salvation,
according to the doctrine affected, believed, understood, and hearkened unto:
as is plain by that of the Apostle to the Ephesians, of whom he says, that
they trusted in Christ, Ephesians. 1.12, 13.
after they heard the Word of truth, the Gospel of their salvation, in whom
also after that they believed, they were sealed with the spirit of promise.

Now if any man desire to be resolved, whether the reading of the Gospel, and
other good books expounding it, may not work in men a saving faith:

I answer: though in the time of persecution, when there is no public
preaching of the Gospel permitted, and in places where there is no
possibility of hearing the Gospel preached, a saving faith may through Gods
blessing be wrought by the reading aforesaid; that is, by the reading of such
good books as expound and apply the Gospel, in the duties and comforts of it;
else must we of necessity hold, all that lived, and dyed in the darkness of
Popery, and in the persecution of those times, to live and dye without a saving
faith, and consequently, without salvation, (which is too hard a censure to
pass upon them) because they had no preaching but reading only: they could
hear no Sermons, but only read good books in secret: yet, I say, that in a
settled Church (such as England is) where there is a Ministry established, and
authority given to preach the Gospel, and where there is preaching to be had;
in this case, the preaching of the Gospel is the ordinary means, whereby God
is pleased to work in men a saving faith. Romans 10.
For when Paul says; How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and when he affirms,
that it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching, 1. Cor. 1.21.
to save them that believe: what can we collect less, then that the
preaching, that is, expounding and applying of the doctrine of the Gospel, is
the ordinary way which God has appointed to work faith in Christ withal; so
that whosoever may have preaching, but will content himself with reading; I
know not how faith in Christ should be wrought in him, that despises the
ordinance of Christ, which he has appointed for that end.

Now then, to the end I may upon these premises, draw to a conclusion of this
Rule; I humbly pray the Reader to examine himself by this Rule: Have thou
lived, where the Gospel has been preached, and in a Parish, where the
Doctrine of the way and means of salvation has been published, and laid
open? examine thy self whether thou have come to hear it, and being come,
have attended to it, and by attention have understood it; and after the
understanding of it, have believed it, and assented to the truth of it; and
upon the belief thereof, have been affected with the desire of salvation
offered in it. If thus God have wrought in thee, and after this work, thou
have come to cast thy self on Christ for salvation, according to the Gospel:
then have thou a good evidence indeed, that God wrought kindly upon thee, and
thou may safely persuade thy self, that thou came rightly by thy faith in
Christ; and that it is truly wrought in thee; because it has been wrought by
the direct means, which is the preaching of the Word, namely, the Gospel; and
by that manner of efficacy* by which it becomes usually powerful to the
working of a saving faith in others.

Otherwise, if thou say thou beleevest in Christ for salvation, and trustest to
Him alone for it, and thou come by this faith but by tradition only, either
because thy Parents and friends that brought thee up, are of this faith, and
Religion; or because the King of the Country where thou live, does publicly
profess, and defend this faith: If thou have never been a diligent hearer of
Sermons, but one that have contented thy self with bare prayers, service and
reading, and contemned preaching; or if thou have heard any Sermons, they have
been matters of History only, or Morality, and not the Gospel; or if thou
have come to hear the Gospel preached, thou have usually slept, or looked
about, or read on some other prayer book, or thought on some other matters: so
that thou could not attend; or if thou did attend, yet thou carest not for
the understanding of points delivered, or doubtest of the truth of them; or if
thou did believe them, yet were not affected with them, to desire salvation
earnestly in the use of the means: then cannot I see how thou should have a
saving faith wrought in thee.

Wherefore my exhortation hereupon is; first, to Ministers, that they in zeal
of the glory of God, and of the salvation of souls, be painful in preaching
the Gospel specially, because it only is the means to work in their people
a saving faith. Secondly, I exhort all people which have the preaching of the
Gospel, (but as yet have not faith in Christ wrought thereby through their
own carelessness,) that they attend unto Gods ordinance, that they labor to
understand the doctrine of the Gospel, and to believe it; yea, to be affected
with it, that so they may be moved to believe in Christ, for that salvation
that is offered them therein: assuring themselves that God having already set
in his Church a way to save souls by, and to work faith in men for the
attaining of salvation; and having ever since the Apostles time, ordinarily
followed that course only, in the Church of Christ: He will not now for their
sakes devise a new way to work a saving faith in them; and the rather because
they are open neglecters, and contemners of the ordinary means.

Simil*
For as when the Lord having created and appointed the creatures that grew out
of the earth for man's food, and commanded the eating and drinking of them, for
the continuance and preservation of life; if any man shall neglect these
ordinary means, and will not eat and drink of them, but expect new
creatures, and means for food and maintenance of health and strength, the
Lord will not give them, but justly suffer that man to die, because he
willingly starues himself: even so now that the Lord has ordained, and
appointed means of spiritual food, to nourish the soul to eternal life,
which is the preaching of the Gospel, and given us the same, he will not
devise nor raise up a new means to thee that despisest the old; not an
extraordinary to thee that contemnest the ordinary, because thou imaginest
the means to be either needless, or fruitless, idle or insufficient.
Specially when thou may (if thou will peruse the Scriptures) see abundance
of examples of Christian men, in whom this saving faith has been wrought by
the preaching of the Gospel; as namely, Act 4.4. and 8.12. and 13.12. and
14.1. and 15.7. and 17.4 and 19.9. wherefore if thou would have a saving
faith wrought in thee: my counsel to thee now is (for it is not too late at
any time to mend truly) that thou come to Gods ordinance, which is the
preaching of the Gospel, and that thou come to it, 1. These. 2.13.
as to the ordinance of God appointed to save thee, that so thou may be saved
by it, and have a saving faith wrought in thee by the same, and it may be a
savor of life unto life unto thee. 2. Cor. 2.16.
Pray God to make thee attentive to it; by attention to make thee understand
it; by understanding to persuade thee to believe it; and by believing,to moove
thee to be affected with the good thing offered in it, that so the Lord may
make thee trust in Christ for salvation according to the Gospel.

And to thee which art a trve Christian, and not only a member of the trve
Church, by professing the trve faith, but a member of Christ, by having it; to
thee my exhortation is, that as thou have been already begotten to Christ, 1.
Pet. 1.18.
by this immortal seed of the Gospel, so thou would endeavor to be
preserved in this spiritual life by the same: and that thou would as a
newborn Babe, 1. Pet. 2.2.
still desire the sincere milk of the Word of God, that thou may grow
thereby, in the comforts of faith in this world, until thou attain the end of
thy faith, which is the salvation of thy soul, in the world to come.

THE FIFTH RULE. Rule 5.

CHAP. VIII. Whether wast thou rightly prepared to believe in Christ, by other
gifts of the Spirit, that he works in men, before they have a saving faith?
THAT a saving Faith is not wrought in men all at one instant, before the
Spirit of God work any other work of grace in them, is evident, both because
John the Baptist was to prepare the way to Christ; Luke 3.4.
and also because Christ himself says, None can come to him, (that is,
believe in him, Ioh. ^.^5. Ioh 6.44.
) except his Father draw him; that is, incline his heart thereunto, by some
means teach him how to believe, give him power to believe, of one that is
unfit, unable, and unwilling to believe in Christ, make him fit, able, and
willing thereunto, and work in him some graces, that dispose him thereunto.

1. Cor. 1.21.
For seeing Christ was a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the
Gentiles, how could they ever come to believe in him for salvation, except the
Lord first wrought a change in them, by enlightening their minds to understand
and believe the Gospel, and also incline their hearts to seek for salvation
by it; not by compelling them against their wills, but by bending their wills,
and (as it were) drawing them by certain cords thereunto?

The cords by which God draws men to believe in Christ, are generally two,
(each being twined of many threads, that is, each motive persuading to believe
upon many grounds.)

1. The Spirit of God draws men to believe in Christ, by making them to know
and believe, that they have need of Christ to save them; for they that are
sick, who feel the need of a Phisician, will seek unto him to be cured.

2. Matt. 9.12, 13.
Gods Spirit draws men to believe in Christ for salvation, by causing them to
know and believe, that there is salvation to be had for them, who feeling
their need of Christ, do go unto him, that is, trust in him for salvatition.
For the knowledge and belief, that the Prophet in Samaria could cure diseases,
2. King. 5.7.14.
moved Naman to go to him to be cured of his Leprosy.

1. To make men know and believe they have need of Christ to save them, the
Lord sends them his Word, by the preaching and attentive hearing whereof, he
works in them a knowledge and belief, Romans 3.20. Psalm. 51.5. Romans 5.12.
not only that they are sinners originally in Adam, and by nature, and
actually in their own persons, and by conversation, but also that for their
sins, they are in a miserable, Romans 3.9. to the 19. Genesis 2.17. Romans 6.21. and
4.15.
and cursed estate, because of the wages of sin, which is eternal death and
condemnation.

Which points of their sinful and damnable estate, Legal preparations t^o
faith in Christ.
the Lord causing them to lay to heart, and to be affected with them, by reason
of the danger wherein they are: the laying of them to heart, causes them by
Gods blessing, 1. To fear Gods justice, and to tremble at the consideration of
his heavy displeasure, Act. 9.6. and 16.29.
lest it should fall on them, as they have justly deserved. 2. To sorrow for
their sins, with a mournful lamentation, Zach. 12.10. Act. 2.37.
as if they were pricked at the very heart with the point of a dagger, and to
groan under them, Mat. 11.28.
as if they were oppressed with some unsupportable burden. 3. To confess their
sins* and their unworthiness of salvation; Luke 15.17, 18. and 18.13. Mat.
5.3. luke 4.18. luke 15.17.
by reason of them. 4. To be poor in spirit, and to acknowledge their
unability to save themselves by any righteousness of their own in themselves.
5. Act. 2.37. and 16.30.
To consult what to do, in this woeful and wretched case, and to enquire;
whether or no, there be any means of deliverance for them. 6. And in the last
place to have some thoughts of leaving their former evil ways, that have
brought them into this woeful plight. Luke 15.18.


And by these six works of the Spirit (for nature only does not work them,
seeing they are wrought by the Word, and are not in all natural men) upon the
minds and wills of men, they are forwarded, and prepared to seek for salvation,
and driven thereunto, for fear of punishment, even as they are compelled and
moved to seek for a pardon from a King, who know themselves condemned to die,
for some theft or treason.

2. But this is not preparation enough to faith in Christ; for if this were
all, it were to little purpose: and therefore after this, there follows
another work, (mentioned before) which is a knowledge and belief of the
Gospel, which is this, That notwithstanding their sinful and cursed estate in
Adam, and in themselves, yet is there salvation to be had for them, who feeling
their need of it, with weary and heavy-loaden hearts, do seek and repair to
Christ to be saved; which was the second cord mentioned before, by which I
said, Gods Spirit draws men to repent and believe in Christ for salvation.

Now to make men know and believe, that there is salvation to be had, for them
that seek it, the Lord by his merciful providence sends them the preaching of
the Gospel, wherein is promised salvation, by the expounding and applying
whereof, they come to understand these points of Christian Religion: namely,
First, who it is that must, will, and can save them, viz. Jesus Christ only,
1. Tim. 1.15 and 2. c. 5. 1. ioh. 2.1.
the Son of God, and of the Virgin Mary. Secondly, how he comes to be a
Savior to mankind, namely, Ioh. 3.16. and 6.27.
by the appointment of God the Father. Thirdly, whereby it is that he will
save, namely, by offering himself up a sacrifice to God his Father, Mat.
10.28. act. 20.28. 1. pet. 1.18. and 2.24. revel. 1.5. Ioh. 3.16. act. 10 43.
and 13.39. mat. 11.28.
and giving his life for the world. Lastly, whom he will save, namely, all
those that believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, whom God has sent, and trust unto
him only for salvation.

Evangelicall preparations to faith in Christ. Act. 13 48.
These points of the Gospel, and such as these be, when men have heard,
understood, and believed, then does the holy Ghost cause them (that are
ordained to eternal life) to lay them to heart, and to be affected with them,
by reason of the great benefit (which is salvation) that is so freely and
graciously offered to them therein, and the laying of them to heart by holy and
serious meditations, moves them, 1. highly to esteem of the salvation offered
them in the Gospel: Mat. 13.44.
2. earnestly to desire it, and to hunger after it: Mat. 5.3.
3. to seek diligently in the use of the means prescribed to that end, Mat.
6.33. ioh. 6.27.
to attain it: 4. and lastly, somewhat more resolutely to be encouraged, in
hope of pardon, to turn from their former evil ways, and to purpose to
return to God, who offers himself so gracious unto such wretched sinners.

And when people are thus wrought upon by Gods Spirit, when their mind is
enlightened with the knowledge and belief of these points of the Gospel, and
their hearts affected with the necessity of having, the possibility of getting,
and the excellency of enjoying so worthy a thing as is salvation; by so worthy
a Person, as is the Lord Jesus; and for such ungracious persons as themselves
are; how is it possible, but they should be more fitted and prepared to seek
for salvation by Christ; and by this belief of the Gospel more forwarded to
believe in Christ; and drawn thereunto in hope of pardon; even as the Syrians
were moved and drawn to sue for a pardon of Ahab the King, because they had
heard, the Kings of Israel were merciful men.

Having drawn out at length these two cords, 1. King. 10.31.
and fastened them both to the head, and understanding, as also to the heart
and affections, to the end men may be drawn by them unto Christ, to seek for
salvation by faith in him. It remains, that I exhort the Reader, to lay
himself to this line, and to exaamine himself by this Rule, to the end he may
discern whether he has been thus wrought upon or no.

Now then try thy self (good Reader) has God prepared a way in thy heart to
believe in Christ, by causing thee to know, believe, and feel thy need of
salvation by Christ, by reason thou art in thy self, in a cursed estate
through sin? do thou feel the burden of them in thy conscience, and is
thy heart pricked and afflicted therewith? do thou fear Gods justice, and
art thou sorry for thy sins? do thou acknowledge thy self unable and
unworthy to save thy self? do thou bethink thee, whether there be any
hope of remedy, and inquire thou after it? and (to conclude) does thy heart
begin to bethink of taking a new course, and of living no more so wickedly?
then art thou not far from the kingdom of God, but in a good forwardness in
thy way to heaven, if withal (having heard of the Gospel) thou beleevest
there is salvation to be had, thou heartily desire it, thou earnestly
seek for it, and by the hope of pardon, through the belief of the Gospel,
thou purposest in the truth of thy heart, without hypocrisy, to leave thy
former evil ways, and to turn to God: otherwise, if thou have felt none of
these preparing works of the Spirit, to fit thee for Christ, and for faith in
him, and thou have nothing to say for thy self but this, that thou have a
general persuasion, (hand over head, and in gross) that thou shall shift as
well as others, that is, go to heaven, and escape hell as well as they, because
God is merciful, and Christ is dead, risen, and ascended into heaven; and
because thou beleevest the Gospel: then art not thou as yet fit to go to
Christ, nor to trust in him for salvation: and therefore thou must labor in
the use of means to be so enlightened in thy mind, and so affected in thy
will, as I have said, if ever thou will duly and truly, comfortably in thy
self, and acceptably unto God, believe in Christ for eternal life.

But if by the preaching of the Law and Gospel, Gods Spirit did thus work
upon thy mind and will, as has been said before, to believe in Christ, then
wast thou rightly prepared to believe in Christ, and may boldly and safely
say, thou have a saving faith specially, if withal there have followed the
fruits of it, in thy holy life, whereof more at large in the next Chapter.

I do not say, that this preparation is wrought in all men in the same degree,
but men are made to feel their need of Christ, according as God is pleased to
make them sensible of their sins and misery; for some are more subject to be
cast down, and troubled in mind, then other are; and consequently more forward
to hunger and thirst for Christ, and for salvation by him: but this I say, that
all Christians are thus prepared, more or less, to faith in Christ, before
they can, or will believe in him.

Neither will I contend so eagerly about the order of this preparation, as to
go about absolutely to determine, that this grace is always wrought in the
first place, and that in the second, in every Christian; nor yet to dispute,
and decide, whether or no, they be all wrought at one instant time, in every
particular man or woman always, but I am of opinion, that they are all wrought
in men in some kind or other, in one measure and degree or other, before they
can or will be fit and able to trust in Christ for salvation; and that most
usually they are wrought in them in that manner, as I have said.

Having declared, how men are fitted to believe in Christ; and in that
declaration affirmed, that a beginning of repentance, is one means to prepare
them thereunto, (namely, a smaller beginning of purpose to forsake former
sins, upon the preaching, understanding, believing, and laying to heart of
the Commandments, and threatening of the Law broken, which convince them of
their sin and misery; and a greater work thereof, upon the preaching,
understanding, believing, and laying to heart, of the promises and comforts of
the Gospel, which offer grace and mercy:) It will be very needful to insist
more at large upon the point, (the rather) because there be many that make much
doubt of that point and many that are grounded and settled in a quite contrary
opinion.

For this end, I will do four things: 1. I will show how farre-forth
repentance is wrought before faith in Christ, to the end I may not be mistaken,
and thought to be of opinion with some other in the precedencie of repentance
unto faith, 2. I will prove it by reasons grounded on the Word, that
repentance is so far begun indeed, as I shall say, to the end I may not
mislead any into error. 3. I will answer the mainest Objections against it.
4. And lastly, I will make particular use and application of the point. And
these four several points shall be comprehended in four several and
distinct Sections.


Touching the first point, I humbly pray, it may be diligently observed, and
remembered, what I hold, concerning the precedencie of repentance unto faith:
and that for this purpose, they would consider generally, of what repentance I
speak in this question, namely, of a true change of the heart, consisting in a
purpose of leaving our former sinful courses, and serving God better; and also
of what faith, namely, of faith in Christ, or that act of faith whereby sinners
trust unto Christ, rest, and rely upon him for salvation.

This that I have said in general of the nature of that repentance and faith,
(whereof the question is to be understood) shall be better conceived in four
particulars:

1. I do not hold, that repentance is wrought in men, before a belief of the
Word, that is, either of the Law which convinces of sin and punishment, or
of the Gospel, which offers hope of pardon; for I think it is impossible a
man should repent, before he believe this for a truth; that if he go on in
his sinful life, and repent not, the Lord will punish him; and if he do
repent, the Lord will forgive him: but this I hold, that repentance must be
wrought in men, before they can believe in Christ, or trust in him for
salvation.

2. I do not mean, that the, practice of repentance, in doing good works,
and bringing forth fruits worthy amendment of life, go's before faith in
Christ, but that a true purpose of the heart to leave our former wicked lives,
(which is properly repentance, as appears by the notation of the Word) goes
before faith in Christ.

3. Neither do I affirm, that so full and perfect a work of repentance is
wrought in the heart before faith in Christ, as is afterward wrought therein;
when by believing in Christ, and by being justified through believing, we
feel the comforts of faith in our souls, which are the strongest motives to
persuade to the accomplishing of it; but this I affirm, that only a beginning
of repentance is wrought before faith in Christ; which though it be but weak,
in comparison of that which is wrought after faith in him; yet is it a true and
sincere purpose of heart, (as truth is opposed to hypocrisy and dissimulation)
to forsake the practice of the former wicked life, and to lead a new.

In the last place, I do not say, that this begun repentance can be sufficient
to salvation, if we could imagine a man could die before he had believed in
Christ: but this begun repentance, and purpose of heart, to turn from sin
and Satan and to return to God, and new obedience is to be manifested by
practice, according to the purpose, and both are to be made acceptable to God,
Heb. 11.6.
and comfortable to our salvation by faith in Christ, when it is wrought within
us, without which it is impossible to please God unto salvation.

I say then fully and plainly, that before sinners can truly trust in Christ
for salvation, or with any confidence crave pardon of their sins by Christ;
they must begin, truly to resolve, and purpose in their hearts, to leave their
former evil courses, and to lead a new life.

Of the proof of the point, that Repentance
This point does deserve proof, because it will be of great use, in that
being well prooved, it will be a good ground to try our faith in Christ, and
whether or no, we truly believe in Christ for salvation: for if this
repentance be begun in us(of which I speak) then are we well fitted to believe
him, else we may not persuade our selves (except we will deceive ourselves)
that we have a saving faith.

And the point likewise will require proof, not so much in it self; but
because many stand doubtful of it: for whose satisfaction I have intended, and
directed this Discourse and disputation.

In both these regards, I crave of the Christian Reader diligence, to peruse
that I have written; and patience, in regard of the length thereof: and the
rather, because I have not done it hastily, but upon great study, and mature
deliberation: nor have I done it vainly, out of any affected humor of
singularity (God is witness:) but only in zeal of Gods glory, and the
salvation of men's souls, for the good of the Church of God. For I know by good
experience, that the understanding, believing, and laying to heart of the truth
of God, which I have written in this matter, will be beneficial unto many, in
that, those that have not this repentance begun in them, shall hereby be
convinced plainly not to have a saving faith, to the end they may labor to
get both, and in that order that I have said: and those that have, shall be
soundly and undoubtedly assured they have a saving faith, and may boldly go to
Christ for salvation; namely, because they have begun to repent, and
therefore are persons qualified for it, and rightly prepared thereunto, as
shall be showed more at large (God willing) in the conclusion of this
Discourse, and in the application of the same, and finishing of this fifth Rule.

But before I come to the proof of the point by Arguments, I think it meet
to cite the words of a uery Reverend, Learned, and godly Divine of our Country,
and time, to the end it may not seem strange which I affirm. The Author is
that worthy Master Perkins, who in the second Volume of his Works, page 257.
Col. 2. B. C. in his Commentary upon the Epistle to the Galatians, chap. 3.
ver. 28. has these words: Perkins 2. volume, p. 257.
We must as good Disciples obey the Commandment, which bids us turn, and
believe, before we can have any benefit or profit by the promises of God. And
afterward he says again more plainly: Lastly, we are here taught in the
working of our salvation, to keep the order of God, which he has set down
unto us, in Baptism. Which is first of all to turn unto God according to his
Laws; and secondly, upon our conversion, to lay hold on the promise of God,
and the confirmation thereof, by the Sacraments. Thus shall we find comfort
in the promises of God, and have true fellowship with God, if we begin where
he begins in making of his covenant with us, and end where he ends. And this
we must do not only in the time of our first conversion; but also afterward
in the time of our distress and affliction; and at such time as by frailety
we fall and offend God. In a word, if for practice we always keep our
selves to this order, we shall find true comfort both in life and death.

I could not have desired this worthy Divine to have spoken more fully, nor
more plainly for me then he has done. Out of his words therefore I thus
reason:

First, if that Commentary upon the Epistle to the Galatians be the Work of
Master Perkins, as it is, except he have great wrong, or except it can be
disproved.

Secondly, if he in this place alleged does speak of true repentance and
saving faith, as he does, because he speaks of that repentance which is a
co^version and turning to God according to all his Laws, and of that faith
which is a laying hold on the promises of God, for the finding of trve comfort
to our souls, both in life and death; and for the having of trve fellowship
with God.

Thirdly, if he say plainly and directly, that this is the order of God,
which he has set down in Baptism, that men must first turn to God; and
secondly, and upon that conversion lay hold upon the promises.

Fourthly, and lastly, if he say this must be done, and this order of
repentance and faith is to be kept both in the first conversion (which is
repentance from dead works;) as also from sins which we commit after our first
conversion, and our first believing in Christ: All which are clearly laid
down in the testimony alleged: then may it from thence easily and truly be
collected, that it was Master Perkins opinion and judgment, that repentance is
truly begun before a saving faith, as I have affirmed.

But because in matters of doctrine, we are not to rest in men's judgments, nor
in their testimonies, (because they are but probable Arguments) but one
Reasons, taken from the testimony of God, which is his written Word: Therefore
for the better satisfying of the Reader, I will produce some Arguments to make
that good which I have said, and I will produce them in that form, that the
simple may conceive the better of them; and each Argument shall be contained
in several Sections. But first of the Arguments of necessary consequence: and
then of them that are very probable.

ARGUMENT. I.
Repentance is begun before faith in Christ, because the repentance of the
Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.32. was begun before their faith: and theirs
was true repentance, and a true saving faith.

The reason is good; because there is but one true repentance, and one saving
faith that is required of all them that shall be saved: So that if the
repentance and faith of the Publicans and Harlots in the Text alleged, were
the trve repentance and faith that God required of them to salvation, and their
repentance were begun before their faith, then is the repentance of other
Christians likewise begun before their faith.

To make good this reason, two points must be further confirmed. 1. That the
repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.31, 32. was begun before
their faith. 2. That their Repentance and Faith, were true repentance and
saving Faith: and each point I will prove by Reasons. But first, of the proof
of the first point.

1. The repentance of the Harlots and Publicans, Math. 21.32. 1. Point proved.
was begun before their faith, 1. Proof.
because their repentance was a means unto it, or was to it as a means to an
end.

The reason is good: because the means to an end, are always before the end
it self, in as much as it is the beginning or cause thereof: for the beginning
must always be before the end; and the cause before the effect. So that if
the repentance of the Publicans and Harlots were to their faith as a means to
an end; then must it needs be begun before their faith.

That the repentance of the Publicans, etc. was to their faith as a means to
an end, I prove, because it is necessarily employed in the Text, that they
repented, that they might believe. Ioh. 19.35. Ioh. 20.21.
For where the Holy Ghost says; John bare record of Christ's death, and John
wrote Christ's miracles, that his Disciples might believe: he implies
necessarily, that the bearing record of Christ's death, and writing of his
miracles, were to the belief of the Disciples, as a means to an end, and
consequently were before it: therefore where the Holy Ghost says, The
Publicans and Harlots repented, that they might believe; he implies
necessarily, that their repentance was to their faith, as a means to an end,
and consequently was begun before it.

And that the Publicans and Harlots repented, that they might believe, I prove
from the Text by a necessary consequence, Math. 21.31, 32
thus: The Evangelist Matthew in the place alleged, sets down the effect of
John's Ministry, by two contrary events, in two different sorts of people: viz
the Scribes and Pharisees, the Publicans and Harlots. If then the Evangelist, in
setting down the effect it had in the Scribes and Pharisees, said plainly,
they repented not that they might believe: then on the contrary it must needs
be employed, that the Publicans and Harlots repented, that they might believe,
and consequently, that their repentance was to their faith, as a means to an
end, and therefore was begun before it. And so much for the proof of the
first point: the second follows, which I will make good: first jointly of them
both together; and then severally of each of them apart.

2. Point proved: first generally of them both.
The repentance and faith of the Publicans and Harlots were trve repentance and
saving faith. 1. Because they were that repentance, and that faith, tha^
profession, whereof was required of all them that came to John's Baptism, as it
is plain by comparing, Math. 21.31, 32. with Luke 7.28. for John required the
profession of repentance, Mat. 3.6.8.11. Joh. 1.7. act. 19.4
and of faith; therefore he required the profession of the true repentance,
and of the saving faith. 2. The repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, Mat.
21.31. and their faith was the trve repentance and the saving faith; because it
was that whereby they entered into Gods Kingdom: Math. 21.31, 32
and for want of which the Scribes and Pharisees could not enter: for no
repentance and faith can entertain into Gods Kingdom but the true; and for
want of none but those, are men excluded thence.

More specially and particularly I say, 2. Point proved: specially of each of
them.
that the Repentance of the Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.31, 32. was true
repentance, because it was that which is required of all those persons that are
to receive forgiveness of sins: for forgiveness of sins belongs to none,
Mar. 1.4. Luke 3.3.
nor is promised to none, but to those which repent truly of their sins.
Secondly, the repentance of the Publicans and Harlots was true repentance,
because it was that repentance that was to be testified by the fruits of it;
Math. 4.8. Luke 4.8. to 15.
for true repentance only can bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life:
and these Publicans and Harlots did profess to bring forth these fruits, else
he had never baptized them.

Matthew. 21.31. was but (...), that is, penitency.

Sol.
True: there is no other word there used to express the repentance of the
Publicans and Harlots, but penitencie: yet that word signifies true repentance
in that place. 1. Because the repentance of the elder son is commended for
true repentance, Mat. 21.24. and yet is it but penitency in the phrase.

Secondly, because it is said, verse 32. that the Scribes and Pharisees did not
(...), the meaning is, they did not repent truly: therefore where it is said,
the Publicans and Harlots did repent, the meaning is, they did repent truly.

John's exhortation was (...). (that is) repent: not (...) (that is) be penitent.

True: it was no more in word, but it was more in effect. Sol.
For Matthew expressly says, the Publicans and Harlots were penitent, and no
Evangelist says, they did repent. Therefore either because Matthew says, they
were penitent, it must be conceived they did truly repent; or else because no
Evangelist says they were repentant, it must be affirmed, they did not truly
repent at all: which will prove a discredit, not to John only; as if he would
baptize any that did not repent truly, or profess true repentance; but also
to the Publicans and Harlots, as if they were not saved: for without true
repentance none can be saved, Luke 13.3.

But some will say, the meaning only

Grant it; then repentance from some sin: viz. infidelity, Sol.
goes before belief in Christ: and why then may not repentance for all sin
be begun in men, before they believe in Christ, if they be discovered to
them as well as their infidelity?

But it will be said, that by the penitencie be understood only the
preparations to repentance.

Solut.
I grant, in some places it may be, but not in this, Math. 21.31. because there
is none other word used in any part of the New Testament to express the work
of trve repentance it self in them after such preparations. Wherefore in the
place alleged, either by penitencie the whole work of true repentance must be
understood, and then I have my purpose, which is, that the repentance of the
Publicans and Harlots, was trve Repentance; Mat. 21.32.
or else will it follow, that they never had trve repentance wrought in them,
but only the preparations to it; which were to call into question the graces
of God in the Saints that are now in Heaven, and to affirm that preparations
only to saving graces, will serve our turn to carry us to Heaven, without the
saving graces themselves.

Lastly, that the faith also of the Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.31.32. was
a saving faith, I prove; because it was a faith in Christ, or a believing in
Christ for salvation. For such a faith is a saving faith. Ioh. 3.16. Act.
13.39. Act. 19.4.
Such a faith was required of all those that came to John's baptism. The
Publicans and Harlots came to John's Baptism, and were baptized of him,
therefore they professed this faith, else he would never have baptized them.

But some will say, Object.
their faith was only a believing John; believing John, is nothing but
believing the doctrine which John preached to be trve, and a belief of the
truth of John's doctrine, is nothing but an Historical faith.

Though Matthew speak only of believing John; and believing John, Solut.
by bare Grammar construction, be no more but believing the truth of his
doctrine, yet by Logical, and Theological construction it must signify more;
viz. a believing in Christ, or a resting upon him for salvation, according to
the doctrine believed: And I prove it thus:

It is certain that John required more faith (that is, profession of more
faith) then believing his doctrine to be trve of all that came unto his
Baptism: for he required faith in Christ, or that they should believe in him
that was to come. And to believe in Christ, Act. 19.4.
or to trust unto him for salvation, is more then to believe the truth of John's
doctrine concerning Christ. But if the Publicans and Harlots that came to John's
Baptism, had no more faith in them then is Grammatically understood by
believing John, or believing the truth of John's doctrine, then had they no more
but an historical faith. For there is no Text of Scripture that says they had
any other.

Wherefore by believing John, Mat. 21.31. either there must be understood more
faith, then believing the truth of John's doctrine, (namely, a trusting unto
Christ for salvation, according to the truth of John's doctrine concerning
Christ which they believed:) and then it will follow that the faith of the
Publicans and Harlots, Math. 21.32. was a saving faith, which is the thing I
labor to prove; or else there must be understood only a belief of John's
doctrine; and then will it follow that the Publicans and Harlots had no other
faith, then that; viz. then an historical faith. Which if it were trve, then
was an historical faith sufficient to save the Publicans and Harlots; and if
so, then not only is the distinction of faith into historical, and saving
merely idle: but (which is worse) then would it follow, that an historical
faith, and consequently a Popish faith will save sinners in these days, as
well as it did the Publicans and sinners in those.

Wherefore (to conclude this first Reason) I cannot see why it should not
directly follow as a good reason, that because the repentance of the Publicans
and harlots was begun before their saving faith; therefore the repentance of
Christians in these days, is begun likewise before their saving faith; except
we shall say, that God has diverse kinds of repentance, and faith to save men,
in the several ages of the Church, or diverse manners of working them
accordingly. And so I pass on to a second Reason or Argument like the former.

ARGUMENT. II.
Repentance is begun before faith, because God gives men repentance, to the end
they may believe in Christ.

The reason is good, because the means are always before the end; therefore
if God give men repentance, to the end they may believe in Christ; then must
they repent, before they can believe in Christ.

And that God gives sinners repentance, to the end they may believe in Christ,
I prove by the words of Paul to Timothy, where he shows, that Ministers must
with meekness instruct sinners, 2. Tim. 2.25.
if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the
truth, 2. Tim. 2.25. that is, to the end they may acknowledge the truth. Now by
acknowledging the truth, in that place, a saving faith, or faith in Christ, is
to be understood: 1. Because it is such a faith, whereby sinners come out of
the snares of the devil; out of which they can come by no faith, but by a
saving faith. 2. Because in other Texts he describes a saving faith, by an
acknowledging the truth. Col. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.4. Ephesians. 4.13.
3. Because the Apostle in another Epistle, calls the acknowledging of the
truth, The faith of the Elect.

Tit. 1.1.
I grant, that in some Texts of Scripture, and by Grammar construction,
acknowledging of the truth of the Gospel, is but a belief of the truth of the
doctrine of the Gospel; and that is no more but an historical faith: but an
acknowledging of the truth must here signify more, (as also it does in other
places) or else will it follow plainly and directly by the Text, that
repentance is wrought before a belief of the Gospel, which is impossible: for
the repentance spoken of in the Text, is a means to work in them an
acknowledging of the truth; (for so runs the Text, If God will give them
repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, that is, to the end they may
acknowledge the truth) and it is impossible a man should repent, before he
believe the Gospel, (which is, that if they repent indeed, they shall be
pardoned.) So that they must, by this place, needs confess, either that
repentance is begun before a saving faith, (which is the point I labor to
prove) viz. because it is unto faith in Christ, as a means to an end; or else
acknowledge, that repentance is wrought before a belief of the Gospel, which I
know they will utterly deny: for there can be no other reasonable sense of the
place.

ARGUMENT. III.
Repentance is begun before faith in Christ, because men cannot believe in
Christ, as long as they live in their sins.

The reason is good, because to live wilfully in sin, and to repent of sin,
are contrary: so that if men cannot believe in Christ, as long as they live in
their sins, then cannot they believe in Christ, as long as they repent not:
then must they repent before they believe in Christ; and therefore
consequently, repentance must be begun before faith in Christ.

And that men cannot believe in Christ, as long as they live in their sins, is
true in the Scribes and Pharisees; who therefore could not believe in him,
because they lived in their sins, and repented not; which I prove by two
testimonies of Christ himself concerning them; who showing why they believed
not in him, gives this for a reason of it.

The first testimony is in S. John's Gospel, where he says of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Ioh. 5 43, 44. compared with Ioh. 1.12.
How can ye believe, that receive honor one of another? that is, Your
purposing to live in your worldly honor and pomp, and not to leave your pride
and ambition, is the cause why you believe not in me.

The second is in S. Matthew, where he says, Mat 21.31.32. Revel. 9.20.
that the Scribes and Pharisees repented not that they might believe: where our
Savior gives a reason, why they believed not in Christ, as well as the
Publicans and harlots, namely, because they repented not as well as they.

And that this is a good reasoning, or arguing, I prove by two other Texts of
Scripture, in the book of the Revelation, where the holy Ghost says, They
repeated not, that they might not worship devils: and they repented not, that
they might give glory to God. Whe^^^ thus argue: If in the first Text there be
a reason rendered why some ceased not to worship devils, (that is, idols)
namely, because they repented not first of their former idolatry: and in the
second there be a reason rendered, why some gave not glory to God; namely,
because they repented not first of their former dishonouring of him: then by
proportion must it be true, that where our Savior says, the Scribes and
Pharisees repented not that they might believe, there is a reason rendered, why
they believed not in Christ, namely, because they repented not first of their
infidelity. and other grievous sins, as pride, ambition and covetousness;
which being true, then will it follow, that men cannot believe in Christ, as
long as they live in their sins: and therefore repentance must be begun
before faith in Christ.

ARGUMENT IIII.
Repentance is begun before faith in Christ, at the first conversion; because
sinners must first repent of sins committed after their first conversion,
before they can trust in Christ for the pardon of them.

The reason is good, because a saving faith, and trust in Christ for pardon of
sins are all one; and the true repentance and faith in Christ, that is
wrought in men after their first conversion, is one in nature and kind, with
that which is wrought at the first, when they are first turned to God, though
there may be some difference betwixt them, in regard of the measure and degree
of their excellency. So that if sinners may not trust in Christ for the
forgiveness of those sins, which they have committed since and after their
first conversion, before they have repented of them: then may they not trust in
Christ for the forgiveness of their sins, which they committed before their
first conversion, before they have repented of them: and if so, then is
repentance in men before faith in Christ; for they cannot begin to repent,
before repentance be begun to be wrought in them.

And that sinners must first repent of sins committed, after their first
conversion, before they can trust in Christ for the pardon of them, I prove, 1.
Because the promise is made to the repentant, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. Isa 1.16.17. and
55. 7. Ier. 31.18, 19.34. 2. Sam. 12, 13. Act. 2.38. and 3.19. and 5.31. and
8.22. 2. Because hell and condemnation is threatened to the impenitent and
unrepentant, Luke 13.3. Deuteronomy. 29.20. Romans 2.4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 5.6 Coloss. 3.6. 3.
Because experience teaches us, that men are ashamed to ask forgiveness of
them, whom they have offended, except they first proffer repentance for their
faults committed. And therefore they that offend God, must first repent of
their sins committed against him, before they can with any boldness trust in
Christ for forgiveness of them; and out of that faith, beg the forgiveness
of them for his sake.

If any chance to except against the and the faith in Christ that is wrought in
men after their first conversion, is the same with that which is wrought at the
first. Disproving this, by urging, that that which is wrought at the first
conversion, is but Legal; but that which is wrought afterward, is Evangelicall:
now Legal repentance is not the same in nature and kind with Evangelicall.

Solut.
I answer, If by Legal repentance they mean that which is taught and commanded
in the Law, then I say, there is no such repentance at all: (for the Law that
commands perfect obedience, supposes perfect obedience; and therefore cannot
imply, or suppose any breach or disobedience of it; which it must do, if it
command repentance, because repentance is for the breach thereof) and therefore
their distinction is naught, and consequently their Objection.

But if by Legal repentance, they mean that, wherein they may be furthered
by the doctrine of the Law, which convinces us of sins committed, for which
we must repent, and threatens punishment, for the committing of them, to drive
us to repentance, then I grant there is such a kind of repentance: but withal
I deny, that the repentance wrought in men before the first conversion, and
before faith in Christ, is only Legal repentance, as by their objection they
would make us to believe; and my Reason is this:

If that be repentance Legal, which is wrought by the Law, that is, a belief
of the Law, then must that be repentance Evangelicall, which is wrought by the
Gospel, that is, a belief of the Gospel. Now I have plainly showed, in
setting down the state of the question, that the repentance which I say goes
before faith in Christ, does necessarily follow a belief of the Gospel; and
therefore their first objection can be of no force against my Argument.

Or if any chance to reply, saying, Indeed if a man do never repent, he can
never trust in Christ for pardon of his sins, with any hope thereof: but (will
they say) he may repent after he has believed in Christ; which if he do, it
is as well, as if he had repented before:

I answer, To the end we may be capable of pardon by repentance, it is
required, that it be duly wrought; and it is not only wrought after a saving
faith, but either before it, or at the very instant time, that a saving faith
it self is wrought, and I prove it thus:

As Soon as ever a sinner has believed in Christ with his heart, he may beg
pardon of his sins, Act. 10.43.
because it is promised to such believers; and that which is promised by God,
may lawfully be craved of him: but if a sinner crave pardon, not being at the
same time a repenting sinner, he has little hope to obtain it; because
pardon is promised to the repenting, and denied to the unrepenting sinner, as
has been showed a little before in this Argument.

If then a sinner beg pardon of his sins, as soon as ever he believes in
Christ, with any hope of obtaining it; he must be a repenting sinner, as soon
as ever he is a believer in Christ; and if he be a repenting sinner, as soon as
he is such a believer, then must his repentance be wrought in him, either
before his faith is wrought, or at the same instant time that it is wrought.

For if it be not wrought till after his faith in Christ, then is he not a
repenting sinner, as soon as he is a believing sinner; and consequently, cannot
by faith crave pardon, as soon as he has believed in Christ.

So that either a sinner may not crave pardon of God for his sins, as soon as
he has believed in Christ, (which I think unreasonable) or a sinner may by
faith in Christ beg pardon of his sins, before he has begun to repent of
them, (which to me is senseless) or repentance cannot be wrought in sinners
after their faith in Christ, (as is stiffely maintained by some.)

Now if it be not wrought after it, then must it be wrought either before it,
or at the same instant time together with it, to the end they may be repenting
sinners, as soon as they are believing sinners, and thereby be made fit
persons to beg and receive forgiveness, as soon as ever they have believed
in Christ for it, by a saving faith.

ARGUMENT. V.
Repentance may be begun before faith in Christ, because as hard a work as
the beginning of repentance, is wrought before Faith.

The Reason is very probable, because it is supposed, that therefore repentance
cannot be begun before faith, because it is too great a work, to be wrought
before a saving faith be wrought.

And that as hard a work as the beginning of repentance, is wrought in men
before faith, I prove, because the taking out of man's mind, ignorance, and
unbelief of the Gospel, and planting in it the knowledge and belief thereof,
is wrought in men before they can believe in Christ; and this is as hard, and
as great a work as the beginning of repentance.

For by the light of Nature men know many actions to be sins, and that they
should not do them, they believe that if they do them, they offend God, and
deserve his judgments for them; and that therefore they ought to repent of
them, and leave them: yea, upon these and the like considerations, many are
moved (at least for a time) to refrain the committing of many sins: but
there is no light in Nature, to make men know and believe the Gospel or the
way of salvation, that is ordained in the new Covenant, viz. that if sinners
believe in Christ Jesus, they shall be saved: 1. Cor. 1.23.
For Christ was both a stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishnes to the
Gentiles: why then should it be thought more impossible for men to begin to
turn to God by the working of the holy Spirit, through the preaching of the
Word, before they believe in Christ; then it is for them to understand and
believe the mystery of the Gospel before they believe in Christ. Specially,
seeing before men begin to repent, there are wrought in them (by Gods Spirit
through the preaching of the Word) certain preparing graces that do begin
repentance: whereas they come to believe the Gospel, there be no such
preparations wrought, to fit them thereunto.

Before the repentance (I speak of) can be wrought in men, first, God works
in men a knowledge and belief that it is his will they should repent; and this
is done by the preaching of the precepts of God, that command men to repent.
Secondly, God works in them a bethinking them of their former sins, Ezekiel.
20.43. Ier. 8.6. Lamen. 3.40. 2. Chron. 6.37. 2. Cor. 7.10. Joel 2.12. Zach.
12. Act. 9.6.
a searching and finding them out, an acknowledgement and confession of them,
and hearty sorrow for them, and fear of condemnation due unto them; and this
is done by the threatenings of God, which denounce condemnation to the
impenitent, which drive them to repent. Thirdly, God works in them a desire to
repent, and an hope of pardon, which is done by the promises of God, that
freely offer forgiveness to the repentant, which draws and allures them to
repent. Lastly, God works in them a persuasion of a possibility for them to
be pardoned: a good hope that God will forgive them as well as others; and
this is done by the examples of the faithful that have been pardoned upon
their repentance; and this animates and encourages them to repent: (now who can
deny, but that these graces prepare men to repentance, and that where these are
wrought, repentance must needs be begun in men by these preparations?)

But before a belief of the Gospel is wrought in men, there are no such
preparing graces wrought; for before this be wrought, there is nothing in men's
minds and understandings, but darkness and ignorance, Act. 26.18. ephesians. 1.17.
Romans 8.7.
infidelity and unbelief, which are enmity to the belief of the Gospel; 1.
Cor. 2.14.
and therefore it is a wonderful great work to cause natural men ( who
cannot receive the things of the Spirit) to assent to the doctrine of the
Gospel, as the Word and truth of God; 1. These. 2.13.
when before this there is no other work of the Spirit to lead and prepare
them thereunto, but hearing and attending to the Word of God. And therefore
these points considered, I cannot see, (for my part) but that repentance may
very well be begun before faith in Christ, seeing as unlikely, and as great a
work as that is wrought before it, namely, a steadfast belief of the Gospel;
and that upon Gods own authority, without any evidence of Reason. And so I
pass unto my sixth and last Reason.

ARGUMENT VI.
Repentance is begun before faith, because it was preached before faith: for
repentance was the first doctrine that was preached by John Baptist, by Christ,
by Christ's Disciples, and his Apostles.

The Reason is probable, because the preaching of it first, implies the
practicing of it first; and the practicing of it first, implies the working of
it first, in those to whom it was preached: for God by the preaching of any
duty, did work usually the grace that must enable them to do it, to the end
they might practice the same accordingly.

And that all these preached the doctrine of repentance first, and before all
other doctrines, is evident in the pa^ticulars: Mat. 3.2. act 19.4.
1. John the Baptist did so, it is plain: for by that doctrine he prepared the
way to the Lord, in the hearts of the people; Mat. 3.3.
and that doctrine is by Mark called the beginning of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Mar. 1.2. act 10 36. Mat. 4.17.
2. Christ himself did so, as is clear by the Evangelist S. Matthew. 3. Luke
10.9. mark 6.12.
Christ's seventy Disciples did so, as is manifest by the Evangelists S. Mark
and S. Luke. 4. And the Apostles of Christ did preach repentance first both
before Christ's death and resurrection, Mat. 10.17. mark 5.12. Act. 2.38. luke
24.47.
and after his resurrection also. So that repentance being the first duty that
was preached by them, preaching being the means to work the duties that were
taught, and the graces that were required of hearers, Romans 10.14.
and the means of preaching being effectual, according to the doctrines were
taught and preached; Act. 11.20. and 14.5.
what should hinder, but that repentance should be first wrought by preaching,
seeing it was first taught by preaching?

I might here allege a place out of the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 26.18.
where taking infidelity and ignorance out of the minds of the Gentiles, and
planting in them a knowledge and belief of the Gospel, is called a turning of
them; which will easily prove, that some turning or repentance is wrought
before faith in Christ: (for turning, or converting, and repenting, are all one
action, Act. 3 19.) Likewise I might cite a Text out of the Epistle to the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 3.16, 17.
where the Apostle says, that before the veil of infidelity (whereby the
Jews did deny to believe in Christ) he taken from them, their hearts must be
turned to the Lord; which implies, that before the Jews will believe in
Christ, their hearts must be turned to the Lord: for they must mourn for their
infidelity, before they can look upon him whom they have pierced, Zach. 12.10.
that is, believe in him for salvation.

Also I might produce a place out of Matthew where Christ wills those that are
weary and heavy laden to come unto him; Mat. 11.28.
and to believe in him, Ioh. 6.35. For I know not how men should so be weary
and heavy laden with sin, (as the people are supposed to be, whom he invites
to ^ome to him) and have no purpose to leave their former evil courses, that
so press and perplexe their consciences, before they come to Christ to be
eased.

In like manner I might quote Hebr. 6.2. Act. 20.21. Mark 1.15. which I take,
must be understood of the precedencie of the purpose of the heart to leave our
former evil courses, and to lead new lives; seeing other reasons from the
Word do plainly prove it: and then the place in Act. 11.21. which seems to
speak of believing before repenting, must be understood of the precedence of
that faith, which is a belief of the Gospel unto repentance; or of the
precedencie of faith in Christ, unto the practice of repentance in the life.

And many other such Texts I could allege, but that I hope these six Reasons
that I have alleged, will be sufficient: and I am loath to be too tedious, in
dwelling any longer upon the proof hereof; wherefore I leave the proof of it,
and come to clearing of the point, by answering the Objections against it.

OBJECTION 1.


The reason (they think) is good, because if repentance be begun before
faith, then is it not of faith; and if it be not of faith, then is it sin:
for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. last Verse.

Solution.
The reason is not good: because though repentance be begun before faith,
and therefore be not of it, yet is it not sin for all that; no more then an
historical faith, which is a belief of the Gospel, is sin, because it goes
before a saving faith, and therefore is none of it.

In like manner, the proof of the reason, out of the fourteenth to the Romans
is not to the purpose.

First, because the question is of faith in CHRIST for justification, but the
proof is only of a faith that is a persuasion of liberty, or warrant to the
conscience, to eat of the meats there spoken of: with which we have nothing
to do in our question.

The Apostles meaning is not (as it should have been, if the proof were to
purpose:) whosoever eats the meats there spoken of, before he have a saving
faith wrought in him, does sin, (for he takes it for granted, that all the
Romans, before he wrote this Epistle, had a saving faith, and therefore the
caveat comes too late.) But the Apostles meaning is, that whosoever he be of
the Church of Rome, that eats of the meats then spoken of without faith; that
is, before he have a belief or assurance to his conscience, upon some good
ground or warrant of the Word, that he may lawfully eat thereof, he sins
in eating. Why? namely, because he doubts whether he may eat or no; and yet
eats (for to eat with doubting whether he may lawfully eat, and to eat
without faith, that is, without warrant to the conscience from the Word whether
he may eat or no, are in that place all one.)

And that this faith there meant is plain by this reason: because though the
Romans had a saving faith, whereby they trusted to Christ for salvation: yet
if they had not the faith Paul speaks of, whereby they certainly believed, and
assuredly persuaded themselves they might lawfully eat of them, but did doubt
whether they might or no, they did certainly sin: for whatsoever is not of
this faith, is sin (says the Apostle.)

Secondly, I answer, that this repentance is of faith, in the Apostles sense;
because it is that we are persuaded in our conscience we have warrant and
precept for, out of the Word of God. So that this first objection with the
proof is to no purpose; but let us hear another.

OBJECTION 2.
Repentance is not begun before faith in Christ: because then repentance
should proceed out of an heart vnpurified.

The reason is taken for good: because the heart is purified by faith; Act. 15
9.
whence they thus argue: If the heart be purified by faith, then is the heart
impure, till it have faith wrought in it: and if the heart be impure till it
have faith wrought in it; then if repentance be wrought before faith, it must
needs proceed out of an heart impure, or unpurified: and consequently be
unacceptable to God; which cannot be affirmed of try repentance, Psalm. 51.

The reason is not good, Sol.
for all the show it makes: because though repentance be begun before a
saving faith, and though faith purify the heart, yet will not repentance
proceed from an heart unpurified, that is wholly and altogether impure, (for
so much the reason necessarily implies, else it is to no purpose.) For before
repentance be wrought in men, the Spirit of GOD, through the Word preached,
works in them certain preparing graces, that fit them to repentance, and
begin it in them (whereof we heard a little before) which also do begin the
purifying of the heart, and do in part cleanse it, though it be more
purified, by a saving faith when it is come, as shall be seen in the next
Chapter, God willing.

The proof likewise of the reason, is insufficient; because it is not to
purpose. For the point to be proved by it, is, that faith purifies the heart,
with the purifying of sanctification, (for it supposes that before faith be
wrought in the heart, it is wholly impure with the filth of sin; and
purifying from the filth of sin, is sanctification) whereas the proof is not
meant of purifying by sanctification, but by justification, which I prove thus:

First, the words, purifying their hearts b^ faith, are not meant of purifying
by sanctification, because they are an answer to a question, and the question
was not touching the necessity of Circumcision, and other Legal purifyings
unto sanctification, that is, whether they were necessary to sanctify the
believing Gentiles, (for there is not a word of that in all that Chapter:) but
whether they were necessary to justification, (that is) to make them capable
of forgiveness of sins, and eternal life.

Secondly, the words of purifying the heart by faith; must be understood of
purifying by justification.

1. Because it is only interpreted of purifying it by justification, as is
plain by the 11. Verse following; where the Apostle says, We believe that
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved as well as they,
that is, though we believing Gentiles be not circumcised: yet do we trust to
be justified and saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as well as the
believing Jews that are circumcised.

2. Because they are a reason of an answer to a question, and the question was
only concerning justification, as appears by the scope of the Chapter. Now
then the question being whether the believing Gentiles were bound, if they will
be saved, to be circumcised, and to keep the whole ceremonial Law (as*
appears by the fifth and tenth Verse of that 15. Chapter of the Acts. The
sum of the answer to this question being that they are not bound (as
appears by verse 10, 19, 24, 28) and one reason why they are not bound, being
given in these words, purifying their hearts by faith, verse. 9. What can we
imagine Peter's meaning to be but this: that therefore the believing Gentiles
are not bound to be circumcised, nor to keep the whole Law to justification;
namely, because they are purified by faith, that is, they are justified and
saved by faith? Rom 3.10. and and 4.11. Act. 10.43. and 13.39. Gal. 2.19.20, 21
For so the Apostle uses in many places to oppose justification by faith, to
justification by the works of the Law, to confute the one by the other.

And to the end no reasonable man may think strange of this interpretation: I
pray them well to consider these three points.

1. That the word purifying is in other places of Scripture understood of
purifying, by justifying or saving: as where the Apostle John says, that the
blood of Jesus Christ purifyeth or cleanses us from all sin: 1. Ioh. 1.7.
that is, iustifies and saves us from the punishment of sin.

2. That the manifest use and end of the Legal cleansings, and Ceremonial
purifyings was, to teach us that we are justified and saved from our sins,
and the punishment of them, Heb. 9.14. Act. 10.22.
by the blood of Jesus Christ.

3. That the Apostle in that place of Acts the 15. does (as I conceive)
therefore use the word purifying, for justifying or saving, by occasion of the
persons and things, about which the question was made; to which the words
purifying their hearts by faith, were in part an answer.

The persons were Gentiles, whom the believing Jews esteemed impure, and
consequently incapable of salvation, because they were not circumcised, and
keepers of Moses Law.

The thing or matter was Circumcision, and other Ceremonial purifyings, by
observing whereof, the Jews thought themselves pure, that is, capable of
salvation. Now the Apostle being to shape an answer to this people of the
Jews, concerning this point of Circumcision, and other Legal, purif^ings,
that they are not necessarily bound to observe them; and one reason of the
answer being given in these words, purifying their hearts by faith. What can
we imagine the effect of that answer to be but this; that therefore they are
not to seek to be justified by the works of the Law: viz. because they are
purified, that is, justified by faith and by it, they are accepted as righteous
in Gods sight, and consequently capable of salvation, though bodily, they be
not circumcised, nor legally washed in the flesh, by Ceremonial purifyings?

And why then should it be thought strange for the Apostle, to use the word
purifying, for justifying: seeing the matter of the question was, concerning
ceremonial purifyings: and the persons that moved the question were believing
Jews, who well understood what was the use and end of such purifyings? the
persons concerning whom the question was moved, were the Gentiles, whom the
Jews esteemed impure and unclean, Act. 10.1. that is, not within the Covenant
of salvation. Seeing the answer to the question was, that they are not bound to
observe them: namely, to the end they may be capable of salvation, by the
observing of them; and the reason of the answer being in effect, because they
are justified by faith.

So that the Objection being of one kind of purifying, viz. from the filth
and corruption of sin, which is sanctification: and the proof of another,
viz. from the punishment and guilt of sin, which is justification; it can
prove nothing at all against my question: And so I proceed to another Objection.

OBJECTION 3.
Repentance is not begun before a saving faith; because then repentance
should be acceptable without faith.

The reason is thought good, because if repentance be begun before faith,
then it is begun without faith; and if it be begun is without faith, then is it
acceptable without faith; but it cannot be acceptable without faith; because
without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.
Heb. 11.6.

Solution.
The reason is not good; because in all the Elect (in whom only trve
repentance is wrought) a saving faith does always follow the beginning of trve
repentance: for God that begins in his, that good work, whereby they may be
made capable of salvation, will continue and perfect the same. Phil. 1.9.
So that as long as a saving faith shall certainly be afterward wrought in
them: and where it is wrought, the begun repentance may be made acceptable
thereby, as well by the working of it after repentance, as by the work of it
before: I can see no reason why it should be more needful to work faith in
Christ, before repentance, to the end that repentance may be made acceptable
unto God thereby: then it is needful to work faith in Christ before a belief
of the Gospel, and other preparing graces, that fit men to believe in Christ,
seeing they also (and therefore repentance as well as they) are made acceptable
to God; namely, unto salvation by faith in Christ, when it comes, afterward,
as well as if it had gone before it.

The proof also of the reason, taken out of the Epistle to the Hebrews, is to
no purpose: because the point to be proved by it, is, that repentance can no
way be acceptable to God, without faith in Christ: for of such an
unacceptablenesse, must the objection be understood, else it prooves nothing
in the question: but the proof is, that nothing can be acceptable unto God
unto salvation, without faith in Christ: for he speaks of such a pleasing of
God as was in Enoch, who so pleased God by faith, that he was transl^ted into
heaven thereby, Verse 5. and therefore pleased God unto salvation.

I freely grant, that Repentance cannot be acceptable to God without faith in
Christ; because it cannot be acceptable without Christ; and Christ does not
make us acceptable without faith.

I confess also, that no man can please God, so as to be saved, without he
believe in CHRIST, no though it were possible for him to sorrow for his sins
never so heartily; to purpose to leave them never so resolutely, and to believe
the Gospel never so steadfastly: (for therefore faith only pleases God,
because faith only trusts in Christ, in whom only God is well pleased, Mat.
3.17. Ioh. 8.16.) but it is not true, that a man can no way please God without
it, (that is) before he have a saving faith, and believe in Christ for
salvation.

And my Reasons are: 1. Because the prayers and Alms to Cornelius, were
unacceptable to God some way, before he had an express and special faith in
Christ, or had ever heard the Gospel distinctly preached which should work it
in him, as is plain by comparing the fourth and thirty fourth Verses of the
tenth Chapter of the Acts, with the fourteenth Verse of the same Chapter.

Secondly, because Ahabs repentance, and Iehues obedience, were acceptable to
God in some kind and to some end; namely, as they were the doing of Gods
commandment, and as they were means to procure temporal blessings to them;
though we read not in the Scripture, that either of them had a saving faith,
when they did those acceptable actions, or all their life after.

Thirdly, because a knowledge and belief of our sinful and cursed estate in
Adam; and thereupon sorrow and humiliation for sin; after this, a belief of
the Gospel, and a desire to repent and be saved, are all wrought in men, before
a saving faith, for they are means and preparations to it: (as has been
showed:) yet are they some way acceptable unto God, namely, as they are
commanded, and commended of God, as they are fruits and effects of
Predestination, and Election, as they are wrought in us by the holy Spirit of
God, through the preaching of the Word, and as they prepare us to believe in
Christ, though none of them all severally, or jointly, can be acceptable to
salvation, or sufficient to save us; if besides them, we have not faith in
Christ to make us acceptable to God. So then, the Objection being of one kind
of acceptablenesse, and the proof of another, it can prove nothing to
overthrow my question; and therefore I will try another.

OBJECTION 4.
Repentance is not begun before a saving faith, because then repentance
should be begun in men, before they have any spiritual life in them.

The reason (they say) is good: because if repentance be begun before faith
in Christ, then is it begun without it; and if it be begun without faith
in Christ; then is it begun without spiritual life; for faith only is the
spiritual life of Christians. Gal. 2.20.


The Reason is not good, because it begs the Question: for it takes that for
granted (which is the point to be proved by the Text alleged) that faith in
Christ is so the spiritual life of Christians, that there is no spiritual
life begun in Christians, before they believe in CHRIST by a saving faith;
whereas the proof out of the Epistle to the Galatians is only of the
spiritual life unto justification and salvation: For whereas the Apostle
says; In that I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God. His meaning
is not (as it must be if the proof be to purpose;) in that I have had at any
time by the preaching of the Word any beginning of grace wrought in me, any
sight of sin and sorrow for it; any belief of the Gospel, and inclination
to repentance; any fear of God, or care to please him, or any work of the
Spirit tending to salvation, I have had it by the faith of Jesus Christ; that
is, I had it not wrought in me till I believed in Jesus Christ, my faith in
Christ was the isntrumental cause to work it

But his meaning (as appears by the sixteenth Verse; and the drift of the
whole Epistle) is this: the ground I have that I shall be saved, and attain
to eternal life, is not, because I am an obeyer of the Law: for I am dead unto
it, verse 19. (that is, I renounce it to justification, and will by no means
seek to be saved by it) but the hope and hold I have, is this, that I am a
believer in Christ, and by this faith in the Son of God, I live in Gods
sight, and by this only, I claim title and interest unto Christ and all his
benefits; and therefore, in that in this life, I have hope of a better life, I
have it by faith in the Son of God.

I grant, that repentance cannot be begun in men, before they have some
spiritual life wrought in them: but I deny that there is no spiritual life
wrought in men at all, till they believe in Christ, and trust in him for
salvation.

I acknowledge also, that there is not spiritual life enough, and sufficient
to salvation wrought in men, when they are moved by the Spirit, through the
preaching of the Word, to feel their need of Christ, by reason of their
sinful and damnable estate, to mourn for it; to be weary and heavy laden with
the burden of it, to believe the Gospel, and to desire to be saved: but all
these do evidently argue, that some spiritual life is begun in them, in
whom all these graces that prepare unto faith in Christ are wrought: because
the natural man does not conceive nor receive these things of the Spirit, 1.
Cor. 2.14.
neither does flesh and blood reveal them: Math. 16.17.
and therefore being all wrought in men before they can believe in Christ (as
has been showed) and by the work of the Spirit, through the preaching of the
Word, (as must needs be granted:) therefore must they needs be effects of the
Spirit, and consequently argue some spiritual life in those, in whom they are
wrought: though as soon as they be wrought, faith in Christ be not wrought in
them, and though they in whom they are wrought have not spiritual life
sufficient unto salvation, until faith in Christ it self be wrought within
them.

OBJECTION 5.
Repentance is not begun before faith in Christ; because repentance is the
proper effect and fruit of the Gospel.

The reason is held good, because it is presupposed that every proper fruit and
effect of the Gospel follows faith in Christ; and that the Gospel can have
no proper effect and fruit in men, before saving faith be wrought in them
thereby.

Solution.
The reason is not good; because the proofs thereof are unsound: for first, it
is (...) not trve, that every proper effect and fruit of the Gospel follows
faith: For the saving faith it self is a proper effect of the Gospel, yea,
the most proper fruit of it. Yet does it not follow faith in Christ: for how
can a thing follow it self? Secondly, it is not true, that the Gospel has no
proper effect and fruit in men, till a saving faith be wrought in them. For
that is a proper effect and fruit of the Gospel, Romans 10.14.
which the preaching of the Gospel only works in men. The preaching of the
Gospel only, works in men a belief of the Gospel; and a belief of the
Gospel is wrought in men, before a saving faith, or faith in Christ for
salvation; because no man will ever trust in Christ for salvation, before he
believe this for a truth, that if he believe in Christ, he shall be saved by
his faith.

I grant, the Gospel can have no proper effect or fruit at all in men, till by
the preaching of it there be wrought in men that says, which is the belief
of the Gospel: 1. Cor. 1.23.
for as long as it is foolishness to them (which it is, till the truth thereof
be believed) what effect can it have?

And I confess, that the preaching of the Gospel can have no proper effects
or fruits in men unto salvation, until a saving faith be wrought in them; for
if men dye before this be wrought, it is not a belief of the Gospel, nor the
beginnings of repentance that can save them. But I deny, (and I have disprooved
it,) that a saving faith is so the proper effect of the Gospel, that the
preaching of it has no effect at all in men, till a saving faith be wrought,
(for upon this lies the whole strength of the reason, because hereby would they
prove, that therefore the Gospel could have no power to begin the work of
repentance, before a saving faith, because it has no power to produce in men
any proper effect or fruit, till a saving faith be wrought in them, by the
preaching thereof.) Wherefore this Objection being as weak as the former, I
will no longer insist upon the disproofe of it, but proceed to the last.

OBJECTION 6.
Repentance is not begun before faith in Christ, because it is not begun
before Regeneration.

The reason is taken for good, because they think that regeneration is not
begun before a saving faith be wrought in men. For (say they) if the beginning
of regeneration follows faith in Christ, and the beginning of repentance
follow regeneration, then cannot repentance be begun before faith, because it
is not begun before regeneration.

Solution.
The reason were good, if the proofs were found, (that is) if the two
Propositions were true, whereon it is grounded, viz. that repentance is not
begun before regeneration; nor regeneration begun before a saving faith.

The first Proposition, viz. that repentance is not begun before regeneration,
is false, being understood of repentance from dead works, or at the first
conversion: for of this is the question, as has been showed, in setting down
the state thereof; and being understood also of regeneration fully wrought in
all the parts (though not degrees) thereof; for of such a work of regeneration
must the Proposition be understood, else it proves nothing in the question.

I grant, repentance cannot be begun till regeneration be begun; for they are
both begun together; and no sooner does a child of God begin to repent, but he
presently begins to be regenerate: for though it be true, (which is not
questioned) that repentance for sins committed after the first conversion, do
follow regeneration in the children of God, because they (after they are
regenerate) do sin often, and therefore repent often after they are
regenerated: yet is it not true (which is questioned) that repentance from dead
works (that is, for sins committed before the first conversion, when men are
dead in trespasses and sins) is not begun before regeneration be fully
wrought. And my reason is plain and good, because then repentance should be no
part of regeneration.

For if repentance do but begin to be wrought in men, when regeneration is
already wrought in them, then cannot repentance be a part of regeneration,
because all the parts of regeneration, (I do not say the degrees) are already
fully wrought in the person regenerated, before repentance do begin to be
wrought in him.

But it is not true, that repentance is no part of regeneration, seeing it is
one of the chief graces of God, wherein the change that is wrought in men by
regeneration does consist, and the fruits of repentance in amendment of life,
are the chief signs and marks, whereby it is manifested and discerned.
Secondly, where (for proof of their reason) they further allege, that
regeneration is not begun before faith in Christ: I say, that this Proposition
is as false as the other, being understood of a saving faith fully wrought,
(for so it is understood in the question.) For though it be true, (which is not
questioned) that when a saving faith is wrought in a man, he may be truly said
to be regenerate, yet is it not true, (which is alleged, but not proved) that
till a saving faith be wrought in a child of God, there is no regeneration so
much as begun in him.

Regeneration is not usually wrought all at once, on a sudden, and in an
instant, but by degrees, and at several times, successively, as experience
teaches, namely, by the fore-worke of some graces of the Spirit, that do
prepare them thereunto: as namely, knowledge of our sinful and damnable estate
by natural generation; a belief of this, and upon this belief, a laying of
it to heart, whereby we are made to fear, tremble; be humbled, and cast down
in our selves, not knowing what to do. After this, upon the hearing, believing,
and laying to heart of the Gospel preached, which promises to regenerate us,
and to bring us into a better estate, then we had by nature: this makes us
desire to be regenerated, and to seek in the use of the means after it; which
when they are wrought in men by the preaching of the Word, then cannot it be
denied, but that regeneration is begun in them, seeing spiritual life is
begun, as has bin showed. And seeing they be all the works of the Spirit of
God in them, John. ^.^
tending to regeneration, and salvation, and are not wrought by the power of
nature, or natural means, but by the means which God has given to his
Church, for the regenerating of the members thereof, viz. the preaching of Gods
holy Word.

I grant, that God is able to work regeneration in an instant, as he does in
children that dye infants; and it may be he has done it by the Ministry of
the Apostles, and other worthy Preachers, for the magnifying of his exceeding
gracious power in their labors; but that he has, or usually now does work so,
I cannot see, because experience teaches, men are effectually called by
degrees, and by Sermon after Sermon successively.

I confess also, that the beginnings of regeneration, (wrought by certain
preparing graces thereunto, whereof I spoke a little before) are not sufficient
to salvation, unless it be perfited in all the parts thereof; and except a
saving faith do afterward ensue, to perfect it, and to make it acceptable:
and yet for all that, I am of opinion, that regeneration is begun, before a
saving faith be fully wrought; and that repentance is begun, before
regeneration be perfected, and consequently, that repentance is begun before a
saving faith.

Now then, it being sufficiently prooved, that repentance is begun before a
saving faith, that is, that men begin to resolve not to live in their former
sins, but to serve God better, before they can trust in Christ for salvation,
it remains, that for a conclusion of this Rule, I make some use and
particular application of the point, to the end the Reader may examine himself
by it accordingly.

The application and use of this point.
And first, the consideration of that which I have said touching the
precedencie of repentance to faith in Christ, in that manner and measure, as I
have said,may sufficiently confute their opinion, who think, that a saving
faith is fully wrought in men, before any repentance begin to be wrought in
them; to which opinion they have bin drawn, partly by color of some places of
Scripture which seem to favor it; whereunto I have already given a
particular, and (as I hope) a sufficient answer, to which I refer the
Christian Reader.

If there be any thing in our Divines that seems to contradict that which I
have said touching this point, namely, if by any of them it be affirmed
indefinitely, that faith goes before repentance; I humbly pray the Reader not
to stumble at it, because it does not cross that which I have said; for I have
often said as much: but to know and remember, that those Divines do not speak
of such a faith and repentance as I do; as shall be showed in four
particulars:

First, where they say, Faith goes before repentance, their meaning is, a
belief of the Gospel goes before repentance, which I never denied: and where
I say, Repentance goes before faith, my meaning is, not before a belief of the
Gospel; but before faith in Christ.

Secondly, if it may be prooved, that any of them in that sentence speak of
faith in Christ, then where they say, Faith goes before repentance, their
meaning is, a special faith in Christ goes before repentance be fully
wrought, perfected and accepted; which I have plainly affirmed: and where I
say, Repentance goes before faith in Christ, my meaning is, only that
repentance is begun before faith in Christ; and that a true (though a weak)
measure of repentance is begun in men, before they can trust in Christ for
salvation.

Thirdly, where they say, Faith goes before repentance, they mean, that faith
in Christ goes before the practice of repentance, or the bringing forth of
fruits worthy amendment of life; which is the putting off the Old man, and
putting on the New man in the actions of our lives, and whereby the repentance
of the heart is manifested: all which I acknowledge with them. And where I say,
Repentance goes before faith, my meaning is, that repentance is begun in the
heart; and that a true purpose and resolution of heart to leave our former
evil ways, and to serve God in a new conversation for time to come, is begun
in men before they can go to Christ, to be eased of their sins, or trust in
him to be saved, which I think none of them ever meant to deny.

Fourthly, where they say, Faith goes before repentance, they mean, faith in
Christ must go, before repentance can be acceptable to God, which I confess.
And where I say, Repentance goes before faith, I do not mean, that this begun
repentance can be acceptable unto God to our salvation, before we believe in
Christ; but that it is only begun as a preparation to make as fit persons to
believe in Christ; and by believing, to crave pardon of our sins for his
sake; which I never read, any of them did deny. So that how ever at first sight
there may seem to be some difference in judgment betwixt my self and some of
our Divines, that speak generally and indefinitely of faiths going before
repentance; yet by applying the distinctions that I have made of faith and
repentance, there will be no contradiction indeed in this point betwixt me and
them, but an easy way of reconciliation, and consequently of consent herein.

Yet am I not ignorant, that there be some Lutherans that oppose this Doctrine
that I have delivered; and I wonder so much the more at it, because (as has
been formerly proved) they hold faith in Christ to be an assured persuasion of
salvation by Christ; which I know not how possibly they can justify by the
Word, in as much as it is impossible, any Christian should be assuredly and
fully persuaded of his salvation, before he has repented: which yet must be
true, if to believe in Christ, be to be fully assured of salvation by Christ;
and this faith be wrought before any beginning of repentance.

2. The point I have delivered touching the beginning of repentance before
faith in Christ, may teach us how to know, whether or no, we have a saving
faith; namely, if before we trusted in Christ for salvation; our hearts began
to turn to God, to resolve to leave our former evil courses, and to lead a
better life.

3. It serves to reprove all those such carnal Gospellers, which presume they
have a saving faith; and will say, they trust they shall be saved, though they
live in their former sins, and have no resolution begun in their hearts (upon
the grounds I have formerly mentioned) to serve God better, then they have done.

4. In the fourth place it may be a ground of great comfort to those, that have
been so prepared to believe in Christ, as I have said, and that have the
beginning of repentance wrought in them: for they may build upon it, that if
the Lord after this manner have caused them to seek to be saved, and to go to
Christ for it; that is, to believe in the merit of his death and righteousness
for the same; and be sure that their faith is sound indeed, and that they are
fit persons to believe in Christ for pardon.

Lastly, this that has been delivered, touching the precedence of repentance
to faith in Christ, may be a ground of exhortation:

First, to Ministers, to be wary how they preach this doctrine, That faith goes
before repentance; and that they expound it, viz. that a belief of the Gospel
does go before repentance; but that repentance is begun, before a saving faith
can be wrought, (that is) before we can trust in Christ for salvation, with any
hope to receive it.

Secondly, to Christians: 1. That if they have bin otherwise minded, then I
have taught, that they would alter and rectify their judgment herein, and
learn to distinguish betwixt a belief of the Gospel in general, and faith
or affiance in Christ in special; because though that faith which is a belief
of the Gospel, go before repentance, yet that faith which is a trust, or
resting, or relying on Christ for salvation, follows the beginning of
repentance, as I have said. Rule 6.
2. That they would try their faith by this Rule, that so they may be the
fitter to try it also by the fruits which follow faith, which is the next Rule
of Trial.

THE SIXTH RULE.
CHAP. IX. Whether do thou find in thy self, that thy faith is effectual,
and lively, to the amending both of thy heart and life, and to the bringing
forth of the fruits of faith in new obedience.
IT is a good proof that our faith is sound, if we be able to show, we have
been rightly fitted to it, and kindly prepared to believe in Christ; but this
is not all, nor enough; for as there do go before faith in Christ certain
works of the Spirit that do prepare us thereunto; so do there follow many
works of the Spirit, as fruits and effects of faith, that do declare, it is
not a dead, but a lively faith indeed; and this shall be the sixth Rule, by
which we are to try our faith, to the end we may discern, whether we have a
saving faith or no; accordingly as we shall discern we have these fruits in
us, or no.

In the handling of this point, I will observe this method: 1. I will prove,
that a saving faith is lively and effectual to produce many holy actions in
them that have it. 2. I will declare what those fruits and effects be, wherein
faith shows her efficacy. 3. I will set down the means by which it becomes so
powerful. 4. and lastly, I will exhort the Reader to examine himself by this
Rule, to the end he may find, whether he have these effects and fruits in
himself or no, and may further do according as he finds by trial: and these
four points shall be comprehended in four Sections.

To prove the first point, viz. that a saving faith is lively and effectual in
A saving faith is lively to stir up to holiness and good duties. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3.
I need no plainer proof, then that of the Apostle to the Thessalonians, where
he speaks of the work of their faith: by work, not meaning any one
particular, and single work only, as if it had no more but one; but a
powerful efficacy, or effectualnesse of their faith, to bring forth many
excellent effects.

This appears not only by the very next words, where two of those effects are
named, viz. Hope and Love; but also by the Apostle James, where he says, Show
me thy faith by thy works, James 2.18.
speaking in the plural number as of many: which may yet further be declared
by the Epistle to the Hebrews; where in the 11. Chapter he reckens up very
many effects and fruits thereof, through the whole Chapter. And no marvel,
seeing that faith, which is but a belief of the Gospel, Mark 6.20. Act.
19.18.
is able to produce some effects in them in whom it is: and also seeing a
saving faith has for the Author of it God himself; for the immediate Object,
Ephesians. 2.8. John 3.16.
Jesus Christ the Son of God; for the foundation and ground of it, the
promise of the Gospel, or the new Covenant of God; for the isntrumental
working cause of it, Romans 16.25.
the preaching of the Gospel, which is the arm and power of God unto
salvation; Romans 1.16.10.14. 1. Pet. 1.9.
and for the end of it, eternal life: all which are strong workers, and
powerful perswaders unto holiness. But I shall not need to labor much in this
general, seeing it shall be further more clearly proved in the particulars,
in the prosecuting of the next point.

Touching the second point, which What be the particular fruits of a saving
faith.
to declare what be those special and particular fruits of a saving faith, by
which she shows her efficacy in true believers. I say they are of two kinds;
the one, are duties; the other, comfo^ts: of the duties I mean to speak in
this Chapter, and of the comforts in the next; but of the duties before the
comforts, because by the well performance of the duties, there arise greater
and sounder comforts to our souls, by our saving faith.

The duties, to the practice whereof, a saving faith does incite, and persuade
a true believer (to the end he may walk worthy of the grace of God; Ephesians. 2.14.
1. Pet. 2.9.
and show forth the virtues of him, that has called him out of darkness to
light,) are many, and manifold, in regard of the diversity of the persons to
whom, matters whereabout, and occasions upon which they are to be done; so that
a declaration of them in particular, would require a larger Volume, then I now
intend: therefore will I content my self with setting down the most general,
to the end the Reader may help himself, with applying of particulars under
each general, as occasion is offered, of the practice of any one of them.

The sum of all our duties is thankfulness.
The sum of all the duties to which we are persuaded by our saving faith, is
thankfulness to God for our salvation by Christ; and to this thankfulness,
upon this ground, we are exhorted by Paul, 1. Cor. 15.57.
where he says, Thanks be to God, who has given us victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ, namely, over sin and hell, death and Satan our spiritual
enemies: and where he says, Ephesians. 1.3.5.
Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with spiritual blessings in heavenly things, (namely, election, adoption,
redemption, to which he says, They were predestinate according to the good
pleasure of his will, 1. Pet. 1.3. Psalm. 103.3.
to the praise of the glory of his grace.) And to this thankfulness upon the
same ground were Peter and David persuaded, and no marvel.

For if the consideration of a temporal blessing received from man, does, or
ought to stir us up to thankfulness; how much more should the blessing of
all blessings, the gift of our salvation by faith in Christ, stir us up to
thankfulness unto God, by how much the more we are vilde and unworthy persons
that receive it; the person is so high and excellent that bestows it, and the
gift so worthy and necessary that is given us, without which we were accursed,
though we had all the world; and with it we are blessed for ever, though we
had nothing else.

Our thankfulness to God for salvation must first be acted and performed;
then showed and declared.

Our thankfulness to God is acted and performed by these five duties. How our
thankefulnes is acted and performed. Luke 1.46.45.50 Gal. 1.15.


First, by acknowledging the rich grace, and free favor of God, in the work
of salvation from the beginning to the end thereof, in all the parts, degrees,
and manner of working the same.

Secondly, by admiring Gods grace, Romans 11.22. 1. Ioh. 3.1.
and wondering what should move God to bestow so great a favor upon such
unworthy wretches.

Thirdly, by prizing and esteeming of it above all gifts and blessings
whatsoever; Mat. 13.44.
Phil. 3.8.
and (in comparison of it) by counting all things but as dross and dung (which
we shall do, Luke 10.20.
if we delight more in the assurance of our salvation, then in all the
pleasures and treasures of the world. 1. These. 16.17.
If we comfort our selves with the meditation hereof, in the midst of all
worldly crosses and afflictions; Phil. 2.12. 2. Pet. 1.10.
and if we labor in the use of means to make it more sure to our selves
every day then other.)

Fourthly, thankfulness to God for our salvation, is performed by
acknowledging in our souls unfainedly, Luke 1.48. and 15.11.19. and 18.13.
our unworthiness of salvation by reason of our sin original and actual;
and particularly for our sin of unthankfulness, for his manifold mercies,
specially this.

Fifthly, and lastly, we are thankful to God for our salvation by faith, when
we desire and study, resolve, and endeavor to serve him with, Luke 1.74. 1 Pet.
2.24. Tit. 2.14.
and for so inestimable a benefit, in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our life afterward.

How our thankfulness to God is manifested and declared.
Secondly, our thankefulnes to God for our salvation, is to be manifested and
declared.

First, by confessing with our mouths Gods great mercy, in singing of Psalms
of praise to him for it, as David, Psalm. 103. luke 1.46.47. and 68.
Zachariah, and Mary did.

Secondly, by refraining to do those things that we know are displeasing to
our gracious Father in Christ. For all that call on the Name of the Lord, 2.
Tim 2.19.
must depart from iniquity, because the grace of God that brings salvation,
Tit. 2.11.
teaches men to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts. For it were a shame
for the redeemed of the Lord to walk as Gentiles do: Ephesians. 4.17.
for with them the night is past, and the day is come; and therefore it is good
reason, that they should cast off the works of darkness: Romans 13.12, 13.
for hereby the purpose of their hearts to leave their former sins, begun
before faith in Christ, is put in practice. In which work of the refraining
sin they are furthered: First, by often remembering of former sins, Luke
15.13.18. 2. Cor. 7.8.
to beware by them of committing the like again. Secondly, Romans 6.21. Jude
ver. 23. Ezekiel. 20.43. 1. Pet. 5.9. Iam. 4 8. Ephesians. 6.12.13. Prou. 4.23. Mat.
5.29. Job 31.1.
by sorrow for past sins. Thirdly, by shame for them. Fourthly, by hatred of
them, and of themselves for their sins sake. Fifthly, by resisting Satan, and
striving against sin. Sixthly, by watchfulness over our actions and
affections, our members and senses. Lastly, by avoiding the occasions and
opportunities of sin.

Prove. 5.8. 1. These. 5.22. Prove. 23.1, 2, 30
Thirdly, our thankfulness to God for our salvation by faith in Christ, is
testified and declared by doing those good works, that we know will please
God; and that not only in the actions of Religion, and of Gods worship
generally, as we are Christians; but in the special works of our particular
Callings, as we are Magistrates, Ministers, Husbands, Wives, Masters, Servants,
Parents, Children, Husbandmen, or Tradesmen, according as God has called us to
any place in the Church, Commonwealth, or Family. For so says Paul to Titus;
Tit. 3.8.
This is a trve saying, and worthy by all means to be received, that they
which have believed, be careful to show forth good works: and the reason is,
because they who have faith in Christ, Ephesians. 2.9, 10.
are Gods workmanship, created unto good works, which God has ordained that
they should walk in: and they are taught to live righteously, Tit. 2.14.
soberly, and godly in this present world: namely, to testify to God, their
own sovles, and others, the foundnesse of their faith and belief, by the
holiness and unblameablenesse of their life: as also the truth of their
repentance, and purpose of heart to serve God in a new life, which was begun
before their faith in Christ, whereof we spoke before.

The duties that we are to do, to testify our thankfulness to God for our
salvation, concern either God, our neighbor, or our selves.

Those which concern God, Duties to God.
are Either particular belonging to each person in the Trinity; or general,
appertaining to the whole Deity.

The particular duties concern either God the Father, Particular to each
person.
as a continual calling upon him Abba our Father, Romans 8.15, 16. Mat. 6.9.
with sighs and groans of our hearts in secret prayer, Or they concern God the
Son; as namely, a continual trusting in his merits for the pardon of the
sins of every day, 1. These. 1.10. 2. Tim. 4.8. Tit 2.13. Ephesians. 4.30. 1.
These. 5.19.
and an earnest looking and longing for his second coming, Or the Holy Ghost,
as namely, a watchful care that we grieve not the Spirit of God, nor quench
his grace in us by relapsing into sin, but endeavor to approve our spirits,
to his Holy Spirit in the scope and aim of all our actions. General to the
whole Deity.


The duties that concern the whole Deity in general, are either inward or
outward.

Inward duties. Gal. 5.6.
The inward that are performed with the mind, are; first love to GOD for his
mercy with all our hearts. Romans 5.2. Tit. 2.14. Revel 3.19. Gal. 2.11, 12.
Secondly, rejoicing in the Lord for his mercy in our souls in the midst of
all our worldly troubles. Thirdly, zeal of Gods glory, in not suffering with
patience his name to be dishonored or taken in vain. Heb. 12.6, 7. Romans
12.12. 1. These. 1.4. Psalm. 34.10. Romans 8.28.32.
Fourthly, patience under Gods corrections, because he is now become to us a
Father. Fifthly, dependence on his providence for temporal things, not fearing
to want necessaries that may further us in the way to Heaven. Phil. 2.12. Psalm.
130.1. Col. 3.22. Act. 23.1. and 24.16. 1. These. 2 4.
Sixthly, fear to offend God; care to please God, and approving our hearts to
him in keeping a good conscience. Seventhly, and lastly, a daily and continual
renewing of our repentance and Covenant with God of new obedience, resolving and
vowing more constantly and conscionably to serve him, then heretofore we have
done, in obeying all his commandments, in believing his promises, in fearing
his threatenings, and profiting by all his works of mercy and judgment, unto
humiliation, sanctification and consolation, according to the several use and
end thereof. And by the practice of these, we show that we are regenerate, that
our sinful nature is in some good measure mortified, and we made partakers of
the divine nature, by faith, in the power of the death and righteousness of
the Lord Jesus Christ.

There be outward works also, Outward duties.
that the faithful perform to God, to testify their thankfulness to him
for their salvation by faith in Christ, as namely: First, labor by study and
meditation more clearly to understand the mystery of the Gospel, in which
the way of salvation is taught us, and by which a saving faith is wrought in
us, for the attaining of salvation according thereunto. Secondly, a Romans 10.10.
2. Cor. 4.13.
professing of his truth more boldly; specially that part of it that concerns
our salvation. Thirdly, a 1. Tim. 6.12. Phil. 1.27. Gal. 2.11.
defending and maintaining of it by word, writing, or purse, or any other
means we may. Fourthly, Col. 1.23. Act. 14.22. 1. Cor. 10.13. Phil. 1.27. 2.
Tim. 4.7. Ioh. 8.31. 1. Tim. 2.15. Gal. 5.1. 2. Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Romans 6.2.
Act. 20.44. and 21.13. 1. These. ^.26.
continuing in the true faith and obedience of the Gospel, without apostasy
either to the Law to seek for justification by it, together with faith in
Christ, or to looseness and dissoluteness of life, and conversation. Fifthly,
a readiness and resolution to suffer for the Gospel, as loss of goods, good
name, life, or liberty, if God should be pleased to vouchsafe us the honor to
be Martyrs and witnesses of his truth. Sixthly, zeal and forwardness in the
worship of God secretly in our closets, Ioh. 9.31, 38. Act. 24.14. Phil. 3.3.
privately in our Families, or publicly in the congregation according to the
Gospel, and the ordinances of God, which in the Gospel are appointed to that
end. And thus much of our duty to God, inward and outward.

Duties to our Neighbor.
The works that are the duties we are to perform to our neighbor, to testify
our thankfulness to God for our salvation, they are general and particular.

Gal. 5.6. 1. These. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.15. 2. Pet. 1.7.
The general is Love, yea, brotherly love, that is, an entire loving affection
to our Neighbor, because he is a believer in Christ, or a brother with us in
the same profession of our Christian Faith.

The special Duties which are also the fruits of this Love, are two. First, a
refraining to do him any harm, in soul, body, goods, or good name, life or
liberty, in his own person, or in the persons, or things that be his, either
by thought, word or deed. Secondly, an endeavor to do him, or his, any or all
the good we possibly can any way, specially in the pitying and relieving him
in his miseries and distresses; as also, 2. Cor. 8.2.7.
in furthering him in the way to Heaven, by mild reproves, Heb. 3.13.
or admonitions, if we hear or see him do ill; or by good exhortations,
comforts and encouragements out of the Word, 1. These. 5.11.
if we take notice he does well: and all this is to be done in conscience of
our duty to God, and merely in Christian love to our neighbor, without
respect of profit or benefit to our selves, to the end it may be acceptable to
God, profitable to our brother, and comfortable to our own souls.

The last duty follows, Duties to our selves.
in doing whereof we may testify our thankfulness to God for our salvation,
by faith in Christ, it concerns our selves, and consists in two points,
according to the two parts that are to be saved by Christ: namely, our souls
and our bodies: for as they are both to be glorified in Heaven; so it is reason
we should here on earth glorify God with them both, 1. Cor. 6 20. Romans 12.1,
2.
being bought with so dear a price as is the precious blood of the Lord Jesus.

The Duties concerning our bodies are principally two. Duties concerning our
bodies.
First, a denying to the members and senses thereof unlawful objects of sin,
whereby we may be ensnared, specially of those sins, whereunto we are most
of all inclined, either by nature, or by custom; for this is to mortify our
earthly members: this is to crucify the flesh, Col. 3.5.
with the affections and lusts thereof: Gal. 5.24. 1. Cor. 9.27.
this is to beat down the body: yea, this is to pluck out the right eye,
Math. 5.29.
and to cut off the right hand: to the end we may not make them weapons of
unrighteousness unto sin. Secondly, an using of the parts, members and
senses of the body, Romans 6.13.19.
as weapons of righteousness unto holiness: as namely, an using of our
tongues and mouths to pray to God, and praise his name; our ears, to hear
his Word; our feet, to to walk in his house, and place of his worship: and
hereby we shall present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto
God by Jesus Christ, Romans 12.1, 2. Cor. 6.19. Cor. 6.15.
whereby we shall make them fit Temples for the Holy Ghost, and members of
Christ.

Duties concerning our Rules. Luke 21.34.
Last of all, the duties to our selves follow, in respect of our souls, which
are: First, a moderating of our desires and affections to earthly things, to
the end our hearts may not be stolen away from the love of God, and care of our
salvation; and this is called sobriety: 1. These. 5.8. Tit. 2.11. 1. Pet. 3.8.
and 3.13. 1. These. 5.16. 1. Pet. 1.8. Phil. 4.4.
if thus we do, we shall be at more liberty to serve God, and have the more
leisure to rejoice in the Lord always, and in the hope of heaven: whereas if
otherwise our hearts be filled with worldly cares, pleasures and treasures,
honors and favors, there will be no room within us for spiritual joys,
and heavenly comfort to lodge and harbor.

2. The second Duty is a striving in the use of means to grow in grace, 2.
Pet. 3. vlt.
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 20.
and to build our selves further in our most holy faith, to the end we may be
the better enabled to resist Satan's temptations unto heresy in opinion, or to
profaneness, in practice of life, to practice holy duties more cheerfully,
and to persevere unto the end constantly; that being faithful to the death,
Revel. 2, 10.
we may receive the crown of life.

The third is a making sure to our selves our Calling and Election, Adoption
and salvation, 2. Pet. 1.10.
to the end we may rejoice with joy unspeakeable and glorious, even in this
life, by keeping faith and a good conscience. And thus much of the second point
of this Rule, namely, the declaring what be the duties which the faithful
perform, as the fruits of their faith, to testify their thanksgiving to God,
for their salvation by faith in Christ.


Now the third point of this Rule follows, which is a declaration how faith
becomes so effectual to the producing of such holy effects, and to the
persuading of them to do such excellent duties.

I say then, this comes to pass efficiently and instrumentally: Efficiently
two ways. First, by the power of God, yea, Ephesians. 1.17.
by the exceeding greatness of his power in them which believe according to
the working of his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, when he raised
him up from the dead: Ephesians. 3.17.
and secondly, by the power of Jesus Christ the object of faith: for by faith
he dwells in our hearts: and by faith we draw virtue from him, namely, from his
death, Rom 6.3. Cor. ^ 12. Phil 3 9, 10.
to dye to sin, and from his Resurrection, to walk in newness of life.

The second way by which faith in Christ becomes so effectual, is
isntrumental, that is, faith uses some means as instruments to work her
efficacy by. And these instruments are without us, or within us: they without
us, are the Word preached, and the administration of the Sacraments, for these
are the food of our souls, whereby we grow in the spiritual strength of
grace: and the inward are: Love and the gift of Prayer, Gal. 5.6.
whereby we beg and obtain increase of grace, whereby we are made fruitful
in good works, Ephesians. 6.18.
to the glorious praise of God, the good example of others, the comfort of our
own souls. And so I come at length to the last branch of this Rule.

The use and application of it.
Seeing then such sweet Herbs grow in the garden of a faithful heart, and
such wholesome fruits on the tree of a saving faith: what remains, but
according to my promise I direct the Reader to try his faith, by that which I
have said of the efficacy of faith, to the end he may know whether he have
such a faith or no.

For I demand of them, If they have the same faith, why should they not have
the same effects and fruits of faith in them? I do not say in measure, but in
kind; why should not thou by thy faith walk with God and please him, as
Abel? Heb. 11.5. Heb. 11.8.
by thy faith obey God, as Abraham did? Job 1. and 19.
by thy faith learn patience under the cross, as well as Job did? by thy faith
love God, Luke 7.47.
Psalm. 103.1.
as well as Mary Magdalen? by thy faith be stirred up to thankfulness to God
for thy salvation, as David was, and Zachariah? Luk 1.68.
Why should not thou being a believer in these days, show thy faith by thy
works, Iam. 2.18.
as well as James wills the believers in his days; and be careful to show
forth good works, Tit. 3.8.
as well as Paul with the believers of his time? Let us see it, that we may
believe thee, that thou art a trve believer indeed, and that thou have a
lively, and not a dead faith.

Simil.
For would thou persuade thy self thou have an Apple Tree in thy orchard, if
thou could never see fruit on it, but Leaves only? or that it were a very
good Apple tree, if it bear nothing but sour Wildings or Crabbes? no more
ought thou to persuade thy self thou have a true lively faith in Christ, if
it stir thee not up to practice duties to God, thy neighbor, and thy self; to
show thy thankfulness for thy salvation by faith in Christ.

If then by thy trial thou find there be none of these fruits in thy
heart, or life, which I have reckoned up, nor conscience to practice these
duties that I have named, to God, to thy neighbor, or to thy self, then may
thou justly suspect thy self, and fear thou have not as yet a saving faith;
and therefore my counsel to thee is, not to delay, but labor in the use of
the means to get it, lest on a sudden thou dye without the faith that should
save thee, and so be damned.

Whereas on the other side, if thou find by trial these effects and fruits in
thy heart and life, that thou departest from iniquity, and make conscience
to lead a holy life, and to practice for conscience sake, duties to God, thy
neighbor, and thy self, and all to testify thy thankfulness to God for thy
salvation by Christ; then may thou build upon it that thou have a saving
faith indeed, and may safely look for salvation by Christ. For if thou
overcome the world, it must be by faith: 1. Ioh. 5.4.
if thou escape the pollutions of the world, 2. Pet. 2.20.
it must be by the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: If thou
love God and thy neighbor, Gal. 5.6.
it must be by faith: If thou resist sin and Satan, 1. Pet. 5.8.
it must be by being strong in the faith: 1. These. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.17.
if thou quench the fiery darts of the Devil, it must be by the breast plate
and shield of Faith: and therefore comfort thy self; if thou have the fruit,
thou have the root; thou have a saving faith; Tit. 2.2. 1. Tim. 5.
thou art sound in the faith; thou have an unfeigned faith; only labor to
strengthen that faith, that thou may in due time receive the end of thy
faith, Luke 17.5. 1. Pet. 1.5.
which is salvation.

I grant, that all belevers sin in many things; and though they have a saving
faith, yet have they their failings: but it is not true, that any such settle
themselves in any evil courses, or live long in known sins; for they strive
against all sin; they resolve to practice obedience to all Gods
commandments, and if they fail, it is against their resolutions; they do not
overtake and run after sin with greediness, but are overtaken with it;
Ephesians. 4.19. Gal. 6.1.
they are humbled with great sorrow for their slips, and by them they are made
the more watchful to do no more so.

I know also that there is a difference in the fruits of the faith of
believers, and in their measure of grace, as well as in their faith: For some
have a stronger faith then others, and therefore they have a greater measure of
sanctification, obedience, love, patience, thankfulness, and other graces: but
for all this, he that has a weak faith in Christ, has some obedience, some
love to God, he has some fear to offend him, and some care to please him: and
therefore let no man deceive himself, to think that as yet he has faith in
Christ, except he have some of these fruits.

I do not mean, that because a man has not these fruits now, nor this saving
faith now, he shall never have it; for though he have been careless
heretofore; yet being better taught, by this and other means of instruction,
he may labor to get it, and so have it, and the fruit of it: but this I mean,
that if a man live and dye without repentance, and new obedience, without love
to God, or to his neighbor, he never had a true faith in Christ, nor can ever
be saved.

I might here make other uses of this point, as namely, of confutation of the
Papist, who slanders us that we do not urge works, nor press our hearers to
a holy life; they may here be confuted: for we teach men to try the truth of
their faith, by the fruits of it, which are manifold.

Secondly, I might here reprove all those who would be taken for good
Christians, and yet are they wicked in their lives and conversations, either
openly by profaneness, or secretly by hypocrisy.

Thirdly, I might here teach and instruct the Reader 1. a way how to try his
faith, namely, by these fruits, and the efficacy of it: and 2. show a reason
of the wickedness and profaneness, that is in the world, namely, because they
want a saving faith: 2. These. 3.2. 2. Tim. 3.8.
but because the chief intendment of this Rule is for the examination and
trial of our faith by these effects, to the end that finding we have them not,
we may get the faith that will produce them; or finding we have it, we may
labor in the use of the means to strengthen it: therefore I will not enter
into any larger discourse of these uses; but will content my self with that,
which already has been said concerning examination, as being most profitable
for us: and therefore now for conclusion of this Rule, and for a further and
final stirring of us up to holiness of life, and to the expressing of our
faith thereby; I pray it may be sufficiently considered and remembered, Jude
ver. 20. Ephesians. 1.4. 1. These. 4.7. Ephesians. 2.10. 1. Pet. 2.24. Luke 1.74.
that therefore faith in Christ is called holy faith and that therefore
holiness of life is the end of our election, of our Vocation, of our
Regeneration, or new creation, of our Redemption or Justification, because our
faith in Christ whereby we trust in him for these ends, should stir us up to
holiness, to the end we may hereby glorify God, strengthen our brethren, and
assure our own souls, that we have a true saving faith indeed; because the
tree is known by the fruit. And so I descend to the seventh Rule.

Rule 7.
THE SEVENTH RULE.
CHAP. X. Whether do thou labor in the use of the means, to feel in thy
soul the comforts of a saving Faith?
IN this Chapter is contained the 7. Rule of Trial, whereby we may find
whether or no we have a saving faith, namely, by examining our selves touching
our endeavor after the comforts of it; and here I would have it to be noted,
that I do not make the trial, whether we feel them in us or no at all times;
or at all times in like measure: for this would deceive many weak Christians,
who though sometimes they want the feeling of these comforts of faith, yet may
they have a saving faith for all that: but my quaere is, whether we desire and
endeavor to find them. And in the handling hereof I purpose (God willing) to
observe this order: First, I will show in general, that a saving faith
ministers spiritual comforts to the souls of Christians. Secondly, I will in
particular show what these comforts be. Thirdly, I will set down the means by
which a saving faith becomes thus comfortable. Fourthly, I will declare why men
should labor for these comforts. Fifthly, I will teach, how men shall labor
in the use of the means for these comforts. Sixthly and lastly, I will make a
brief application of the Rule, to the end the Reader may examine himself by
it, and accordingly deal as he finds by trial: and of each of them a little.

A saving faith is comfortable to the Soul.
That a saving faith brings comfort to the soul of him that has it, is
evident to him that considers, First, that the Apostle says plainly, that
they who have fled for a refuge to lay hold upon the hope that is set before
them, (which all do, Heb. 6.18, 19.
that by faith believe in Christ for salvation) may have strong consolation:
and that they have hope, as an anchour of the soul both sure and steadfast. And
secondly, how the Apostle joins to faith a good conscience* 1. Tim. 1.19.
viz. as an effect and companion of it; because a good conscience is a
continually feast; that is, it ministers continually cause of spiritual joy
and mirth to the souls of Christians: and no marvel, 1. Seeing that by grace
we receive a strong consolation: 2. These. 2 16. Ephesians. 2.8. Philip. 2.1. Ephesians.
3.17. Ioh. 14.16, 17. Gal. 3.2.5.
and by faith we are saved through grace. 2. Seeing by Christ we recive all
consolation, and by faith Christ dwells in our hearts to give it us. 3. Seeing
the Spirit is the true comforter; and by faith we receive the Spirit. And
fourthly, Romans 15.4.
seeing the Word and Gospel minister consolation; and by faith in Christ we
receive the comforts of the Word. Hebr. 4.3. romans 1.16.
But because this general point will be made more clear in the particular
comforts, therefore will I spend no more time in the proof thereof.


Touching the second point, viz. what be the comforts which a saving faith
ministers to the souls of the faithful, I say they are principally seven:

The first is Peace, namely, in our own souls and consciences, 1. Peace.
through the blood of Christ's Cross. For Paul says, that being justified by
faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ: and he prays for
the Roman Christians, that the God of hope would fill them with peace by
believing: Romans 15.13.
yea Christ says to Mary Magdalen, Go in peace, after he had affirmed, her
faith had saved her: Luke 7.50. Mat. 11.28, 29.
and to all that come unto him with broken And heavy-loaden souls, that is,
which believe in him, that he would give them rest to their souls.

This peace is not in a scanty measure to be enjoyed by faith, but abundantly,
if men seek it as they should; according to that of Peter, Grace and peace be
multiplied unto you, through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ our
Lord, that is, 2. Pet. 1.3.
through faith in Jesus Christ.

The second comfort is like the first, 2. Joy.
but yet distinct from it, and it is Joy; which appears not only by the
places alleged formerly out of the Epistle to the Romans, namely, where Paul
says, Romans 5.2.
that by faith we rejoice under the hope of the glory of God: and where he
prays, Romans 15.13.
that they might be filled with joy, as well as with peace by believing: but
also it is evident by the Epistle to the Philippians, where he speaks of the
joy of their faith: Phil. 1.25.
and by the Epistle to the Hebrews, where he exhorts them to hold fast their
confidence, Heb. 3.6.
and the rejoicing of their hope firm unto the end.

This joy shows it self, not only in respect of this, that we are converted
to the faith, Act. 8.39. and 16.34. Luke 10.20.
and made Gods children; nor in regard of this, that we shall be saved: but it
is seen even in troubles and afflictions, in which no man naturally or
reasonably can rejoice: for the faithful rejoice in troubles and persecutions;
Heb. 12.12.
Romans 5.3.
they take joyfully the spoiling of their goods; Hebr. 10.34. Act. 5.41.
and they rejoice, that they are counted worthy to suffer for Christ's sake.

The third comfort of faith is Hope, that is, 3. Hope.
hope of heaven, or of eternal life: for by faith Paul says, We rejoice
under the hope of the glory of God; Romans 5.2, 5.
and that with such a hope, as will not make us ashamed. And Paul prays, that
the Roman Christians may by faith abound in hope by the power of the holy
Ghost; Romans 15.13. H^b. 11.7. John 3.16. Romans 4.16.
for faith is the ground of hope, and the substance of things hoped for, as the
promise is the ground of faith; and God himself in his truth, power, and mercy
is the ground of the promise.

The fourth comfort (which arises also out of the three former comforts) is
Assurance of salvation, 4. Assurance of salvation.
and a good persuasion of Gods love to us, and that we are his children. For
because we are sons, (which we are by faith in Christ, Gal. 3.26. Ioh.
1.12.) God sends forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, Gal. 4.6.
crying, Abba Father: and the Apostle wills us to draw near to God in full
assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. Hebr.
10.22.
Yea Paul professes of himself, (not as an Apostle, Romans 8.35.
but as a believer) that he was persuaded nothing should be able to separate
him from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

The fifth comfort of a saving faith, 5. Boldness in prayer.
is Boldness in prayer to God, as to our Father, with confidence to be heard
in our prayers for forgivenes of sin, and all other spiritual and temporal
comforts. Ephesians. 3.12.
For by faith in Christ we have boldness and access with confidence: Romans 5.2.
by faith we have access into this grace wherein we stand: for he being now
become our Father in Christ, we may be sure, John 16.23 and 14.13. James 1.6.
6. Ability to resist temptations.
that whatsoever we ask the Father in Christ's Name, he will give it unto us.

The sixth comfort, is an Ability whereby we may answer all Satan's accusations,
and resist all his temptations, whereby he would persuade us to despair of
mercy, in regard of our misery and great sins, which have deserved
temporal, spiritual, and eternal curses. For therefore Paul calls a saving
faith, 1. These. 5.8. Ephesians. 6.17.
a breast plate, and a shield, Ephesians. 6.17. not because the faithful shall be
freed from Satan's temptations, and no way to be assaulted with them; but
because by it they shall be able to quench all his fiery darts, that is, to
answer and refell them, that they shall do us no harm, nor drive us to
despair.

For though Satan may bruize our heel, that is, sting or prick us with some
fear and horror, yet shall he never be able to break our heads, or our
hearts with despair; Genesis 3.15.
because in the end we shall be more then conquerors by faith in Christ, Romans
8.37. 1. John 5.4.
by which we overcome the world.

7 Perseverance in grace
Now follows the last comfort of faith, which is, that if we be truly ingraffed
into Christ, by a true and lively faith, we shall be sure to persevere in
grace unto the end: for he that drinks of the water of life that Christ gives,
(that is, whosoever believes in him) it shall be in him a Well of water
springing up to life eternal: and though they be here on earth, and Christ in
heaven, John 4.14.
yet are they in the hands, (that is) in the keeping of the Father, and of
Jesus Christ; Ioh. 10.28, 29.
whence none shall be ever able to pluck them: and no marvel, 1. Pet. 1.5.
seeing they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. From
whence we may collect three singular comforts: 1. Art thou afraid thou shall
never endure to the end? be of good cheer, thou shall be kept unto salvation.
2. Does it trouble thee that Satan is a strong and subtle adversary, able to
overturne thee? be of good comfort, thou art kept by the power of God, who is
stronger then he. 3. Art thou dismayed thy faith will fail thee? take heart of
grace, thou art kept by the power of God through faith; therefore thou shall
keep thy faith, and thy faith shall keep thee, if thou have such a true faith
in Christ as I have said.

The means by which faith in Christ becomes
Now follows the third thing propounded in the handling of this Rule, which is
a declaration of the means by which faith in Christ becomes so comfortable to
the soul: and I say that this comes to pass by the power of the holy Ghost,
Romans 15.13. John 14 26. and 15.26.
who is the true comforter. Now the holy Ghost works these comforts in
Christians through faith, by reason, first, of the proper and immediate object
thereof, which is Jesus Christ, the meritorious cause and fountain of all
spiritual consolation. 2. Cor. ^.3, 4, 7.
Secondly, by reason of the goodness, sweetness, and comfortablenesse of the
things themselves, which faith believes, and which are promised in the Word,
viz. justification or forgiveness of sins, grace or sanctification in this
life, and glory in the life to come, freedom from the guilt of sin original
and actual, and from the curse of the Law thereby; and adoption to be the
sons of God, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven.


The fourth thing in this Rule, is to consider the Reasons, why men should
labor for the comforts of faith; and they are chiefly these: 1. Because these
comforts are in the Word promised to true believers: therefore may they be
attained by seeking after them. 2. Mat. 5.4. and 11.28, 29. 2. Cor. 1.4.7.
Because the faithful in time past have inioyed them, as may be seen in Job,
Daniel, Peter, Paul, and the rest; therefore may they be attained in this life
by others also, namely, in some measure, though not in a like measure, in all.
3. Christians must labor for the comforts of faith, in regard of the necessity
of them; which appears by this, in that, if they have these comforts in their
souls, they are happy, if they had no comfort in the world besides, but were
every way else uncomfortable; and without these they are accursed, and shall
perish, and be swallowed up of other discomforts. Lastly, Psalm. 119.92. 1. Cor.
15.19.
they must labor for these comforts of faith, because of the excellency of
them, in that they far surpass all other joys and comforts; for they are
not sensual, corporal and sinful, but holy, pure, and spiritual, not
utterable and worldly, but unspeakeable and glorious; not fading, 1. Pet. 1.7.
but permanent and durable, such as shall never be taken away, Ioh. 56.22.
but shall do them most good when they have most need.


In the fifth place, I am to show how Christians should labor in the use of
means to attain these comforts, and what means they should use to that end.
The means are, 1. An emptying of our hearts of all love of worldly, carnal,
and sensual joys, comforts, and pleasures. 2. A feeling of the want of these
spiritual comforts. 3. A knowledge of the necessity and excellency of them.
4. An hungring and thirsting, even an earnest desire of them. 5. A continual
reading, hearing, and meditating on the promises of the Word, and the comforts
thereof. 6. A diligent and continual use and meditation of the Sacraments of
the Gospel, which are the spiritual nourishment of our souls to eternal
life. 7. And lastly, a frequent, and fervent use of prayer to God for his
blessing upon the means, that our hearts may be ravished with these holy and
heavenly joys and comforts, according to the necessity, and excellency of
them.


Now come I to conclude this Rule, and to make application thereof. That which
I have said touching these comforts of faith, may serve, First, to confute the
opinion of profane men, and carnal Gospellers, who imagine in their hearts, and
speak with their mouths, that there is no joy nor comfort in faith and
Religion; that godly men and women are quite without any mirth; and that the
profession of the Gospel is an utter enemy to all pleasure and joys. Indeed to
sinful and carnal pleasure it is, but not to all pleasure and joy: for godly
men have a liberty to partake in many lawful pleasures, and recreations; they
are not debarred of them, though they belong to the senses, and members of
their bodies; and as for their inward joys, they are unspeakeable and
glorious; though wicked men cannot (as long as they continue wicked) be
acquainted with them; because they are not fit persons to receive them. Luke
4.18.


Secondly, this that I have said concerning the comforts of faith, may justly
reproove many professors in the Church, and carnal Gospellers, that do not
labor for them, though they are to be had; and though being had, they be so
necessary and excellent. The reason is, because they are sensual, and their
hearts are so stuffed with carnal joys, and taken up with worldly pleasures,
that there is no room for holy, spiritual, and heavenly joys to lodge and
harbor. Let such men take heed that go on in the eager pursuit of them, and
careless neglect of the other, that they be not in the number of them, that
have already received their consolation; Luke 6.24. Psalm. 17.14. 1. Cer. 15.19.
whose portion is in this world, and who have their hope in this life only.

Thirdly, this discourse of the comforts of faith, may serve to teach and
instruct us, what is the way to get holy and heavenly comfort, namely, to get a
saving faith; as being the cause, root, and fountain of them, as has been
showed in the second Section of this Chapter.

Lastly, it serves to exhort us all to labor for these comforts, and to
examine our selves, whether we labor for them, and hunger after them.

If we do not, then are we sensual and carnal either in whole or in part,
according as we are negligent of them: let us therefore reprove our selves for
this neglect, and fear that as yet we have not the saving faith it self.

Indeed, if either there were no comforts to be had by a saving faith; or if
these comforts were but mean; or if they were not durable, then might we have
some plea for our negligence in getting a saving faith, and the comforts of it:
but seeing they are possible to be attained; being attained, they are worthy
to be enjoyed; being enjoyed, they are permanent and may be kept: therefore are
we most worthy of sharp reproof, if we labor not for them.

But if on the other side, we find by trial, that in some measure we feel
these comforts, whereby we taste how sweet the Lord is to us, then have we
reason to assure our selves we have a saving faith indeed, as also we have
good encouragement further to apply them to our souls; which if we do, we
shall not need to fear again unto bondage, Romans 8.15.
or despair, though happily sometimes we may find some discomforts in our
souls, by reason of former sins not soundly enough repented of, or later
sins not carefully prevented.

For first, what though Satan tells thee thou art a sinner? yet God tells thee in
the Word, that by faith in Christ's death and righteousness, thou art accounted
as righteous in Gods sight: for Abraham trusted in Christ, Romans 3.3.
and it was imputed to him for righteousness: Philip. 3.9.
and so was S. Paul accounted righteous, by the righteousness of God which is
faith in Christ.

Secondly, what though Satan tell thy conscience, thou art a transgressour of
Moses Law, and therefore that thou art liable to the curse? yet God tells thee
in the Word, that from all things from which thou can not be justified by the
Law of Moses, every one that believes in Christ is justified: Act. 3.39.
the reason is, because Christ has blotted out the handwriting of ordinances,
that was against us, and was contrary to us, that he has taken it out of the
way, and nailed it to his Cross.

Coloss. 2.14.
Thirdly, what though Satan suggest into thine heart, that thou art in Adam
condemned to die the second death? yet will the Lord tell thee in his Word,
that in the mean time that execution is stayed; and that Christ has procured
a pardon for thee; for whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, shall receive
remission of sins: Act. 10 43.
yea if thou beleevest in Christ, Ioh. 3.33.
thou have this pardon under seal: thou have everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation, and art past from death to life. John 5.24.


Lastly, what though Satan object against thee, that thou must die, and after
death come to judgment? yet will the Lord tell thee out of the Word, that the
sting of death is taken away; so that it shall not be to thee a passage to
hell, 1. Cor. 15.56, 57.
as it is to unbeleevers, but an entrance into life: for Christ by his death
has overcome him that had the power of death, Heb. 2.14. 1. Cor. 15.20.
which is the Devil: and Christ is risen from the dead, and hereby is become
the first fruits of them that sleep. Only labor for these comforts in the
use of the means ordained to give them; and though thou want them for a time,
yet as long as thou art troubled for the want of them, mournest after the Lord,
and hungrest for him, fear not, but be of good cheer, thou shall be eased
and comforted in due time; 1. Cor. 10.13.
He will not try thee above thy strength, but give a good issue; and though
heaviness endure for a night, Psalm. 30.5.
yet joy and comfort will come in the morning. And so much for the seventh
Rule, I now come to the 8. and last.

Rule 8.
THE EIGHTH RULE.
CHAP. XI. Whether do thou use the means to grow in Faith, and to
strengthen it?
IN the handling of this Rule, I will observe this method, and declare these
points: 1. I will show, that Christians must strive to strengthen their faith.
2. I will propound some Reasons to induce them to strengthen their faith. 3. I
will direct them to the means, by which they may learn how to strengthen it.
4. I will declare, that if they labor in the use of means, they may
strengthen it. 5. And lastly, I will apply this Rule, and exhort the Reader to
try himself by it.


That Christians must labor to strengthen their faith, appears by the Word of
God. First, in Paul, where he exhorts the Colossians to be rooted and built up
in Christ, and strengthened in the faith; Col. 2.7.
showing that it was not enough for them to be planted in Christ, except they
were rooted in him: for else how can they watch and stand fast in the faith; 1.
Cor. 16.13.
how can they quite themselves like men, and be strong? Secondly, in Peter,
where he exhorts the Christian and believing Jews, to grow in grace, 2. Pet. 3.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, signifying unto
them, that when they are once begotten to the faith, and newborn in Christ,
they must not be babes still, but grow in spiritual strength to a perfect man
in Christ, even to the measure of the fullness of the age of Christ. Ephesians.
4.13.
Lastly, this is taught us by the Word of God in Iudes Epistle, Verse 5. where
he exhorts the Christian Israelites to edify one another in their most holy
faith: Jude ver. 20.
intimating that it is not enough to have the foundation of faith laid in us,
except we be further edified and built up in the same, to be an holy temple to
the Lord. Ephesians. 2.21.


Why Christians must strengthen their
Touching the second point, although these three plain Texts are sufficient to
persuade any reasonable man to labor to strengthen his faith; yet for a better
enforcing of this point, I will add some reasons why they must so do, whereof
some are taken from the necessity of this duty, and some from the fruit and
benefit of it. The Reasons that are taken from the necessity of laboring to
strengthen our faith, are three.

The first is borrowed from the nature and condition of our faith in this life,
which is but weak and imperfect, and therefore has need to be strengthened;
for we know in part, 1. Cor. 13.9.
we believe in part; Simil.
so that as men do therefore take food and Physic for the strengthening of
their bodies, because they are frail, weak and mortal; so therefore should
Christians use the means of spiritual food and Physic, for the strengthening
of their souls unto eternal life; namely, because their faith is weak for the
most part.

My second Reason that prooves it it necessary for Christians to strengthen
their faith, is drawn from the consideration of Satan's malice, who uses all
means to weaken it; yea, quite to subvert and ouerturne it (if it were
possible) as may be seen in the case of Peter, who was winnowed by Satan, Luke
22.31.
that his faith might fail. For I demand, if a house begin to sink or reele
of one side, Simil.
will we not put under some shore to prop it up? Or if any man question the
Title of Land we have purchased, will we not search Records, and use means to
strengthen our Title? Or if an enemy lay siege to a City to conquer it; or a
thief seek to break into an house to rob it: will not the Inhabitants of
that City, or that house, fortify and defend it? if they do not, they are
worthy to be made Vassals, and be spoiled of their goods. Even so, when
Christians do know that Satan labors to weaken their faith; yea, wholly (if
it were possible) to subvert it, they have reason to strengthen the same,
specially, seeing by faith we stand in the grace and favor of God: by being
steadfast in the faith, Gal. 5.22.
we resist Satan: seeing faith is our victory, 1. Pet. 5.8. 1. Job. 5.4.
whereby we overcome the world: seeing faith is a breast plate, or Corslet, 2.
These. 5.8.
whereby we bear off all the strokes of Satan, that they cannot hurt us to
death; yea, it is the Shield and armor of proof, whereby we quench all the
fiery darts of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.17.
that they cannot wound us unto damnation.

The third reason enforcing a necessity of strengthening our faith, is taken
from the consideration of the nature and condition of the life of Christians in
this world, which is subject by afflictions, to many trials that require
strength of faith to undergo them, and to make use of them, that we fail not
under them. For upon this ground Paul exhorts the Christians at Antioch to
continue in the faith; Act. 14.22.
because we must through many tribulations, enter into the Kingdom of Heaven:
and upon the same ground Paul sends Timothy to the Thessalonian Christians, to
stablish and comfort them in their faith, to the end they might not be moved
by the afflictions of those times, which he told them beforehand they must
suffer, 1. These. 3.2, 3, 4. And no marvel: for when the stormy tempests of
affliction and persecution beat upon us, how shall we be able to stand, if we
be not deeply founded on a Rock? Surely a silly Woman will make us deny our
Master, as Peter did, if we be not strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might; and if in feeling of the weakness of our faith, we labor not in the
use of means to strengthen it.

The second ground of Reasons to persuade us to strengthen our faith, is taken
from the benefit that comes by this labor, and by the strengthening of our
faith; and the benefits are likewise three.

The first is this, that if we use means to strengthen our faith, we shall
increase our spiritual comfort; for the stronger our faith is, the stronger is
the consolation, the sweeter are the comforts, and the more permanent are the
joys of our souls, that proceed from our saving faith within us.

The second benefit of strengthening our faith is, that hereby we shall find
in us the more, and the more lively fruits of our faith in holy obedience: for
the stronger our faith is, the more constant and conscionable shall be our
serving of God, in caring to please him, and fearing to offend him; for hereby
we shall draw down from the death and Resurrection of Christ, dwelling in our
hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. more strength to dye to sin, and to walk in
newness of life.

The third and last benefit of strengthening our faith, is, continuance and
perseverance in the faith, whereby we shall come to attain to the end of our
faith, which is the salvation of our souls. For we shall be presented, holy
and unblameable before God at Christ's second coming, Colos. 2.21.
if we continue in the faith, rooted and settled, and be not moved away from
the hope of the Gospel.


But though we know we are commanded to use means to strengthen our faith,
and the reasons why: yet if there be no means to strengthen it, how shall we
strengthen it? It remains therefore in the next place, that I show what the
means be which God has ordained for that end. And of these, the first is, the
continual hearing of the Word, which is the object of a saving faith, viz. the
Gospel. For to this end does Paul commend the Ephesians to God, Act. 20.31.
and to the Word of his grace, to the end they might be built up thereby. And
for that end he desires to see the Romans, whom he had by preaching at first
converted to the Faith, Romans 1.11.
that he might bestow upon them a spiritual gift to strengthen them, and to
see the Thessalonians, 1. These 3.10.
that he might perfect that which was lacking in their faith: and for this end
does Peter command the Christian Jews, as new born babes, 1. Pet. 2.2.
to desire the sincere milk of the Word, namely, that they might grow thereby:
Heb. 4 12.
for the Word is lively and mighty in operation, Act. 20.32.
and able to strengthen it; and besides, it is a fit means to strengthen our
faith; because it was the means whereby it was at first begotten in us.

The second means to strengthen our faith, is the frequent use of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

For if Circumcision were a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11.
why not the Lords Supper also, being a Sacrament as well as it, and a
Sacrament of the New Covenant or Testament? I do not mean, that the Sacraments
confirm the promise of the Gospel in it self, nor in respect of God, but in
regard of us, who by reason of our weak faith, stand in need of the
confirmation thereof, and who without it, should not be so sure of obtaining
salvation by faith in Christ, as otherwise with it we are: And therefore (me
thinks) has the Lord Jesus ordained specially one of the Sacraments of the New
Testament in a Supper, and in Bread and Wine; not only to teach us, that now
he has put an end to all the carnal and fleshly sacrifices and offerings of
the Law, by this Bread and Wine representing himself: but also to teach
thereby, Psalm. 104.14.15.
that as Bread and Wine do naturally nourish our bodies: so the benefits of
the body and blood of Christ crucified comfort our souls; and not so only,
but that the ordinance of the Lords Supper does also nourish, increase, and
strengthen our faith in the death of the Lord Jesus Christ, there represented
for the further assurance of our salvation thereby; even as those creatures
nourish our bodies.

The third means of strengthening our faith is the frequent use, and fervent
exercise of Prayer to God, in the name of Christ, the object of our faith. This
the Apostles knew, and therefore do they all pray to the Lord, Luke 17.5.
to increase their faith: and this the poor man in the Gospel knew also; and
therefore having said, Mar. 9.24.
Lord, I believe, he prays in the next words, as in one breath, Lord, help my
unbelief: and no marvel for if Prayer be a means to obtain a blessing of
strength, to the means that God is pleased to give us for the preservation of
our corporal strength, and bodily life: 1. Tim. 4 4.
then well may it be a mean to obtain strength to our faith, wherein
consists our spiritual strength. If Prayer be a mean to strengthen the faith
of other Christians, 1. These. 3.10. Phil. 1.9.
and to confirm in them other graces, then why should it not be a means to
strengthen our faith in Christ, and to increase it for the further comfort of
our souls in Christ, in whom our faith is fixed?

The fourth and last means that I will mention for the strengthening of our
faith, is the meditation on the power, truth, goodness, and mercy of God, in
performing of his promises made unto us in Jesus Christ, both of grace and
glory; specially for spiritual blessings in heavenly things: for hereby we
are the rather assured that he is able and willing to make them good.

For as the consideration of the honesty and sufficiency of a man that makes
us a promise of any thing, Simil.
gives us good encouragement to believe we shall have it, and make us with
patience to expect it: even so the meditation of Gods power, truth and
goodness, does strengthen our faith to make us rest in him, and trust unto him
for the good things promised: yea, with patience to expect the receiving of
them. To. 4.19, 20, 21


That Christians may strengthen their faith by these means.


The promises are general or special. General, Math. 7.7.
that they that ask and seek, shall find and have. Special as namely, that
of Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 9.8.
where he says, The Lord shall cause all grace to abound to the faithful;
and that the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1.17.
that is, from one measure of faith to another; and that of Christ's fulness we
all receive grace for grace. Ioh. 1.16.


This point likewise is made plain by the examples of the godly in the Word,
whose faith has been strengthened by these means, as namely, the Christian
Jews, who are said to be rich in faith. Iam. 2.5.
The Thessalonians, whose faith grew exceedingly: The Corinthians, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
2. Cor, 8.7. and 10.15.
who abounded and increased in faith: and Abraham himself the father of the
faithful, Romans 4.20.
who was strong in the faith.

And yet for all this, I would not have men to judge, as if I meant that al
Christians, by the use of the means, shall attain unto a like measure of the
strength of faith; for that is not to be expected: but that they shall attain
unto such a measure of spiritual strength thereby, as shall be able to support
them from final falling away from God, or fainting under the afflictions of
this life, with which God is pleased to try their faith in this world.

The application and use of this Rule.
Now then, to come to the last thing promised in handling this Rule: Examine
thy self, good Reader, whether thou do with care and conscience, with
diligence and continuance, use the means prescribed or no: if thou do not, it
is to be feared, either thou have no faith at all; and then it is no wonder
thou do not labor to strengthen it, (for thou can not strengthen that which
is not) or that it is such a one, that will prove weaker every day then other,
for want of spiritual means to strengthen it. For I demand, Job 8.11. Mat.
13.5.
can a bulrush grow without water; or seed without heart of earth? Can the
body be strong to labor, without food and rest? no more can faith in Christ
without the water of life, or the food of our souls. And therefore as men in
the world, Simil.
Merchants and Tradesmen, do not content themselves with a little wealth or
stock, but strive and labor to increase it, to hundreds or thousands; so do
not thou content thy self with a small portion of these heavenly treasures,
but labor to increase it; and the rather, because of the worlds many
allurements to weaken it, and Satan's great malice, to ouerturne it.

But if on the other side, thou find in thy self a desire of thy heart, an
endeavor of thy mind, and an use of the means to strengthen thy faith, then
persuade thy self thy faith is sound. For it argues thou feel need to
strengthen it; 1. Cor. 10.12. 2. (...). 1.10. (...). 2.^2.
for thou take heed thou fall not, thou make sure to thy self thine own
Calling and Election, and workest out thy salvation with fear and trembling;
thou take heed to thy self, Heb. 3.12.
that there be not in thee an evil heart of infidelity to depart away from
the living God, and therefore art thou like to abide and continue: for blessed
is he that fears always. Likewise it argues thou have an eye to the Lord
for help, and to his ordinance for strength, by means whereof, thou may
well in faith expect it, and find it, to the end that hereby being strengthened
in thy faith, thou may be faithful to the death, Revel. 2.10.
and being faithful to the death, thou may receive the crown of life; only
go on still in the use of means as thou have begun, go on (I say) as long as
thou live in this world, and be of Paul's mind, who never thought he had
faith enough; and therefore still labored to know Christ, Phil. 3.9.
and the power of his Resurrection: still pray for Gods blessing on the means,
and depend on him for the same: and he that has commanded thee to use the
means to show thy obedience to his will, and promised a blessing, Gal. 6.9.
to the end thou might trust in him for the same, will in due time cause
thee to reap of the fruit, if thou faint not, 1. Cor. 15. vlt.
knowing this assuredly that thy labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. And
so I come at length to the conclusion of my Treatise.

At length, after many paces, and passages, I am drawing on to my iourneys end,
(that is) toward a conclusion of my Discourse of the trial of faith: wherein,
as largely as was needful, as plainly as for me was possible, and as
sufficiently as God enabled me; I have labored to persuade and encourage
Christians, to examine themselves whether they have a saving faith.

To persuade them, I have prooved the point, by alleging reasons for it, and
cleared it by answering objections against it: by which it may appear it is
necessary to be done.

And to encourage men thereunto, I have set down certain rules to direct them
how they may try their faith, and exhorted to the trial of it by those rules:
by which it may be discerned that it is possible to be done.

It remains, that as a Traveler, after a hard journey, I sit me down: (that
is) that I finish the whole Work, and having done, that I make an end.

And wherewithal shall I do this better (having already commended it to the
Christian Reader in the Preface) then with a suppliant prayer to the Father of
Lights, that he would be pleased in Jesus Christ to accept of these my poor
labors in his Vineyard, and to bless them to the good thereof: As also with
an humble thankesgiving to the same eternal Majesty, (God blessed for
evermore) for health and strength of body, whereby I have had opportunity, and
for some measure of understanding in the mystery of Christ, whereby I have had
ability to write this Treatise.

For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
3.14. to the end of the Chapter.
of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named; that he would grant
you, according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the inner Man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith: that
ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the
love of Christ, which passes knowledge: that ye might be filled with all the
fullness of God. Now unto him, that is able to do exceeding abundantly, above
all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us: unto
him be glory in the Church, by Jesus Christ, throughout all ages, world
without end. Amen.

FINIS.
The Table.
A.
WE are not justified by being assured of salvation. 148. Assurance of
salvation: see faith.
B.
Believing. See faith. What blessedness is promised in the Gospel. 110.
C.
Tender Consciences not to be wounded. 153.
D.
Many kinds of Despair, 68. to 71. Why fewer despair, then presume of
salvation in this life. 70
E.
Exhortations to Christian duties are precepts. 8
F.
The true definition of a saving faith propounded, 96. and expounded, 98. to
113. The causes of faith. The efficient cause. 100.203.113. The material
101.113. The formal. 102.113. The small. 110.113. The moving 100.101. The
imstrumentall. 206. to 213. The ground or foundation of it. 111. to 114. The
object of a saving faith. 109. The subject or place in the soul where it is,
60.126. Faith in Christ does save. 108. How it saues. 195. to 198. Why it
saues. 198. How we may be persuaded it will save. 176 Only faith in Christ is
the condition of the Gospel. 32.147.150. The act of faith by which we are
justified, is trusting in Christ. 102.130, 131.132.102. to 109. What is
trusting in Christ. 102.103. Trusting in Christ is faith. 117. It is commanded
117. It is accepted of God to salvation. 108. It is more then believing the
truth of Gods Word. 118. It goes before the assurance of salvatian. 145. to
148. Men are prepared to believe in Christ. 219. How they are prepared. 220.
Legal preparations. 220. to 224. Evangelicall 224. All men are not prepared in
like measure. 236. Begun repentance is a preparation to faith in Christ.
Proved by six Reasons. 233.264. Cleared by 6. objections answered. 264. to
288. How far repentance is begun before faith in Christ. 230. to 233.289.
to 292. The use of it. 288. A saving faith is lively to bring forth many holy
fruits. 296. What the fruits be. 297. to 310. How it becomes so effectual.
310.311. The uses of ^t. 311. A saving faith brings comforts to the soul. 319.
What the particular comforts be. 320. The means by which it becomes so
comfortable. 325. Why Christians should labor for the comforts of faith. 326.
How they should use the means to attain the comforts of faith. 328. It assures
us of the efficacy of the Gospel in us. 45. that Christ is in us. 47. Of our
salvation. 323.142, etc. It never fails. 12.16.22.23. It continues after this
life. 37. Every one has not a saving faith, 14.16. few have it. 15. Every
faith is not a saving faith, 11. to 14. only trust in Christ is. 102. to
109.130. to 132. No grace of God is so excellent for our use as a saving faith.
32. to 39. none so necessary as it. 39. to 42. No grace is acceptable without
it. 275. It is the duty of Christians to try their faith, prooved by 12.
Reasons. 6. to 52. cleared by answering 7. objections. 52. to 89. The
definition of a saving faith given by some Lutherans, confuted by five
Arguments, and their chief reasons answered. 138. to 172. Faith (as it
iustifies us) is not assurance of salvation. ibid. The uses of it. 172.
Assurance of salvation is an effect of faith, 142. to 145. it does not
presently follow faith in all Christians. 149. we must trust in Christ, before
we can be assured of our salvation. 145. to 148.150. The Definition of a saving
faith, according to the Church of Rome. 115. confuted by two reasons, 117. to
125 and their chief Arguments answered* 125. to 137. A saving faith is not
only an assent to the truth of the Word. ibid. 117. All the faith which the
Church of Rome requires to salvation, is, that Catholics assent to the truth
of the Word. 116. We must strengthen our faith. 334. We may. 344. Reasons why.
335. Means whereby. 340.
G.
Christians must try their graces. 30. The Gospel is the ground or warrant of
faith in Christ. 111.
I.
Justification. See faith.
K.
Knowing Christ, put for believing in Christ. 164.
L.
Love is a fruit of faith. 304. We must try it. 31.
M.
Miracles were done to confirm our faith in Christ, as well as our belief of
the Gospel. 134.135.
P.
Carnal professers must not be nouzled up in presumption of their salvation.
156.157. It is not enough to salvation, to come of religious Parents. 56
R.
Repentance is begun, before faith in Christ. 106. We must try it. 31.
S.
Al men shall not be saved. 16. All true believers shall certainly be saved in
the end and event. 168. whereon the certainty of salvation depends 169
T.
God tryes our faith. 17. Satan tryes it 20. Heretics try it. 26.
Texts of Scripture alleged, and in part expounded by occasion.
Math. 21.32. Fol. 238 Luke 18.8. Fol. 15 Ioh. 5.43. Fol. 44 20.31. Fol. 133
Act. 15.9. Fol. 267 Romans 4.30. Fol. 130 8.38. Fol. 162 14.23. Fol. 265 1. Cor.
11.28. Fol. 10 13.13. Fol. 35 2. Cor. 5. page 7. and in the whole Preface. Gal.
2.20. Fol. 277 Ephesians. 6.16. Fol. 40 Philip. 1.25. Fol. 166 2. Tim. 1.12. Fol.
162 2.25. Fol. 248 Heb. 10.22. Fol. 165 11.1, 3. Fol. 125 11.6. Fol. 273 1.
Pet. 3.15. Fol. 24 1. Ioh. 4.16. Fol. 163
Faults escaped. p. for page: l. for line: r. for read.
PAge 8. lin. 18. after command, put them. p. 43. l. 5. for whereas, read
namely because. p. 86. l. 18. for our r. their. p 106. l. 17. for seeking, r.
seeing. p. 113. l. 17. for thereof, r of a saving faith. p. 139. l. 28. after
former, put the former. p. 140. l. 2. put our as. p. 176. l. 16. for sinners,
r. sins. and l. 17. for sins, r. sinners. p. 180. l. 21. for they, r. you,
and l. 23. for their, r. your. p. 181. l. 14. put out and p. 219. l. ult. for
5. r. 6. p. 237. l. 22. for one, r. upon. p. 241. l. 3. for that, r. the. p.
251. l. 11. for where, r. whence p. 253. l. 20. for proffer, r. profess. p.
255. l. ult. for only read duly. p. 259. l. 13. after whereas, put in before.
p. 262. l. 25. put out were. p. 266. l. 6. for then, r. there. p. 276. l 2. for
to, r. of: and l. 3. for unacceptable, r. acceptable. p. 293. l. 21. put out
that. p. 308. l. 21. for in, r. to. p. 327. l. 4. for Daniel, r. David. p. 332.
l. 16. put out that.


