THE APPROBATION.
Libellum hunc, a viro Anglo, docto and pio, perlegendum curauimus; eiusque
iudicio probatum, imprimendum duximus.

25. Ianuarij. 1599. Matthias Archiepu^s Mechliniensis.

THE SVMME OF ALL, (namely) GODS service, and Man's salvation.

And A Brief of Man's duty to God concerning both: Which is, seeking To serve
God while he lives, And To be saved, when he dies.

By WILLIAM CHIBALD, Rector of S. Nic. Col. Abbey in Old Fishstreete.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostocke, at the Sign of the Kings head in ^aules
Churchyard. 1630.

TO MY DEARLY beloved Neighbors, the Inhabitants of the Parish of S. Nic.
Col. Abbey in Old Fishstreet, LONDON.
ALL divine truths and duties are therefore worthy to be known, and practiced
by men, because they have been worthy to be revealed, and ^^mmanded by God:
But of them all, the heavenly truths of Gods service, and Man's salvation; and
the holy duty of seeking after both, are most worthy of their knowledge and
practice.

For if those things be chiefly to be sought after, that are best woe thy of our
seeking: If those things be best worthy of our seeking, that do most nearly
concern us. And if Gods service and Man's salvation do most nearly concern
us; because the one most nearly concerns our duty to God, and the other our
happiness from God: then ought Christians chiefly to seek after Gods service,
and their own salvation.

The rather: Partly because all other Divinity does but serve to further
Christians in seeking after these two: and partly also, because all other
without these, will never make them wise with that wisdom, Psalm: 111.^0 2 Timothy: 3 15.
The beginning whereof is Gods fear, and the end their own salvation.

Upon these and the like grounds, (my dearly beloved people and Parishioners)
I have endeavored to instruct you in these two points, and what I have taught
you concerning them in my Sermons, I have now put into a little book, with
some additions; to the end, your eyes by reading, as well as your ears by
preaching, may witness how unfeinedly I desire you should serve God, Rom: 10.1.
and he saved.

The book is but little, (it is the fitter to be carried in your pockets, and
kept in your memories.) And it is framed in a Dialogue, or familiar conference
betwixt my self and one of you, hoping to draw you, better to like of the
matter therein contained, by my friendly manner of handling it.

Though the Dialogue and conference be betwixt but one of you and my self: yet
is it in the name and for the benefit of you all; upon whom it is bestowed for
a New-yeares gift by him, who has bestowed himself upon you these many
years, 2 Cor: 12.15.
and who will yet he spent upon you (to Gods pleasure) for the furthering of
you in the service of God unto your salvation.

What remains, but that as I have made my labors yours, by publishing them for
you, and dedicating them unto you; so you would endeavor to make them your
own, by perusing them, and laboring to benefit your selves and families, by
reading them together, by conference about them, and prayer to God for his
blessing upon them to your edification.

I have heretofore made and published other books (besides this) for your
learning: but how you have used and perused them to this end, is better known
to God, your selves and Households, than unto me. If you have endeavored to
build up your selves in grace by them, I shall be glad to see the fruits
thereof: But if you have only contented your selves with this, that they were
made for you, given unto you, and that you have them lying on your shelves or
in your chests, I will rejoice to hear of your amendment in using this book
better; Ios. 14.15.
if now you and your household will seek to serve the Lord, and to be saved.

You shall do this the better, if you will observe these Directions.

1. I would have you to read it often, because the subject matter of it, is of
such necessary, ordinary, and excellent use.

2. I would have you (as you read it) to examine and consider, how you have
known the truths, and practiced the duties taught therein, concerning Gods
service, and man's salvation, that so you may see cause, either to repent of
your ignorance, and negligence herein for time past; or to grow in your
knowledge and diligence concerning those points in time to come.

3. I would have you to call to mind, and use, the several duties that are
peculiar to Gods Attributes of greatness, or goodness, or to Gods works of
mercy or justice, as by Gods providence they shall come into your thoughts, or
fall out in the world: and specially that (before you go to any holy Ordinance
of God, appointed for his public service) you would look into this book for
the particular duties which belong unto them severally; to the end you may
address your selves to perform those Ordinances, with those duties
accordingly. The like direction I give for the reading over my book of the
Lords Supper, before you go to the Communion. And this is the greatest
recompense that I will require of you for my love, and it is the least
requital you can make me for my labor. 2 Chronicles. 30.18.


The good Lord direct and encourage every one of you, to set your hearts to
seek God, the Lord God of your fathers, (that is) to seek to serve God, while
you live on earth; that when you dye, you may be saved in heaven by Jesus
Christ: in whom I am

Yours all, and all yours WILLIAM CHIBALD

SEEKING to serve God, while we live
Parishioner. With your leave Sir; if I should not be too troublesome to you,
I would feign speak a word with you in private.


Minister. You are welcome, I pray you come in, and sit down, good neighbor.


P. Sir, I humbly thank you for your kindness, and pray you to pardon my
boldness.


M. You are not so bold as welcome: I pray you be covered, and tell me what
is your will with me.


P. Sir, I have lived in your parish, under your public Ministry a good
while, and yet I remain very ignorant; therefore am I come unto you, for some
private instruction.


M. And I am as willing to instruct you, as you are to learn; if you come not
(as many do) to ask curious questions, which tend not to godly edification;
but contention, and vain glory.


P. Surely Sir, (if I may be believed) my coming is to no such end; but to
learn such things, as are most chiefly and necessarily to be learned.


M. Your intent is good, and I am as willing to instruct you, as you are to be
instructed; but tell me your mind yet more plainly, and fully,


P. I will Sir, and it is this by your favor; The whole Bible is large, it
contains many books, chapters, and verses, and in each of them are
comprehended many divine truths: All these are worthy of my learning, if I had
either time or wit to attain the understanding of them: but of these many,
some (me thinks) should be more needful to be learned than others, are they
not I pray you?


M. Yes, that they be: for though you must not neglect the knowledge of any
truth revealed by God in the holy Scriptures; yet must you chiefly secke to
know some things above others.


P. And I pray you (Sir) may not these chief points be drawn to some general
heads for the help of my memory, which is but weak?


M. Yea. There be two general heads of them: whereof the first is, to seek to
serve God while you live; and the second is, to seek to be saved when you die.


P. God forbid but we should all seek after both these things. But I pray you
(good Sir) first declare the first point unto me at this time, and then handle
the second at some other opportunity: for I would be loath to hold you too long
at once.


M. I will. For the handling then of the 1. point, which is this; You must
seek to serve God while you live: you must observe that there be 3. branches
of it, and that are contained in it. 1. That you must serve God. 2. That you
must seek to serve God. 3. That you must seek to serve God while you live. Of
the first I shall have just occasion to speak, when I come to treat, how you
may be affected with the service of God; for there I shall speak of the
necessity of Gods service, and that it is commanded us by God, and therefore
we must serve God.


P. I pray you then, good Sir, follow your owwe mind and order: let that point
alone till then, and now go on to show me the second branch, which is, that I
must seek to serve God.


M. I will: and in the handling of this I would have you to observe these 5.
particulars. 1. That we must seek to serve God. 2. Why we must seek to serve
God. 3. How, and in what manner. 4. In what measure. 5. What are the marks of
them, that seek to serve God.


P. I pray you prove unto me, that I must seek to serve God, for I would feign
bind my loose heart to obedience.


M. It is proved by many places of Scripture, specially these, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
wherein David in the name of the Lord, exhorts and commands Solomon, and all
Israel, to seek to serve God: So did Asa the people of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 14.4.


P. Now I pray you show me why I must seek to serve God.


M. The reasons why are these. 1. You must encourage others to seek to serve
God, Ezra. 4.2. therefore you must much more do it your self. 2. You have
many examples hereof in the Scriptures, which are patterns for you to follow,
as the Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 14.7. and 15.15. Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 22.9. David,
Psalm. 119.45. and many other. 3. The benefits of seeking to serve God should
move you herunto, which are that God will reward the^, Heb. 11.6. that Gods
hand shall be upon them for good, Ezra. 8.20. that they shall find God,
(namely) to be gracious to them; 1 Chronicles, 28.9. and that they shall not be
confounded, (that is) of their sins or afflictions, Psalm. 96.6. 4. You ought
to be moved herunto, by the danger of not seeking God to serve him; which
danger appears: 1. in that it is a sign and mark of a man in his natural
estate, and without grace, Romans 3.11. and 2. because such as seek him not, are
liable to punishments temporal, that they shall not prosper, Ier. 10.21. but
be destroyed, Zeph. 1.3.4.6: and also eternal, because Gods power and wrath is
against them. Ezra. 8.20.


P. Show me (I pray you) now, how I must seek to serve God.


M. The manner how you must seek to serve God is this. 1. You must prepare
your heart to it, 2 Chronicles. 30.18. 2. You must do it joyfully, 2 Chronicles. 15.15.
3. You must seek to serve God sincerely, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Ios. 24.14.


P. Tell me also (I pray you) in what measure I must seek to serve God.


M. The measure is, 1. Betimes, not putting it off to old age, 2 Chro. 34.3.
Zech. 8.21. 2. D^ligently, Hebr. 11.6. 3. Earnestly, with all our souls, Deuteronomy.
4.29. Ier. 29.13. 4. Continually, Psalm. 16.11.


P. What are the marks of them that seek to serve God?


M. They are these. 1. They have pure hearts and hands, (that is) affections
and actions, Psalm. 24.4.6. 2. They desire to know Gods ways, Isay. 58.2. and
they shall know (and understand all things, Prove. 28.5.) 3. They call upon God,
and are frequent in prayer, Zech. 8.21. Ier. 29.12, 13. Isay. 55.5. 4. They
forsake their wicked ways Hos. 7.10. Isay. 55.5, 6.5. They fear to offend
God, Hos. 3.5. 6. They delight in God, Mal. 3.1. 7. They wait upon God by
faith, and stay his leisure for the accomplishing of his promises, Lament.
3.25. Psalm. 69.6.


P. But why must we seek to serve God whilst we live here?


M. Because, this present life is the time of doing service to God, Luke 1.74,
75. Tit. 2.12. and the life to come is the time of receiving our reward from
God (in his free favor) for our faithful service done unto him here: Matthew.
25.23, 34.


P. Sir, I thank you; for these are good reasons indeed; for they show both
that we must seek to serve God, and why we must, and other excellent points;
but I would also feign know, By what means I may seek to serve God here in
this world?


M. That is to be learned also; and the means are threefold: 1. by seeking to
know what Gods service is: 2. by seeking to desire and affect Gods service: 3.
by seeking to perform and practice it.

I pray you (Sir) what is the service of God, and wherein does it consist?


M. Serving God, is obeying his will, and doing what he bids us, Deuteronomy. 13.4.
Romans 6.16. for to serve an ordinary Master is, to obey his will, and to do as
he would have us: Matthew. 8.9. Ephesians. 6.5.


P. Wherein is Gods will obeyed for his service? and what things must they do
to that end?


M. That Christians may serve God, and obey his will, they must do diverse
duties; and these duties have respect, either, 1. to God, or, 2. to our
neighbor, or, 3. to our selves.


P. What duties concern God?


M. They are of 2. kinds, for they have respect unto God, either 1.
immediately, as he is in himself, and in respect of some things in him; or 2.
mediately by the means, and in respect of some things, that proceed, and come
from him.


P. What duties concern God immediately as he is in himself? Duties to God in
respect of himself immediately.



M. They are either 1. general, or 2. special.


P. What are the general duties?


M. 1. Knowledge and belief, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Psalm, 100.2, 3. 1. that there is a
God, Hebr. 11.6. 2. that there is but one God, Ephesians. 4.6. 3. that in the Godhead
there be three glorious persons, namely, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, 1 Ioh. 5.7. 4. that the God of Israel is this God, Deuteronomy. 5.6.

2. The having of a God, and the taking, choosing, and acknowledging of the God
of Israel only for our God: Exodus 20.3. Josh. 24.22.


P. And what are the special duties which concern GOD immediately?


M. They be such as concern his Nature, being, and essence.


P. What is God in his Nature?


M. God is a Spirit, infinite in all perfections: Ioh. 4.24. 2 Cor. 3.17. Psalm.
147.5. 1 Timothy 1.17.


P. What are the perfections in God?


M. Certain divine Attributes, whereby (as it were) a part of his divine
nature, or some holy quality of God, is shadowed out unto us; and they are of
two kinds, for they betoken either 1. his greatness, or 2. his goodness.


P. What are the Attributes of God, Gods Attributes of Greatness.
which set forth his Greatness?


M. They are faculties, whereby he is able to work, and do, what he knows
is to be done, and what he wills shall be done; and they are these six: 1.
Simpleness, or absoluteness, 2. Infiniteness; 3. Eternity; 4. Immensity; 5.
Wisdom; 6. Almightinesse, or All Sufficiency.


P. What is the Absoluteness, or Simpleness of God?


M. Simpleness is a faculty in God, which removes from him all composition of
parts, (as soul and body, etc) and whereby he is God of himself, and every
thing in God, is God himself: Exodus 3.14. 1 Ioh. 4.16.


P. What is the Infiniteness of God?


M. Infiniteness is a faculty in God, which denies unto him all limitation,
and whereby the perfections that are in God are in him without all measure:
Io^^ 11.7. Psalm. 147.5.


P. What is the Eternity of God?


M. Eternity is a faculty in God, whereby he is incapable, of beginning,
succession, or ending: Psalm. 90.2.4. 1 Timothy 1.17.


P. What is the Immensity of God?


M. Immensity is a faculty in God, whereby he is every where, and cannot be
comprehended in any one place 1 Kings. 8.27. Psalm. 139.7.


P. What is the Wisdom of God?


M. Wisdom is a faculty in God, whereby he perfectly knows himself, and in
himself all things, that have any kind of being: Job 9.3, 4. Acts. 15.18.


P. What is the All-mightinesse, or All Sufficiency of God?


M. Almightinesse is a faculty in God, whereby he is All-sufficient to do
whatsoever he can will: Psalm. 113.3. and 135.6. Genesis 17.1.


P. O Sir, I humbly confess to Gods glory, and mine own shame, that I was
ignorant of most of these points, and I bless God for the knowledge of them
thus far by your means; but proceed (I pray you) to teach me also what are
the Attributes of God, which betoken his Goodness.


M. I will, Gods Attributes of Goodness
Neighbor; and they are virtues, whereby he is willing and ready, to do and
work well: and they are these four. 1. Holiness, 2. Mercy, 3. Justice, 4.
Love.


P. What is the Holiness of God?


M. Holiness is a virtue in God, whereby he is pure from all evil and sin
in himself, and utterly dislikes it in all others: Psa. 99.5. Habac. 1.13.


P. What is the Mercy of God?


M. Mercy is a virtue in God, whereby he pittieth his children in all their
miseries, and is ready to deliver them out of the same: Psalm. 103.8. Ephesians. 2.4,
5.


P. What is the Justice of God?


M. Justice, or righteousness is a virtue in God, whereby he renders to all,
according to his promise, for the good of the godly, and according to his
threatening, for the punishment of the wicked: Dan. 9.13. 1 John. 1.9.


P. What is the Love of God?


M. Love is a virtue in God, whereby he is infinitely delighted in himself,
and is so far affected to his creatures, as he is pleased to impart any
goodness unto them: Revel. 3.9.19.


P. Good Sir, I thank you, for making me know God better than I did, by
teaching me his Attributes; but now also I pray you teach me to serve God in
respect of them; and therefore tell me what duties I am to perform to God in
respect of these divine faculties and powers, holy virtues and qualities in
God?


M. The duties of service which you owe to God in respect of these Attributes
of his Nature, are of two kinds: 1. General, which concern them all. 2.
Special, which belong to the several kinds of them.


P. I pray you what duties of service must I perform to God, in respect of his
Attributes, both of Greatness and Goodness?


M. They are two: 1. Admiring and adoring all these perfections and
excellencies that are so infinitely in God: Psalm. 139.5. 2. Praising and
extolling, commending and magnifying God, in and for them: Psalm. 150.2. Revel.
5.11.


P. What special duties of service to God belong unto him, in respect of his
Attributes of Greatness severally?


M. They are two: 1. an awefull reverence of the Majesty, and glorious presence
of God, wheresoever we be: Psalm. 89.7. 2. Fear and trembling to offend this
great God by sin, in any time or place: Psalm. 4.4. Genes. 39.9. 1 Cor. 10.22.


P. And I pray you what special duties of service to God must I do unto him,
in respect of his Attributes of Goodness?


M. They are two principally. 1. Faith, whereby we believe whatsoever he
speaks, or writes, and also we put trust and confidence in him for all good
things which he has promised in his word, Ioh. 20.31. 2. Love, whereby our
hearts are so knit unto, and our affections so set upon God, that we desire
nothing more than him, nor delight in nothing equal unto him: Psalm. 116.1, 2.
and 97.10.12.


P. Sir, I heartily thank you for these savoury lessons; the Lord bend my heart
to practice these duties of service which concern God immediately in respect
of some things in himself: Duties to God immediately in respect of some things
that come from him: as his Ordinances.
you told me also of some other duties, that I am to do, in respect of some
things that proceed and come from him; what are these things I pray you, and
what mean you by them?


M. They are either 1. his Ordinances; or 2. his Works.


P. What mean you by an Ordinance of God?


M. I mean, not a civil ordinance, as food and physic appointed by God for
civil and bodily uses and ends; but an holy ordinance or means, appointed by
God, for spiritual and religious uses and ends, (namely) to beget and begin,
to increase and confirm grace and holiness in us.


P. Then I pray you, what be these holy and religious Ordinances of God?


M. They be either 1. holy things, or 2. holy actions.


P. What are the holy things which God has ordained for holy uses?


M. The holy Scriptures, The holy Scriptures.
or the holy writings of the Prophets and Apostles.


P. What duties of service to God must I perform to him in respect of the holy
Scriptures?


M. These four. 1. Believing that the 39 Books of the Old Testament, and the
28 of the New, were endited by Gods Spirit: 2 Timothy 3.15. 2 Pet. 1.21. and that
they contain all truths necessary to Gods service, and our salvation: 2 Timothy
3.15.17. 2. Reading, searching and perusing them, 1 Timothy 4.13. Ioh. 5.29. 3.
Praise and thanks to God for giving and keeping them unto, and in his Church:
Psalm. 147.19, 20. 4. Desire and endeavor to understand, and make a right use
of them for our direction, conversion, consolation, and satisfaction: Acts.
8.34. Psalm. 119.


P. What are the holy actions ordained by God for holy uses, in the doing of
which I must serve God?


M. Holy exercises.
They are certain religious exercises, ordained, and specially appointed by
God, for holy uses, (namely) the honor of God, and edification of his Church,
and for Gods public service; and they are these four specially: 1. Hearing
the word, 2. receiving the Sacraments; 3. praying to God: 4. praising God. We
serve God in performing any or all these holy exercises, for God has commanded
that they be done: But (besides the doing of them) we are also to perform them
in a manner prescribed by God, and this manner of performing is service to God
also; and the duties that are to be done for this end, are such as are either
1. common to all the four exercises; or 2. peculiar to each of them.


P. What are the duties, common to them all?


M. They are threefold; for they concern the time, either 1. before we come
unto them; or 2. when we are in doing them; or 3. after we have done them.


P. What duty is to be done, before we come to these religious exercises?


M. We must prepare our selves to them and not come hand over head: Eccles.
5.1. and this we shall do, by considering, 1. that we which perform them are
but dust and ashes, yea miserable sinners, and unworthy to perform them: 2.
that herein we have to do with the great God of heaven and earth, Heb. 4.13:
that we are in his special presence taking notice of us, and our behavior,
Acts. 10.31: and that he will not hold us guiltless, if we take his name in
vain, Exodus 20.7.


P. What duty is to be done in the instant time we perform these religious
exercises?


M. Generally we must perform them as God has commanded both for substance
and circumstance, Exodus 25.9. Hebr. 8.5. Specially we must perform them with
worship, and reverence to God, 2 Chronicles. 29.29.


P. What duties are to be done after we have been at these religious
exercises?


M. When we have done and performed them, we must endeavor to be bettered by
them, and remember to keep our Covenant with God of serving him, (which we
profess to renew by our daily resorting unto them) and not return to our
former sins again, 1 Samuel 7.3. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. Ezra 9.14.


P. Oh Sir, you told me even now, that when I serve God in doing religious
exercises to him, that I must also worship God at the same time; I would feign
better understand what it is to worship God?


M. What it is to worship God.
To worship God is to perform a religious exercise to God immediately, with an
humble affection of our soul, and reverent gesture of the body, Ioh. 4.24.
Psalm. 95.6. Or, to humble the soul, and to bend the body immediately to God
for his honor, though we be not in doing any such special religious
exercise, Genesis 24.52. Exodus 4.31.


P. But I have heard that to serve God, and to worship God are all one, are
they not?


M. How it differs from the service of God.
In common speech amongst many, the service of God is taken for Gods worship;
but in propriety of speech, and in the nature of the thing they are not: for
Gods service is a more general duty, and it is as much as obedience to God,
and it reaches unto all things that are to be done, whether they be natural
and civil, or holy and religious, for in all these things we must serve God.
But the worship of God is but a particular duty, and it is used only in holy
and religious actions and exercises; and it is but obedience to one particular
commandment. 2. All worship commanded by God is service to him, in as much as
it is an obedience to God which has commanded it: But all service to God is
not worship to God, as will easily appear by this. Faithfulness in our civil
calling is service to God, because it is obedience to God, who has commanded
it, Mat. 25.21. but it is not worship to God: because worship to God is
performed in religious actions only, and unto God only, and that immediately
only; but faithfulness in our calling is performed in civil actions, and
mediately to men, our selves, or others.


P. I pray you good Sir, make this a little more plain unto me.


M. I will: you may better understand it, by a familiar comparison, taken from
the service of men. To serve a Master is to do as he bids him, Matthew. 8.9.
Ephesians. 6.5. But to worship or reverence him, is to do obeisance to him, and to
give him an humble and submissiue respect, in looks, words and gestures, of
putting off the hat, making a leg, or the like: 1 Chronicles. 29.20. Dan. 2.46. Mat.
18.26. Luke 14.10.


P. Sir, I thank you; I now perceive clearly the difference betwixt Gods
service, and worship: But now I pray you proceed to the duties of serving God,
which are peculiar to each of these four religious exercises even now named,
and because the hearing of the word was the first, therefore tell me what is
that exercise?


M. Duties in respect of hearing the word read and preached.
The hearing of the word is a part of Gods public service wherein we
diligently hearken and attend unto it, whenever it is read, or preached and
published, (that is) expounded and applied unto us: Act. 16.14.


P. What duties of service to God are we to perform at the hearing of the
word?


M. They are of two kinds, for they belong to the hearing of it, either first
both read and preached, or preached only.


P. What duties belong to the hearing of the word, both read and preached too?


M. These six. 1. Earnest heeding, marking and minding of it, Deuteronomy. 32.46. 2.
Believing or assenting to the truth of it, Ioh. 5.47. 3. Loving and delighting
in it, Psalm. 119.127.159. 4. Laying it up in our hearts, Deuteronomy. 11.18. 5.
Keeping it in our hearts Luke 8.15. Luke 2.51. 6. Calling of it again to mind
and memory, and meditating upon it, Iam. 1.25. Josh. 1.8.


P. And what duties belong to the hearing of the word preached only?


M. They are of two kinds, for they be either 1. common to all, and every part
of the word preached; or 2. peculiar to some parts only.


P. What duties are common to the hearing of any and every part of the word
preached?


M. These two: 1. receiving it not as the word of man, but of God, 1 Thessalonians.
2.13. 2. Examining our selves how we profit by it, (that is) whether we be
converted and saved by it, and whether we be guilty of the sins which it
reproves, or do the duties which it commands, or be refreshed with the
comforts it affords, or be terrified from sin, with the threatenings of it?


P. What are the several parts of the word that we must perform duties unto,
when they are preached?


M. They are four chiesly: 1. the commandments of the word: 2. the promises:
3. the threatenings: 4. the good examples of the godly doings and sufferings of
godly persons recorded in it.


P. What are the Commandments of the word?


M. The commandments of the word, The commandments of God.
are those parts thereof which bind and enjoin the doing of good actions, and
which forbid the committing of evil actions, in thought word and deed.


P. And what duties of service to God, do properly concern the commandments
of the word preached?


M. These three. 1. Obedience in doing the good actions commanded, and in
leaving undone, and forbearing to do the evil actions forbidden, Romans 2.13.
Ioh. 13.17. Matthew. 7.24: and that for conscience sake, Genes. 39.9. Iam. 2.11:
and constantly, Romans 2.7. Gal. 3.10. 2. Using al good means whereby we may be
furthered in our obedience, Psalm. 119.10.11. 3. Refraining all means occasions
and opportunities, whereby we may be hindered in our obedience, Psalm. 119.101.


P. What are the promises of the word? The promises of the word.



M. Gods promises are those parts of the word, wherein God covenants with his
people, to bestow upon them, (upon their faith and repentance) the things of
this life, (that may be good for them) and of the life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.
Psalm. 34.10.


P. And what duties do properly belong to the promises of the word preached?


M. These four. 1. Faith whereby we believe the truth of them, and trust in
Gods power, goodness and faithfulness, for the performance of them, 2 Timothy
1.12. 2. Hope in God assuredly to look for the performance of them, Psalm.
119.81. and 42.5. 3. Joy or rejoicing in the good things promised and hoped
for, Psalm. 119.162. 4. Patience to wait Gods leisure, till we be made
partakers of them, without limiting God, the time or means, Heb. 10.36. and
6.12. Romans 8.25. Psalm. 130.6. and 123.2. Isay 28.16.


P. What are the threatenings of the word?


M. Gods threatenings are parts of his word, The threatenings of the word.
wherein God denounces to bring upon sinners, for their infidelity and
impenitency, temporal, spiritual, and eternal judgments.


P. And what duties of service to God, do properly concern these threatenings?


M. These two. 1. Trembling and astonishment, at the very hearing of them, Ier.
36.16.24. 2. Fear to sin against God, lest the evils threatened in them, do
come upon us, Revel. 18.4.


P. What are the examples of the word?


M. Certain presidents, The examples of the word.
and particular patterns of the faith, obedience and patience of Gods servants
and children, recorded in the Bible.


P. And what duties properly concern these holy examples?


M. These two. 1. An honorable memorial of them, and of their good name,
seeing God was glorified by them, Matthew. 28.13. and 5.16. 2. A sincere purpose
and endeavor, to imitate and follow their patterns, in the practice of the
like duties, Luke 10.37. Heb. 6.12.


P. Sir, I thank you for your labors touching my service to God, in respect
of the first religious exercise, and part of Gods public service: I pray you
go on now with the second, which is the receiving of the Sacraments: and first
tell me what the receiving of the Sacraments is?


M. Receiving the Sacraments, Duties in respect of receiving the Sacraments.
is a part of Gods worship, wherein by taking certain creatures, and using
certain actions about them, (appointed by God) and by setting them apart, by
the word and prayer (from common and civil use to a sacred use) there is
thereby signified and remembered, Christ his death; and also the benefits and
merits thereof, are sealed and assured to all true believers, 1 Cor. 11.28.
Romans 4.11. and 6.2, 3.


P. How many be there of these Sacraments, that are to be received?


M. Two: 1. Baptism, 2. the Lords Supper.


P. What duties of obedience and service to God, belong to the receiving of
these Sacraments?


M. They be of two sorts. 1. Some which be common to the receiving of both the
Sacraments. Some that be proper to each of them.


P. What be the duties that be common to the receiving of both the Sacraments?


M. These two.

1. In respect of our bodies, we must look upon the creatures and actions
about them, appointed by God to be used in the administering of them for the
remembering of Christ, and for the setting forth of his death; and we must
permit the Minister, to administer unto us those creatures and actions to this
end; and also receive them from him, when they are administered to us by him,
Act. 8.38. Mark. 16.16, Ezra 6.21.

2. In respect of our souls; 1. we must meditate on the nature and parts, use
and end, benefit and comfort of the Sacraments. 2. We must remember with
thankfulness the death and bloodshedding of Christ showed and set forth
therein. 3. We must by faith apply to our selves the merits of Christ's bloody
death, to the washing away of our sins, and to the nourishing of our souls in
the life of grace, to the life of glory, 1 Cor. 10.16.


P. What duties to God are proper, to the receiving of the Sacrament of
Baptism?


M. These two. 1. Duties in respect of praying to God.
Desire and endeavor, by prayer and examination, to find in our selves the
efficacy and benefit thereof to the cleansing of us from the power and
punishment of our sins, Romans 6.3, 4.2. Conscience to do what we have
professed, and to perform what we have promised, (when we were baptized)
namely, to renounce the service of sin, and to continue Gods faithful
servants. For hereby we shall manifest to our selves and others, that our
souls are inwardly and spiritually baptized with Christ's blood and Spirit, as
well as our bodies are outwardly by the water and Minister, Ioh. 3.5. 1 Pet.
3.20, 21.


P. And what duties are proper to the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper?


M. The duties proper to that Sacrament have been (as you know) plainly and
largely delivered, by me in a Book, called Spiritual exercise, to procure a
good appetite unto, and a good digestion of the Lords Supper; to which I
refer you for more particular instruction.


P. Sir, I bless God for these your directions, touching the receiving of the
Sacraments, which is the second religious exercise of Gods public service: I
pray you proceed to the third, which is Prayer, and therein first tell me
what it is?


M. Praying to God is a part of his public service, wherein we call upon him,
and beg of him, either the bestowing of good things upon us, or the removing of
hurtful things from us, Psalm. 50.15.


P. What duties of service concern prayer to God?


M. They are of three kinds; for they belong either 1. to the matter of our
prayers, or 2. to the manner; or 3. to the end of them.


P. What duties concern the matter of our prayers, or the things we pray for?


M. Two. 1. We must pray for such things as be in themselves lawful, and be
warrantable by Gods word, Iam. 4.3. 2. We must pray according to Gods will,
(that is) for such things, as may stand with Gods secret will in giving of
them, 1 Ioh. 5.14. Matthew. 26.39.


P. What duties concern the manner of our praying?


M. These four: we must pray, 1. with humility in conscience of our unability
and unworthiness to ask or receive, Luke 18.13. 2. with fervency in a
sensible feeling of our want of the things we beg, and in an earnest desire to
enjoy them: 3. with faith trusting in God, through Christ, for receiving what
we pray for, Iam. 1.6.4. with patience waiting Gods leisure and pleasure, till
we be made partakers of that we desire and beg, Ps. 40.1


P. And what duties concern the end of our praing to God, or the cause why we
pray?


M. These three. 1. In respect of God, we must aim at this, that he may be
glorified by his giving, and our receiving, and using of the good things which
we pray for, even as he is glorified by our seeking to him for them; for
thereby we acknowledge him to be the giver of all, which is an honor to him,
Iam. 1.17. 1 Cor. 10.31.

2. In respect of our selves, we are to pray for Gods blessings, not that we
might spend them upon our sins; but that in the use of them we might be
furthered in Gods service, Iam. 4.3. Romans 2.4.

3. In respect of our brethren, we must aim in our prayers that we may be
helpefull to them, and enabled by receiving good things from God, (through
prayer) not to heap up all for our selves and ours; but to distribute it
amongst Gods poor servants and children, that are in want, according to their
need and our ability,


P. These are indeed holy and heavenly directions, concerning my duty in
praying to God, which is the third religious exercise and part of Gods public
service: But I pray you, let me be beholden to you, for further instruction
in the fourth and last, which is praising of God; and to tell me first, what
praising of God is?


M. Praising God, Duties in respect of praising God.
is a part of Gods public service, wherein we magnify, commend and extol
God, for those excellent perfections of greatness and goodness that are in
him, Psalm. 150.2: and also give him thanks for his benefits bestowed upon us,
Revel. 7.12.


P. What duties of obedience to God concern our praising him?


M. They are of two kinds; for they belong either 1. to the parts of our
praising God; or 2. to the means whereby it is performed, (namely) singing of
Psalms.


P. What duties concern the parts of praising God?


M. They are these four. 1. An high esteem and opinion (beyond that which we
are able to express) of the holy and happy perfections that are in God, Psalm.
8.1.9. 2. A free acknowledgement of the receipt from his bountiful hands, of
all the good things we enjoy, 2 Chronicles. 29.16. 3. An humble confession of our
unworthiness to receive any good things from God, or to return any praise or
thanks unto him, for the things we have received, Genesis 32.10. 4. A full
resolution to use and employ all Gods blessings which he gives us, to his
glory, Prove. 3.9. to the good of others, 1 Timothy 6.17. and our own furtherance
in godliness, Romans 2.4, 5.


P. And what duties of servi^ce to God, do concern our singing of Psalms?


M. Three especially. 1. For the matter which we must sing, it must be holy and
spiritual; not foolish and profane songs and ballads, made by wicked men; but
hymns and psalms of Gods making, or according to them, Col. 3.16. 2. For our
manner of singing, it must be with the spirit, and with an holy and sanctified
heart and affection, with grace in our hearts, Col. 3.16. 3. For our end in
singing, it must be, not to take pride in our own sweet voice and breast, nor
to please other men's ears, who are more delighted in the sound and music,
than in the matter: but to make melody in our hearts to God, and to comfort
our selves in him, Col. 3.16.


P. I cannot but acknowledge, (good Sir) that you have been very large and
profitable in your Instructions concerning my duties of service to God,
concerning the first sort of things that proceed from God, namely his
ordinances, there remains the second sort of things that proceed from God, and
that is his works, in respect whereof also I must serve God: I pray you
therefore direct me herein also, and first tell me what these works of God be?


M. Gods works are either 1. general, which have respect to all the world, as
the creating, preserving, and governing of all things therein, Romans 11.36: Or
2. they are special works of his, which concern our selves, and which
proceed either from his mercy, as blessings; or from his justice, as crosses
and afflictions.


P. What duties of service to God belong to him in respect of these his works?


M. They are of 3. Duties in respect of Gods works.
kinds; for they concern either 1. Gods general works on the whole world;
or 2. Gods special works of mercy on our selves and others: or 3. Gods
special works of justice on our selves and others.


P. What duties concern Gods general works of creating, preserving and
governing the whole world?


M. These three. 1. We must look upon them with our eyes, Psalm. 19.1. Job
36.24. 2. We must talk of them with our tongues, Psalm. 26.7. 3. With our
minds we must take notice, and observe in these his works, his infinite
wisdom, power and goodness, Romans 1.20: and magnify God for them
accordingly, Psalm. 148.5. etc.


P. What duties concern Gods special works of mercy, or his blessings, on
our selves or others?


M. 1. Thankfulness, Ephesians. 5.20. 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. whereof you have heard in the
ordinance of praising God. 2. Rejoicing in God, and in the use and enjoying of
his blessings, Romans 12.15. Deuteronomy. 12.7.


P. And what duties concern Gods special works of justice, or afflictions on
our selves and others?


M. These following.

First, in respect of all afflictions on our selves, we must 1 meekly subject
our selves with patience to bear them, in consideration, 1. that they are Gods
hand on us, 1 Samuel 3.18. which we cannot resist Psalm. 39.9. 2. That they are
justly deserved by our sins, Micah 7.9. 3. That we are not alone therein; but
have many fellows in temptations common to men, 1 Cor. 10.13. 1 Samuel 7.14. 4.
That after them there is a rest prepared for them that endure them, Hebr. 4.11.
Revel. 14.13. 5. That God will either give us assistance in the trial, or
deliverance out of it, 1 Cor. 10.13. 2. We must wisely endeavor to profit by
them to amendment of life, and new obedience, Ioh. 5.14. Hebr. 12.11.

Secondly, in respect of all afflictions on our brethren, we must 1. have a
fellow-feeling of the same upon them, as if they were on our selves, Romans
12.15. Heb. 13.5. 1 Pet. 3.8. 2. We must pray for them, for their ease, remedy
and deliverance, if it be Gods will; or a sanctified use of them, Iam. 5.14.
Psalm. 35.13. 3. We must help to releeve them in the same (as we are able) and
to deliver them out of the same, Matthew. 14.14. Job 31.20.

Thirdly, in respect of some temptations and afflictions that have been
sanctified to us, or our brethren, so that we have received from them,
(through Gods good grace) some holy fruit of righteousness, we must 1.
acknowledge Gods goodness in them, Psalm. 73.1. and 119.69.71. 2. We must bless
God for them, Job 1.21. 3. We must rejoice and comfort our selves in them, Iam.
1.2, 3. because 1. they are not Gods vengeance, but chastisement, Hebr. 12.5.
2. They come from God not as an enemy, but as a father reconciled in Christ, 2 Samuel 7.14. Hebr: 12.5. 3. God is moved to send them in love, Rev. 3.9. and that
they shall not separate us from the love of God in Christ, Romans 8.38, 39. 4.
God aimed in these afflictions at some spiritual good, Hebr. 12.10. Phil.
3.10. 5. The event of them shall be their and our furtherance in grace, Psalm.
119.71. and 37.37, unto salvation, Phil. 1.19.28.


P. Sir, you have been very large and long, (to your great pains) in teaching
me how to serve God, with duties that have respect to himself in
consideration of his divine Attributes that be in him, and also of his
Ordinances and works proceeding from him: I pray you proceed to my duties
unto my Neighbor.


M. They are of 2. kinds; 1. such as are common to all and every one: 2. such
as are peculiar to some.


P. What are those duties that are common to all?


M. They are 1. general, namely 1. to love our neighbor as our selves, Matthew.
22.39: 2. to do unto him as we (being guided by true reason) would have him to
do to us, Math. 7.12. 2. special, which are five.


P. Which are they?


M. The first is to maintain his place and authority, office and pre-eminence,
in commonwealth, Church or family, Exodus 20.12. which is the 5. Commandment.

The second is to preserve his life, health, and bodily strength, Exodus 20.13.
which is the 6. Commandment.

The third is to cherish the chastity of our neighbor, and neither by looks
or gestures, words or actions, to assault or violate the same, Exodus 20.14.
which is the 7. Commandment.

The fourth is, to further the profit and lawful gain of our neighbor, and
in nothing of the least worth to seek his loss and damage, Exodus 20.15.
which is the 8. Commandment.

The fifth is, to uphold his credit and good name, and not to disgrace him, by
word or action in the least manner or measure, Exodus 20.16. which is the 9.
Commandment.


P. What are those duties that are peculiar to some of our Neighbors?


M. 1. Such as are due to godly and sincere Christians, as namely, 1. brotherly
love and religious affection, Hebr. 13.1: when we therefore love them, not
because they are men, or our kindred, or beneficial to us; but because of
their graces, and Christian virtues eminent in them. 2. Patience to bear with
their weaknesses, and cover their infirmities, Gal. 6.2. 1 Pet. 4.8. 2. Such as
are due to some, namely, as they are tied to us by any bond of nature, or law,
as husbands and wives, parents or children, Masters or Servants, or the like:
of which duties you may read at large in a book made by D. Gouge, D Gouge of
Household duties.
who has written fully, and to excellent purpose thereof.


P. Sir, my desire is to know and do the whole revealed will of God, and
therefore as you have instructed me in my duty, 1. in respect of God, and 2.
in respect of my Neighbor: so I beseech you also to tell me in the third
place, what is my duty of service unto God, in respect of my self?


M. I will: and because you consist both of a body, and of a soul, Duties in
respect of our selves.
and have a double calling to live in, namely a civil calling, and a Christian
calling; therefore will I briefly show you the sum of your duty in respect
of all four.


P. Sir I thank you, I pray you then show me my duty in respect of my body.


M. It is this, to possess your vessel in holiness and honor, (that is) in
chastity, temperance and sobriety, without pride or luxury, chambering or
wantonness, continually restraining the senses, parts and members thereof,
from being weapons and instruments to let in, or let out sin; and withholding
them from the occasions and opportunities of doing evil, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4, 5. Tit.
2.12 Romans 13.13.


P. What is my duty in respect of my soul?


M. To be watchful over it, and over all the powers and faculties thereof,
that you grow not loose or secure in sin; yea to be circumspect in all your
ways, that you be not deceived by your own deceitful heart, the worlds
vanities, and Satan's subtleties, Prove. 4.23. 2 Timothy 4.5. Ephesians. 5.17. and 6.13.
to 19.


P. What duties appertain to me in my Christian calling?


M. These seven chiefly.

1. To be zealous and discreet, humble and sincere, in the profession of
Christian religion, Revel. 3.19. Romans 12.3. Iam. 3.17. Tit. 1.16.

2. Daily to repent of our sins, and to cry God mercy by faith in Christ, as
we sin daily, Matthew. 6.12.

3. So to live, as those that look to die, and to rise unto judgment, at the
second coming of Christ, Acts 17.30, 31. and 24.17, 18. Deuteronomy. 32.29.

4. To mortify our sinful and corrupt nature, 1. by applying to our selves
the commandments, promises and threatenings of the word, Col: 3.5: and 2: by
denying to our selves all occasions, means and opportunities of sin, Matthew.
5.29, 30.

5. To moderate our desires to the profits, pleasures and honors of the world,
(considering the vanity of them Eccles: 1.2) and not to be discontent with our
present state, nor to covet our neighbors, Hebr: 13.5. Tit: 2.12. Exodus: 12.17.
Rom: 7.7.

6. To make sure unto our selves, our calling, election and salvation, by
growing in the number and measure of Christian graces, 2 Pet: 1.5. and 10.

7. To strive and endeavor to continue and persevere in well-doing, and
patient suffering for conscience sake, Matthew: 10.22. Iam: 1.25. Rev: 2.25. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.


P. And I pray you (good Sir) what duties appertain to me in my civil
calling, course, and trade of life?


M. These seven principally.

1. Diligence and painfulnesse without idleness, 2 Thessalonians. 3.7, 8.

2. Cheerefulnes and joyfulnes, without being weary of well-doing, Deuteronomy: 12.7.2
These. 2.13.

3. Moderation, without plodding and moyling, carking and caring (through
distrust) to the neglect of our bodily health and salvation, Hebr. 13.5. Matthew:
6.33.

4. Honesty and righteousness, without wronging others, or deceiving them, 1
These: 4.6.12.

5. Charity, in seeking not our own profit and good only, and to be all for
our selves, but the benefit of others, Phil: 2.4. 1 Cor: 10.33.

6. Sincerity, in performing the duties of our callings, not as before men
only, and to be seen of them; but as unto God, to approve our selves to him
Col: 3.22, 23.

7. Piety in going about them, not in confidence of our own wisdom, Prove.
3.5; but with prayer to God in affiance of his blessing, Genes: 24.42.48. 1
Cor: 3.6.


P. Oh good Sir, this is abundantly enough to teach me to know what Gods
service is, and wherein it does consist: now I pray you affect me with Gods
service, and teach me how to be affected, and in love with it?


M. I will: Seeking to be affected with Gods service.
for what good will it do you to know what Gods service is, except you desire
to serve God. For this end therefore you must know and believe, consider and
lay to heart, certain motives concerning his service, that may stir you up
to desire, love and affect it; and they are these five; 1. the possibility of
serving God; 2. the necessity of it; 3. the excellency of it; 4. the equity of
it; and 5. the reward of it.


P. How may the possibility of Gods service appear, and that it is possible
for us to serve God here in this world?


M. Two ways: 1. by the promise of the Spirit to be given to them that seek
it, whereby he will put Gods laws in their hearts, and write them in their
inner parts for his obedience and service, Luke 11.13. Ezekiel: 11.19. Ier. 31.33.
2. By the many examples of godly men, who have been called by God himself,
his Servants, as Moses, Josh. 1.1. Ioshuah: chapter 24.29: Job, chapter 1.8: David,
Psalm. 18.1: Isaiah, chapter 20.3: Zerubbabel, Hag: 2.23: and others.


P. How may the necessity of the service of God be made plain unto me?


M. By considering 1. the commandment of God, which enjoins it often and
earnestly in his word, Deuteronomy: 10.12.20. and 6.13. and 13.4. Josh: 24.24. 2. The
danger of not serving God, for they who neglect it are guilty of great sins,
Judge. 10.6. Nehem: 9.35. and are liable to greater punishments. Deuteronomy, 28.47.
Romans 2.8. and 6.21.


P. How may the excellency of the service of God be proved?


M. By knowing and laying to heart, 1 That it is no base or mean thing, to be
Gods servant: but that it is an honor, and a great favor, Romans 9.4. Iosu.
1.2. 2. That Gods service is not a bondage but a liberty, 1 Cor. 7.22. 3. That
God is the best Lord and Master to serve, and that his wages is the best
reward, and ^^st pay, Deu: 10.20 (...) Col. 3.24.


P. How may the equity of Gods service appear?


M. It will easily appear, that it is equal and just you should serve God if
you consider: 1. That God, deserves it of you by his many benefits bestowed
upon you, as namely your creation, Psa. 100, 2. and your preservatio^: Ios. 24
17: but specially your salvation: Luke 1.74.75 2. That before your conversion
unto him, you have made God to serve with your sins, Isai, 43.24. 3. That
before your co^version you served the world, the Devil, and your own lusts
for the greatest part of your life, and too long; and that now you know not how
little time you have to serve him, 1 Pet. 4.4. Ezech. 44.6.


P. What is the reward of Gods service?


M. It is this: God will not only graciously accept of our service, Ezech.
40.41. passing by the failings of it, 2 Chronicles. 30.18: But will also bestow
upon his faithful servants, 1 Temporal things: as long life, health, wealth,
children, and a good name, Job. 1.9. and 42.10 Deuteronomy: 28. Psalm. 112. and 128.

2. Spiritual, as increase of grace, and peace, joy, and comfort of a good
conscience: Prove: 15.15: Ps: 119 Isai 56.6: 7. 2 Cor. 1.21. Gal. 6.16.

3 Eternal, which is deliverance from all eternal misery, and participation
of all like happiness and glory, Romans 2.7. Math: 25.34.


P. These are indeed powerful mot ves to persuade Christians to be affected
with Gods service, and (I bless God) I am much moved therewith: but one thing
is yet wanting whereof you told me^, which is the third and last th ng in
seeking to serve God, namely, Seeking to perform and practice it; I pray you
instruct me therein also.


M. I will, and indeed there is good reason you should learn this lesson too,
Seeking to practice the service of God.
because the end of your desire of Gods service is to practice it, and it had
been better for you never to have been affected with the love and liking of
Gods service, if you do not perform it to God accordingly. Now then in the
performance and practice of Gods service, these four things are to be
considered and handled: 1, the manner how: 2, the measure wherein: 3, the end
whereunto: and 4, the means whereby it is to be done.


P. Sir I thank you, and I pray you further instruct me in each of them, for
they are material points indeed; and first tell me in what manner the service
of God is to be performed.


M. The manner of performing service and obedience to God, consists in these
six particulars chiefly:

1. Understandingly, with knowledge and judgment, 1 Chronicles: 28.9. Psalm: 47.7. 1
Cor: 14.15.

2. Humbly, in regard of our unability and unworthiness to serve him, Act.
20.19.

3. Faithfully, with affiance and trust in Gods mercy through Christ's merits
for acceptance, laying hold on the covenant of grace, Col: 1.17. Isay 56.6.

4. Conscionably, in obedience to God, who in his word wills and commands us to
serve him, Acts 23.1. Iam: 2.11.

5. Holily, with a religious, godly and heavenly mind in newness of spirit and
life, Rom: 12.1. and chap: 7.6.

6. Sincerely, and with an upright and honest heart, 1 Chronicles: 28.9. Josh:
24.14. Genesis 17.1.


P. In what measure is our service to God to be performed?


M. The measure in which the service of God is to be performed, may thus be
laid down on this manner:

1. Generally, we must serve God with all our might, (that is) with all the
parts and members of our bodies and with all the powers and faculties of our
souls, Deuteronomy: 6.5. and 10.12. Josh: 14.8. Number. 14.24.

2. And more specially we must serve God, as touching the measure:

1. Cheerfully, and with a willing mind, Isay 58.13. 1 Chronicles: 28.9. Psalm: 40.7,
8.

2. Joyfully, and with a glad heart, Psalm: 100. 2. and 119.132.

3. Zealously, and with earnest affection, and devotion, Acts 21.20. Tit. 2.14.
Acts 10.2.

4. Constantly, continually, and with perseverance unto the end, Luke 1.74, 75.
1 Chronicles: 28.7.


P. Oh this constancy and perseverance is a rare grace indeed, but I feel my
heart very fleeting and unsettled; I pray you how may I get to continue in the
serving and obeying of God?


M. For this purpose you must do these things:

1. You must give and consecrate your self to Gods service, Rom: 6.19. and
12.1. Set your heart and soul to seek God, Deuteronomy: 32.46. and to obey his
Commandments, Deuteronomy: 32.46. Yield your self to the Lord, 2 Chronicles: 30.8. and
subscribe unto him, Isay 44.5.

2. You must be rooted and grounded in the knowledge and love of Gods service,
Deuteronomy: 10.11. and 11.13. Isay 56.6. Ephesians: 3.17. 2 These: 2.10.

3. You must often renew your promise and purpose, vow, covenant and oath of
serving God, Psalm: 119.106. and 39.1. and 17.3. and 61.8. Ezra 10.3. 2 Chronicles:
15.32.

4. You must not be formal and ceremonial only in Gods service, to do it
publicly in the Church only, or privately in the family only, where others
may see you; but secretly in your closet, where none is present but God; and
you must serve God with the intention of your mind, and affection of your
heart, carefully and conscionably, 2 Timothy: 3.5. Tit: 1.16. Acts 23.1. and 26.7.

5. You must be jealous and suspicious of your self, lest there be in you a
deceitful and an unfaithful heart to withdraw you from Gods service, Hebr:
3.13.

6. You must seriously consider the danger of apostasy, and the benefit of
perseverance in Gods service, 1 Pet: 2.20, 21. Heb: 6. and 10. chapters: Matthew:
10.22. Revel: 2.10.

7. You must pray to God to keep you in his name, Ioh. 17.11. Jude 24 2 Cor:
12.8, 9.


P. I pray you good Sir, now show me the end why I must serve God.


M. Not to be justified and saved thereby, for this is to work for wages as a
base servant, and not as a good son; nor yet out of any carnal worldly ends
or respects, as vain glory, and the good opinion of men, or worldly profit;
but for a threefold end.

1. In respect of God, that he may be glorified thereby, whose service it is
by appointment, and to whom it is to be performed, Matthew: 5.16. 1 Cor. 10.31.

2. In respect of others, that they may be either won to the same service
with us, or confirmed in it, 1 Pet: 3.5.

3. In respect of our selves, that we may make good proof of the truth of our
faith, and thereby make sure unto our selves the good will of God toward us,
and that he means to save us, Rom: 12.1, 2.


P: Now in the last place I pray you show me, the means whereby I may come to
practice this service of God.


M: That you may indeed practice Gods service which you know and affect, you
must do these things: 1. You must put away, renounce and wholly leave, and
shake off your former service of sin, the world, and Satan: 1 Sa^: 7:3: else
you cannot serve God: Joshua 24 19: You must be purged from dead works: Heb
9:14. you must dye to sin, 1 Pet. 2.24. Put off the old man. Ephesians. 4.22.23. 2
You must seek to God for grace to enable you to serve him. Heb: 12.28. 3. You
must stir up the grace of God in you, and when you have received it, you must
use it well, 2. T^m. 1.6. Matthew. 25.20.22.


P. How may we be moved to leave the service of sin, Satan, and the world?


M. By believing, and laying to heart, remembering and considering the
sinnefulnesse, and damnablenesse of that service, together with the excellency
of Gods service, and remedy, whereof we have heard before in the motives to
Gods service.


P. How may I be moved to seek to God for grace, to enable me to his service?


M. 1. By knowing and feeling your need of grace, and that without it you are
unable to serve God, Luke 17.10. 2 Cor: 3.5. 2. By believing, and considering
the sufficiency and essicacie of grace, to enable you to serve God, and to
abide in you, and to keep you in his service, 2 Cor: 12.9. I Ioh: 2.27. Ioh:
4.14.


P. How may I be stirred up, well to use the grace of God when I have received
it?


M. By considering, 1. that the grace of God is given to you for this end,
namely, that you might serve God with it, Heb. 12.28 Luke 19.13. 2. that God is
worthy to be served with the grace which himself has given; for without him
we can do nothing that good is, Revel: 4. 3. That if you will use a little
measure of grace, and stir up your self to serve God with it, then shall
your talent hereof increase, Mat. 25.20.21


P. Sir I humbly thank you for your pains with me, and patience toward me. I
am loath to be overbold with you at once, and to interrupt your studies too
long: I hope it will not be offensive to you if when I have suff^ciently
thought upon these your instructions touching seeking to serve God, (which is
the first thing you propounded unto me:) if at another time. I repair unto
you, in the second, which is, seeking to be saved.


M. You shall be welcome, if you come at the beginning of the week, at which
time, I have most leisure. In the mean time, the Lord be with you, and bless
my labors, for the furtherance of you, and the rest of my people, in the
service of God, unto salvation, by Jesus Christ. Amen.


SEEKING to be saved, when we dye.
Minister. Well met (good Neighbor:) how have you done, since you were with
me last, and how does your family?


Parishioner. The beter for you (Sir, I praise God) and for your good
^nstructions you gave me.


M. Much good may they do you. I desire, that God may have the praise of them,
and you the profit: I hope, that at least, you remember what was the sum of
our conference then.


P. I were much to blame, if I should forget that, being a point that so
nearly concerned me, and which you handled so largely: (By your favor) it was
this, that I ought to seek to serve God, while I live in this world. But (good
Sir) you mentioned there another duty like unto this, which I greatly desire
you would instruct me in at your convenient leisure: If I should not be too
tedious, I would resort unto you at the beginning of the week for further
instruction in that also.


M. You shall not be troublesome, but welcome; I would I had in my Parish more
of your mind, for then should I conceive hope that they minded good things,
seeing they inquired after them, and repaired unto me for private information,
over and above my public Ministry. If you will (Neighbor) go home with me
now, and we will confer together about it. But can you tell me, what that
second point of Christian duty was?


P. Yes that I can, I thank God; though my memory be bad enough: It was this,
I take it; I must seek to be saved when I die. Me thinks it is a necessary
duty, and it is good reason I should practice it: but I would feign have some
good arguments, to bind me to the practice of it, that I might not fail to
do it, being so needful.


M. I will satisfy your desire, and the reasons that I shall propound unto you
to persuade you to the practice of this duty, shall be drawn into some heads,
for the help of your memory. The heads are four: whereof the first concerns
God; the second your self; the third other men; and the fourth has respect
unto salvation it self.


P. Which be those reasons that concern God, and which may persuade me to
seek to be saved?


M. They are three. That Christians must seek to be saved, and why.


The first is taken from Gods commandment, that biddes Christians to seek the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; yea to seek it first, (that is)
before and above al worldly things, Matthew: 6.33: To strive to enter in at the
strait gate, Luke 13.24: To labor for the meat, that endures to eternal
life, John 6.27: and to labor to enter into that rest, Hebr: 4.11.

The second reason is drawn from Gods promise, Why Christians must seek to be
saved.
which is 1. in general, that they which seek shall find, Matthew: 7.7. 2. in
special, that they which seek the Lord shall find him, Ier: 29.13. 3. and in
particular, that they which seek Gods Kingdom, it will be their Fathers
pleasure to give it unto them, Luke 12.31, 32.

The third argument is taken from Gods dealing with sinners, in his seeking
that they might be saved. For 1. God the Father expostulates with sinners, why
they will dye, and not be saved, Ezck: 33.11: yea he intreates (by his
Ministers) that they would be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. 2. Jesus Christ
came to seek and save lost sinners, Luk: 19.10: yea he invites them to come
unto him, (that is) to believe in him, that they may be eased, and saved,
Matthew: 11.28. Ioh: 6.35. And 3. the Holy Ghost strives with them by
exhortations, Gen: 6.3: and testifies to them, (that is) forewarnes and
charge the^ by threatenings, that they would be converted, to the end they
may be saved, Nehem. 9.30. 1 Thessalonians: 4.6. Now there is no reason that God should
seek to us to be saved; and not we to him.


P. What is the reason that concerns our selves, that may move us to seek to
be saved?


M. It is this: we must seek to be saved, because we need to seek it, and
we need to seek for salvation; partly, because we are (by nature) ignorant of
the way thereunto, 1 Cor: 1.22, 23. and 2.14: (and the Devil seeks to keep
us in this ignorance, 2 Cor: 4.4:) partly, because salvation will not be
obtained without diligent seeking, for the violent take it by force, Matthew:
11.12: and partly also, because, if we do neglect to seek salvation, we sin
fearfully, and cannot escape condemnation, Hebr: 2.4. John 3.19.


P. What is the reason to persuade me to seek for salvation, that is taken
from other men?


M. It is this. First, Gods Ministers do seek us, that we might be saved, 2
Cor: 12.14. for they beseech us to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor: 5.20: they
exhort us to save our selves from the wicked generation of this world, Acts
2.40: yea their hearts desire and prayer to God for us is, that we might be
saved, Rom: 10.1. And there is no reason, that Ministers should be more
careful of our salvation, than we of our own. Secondly, the Church of God in
all ages, has afforded many memorable examples of holy people that have sought
for salvation, and found it, Acts 2.37. and 16.30. Hebr. 11.6.


P. What is the fourth and last reason, taken from some consideration
concerning salvation it self?


M. It is this: You ought to seek for salvation, because it is worth your
seeking; for it is called by way of excellency, so great salvation, Hebr: 2.4:
the salvation of God, Acts 23.28: yea salvation with eternal glory, 2 Timothy: 2.10


P. These indeed are good arguments to prove, both that I must seek it, and
why I must: but when must I seek it?


M. Though I say you must seek to be saved when you dye; I do not mean, you
must seek when you dye; but that you must seek to be saved, while you live.
You must seek God while he may be found, Isay. 55.5: and God will be found in
this life; for now is the day of salvation, now is the accepted time, 2 Cor:
6.3: for now the means of grace are afforded unto us, in the use of Gods
ordinances, appointed for that end. Dives was carried to hell when he dyed; and
out of it there is no redemption, Luke 16.23.26. The foolish virgins wanting
oil in their lamps, when the bridegroom came, were shut out of the
bride-chamber, though then they desired to get oil, Math. 25.12.


P. But I pray you (good Sir) how, and by what means may I seek for
salvation?


M. Even in the same manner, How Christians must seek to be saved.
and by the same means, that I taught you to seek to serve God; namely by
seeking 1. to know the chief points of the doctrine of salvation: 2. to affect
and desire it: 3. to get and obtain salvation.


P. I pray you then Sir in the first place tell me, what are the chief points
of the doctrine of salvation, that are to be known.


M. They are three, To know the chief points of salvation.
for we must know and believe: 1. What it is to be saved, and this we may
know, for God has ordained means to give us knowledge of salvation, Luke
1.77. And to show us the way of it. Act, 16.17.2. The several degrees, by
which salvation is attained, which is not all at once: 3. The means whereby it
is effected and brought to pass, in these several degrees.


P. Sir, (I think) I know already the first point, which is, what it is to be
saved, (namely) it is to be freed from hell and damnation.


M. It is some thing which you say; but that is not all. For to be saved is
not only to be freed from all eternal curssednesse, which is to escape the
damnation of hell: Math. 23, 33. to be delivered from the wrath to come, 1,
These. 5.10: to have your soul saved from death eternal: Iam: 5.20: and to be
kept that ye perish not, nor be condemned, John 3:16, 17. But to be saved is
to partake of all eternal blessedness in another life and world, which is, to
obtain eternal glory: 2. Tim: 2:10: to inherit the kingdom of God, Math:
25:34: to enter into our Masters joy: Math: 25.34: to be ever with the Lord
Christ: 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Ph^l: 1, 23: namely, to behold and partake of his glory,
John 17.24.


P. I perceive now my failing, and it must needs be so, as you say, touching
the nature of salvation: but I pray you also proceed to the second general
point of the doctrine of salvation, to show me what are the degrees, by which
it is attained.


M. They are three. The degrees of salvation.
1. In this life, Luke 19.9. 2. At the end of this life, Acts 7.59. 3. At the
end of the world, Hebr: 9.28.


P. What degree of salvation is attained unto in this life?


M. It has three branches.

1. Justification, whereby the faithful are fully acquitted and discharged,
from the guilt and punishment of all their sins, by free pardon and
forgiveness of them all, and whereby also they are accepted as righteous in
Gods sight by the merit of Christ's righteousness, both of his life and death
imputed unto them, Mat: 9.2. Rom: 3.25. and 4.6, 7. 2 Pet. 1.1.

2. Reconciliation, whereby sinners being freed from Gods anger and
displeasure, justly incurred and provoked by their sins, they are again
received into his love, favor, and friendship, Matthew: 3.17. Col: 1.21.

3. Adoption, whereby of the children of disobed^ence, of wrath, and of the
Devil, (which they were in Adam, and by their sins, Ephesians: 2.2. and 5.6.
Ioh: 8.44) they are made the children of God, and heirs of the Kingdom of
heaven, Gal: 4.4. and 5.6. Ephesians: 1.4, 5, 6.


P. What degree of salvation do the faithful attain at the end of this life?


M. It is this. First, and generally, they depart in peace, Luke 2.29: for
their souls are parted from their bodies in Gods favor; they are carried to
heaven, Luk: 16.22. and received thither, Acts 7.50: They dye in Christ, 1 Thessalonians: 4.16: they sleep in Jesus, verse 24: they dye in the Lord, Revel:
14.13: they dye the death of the righteous, Number: 23.10: they depart to the
Father, John 13:1. As soon as they are departed this life, their souls are
with Christ in Paradise, which is Christ's Kingdom, Luke 23.42.43: even when
their bodies are unburied, or lie in the grave: and therefore this salvation is
called the salvation of the soul, 1 Pet: 1.9. Heb: 10.39: for the spirits of
just and perfect men are in heaven, Hebr: 12.25. And well may the faithful
depart in peace when they dye, seeing when they lived they were justified by
faith, and had peace with God, Romans 5.1: Good cause have they, (if they forget
not to consider it) not to fear to dye, seeing they know, that the sting of
their death is taken away, 1 Cor: 15.55, by Christ, who through his death has
overcome him that had the power of death, (that is) the Devil, Hebr: 2.14: and
seeing they are persuaded that death shall not separate them from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus, Rom: 8.38, 39.

Secondly, and more specially: 1. The bodies of the faithful at the end of
this life, are at rest from their labors pains and diseases, and are free
from sense of all miseries and vexations, Revel: 14.13. Isai: 56.1, 2. 2. Their
souls are wholly freed from original and natural corruption; for the flesh
which was therein while they lived, is wholly killed and destroyed. For they
are carried into heaven Luk: 16, 22. into which no unclean thing can enter:
Revel: 21:27. 1 Cor: 15.50.


P. And what degrees of salvation do the faithful attain unto at the end of
the world?


M. It consists of 2 branches, whereof the first concerns the body; the second
belongs to the soul and body too.


P. What happiness receives the body at the end of the world?


M. It is this: Of a natural, dead, weak, corruptible, and mortal body,
(which it was when it was alive in the world, and lay in the grave) it is
raised a spiritual, living, strong, incorruptible, and immortal body; and
being raised from death to life, it is restored to its former being and shape,
complexion and proportion, yet without any defect or blemish, in a most comely
manner; for it is a glorified body, 1 Cor: 15.42. to 46.


P. Yea but it seems to natural reason an impossible thing, for a dead body
to rise and live again?


M. True: but Christians know by the light of the holy Scriptures, that the
dead body shall rise from death to life, not by any power in it self, or by
the means of any natural cause; but by a supernatural, even the power of
God, Matthew: 22.29. Josh: 22.1 These. 4.16.


P. How may I be drawn better to believe the Resurrection from the dead?


M. By these seven Reasons.

1 The testimony of Christ, who said, that all that are in the graves shall
hear Christ's voice, and come forth unto the Resurrection: John 5, 28 29.

2 The promise of it made by God unto the Patriarks, Act, 26:6:7:8.

3 The faith and hope of Gods children, who in all ages believed it, hoped and
looked for it, Acts 23:6: and 24:15. John 11:24.

4 The practice of many Heathen, who in hope of the Resurrection, washed the
dead bodies of their friends departed, before they buried them, 1 Cor: 15:29.
and Acts 9:36.

5 The proof and experience of many recorded in the Scriptures, who have risen
from death to life, Mat. 27:52:53. Ioh. 11:35.

6 The appoynting of a day of judgment, at the second coming of Christ: Act:
17.30, 31, 32. Ioh: 5:28:29. Dan: 12.2.

7 The Resurrection of Christ himself from death to life, to be the first
fruits of them that sleep: 1 Cor: 15: 20. 1 These: 4:14. 1: Pet: 1.3. For the
gathering in of the first ripe fruits, do give hope to the husbandman, of
ripening and gathering in of the rest afterward.


P. Indeed these Reasons clearly and unanswerably do prove that the dead
shall rise again, and that there shall be a Resurrection from the dead. But
you said it was a branch of happiness unto the faithful, that their bodies rose
from death to life, how may this be prooved?


M. This also may be sufficiently proved out of the Scripture, and that, by
these 7 reasons also.

1 Because it is said that they are counted worthy of the Resurrection: Luke
20, 35. Therefore the Resurrection is a favor, and consequently a branch of
happiness unto them.

2 Because they are called the children of the Resurrection, Luk: 20: 36. and
they are so called (as in other respects so in this) because they rise Gods
children, (as they lived and dyed) and are in his favor, which is a great
happiness.

3. Because they are said to be equal to the Angels, (when they are raised)
Luke 20.36: and the Angels are happy, for nothing but happiness can befall
them.

4. Because the Apostle says, that if the faithful did not rise, they were of
all men most miserable, 1 Cor: 15.19: therefore because they do rise again,
they are happy.

5. Because when they are raised from death to life, they are called blessed:
for Christ will call unto them, and say, Come ye blessed of my Father, Matthew:
25.34.

6. The resurrection from the dead is a degree of happiness, because (as it
has been said before) the naturalnesse, weakness, corruption and morrality of
the body is abolished and destroyed; and by the resurrection, it is made a
spiritual, strong, incorruptible, and immortal body; yea it is raised a
glorified body, to be made fit to enter into and enjoy the glory of heaven, 1
Cor: 15.41.50.

7. And lastly, the resurrection of the body from death to life, is a degree of
happiness because the assured expectation of it did work in the faithful, both
more grace, and also more peace and comfort in their consciences, Acts 24.15,
16. Psalm: 16.9. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.


P. Sir, I cannot deny, but these reasons do prove the point most clearly:
but one thing there is, that I am not as yet resolved of, namely, I would feign
learn, how the resurrection from the dead should be a happiness to the
faithful, more than to the wicked and unfaithful; for all both good and bad
arise.


M. It cannot be denied, but all both good and bad, just and unjust, must arise
from death to life, John 5.28. Acts 24.15: but though this be true, yet there
is a great difference in their rising, and this difference shows the
happiness of the one, and the unhappiness of the other.


P. Wherein, I pray you, is the difference betwixt the resurrection of the
godly and of the wicked?


M. It appears specially in three things.

1. All arise not the same manner of persons, for some rise just, and godly, as
they lived and dyed, Luke 14.14: yea they rise Gods children, Luke 22.36: but
others rise unjust, unrighteous and wicked, as they lived and dyed, Acts 24 15.

2. All arise not by the same means; for the godly arise by Christ's mediation
and resurrection, as his members, 1 Thessalonians: 4.14. 1 Pet: 1.3, 4. 2 Cor: 4.14.
But the wicked arise from death to life only by Gods power, and as his
creatures.

3. All arise not to the same end, for the godly arise to the resurrection of
life, and eternal blessedness, Ioh: 5.29. Matthew: 25.32.34: To shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.2.
Whereas the ungodly arise to the resurrection of condemnation, John 5.29: and
to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan: 12.2.

Some also have thought, that there is a fourth difference between the
resurrection of the just and unjust, (namely) that the dead in Christ shall
arise before them that have dyed out of him: and for that they allege a place
in S. Paul, 1 Thessalonians: 4.16.

But I answer, though it be not a thing improbable, that the godly shall arise
before the wicked, yet do I not think that that place proves it; because that
place speaks not of an order betwixt the rising of the godly and wicked; but
of an order betwixt the dead in Christ, and the living in Christ at his second
coming: and that order is, that the dead in Christ shall not prevent, (or go
before unto heaven and happiness) the living, or them that shall be alive at
Christ's second coming.


P. But I pray you forget not that degree of happiness, whereof both the
souls and bodies of the godly partake at the end of the world.


M. This happiness has 6 branches:

1. Both soul and body shall be joined together, even the very same, Job
19.25, 26.

2. They shall be freed from ever dying any more, Luke 20.36.

3. They shall be perfectly sanctified with that measure of grace whereof a
creature can be capable for the fitting of him to enjoy the heavenly glory, 1
Cor: 15.49.

4. Being sanctified, they shall be translated and received into the kingdom
of heaven, Matthew: 25.34.

5. Being translated, they shall partake of glory with God and Christ, John
17.24.

6. Partaking of heavenly glory, they shall enjoy it for ever, 1 These: 4.17.


P. These indeed are excellent degrees of happiness, (the Lord fit us to
partake of them.) but I pray you remember to show me the third general point
necessary to be known in the doctrine of salvation; which was, the means
whereby it is effected, and brought to pass in the several degrees thereof.


M. I will, The means whereby salvation is effected.
(by the grace of God:) These means are certain actions of God.


P. What are the actions wrought by God, that bring to pass man's salvation?


M. They are actions that properly belong to the several Persons of the sacred
Trinity, namely 1. God the Father; 2. God the Son; and 3. God the Holy Ghost.


P. What were the actions of God the Father, whereby man's salvation was
effected?


M. Twofold: 1. In respect of Christ, his appointing and sending him into the
world to save it, John 3.16: and his setting him in the office of his
Mediatorship, Ioh. 6.28. Matthew: 3.17. 2. And in respect of the faithful, his
justifying of them, his being reconciled unto them, and his adopting of them to
be his children, and heirs of heaven, whereof you have heard before in the
degrees of salvation.


P. What were the actions of God the Son, which he did to bring to pass our
salvation?


M. They were those, whereby he merited and procured, that the Elect should be
surely brought into Gods favor again, and safely carried to heaven; for he is
called the Author of our salvation, Hebr: 5.9: and the Capta^ne of our
salvation, Hehr: 2.10. And he is called a Savior, and our Savior, 23 times
in the New Testament. And these actions of Christ concerned either 1 his
conception and birth: or 2. his life: or 3. his death: or 4. his resurrection:
or 5. ascension: or 6. his sitting on Gods right hand.


P. What was Christ's conception and birth, and the merit of them to our
salvation?


M. Christ's conception and birth was his incarnation, whereby he took into the
unity of his Person, (being the Son of God) the man then in framing in the
womb of the Virgin Mary: By this (being a great abasing to him, Phil: 2.6, 7.
Hebr: 2.14:) he merited and procured, that our original sin, wherein we were
conceived and borne of our parents, should be pardoned and purged, Psalm: 51.3.


P. What were the actions of Christ's life, whereby he wrought our salvation?


M. They were these principally.

1. In his life he was just and righteous, 1 Pet. 3.18: for he knew no sin
experimentally, 2 Cor. 5.21: But was holy, and separate from sinners, Hebr:
7.26: He was Gods righteous servant, Isay 53.11: He was made unto us
righteousness, 1 Cor: 1.30: That by the imputatio^ of the merit thereof to all
true believers, their imperfect righteousness might be covered, and they therein
accepted, and presented as faultlesse, Jude verse 24: holy and without blame,
Ephesians: 5.25: Yea that he might establish them unblameable in holiness before God,
1 Thessalonians: 3 13.

2. In his life, Christ made many heavenly prayers to God his Father, for his
Elect; and by them Christ merited, that their faith might not fail, Luke
22.32: nor they fall from grace; but be brought safe to glory in heaven, Ioh.
17.11.24.

3. In the life of Christ 1. he endured much poverty, Mat: 8.20: having not a
house to put his head in of his own, though he were Lord of all, Acts 10.36.
2. He was much shamed and disgraced, being reviled and rayled upon, Mat:
27.30. And 3. he was put to much pain, being buffeted and scourged, Matthew:
27.26. Ioh: 19.1. Matthew: 26.6, 7. But Christ merited and procured for us
hereby, that by his poverty we might be made rich, 2 Cor: 8.9: that by his
disgrace we might be honored with this prerogative of being Gods children,
John 1.12: that by his stripes we might be healed, 1 Pet: 2.24: And that all
our afflictions might be sanctified and seasoned, to our reformation and
consolation in Christ.


P. What was Christ's action at his death whereby he merited our salvation?


M. He willingly la^d down his life, when (by his divine power) he might have
held it, and none could have taken it from him, John 10.17. 1 John 3.16. Hereby
Christ offered up himself a propitiatory sacrifice to God his Father, for the
ransom of mankind, Gal: 4.5. Heb: 10.6, 7, 8: and hereby he redeemed the
Elect from the second death, which is damnation, and from the tyranny of the
Devil, Hebr: 2.14. Iam: 5.20. Acts 26.18.


P. What was Christ's resurrection, and the merit of it for our salvation?


M. Christ's resurrection was the freeing of himself from the power of death,
under which he was held in the grave, some part of three days; and the
uniting again of his soul which was in heaven, to his body which lay in the
grave: Christ merited hereby, that the faithful should rise again from death
to life, as members of his mystical body, and be begotten to a lively hope of
their own resurrection by the power of his, 1 Cor: 15.19, 20. 1 Pet: 1.3. 1 Thessalonians: 4.14.


P. What was Christ's Ascension, and what did he merit thereby, tending to our
salvation?


M. Christ's Ascension was his leaving to live any longer on the earth as man,
and his entering into heaven both in soul and body, there to continue till the
end of the world, Acts 1.9, 10, 11. Hebr: 4.14. By Christ's Ascension into
heaven, he took possession of it for the faithful, that at the end of their
lives, he might receive their souls thither, Acts 7.59: and at the end of the
world he might receive into it both their souls and bodies, John 14.2. Heb:
6.20.


P. What was Christ's sitting on the right hand of God the Father in heaven? and
what did he merit thereby for our salvation?


M. Christ's sitting on the right hand of the Father in heaven, is his partaking
(as man) of heavenly glory, far above all creatures, Hebr. 1.3. The merit
thereof, is his Intercession for us, Hebr. 7.24, 25: for in heaven he
continually appears in Gods presence for us, Heb: 9.24: to present all his
merits unto God his Father, for our benefit; that God beholding the worth of
them, he might continually apply the virtue and benefit of them, to the
conversion and salvation of his Elect, successively to the worlds end.


P. Now you have showed mec, what were the act ons of God the Father, and God
the Son, which they wrought for the effecting of man's salvation; I pray you
also tell me, what were the actions of the Holy Ghost for that end?


M. They were of two kinds: The actions of the holy Spirit for effecting man's
salvation.
1. Such as he wrought in Christ, that was to be the Savior of the world: and
2. such as he wrought in them that are to be saved by him.


P. What were the actions, wrought in Jesus Christ by the Holy Ghost, for the
bringing to pass of man's salvation?


M. They were three: 1. the sanctifying of the seed of the woman, for the
framing of his body thereof, as he was man, Luke 1.35. 2. The declaring of him
to be the Savior of the world, by descending upon him like a dove, Matthew:
3.16. John 3.33. 3. The filling of him with the gifts and graces of the Spirit
above measure, John 3.34: and above his fellows, Hebr: 1.9.


P. What are the actions of the Holy Spirit, which he works in them that are
to be saved, for the effecting thereof?


M. They are two. 1. Regeneration, or bringing them into the state of grace. 2.
Preservation, or keeping them therein.


P. Sir, I have heard much of Regeneration, but I do not well understand it: I
pray you therefore cause me to understand better what it is?


M. Regeneration is an action of the holy Spirit, The Regeneration of the holy
Spirit.
whereby Christians are begotten again, borne again; and renewed, or made new
again, 1 Pet: 1.3: John 3.5. Tit. 3.5.


P. Wherein does the holy Spirit regenerate Christians?


M. Not in making new the substance of their souls, nor in enduing their
souls with new parts, powers and faculties: But Regeneration consists in
healing and recovering, rectifying and amending, purging and sanctifying (with
a new supply of grace) the former parts, powers and faculties, that were wholly
depraved, and corrupted with sin, through Adams disobedience, Ecclefiast:
7.29.


P. To what end does the holy Spirit regenerate Christians by his grace?


M. For a twofold end, in respect of themselves.


P. Which is the first?


M. To enable them to serve God sincerely and acceptably in this world, Hebr:
12.28: in newness of spirit, Rom: 7.6: and in newness of life, Rom: 6.4. For
they are created (anew) in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God had before
ordained that they should walk in, Ephesians: 2.10. This they could not do, as they
were begotten of their parents, for so they were begotten in sin, Psalm: 51.5:
and borne of, and after the flesh, John 3.3. Gal. 4.29: which cannot please
God, Rom: 8.8. And therefore to the end, they may be fitly disposed, and
effectually enabled, to do the holy duties of Gods service, they must be made
new men and women: for the image of God, which (through Adams sin) was
defaced in them, as touching right knowing, willing and doing Gods will, must
again be renewed in them, Col: 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.


P. What is the second end, why the holy Spirit does regenerate Christians?


M. It is, to order them, and to set them in the way to heaven; which is, to
make them meet partakers of that inheritance, Col: 1.12. For without holiness
no man shall see the Lord, Hebr. 12.14. Into the new Jerusalem of heaven, shall
in no wise enter any unclean thing, Revel. 21.27. And flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. Now they can not go to heaven as
they are begotten of their natural parents; for so they are the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6: the children of wrath Ephesians: 2.3: and the children of the
Devil, John 8.44. And therefore to the end they may be made capable of
salvation, they must by the holy Spirit be turned from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive an inheritance with
them that are sanctified, Acts 26.18, 19. For holiness is the way to
happiness, and grace unto glory.


P. But by what means does the holy Spirit regenerate Christians, and make
them new?


M. By the incorruptible seed of the word of truth, Iam: 1.18: which is the
word of God: 1. Pet. 1.23. which is the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. 1 Pet. 1.23.
which is the Preaching of Jesus Christ: Romans 16.25: and of salvation: Act.
13.26. In whom they are begotten again: 1 Pet. 1.3. and created anew: Ephesians.
2.10. And therefore you ought carefully to attend upon this ordinance, which is
the power of God to salvation to them that believe: Romans 1.16.


P. I pray you Sir, What is Preservation, which, you said, was the second act
on of the holy Spirit, which he works, to bring to pass man's salvation?


M. Preservation, The Preservation of the Spirit
is an action of the holy Spirit, whereby he upholdeth them that are
regenerate, that they fall not away from grace, but be kept to continue therein.

That the regenerate are kept in the state of grace, is plain by S. Peter; who
says, that they are kept unto salvation, 1 Pet: 1.3.5. And that they do
receive the end of their faith, which is the salvation of their souls, verse
9. And that they are kept thereunto by the holy Spirit, is as plain by the
same Apostle, where he says, they are kept by the power of God, 1 Pet: 1.5:
which is the power of the holy Ghost, Rom: 15.13. For they are led by the
Spirit, Gal: 5.18: They walk in the Spirit, Gal: 5.16. Rom: 8.14. They live in
the Spirit, Gal: 5.25: They are sealed by the Spirit, Ephesians: 1.13: strengthened
by the Spirit in the inner man, Ephesians: 3.16: And they are sanctified by the
Spirit wholly, and preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Thessalonians: 5.23. 2 Thessalonians: 2.13. And if the regenerate be kept by the
holy Spirit unto salvation, then (in respect of Gods keeping) can they not fall
from grace, to miss salvation in the event and end

I know the strongest Christian is not able to stand of himself, for even he
that stands must take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor: 10.12: And therefore he
must not be high-minded, but fear, Rom: 11.20.

I acknowledge also, that there is nothing in grace it self, (as it is man's)
but that it might fail; for it is received but in part in this life, 1 Cor:
13.9. And that which is but in part, is imperfect; and that which is imperfect,
may (of it self) fail. Neither is there any thing in the particular grace of
faith, but that it might fail too; for Peter's faith might have failed, if
Christ had not prayed that it might not fail, Luke 22.32: (and Peter's faith
was the same, (for nature and kind) with the faith of all that are
regenerate.) But though both these be true, both of grace generally, and of
faith particularly; yet for all this the truly regenerate do not fall from
grace; but are preserved therein: for first, touching grace in general, I say,
that it fails not; for it is the anointing which they receive, and which
abides in them 1 John 2.27: and that which abides, fails not: for by it they
are strengthened and preserved to Gods heavenly kingdom, 2 Timothy: 4.18.
Secondly, touching the particular grace of faith, I say, that that fails not
neither: 1. because Christ prayed not only for Peter's faith, that it might not
fail; but for the faith of all the Elect and Regenerate, that theirs might not
fail; for he prayed that they might all be kept by the Father in his Name,
that they may be one in God, as the Father and the Son are one, John
17.11.15.20, 21: And Christ was heard and answered in all his prayers, John
11.42. 2. The faith of the regenerate fails not in the end, because they are
kept by the power of God through faith, 1 Pet: 1.5. Now if they be kept
through faith, then must they keep the faith, and be kept in it also, else
they cannot attain salvation in the end: for if the regenerate do receive the
salvation of their souls as the end of their faith, 1 Pet: 1.9: then must they
by some means keep their faith to the end.

I know and confess, that there be many which think of themselves, that they
have indeed the true faith and grace, (and so are thought by others to have
it) when indeed they have it not; and these (after a sort) may be thought to
fall from faith and grace, because in time they discover their hollownesse; for
their faith works not by love, Gal: 5.6: nor their love by obedience, John
14.15: Nor is their obedience a sincere endeavor to keep all Gods
commandments, Iam: 2.10. But this can not be called truly falling from grace;
(because they had not grace indeed, and they cannot fall from that they had
not:) but from the profession of grace and faith. And therefore for all this,
they that have true grace, do by Gods power keep it, and persevere in it; for
Paul did fight a good fight, he finished his course, and kept the faith, 2 Timothy
4.6. They do not withdraw themselves, but believe to the salvation of their
souls: Heb, 10, 28: therefore they believe to the end.


P. Me th^nkes you prove this point so directly by the word, that I cannot
tell what to say to the contrary: but there be many learned men of a contrary
mind, and therefore I pray prove it unto me by some reason also.


M. I will, and it shall be by this which shall include diverse branches.

If the regenerate be not preserved by God in the state of grace, so as they
shall certainly be saved in the end, then it is either, 1 because God cannot
keep them, or 2 because he will, not keep them; or 3 because they have no
need of his keeping: or 4 Because God thinks it best, to leave every man to
himself, to keep himself; and to the use and choice of his own freewill, to
persevere in grace, and faith, or to fall from it.

But neither of these are true, as shall appear in the particulars.

Therefore the Regenerate are preserved by God, in the State of grace unto the
end.

These four particulars, on which the truth of this argument does stand; shall
all be proved in order.

1 That God is able to keep the regenerate in the state of grace, is plain by
Paul who says, that God was able to keep that which he had committed unto him:
2. Tim. 1.12: By the Apostle Jude, who says that God is able to keep them
from falling: Jude v. 24. And no marvel seeing they are in his Fathers hands
and in his, Christ says none is able to pluck them out of his, or his Fathers
hands, John. 10.28 29: and therefore they shall never perish, ibid.

2 That God is willing to keep the truly Regenerate that have grace indeed,
is as evident by Saint Paul, where he says, that God shall confirm them unto
the end, 1 Cor. 1.4.8.9. He that had begun a good work in them, will perform
it until the day of Christ: Philipp. 1.6. and God is faithful, who shall
stablish them and keep them from evil, 2 Thessalonians: 3.3: and Paul affirms, that
God would preserve him to his heavenly kingdom, 2 Timothy: 4.18.

3. That the regenerate had need to be kept by God, in the state of grace,
will easily be proved, if we consider, 1. that their corrupt nature, and
infidelity (a fruit of it) are not quite subdued in them as long as they live,
Rom: 7.17, 18. Heb: 3.12. 2. That grace is but imperfectly received in this
life, as has been showed even now. 3. That Satan seeks to winnow them, that
their faith might fail, Luke 22.32. And lastly, that they are subject to many
afflictions and persecutions, which make many fall away, Matthew: 13.21. Luke
8.13.

4. That God does not think it best to leave every man to himself, to keep
himself, and to the use and choice of his own freewill, to persevere in grace
and faith, or to fall from it, shall be prooved by two Reasons.


P. Which is the first?


M. If man were left by God to the use and choice of his own free will to
keep himself, and to persevere in grace, or fall from it, then would these
two great mischiefs follow thereupon: 1. that then not God, but man himself,
should make the difference betwixt him that perseveres, and him that falls away.
But this is denied by Paul, who says, It is not in him that wills, nor in
him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, Rom: 9.16. And again, Who
makes thee to differ from another, and what have thou, that thou have not
received? 1 Cor: 4.7. 2. This mischief will follow thereupon also, that not
God, but man himself must have the chief praise of his own salvation. Indeed
God might have some thanks: 1. for appointing and sending a Savior into the
world: 2. for offering grace and salvation to man by him: and 3. for moving him
by his Spirit to believe in Christ, that he may be saved. But that he does
indeed actually consent to the motion of grace and receive it, does indeed
believe in Christ, and actually persevere in grace: so as to be saved in the
event, this proceeds from himself merely, and only from the good use and
choice of his own freewill, when God left him to himself to believe or not
believe, and to persevere or not persevere: and therefore himself must have
the chief praise of his being saved; and not God, who of right is to have all
the glory, of the beginning, proceeding, and accomplishing of the work of our
salvation.


P. I pray you give me also the second reason, why God thinks it not best, to
leave every man to himself, to persevere or fall from grace.


M. If every man were a like left to himself, and to the use and choice of his
own free will, to persevere or not persevere, and none were actually kept unto
salvation, nor effectually caused by the holy Spirit to persevere in grace to
the end, so that in the event they might certainly be saved, then were it
uncertayne, whether any man should in the event be saved or no; (for it is
uncertain in respect of the event, whether any man should persevere in the
faith or no, because it is uncerteine whether any man should well use his
freewill to persevere or no:) and if it were uncertain, whether any man should
be saved or no in the event, then were it uncertain, whether the blood of
Christ shedd on the Cross for man's salvation, should be spilt in vain or no.
For salvation is purchased by Christ's blood only, Act. 20.28, without it there
is no remission: Heb. 9.14.22. And they only that persevere in the faith shall
be saved: Mat: 10.22. Reve: 2.10. and therefore the Regenerate are preserved in
the state of grace by the holy Spirit, to the end, that Christ may not die in
vain, nor the salvation of the Regenerate be uncertain, nor the chief praise
of their salvation redound to themselves, but to God only and wholly.


P. Sir I thank you, I am fully satisfied in this point: you have said enough,
touching the first point of seeking to be saved; which was seeking to know the
chief points of the doctrine of salvation: The last branch whereof was, the
means whereby man's salvation is effected. I pray you now proceed to the
second point, Seeking to be affected with salvation.
which is, seeking to be affected with salvation.


M. That you may be moved to desire to be saved, and to affect it, you must
consider these four things chiefly: 1. the possibility of attaining it: 2. the
necessity of getting it: 3. the excellency of it, when it is had and enjoyed:
and 4. the certainty of holding it when we have it.


P. How may it be proved, that it is possible for us to be saved, if we seek
it?


M. By these reasons.

1. Because it is revealed, offered, and promised in the Gospel, Luke 1.77.
and 12.31, 32. John 3.16. Acts 10.23. Rom: 10.10.

2. Because it is merited and procured by Jesus Christ, who has done and
suffered all things needful for the purchasing of it, Ephesians: 1.14. Acts 20.28. 1
Pet: 1.18, 19. 1 Cor: 6.20.

3. Because salvation is already possessed and enjoyed, by infinite millions of
Christians, who have sought and obtained it, Hebr: 11.3.5. and 12.1. Luke
23.42, 43. Matthew: 11.12.


P. How may the necessity of salvation appear?


M. By these three reasons also.

1. By the commandment of God which bids us seek it; and by the threatening of
the word, which denounces judgment to them that neglect to seek it; whereof
you have heard more particularly before.

2. By the words of our Savior, who (speaking of taking the present
opportunity of hearing himself preach the Gospel of salvation) says, One
thing is necessary, Luke 10.42.

3. By considering and laying to heart the miserable estate of not being saved,
1 Cor: 15.18, 19. For it had been better for them they had never been borne,
Matthew: 26.24. And no marvel, seeing the Lord will one day pronounce that
direful sentence, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, Matthew: 25.41.


P. How may the excellency of salvation be showed?


M. By these four things.

1. The excellency of Gods love, and free grace, which is the foundation of it,
and which moved God to appoint and provide it, 1 John 3.1. Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
Tit. 2.8.

2. The excellency of the price by which it was purchased and procured for us,
namely Christ himself, Gal: 1.4. Ephesians: 1.24. His life, 1 John 3.16. Rom: 3.10:
His blood, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet: 1.23: His death, Hebr: 2.10: Yea a cursed death
on the Cross, Phil: 2.8. Gal. 3.13.

3. The excellency of the nature and parts, degrees and privileges, benefits
and comforts of our salvation, whereof you have heard at large before in the two
first points.

4. The excellency of the persons, that in the event are to be made partakers
of it, namely the Elect, and the beloved of the Lord, 2 Timothy: 2.10. Tit: 1.1: To
whom the very Elect Angels are ministering spirits, to attend upon them, Hebr.
1.14.


P. I pray you how may the certainty of salvation be proved?


M. By three things.

1 The Decree and purpose of God to save true believers in Christ Ephesians, 1.5.9.
which stands sure: 2 Timothy: 2.19. and cannot be changed, because with God there
is no variableness, neither shadow of turning: Iam: 1:17.

2 The prom se, covenant, and oath of God, to save them that are in Christ:
Luke 1.72.73. all which are immutable: Heb: 6.17.

3 The power and goodness, righteousness, and faithfulness of God, in performing
the promise of salvation to them to whom it belongs, and is intended: Rom:
4.21. Heb, 11.19. 1 John 1.9.


P. Oh good Sir: it may be, that salvation may in it self, and in the event
be sure to the faithful, but may they themselves be sure of it?


M. Yea, they they may, (being truly faithful) at one time or other, before
they dye, and in one measure or other of assurance, (namely, such as shall be
suitable to their trialls, and sufficient to comfort them in their afflictions,
2 Cor: 1.5:) but all have not like assurance of salvation; neither has any one
the like assurance always, nor in the same degree, free from doubting.


P. How may it be proved?


M. By these two reasons:

1. Because it is witnessed to their spirit by Gods Spirit, (who shedds Gods
love abroad in their hearts, Rom: 5.5:) that they are Gods children; and
consequently that they shall be saved: for none are saved but only Gods
children, Romans 8.16: And they may be sure of that which Gods Spirit does
witness unto them, because he is the Spirit of truth, 1 Ioh: 5.6.

2. Because true believers in Christ are sealed with the Spirit of promise; and
receive an earnest of their inheritance, Ephesians: 1.13, 14. Now an earnest penny,
it gives assurance of the bargain, and a seal confirms and assures a writing,
to which it is put.

3. Because the Apostles were assured of it; for Paul was persuaded and
assured, that nothing should separate them from the love of God in Christ, Rom:
8, 38. and John knew the love of God to him, 1 Ioh: 4.16. and 5.19. Now the
Apostles had not this persuasion and knowledge or assurance as they were
Apostles, but as they were Christians, because they were not saved as Apostles,
but as Christians.


P. Oh, but how can they be sure to be saved, when they cannot be sure to
persevere to the end? for they only are saved that persevere to the end.


M. They that only profess to have grace and faith in Christ, (but have it
not indeed) can never be sure to be saved, because they cannot be sure to
persevere, for they cannot persevere in that which they have not: But (for all
this) they that have grace indeed, and are truly regenerate, may be sure to
persevere: 1. because God loves the^ to whom he gives saving grace, 2 Cor:
13.13: And whom he loves once, he loves to the end, John 13.1. And therefore
they persevere in grace to the end, that they may be loved in the end: and
therefore are they loved to the end, that they may persevere to the end. John
13.1. 2 They may be sure to persevere, because the Lord has promised that the
peace of God shall keep their hearts and minds in Jesus Christ: Phil: 4.7, 3
They may be sure to persevere, because the Spirit of God so assists them: that
by the motion and efficacy thereof, they (that are truly and indeed borne of
God and begotten of him, and not Sacramentally only) they do keep
themselves, and that wicked one touches them not: 1 John 5.18. For they
building up themselves in their most holy faith, and praying in the holy Ghost
for continual assistance, they keep themselves in the love of God, looking
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life: Jude v 20.21. 4 They
may be sure to persevere in grace, if the Annoynting which they have received
abide in them; and if his seed remain in them: and this has God promised to
the truly regenerate, 1 John 2.27. and 3.9. For though in respect of some
things in themselves, (whereof you have heard in the point of Preservation by
the Spirit) and as of themselves they could not persevere, nor be sure to
persevere, but fall away; yet in other respects they do, as has been showed.


P. Sir, I am much beholden to you for your great pains in the teaching me the
second point of seeking to be saved; and ^n all the branches thereof: I pray
you now in the last place show me the last point, which is, seeking to get
salvation.


M. You must get salvation, Seeking to get salvation.
by performing some actions, which God requires, on your part to be performed,
for the attaining thereof.


P. Me thinks it seems strange to me, how man can get and attain salvation
by any action of his, which he does himself?


M. When I speak of some actions of men whereby they attain unto salvation, I
would have you to consider two things:

1. That I do not mean that man does these actions, by any absolute activity
or efficiency that is in, and of himself, or the power and dominion he has
over his own will: for he does them by Gods will, and by his effectual grace,
disposing and enabling him thereunto, who works in him to will and to do of
his own good pleasure, Phil: 2.13. But I mean that these actions are done by
their own understanding and will; (for they are not ignorant of what they do,
nor are they compelled to the doing of them.) Man's supernatural and godly
actions are Gods, as he moves him thereunto by his grace, and procures him
actually to consent to the motion of grace: but they are man's own actions, as
he is the next and immediate doer of them; and as they proceed from him, as a
vital, and reasonable creature. And therefore it is said, that the just shall
live by faith, Hab: 2.4. And therefore the actions of believing are applied to
men in all the three persons: I believe, Acts 8.37: Thou beleevest, Rom: 10.9:
He believes, Mark 16.16.

2. When I say, man gets and attaines unto salvation by some actions of his
own, I do not mean, that there is any merit or worth, in these his actions
to procure or deserve salvation, in the least measure or degree as they come
from man: But that God has appointed such actions of men to be conditions to
be performed on their part to make their persons capable of salvation, and
that these actions have this efficacy to this end, not as they be done by them,
but as they are appointed by God for them; and as he enables them to do them
according to his appointment.


P. Sir, I am fully satisfied: But I pray you, what be those actions of men
appointed by God, as conditions on their part to be performed for the
attaining of salvation?


M. They be of three kinds, whereof the first prepare them to get it: the
second give them title and interest to claim it, and receive it: and the third
give them assurance of it.


P. What be the actions that prepare them to get salvation?


M. They are these:

First, they must know and acknowledge their sin and misery, they must believe
and feel the guilt and punishment of their sins, Acts 2.37. For this will make
them to feel their need of salvation, and their unability to save themselves:
Mat: 9.13: and that they need to repent, and cry God mercy, Luke 15.9: And
this is wrought by the preaching of the law, Romans 3.20. and 4.11.

2. They must also believe the Gospel, (that is) consent in their opinion and
judgment, that there is salvation to be had; and that this is a truth of God,
that it is possible for men to get salvation; and this is wrought by the
Gospel, Mark 1.15. Acts 4.4.

3. They must heartily be sorry for their past sins, and unfeinedly purpose
to leave them, (which is Repentance begun in the root) Matthew: 21.32.

4. They must hunger and earnestly desire to be saved, Matthew: 5.6. Isay 55.1.

5. They must consult what to do, and enquire further into and after the way
and the means of salvation, with a mind to follow those directions
accordingly, Act. 2.37. and 16.30: And these three last actions are wrought by
the Law and Gospel, whereby they are both drawn and driven to seek and get
salvation.


P, What be the actions of men, which give them title and interest unto
salvation: to claim and receive it of God?


M. Actions that g^ue title to claim and receive salvation.
They are believing or trusting in Jesus Christ: Rom, 10: 9. Ephesians. 1:13. whereby
weary and heavy laden sinners come to Christ for salvation, Math: 11, 28. John
6, 35: and rest only upon the merits of the righteousness of his life and
death, for salvation in all the several degrees thereof. For by this faith,
they get and lay hold upon the Savior himself, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
and are engrasfed and united to him: Rom, 11: 19.20. for by faith, Christ is in
true believers, 2 Cor: 13, 5. he lives in them: Gal: 2 20 and dwells in them:
Ephesians. 3.17.


P. What reasons may be brought from the Scripture to prove this which you
say, concerning the action of believing in Christ?


M. These:

1 Believing in Christ is the action appointed by God, to be performed by man
for receiving salvation, because it is required of him as the condition to
obtain forgivenes of sins Act, 10, 43. reconciliation and peace with God:
Rom: 5, 1. and 3:25. justification: Act: 13, 29. adoption: John 1.12.
blessedness, Gal. 3, 9: eternal life: John 3, 16. ease from the burden of
sin: Matthew: 11, 28. quenching all Satan's fiery darts, Ephesians: 6, 16. not being
confounded of our sins: Romans 10.11. and of pleasing God: Heb. 11.6.

2 Believing in Christ is the action required by God, to be performed on man's
part for receiving salvation; because by this means, salvation comes to him by
the free grace and mercy, love and favor of God: Rom, 4: 16. Ephesians, 2, 8.

3 Believing in Christ is the action and condition required on man's part, for
obtaining salvation; because hereby the promise of salvation will be sure to
the faithful, Rom: 4.16: which by the action of obeying the Law it could not
be, because he could not perform it, Acts 13.39. Rom: 8.3.

4. Believing in Christ is the action and condition required, to be performed
by man, for the getting of salvation; because it makes a man renounce his own
righteousness, and to go out of himself to another for it, (namely) to Jesus
Christ, to be saved by his righteousness, Matthew: 11.28. Ioh: 6.35. Phil: 3.9.
Gal: 2.19.


P. What are the actions, which Christians must perform to make their
salvation sure unto themselves?


M. They are diverse: Actions that assure salvation.
for they concern either 1. God, or 2. our brethren; or 3. our selves.


P. What actions concern God?


M. They are such as belong either 1. to God the Father; or 2. to God the
Son: or 3. to God the holy Ghost.


P. What actions belong to God the Father?


M. They are three principally.

1. Fearing to offend God, and caring to please him, 1 Pet. 1.17. 1 Cor: 7.32:
For unto such, and for their comfort is the word of salvation sent, Acts 13.26:
and such may work out their salvation, (that is) the assuming (not the
procuring of it) unto themselves, Phil: 2.12. And no marvel, seeing Gods mercy
is on them that fear him for ever, Luke 1.50. Such know that they are redeemed
with the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet: 1.17, 18: and such are blessed, Psalm:
128.1.

2. Loving God, and setting our hearts and delight upon him; for such may know
that they are of the truth, and shall assure their hearts before him, 1 John
3.18, 19: And that they may have boldness in the day of judgment, 1 John
4.16, 17. And no marvel, seeing their love to God will assure them that they
are borne of God, 1 John 4.7: that they dwell in God, and God in them, 1 John
4.19: that they are known and acknowledged, and approoved of God: The first to
the Corinthians, the 8 chapter, 3 verse: that all things shall work to their
good, (that is) to the furtherance of their sanctification and salvation, Romans
8.28: And that the crown of life eternal, and the Inheritance of the kingdom
of heaven is promised to such as love God, Iam: 1.12. and 2.5.

3. Christians must hope in God, (that is) assuredly expect and look for, yea
patiently abide and wait for the accomplishment of all Gods promises,
specially that of the resurrection of the body, and of eternal life; for they
are saved by hope, Romans 8.24: And Hope is a helmet of salvation to them, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8: And an anchor to the soul both sure and steadfast, and which enters
into heaven, whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, Heb: 6.19,
20. And no marvel, seeing their hope will not deceive, nor make them ashamed,
Rom: 5.5: Because into the hearts of such as hope in God, the love of God is
shed abroad by the holy Ghost, Rom: 5.5: And they rejoice in the hope of the
glory of God, Rom: 5.3.


P. What actions of Christians concern Jesus Christ, that will assure them of
their salvation?


M. They are these two principally.

1. They must obey him in all his Evangelicall precepts and commandments,
which belong to the hearing and believing of the Gospel preached; and to the
administering and receiving the Sacraments in remembrance of him, Matthew: 28.20.
Mark 1.15. Luke 10.16. Matthew. 26.26, 27. 1 Cor: 11.24, 25. For unto such as
obey him herein, Jesus Christ is become author of eternal salvation: Heb: 5.9.
and no marvel, seeing they are blessed of God: Luk 11.28. Revel. 1.3. they are
of God (that is) chosen and beloved of him: John 8, 4.7. and they are the
sheep of Christ, to whom he will give eternal life: John 10:27.28.

2 They must love and long for, look and wait for, the second appearing or
coming of Christ. For such believe that there is laid up for them a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give them at that day: 2 Timothy 4.8. Titus: 2.13.14. Such the Lord Christ will deliver from the wrath to
come: 1 Thessalonians. 1.10: and to such he will appear the second time unto
salvation: Hebr. 9.28.


P. What actions of Christians concern the holy Spirit, that will assure them
of salvation?


M. These. Not to resist, or vex the holy Spirit: Act, 7, 51. Isai 63.10. not
to quench or grieve it: 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.30: but to be led thereby, and to
walk after the direction and guidance thereof; for such are sealed to the day
of Redemption, Ephesians: 4.30. They are Gods children: Romans 8.14. and unto such
there is no condemnation, for they are in Christ Jesus: Romans 8.1: and in them
the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled: Romans 8.4: (namely) sincerely, and in
Gods favorable acceptance.


P. What actions that concern our neighbor, must Christians do to assure
them of salvation?


M. Loving him; which is manifested, chiefly in giving, Heb. 13, 16. and 9,
10. and forgiving: Ephesians: 4.32. and is exercised toward all men, but specially
toward the household of faith, and all sincere Christians: Gal. 6: 10. For these
loving affections and actions accompany salvation; Heb: 6, 9. and they which
are exercised therein with diligence unto the end, do attain the full
assurance of hope: Heb, 6.11. Hereby Christians that love in deed and in truth,
do know that they are translated from death to life: 1 John 3.14: and that
they are of the truth, and shall assure their hearts before God: 1 Ioh. 3.19.
and unto such God will one day say, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the
kingdom prepared from the beginning of the world; because when I was hungry
ye fed me, when I was naked ye clothed me, and when I was sick and in
prison ye visited me in my members Math. 25.34.35.36.


P. What actions be they, that concern our selves, the doing whereof will
assure us of salvation?


M. They are these Nine chiefly.


P. Which is the first?


M. Daily repenting of our daily sins, with purpose and practice of
amendment, and crying God mercy in Christ. For such godly sorrow for sin
causing amendment, is unto salvation: 2 Cor. 7 10. Such departing from
iniquity, is a seal unto them, that the Lord knows they are his, and belong
unto him. 2 Timothy 2, 19: and such purging of themselves from sin, is an
assurance unto them, that they are vessels of honor: 2. 2 Timothy: 2.21: and
vessels of honor are vessels of mercy, prepared unto glory, Rom: 9.23.


P. Which is the second?


M. Giving and consecrating our selves to the service of God with an upright
heart, 1 Chronicles: 28.9. For such prove what is that good, that acceptable, and
perfect will of God, Rom: 12.1: that is, they understand thereby that it is
Gods will and purpose to save them: and no marvel, seeing Gods servants have
the fruit of their service in holiness here, and the end eternal life
hereafter, Rom: 6.19.22.


P. Which is the third?


M. Mortifying the old man, (that is) subduing and weakening the power of our
corrupt nature by the word, prayer, and fasting, and by denying to our selves
the occasions and opportunities of sin; specially of those sins to which
we are most inclined by nature or custom, Col: 3.5: For such shall live in
heaven, Rom: 8.13: such may with rejoicing look for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of that great God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit:
2.12.13: And no marvel, seeing such are Christ's, and members of him, Gal: 5.24.


P. Which is the fourth?


M. Strengthening the new man, or the inner man by the word, prayer, and
Sacraments, 2 Cor: 4.16. 1 Pet: 2.2: And thereby growing in the number and
measure of their Christian virtues and graces; for thereby they shall make
their calling and election sure; and an entrance shall be ministered unto them
abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
2 Pet: 5. to 12. And such shall be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is
the breadth, and length, and depth and height of the love of God toward them in
Jesus Christ, Ephesians: 3.16.18: Yea God will establish their hearts unblameable in
holiness before God even the Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
with all Saints, 2 Thessalonians: 3.12, 13.


P. Which is the fifth?


M. Moderating our desires to the pleasures, profits and honors of this world,
1 Cor: 7.29, 30, 31: and setting our affections upon holy and heavenly things,
Col: 3.1. For such have their conversation in heaven, and that their end is
salvation, Phil: 3.19, 20: Yea it is a sign, that such as be thus sober, 1 Thessalonians: 5.5.8: and are not besotted and drunk with the things of this life,
they have not their portion in this life, as the wicked have, Psalm: 17.14: but
that God has appointed them to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians: 5.8, 9.


P. Which is the sixth?


M. Professing Christianity, the Gospel and godliness before men, zealously
and sincerely, discreetly, and devoutly, Rom: 14.11: For Christ will confess,
and acknowledge such before the Angels of God, Luke 12.8: such lay hold on
eternal life, 1 Timothy: 6.12: Yea such confess unto salvation, and shall be
saved, Rom: 10.9, 10.


P. Which is the seventh?


M. Getting and keeping a good conscience, being in all things desirous and
endeavorous to please God, Hebr: 13.18. Acts 23.1. For such may draw near unto
God with full assurance of faith, Hebr: 10.22: such have hope toward God of a
joyful resurrection to eternal life, Acts 24.15, 16: and may have considence
toward God, and assure their hearts before him, 1 John 3.19 21.


P. Which is the eighth?


M. Striving and endeavoring to persevere in right believing, well doing, and
patient suffering, 1 Cor: 15.1. Gal: 5.1 Hebr: 4. and 10.22. For such shall be
saved, Matthew: 10.22: shall have the crown of life, Rev: 2.11: When Christ
shall appear, they shall have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his
coming, 1 John 2.28: And they may assure themselves, that there is laid up for
them a crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge will give unto them at
that day, 2 Timothy: 4.8.


P. Which is the last action, whereby Christians may assure themselves of
salvation?


M. The proving, and trying, approving and warranting of our Christian virtues
and graces: 2 Cor. 13.5: For by the proof of them, namely works of faith,
labor of love, and patience of hope, by these effects S. Paul knew that the
Thessalonians, were elected of God, and that consequently they should be saved:
1 These. 1.3. and what he knew of the^ by this means, they might also know of
themselves by the same.


P. How may we try and prove our graces, so as to approve of them for good?


M. On this manner.

1 Our faith or belief of the Gospel is good, when in our judgment we do not
join the works of the Law with faith in Christ for salvation, but stand fast
in this belief, Gal: 5.2. 1 Cor: 15.1, 2. Acts 15.5. to 24.

2. Our repentance is good, when we are sorry for sin, not only as it is
dangerous to our souls, but as it offends God by breaking his Law, Psalm: 51.4:
and when being rooted in the heart, it shows it self in the actions of the
life, by leaving former sin, and amending our lives, 1 Samuel: 7.3. Matthew: 3.8.
Acts 26.18.

3. Our faith or belief in Christ is good, when it works in us by love to God
and our neighbor, Gal: 5.6: and is showed by good works, Tit: 3.8. Iam: 2.18:
and when it stirs us up to sincere obedience to Gods commandments Hebr: 11.8.

4. Our fear of God is right, when we fear him as much for his mercy as for
his justice, Psalm: 130.2: and fear more to sin against him, than to be
punished by him, Psalm: 4.4. Gen: 39.9.

5. Our love of God is good, when it stirs us up to keep his Commandments,
John 14.15.23: when we love him for those excellent perfections of wisdom
and goodness that are in him, as well as for the benefits that come from him;
and when it stirs us up to hate evil and sin, Psalm: 97.9, 10.

6. Our hope in God, namely, for the resurrection to eternal life, and for
Christ's second coming, is right; when being grounded on the Scriptures, Rom:
15.4, we comfort our selves in our afflictions with it, 1 Thessalonians: 4.13.18: when
we patiently wait Gods leisure for the obtaining of things promised, 1 Thessalonians:
1.3. Rom: 8.23: and when it purifies our hearts, 1 John 3.3: and makes us deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously and godlily, and
soberly in this present world, Titus 2.12, 13.


P. Good Sir, I humbly acknowledge my self beholden to you, for your care over
me, and pains with me; I hope I shall never forget it; but endeavor to show
my self thankful. The Lord requite your labor of love to me in private, by
a greater blessing upon your ministry in public; and by prolonging your life,
health and strength, for Gods glory, and the good of his Church in Jesus
Christ. The Lord be with you (Sir) and with your studies.


FINIS.
A PRAYER FOR GRACE, TO Seek to serve God, and be saved.
MOst glorious Lord God, and heavenly Father, Reu: 4, 11
who art worthy of all honor and service, Iam: 4, 12
and who art able to save and destroy; Luk: 17, 10
Thy unprofitable servant, unworthy of salvation, Acts 13 46
does desire to humble himself before thee; freely acknowledging, that
howsoever I am convinced in my judgment, that nothing in this world does so
nearly concern me to look unto, as thy service, and mine own salvation; yet
my heart tells and smites me, that I have minded nothing less then these, and
that I have with much greediness sought after health and wealth, worldly
pleasures and treasures, (which only belong to the body and this present life)
as if they only were worth my seeking, and were more able to afford me true
content, than thy service, and my salvation.

Thou have brought me into the world, and made me a member of thy Christian
Church, (chiefly) for to get grace into my heart, that I might serve thee, and
live in thy fear; and also to get peace into my conscience, that I might dye
in thy favor, and be eternally saved; 2 Cor: 6; 2
for now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation: But I have
neglected the prerogative of thy service, Rom: 9, 2
Hebr: 2, 4
and so great salvation; and have spent my precious time and thoughts, in the
pursuit of carthly things, which I should have counted but as loss and dung,
Phil: 3, 8
in comparison of winning Christ, and with him salvation: as if I had been
borne to no other end, but to serve the world, sin and Satan, and to make
provision f^r the flesh, Rom: 13, 14
to fulfill the lusts thereof.

O Lord God, when I call to mind and consider my vanity and folly, yea
ungracious wickedness in trampling under my feet such precious pearls as are
thy service, Hebr: 10, 29
and my salvation; I am confounded in my self, wondcring at thy patiencc, that
could so long endure such an ungrateful wretch to live in thy Church; yea I
am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, because this mine iniquity is
increased over my head, Ezra 9, 6
and my wickedness is grown up unto heaven, crying for vengeance upon such
contempt of thy grace, John 3, 19
it being condemnation to love darkness more than light, earth more than
heaven, and the world more than thee, or mine own soul.

But thy mercy (O Lord God) is over all thy works, Psalm: 145, 9 138, 8.
and endures for ever: It is as great as thy Majesty, and thy goodness is as
much as thy greatness, and the blood of Jesus Christ is able to wash me so
clean from my sins, Revel: 1, 5
that I shall be holy, Ephesians: 5, 27
and without blemish before thee: therefore there is hope in Israel concerning
this thing. Ezra 10, 2
And therefore upon the bended knees of my heavy laden soul, I most humbly cry
thee mercy, (most merciful Father) for this and all other my sins original
and actual, committed against the Law and the Gospel: and with all the powers
of my soul most earnestly beseech thee for the Lords sake, Dan: 9, 17 Isay 53,
11 Acts 3, 14. Mat: 3, 17
thy righteous servant, the holy One, and the just, in whom thou art well
pleased, to forgive me, to be reconciled unto me; and to shed thy love into my
heart by thy holy Spirit, Rom: 5, 5
which may bear witness to my Spirit, etc. 8, 16.
that I am thy Child, beloved in thy holy Child Jesus. Acts 4, 27
Let thy mercy move thee to look upon his righteousness to justify me, when
thy justice would make thee look upon my sins to condemn me: Accept of him
for my surety, Hebr. 7.22
and of the price of his blood for my ransom. 1 Pet: 1, 23
Thou have said (O blessed God) that whosoever comes: Mat: 11, 28
unto thy Son Jesus Christ, Ioh: 6, 35.
and believes in him, with an heavy laden soul, weary of their former
wickedness, thou will ease and forgive them. 1 John 1: 9
Oh be just and faithful, to make good this promise unto me, to ease and to
save me. I desire to honor thy infinite mercy, and thy Sons unvaluable
merits, by seeking to them only, and trusting in them alone for salvation. O
be thou pleased also to magnify them upon me; for I have as much need of them
as any, 1 Timothy: 1, ^5
(being the chief of sinners) and the saving virtues of them shall be
magnified in the cure of my soul, as well as of any other.

It has pleased thee (heavenly Father) to give unto me (in some measure) a
sight and sense of my sins, (particularly) of my neglect and contempt of thy
service, and my salvation: Oh be pleased (I beseech thee) yet more and more to
discover unto me the folly and foulness of this and all my sins, that my
heart may be so broken with godly remorse and sorrow for them, that I may leave
them, and live no longer in them; but cleave unto thee, to serve thee in new
obedience; for what will it profit me to win the whole world, Mat. 16.26
and to lose thy favor, and mine own soul?

Oh, 1 Pet: 4.3.
it is enough, and too much, that I have already spent so much time of my life
past in worldly vanities, and I cannot tell how little I have to spend
hereafter; and therefore I beseech thee give me conscience to redeem it, Ephesians:
5.16.
and to spend the remainder in thy service, and in the assuring to my self my
calling, 2 Pet: 1.10 Phil: 2.12.
election, and salvation; that I may yet at length (before it be too late)
seek thy kingdom, Mat: 6.33.
and righteousness, Luk: 13.24 Hebr: 4.11. John 6.27
strive to enter into thy strait gate: and labor to enter into that rest: and
for the meat that endures to life eternal.

I beseech thee enlighten my mind more and more with the knowledge of those
chief points of thy service, and my salvation, which do most nearly concern
me, and which are revealed in thy holy word: Inflame my heart with the love of
them, that I may set it upon them; and quicken up my conscience to endeavor
(in the use of all holy means afforded for this end) to practice thy service
in such a manner and measure of sincerity, and constancy, that in the end I
may attain the salvation of my soul.

For this end I most humbly beseech thee to give me power, wholly to renounce
the service of sin, Satan, and the world, that I may give my self to thy
service; to moderate my desires to earthly things, (using the world, 1 Cor: 7,
31 Col: 3, 1.
as not abusing it) that I may set my affections on things above; because I see
I cannot serve God and Mammon. Mat 6.24.
Yet give me (I pray thee) a sufficiency of Necessaries for this life, without
which I cannot well serve thee in my place, and with my charge; 1 Timothy 6, 8.
Prove 30.8.
even food and apparel convenient; and a sanctified use of them; or a holy
want of them, in being content, that I enjoy thee as my portion, though I had
nothing else besides.

Good Lord, (I beseech thee) strengthen my faith in Christ daily, and renew my
repentance for my daily sins. Confirm my hope of a joyful resurrection to
eternal life; and increase my patience under all afflictions, learning daily
to take up my Cross, Luke 9.23
and to follow Christ. Make me watchful over my deceitful heart, Ier: 17.10.
Prove: 4.
to keep it with all diligence, that it let not sin either in or out; and give
me wisdom to cut from the senses and members of my body, Mat: 5, 29
all occasions and opportunities of doing ill.

Work in me conscience to be diligent and faithful in my place and calling
wherein I live, to do all the duties thereof as unto thee, Col: 3, 22 Rom: 14,
12 Deutr. 32, 29 Psalm: 90, 12
to whom I must give an account. And for that end give me wisdom to consider
my latter end, to number my days; and to remember that one day, (I know not
how soon) I must die, Eccle: 11, 9
and come to judgment.

Remember in mercy (O heavenly Father I beseech thee) with me, thy whole
Church, to settle peace and the Gospel therein. Continue thy blessings of thy
pure worship, and safety to our Land, and the other Kingdoms; and for that end
govern all our Governors, (specially our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, and
our Royal Queen MARY) with that wisdom of thy Spirit, Psalm: 111, 10 2 Timothy:
3.15
the beginning whereof is thy fear, and the end their own salvation. Be
comfortable (oh Father of mercy) to all thy children in affliction; ease the
pained, cure the diseased, relieve the distressed, visit the sick, and either
deliver Israel out of her troubles, Psa. 25, 22
or sanctify their several crosses to their humiliation and conversion,
consolation and salvation in Jesus Christ. Forget not to bless my kindred,
allies and friends, with a long, holy and prosperous life (if it be thy will)
in this world, with a comfortable departure in peace out of the same, Luke 2, 29
and with an eternal and happy life in the world to come: and for that end
make them dear unto thee in Jesus Christ, and by thy holy Spirit, as they are
near unto me in any bond of nature or grace, of law or love, and of
neighborhood or friendship.

Lastly, oh heavenly Father, according to my bounden duty I (...) give thee
thanks (...) thy mercies bestowe^ (...) me, mine, and all thine, (...) things
temporal, spiritual and eternal; for this prosent life, and a better that is
to come, upon our bodies and souls. Of them all I acknowledge thee the
bountiful giver and blesser; and of them all I confess my self to be a most
unworthy receiver, by reason of my sins, (specially my great unthank
fullness:) Notwithstanding I do desire unfeignedly, and (by thy grace) will
earnestly endeavor, that thou may have more sincere and constant service,
with and for all the good benefits which I have received from thee. And
therefore unto the King immortal, 1 Timothy: 1, 17
invisible, and only wise God, and merciful Father, be given with all the
parts and powers of my soul and body, in Jesus Christ, by the holy Spirit, all
glory and thanks, with obedience and service, from this present time, and from
henceforth for evermore: Amen.

THE TABLE.
A.
ATtributes of God what they be. Page 19 Of Greatness. Page 20 The duties
belonging to them. Page 28 Of Goodness. Page 24 Duties to them. Page 29 The
Almightinesse of God. Page 23 Adoption. Page 138
B.
Duties of Christians in respect of Baptism. Page 59 Duties of Christians to
their bodies. Page 87
C.
Duties belonging to our Christian Calling. Page 88 The Commandments of the
word, and duties to them. Page 48.49
D.
The two chief duties of all Christians. Page 5
E.
The Eternity of God. Page 21 Holy Exercises. Page 34 Duties before we come to
them, Page 36 2. At the time of them. Page 37 3. After them. Page 38 Examples
of the word. Page 53 Duties in respect of them. Page 54
F.
Faith. Page 29 Faculties in God. Page 20
G.
What GOD is. Page 19 What general duties belong to him, Page 17 What special
duties. Page 18 How we may be moved to seek grace. Page 114 To use grace.
Page 115 The regenerate fall not from grace. Page 181
H.
The Holiness of God. Page 24 What the hearing of the word is, Page 44 Duties
in respect of it. Page 45
I.
The Immensity of God. Page 22 Infiniteness of GOD. Page 21 Justice of GOD.
Page 25 Justification. Page 137
K.
What things we must know of God. Page 17
L.
The love of GOD to us, Page 26 Our love to GOD. To our Neighbor.
M.
The Mercy of GOD. Page 25
N.
Duties to our Neighbor. 1. General. Page 81 2. Special. Page 82 Common to
all. Peculiar to some. Page 83
O.
What GODS holy Ordinances are. Page 31 Of what kinds they are. Page 32 Duties
belonging to them. Duties to our selves. Page 86
P.
Promises of the word. What they be. Page 50 Duties to them. Page 51 Praying to
GOD, what it is. Page 61 Duties about it. Page 62 Praising GOD, what it is.
Page 67 Duties about it. Page 68 Preservation of the holy Spirit. Page 181
Perfections in GOD. Page 19
R.
The Resurrection proved. Page 144 That it is a blessing to the faithful. Page
148 The difference betwixt the raising of the godly and wicked. Page 153
Reconciliation with God. Page 137 Regeneration of the Spirit. Page 174
Whereunto. Page 176 Whereby. Page 180
S.
Christians must seek to be saved. Page 124 Why. Page 125 By what means. Page
132 What salvation is. Page 133 The degrees of it: In this life. Page 137 At
the end of it, Page 139 At the end of the world. Page 143 The means to effect
salvation. Page 159 Actions of GOD the Father. Page 160 The Son. Page 161 The
holy Ghost. Page 174 Seeking to be affected with salvation. Page 202 The
possibility of salvation. Page 203 The necessity of it. Page 205 Excellency of
it. Page 207 Certainty of it. Page 209 Seeking to get salvation. Page 218
Actions of men that prepare them to salvation. Page 223 To claim and receive
it. Page 226 To assure it. Page 231 That we must serve. Page 8 Why we must.
Page 9 The manner how to seek to serve GOD. Page 11 The measure. Page 12 The
works of them that seek to serve GOD. Page 13 What GODS service is. Page 15
Why we must seek to serve GOD while we live. Page 14 Service to GOD
immediately in respect of himself. Page 17 Duties to our souls. Page 87
Seeking to be affected with his service Page 94 The Necessity of it. Page 96
Excellency. Page 97 Equity. Page 98 Reward. Page 99 Duties in respect of the
holy Scriptures. Page 32 Seeking to practice GODS service. Page 101 The manner
of practice. Page 102 Measure. Page 104 End, why. Page 110 Means, whereby.
Page 112 How we may seek grace to serve GOD. Page 114 The Simpleness of GOD.
Page 21 Duties about receiving the Sacraments. Page 55
T.
Threatenings of GOD, what they be. Page 52 Duties about them. Page 53
V.
Virtues in GOD. Page 24
W.
The Wisdom of GOD. Page 22 What it is to worship GOD. Page 39 Difference
betwixt service and worship. Page 40 The works sf GOD. Page 72 Duties about
them. Page 73 GODS works of mercy. Page 74 Justice. Page 75
Faults escaped.
Page 10. line 2. after them, read that seek him. p. 30 in the margent; for
immediately r. mediately; and put out as his ordinances. p. 52. l. 13. for and
r. or. p. 97. l. 1. for greater r. great. p. 114. l. 5. for remedy r. reward
thereof. p. 116. l. last; after unto you, r. for instruction. p. 131. l. 4.
after dye r. and not till then. p. 135. l. 8. after is r. also. p. 187. l. 18.
after end r. through faith. p: 220: l: 19: for by faith r. by his faith. p:
221: l: last, for their r. them. p: 232: l: 9: for assuming r. assuring. p:
247: l: 11. put out that.


