THE RELIGION OF PROTESTANTS A SAFE WAY TO SALVATION. OR AN ANSWER TO A BOOK
ENTITLED MERCY AND TRVTH, Or, Charity maintained by Catholics, Which pretends
to prove the Contrary. By WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH Master of Arts of the
University of OXFORD.

Isaac. Casaubon. in Epist. ad Card. Perron. Regis IACOBI nomine scripta, Rex
arbitratur, rerum absolute necessariarum ad salutem, non magnum esse numerum.
Quare existimat ejus Majest^s, nullam ad ineundam concordiam breviorem viam
fore, quam si diligenter sepatentur necessaria a non necessariis, and ut de
necessariis conveniat, omnis opera insumatur: in non necessariis libertati
Christianae locus detur. Simplici^er necessaria Rex appellat, quae vel express
verbum Dei praecipit credenda faciendave, vel ex verbo Dei necessaria
consequentia vetus Ecclesia elicuit. -- Si ad decidendas hodiernas
Controversias haec distinctio adhiberetur, and jus divinum a positivo sen
Ecclesiastico candide separaretur; non videtur de iius quae sunt absolute
necessaria, inter pios and moderatos viros, longa aut acris contentio futura.
Nam and paucailla sunt, ut modo dicebamus, and fere ex aequo omnibus probantur,
qui se Christianos dici postulant. Atque istam distinctionem Sereniss. Rex
tanti putat esse momenti ad minuendas Controversias, quae hodie Ecclesiam Dei
tantopere exercent, ut omnium pacis studiosorum judicet officium esse,
diligentissime hanc explicare, docere, urgere.

OXFORD Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, and are to be sold by John Clarke under
St Peter's Church in Cornhill. Anno Salutis M.DC.XXXVIII.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES
By the Grace of God, KING of great Britain, France and Ireland, Defendor of
the Faith etc.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
I Present, with all humility, to Your most sacred hands, a Defense of that
Cause which is and ought to be infinitely dearer to you, then all the world:
Not doubting but upon this Dedication I shall be censured for a double
boldness; both for undertaking so great a Work, so far beyond my weak
abilities, and again, for presenting it to such a Parton, whose judgment I
ought to fear more then any Adversary. But for the first, it is a satisfaction
to my self, and may be to others, that I was not drawn to it out of any vain
opinion of my self, (whose personal defects are the only thing which I
presume to know,) but undertook it in obedience to Him, who said, Tu conversus
confirma fratres, not to S. Peter only but to all men: being encouraged also to
it by the goodness of the Cause, which is able to make a weak man strong. To
the belief hereof I was not led partially or by chance, as many are, by the
prejudice and prepossession of their Country, Education, and such like
inducements, which if they lead to truth in one place, perhaps lead to error in
a hundred; but having with the greatest equality and indifferency, made enquiry
and search into the grounds on both Sides, I was willing to impart to others
that satisfaction which was given to my self. For my inscribing to it your
Majesty's sacred Name, I should labor much in my excuse of it from high
presumption, had it not some appearance of Title to your Majesty's Patronage
and protection as being a Defense of that Book, which by special order from
your Maty was written some years since, chiefly for the general good, but
peradventure not without some aim at the recovery of One of your meanest
Subjects from a dangerous deviation, and so due unto your Maty, as the fruit of
your own High humility and most Royal Charity. Besides, it is in a manner
nothing else, but a pursuance of, and a superstruction upon that blessed
Doctrine, where With I have adorned and armed the Frontispice of my Book, which
was so earnestly recommended by your Royal Father of happy memory, to all the
lovers of Truth and Peace, that is to all that were like himself, as the only
hopeful means of healing the breaches of Christendom, whereof the Enemy of
souls makes such pestilent advantage. The luster of this blessed Doctrine I
have here endeavored to uncloud and unveile, and to free it from those mists
and fumes which have been raised to obscure it, by that Order, which envenomes
even poison it self, and makes the Roman Religion much more malignant and
trubulent then otherwise it would be: whose very Rule and Doctrine, obliges
them to make all men, as much as lies in them, subjects unto Kings, and
servants unto Christ, no farther then it shall please the Pope. So that whether
Your Majesty be considered, either as a Pious Son toward your Royal Father
K. JAMES, or as a tender hearted and compassionate Son toward your
distressed Mother, the Catholic Church, or as a King of your Subjects, or as
a Servant unto Christ, this work, (to which I can give no other commendation,
but that it was intended to do you service in all these capacities,) may
pretend not unreasonably to your Gracious acceptance. Lastly being a defense of
that whole Church and Religion you profess, it could not be so proper to any
Patron as to the great Defendor of it; which style your Majesty has ever so
exactly made good, both in securing it from all dangers, and in vindicating it
(by the well ordering and rectifying this Church) from all the foul as
persions both of Domestic and Foreign enemies, of which they can have no
ground, but their own malice and want of Charity. But it is an argument of a
despairing and lost cause to support it self with these impetuous outcries
and clamors, the faint refuges of those that want better arguments; like that
Stoic in Lucian that cried (...)! O damned villain, when he could say nothing
else. Neither is it credible the wiser sort of them should believe this their
own horrid assertion, That a God of goodness should damn to eternal
torments, those that love him and love truth, for errors which they fall into
through humane frailty! But this they must say, otherwise their only great
argument from their da^ning us, and our not being so peremptory in damning
them, because we hope unaffected Ignorance may excuse the^, would be lost: and
therefore they are engaged to act on this Tragical part, only to fright the
simple and ignorant, as we do little children by telling them that bites, which
we would not have them meddle with. And truly that herein they do but act a
part, and know themselves to do so, and deal with us here as they do with
the King of Spain at Rome, whom they accurse and Excommunicate for fashion sake
on Maundy-Thursday, for detaining part of S. Peter's Patrimony, and absolve him
without satisfaction on Good Friday, methinkes their faltring and inconstancy
herein, makes it very apparent. For though for the most part, they speak
nothing but thunder and lightning to us, and damn us all without mercy or
exception, yet sometimes to serve other purposes, they can be content to speak
to us in a milder strain, and tell us, as my adversary does, more then once,
That they allow Protestants as much Charity as Protestants allow them. Neither
is this the only contradiction which I have discovered in this uncharitable
Work; but have showed that by forgetting himself, and retracting most of the
principal grounds he builds upon, he has saved me the labor of a
confutation: which yet I have not in any place found any such labor or
difficulty, but that it was undertakable by a man of very mean, that is, of my
abilities. And the reason is, because it is Truth I plead for; which is so
strong an argument for it self, that it needs only light to discover it:
whereas it concerns Falsehood and Error to use disguises and shadowings and all
the fetches of Art and Sophistry, and therefore it stands in need of abler men,
to give that a color at least, which has no real body to subsist by. If my
endeavors in this kind may contribute any thing to this discovery, and the
making plain that Truth (which my Charity persuades me the most part of them
disaffect only, because it has not been well represented to them,) I have the
fruit of my labor, and my wish; who desire to live to no other end, then to
do service to Gods Church and Your most Sacred Majesty, in the quality of

Your MAIESTIE'S most faithful Subject, and most humble and devoted Servant
WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH.

MAndetur Typis hic Liber, cui Titulus The Religion of Protestants a safe way
to Salvation: In quo nihil occurrit a bonis Moribus, a Doctrina and Disciplina
in Ecclesia Anglicana assertis, alienum.

RICH. BAYLIE Vicecan. Oxon.

PErlegi hunc Librum, cui Titulus est The Religion of Protestants a safe way to
Salvation: In quo nihil reperio Doctrinae vel Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae
adversum, sed quamplurima quae Fidem Orthodoxam egregie illustrant, and
adversantia glossemata acute, perspicue, and modeste dissipant.

Io. PRIDEAVX S. T. P. Regius Oxon.

EGo Samuel Fell Publicus Theol. Professor in Vniv. Oxon. and ordinarius
Praelector D. Marg. Comitiss. Richmondiae, perlegi Librum cui Titulus est, The
Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation: In quo nihil reperio Doctrinae
vel Disciplinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis Moribus adversum: sed multa
nervose and modeste eventilata contra Adversarios nostrae Ecclesiae and
veritatis Catholicae, quam feliciter tuetur.

Dat. 14^ October. An. 1637 SAMVEL FELL.

THE PREFACE TO THE AVTHOR OF CHARITY MAINTAINED.
WITH AN ANSWER TO HIS Pamphlet entitled a Direction to N. N.
SIR
Upon the first news of the publication of your Book, I used all diligence
with speed to procure it; and came with such a mind to the reading of it, as S.
Austin before he was a settled Catholic, brought to his conference with
Faustus the Manichee. For as he though that if any thing more then ordinary
might be said in defense of the Manichean Doctrine, Faustus was the man from
whom it was to be expected: So my persuasion concerning you was, -- Si Pergama
dextra defendi possunt, certe has defensa videbo. For I conceived that among
the Champions of the Roman Church, the English in reason must be the best, or
equal to the best, as being by most expert Masters trained up purposely for
this war, and perpetually practiced in it. Among the English, I saw the
Jesuits would yield the first place to none; and men so wise in their
generation as the Jesuits were, if they had any Achilles among them, I
presumed, would make choice of him for this service. And besides, I had good
assurance that in the framing of this building, though you were the only
Architect, yet you wanted not the assistance of many diligent hands to bring
you in choice materials toward it; nor of many careful and watchful eyes to
correct the errors of your work, if any should chance to escape you. Great
reason therefore had I to expect great matters from you, and that your Book
should have in it the Spirit and Elixir of all that can be said in defense of
your Church and Doctrine; and to assure my self, that if my resolution not to
believe it, were not built upon the rock of evident grounds and reasons, but
only upon some sandy and deceitful appearances, now the wind and storm and
floods were coming which would undoubtedly overthrow it.

2 Neither truly were you more willing to effect such an alteration in me then
I was to have it effected. For my desire is to go the right way to eternal
happiness. But whether this way lie on the right hand or the left, or straight
forwards; whether it be by following a living Guide, or by seeking my direction
in a book, or by hearkening to the secret whisper of some private Spirit, to me
it is indifferent. And he that is otherwise affected, and has not a travelers
indifference, which Epictetus requires in all that would find the truth, but
much desires in respect of his ease, or pleasure, or profit, or advancement, or
satisfaction of friends, or any human consideration, that one way should be
true rather then another; it is odds but he will take his desire that it
should be so, for an assurance that it is so. But I for my part, unlese I
deceive my self, was and still am so affected as I have made profession: not
willing I confess to take any thing upon trust, and to believe it without
asking my self why; no, nor able to command my self (were I never so willing)
to follow, like a sheep, every shepherd that should take upon him to guide
me; or every flock that should chance to go before me: but most apt and most
willing to be led by reason to any way, or from it; and always submitting all
other reasons to this one, God has said so, therefore it is true. Nor yet was
I so unreasonable as to expect Mathematical demonstrations from you in matters
plainly incapable of them, such as are to be believed, and if we speak
properly, cannot be known; such therefore I expected not. For as he is an
unreasonable Master, who requires a stronger assent to his conclusions then his
arguments deserve; so I conceive him a froward and undisciplined Scholar, who
desires stronger arguments for a conclusion then the matter will bear. But had
you represented to my understanding such reasons of your Doctrine, as being
weighed in an even balance, held by an even hand, with those on the other
side, would have turned the scale, and have made your Religion more credible
then the contrary; certainly I should have despised the shame of one more
alteration, and with both mine arms and all my heart most readily have
embraced it. Such was my expectation from you, and such my preparation, which I
brought with me to the reading of your book. Would you know now what the event
was, what effect was wrought in me, by the perusal and consideration of it? To
deal truly and ingenuously with you, I fell somewhat in my good opinion both of
your sufficiency and syncerity: but was exceedingly confirmed in my ill opinion
of the cause maintained by you. I found every where snares that might entrap,
and colors that might deceive the simple; but nothing that might persuade, and
very little that might move an understanding man, and one that can discern
between discourse and sophistry. In short, I was verily persuaded that I
plainly saw and could make it appear, to all dis-passionate and unprejudicate
Judges, (...) a vein of sophistry and calumny, did run clean through it from
(...) beginning to the end. And letting some friends understand so much, (...)
my self to be persuaded by them, that it would not be either unproper for me,
nor un-acceptable to God, nor peradventure altogether unserviceable to his
Church, nor justly offensive to you (if you indeed were a lover of Truth, and
not a maintainer of a Faction,) if setting aside the second Part, which was in
a manner wholly employed in particular disputes, repetitions and references,
and in wranglings with D. Potter about the sense of some super-numerary
quotations, and whereon the main question no way depends, I would make a fair
and ingenuous Answer to the first, wherein the substance of the present
Controversy is confessedly contained; and which, if it were clearly answered,
no man would desire any other answer to the second. This therefore I undertook
with a full resolution to be an adversary to your errors, but a friend and
servant to your person: and so much the more a friend to your person, by how
much the severer and more rigid adversary I was to your errors.

4 In this work my conscience bears me witness that I have according to your
advice proceeded always with this consideration, that I am to give a most
strict account of every line, and word that passes under my pen; and therefore
have been precisely careful for the matter of my book to defend truth only,
and only by Truth. And then scrupulously fearful of scandalizing you or any
man with the manner of handling it. From this rule sure I am, I have not
willingly swerved in either part of it, and that I might not do it ignorantly,
I have not only my self examined mine own work, perhaps with more severity
then I have done yours, (as conceiving it a base and unchristian thing to go
about to satisfy others with what I my self am not fully satisfied;) But have
also made it pass the fiery trial of the exact censures of many understanding
judges, always heartily wishing that you your self had been of the Quorum.
But they who did undergo this burden as they wanted not sufficiency to
discover any heterodoxe doctrine, so I am sure they have been very careful to
let nothing flip dissonant from truth or from the authorized doctrine of the
Church of England, and therefore whatsoever causeless and groundless
jealousy, any man may entertain concerning my Person, yet my book, I presume,
in reason and common equity should be free from them: wherein I hope that
little or nothing has escaped so many eyes, which being weighed in the
balance of the Sanctuary will be found too light. And in this hope I am much
confirmed, by your strange carriage of your self in this whole business. For
though by some crooked and sinister arts, you have got my Answer into your
hands, now a year since and upwards, as I have been assured by some that know
it, and those of your own party; though you could not want every day fair
opportunityes of sending to me, and acquainting me with any exceptions, which,
you conceived, might be justly taken to it, or any part of it, then which
nothing could have been more welcome to me, yet hitherto you have not been
pleased to acquaint me with any one. Nay more, though you have been at sundry
times, and by several ways entreated and solicited, nay pressed and
importuned by me, to join with me in a private discussion of the Controversy
between us, before the publication of my Answer, (because I was extremely
unwilling to publish any thing which had not passed all manner of trials,) as
desiring not that I, or my Side, but that truth might overcome on which Side
soever it was) though I have prot^sted to you, and set it under my hand, (which
protestation by Gods help I would have made good) if you, or any other would
undertake your cause, would give me a fair meeting, and choose out of your
whole Book any one argument, whereof you were most confident, and by which you
would be content the rest should be judged of, and make it appear that I had
not, or could not answer it, that I would desist from the work which I had
undertaken, and answer none at all; though by all the Arts which possibly I
could devise, I have provoked you to such a trial, in particular by assuring
you that if you refused it, the world should be informed of your
tergiversation, notwithstanding all this you have perpetually, and obstinately
declined it; which to my understanding is a very evident sign that there is
not any truth in your cause, nor (which is impossible there should be strength
in your arguments, especially considering what our Savior has told us, every
one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, least his
deeds should be reproved; but he that does truth comes to the light that his
deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.

5 In the mean while though you despaired of compassing your desire this
honest way, yet you have not omitted to tempt me by base and unworthy
considerations to desert the cause which I had undertaken; letting me
understand from you, by an acquaintance common to us both, how that in case my
work should come to light, my inconstancy in religion (so you miscall my
constancy in following that way to heaven which for the present seems to me
the most probable,) should be to my great shame painted to the life; that my
own writings should be produc^d against my self; that I should be urged to
answer my own motives against Protestantisme, and that such things should be
published to the world touching my belief, (for my painter I must expect
should have great skill in perspective) of the doctrine of the Trinity, the
Deity of our Savior, and all supernatural verities, as should endanger all my
benefices present or future: that this warning was given me, not out of fear
of what I could say (for that Catholics if they might wish any ill would beg
the Publication of my book, for respects obvious enough,) but out of a mere
charitable desire of my good and reputation: and that all this was said upon a
supposition that I was answering, or had a mind to answer Charity maintained;
If not, no harm was done. To which co^^^^us premonition as I remember, I
desired the Gentleman, who dealt between us to return this answer, or to this
effect, that I believed the Doctrine of the Trinity, the Deity of our Savior,
and all other super-naturall verities revealed in Scripture, as truly and as
heartily as your self, or any man: and therefore herein your Charity was very
much mistaken; but much more and more uncharitably in conceiving me a man that
was to be wrought upon with these Terribiles visu formae, those carnal and
base fears which you presented to me, which were very proper motives for the
Devil and his instruments to tempt poor spirited men out of the way of
conscience and honesty, but very incongruous, either for Teachers of truth to
make use of, or for Lovers of truth (in which Company I had been long ago
matriculated) to hearken to with any regard. But if you were indeed desirous
that I should not answer Charity maintained, one way there was, and but one,
whereby you might obtain your desire; and that was by letting me know when and
where I might attend you, and by a fair conference, to be written down on both
sides, convincing mine understanding (who was resolved not to be a Recusant if
I were convicted,) that any one part of it, any one argument in it, which was
of moment and consequence, and whereon the cause depends, was indeed
unanswerable. This was the effect of my answer which I am well assured was
delivered: but reply from you I received none but this, that you would have no
conference with me but in Print; and soon after finding me of proof against
all these batteries, and thereby (I fear) very much en^aged, you took up the
resolution of the furious Goddess in the Poet, madded with the
unsuccessefulnesse of her malice, Flectere si neque^ superos Acherontamovebo!

6 For certainly those indigne contumelies, that mass of portentous and
execrable calumnies, wherewith in your Pamphlet of Directions to N. N. you have
loaded not only my person in particular, but all the learned and moderate
Divines of the Church of England, and all Protestants in general, nay all wise
men of all Religions but your own, could not proceed from any other fountain.

7 To begin with the last, you stick not in the beginning of your first
Chapter, to fasten the imputation of Atheism and irreligion upon all wise and
gallant men, that are not of your own Religion. In which uncharitable and
unchristian judgment, void of all color or shadow of probability, I know yet
by experience that very many of the Bigots of your Faction are partakers with
you. God forbid I should think the like of you! Yet if I should say, that in
your Religion there want not some temptations unto, and some Principles of
irreligion and Atheism, I am sure I could make my assertion much more probable
then you have done, or can make this horrible imputation.

8 For to pass by first, that which experience justifies, that where and when
your Religion has most absolutely commanded, there and then Atheism has most
abounded; To say nothing Secondly, of your notorious and confessed forging of
so many false miracles, and so many lying Legends, which is not unlikely to
make suspicious men to question the truth of all; Nor to object to you Thirdly,
the abundance of your weak and silly Ceremonies and ridiculous observances in
your Religion, which in all probability cannot but beget secret contempt and
scorn of it in wise and considering men, and consequently Atheism and
impiety, if they have this persuasion settled in them (which is too rise among
you, and which you account a piece of Wisdom and Gallantry) that if they be
not of your Religion, they were as good be of none at all; Nor to trouble you
Fourthly with this, that a great part of your Doctrine, especially in the
points contested, makes apparently for the temporal ends of the teachers of
it; which yet I fear is a great scandal to many Bea^x Esprits among you:
Only I should desire you to consider attentively when you conclude so often
from the differences of Protestants, that they have no certainty of any part of
their religion, no not of those points wherein they agree, whether you do not
that which so magisterially you direct me not to do, that is, proceed a
destructive way, and object arguments against your adversaries, which tend to
the overthrow of all Religion? And whether as you argue thus, Protestants
differ in many things, therefore they have no certainty of any thing: So an
Atheist or a Sceptique may not conclude as well, Christians and the Professors
of all Religions differ in many things, therefore they have no certainty of any
thing? Again I should desire you to tell me ingenuously, whether it be not too
probable that your portentous Doctrine of Transubstantiation joined with your
forementioned persuasion of, no Papists no Christians, has brought a great
many others as well as himself to Averroes his resolution, Quandoquide^
Christiani adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum Philosophis? Whether your
requiring men upon only probable and Prudentiall motives, to yield a most
certain assent unto things in humane reason impossible, and telling them, as
you do too often, that they were as good not believe at all, as believe with
any lower degree of faith, be not a likely way to make considering men scorn
your Religion, (and consequently all, if they know no other) as requiring
things contradictory, and impossible to be performed? Lastly, whether your
pretense that there is no good ground to believe Scripture, but your Churches
infallibility, joined with your pretending no ground for this but some texts of
Scripture, be not a fair way to make them that understand themselves, believe
neither Church nor Scripture?

9 Your calumnies against Protestants in general are set down in these words,
Chap. 2.. 2. The very doctrine of Protestants if it be followed closely, and
with coherence to it self, must of necessity induce Socinianisme. This I say
confidently, and evidently prove, by instancing in one errror, which may well
be termed the Capital, and mother Heresy, from which all other must follow at
ease; I mean, their heresy in affirming, that the perpetual visible Church of
Christ, descended by a never interrupted succession from our Savior, to this
day, is not infallible in all that it proposes to be believed, as revealed
truths.

For if the infallibility of such a public Authority be once impeached; what
remains, but that every man is given over to his own wit, and discourse? And
talk not here, of holy Scripture. For if the true Church may err, in defining
what Scriptures be Canonical; or in delivering the sense and meaning thereof,
we are still devolved, either upon the private spirit (a foolery now explo^ed
out of England, which finally leaving every man to his own conceits, ends in
Socinianisme) or else upon natural wit, and judgment. for examining and
determining, what Scriptures contain true or false doctrine, and in that
respect, ought to be received, or rejected. And indeed, take away the authority
of Gods Church, no man can be assured, that any one Book, or parcel of
Scripture, was written by divine inspiration; or that all the contents, are
infallibly true; which are the direct errors of Socinians. If it were but for
thi^ reason alone, no man, who regards the eternal salvation of his soul,
would live or dye in Protestancy, from which, so vast absurdities as these of
the Socinians must inevitably follow. And it ought to be an unspeakable comfort
to all us Catholics, while we consider, that none can deny the infallible
authority of our Church, but jointly he must be left to his own wit and ways;
and must abandon all infused faith, and true Religion, if he do but understand
himself aright.

In all which discourse, the only true word you speak is, This I say
confidently: As for proving evidently, that I believe you reserved for some
other opportunity: for the present I am sure you have been very sparing of it.

10 You say indeed confidently enough, that the denial of the Churches
infallibility is the Mother Heresy, from which all other must follow at ease:
Which is so far from being a necessary truth, as you make it, that it is
indeed a manifest falsehood. Neither is it possible for the wit of man by any
good, or so much as probable consequence, from the denial of the Churches
Infallibility to deduce any one of the ancient Heresies, or any one error of
the Socinians, which are the Heresies here entreated of. For who would not
laugh at him that should argue thus; Neither the Church of Rome, nor any other
Church is infallible, go, The doctrine of Arrius, Pelagius, Eutyches,
Nestorius, Photinus, Manichaeus was true Doctrine? On the other side, it may be
truly said and justified by very good and effectual reason, that he that
affirms with you, the Popes infallibility, puts himself into his hands and
power to be led by him at his ease and pleasure into all Heresy, and even to
Hell it self, and cannot with reason say (so long as he is constant to his
grounds) Domine cur ita facis? but must believe white to be black and black to
be white, virtue to be vice and vice to be virtue; nay (which is a horrible but
a most certain truth) Christ to be Antichrist and Antichrist to be Christ, if
it be possible for the Pope to say so: Which I say and will maintain, howsoever
you daube and disguise it, is indeed to make men Apostate from Christ to his
pretended Vicar, but real enemy. For that name and no better (if we may speak
truth without offense) I presume he deserves, who under pretense of
interpreting the law of Christ, (which Authority without any word of express
warrant he has taken upon himself,) does in many parts evacuate and dissolve
it: So dethroning Christ from his dominion over men's consciences, and in stead
of Christ, setting up himself. In as much as he that requires that his
interpretations of any law should be obeyed as true and genuine, seem they to
men's understandings never so dissonant and discordant from it, (as the Bishop
of Rome does) requires indeed that his interpretations should be the Laws; and
he that is firmly prepared in mind to believe and receive all such
interpretations without judging of them, and though to his private judgment
they seem unreasonable, is indeed congruously disposed to hold adultery a
venial sin, and fornication no sin, whenever the Pope and his adherents
shall so declare. And whatsoever he may plead, yet either wittingly or
ignorantly he makes the Law and the Lawmaker both stales, and obeyes only the
interpreter. As if I should pretend that I should submit to the Laws of the
King of England, but should indeed resolve to obey them in that sense which the
King of France should put upon them what soever it were; I presume every
understanding man would say that I did indeed obey the King of France and not
the King of England. If I should pretend to believe the Bible, but that I would
understand it according to the sense which the chief Mufty should put upon it,
who would not say that I were a Christian in pretense only, but indeed a
Mahumetan?

11 Nor will it be to purpose for you to pretend that the precepts of Christ
are so plain that it cannot be feared, that any Pope should ever go about to
dissolve them and pretend to be a Christian: For, not to say that you now
pretend the contrary, (to wit), that the law of Christ is obscure even in
things necessary to be believed and done; and by saying so, have made a fair
way for any fowle^ interpretation of any part of it: certainly that which the
Church of Rome has already done in this kind is an evident argument, that (if
she once had this power unquestioned and made expedite and ready for use, by
being contracted to the Pope) she may do what she pleases with it. Who that
had lived in the Primitive Church, would not have thought it as utterly
improbable, that ever they should have brought in the worship of Images and
picturing of God, as now it is that they should legitimate fornication? Why may
we not think they may in time take away the whole Communion from the Laity, as
well as they have taken away half of it? Why may we not think that any Text and
any sense may not be accorded, as well as the whole 14. Chapter of the Ep. of S.
Paul to the Corinth. is reconciled to the Latin service? How is it possible
any thing should be plainer forbidden, then the worship of Angels, in the Ep.
to the Colossians? then the teaching for Doctrines men's commands in the Gospel
of S. Mark? And therefore seeing we see these things done which hardly any man
would have believed, that had not seen them, why should we not fear that this
unlimited power may not be used hereafter with as little moderation? Seeing
devices have been invented how men may worship images without Idolatry, and
kill innocent men under pretense of heresy without murder, who knows not that
some tricks may not be hereafter devised, by which lying with other men's wives
shall be no Adultery, taking away other men's goods no theft? I conclude
therefore, that if Solomon himself were here, and were to determine the
difference, which is more likely to be mother of all Heresy, The denial of the
Church's or the affirming of the Popes infallibility, that he would certainly
say this is the mother, give her the child.

12 You say again confidently, that if this infallibility be once impeached,
every man is given ^ver to his own wit and discourse: which, if you mean,
discourse, not guiding it self by Scripture, but only by principles of nature,
or perhaps by prejudices and popular errors, and drawing consequences not by
rule but chance, is by no means true; if you mean by discourse, right reason,
grounded on Divine revelation and common notions, written by God in the hearts
of all men, and deducing, according to the never failing rules of Logic,
consequent deductions from them, if this be it, which you mean by discourse, it
is very meet and reasonable and necessary that men, as in all their actions, so
especially in that of greatest importance, the choice of their way to
happiness, should be left unto it: and he that follows this in all his
opinions and actions, and does not only seem to do so, follows always God;
whereas he that follows a Company of men, may oftimes follow a company of
beasts. And in saying this, I say no more then S. John to all Christians in
these words, Dearly beloved believe not every spirit, but try the spirits,
whether they be of God, or no: and the rule he gives them to make this trial
by, is to consider whether they confess Jesus to be the Christ; that is, the
Guide of their Faith, and Lord of their actions; no^ whether they acknowledge
the Pope to be his Vicar: I say no more then S. Paul in exhorting all
Christians, to try all things and to hold fast that which is good; then S.
Peter in commanding all Christians, to be ready to give a reason of the hope
that is in them: then our Savior himself in forewarning all his followers,
that if they blindly followed blind guides, both leaders and followers should
fall into the ditch; and again in saying even to the people, Yea and why of
your selves judge ye not what is right? And though by passion, or
precipitation, or prejudice; by want of reason, or not using that they have,
men may be and are oftentimes led into error and mischief; yet that they
cannot be misguided by discourse truly so called, such as I have described, you
your self have given them security. For what is discourse, but drawing
conclusions out of premises by good consequence? Now the principles which we
have settled, to wit, the Scriptures, are on all sides agreed to be infallibly
true. And you have told us in the fourth chap. of this Pamphlet, that from
truth no man can by good consequence infer falsehood; Therefore by discourse
no man can possibly be led to error: but if he err in his conclusions, he must
of necessity either err in his principles, (which here cannot have place,) or
commit some error in his discourse; that is indeed, not discourse but seem to
do so.

13 You say thirdly with sufficient confidence, that if the true Church may
err in defining what Scriptures be Canonical, or in delivering the sense
thereof, then we must follow either the private Spirit, or else natural wit and
judgment, and by them examine what Scriptures contain true or false doctrine,
and in that respect ought to be received or rejected: All which is apparently
untrue, neither can any proof of it be pretended. For though the present
Church may possibly err in her judgment touching this matter, yet have we
other directions in it, besides the private spirit, and the examination of the
contents, (which latter way may conclude the negative very strongly, to wit,
that such or such a book cannot come from God, because it contains
irreconcilable contradictions, but the affirmative it cannot conclude, because
the contents of a book may be all true, and yet the book not written by divine
inspiration:) other direction therefore I say we have, besides either of these
three, and that is, the testimony of the Primitive Christians.

14 You say Fourthly with convenient boldness, That this infallible Authority
of your Church being denied, no man can be assured, that any parcel of
Scripture was written by Divine inspiration: Which is an untruth, for which no
proof is pretended, and besides, void of modesty and full of impiety. The
first, because the experience of innumerable Christians is against it, who are
sufficiently assured, that the Scripture is divinely inspired, and yet deny the
infallible authority of your Church or any other. The second, because if^ I
cannot have ground to be assured of the divine authority of Scripture, unless
I first believe your Church infallible, then I can have no ground at all to
believe it: because there is no ground, nor can any be pretended why I should
believe your Church infallible, unless I first believe the Scripture divine.

15 Fifthly and lastly, You say with confidence in abundance, that none can deny
the infallible authority of your Church, but he must abandon all infused faith
and true religion, if he do but understand him self: Which is to say,
agreeable to what you had said before, and what out of the abundance of your
hearts you speak very often, That all Christians besides you, are open Fools,
or concealed Atheists. All this you say with notable confidence (as the manner
of Sophisters is, to place their confidence of prevailing in their confident
manner of speaking,) but then for the evidence you promised to maintain this
confidence, that is quite vanished and become invisible.

16 Had I a mind to recriminate now, and to charge Papists (as you do
Protestants) that they lead men to Socinianisme, I could certainly make a much
fairer show of evidence then you have done. For I would not tell you, you deny
the infallibility of the Church of England, ergo you lead to Socinianisme,
which yet is altogether as good an Argument as this; Protestants deny the
infallibility of the Roman Church, ergo they induce Socinianisme: Nor would I
resume my former Argument, and urge you, that by holding the Popes
infallibility, you submit your self to that capital and Mother Heresy, by
advantage whereof, he may lead you at ease to believe virtue vice, and vice
virtue, to believe Antichristianity Christianisme, and Christianity
Antichristian; he may lead you to Socinianisme, to Turcisme, nay to the Devil
himself if he have a mind to it: But I would show you that diverse ways the
Doctors of your Church do the principal and proper work of the Socinians for
the, undermining the Doctrine of the Trinity, by denying it to be supported by
those pillars of the Faith, which alone are fit and able to support it, I mean
Scripture, and the Consent of the ancient Doctors.

17 For Scripture, your men deny very plainly and frequently, that this
Doctrine can be proved by it. See if you please this plainly taught, and urged
very earnestly by Cardinal Hosius, De Author. Sac. Scrip. l. 3. p. 53. By
Gordonius Huntlaeus, Contr. Tom. 1. Controv. 1. De verbo Dei C. 19. by
Gretserus and Tanerus, in Colloquio Ratesbon: And also by Vega, Possevin,
Wiekus, and Others.

18 And then for the Consent of the Ancients, that that also delivers it not,
by whom are we taught but by Papists only? Who is it that makes known to all
the world, that Eusebius that great searcher and devourer of the Christian
libraries was an Arrian? Is it not your great Achilles, Cardinal Perron, in
his 3. Book 2. Chap. of his Reply to K. James? Who is it that informs us that
Origin (who never was questioned for any error in this matter, in or near his
time) denied the Divinity of the Son and the Holy Ghost? Is it not the same
great Cardinal, in his Book of the Eucharist against M. du Plessis. l. 2. c.
7? Who is it that pretends that Irenaeus has said those things, which he that
should now hold, would be esteemed an Arrian? Is it not the same Perron in his
Reply to K. James, in the fifth Chap. of his fourth observation? And does he not
in the same place peach Tertullian also, and in a manner give him away to the
Arrians? And pronounce generally of the Fathers before the Council of Nice,
That the Arrians would gladly be tried by them? And are not your fellow Jesuits
also, even the prime men of your Order, prevaricators in this point as well as
others? Does not your friend M. Fisher, or M. Flued in his book of the Nine
Questions proposed to him by K. James speak dangerously to the same purpose, in
his discourse of the Resolution of Faith, toward the end? Giving us to
understand, That the new Reformed Arrians bring very many testimonies of the
ancient Fathers to prove that in this Point they did contradict themselves and
were contrary one to another: which places whosoever shall read will clearly
see, that to common people they are unanswerable, yea that common people are
not capable of the answers that learned men yield unto such obscure passages.
And has not your great Antiquary Petavius, in his Notes upon Epiphanius in
Haer. 69. been very liberal to the Adversaries of the Doctrine of the Trinity,
and in a manner given them for Patrons and Advocates, first Justin Martyr, and
then almost all the Fathers before the Council of Nice, whose speeches he
says, touching this point, cum Orthodoxae fidei regula minime consentiunt?
Hereunto I might add that the Dominicans and Jesuits between them in another
matter of great importance, viz. Gods Prescience of future contingents, give
the Socinians the premises, out of which their conclusion does unavoidably
follow. For the Domini^ans maintain on the one Side, that God can foresee
nothing but what he Decrees: The Jesuits on the other Side, that he does not
Decree all things: And from hence the Socinians conclude (as it is obvious for
them to do) that he does not foresee all things. Lastly, I might adjoyn this,
that you agree with one consent, and settle for a rule unquestionable, that no
part of Religion can be repugnant to reason, whereunto you in particular
subscribe unawares in saying, From truth no man can by good consequence infer
Falsehood, which is to say in effect, that Reason can never lead any man to
error: And after you have done so, you proclaim to all the world (as you in
this Pamphlet do very frequently,) that if men follow their Reason and
discourse, they will (if they understand themselves) be led to Socinianisme.
And thus you see with what probable matter I might furnish out and justify my
accusation, if I should charge you with leading men to Socinianisme! Yet I do
not conceive that I have ground enough for this odious imputation. And much
less should you have charged Protestants with it, whom you confess to abhor
and detest it: and who fight against it not with the broken reeds, and out of
the paper fortresses of an imaginary Infallibility, which were only to make
sport for their Adversaries; but with the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God:
of which we may say most truly, what David said of Goliah's sword, offered him
by Abilech, non est sicut iste, There is none comparable to it.

19 Thus Protestants in general, I hope, are sufficiently vindicated from your
calumny: I proceed now to do the same service for the Divines of England; whom
you question first in point of learning and sufficiency, and then in point of
conscience and honesty, as prevaricating in the Religion which they profess,
and inclining to Popery. Their Learning (you say) consists only in some
superficial talent of preaching, languages, and elocution, and not in any deep
knowledge of Philosophy, especially of Metaphysics, and much less of that
most solid, profitable, subtle, and (O re^ ridicula^ Cato and jocosa^!)
succinct method of School Divinity. Wherein you have discovered in your self
the true Genius and spirit of detraction. For taking advantage from that
wherein envy it self cannot deny but they are very eminent, and which requires
great sufficiency of substantial learning, you disparage them as insufficient
in all things else. As if forsooth, because they dispute not eternally, Vtru^
Chimaera bombinans in vacuo, possit comedere, secundas Intentiones? Whether a
Million of Angels may not sit upon a needles point? Becuase they fill not their
brains with notions that signify nothing, to the utter extermination of all
reason and common sense, and spend not an Age in weaving and un-weaving subtle
cobwebs, fitter to catch flies then Souls; therefore they have no deep
knowledge in the Acroamaticall part of learning! But I have too much honored
the poorness of this detraction to take notice of it.

20 The other Part of your accusation strikes deeper, and is more co^siderable:
And that tells us that, Protestantisme waxes weary of it self; that the
Professors of it, they especially of greatest worth, learning, and authority,
love temper and moderation: and are at this time more unresolved where to
fasten, then at the infancy of their Church: That their Churches begin to look
with a new face: Their w^lls to speak a new language: Their Doctrine to be
altered in many things for which their Progenitors forsook the then Visible
Church of Christ: For example, the Pope not Antichrist: Prayer for the dead:
Limbus Patrum: Pictures: That the Church has Authority in determining
Controversies of Faith, and to interpret Scripture; about Freewill,
Predestination, Universal grace: That all our works are not sins: Merit of
good works: Inherent Justice: Faith alone does not justify: Charity to be
preferred before knowledge: Traditions: Commandments possible to be kept: That
their thirty nine Articles are patient, nay ambitious of some sense wherein
they may seem Catholic: That to allege the necessity of wife and children in
these days is but a weak plea for a married minister to compass a Benefice:
That Calvinisme is at length accounted Heresy, and little less then treason:
That men in talk and writing use willingly the once fearful names of Priests
and Altars: That they are now put in mind that for exposition of Scripture they
are by Canon bound to follow the Fathers: which if they do with syncerity, it
is easy to tell what doom will pass against Protestants; seeing by the
confession of Protestants, the Fathers are on the Papists side, which the
Answerer to some so clearly demonstrated, that they remained convinced: In
fine, as the Samaritans saw in the Disciples countenances that they meant to
go to Jerusalem, so you pretend it is even legible in the foreheads of these
men, that they are even going, nay making have to Rome. Which scurrilous libell
void of all truth, discretion and honesty, what effect it may have wrought,
what credit it may have gained with credulous Papists, (who dream what they
desire, and believe their own dreams,) or with ill-affected, jealous, and weak
Protestants, I can not tell: But one thing I dare boldly say, that you your
self did never believe it.

21 For did you indeed conceive, or had any probable hope, that such men as you
describe, men of worth of learning and authority too, were friends and
favorers of your Religion, and inclinable to your Party, can any man imagine
that you would proclaim it, and bid the world take heed of them? Sic notus
Ulysses? Do we know the lesuites no better then so? What are they turned
prevaricators against their own Faction? Are they likely men to betray and
expose their own Agents and instruments, and to awaken the eyes of jealousy,
and to raise the clamor of the people against them? Certainly your Zeal to the
Sea of Rome, testified by your fourth Vow of special obedience to the Pope,
proper to your Order, and your cunning carriage of all affairs for the greater
advantage and advancement of that Sea, are clear demonstrations that if you had
thought thus, you would never have said so. The truth is, they that run to
extremes in opposition against you, they that pull down your infallibility and
set up their own, they that declaim against your tyranny, and exercise it
themselves over otheres, are the Adversaries that give you greatest advantage,
and such as you love to deal with: whereas upon men of temper and moderation,
such as will oppose nothing because you maintain it, but will draw as near to
you, that they may draw you to them, as the truth will suffer them: such as
require of Christians to believe only in Christ, and will damn no man nor
Doctrine without express and certain warrant from gods word: upon such as
these you know not how to fasten; but if you chance to have conference with any
such, (which yet as much as possibly you can you avoid and decline,) you are
very speedily put to silence, and see the indefensible weakness of your cause
laid open to all men. And this I verily believe, is the true reason that you
thus rave and rage against them, as foreseeing your time of prevailing, or even
of subsisting, would be short, if other Adversaries gave you no more advantage
then they do.

22 In which persuasion also I am much confirmed by consideration of the
sillyness and poorness of those suggestions, and partly of the apparent
vanity and falsehood of them, which you offer in justification of this wicked
calumny. For what if out of devotion toward God; out of a desire that he
should be worshipped as in Spirit and truth in the first place, so also in the
beauty of holiness? what if out of fear that too much simplicity and
nakedness in the public Service of God may beget in the ordinary sort of men
a dull and stupid irreverence, and out of hope that the outward state and glory
of it, being well disposed and wisely moderated, may engender, quicken,
increase and nourish the inward reverence respect and devotion which is due
unto Gods Sovereign Majesty and power? what if out of a persuasion and desire
that Papists may be won over to us the sooner, by the removing of this
scandal out of their way; and out of an holy jealousy, that the weaker sort of
Protestants might be the easier seduced to them by the magnificence and pomp of
their Church Service in case it were not removed? I say, what if out of these
considerations, the Governors of our Church, more of late then formerly, have
set themselves to adorn and beautify the places where Gods honor dwells, and
to make them as heavenly as they can with earthly ornaments? Is this a sign
that they are warping toward Popery? Is this Devotion in the Church of England
an argument that she is coming over to the Church of Rome? Sir Edwin Sands, I
presume every man will grant, had no inclination that way; yet he forty years
since highly commended this part of devotion in Papists, and makes no scruple
of proposing it to the imitation of Protestants: Little thinking that they who
would follow his counsel, and endeavor to take away this disparagement of
Protestants, and this glorying of Papists, should have been censured for it as
making way and inclining to Popery. His words to this purpose are excellent
words, and because they show plainly, that what is now practiced was approved
by Zealous Protestants so long ago, Survey of Religion. Init.
I will here set them down.

23 This one thing I cannot but highly commend in that sort and Order: They
spare nothing which either cost can perform in enriching, or skill in adorning
the Temple of God, or to set out his Service with the greatest pomp and
magnificence that can be devised. And although, for the most part, much
baseness and childishness is predominant in the Masters and contrivers of
their Ceremonies, yet this outward state and glory being well disposed, does
engender, quicken, increase, and nourish the inward reverence, respect and
devotion, which is due unto Sovereign Majesty and Power. And although I am not
ignorant that many men well reputed have embraced the thrifty opinion of that
Disciple who thought all to be wasted that was bestowed upon Christ in that
sort, and that it were much better bestowed upon him on the poor, (yet with an
eye perhaps that themselves would be his quarter Almoners,) notwithstanding I
must confess, it will never sink into my heart, that in proportion of reason,
the allowance for furnishing out of the service of God should be measured by
the scant and strict rule of mere necessity, (a proportion so low that nature
to other most bountiful in matter of necessity, has not failed no not the
most ignoble creatures of the world,) and that for our selves no measure of
heaping but the most we can get, no rule of expense but to the utmost pomp we
list: Or that God himself had so enriched the lower parts of the world with
such wonderful varieties of beauty and glory, that they might serve only to
the pampering of mortal man in his pride; and that in the Service of the high
creator Lord and giver (the outward glory of whose higher palace may appear by
the very lamps that we see so far of burning gloriously in it) only the
simpler, baser, cheaper, less noble, less beautiful, less glorious things
should be employed. Especially seeing as in Princes courts, so in the service
of God also, this outward state and glory, being well disposed, does (as I have
said) engender, quicken, increase and nourish the inward reverence, respect and
devotion, which is due to so Sovereign majesty and power. Which those whom the
use there of cannot persuade unto, would easily by the want of it be brought to
confess; for which cause I crave leave to be excused by them herein, if in
Zeal to the common Lord of all, I choose rather to commend the virtue of an
enemy then to flatter the vice and imbecility of a friend. And so much for this
matter.

24 Again, what if the names of Priests and Altars so frequent in the ancient
Fathers, though not in the now Popish sense, be now resumed and more commonly
used in England then of late times they were: that so the colorable argument
of their conformity, which is but nominall, with the ancient Church, and our
inconformity, which the Governors of the Church would not have so much as
nominall, may be taken away from them* and the Church of England may be put in
a state, in this regard more justifiable against the Roman then formerly it
was, being hereby enabled to say to Papists (whenever these names are
objected,) we also use the names of Priests and Altars, and yet believe neither
the corporal Presence, nor any Proper and propitiatory Sacrifice?

25 What if Protestants be now put in mind, that for exposition of Scripture,
they are bound by a Canon to follow the ancient Fathers: which whosoever does
with syncerity, it is utterly impossible he should be a Papist? And it is most
falsely said by you, that you know that to some Protestants, I clearly
demonstrated, or ever so much as undertook, or went about to demonstrate the
contrary. What if the Centurists be censured somewhat roundly by a Protestant
Divine for affrming, that the keeping of the Lords day was a thing indifferent
for two hundred years? Is there in all this or any part of it any kind of
proof of this scandalous calumny? Certainly if you can make no better
arguments then these, and have so little judgment as to think these any, you
have great reason to decline conferences, and Signior Con to prohibit you from
writing books any more.

26 As for the points of Doctrine wherein you pretend that these Divines begin
of late to falter, and to comply with the Church of Rome, upon a due
examination of particulars it will presently appear, First, that part of them
always have been, and now are held constantly one way by them; as the
Authority of the Church in determining Controversies of faith, though not the
infallibility of it: That there is Inherent Justice, though so imperfect that
it cannot justify: That there are Traditions, though none necessary: That
charity is to be preferred before knowledge: That good Works are not properly
meritorious And lastly, that faith alone justifies, though that faith justifies
not which is alone. And secondly, for the remainder that they, every one of
them, have been anciently without breach of charity disputed among Protestants,
such for example were the Questions about the Popes being the Antichrist, The
lawfulness of some kind of prayers for the dead, the Estate of the Fathers
souls, before Christ's ascension; Freewill, Predestination, Universal grace:
The Possibility of keeping Gods commandments. The use of Pictures in the
Church: Wherein that there has been anciently diversity of opinion amongst
Protestants, it is justified to my hand by a witness, with you, beyond
exception, even your great friend M. Brerely, whose care, exactness and
fidelity (you say in your Preface) is so extraordinary great. Consult him
therefore: Tract. 3. Sect. 7. of his Apology: And in the 9. 10. 11. 14. 24. 26.
27. 37. Subdivisions of that Section, you shall see as in a mirror, your self
proved an egregious calumniator, for charging Protestants with innovation and
inclining to Popery, under pretense forsooth, that their Doctrine begins of
late to be altered in these points. Whereas, M. Brerely will inform you, they
have been anciently, and even from the beginning of the Reformation,
controverted amongst them, though perhaps the stream and current of their
Doctors run one way, and only some brook or rivulet of them the other.

27 And thus my Friends, I suppose are clearly vindicated, from your scandalls
and calumnies: It remains now that in the last place I bring my self fairly
off from your foul aspersions, that so my person may not be (as indeed
howsoever it should not be) any disadvantage or disparagement to the cause, nor
any scandal to weak Christians.

28 Your injuries then to me (no way deserved by me, but by differing in
opinion from you, wherein yet you surely differ from me as much as I from you,)
are especially three. For first upon heere^ay, and refusing to give me
opportunity of begetting in you a better understanding of me, you charge me with
a great number of false and impious doctrines, which I will not name in
particular, because I will not assist you so far in the spreading of my own
undeserved defamation: but whosoever teaches or holds them let him be Anathema!
The sum of them all cast up by your self, in your first chap. is this,
Nothing ought or can be certainly believed, farther then it may be proved by
evidence of Natural reason: (where I conceive Natural reason is opposed to
supernatural Revelation) and whosoever holds so let him be Anathema! And
moreover to clear my self once for all, from all imputations of this nature,
which charge me injuriously with denial of Supernatural Verities, I profess
syncerely, that I believe all those Books of Scripture, which the Church of
England accounts Canonical, to be the Infallible word of God: I believe all
things evidently contained in them; all things evidently, or even probably
deducible from them: I acknowledge all that to be Heresy, which by the Act of
Parliament primo of Q. ELIZ. is declared to be so, and only to be so: And
though in such points which may he held diversely of diverse men salva Fidei
compage. I would not take any man's liberty from him, and humbly beseech all
men, that they would not take mine from me! Yet thus much I can say (which I
hope will satisfy any man of reason,) that whatsoever has been held necessary
to salvation, either by the Catholic Church of all ages, or by the consent of
Fathers, measured by Vincentius Lyrinensis his rule, or is held necessary
either by the Catholic Church of this age, or by the consent of Protestants,
or even by the Church of England, that, against the Socinians, and all others
whatsoever, I do verily believe and embrace.

29 Another great and manifest injury you have done me, in charging me to have
forsaken your Religion, because it condus'd not to my temporal ends, and suited
not with my desires and designs: Which certainly is a horrible crime, and
whereof if you could convince me, by just and strong presumptions, I should
then acknowledge my self to deserve that opinion, which you would feign induce
your credents unto, that I changed not your Religion for any other but for none
at all. But of this great fault my conscience acquits me, and God, who only
knows the hearts of all men, knows that I am innocent? Neither doubt I but
all they who know me, and amongst them many Persons of place and quality, will
say they have reason in this matter to be my compurgators. And for you, though
you are very affirmative in your accusation, yet you neither do, nor can
produce any proof or presumption for it, but forgeting your self, (as it is
Gods will oftimes that slanderers should do) have let fall some passages which
being well weighed, will make considering men apt to believe, that you did not
believe your self. For how is it possible, you should believe that I deserted
your Religion for ends, and against the light of my conscience, out of a desire
of preferment, and yet out of scruple of conscience, should refuse (which also
you impute to me,) to subscribe the 39 Articles, that is, refuse to enter at
the only common door, which here in England leads to preferment? Again how
incredible is it that you should believe, that I forsook the profession of
your Religion, as not suting with my desires and designs, which yet reconciles
the enjoying of the pleasures and profits of sin here, with the hope of
happiness hereafter, and proposes as great hope of great temporal
advancements to the capable servants of it, as any, nay more then any Religion
in the world; and instead of this should choose Socinianisme, a Doctrine, which
howsoever erroneous in explicating the mysteries of Religion, and allowing
greater liberty of opinion in speculative matters, then any other Company of
Christians does or they should do, yet certainly which you, I am sure, will
pretend and maintain to explicate the Laws of Christ with more rigor, and
less indulgence and condescendence to the desires of flesh and blood then your
Doctrine does! And besides, such a Doctrine by which no man in his right mind,
can hope for any honor or preferment either in this Church or State or any
other! All which clearly demonstrates that this foul and false aspersion,
which you have cast upon me, proceeds from no other fountain, but a heart
abounding with the gall and bitterness of uncharitableness, and even blinded
with malice toward me, or else from a perverse zeal to your superstition,
which secretly suggests this persuasion to you, That for the Catholic cause
nothing is unlawful, but that you may make use of such indirect and crooked
arts as these, to blast my reputation, and to possess men's minds with
disaffection to my person, least otherwise peradventure they might with some
indifference hear reason from me. God I hope which brings light out of
darkness, will turn your counsels to foolishness, and give all good men
grace to perceive how weak and ruinous that Religion must be, which needs
supportance from such tricks and devices! So I call them because they deserve
no better name: For what are all these Personal matters, which hitherto you
have spoke of, to the business in hand? If it could be proved, that Cardinal
Bellarmine was indeed a Jew, or that Cardinal Perron was an Atheist, yet I
presume you would not accept of this for an answer to all their writings in
defense of your Religion. Let then my actions and intentions and opinions be
what they will, yet I hope truth is nevertheless truth, nor reason ever the
less Reason because I speak it. And therefore the Christian Reader, knowing
that his Salvation or damnation depends upon his impartial and sincere
judgment of these things, will guard himself I hope from these impostures, and
regard not the person but the cause and the reasons of it; not who speaks but
what is spoken: Which is all the favor I desire of him, as knowing that I am
desirous not to persuade him, unless it be truth whereunto I persuade him.

30 The third and la^t part of my Accusation was, that I answer ou^ of
Principles which Protestants themselves will profess to detest: which indeed
were to the purpose if it could be justified. But, besides that it is confuted
by my whole Book, and made ridiculous by the Approbations premised unto it, it
is very easy for me out of your own mouth and words to prove it a most
injurious calumny. For what one conclusion is there is the whole fabric of my
discourse, that is not naturally deducible out of this one Principle, That all
things necessary to salvation are evidently contained in Scripture? Or what one
Conclusion almost of importance is there in your Book, which is not by this one
clearly confutable? Grant this, and it will presently follow in opposition to
your first Conclusion, and the argument of your first Ch: that amongst men of
different opinions, touching the obscure and controverted Questions of
Religion, such as may with probability be disputed on both Sides (and such as
are the disputes of Protestants;) Good men and lovers of truth of all Sides may
be saved; because all necessary things being supposed evident, concerning
them, with men so qualified, there will be no difference: There being no more
certain sign that a Point is not evident, then that honest and understanding
and indifferent men, and such as give themselves liberty of judgment, after a
mature consideration of the matter differ about it.

31 Grant this, and it will appear Secondly, that the means whereby the
revealed Truths of God are conveyed to our understanding, and which are to
determine all Controversies in Faith, necessary to be determined, may be, for
any thing you have said to the contrary, not a Church but the Scripture; which
contradicts the Doctrine of your Second Chapter.

32 Grant this, and the distinction of points Fundamental and not
Fundamental, will appear very good and pertinent. For those truths will be
fundamental, which, are evidently delivered in Scripture and commanded to be
preached to all men; Those not fundamental which are obscure. And nothing will
hinder but that the Catholic Church may err in the latter kind of the said
points: because Truths not necessary to the Salvation, cannot be necessary to
the being of a Church; and because it is not absolutely necessary that God
should assist his Church any farther then to bring her to Salvation; neither
will there be any necessity at all of any infallible Guide, either to consigne
unwritten Traditions, or to declare the obscurities of the faith. Not for the
former end, because this Principle being granted true, nothing unwritten can be
necessary to be consigned. Nor for the latter, because nothing that is obcsure
can be necessary to be understood, or not mistaken. And so the discourse of
your whole Third Chap: will presently vanish.

33 Fourthly, for the Creed's containing the Fundamentals of simple belief,
though I see not how it may be deduced from this principle, yet the granting of
this plainly renders the whole dispute touching the Creed unnecessary. For if
all necessary things of all sorts, whether of simple belief or practice be
confessed to be clearly contained in Scripture, what imports it whether those
of one sort be contained in the Creed?

34 Fifthly let this be granted, and the immediate Corollary in opsition to your
fifth Ch: will be and must be, That, not Protestants for rejecting, but the
Church of Rome for imposing upon the Faith of Christians, Doctrines unwritten
and unnecessary, and for disturbing the Churches peace and dividing Unity for
such matters, is in a high degree presumptuous and Schismatic.

35 Grant this sixthly, and it will follow unavoidably that Protestants cannot
possibly be Heretics, seeing they believe all things evidently contained in
Scripture, which are supposed to be all that is necessary to be believed: and
so your Sixth Chapter is clearly confuted.

36 Grant this lastly, and it will be undoubtedly consequent, in contradiction
of your seventh Chapter, that no man can show more charity to himself then by
continuing a Protestant, seeing Protestants are suppos' to believe, and
therefore may accordingly practice, at least by their Religion are not hindered
from practicing and performing all things necessary to Salvation.

37 So that the position of this one Principle, is the direct overthrow of your
whole Book, and therefore I needed not, nor indeed have I made use of any
other. Now this principle, which is not only the corner stone or chief Pillar,
but even the base, and adequate foundation of my Answer; and which while it
stands firm and unmovable, cannot but be the supporter of my Book and the
certain ruin of yours, is so far from being, according to your pretense,
detested by all Protestants, that all Protestants whatsoever, as you may see in
their Harmony of confessions, unanimously profess and maintain it. And you
your self, C. 6. 30. plainly confess as much, in saying, The whole Edifice of
the faith of Protestants is settled on these two Principles: These particular
Books are Canonical Scripture: And the sense and meaning of them is plain and
evident at least in all points necessary to Salvation.

38 And thus your venom against me is in a manner spent, saving only that
there remain two little impertinencies, whereby you would disable me from being
a fit advocate for the cause of Protestants. The first, because I refuse to
subscribe the Artic. of the Chapter of England: The second because I have set down
in writing motives which sometime induced me to forsake Protestantisme, and
hitherto have not answered them.

39 By the former of which objections it should seem, that either you conceive
the 39 Articles the common Doctrine of all Protestants; and if they be, why
have you so often upbraided them with their many and great differences? Or else
that it is the peculiar defense of the Church of England, and not the common
cause of all Protestants, which is here undertaken by me: which are certainly
very gross mistakes. And yet why he who makes scruple of subscribing the
truth of one or two Propositions may not yet be fit enough to maintain that
those who do subscribe them are in a saveable condition, I do not understand.
Now though I hold not the Doctrine of all Protestants absoluetly true, (which
with reason cannot be required of me while they hold contradictions,) yet I
hold it free from all impiety, and from all error destructive of Salvation, or
in it self damnable: And this I think in reason may sufficiently qualify me,
for a maintainer of this assertion, that Protestancie destroies not Salvation.
For the Church of England, I am persuaded that the constant Doctrine of it is
so pure and Orthodoxe, that whosoever believes it and lives according to it,
undoubtedly he shall be saved; and that there is no error in it which may
necessitate or warrant any man to disturb the peace or renounce the Communion
of it. This in my opinion is all intended by Subscription, and thus much if you
conceive me not ready to subscribe, your Charity I assure you is much mistaken.

40 Your other objection against me is yet more impertinent and frivolous then
the former: Unless perhaps it be a just exception against a Physician, that
himself was sometimes in, and recovered himself from that disease which he
undertakes to cure; or against a guide in a way, that at first before he had
experience himself mistook it, and after, wards, found his error and amended
it. That noble writer Michael de Montai'gne, was surely of a far different
mind; for he will hardly allow any Physician competent, but only for such
diseases as himself had passed through: And a far greater then Montai'gne,
even he that said, Tu conversus confirma fratres, gives us sufficiently to
understand that they which have themselves been in such a state as to need
conversion, are not thereby made incapable of, but rather engaged and obliged
unto, and qualified for this charitable function.

41 Neither am I guilty of that strange and preposterous zeal (as you esteem
it) which you impute to me; for having been so long careless in removing this
scandal against Protestants, and answering my own Motives, and yet now showing
such fervor in writing against others. For neither are they other Motives, but
the very same for the most part with those which abused me, against which this
Book which I now publish, is in a manner wholly employed: And besides, though
you Jesuits take upon you to have such large and universal intelligence of all
state affairs and matters of importance, yet I hope such a contemptible
matter, as an answer of mine to a little piece of paper, may very probably have
been written and escaped your observation. The truth is, I made an answer to
them three years since and better, which perhaps might have been published,
but for two reasons: one because the Motives were never public, until you
made them so; the other, because I was loath to proclaim to all the world so
much weakness as I showed, in suffering my self to be abused by such silly
Sophismes; All which proceed upon mistakes and false suppositions, which
unadvisedly I took for granted; as when I have set down the Motives in order by
subsequent Answers to them I shall quickly demonstrate, and so make an end. The
Motives then were these.

1 Because perpetual visible profession, which could never be wanting to the
Religion of Christ, nor any part of it, is apparently wanting to Protestant
Religion, so far as concerns the points in contestation.

2 Because Luther and his followers, separating from the Church of Rome,
separated also from all Churches, pure or impure, true or false then being in
the world; upon which ground I conclude, that either Gods promises did fail of
performance, if there were then no Church in the world, which held all things
necessary, and nothing repugnant to Salvation; or else that Luther and his
Sectaries, separating from all Churches then in the world, and so from the
true, if there were any true, were damnable Schismatics.

3 Because, if any credit may be given to as creditable records, as any are
extant, the Doctrine of Catholics has been frequently confirmed; and the
opposite doctrine of Protestants, confounded with supernatural and divine
Miracles.

4 Because many points of Protestant doctrine, are the damned opinions of
Heretics, condemned by the Primitive Church.

5 Because the Prophecies of the old Testament, touching the conversion of
Kings and Nations to the true Religion of Christ, have been accomplished in and
by the Catholic Roman Religion, and the Professors of it; and not by
Protestant Religion, and the Professors of it.

6 Because the doctrine of the Church of Rome is conformable, and the doctrine
of Protestants contrary, to the doctrine of the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, even by the confession of Protestants themselves; I mean, those
fathers, who lived within the compass of the first 600. years; to whom
Protestants themselves do very frequently, and very confidently appeal.

7 Because the first pretended Reformers had neither extraordinary Commission
from God, nor ordinary Mission from the Church, to preach Protestant Doctrine.

8 Because Luther, to preach against the Mass (which contains the most
material points now in controversy) was persuaded by reasons suggested to him
by the Devil himself, disputing with him. So himself professes in his Book
de Missa Privata. That all men might take heed of following him, who professes
himself to follow the Devil.

9 Because the Protestant cause is now, and has been from the beginning,
maintained with gross falsifications, and Calumnies; whereof their prime
Controversy writers, are notoriously, and in high degree guilty.

10 Because by denying all humane authority, either of Pope, or Counsels, or
Church, to determine Controversies of Faith, they have abolished all possible
means of suppressing Heresy, or restoring unity to the Church.

These are the Motives; now my Answers to them follow brie^ly and in order.

43 To the first: God has neither decreed nor foretold, that his true Doctrine
should de facto be always visibly prfessed, without any mixture of falsehood.

To the second: God has neither decreed nor foretold, that there shall be
always a visible company of men free from all error in it self damnable.
Neither is it always of necessity Schismatic to separate from the external
communion of a Church, though wanting nothing necessary: For if this Church
supposed to want nothing necessary, require me to profess against my
conscience, that I believe some error* though never so small and innocent,
which I do not believe, and will not allow me her communion but upon this
condition, In this case, the Church for requiring this condition is
Schismatic, and not I for separating from the Church.

To the third: If any credit may be given to Records far more creditable then
these, the Doctrine of Protestants, that is the Bible has been confirmed, and
the Doctrine of Papists, which is in many points plainly opposite to it,
confounded with supernatural and divine Miracles, which for number and glory
outshine Popish pretended Miracles, as much as the Sun does an Ignis fatuus,
those I mean which were wrought by our Savior Christ and his Apostles, Now
this book, by the confession of all sides confirmed by innumerous Miracles,
foretells me plainly, that in after ages great signs and wonders shall be
wrought in confirmation of false doctrine, and that I am not to believe any
doctrine which seems to my understanding repugnant to the first, though an
Angel from Heaven should teach it; which were certainly as great a Miracle as
any that was ever wrought in attestation of any part of the doctrine of the
Church of Rome: But that true doctrine should in all ages have the testimony of
Miracles, that I am no where taught; So that I have more reason to suspect and
be afraid of pretended Miracles, as signs of false doctrine, then much to
regard them as certain arguments of the truth. Besides, setting aside the
Bible, and the Tradition of it, there is as good story for Miracles wrought by
those who lived and died in opposition to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, (as
by S. Cyprian, Colmannus, Columbanus, Aidanus and others,) as there is for
those that are pretended to be wrought by the members of that Church. Lastly,
it seems to me no strange thing that God in his Justice should permit some
true Miracles to be wrought to delude them, who have forged so many as
apparently the professors of the Roman Doctrine have to abuse the World.

To the fourth: All those were not See this acknowledged by Bellar: de Script:
Eccles^in Philastri^: by Petavius Animad in Epiph. de inscrip. operis* By S.
Austin* Lib. de Haeres. Haer. 80*
Heretics which by Philastrius, Epiphanius, or S. Austine were put in the
Catalogue of Heretics.

To the fifth: Kings and Nations have been and may be converted by men of
contrary Religions.

To the sixth: The Doctrine of Papists, is confessed by Papists contrary to the
Fathers in many points.

To the seventh: The Pastors of a Church cannot but have authority from it, to
preach against the abuses of it whether in Doctrine or practice, if there be
any in it: Neither can any Christian want an ordinary commission from God to
do a necessary work of Charity after a peaceable manner, when there is no body
else that can or will do it. In extraordinary cases extraordinary courses are
not to be disallowed. If some Christian Layman should come into a country of
Infidels, and had ability to persuade them to Christianity, who would say he
might not use it for want of Commission!

To the eighth: Luthers conference with the Devil might be, for ought I know,
nothing but a melancholy dream: If it were real, the Devil might persuade
Luther from the Mass, hoping by doing so to keep him constant to it: Or that
others would make his diswasion from it an Argument for it, (as we see Papists
do) and be afraid of following Luther, as confessing himself to have been
persuaded by the Devil.

To the ninth: Illiacos intra muros peccatur and extra. Papists are more guilty
of this fault then Protestants. Even this very author in this very Pamphlet
has not so many leaves as falsifications and calumnies.

To the tenth: Let all men believe the Scripture and that only, and endeavor
to believe it in the true sense, and require no more of others, and they shall
find this not only a better, but the only means to suppress Heresy, and
restore Unity. For he that believes the Scripture sincerely, and endeavors to
believe it in the true sense, cannot possibly be an Heretic: And if no more
then this were required of any man, to make him capable of the Churches
Communion, then all men so qualified, though they were different in opinion,
yet notwithstanding any such difference, must be of necessity one in Communion.

The Preface to the READER.
GIVE me leave (good Reader) to inform thee by way of Preface, of three
points. The first concerns D. Potters Answer to Charity Mistaken. The second
relates to this Reply of mine. And the third contains some Premonitions, or
Prescriptions, in case D. Potter, or any in his behalf think fit to rejoyne.

2. For the first point concerning D. Potters Answer, A general consideration
of D. Potters Answer.
I say in general, reserving particulars to their proper places, that in his
whole Book he has not so much as once truly and really fallen upon the point
in question, which was, Whether both Catholics and Protestants can be saved
in their several professions. And therefore Charity Mistaken judiciously
pressing those particulars, wherein the difficulty does precisely consist,
proves in general, that there is but one true Church; that all Christians are
obliged to harken to her; that she must be ever visible, and infallible; that
to separate ones self from her communion is Schism; and to dissent from her
doctrine is Heresy, though it be in points never so few, or never so small in
their own nature; and therefore that the distinction of points fundamental,
and not fundamental, is wholly vain, as it is applied by Protestants. These (I
say) and some other general grounds Charity Mistaken handles, and out of them
does clearly evince, that any least difference in faith cannot stand with
salvation on both sides: and therefore since it is apparent, that Catholics
and Protestants disagree in very many points of faith, they both cannot hope to
be saved without repentance: and consequently, as we hold, that Protestancy
unrepented destroies Salvation; so must they also believe that we cannot be
saved, if they judge their own Religion to be true, and ours to be false. And
whosoever disguizeth this truth, is an enemy to souls, which he deceives with
ungrounded false hopes of salvation, indifferent Faiths, and Religions. And
this, Charity Mistaken performed exactly, according to that which appears to
have been his design, which was not to descend to particular disputes, as D.
Potter affectedly does, namely, Whether or no the Roman Church be the only true
Church of Christ; and much less whether General Counsels be infallible;
whether the Pope may err in his Decrees common to the whole Church; whether he
be above a General Council; whether all points of faith be contained in
Scripture; whether Faith be resolved into the authority of the Church, as into
his last formal Object, and Motive; and least of all did he discourse of
Images, Communion under both kinds, public service in an unknown Tongue,
Seven Sacraments, Sacrifice of the Mass, Indulgences, and Index Expurgatorius:
all which and diverse other articles D. Potter (as I said) draws by violence
into his Book: and he might as well have brought in Pope Joan, or Antichrist,
or the Jews who are permitted to live in Rome, which are common Themes for men
that want better matter, as D. Potter was forced to fetch in the aforesaid
Controversies, that so he might dazzle the eyes, and distract the mind of the
Reader, and hinder him from perceiving that in his whole Answer he uttered
nothing to the purpose, and point in question: which if he had followed
closely, I dare well say, he might have dispatched his whole Book in two or
three sheets of paper. But the truth is, he was loath to affirm plainly, that
generally both Catholics and Protestants may be saved: and yet seeing it to
be most evident that Protestants cannot pretend to have any true Church before
Luther, except the Roman, and such as agreed with her, and consequently that
they cannot hope for Salvation* if they deny it to us; he thought best to avoid
this difficulty by confusion of language, and to fill up his Book with points
which make nothing to the purpose. Wherein he is less excusable, because he
must grant, that those very particulars to which he digresseth, are not
fundamental errors, though it should be granted that they be errors, which
indeed are Catholic verities. For since they be not fundamental, not
destructive of salvation, what imports it whether we hold them or no, for as
much as concerns our possibility to be saved?

3 In one thing only he will perhaps seem to have touched the point in
question, to wit, in his distinction of points fundamental, and not
fundamental: because some may think, that a difference in points which are
not fundamental breaks not the Unity of Faith, and hinders not the hope of
salvation in persons so disagreeing. And yet in this very distinction, he never
speaks to the purpose indeed, but only says, that there are some points so
fundamental, as that all are obliged to know and believe them explicitly, but
never tells us, whether there be any other points of faith, which a man may
deny or disbelieve, though they be sufficiently presented to his understanding,
as truths revealed, or testified by almighty God; which was the only thing in
question. For if it be damnable, as certainly it is, to deny, or disbelieve any
one truth witnessed by almighty God, though the thing be not in it self of any
great consequence, or moment; and since of two disagreeing in matters of faith,
one must necessarily deny some such truth; it clearly follows that amongst men
of different Faiths, or Religions, one only can be saved, though their
difference consist of diverse, or but even one point, which is not in his own
nature fundamental, as I declare at large in diverse places of my first part.
So that it is clear, D. Potter even in this his last refuge and distinction,
never comes to the point in question, to say nothing that he himself does
quite overthrow it, and plainly contradict his whole design, as I show in the
third Chapter of my first Part.

4 And as for D. Potters manner of handling those very points, which are
utterly beside the purpose, it consists only in bringing vulgar mean
objections, which have been answered a thousand times, yea, and some of them
are clearly answered even in Charity Mistaken; but he takes no knowledge at
all af any such answers, and much less does he apply himself to confute
them. He alleges also Authors with so great corruption and fraud, as I would
not have believed, if I had not found it by clear, and frequent experience. In
his second Edition, he has indeed left out one or two gross corruptions,
amongst many others no less notorious, having as it seems been warned by some
friends, that they could not stand with his credit: but even in this his second
Edition he retracts them not at all, nor declares that he was mistaken in the
First, and so his reader of the first Edition shall ever be deceived by him,
though withal he read the Second. For preventing of which inconvenience, I
have thought it necessary to take notice of them, and to discover them in my
Reply.

5. And for conclusion of this point I will only say, that D. Potter might well
have spared his pains if he had ingeniously acknowledged, where the whole
substance, yea and sometime the very words and phrases of his book may be found
in far briefer manner, namely, in a Sermon of D. Vshers preached before our
late sovereign Lord King James the 20. of June 1624. at Wansted, containing A
Declaration of the Universality of the Church of Christ, and the Unity of
Faith, professed therein, which Sermon having been roundly and wittily confuted
by a Catholic Divine, under the name of Paulus Veridicus, within the compass
of about 4. sheets of Paper, D. Potters Answer to Charity Mistaken was in
effect confuted before it appeared. And this may suffice for a general Censure
of his Answer to Charity Mistaken.

6 For the second, touching my Reply: if you wonder at the Bulk thereof,
compared either with Charity Mistaken, Concerning my Reply.
or D Potters Answer, I desire you to consider well of what now I am about to
say, and then I hope you will see, that I was cast upon a mere necessity of
not being so short, as otherwise might peradventure be desired. Charity
Mistaken is short I grant, and yet very ^ull, and large, for as much as
concerned his design, which you see was not to treat of particular
Controversies in Religion, no not so much as to debate, whether or no the Roman
Church be the only true Church of Christ, which indeed would have required a
larger Volume, as I have understood there was one then coming forth, if it had
not be prevented by the Treatise of Charity Mistaken, which seemed to make the
other intended work a little less seasonable at that time. But Charity
Mistaken proves only in General out of some Universal Principles, well backed
and made good by choice and solid authorities, that of two disagreeing in
points of Faith, one only without repentance can be saved; which aim exacted
no great bulk. And as for D. Potters Answer, even that also is not so short as
it may seem. For if his marginall notes printed in a small letter were
transferred into the Text, the Book would appear to be of some bulk: though
indeed it might have been very short, if he had kept himself to the point
treated by Charity Mistaken, as shall be declared anon. But contrarily, because
the question debated betwixt Charity Mistaken and D. Potter, is a point of the
highest consequence that can be imagined, and in regard that there is not a
more pernicious Heresy, or rather indeed ground of Atheism, then a persuasion
that men of different Religions may be saved, if otherwise forsooth they lead a
kind of civil and moral life: I conceaved, that my chief endeavor was not to
be employed in answering D Potter, but that it was necessary to handle the
Question it self somewhat at large, and not only to prove in general, that
both Protestants and Catholics cannot be saved; but to show also, that
Salvation cannot be hoped for out of the Catholic Roman Church; and yet
withal, not to omit to answer all the particulars of D. Potters Book which
may any way import To this end I thought it fit, to divide my Reply into two
Parts; in the formet whereof, the main question is handled by a continued
discourse without stepping aside to confute the particulars of D. Potters
Answer, though yet so, as that even in this first Part, I omit not to answer
such passages of his, as I find directly in my way, and naturally belong to the
points whereof I treat: and in the second Part I answer D. Potters Treanse,
Section by Section, as they lie in order. I here therefore entreat the Reader,
that if heartily he desire satisfaction in this so important question, he do
not content himself with that which I say to Doctor Potter in my second Part,
but that he take the First before him, either all, or at least so much as may
serve most to his purpose of being satisfied in those doubts which press him
most. For which purpose I have caused a Table of the Chapters of the first
Part, together with their Titles and Arguments, to be prefixed before my Reply.

7. This was then a chief reason why I could not be very short. But yet there
wanted not also diverse other causes of the same effect. For there are so
several kinds of Protestants through the difference of Tenets which they hold,
as that if a man convince but one kind of them, the rest will conceive
themselves to be as truly unsatisfied, and even unspoken to, as if nothing had
been said therein at all. As for example, some hold a necessity of a perpetual
visible Church, and some hold no such necessity. Some of them hold it necessary
to be able to prove it distinct from ours; and others, that their business is
dispatched when they have proved ours to have been always visible: for then
they will conceive that theirs has been so: and the like may be truly said of
very many other particulars. Besides it is D. Potters fashion, (wherein as he
is very far from being the first, so I pray God he prove the last of that
humor) to touch in a word many trivial old objections, which if they be not
all answered, it will, and must serve the turn, to make the more ignorant sort
of men believe, and brag, as if some maine unanswerable matter had been subtily
and purposely omitted; and every body knows that some objection may be very
plausibly made in few words, the clear and solid answer whereof will require
more leaves of paper the^ one. And in particular D. Potter does couch his
corruption of Authors within the compass of so few lines, and with so great
confusednesse and fraud, that it requires much time, pains, and paper to open
them so distinctly, as that they may appear to every man's eye. It was also
necessary to show, what D. Potter omits in Charity Mistaken, and the importance
of what is omitted, and sometimes to set down the very words themselves that
are omitted, all which could not but add to the quantity of my Reply. And as
for the quality thereof, I desire thee (good Reader) to believe, that whereas
nothing is more necessary then books for answering of books: yet I was so ill
furnished in this kind, that I was forced to omit the examination of diverse
Authors cited by D. Potter, merely upon necessity; though I did very well
perceive by most apparent circumstances, that I must probably have been sure
enough to find them plainly misalleadged, and much wronged: and for the few
which are examined, there has not wanted some difficulties to do it. For the
times are not for all men alike; and D. Potter has much advantage therein. But
truth is truth, and will ever be able to justify it self in the midst of all
difficulties which may occur. As for me, when I allege Protestant Writers as
well domestical as foreign, I willingly and thankfully acknowledge my self
obliged for diverse of them to the author of the Book entitled, The Protestants
Apology for the Roman Church, who calls himself John Brerely, whose care,
exactness, and fidelity is so extraordinary great, as that he does not only
cite the Books, but the Editions also, with the place and time of their
printing, yea and often the very page, and line where the words are to be had.
And if you happen not to find what he cites, yet suspend your judgment, till
you have read the corrections placed at the end of his book; though it be also
true, that after all diligence and faithfulness on his behalf, it was not in
his power to amend all the faults of the print: in which prints we have
difficulty enough for many evident reasons, which must needs occur to any
prudent man.

8. And for as much as concerns the manner of my Reply, I have procured to do
it without all bitterness, or gall of invective words, both for as much as may
import either Protestants in general, or D. Potters person in particular;
unles, for example, he will call it bitterness for me to term a gross
impertinency, a slight, or a corruption, by those very names, without which I
do not know how to express the things: and yet therein I can truly affirm
that I have studied how to deliver them in the most moderate way, to the end I
might give as little offense as possibly I could, without betraying the Cause.
And if any unfit phrase may peradventure have escaped my pen (as I hope none
has) it was beside, and against my intention, though I must needs profess,
that D. Potter gives so many and so just occasions of being round with him, as
that perhaps some will judge me to have been rather remiss, then moderate. But
since in the very title of my Reply I profess to maintain Charity, I conceive
that the excess will be more excusable amongst all kinds of men, if it fall to
be in mildness, then if it had appeared in too much zeal. And if D. Potter
have a mind to charge me with ignorance or any thing of that nature, I can, and
will ease him of that labor, by acknowledging in my self as many and more
personal defects, then he can heap upon me. Rules to be observed if D. Potter
intend a Rejoinder.
Truth only and syncerity I so much value and profess, as that he shall never
be able to prove the contrary in any one least passage or particle against me.

9. In the third and last place, I have thought fit to express my self thus.
If D. Potter, or any other resolve to answer my Reply* I desire that he will
observe some things which may tend to his own reputation, the saving of my
unnecessary pains, and especially to the greater advantage of truth. I wish
then that he would be careful to consider, wherein the point of every
difficulty consists, and not impertinently to shoot at Rovers, and affectedly
mistake one thing for another. As for example, to what purpose (for as much as
concerns the question between D. Potter and Charity Mistaken) does he so
often and seriously labor to prove, that faith is not resolved into the
authority of the Church, as into the formal Object and Motive thereof? Or that
all points of Faith are contained in Scripture? Or that the Church cannot make
new Articles of Faith? Or that the Church of Rome, as it signifies that
particular Church or Diocese, is not all one with the universal Church? Or
that the Pope as a private Doctor may err? With many other such points as will
easily appear in their proper places. It will also be necessary for him not to
put certain Doctrines upon us, from which he knows we disclaim as much as
himself.

10 I must in like manner entreat him not to recite my reasons and discourses
by halfes, but to set them down faithfully and entirely, for as much as in very
deed concerns the whole substance of the thing in question; because the want
sometime of one word, may chance to make void, or lessen the force of the whole
argument. And I am the more solicitous about giving this particular caveat,
because I find how ill he has complied with the promise which he made in his
Preface to the Reader, not to omit without answer any one thing of moment in
all the discourse of Charity Mistaken. Neither will this course be a cause that
his Reioynder grow too large, but it will be occasion of brevity to him, and
free me also from the pains of setting down all the words which he omits, and
himself of demonstrating that what he omitted was not material. Nay I will
assure him, that if he keep himself to the point of every difficulty, and not
weary the Reader, and overcharge his margent, with unnecessary quotations of
Authors in Greek and Latin, and sometime also in Italian and French, together
with proverbs, sentences of Poets, and such grammatical stuff, nor affect to
cite a multitude of our Catholic School divines to no purpose at all; his
Book will not exceed a competent size, nor will any man in reason be offended
with that length which is regulated by necessity. Again before he come to set
down his answer, or propose his Arguments, let him consider very well what
may be replied, and whether his own objections may not be retorted against
himself, as the Reader will perceive to have happened often to his disadvantage
in my Reply against him. But especially I expect, and Truth it self exacts at
his hand, that he speak clearly and distinctly, and not seek to walk in
darkness, so to delude and deceive his Reader, now saying, and then denying,
and always speaking with such ambiguity, as that his greatest care may seem
to consist in a certain art to find a shift, as his occasions might chance,
either now, or hereafter to require, and as he might fall out to be urged by
diversity of several arguments. And to the end it may appear, that I deal
plainly, as I would have him also do, I desire that he declare himself
concerning these points.

11 First, whether our Savior Christ have not always had, and be not ever to
have a visible true Church on earth: and whether the contrary doctrine be not a
damnable Heresy.

12 Secondly, what visible Church there was before Luther, disagreeing from the
Roman Church, and agreeing with the pretended Church of Protestants.

13 Thirdly, Since he will be forced to grant that there ca^ be assigned no
visible true Church of Christ, distinct from the Church of Rome, and such
Churches as agreed with her when Luther first appeared, whether it do not
follow that she has not erred fundamentally; because every such error
destroies the nature and being of the Church, and so our Savior Christ should
have had no visible Church on earth.

14 Fourthly, if the Roman Church did not fall into any fundamental error,
let him tell us how it can be damnable to live in her Communion, or to
maintain errors, which are known and confessed, not to be fundamental, to
damnable.

15 Fifthly, if her Errors were not damnable, nor did exclude salvation, how
can they be excused from Schism, who forsook her Communion upon pretense of
errors, which were not damnable.

16 Sixthly, if D. Potter have a mind to say, that her Errors are damnable, or
fundamental, let him do us so much charity, as to tell us in particular what
those fundamental errors be. But he must still remember (and my self must be
excused, for repeating it) that if he say the Roman Church erred fundamentally,
he will not be able to show, that Christ our Lord had any visible Church on
earth, when Luther appeared: and let him tell us how Protestants had, or can
have any Church which was universal, and extended her self to all ages, if
once he grant, that the Roman Church ceased to be the true Church of Christ;
and consequently how they can hope for Salvation, if they deny it to us.

17 Seaventhly, whether any one Error maintained against any one Truth, though
never so small in it self, yet sufficiently propounded as testified or
revealed by almighty God, do not destroy the Nature and Unity of Faith, or at
least is not a grievous offense excluding Salvation.

18 Eighthly, if this be so, how can Lutherans, Calvinists, Zuinglions, and all
the rest of disagreeing Protestants, hope for salvation, since it is manifest
that some of them must needs err against some such truth as is testified by
almighty God, either fundamental, or at least not fundamental.

19 Ninthly, we constantly urge, and require to have a particular Catalogue of
such points as he calls fundamental* A Catalogue, I say, in particular, and
not only some general definition, or description, wherein Protestants may
perhaps agree, though we see that they differ when they come to assign what
points in particular be fundamental; and yet upon such a particular Catalogue
much depends: as for example in particular, Whether or no a man do not err in
some point fundamental or necessary to salvation; and whether or no Lutherans,
Calvinists, and the rest do disagree in fundamentalls, which if they do, the
same Heaven cannot receive them all.

20 Tenthly, and lastly, I desire that in answering to these points, ^he would
let us know distinctly, what is the doctrine of the Protestant English Church
concerning them, and what he utters only as his own private opinion.

21 These are the Questions which for the present I find it fit and necessary
for me to ask of D. Potter, or any other who will defend his cause, or impugn
ours. And it will be in vain to speak vainly, and to tell me, that a Fool
may ask mere questions in an hour, then a wise man can answer in a year;
with such idle Proverbs as that. For I ask but such questions as for which he
gives occasion in his Book, and where he declares not himself but after so
ambiguous and confused a manner, as that* Truth it self can scarce tell how to
convince him so, but that with ignorant and ill-judging men he will seem to
have somewhat left to say for himself, though Papists (as he calls them) and
Puritans should press him contrary ways at the same time: and these questions
concern things also of high importance, as whereupon the knowledge of Gods
Church, and true Religion, and consequently Sa^^ation of the soul depends. And
now because he shall not tax me with being like those men in the Gospel,
whom our blessed Lord and Savior charged with laying heavy burdens upon other
men's shoulders, who yet would not touch them with their finger* I oblige my
self to answer upon any demand of his, both to all these Questions, if he
find that I have not done it already, and to any other, concerning matter of
faith that he shall ask. And I will tell him very plainly, what is Catholic
doctrine, and what is not, that is, what is defined or what is not defined, and
rests but in discussion among Divines.

22 And it will be here expected, that he perform these things, as a man who
professes learning should do, not flying from questions which concern things
as they are considered in their own nature, to accidental, or rare
circumstances of ignorance, incapacity, want of means to be instructed,
erroneous conscience, and the like, which being very various and different,
cannot be well comprehended under any general Rule. But in delivering
general doctrines we must consider things as they be ex natura rei, or per. se
loquendo (as Divines speak) that is, according to their natures, if all
circumstances concu^re proportionable thereunto. As for example some may for a
time have invincible ignorance, even of some fundamental article of faith,
through want of capacity, instruction, or the like, and so not offend either in
such ignorance or error, and yet we must absolutely say, that error in any
one fundamental point is damnable, because so it is, if we consider things in
themselves, abstracting from accidental circumstances in particular persons:
as contrarily if some man judge some act of virtue, or some indifferent action
to be a sin, in him it is a sin indeed, by reason of his erroneous
conscience; and yet we ought not to say absolutely, that virtuous, or
indifferent actions are sins: and in all sciences we must distinguish the
general Rules from their particular Exceptions. And therefore when, for
example, he answers to our demand, whether he hold that Catholics may be
saved, or whether their pretended errors be fundamental and damnable, he is
not to change the state of the question, and have recourse to Ignorance, and
the like, but to answer concerning the errors being considered what they are
apt to be in themselves, and as they are neither increased nor diminished, by
accidental circumstances.

23 And the like I say of all the other points, to which I once again desire
an answer without any of these, or the like ambiguous terms, in some sort, in
some sense, in some degree, which may be explicated afterward as strictly or
largely as may best serve his turn; but let him tell us roundly and
particularly, in what sort, in what sense, in what degree he understands those,
and the like obscure mincing phrases. If he proceed solidly after this manner,
and not by way of mere words, more like a Preacher to a vulgar Auditor, then
like a learned man with a pen in his hand, thy patience shall be the less
abused, and truth will also receive more right. And since we have already laid
the grounds of the question, much may be said hereafter in few, words, if (as I
said) he keep close to the real point of every difficulty without wandering
into impertinent disputes, multiplying vulgar and threed-bare objections and
arguments, or laboring to prove what no man denies, or making a vain
oftentation by citing a number of Schoolmen, which every ^uny brought up in
Schools is able to do; and if he cite his Authors with such sincerity, as no
time need be spent in opening his corruptions, and finally if he set himself a
work with this consideration, that we are to give a most strict account to a
most just, and unpartiall Judge, of every period, line, and word that passes
under our pen. For if at the latter day we shall be arraigned for every idle
word which is spoken, so much more will that be done for every idle word which
is written, as the deliberation wherewith it passes makes a man guilty of more
malice, and as the importance of the matter which is treated of in books
concerning true faith and religion, without which no Soul can be saved, makes
a man's Errors more material, then they would be, if question were but of
toys.

The Answer to the PREFACE.
TO the First, and Second. If beginings be ominous (as they say they are,) D.
Potter has cause to look for great store of uningenuous dealing from you; the
very first words you speak of him vz. That he has not so much as once truly
and really fallen upon the point in question, being a most unjust and immodest
imputation.

2 For first, the point in question, was not, that which you pretend, Whether
both Papists and Protestants can be saved in their several Professions? But,
Whether you may without uncharitableness affirm that Protestancy unrepented
destroys Salvation? And that this is the very question is most apparent and
unquestionable, both from the title of Charity Mistaken, and from the Arguments
of the three first Chapters of it, and from the title of your own Reply. And
therefore if D. Potter had joined issue with his Adversary only thus far, and
not meddling at all with Papists, but leaving them to stand or fall to their own
master, had proved Protestants living and dying so capable of Salvation, I
cannot see how it could justly be charged upon him, that he had not once truly
and really fallen upon the point in Question. Neither may it be said that your
Question here and mine, are in effect the same, seeing it is very possible that
the true Answer to the one might have been Affirmative, and to the other
Negative. For there is no incongruity but it may be true That You and We cannot
both be saved: And yet as true, That without uncharitableness you cannot
pronounce us damned. For all ungrounded and unwarrantable sentencing mento
damnation, is either in a propriety of speech uncharitable, or else (which for
my purpose is all one,) it is that which Protestants mean, when they say,
Papists for damning them are uncharitable. And therefore though the Author of
C. M. had proved as strongly as he has done weakly, that one Heaven could not
receive Protestants and Papists both, yet certainly, it was very hastily and
unwarrantably, and therefore uncharitably concluded, that Protestants were the
part that was to be excluded. As, though Jews and Christians cannot both be
saved, yet a Jew cannot justly, and therefore not charitably pronounce a
Christian damned.

3 But then secondly, to show your dealing with him very injurious; I say he
does speak to this very Question very largely, and very effectually; as by
confronting his work and Charity Mist. together, will presently appear.
Charity M. proves you say in general, That there is but one Church. D. Potter
tells him, His labor is lost in proving the unity of the Catholic Church,
whereof there is no doubt or controversy: and herein I hope you will grant he
answers right and to the purpose. C. M. proves (you say) secondly, That all
Christians are obliged to harken to the Church. D. Potter answers, It is true:
yet not absolutely in all things, but only when she commands those things which
God does not countermand. And this also I hope is to his purpose, though not to
yours. C. M. proves, you say thirdly, That the Church must be ever visible and
infallible. For her Visibility, D. Potter denies it not; and as for her
Infallibility, he grants it in Fundamentalls but not in Superstructures. C. M.
proves you say fourthly, That to separate ones self from the Churches
Communion, is schism. D. Potter grants it, with this exception, unless there
be necessary cause to do so; unless the conditions of her Communion be
apparently unlawful. C. M. proves, you say lastly, That to dissent from her
doctrine is heresy, though it be in points never so few, and never so small,
and therefore that the distinction of points fundamental and unfundamentall,
as it is applied by Protestants is wholly vain. This D. Potter denies, shows
the Reasons, brought for it, weak and unconcluding; proves the contrary by
reasons unanswerable: and therefore that The distinction of points into
fundamental and not fundamental, as it is applied by Protestants, is very
good. Upon these grounds you say, C. M. clearly evinces That any least
difference in faith cannot stand with salvation, and therefore seeing
Catholics and Protestants disagree in very many points of faith, they both
cannot hope to be saved without Repentance, you must mean, without an explicit
and particular repentance, and dereliction of their errors; for so C. M. has
declared himself p. 14. where he has these words, We may safely say that a
man who lives in Protestancy, and who is so far from Repenting it, as that he
will not so much as acknowledge it to be a sin, though he be sufficiently
enform'd thereof, etc. From whence it is evident, that in his judgment there
can be no repentance of an error, without acknowledging it to be a sin: And
to this D. Potter justly opposes: That both sides, by the confession of both
sides, agree in more points then are simply and indispensably necessary to
Salvation, and differ only in such as are not precisely necessary: That it is
very possible, a man may dye in error, and yet dye with Repentance, as for all
his sins of ignorance* so in that number, for the errors in which he dies:
with a repentance though not explicit and particular which is not simply
required, yet implicit and general which is sufficient: so that he cannot but
hope considering the goodness of God, that the truth's retained on both sides,
especially those of the necessity of repentance from dead works and faith in
Jesus Christ, if they be put in practice, may be an antidote against the errors
held on either side; to such he means, and says, as being diligent in seeking
truth, and desirous to find it, yet miss of it through humane frailty and dye
in error. If you will but attentively consider and compare the undertaking of
C. M. and D. Potters performance in all these points, I hope you will be so
ingenuous as to acknowledge, that you have injurd him much in imputing
tergiversation to him, and pretending that through his whole book he has not
once truly and really fallen upon the point in Question. Neither may you or C.
M. conclude him from hence (as covertly you do,) An enemy to souls by
deceiving them with ungrounded false hopes of Salvation; seeing the hope of
salvation cannot be ungrounded, which requires and supposes belief and
practice of all things absolutely necessary unto salvation, and repentance of
those sins and errors which we fall into by humane frailty: Nor a friend to
indifferency in Religions, seeing he gives them only hope of pardon of Errors
who are desirous, and according to the proportion of their opportunities and
abilities industrious to find the truth, or at least truly repentant, that they
have not been so. Which doctrine is very fit to excite men to a constant and
impartial search of truth, and very far from teaching them that it is
indifferent what Religion they are of, and without all controversy very
honorable to the goodness of God, with which how it can consist, not to be
satisfied with his servants true endeavors to know his will and do it,
without full and exact performance, I leave it to you and all good men to judge.

4 As little Justice me thinks you show, in quarrelling with him for
descending to the particular disputes here mentioned by you. For to say nothing
that many of these Questions are immediately and directly pertinent to the
business in hand, as the 1. 2. 3. 5. 6. and all of them fall in of themselves
into the stream of his discourse, and are not drawn in by him, and besides are
touched for the most part, rather then handled; to say nothing of all this, you
know right well, if he conclude you erroneous in any one of all these, be it
but in the Communion in one kind, or the Language of your service; the
infallibility of your Church is evidently overthrown: And this being done, I
hope there will be no such necessity of harkening to her in all things: It will
be very possible to separate from her communion in some things, without
schism, and from her doctrine so far as it is erroneous without heresy: Then
all that she proposes will not be, eo ipso, fundamental, because she proposes
it: and so presently all Charity Mistaken will vanish into smoke, and clouds
and nothing.

5 You say he was loath to affirm plainly, that generally both Catholics and
Protestants may be saved: which yet is manifest he does affirm plainly, of
Protestants throughout his book; and of erring Papists that have syncerely
sought the Truth and failed of it, and dye with a general repentance: p. 77.
78. And yet you deceive your self if you conceive he had any other necessity
to do so, but only that he thought it true. For we may and do pretend that
before Luther there were many true Churches, besides the Roman, which agreed
not with her: in particular, The greek Church. So that what you say is
evidently true, is indeed evidently false. Besides if he had had any necessity
to make use of you in this matter, he needed not for this end to say that now
in your Church Salvation may be had; but only that before Luthers time it
might be: Then when your means of knowing the Truth were not so great, and
when your ignorance might be more invincible, and therefore more excusable. So
that you may see if you please, it is not for ends, but for the love of truth,
that we are thus charitable to you.

6 Neither is it material that these particulars he speaks against, are not
fundamental errors; for though they be not destructive of salvation, yet the
convincing of them, may be, and is destructive enough of his Adversaries
assertion: and if you be the man I take you for, you will not deny they are so.
For certainly no Consequence can be more palpable then this; The Church of Rome
does err in this or that, therefore it is not infallible. And this perhaps you
perceived your self; and therefore demanded not, Since they be not
fundamental, what imports it whether we hold them or no, simply: But, for as
much as concerns our possibility to be saved. As if we were not bound by the
love of God and the love of truth to be zealous in the defense of all Truths,
that are any way profitable, though not simply necessary to salvation. Or as if
any good man could satisfy his conscience without being so affected and
resolved. Our Savior himself having assured us, Mat. 5. 19.
That he that shall break one of his least Commandments (some whereof you
pretend are concerning venial sins, and consequently the keeping of them not
necessary to salvation) and shall so teach men, shall be called the least in
the kingdom of Heaven.

7 But then it imports very much, though not for the possibility that you may
be saved, yet for the probability that you will be so: because the holding of
these errors, though it did not merit, might yet occasion damnation. As the
doctrine of Indulgences may take away the fear of Purgatory, and the doctrine
of Purgatory the fear of Hell; as you well know it does too frequently. So
that though a godly man might be saved with these errors, yet by means of
them, many are made vicious and so damned. By them I say, though not for them.
No godly Layman who is verily persuaded that there is neither impiety nor
superstition in the use of your Latin service, shall be damned, I hope, for
being present at it; yet the want of that devotion which the frequent hearing
the Offices understood, might happily beget in them, the want of that
instruction and edification which it might afford them, may very probably
hinder the salvation of many which otherwise might have been saved. Besides,
though the matter of an Error may be only something profitable, not
necessary, yet the neglect of it may be a damnable sin. As not to regard
venial sins is in the doctrine of your Schools, mortal. Lastly, as venial
sins, you say, dispose men to mortal; so the erring from some profitable,
though lesser truth, may dispose a man to error in greater matters. As for
example: The Belief of the Popes infallibility is, I hope, not unpardonably
damnable to every one that holds it; yet if it be a falsehood (as most
certainly it is) it puts a man into a very congruous disposition to believe
Antichrist, if he should chance to get into that See.

8 To the Third. In his distinctions of points fundamental and not
fundamental, he may seem, you say, to have touched the point, but does not so
indeed. Because though he says there are some points so fundamental, as that
all are obliged to believe them explicitly, yet he tells you not, whether a
man may disbeleiue any other points of faith, which are sufficiently presented
to his understanding, as Truths revealed by Almighty God. Touching which matter
of Sufficient Proposal, I beseech you to come out of the Clouds, and tell us
roundly and plainly, what you mean by Points of faith sufficiently propounded
to a man's understanding, as Truths revealed by God. Perhaps you mean such, as
the person to whom they are proposed, understands sufficiently to be truths
revealed by God. But how then can he possibly choose but believe them? Or how
is it not an apparent contradiction, that a man should disbelieue what himself
understands to be a Truth; or any Christian what he understands or but belieues
to be testified by God? Dr Potter might well think it superfluous to tell you
This is damnable; because indeed it is impossible. And yet one may very well
think, by your saying, as you do hereafter, That the impiety of heresy
consists in calling Gods truth in question, that this should be your meaning.
Or do you esteem all those things sufficiently presented to his understanding
as Divine truths, which by you, or any other man, or any company of men
whatsoever, are declared to him to be so? I hope you will not say so: For this
were to oblige a man to believe all the Churches, and all the men in the world,
whenever they pretend to propose divine Revelations. D. Potter, I assure you
from him, would never have told you this neither. Or do you mean by
sufficiently propounded as Divine Truths, all that your Church propounds for
such? That you may not neither; For the Question between us is this; Whether
your Churches Proposition be a sufficient Proposition? And therefore to suppose
this, is to suppose the question; which you know in Reasoning is always a
fault. Or Lastly, do you mean (for I know not else what possibly you can
mean,) by sufficiently presented to his understanding as revealed by God; that
which all things considered, is so proposed to him, that he might and should
and would believe it to be true and revealed by God, were it not for some
voluntary and avoidable fault of his own that interposeth it self between
his understanding and the truth presented to it? This is the best construction
that I can make of your words; and if you speak of truths thus proposed, and
rejected, let it be as damnable, as you please, to deny or disbelieue them. But
then I cannot but be amazed to hear you say, That D. Potter never tells you
whether there be any other points of faith, besides those which we are bound to
believe explicitly, which a man may deny or disbelieue, though they be
sufficiently presented to his understanding as truths revealed or testified by
Almighty God; seeing the light it self is not more clear then D. Potters
Declaration of himself for the Negative in this Question. p. 245. 246. 247.
248. 249. 250. of his Book. Where he entreats at large of this very Argument,
beginning his discourse thus. It seems fundamental to the faith, and for the
salvation of every member of the Church, that he acknowledge and believe all
such points of faith, as whereof he may be convinced that they belong to the
doctrine of Jesus Christ.

To this conviction he requires three things. Clear Revelation; Sufficient
Proposition, and Capacity and understanding in the hearer. For want of clear
Revelation, he frees the Church before Christ and the Disciples of Christ from
any damnable error, though they believed not those things which he that should
now deny were no Christian. To sufficient Proposition, he requires two things.
1. That the points be perspicuously laid open in themselves. 2. So forcibly, as
may serve to remove reasonable doubts to the contrary, and to satisfy a
teachable mind concerning it, against the principles in which he has been
bred to the contrary. This Proposition he says is not limited to the Pope or
Church, but extended to all means whatsoever, by which a man may be convinced
in conscience, that the matter proposed is divine Revelation; which he
professes to be done sufficiently, not only when his conscience does expressly
bear witness to the truth; but when it would do so, if it were not choked,
and blinded by some unruly and unmortified lust in the will. The difference
being not great between him that is wilfully blind, and him that knowingly
gainesaieth the Truth. The third thing he requires is Capacity and Ability to
apprehend the Proposal, and the Reasons of it: the want whereof excuses
fools and madmen, etc. But where there is no such impediment, and the will of
God is sufficiently propounded, there (says he) he that opposes is
convinced of error; and he who is thus convinced is an Heretic: and heresy
is a work of the Flesh which excludes from salvation, (he means without
Repentance,) And hence it follows, that it is fundamental to a Christians
faith, and necessary for his salvation, that he believe all revealed truths of
God, whereof he may be convinced that they are from God. This is the Conclusion
of Dr Potters discourse; many passages whereof you take notice of in your
subsequent disputations, and make your advantage of them. And therefore I
cannot but say again, that it amazeth me to hear you say, that he declines
this Question and never tells you whether or no there be any other points of
faith, which being sufficiently propounded as divine Revelations may be denied
and disbelieved. He tells you plainly there are none such: and therefore you
cannot say, that he tells you not whether there be any such. Again, it is
almost as strange to me, why you should say, this was the only thing in
question, Whether a man may deny or disbelieue any point of faith, sufficiently
presented to his understanding as a truth revealed by God. For to say that any
thing is a thing in question, me thinks at the first hearing of the words,
imports, that it is by some affirmed, and denied by others. Now you affirm I
grant, but what Protestant ever denied, that it was a sin to give God the
lie? Which is the first and most obvious sense of these words. Or which of them
ever doubted, that to disbelieue is then a fault, when the matter is so
proposed to a man, that he might and should, and were it not for his own
fault, would believe it? Certainly he that questions either of these, justly
deserves to have his wits called in question. Produce any one Protestant that
ever did so, and I will give you leave to say it is the only thing in question.
But then I must tell you, that your ensuing Argument, viz: To deny a truth
witnessed by God is damnable, But of two that disagree one must of necessity
deny some such truth, Therefore one only can be saved; is built upon a ground
clean different from this postulate. For though it be always a fault to deny
what either I do know, or should know to be testified by God; yet that which
by a cleanly conveyance you put in the place hereof, To deny a truth witnessed
by God simply, without the circumstance of being known or sufficiently
proposed, is so far from being certainly damnable, that it may be many times
done without any the least fault at all. As if God should testify something to
a man in the Indies, I that had no assurance of this testification should not
be obliged to believe it. For in such cases the Rule of the Law has place, Idem
est non esse and non apparere: not to be at all and not to appear to me, is to
me all one. If I had not come and spoken unto you (says our Savior) you had
had no sin?

10 As little necessity is there for that which follows: That of two
disagreeing in a matter of faith one must deny some such truth. Whether by
[such] you understand, Testified at all by God; or testified and sufficiently
propounded. For it is very possible the matter in controversy may be such a
thing wherein God has not at all declare himself, or not so fully and
clearly as to oblige all men to hold one way; and yet be so overvalued by the
parties in variance, as to be esteemed a matter of faith, and one of those
things of which our Savior says; He that beleiveth not shall be damned. Who
sees not that it is possible two Churches may excommunicate and damn each
other for keeping Christmasse ten days sooner or later; as well as Victor
excommunicated the Churches of Asia, for differing from him about Easter day?
And yet I believe you will confess, that God had not then declared himself
about Easter; nor has now about Christmasse. Anciently some good Catholic
Bishops excommunicated and damned others for holding there were Antipodes: and
in this question I would feign know on which side was the sufficient proposal.
The contra-Remonstrants differ from the Remonstrants about the point of
predetermination as a matter of faith: I would know in this thing also, which
way God has declared himself; whether for Predetermination or against it.
Stephen Bishop of Rome held it as a matter of faith and Apostolic tradition,
That Heretics gave true Baptism: Others there were, and they as good
Catholics as he, that held that this was neither matter of Faith nor matter
of Truth. Justin Martyr and Irenaeus held the doctrine of the Millenaries as a
matter of faith: and though Justin Martyr deny it, yet you, I hope, will
affirm, that some good Christians held the contrary. St Augustine, I am sure,
held the communicating of Infants as much Apostolic tradition, as the
Baptising of them: whether the Bishop and the Church of Rome of his time, held
so too, or held otherwise, I desire you to determine. But, sure I am, the
Church of Rome at this present holds the contrary. The same S. Austin held it
no matter of faith that the Bishops of Rome were Judges of Appeals from all
parts of the Church Catholic, no not in Major causes and Major Persons:
whether the Bishop or Church of Rome did then hold the contrary do you resolve
me; but now I am resolved they do so. In all these differences, the point in
question is esteemed and proposed by one side at least as a matter of faith,
and by the other rejected as not so: and either this is to disagree in matters
of faith, or you will have no means to show that we do disagree. Now then to
show you how weak and sandy the foundation is, on which the whole fabric both
of your Book and Church depends, answer me briefly to this Dilemma. Either in
these oppositions one of the opposite Parts erred damnably, and denied Gods
truth sufficiently propounded, or they did not. If they did, then they which
do deny Gods truth sufficiently propounded may go to heaven; and then you are
rash and uncharitable in excluding us, though we were guilty of this fault. If
not, then there is no such necessity, that of two disagreeing about a matter of
faith, one should deny Gods truth sufficiently propounded. And so the Major and
Minor of your Argument, are proved false. Yet, though they were as true as
Gospel, and as evident as Mathematical Principles, the conclusion (so
impertinent is it to the Premises) might still be false. For that which
naturally issues from these propositions is not. Therefore one only can be
saved: But, Therefore one of them does something that is damnable. But with
what Logic or what Charity you can infer either as the immediate production
of the former premises, or as a Corollary from this conclusion, Therefore one
only can be saved, I do not understand; unless you will pretend that this
consequence is good, such a one does something damnable, therefore he shall
certainly be damned: which whether it be not to overthrow the Article of our
Faith, which promises remission of sins upon repentance, and consequently to
ruin the Gospel of Christ, I leave it to the Pope and the Cardinals to
determine. For if against this it be alleged, that no man can repent of the
sin wherein he dies: This much I have already stopped, by showing that if it
be a sin of Ignorance, this is no way incongruous.

11 To the fourth. You proceed in sleighting and disgracing your Adversary,
Pretending his objections are mean and vulgar, and such as have been answered a
thousand times. But if your cause were good, these Arts would be needless. For
though some of his objections have been often shifted by men I mean the Divines
of Doway: whose profession we have in your Belgic Expurgatorius p. 12. in
censura Bertrami, in these words. Seeing in other ancient Catholics, we
tolerate extenuate and excuse very many errors, and devising some shift often
deny the^, and put upon them a convenient sense when they are objected to us in
disputations and conflicts with our adversaries; we see no reason why Bertram
may not deserve the same equity.
that make a profession of devising shifts and evasions to save themselves and
their Religion from the pressure of truth, by men that are resolved they will
say something, though they can say nothing to purpose; yet I doubt not to make
it appear, that neither by others have they been truly and really satisfied;
and that the best Answer you give them, is to call them Mean and vulgar
objections.

12 To the Fifth. But this pains might have been spared: For the substance of
his discourse is in a Sermon of D. Vshers, and confuted four years ago by
Paulus Veridicus. It seems then the substance of your Reply is in Paulus
Veridicus, and so your pains also might well have been spared. But had there
been no necessity to help and piece out your confuting his Arguments with
disgracing his person, (which yet you cannot do) you would have considered,
that to them who compare D. Potters Book, and the Archbishops Sermon, this
aspersion will presently appear a poor detraction, not to be answered but
scorned. To say nothing that in D. Potter, being to answer a book by express
Command from Royal Authority, to leave any thing material unsaid, because it
had been said before, especially being spoken at large, and without any
relation to the Discourse which he was to Answer, had been a ridiculous vanity
and foul prevarication.

13 To the sixth. In your sixth parag. I let all pass saving only this, That a
persuasion that men of different Religions (you must mean, or else you speak
not to the point, Christians of diverse Opinions and Communions) may be saved,
is a most pernicious heresy, and even a ground of Atheism. What strange
extractions Chemistry can make I know not; but sure I am, he that by reason
would infer this conclusion, That there is no God; from this ground, That God
will save men in different Religions, must have a higher strain in Logic, then
you or I have hitherto made show of. In my apprehension, the other part of the
contradiction, That there is a God, should much rather follow from it. And
whether contradictions will flow from the same fountain, let the Learned
judge. Perhaps you will say you intended not to deliver here a positive and
measured truth, and which you expected to be called to account for; but only a
high and tragical expression of your just detestation of the wicked doctrine
against which you write. If you mean so, I shall let it pass: only I am to
advertize the lesse-wary Reader, that passionate expressions, and vehement
asseverations are no arguments; unless it be, of the weakness of the cause
that is defended by them, or the man that defends it. And to remember you of
what Boethius says of some such things as these, -- Nubila men's est haec ubi
regnant. For my part I am not now in Passion; neither will I speak one word
which I think I cannot justify to the full: and I say and will maintain, that
to say, That Christians of different Opinions and Communions (such I mean, who
hold all those things that are simply necessary to Salvation) may (...) obtain
pardon for the Errors wherein they dye ignorantly, by a general Repentance;
is so far from being a ground of Atheism, that to say the contrary, is to
cross in Diameter a main Article of our Creed, and to overthrow the Gospel of
Christ.

14 To the Seventh and Eight. To the two next Paragraphes, I have but two
words to say. The one is, that I know no Protestants that hold it necessary to
be able to prove a Perpetual Visible Church distinct from Yours. Some perhaps
undertake to do so, as a matter of curtesy; but I believe you will be much to
seek for any one that holds it necessary. For though you say that Christ has
promised there shall be a Perpetual Visible Church; yet you yourselves do not
pretend that he has promised there shall be Histories and Records always
extant of the Professors of it in all ages: nor that he has any where enjoined
us to read those Histories that we may be able to show them.

14 The other is. That Breerelie's great exactness, which you magnify so and
amplify, is no very certain demonstration of his fidelity. A Romance may be
told with as much variety of circumstances, as a true Story.

16 To the Ninth and Tenth. Your desires that I would in this rejoinder; Avoid
impertinencies. Not impose doctrines upon you which you disclayme: Set down the
substance of your Reasons faithfully and entirely: Not weary the reader with
unnecessary quotations: Object nothing to you which I can answer my self, or
which may be returned upon my self: and lastly, (which you repeat again in the
end of your Preface) speak as clearly and distinctly and univocally as possibly
I can, are all very reasonable, and shall be by me most punctually and fully
satisfied. Only I have Reason to complain, that you give us rules only and not
good example in keeping them. For in some of these things I shall have frequent
occasion to show, that Medice curateipsum, may very justly be said unto you;
especially for objecting what might very easily have been answered by you, and
may be very justly returned upon you.

17 To your ensuing demands, though some of them be very captious and
ensnaring; yet I will give you as clear and plain and ingenuous Answers as
possibly I can.

18 To the Eleventh. To the first then, about the Perpetuity of the visible
Church, my Answer is: That I believe our Savior, ever since his Ascension,
has had in some place or other a Visible true Church on earth: I mean a
company of men, that professed at least so much truth as was absolutely
necessary for their Salvation. And I believe that there will be somewhere or
other such a Church to the Worlds end. But the contrary doctrine I do at no
hand believe to be a damnable heresy.

19 To the twelfth. To the second, what Visible Church there was before Luther
disagreeing from the Roman? I answer, that before Luther there were many
Visible Churches in many things disagreeing from the Roman: But not that the
whole Catholic Church disagreed from her, because she her self was a Part of
the Whole, though much corrupted. And to undertake to name a Catholic Church
disagreeing from her, is to make her no Part of it, which we do not, nor need
not pretend. And for men agreeing with Protestants in all points, we will then
produce them, when you shall either prove it necessary to be done, which you
know we absolutely deny; or when you shall produce a perpetual succession of
Professors, which in all points have agreed with you, and disagreed from you in
nothing. But this my promise, to deal plainly with you, I conceive, and so
intended it to be very like his, who undertook to drink up the Sea, upon
condition, that he, to whom the promise was made, should first stop the Rivers
from running in. For this unreasonable request which you make to us is to your
selves so impossible, that in the very next Age after the Apostles, you will
never be able to name a man, whom you can prove to have agreed with you in all
things, nay (if you speak of such, whose Works are extant and unquestioned)
whom we cannot prove to have disagreed from you in many things. Which I am so
certain of, that I will venture my credit, and my life upon it.

20 To the Thirteenth. To the third, Whether, seeing there cannot be assigned
any visible true Church distinct from the Roman, it follows not that she erred
not fundamentally. I say in our sense of the word Fundamental, it does follow.
For if it be true, that there was then no Church distinct from the Roman, then
it must be, either because there was no Church at all, which we deny: Or
because the Roman Church was the whole Church, which we also deny: or because
she was a Part of the Whole, which we grant. And if she were a true part of the
Church, then she retained those truths which were simply necessary to
Salvation, and held no errors which were inevitably and unpardonably
destructive of it. For this is precisely necessary to constitute any man or any
Church a member of the Church Catholic. In our sense therefore of the word
Fundamental, I hope she erred not fundamentally: but in your sense of the
word, I fear she did. That is, she held something to be Divine Revelation,
which was not; something not to be which was.

21 To the fourteenth. To the fourth. How it could be damnable to maintain her
errors, if they were not fundamental? I answer. 1. Though it were not
damnable, yet if it were a fault, it was not to be done. For a venial sin,
with you is not damnable; yet you say, it is not to be committed for the
procuring any good. Non est faciendum malum vel minimum, ut eveniat bonum vel
maximum. 2. It is damnable to mantaine an error against conscience, though the
error in it self, and to him that believes it, be not damnable. Nay the
profession not only of an error, but even of a truth, if not believed, when
you think on it again, I believe you will confess to be a mortal sin;
unless you will say, Hypocrisy and Simulation in Religion is not so. 3.
Though we say the errors of the Roman Church were not destructive of Salvation,
but pardonable even to them that dyed in them, upon a general repentance: yet
we deny not but in themselves they were damnable. Nay, the very saying they
were pardonable, implies they needed pardon, and therefore in themselves were
damnable: damnable meritoriously, though not effectually. As a poison may be
deadly in it self, and yet not kill him, that together with the poison takes
an antidote: or as felony may deserve death and yet not bring it on him that
obtaines the Kings pardon.

22 To the fifteenth. To the fifth. How they can be excused from Schism, who
forsook her Communion upon pretense of errors which were not damnable! I
answer. All that we forfake in you, is only the belief, and practice, and
profession of your Errors. Hereupon, you cast us out of your Communion. And
then with a strange, and contradictious, and ridiculous hypocrisy, complain
that we forsake it. As if a man should thrust his friend out of doors, and
then be offended at his departure* But for us not to forsake the belief of
your Errors, having discovered them to be Errors, was impossible; and therefore
to do so could not be damnable, believing them to be Errors. Not to forsake
the practice and profession of them, had been damnable hypocrisy; supposing
that (which you vainly run away with, and take for granted) those errors in
themselves were not damnable. Now to do so, and as matters now stand, not to
forsake your Communion, is apparently contradictious: seeing the condition of
your Communion is, that we must profess to believe all your doctrines not only
not to be damnable errors (which will not content you,) but also to be certain
and necessary and revealed truths. So that to demand why we forsake your
Communion upon pretense of Errors which were not damnable, is in effect to
demand why we forsook it upon our forsaking it! For to pretend that there are
Errors in your Church though not damnable, is ipso facto to forsake your
Communion, and to do that which both in your account, and as you think in Gods
account, puts him as does so, out of your Communion. So that either you must
free your Church, from requiring the belief of any error whatsoever, damnable
and not damnable, or whether you will or no you must free us from Schism. For
schism there cannot be in leaving your communion, unless we were obliged to
continue in it. Man cannot be obliged by Man, but to what either formally or
virtually he is obliged by God, for all just power is from God. God the
eternal truth neither can nor will obliege us to believe any the least and the
most innocent falsehood to be a divine truth, that is, to err; nor, to profess
a known error, which is to lie. So that if you require the belief of any
error among the conditions of your Communion, our obligation to communicate
with you cease, and so the imputation of schism to us, vanishes into
nothing: but lies heavy upon you for making our separation from you just and
necessary, by requiring unnecessary and unlawful conditions of your Communion.
Hereafter therefore, I entreat you, let not your demand be, how could we
forsake your Communion without Schism, seeing you erred not damnably? But how
we could do so without Schism, seeing you erred not at all? which if either
you do prove, or we cannot disprove it, we will (I at least will for my part)
return to your Communion, or subscribe my self Schismatique. In the mean
time, (...).

23 Yet notwitstanding all your Errors we do not renounce your Communion
totally and absolutely, but only leave Communicating with you in the practice
and profession of your Errors. The trial whereof will be to propose some form
of worshipping God, taken wholly out of Scripture; and herein if we refuse to
join with you, then, and not till then, may you justly say we have utterly and
absolutely abandoned your Communion.

24 To the sixteenth. Your sixth demand I have already satisfied in my answers
to the Second and the Fourth: and in my reply, Ad 2. toward the end. And though
you say your repeating must be excused, yet I dare not be so confident, and
therefore forbear it.

25 To the seaventeenth. To the seventh, Whether error against any one truth
sufficiently propounded as testified by God, destroy not the Nature and Unity
of Faith, or at least, is not a grievous offense excluding salvation! I
answer, if you suppose, as you seem to do the proposition so sufficient, that
the party to whom it is made is convinced that it is from God, so that the
denial of it involves also with it the denial of Gods veracity; any such
error destroys both faith and salvation. But if the Proposal be only so
sufficient, not, that the party to whom it is made is convinced, but only that
he should, and but for his own fault would have been convinced of the divine
verity of the doctrine proposed: The crime then is not so great, for the
belief of Gods veracity may well consist with such an Error. Yet a fault I
confess it is (and without Repentance) damnable, if all circumstances
considered the proposal be sufficient. But then I must tell you that the
proposal of the present Roman Church is only pretended to be sufficient for
this purpose, but is not so: especially all the Rays of the Divinity, which
they pretend to shine so conspicuously in her proposalls, being so darkened and
even extinguished with a cloud of contradiction, from Scripture, Reason, and
the Ancient Church.

26 To the Eighteenth. To the eight. How of disagreeing Protestants, both parts
may hope for salvation, seeing some of them must needs err against some Truth
testified by God? I answer, 1. The most disagreeing Protestants that are, yet
thus far agree, that these books of Scripture which were never doubted of in
the Church, are the undoubted word of God, and a perfect rule of faith. 2. That
the sense of them, which God intended, whatsoever it is, is certainly true. So
that they believe implicitly even those very truths against which they err;
and why an implicit faith in Christ and his Word, should not suffice as well as
an implicit faith in your Church, I have desired to be resolved by many of your
Side, but never could. 3. That they are to use their best endeavors to believe
the Scripture in the true sense and to live according to it. This if they
perform (as I hope many on all Sides do) truly and syncerely, it is
impossible but that they should believe aright in all things necessary to
salvation; that is, in all those things which appertain to the Covenant between
God and man in Christ, for so much, is not only plainly but frequently
contained in Scripture. And believing aright touching the Covenant, if they for
their parts perform the condition required of them, which is sincere obedience,
why should they not expect that God will perform his promise and give them
salvation? For, as for other things which lie without the Covenant, and are
therefore less necessary, if by reason of the seeming conflict which is
oftentimes between Scripture and Reason, and Authority on the one side, and
Scripture, Reason, and Authority on the other; if by reason of the variety of
tempers, abilities, educations, and unavoidable prejudices, whereby men's
understandings are variously formed and fashioned, they do embrace several
Opinions, whereof some must be erroneous; to say that God will damn them for
such errors, who are lovers of him, and lovers of truth, is to rob man of his
comfort, and God of his goodness; it is to make Man desperate and God a
Tyrant. But they deny Truths testified by God, and therefore shall be damned.
Yes, if they knew them to be thus testified by him, and yet would deny them,
that were to give God the lie, and questionless damnable. But if you should
deny a truth which God had testified but only to a man in the Indies, (as I
said before) and this testification you had never heard of, or at least had no
sufficient reason to believe that God had so testified, would not you think it
a hard case to be damned for such a denial? Yet consider I pray a little more
attentively the difference between them, and you will presently acknowledge,
the question between them is not at any time, or in any thing, Whether God
says true or no? or whether he says this or no? But supposing he says this,
and says true, whether he means this or no? As for example, between
Lutherans, Calvinists, and Zwinglians, it is agreed that Christ spoke these
words, This is my Body; and that whatsoever he meant in saying so is true: But
what he meant and how he is to be understood, that is the question. So that
though some of them deny a truth by God intended, yet you can with no reason or
justice accuse them of denying the truth of Gods Testimony, unless you can
plainly show that God has declared, and that plainly and clearly, what was his
meaning in these words. I say plainly and clearly. For he that speaks obscurely
and ambiguously, and no where declares himself plainly, sure he has no reason
to be much offended if he be mistaken. When therefore you can show, that in
this and all other their Controversies, God has interposed his Testimony on
one side or other; so that either they do see it, and will not; or were it not
for their own voluntary and avoidable fault, might and should see it and do
not; let all such Errors be as damnable as you please to make them. In the mean
while, if they suffer themselves neither to be betrayed into their errors, nor
kept in them by any sin of their will; if they do their best endeavor to free
themselves from all errors, and yet fail of it through humane frailty; so well
am I persuaded of the goodness of God, that if in me alone, should meet a
confluence of all such errors of all the Protestants in the World, that were
thus qualified, I should not be so much afraid of them all, as I should be to
ask pardon for them. For, whereas that which you affright us with of calling
Gods Veracitie in Question, is but a Panicke fear, a fault that no man thus
qualified, is, or can be guilty of; to ask pardon of simple and purely
involuntary errors is tacitly to imply that God is angry with us for them, and
that were to impute to him the strange tyranny of requiring brick, when he
gives no straw; of expecting to gather, where he strewn not; to reap where he
sowed not: of being offended with us for not doing what he knows we cannot
do. This I say upon a supposition that they do their best endeavors to know
Gods will and do it; which he that denies to be possible knows not what he
says; for he says in effect, That men cannot do, what they can do; for to
do what a man can do, is to do his best endeavor. But because this
supposition, though certainly possible, is very rare, and admirable, I say
secondly, that I am verily persuaded, that God will not impute errors to them,
as sins, who use such a measure of industry, in finding truth, as humane
prudence and ordinary discretion (their abilities and oportunities, their
distractions and hindrances, and all other things considered) shall advise them
unto, in a matter of such consequence. But if herein also we fail, then our
errors begin to be malignant, and justly imputable, as offenses against God,
and that love of his truth which he requires in us. You will say then, that for
those erring Protestants, which are in this case, which evidently are far the
greater part, they sin damnably in erring, and therefore there is little hope
of their Salvation. To which I answer, that the consequence of this Reason, is
somewhat strong against a Protestant; but much weakened by coming out of the
mouth of a Papist. For all sins with you are not damnable; and therefore
Protestants errors might be sins, and yet not damnable. But yet out of
courtesy to you, we will remove this rub out of your way; and for the present
suppose them mortal sins; and is there then no hope of Salvation, for him
that commits them? Not, you will say, if he dye in them without repentance; and
such Protestants you speak of, who without repentance dye in their errors. Yea
but what if they dye in their errors with repentance? then I hope you will have
Charity enough to think they may be saved. Charity Mist. takes it indeed for
granted, that this supposition is destructive of it self; In the place above
quoted.
and that it is impossible, and incongruous that a man should repent of those
errors wherein he dies; or dye in those whereof he repents. But it was wisely
done of Him to take it for granted; for most certainly He could not have spoken
one word of sense for the confirmation of it. For seeing Protestants believe,
as well as you, Gods infinite and most admirable perfections in himself, more
then most worthy of all possible love: seeing they believe, as well as you, his
infinite goodness to them, in creating them of nothing; in creating them
according to his own image; in creating all things for their use and benefit;
in streaming down his favors on them every moment of their lives; in designing
them, if they serve him, to infinite and eternal happiness; in redeeming
them, not with corruptible things, but the precious blood of his beloved son:
seeing they believe, as well as you, his infinite goodness, and patience
toward them, in expecting their conversion; in wooing, alluring, leading, and
by all means, which his wisdom can suggest unto him, and man's nature is
capable of, drawing them to Repentance and Salvation: Seeing they believe these
things as well as you, and for ought you know, consider them as much as you,
(and if they do not, it is not their Religion, but They that are too blame,)
what can hinder, but that the consideration of Gods most infinite goodness to
them, and their own almost infinite wickedness against him, Gods spirit
cooperating with them, may raise them to a true and sincere and a cordial love
of God? And seeing sorrow for having injured or offended the person beloved, or
when we fear we may have offended him, is the most natural effect of true
love; what can hinder, but that love which has oftimes constrained them, to
lay down their lives for God (which our Savior assures us is the noblest
sacrifice we can offer,) may produce in them an universal sorrow for all their
sins, both which they know they have committed, and which they fear they may
have? In which number, their being negligent, or not dispassionate, or not
unprejudicate enough in seeking the truth, and, the effect thereof, their
errors, if they be sins, cannot but be comprised. In a word, what should
hinder, but that, that Prayer -- Delicta sua quis intelligit? who can
understand his faults? Lord cleanse thou me from my secret sins, may be heard
and accepted by God, as well from a Protestant that dies in some errors, as
from a Papist that dies in some other sins of Ignorance, which perhaps he might
more easily have discovered to be sins, then a Protestant could his errors
to be errors? As well from a Protestant, that held some error, which (as he
conceived) Gods word, and his reason, (which is also in some sort Gods word)
led him unto; as from a Dominican, who perhaps took up his opinion upon trust,
not because he had reason to believe it true, but because it was the opinion of
his Order; for the same man if he had light upon another Order, would in all
probability, have been of the other opinion. For what else is the cause, that
generally all the Dominicans are of one opinion, and all the Jesuits of the
other? I say, from a Dominican who took up his opinion upon trust; and that
such an opinion (if we believe the writers of your Order) as if it be granted
true, it were not a point matter, what opinions any man held, or what actions
any man did, for the best would be as bad as the worst, and the worst as good
as the best. And yet such is the partiality of your Hypocrisy, that of
disagreeing Papists, neither shall deny the truth testified by God, but both
may hope for salvation: but of disagreeing Protestants (though they differ in
the same thing,) one side must deny Gods Testimony and be incapable of
salvation. That a Dominican through culpable negligence, living and dying in
his error, may repent of it, though he knows it not; or be saved though he
do not: But if a Protestant do the very same thing, in the very same point,
and die in his error, his case is desperate. The sum of all that has been
said to this Demand is this. 1. That no erring Protestant denies any truth
testified by God, under this formalitie, as testified by him; nor which they
know or believe to be testified by him. And therefore it is a horrible calumny
in you to say, They call Gods Veracitie in question. For Gods undoubted and
unquestioned Veracitie, is to them the ground why they hold all they do hold:
neither do they hold any opinion so stiffly, but they will forgo it rather
then this one, That all which God says is true. 2. God has not so clearly
and plainly declared himself in most of these things which are in controversy
between Protestants, but that an honest man, whose heart is right to God, and
one that is a true lover of God, and of his truth, may by reason of the
conflict of contrary Reasons on both sides, very easily, and therefore
excusably mistake, and embrace error for truth, and reject truth for error.
3, If any Protestant or Papist be betrayed into, or kept in any Error, by any
sin of his will (as it is to be feared many millions are) such Error is, as
the cause of it, sinful and damnable: yet not exclusive of all hope of
salvation, but pardonable if discovered, upon a particular explicit
repentance; if not discovered, upon a general and implicit repentance for all
Sins known and unknown: in which number all sinful Errors must of
necessity be contained.

17 To the 9. To the nineteenth, Wherein you are so urgent for a partilar
Catalogue of Fundamentalls: I answer almost in your own words, that we also
constantly urge and require to have a particular Catalogue of your
Fundamentals, whether they be written Verities, or unwritten Traditions, or
Church Definitions? all which, you say, integrate the material Object of your
Faith: In a word of all such points as are defined and sufficiently proposed;
so that whosoever denies, or doubts of any of them, is certainly in the state
of damnation. A Catalogue I say in particular of the Proposals: and not only
some general definition, or description, under which you lurk deceitfully, of
what and what only is sufficiently proposed: wherein yet you do not very well
agree. This great diversity of opinions among you, touching this matter, if any
man doubt of it, let him read Franciscus Picus Mirandula in l. Theorem. in
Exposit. Theor. quarti, and T h. Waldensis. Tom. 3. De Sacramentalibus. doct.
3. fol. 5. andhee shall be fully satisfied that I have done you no injury.
For many of you hold the Popes proposal Ex Cathedra, to be sufficient and
obligeing: Some a Council without a Pope: Some, of neither of them severally,
but only both together: Some not this neither in matter of manners, which
Bellarmine acknowledges, and tells us it is all one in effect, as if they
denied it sufficient in matter of faith: Some not in matter of faith, neither
think this proposal infallible, without the acceptance of the Church
universal: Some deny the infallibility of the Present Church, and only make
the Tradition of all ages the infallible Propounder. Yet if you were agreed
what and what only is the Infallible Propounder, this would not satisfy us;
nor yet to say that All is fundamental which is propounded sufficiently by
him. For though agreeing in this, yet you might still disagree whether such or
such a Doctrine were propounded or not: or if propounded, whether sufficiently,
or only unsufficiently. And it is so known a thing, that in many points you
do so, that I assure my self you will not deny it. Therefore we constantly
urge and require a particular and perfect Inventory of all these Divine
Revelations, which you say are sufficiently propounded, and that such a one to
which all of your Church will subscribe as neither redundant, nor deficient;
which when you give in with one hand, you shall receive a particular Catalogue
of such Points as I call Fundamental, with the other. Neither may you think
me unreasonable in this demand, seeing upon such a particular Catalogue of
your sufficient Proposalls as much depends, as upon a particular Catalogue of
our Fundamentalls. As for example. Whether or no a man do not err in some
point defined and sufficiently proposed: and whether or no those that differ
among you, differ in Fundamentalls; which if they do One Heaven (by your own
Rule) cannot receive them All. Perhaps you will here complain, that this is
not to satisfy your demand, but to avoid it, and to put you off as the
Areopagites did hard causes ad diem longissimum, and bid you come again a
hundred years hence: To deal truly, I did so intend it should be. Nether can
you say my dealing with you is injurious, seeing I require nothing of you, but
that, what you require of others, you should show it possible to be done, and
just and necessary to be required. For, for my part, I have great reason to
suspect, it is neither the one nor the other. For whereas the Verities which
are delivered in Scripture, may be very fitly divided into such as were written
because they were necessary to be believed, Of which rank are those only which
constitute and make up the Covenant between God and Man in Christ: and then
such as are necessary to be believed not in themselves but only by accident,
because they were written. Of which rank are many matters of History, of
Prophecy, of mystery, of Policy, of Oeconomie, and such like, which are
evidently not intrinsecall to the Covenant. Now to sever exactly and punctually
these Verities one trom the other: what is necessary in it self and
antecedently to the writing, from what is but only profitable in it self, and
necessary only because written, is a business of extreme great difficulty,
and extreme little necessity. For first he that will go about to distinguish
especially in the Story of our Savior, what was written because it was
profitable, from what was written because necessary, shall find an intricate
piece of business of it, and almost impossible that he should be certain he
has done it, when he has done it. And then it is apparently unnecessary to
go about it, seeing he that beleiues all, certainly belieues all that is
necessary. And he that does not believe all (I mean all the undoubted parts of
the undoubted Books of Scripture) can hardly believe any, neither have we
reason to believe he does so. So that, that Protestants give you not a
Catalogue of Fundamentalls, it is not from Tergiversation (as you suspect, who
for want of Charity to them always suspect the worst,) but from Wisdom and
Necessity. For they may very easily err in doing it; because though all which
is necessary be plain in Scripture, yet all which is plain is not therefore
written because it was necessary. For what greater necessity was there that I
should know S. Paul left his Cloak at Troas, then those Worlds of Miracles,
which our Savior did, which were never written. And when they had done it, it
had been to no purpose; There being, as matters now stand, as great necessity,
of believing those truths of Scripture, which are not Fundamental, as those
that are. You see then what reason we have to decline this hard labor, which
you a rigid Taskemaster have here put upon us. Yet instead of giving you a
Catalogue of Fundamentalls, with which I dare say you are resolved before it
come, never to be satisfied, I will say that to you, which if you please may
do you as much service; and this it is. That it is sufficient for any man's
salvation that he believe the Scripture: That he endeavor to believe it in the
true sense of it, as far as concerns his duty: And that he conform his
life unto it either by Obedience or Repentance. He that does so (and all
Protestants according to the Dictamen of their Religion should do so,) may be
secure that he cannot err fundamentally. And they that do so cannot differ in
Fundamentals. So that notwithstanding their differences, and your presumption,
the same Heaven may receive them All.

28 To the twentieth. Your tenth and last request is, to know distinctly what
is the doctrine of the Protestant English Church, in these points; and what my
private opinion. Which shall be satisfied when the Church of England has
expressed her self in them; or when you have told us what is the doctrine of
your Church, in the Question of Predetermination, or the Immaculate Conception.

29 To the 21 and 22. These answers I hope in the judgment of indifferent men
are satisfactory to your Questions, though not to you, For I have either
answered them, or given you a reason why I have not. Neither, for ought I can
see, have I flitted from things considered in their own nature, to accidental
or rare Circumstances, But told you my opinion plainly what I thought of your
Errors in themselves: and what as they were qualified or malignified with good
or bad circumstances. Though I must tell you truly, that I see no reason, the
Question being of the damnablenesse of Error, why you should esteem
ignorance, incapacitie, want of means to be instructed, accidental and rare
Circumstances: As if knowledge, capacity, having means of Instruction,
concerning the truth of your Religion or ours, were not as rare and unusual in
the adverse part of either, as Ignorance, Incapacitie, and want of means of
instruction. Especially how erroneous Conscience can be a rare thing in those
that err, or how unerring Conscience is not much more rare, I am not able to
apprehend. So that to consider men of different Religions (the subject of this
Contoversie) in their own nature and without circumstances, must be to
consider them, neither as ignorant, nor as knowing: neither as having, nor as
wanting means of Instruction: neither as with Capacity, nor without it:
neither with erroneous, nor yet with unerring conscience. And then what
judgment can you pronounce of them, all the goodness and badnesse of an
Action depending on the Circumstances. Ought not a Judge being to give sentence
of an Action, to consider all the Circumstances of it, or is it possible he
should judge rightly that does not so? Neither is it to purpose, That
Circumstances being various, cannot be well comprehended under any general
rule: For though under any general rule they cannot, yet under many general
rules they may be comprehended. The Question here is, you say, whether men of
different Religions may be saved? Now the subject of this Question is an
ambiguous term and may be determined and invested with diverse and contrary
Circumstances: and accordingly contrary judgments are to be given of it. And
who then can be offended with D. Potter for distinguishing before he defines,
(the want whereof is the chief thing that makes defining dangerous?) Who can
find fault with him for saying, If, through want of means of instruction,
incapacitie, invincible or probable ignorance a man dye in error, he may be
saved. But if he be negligent in seeking Truth, unwilling to find it, either
does see it and will not, or might see it and will not, that his case is
dangerous, and without repentance desperate. This is all that D. Potter says:
neither rashly damning all that are of a different opinion from him, not
securing any that are in matter of Religion sinfully, that is, willingly
erroneous. The Author of this Reply (I will abide by it) says the very same
thing, neither can I see what adversary he has in the maine Question but his
own shadow; and yet I know not out of what frowardness finds fault with D.
Potter, for affirming that which himself affirms: and to cloud the matter,
whereas the Question is, whether men by ignorance, dying in error may be
saved, would have them considered neither as erring, nor ignorant. And when the
question is, whether The errors of Papists be damnable: to which we answer.
That to them that do or might know them to be errors, they are damnable, to
them that do not, they are not. He tells us that this is to change the state of
the Question, whereas indeed it is to state the Question, and free it from
ambiguity before you answer it: and to have recourse to Accidental
Circumstances; as if Ignorance were accidental to error, or as if a man could
be considered as in error, and not be considered as in ignorance of the Truth
from which he erres! Certainly Error against a Truth, must needs presuppose a
nescience of it: unless you will say, that a man may at once resolve for a
Truth and resolve against it, assent to it, and dissent from it, know it to be
true, and believe it not to be true. Whether Knowledge and Opinion touching the
same thing, may stand together, is made a Question in the Schools: But he
that would question, whether knowing a thing and doubting of it, much more,
whether knowing it to be true and believing it to be false, may stand together,
deserves without question no other Answer but laughter. Now if Error and
knowledge connot consist, then Error and Ignorance must be inseparable. He
then that professes your errors may well be considered either as knowing or
as Ignorant. But him that does err indeed, you can no more conceive without
ignorance, then Long without Quantity, Virtuous without Quality, a Man, and
not a living Creature, to have gone ten miles, and not to have gone five, to
speak sense, and not to speak. For as the latter in all these is implied in
the former, so is Ignorance of a Truth, supposed in error against it. Yet such
a man, though not conceaueable without Ignorance simply, may be very well
considered either as with, or without voluntary and sinful Ignorance. And he
that will give a wise answer to this Question, Whether a Papist dying a Papist
may be saved, according to Gods ordinary proceeding; must distinguish him
according to these several considerations, and say, He may be saved, If his
ignorance were either invincible, or at least unaffected and probable: if
otherwise, without repentance he cannot.

To the rest of this Preface, I have nothing to say; saving what has been
said, but this, That it is no just exception to an argument to call it vulgar
and thredbare. Truth can neither be too common nor superannuated, nor Reason
ever worn out. Let your Answers be solid and pertinent, and we will never
find fault with them for being old or common.

THE FIRST PART.
The State of the Question; with a summary of the reasons for which amongst men
of different Religions, one side only can be saved.
CHAP. I.
NEver is Malice more indiscreet, then when it charge others with imputation
of that, to which it self becomes more liable, even by that very act of
accusing others. For, though guiltiness be the effect of some error, yet
usually it begets a kind of Moderation, so far forth, as not to let men cast
such aspersions upon others, Qui^ tulerit Gracchum etc.
as must apparently reflect upon themselves. Thus cannot the Poet endure, that
Gracchus, who was a factious and unquiet man, should be inveighing against
Sedition: and the Roman Orator rebukes Philosophers; who, to wax glorious,
superscribed their Names upon those very books which they entitled, Of the
contempt of glory. What then shall we say of D. Potter, who in the Title, and
Text of his whole book does so tragically charge Want of Charity on all such
Romanists, as dare affirm, that Protestancy destroys Salvation; while he
himself is in act of pronouncing the like heavy doom against Roman
Catholics? For, not satisfied with much uncivil language, in affirming the
Roman Church many Page 11.
ways to have played the Harlot, and in that regard deserved a bill of divorce
from Christ, and detestation of Christians; in styling her, that proud Ibid.
and cursed Dame of Rome, which takes upon her to revell in the House of God; in
talking of an Idol Page 4. Edit. 1.
to be worshipped at Rome; he comes at length to thunder out this fearful
sentence against her: For that Page 20.
Mass of Errors (says he) in judgment and practice, which is proper to her,
and wherein she differs from us, we judge a reconciliation impossible, and to
us (who are convicted in conscience of her corruptions) damnable. And in
another place ho says: For us who Page 81.
are convinced in conscience, that she erres in many things, a necessity lies
upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake her in those Errors. By the
acerbity of which Censure, he does not only make himself guilty of that, which
he judges to be a heinous offense in others, but freeth us also from all
color of crime by this his unadvised recrimination. For, if Roman Catholics
be likewise convicted in conscience of the Errors of Protestants; they may, and
must, in conformity to the Doctor's own rule, judge a reconciliation with them
to be also damnable. And thus, all the Want of Charity so deeply charged on us,
dissolves it self into this poor wonder, Roman Catholics believe in their
conscience, that the Religion which they profess, is true, and the contrary
false.

2. Nevertheless, we earnestly desire, and take care, that our doctrine may
not be defamed by misinterpretation. Far be it from us, by way of insultation,
to apply it against Protestants, otherwise then as they are comprehended under
the generality of those who are divided from the only one true Church of Christ
our Lord, within the Communion whereof he has confined salvation. Neither do
we understand, why our most dear Countrymen should be offended if the
Universality be particularized under the name of Protestants, first given
Sleidan. l. 6. fol. 84.
to certain Lutherans, who protesting that they would stand out against the
Imperial decrees, in defense of the Confession exhibited at Ausburge, were
termed Protestants, in regard of such their protesting: which Confessio
Augustana disclaiming from, and being disclaymed by Calvinists, and Zwinglians,
our naming or exemplifying a general doctrine under the particular name of
Protestantisme, ought not in any particular manner to be odious in England.

3 Moreover, our meaning is not, as misinformed persons may conceive, that we
give Protestants over to reprobation; that we offer no prayers in hope of their
salvation; that we hold their case desperate. God forbid! We hope, we pray for
their Conversion; and sometimes we find happy effects of our charitable
desires. Neither is our Censure immediately directed to particular persons. The
Tribunal of particular Judgment is Gods alone. When any man esteemed a
Protestant, leaves to live in this world, we do not instantly with
precipitation avouch, that he is lodged in Hell. For we are not always
acquainted with what sufficiency or means he was furnished for instruction; we
do not penetrate his capacity to understand his Catechist, we have no
revelation what light might have cleared his errors, or Contrition retracted
his sins, in the last moment before his death. In such particular cases, we
wish more apparent signs of salvation, but do not give any dogmaticall
sentence of perdition. How grievous sins, Disobedience, Schism, and Heresy
are, is well known. But to discern how far the natural malignity of those
great offenses might be checked by Ignorance, or by some such lessening
circumstance, is the office rather of Prudence then of Faith.

4 Thus we allow Protestants as much Charity, as D. Potter spares us, for whom,
in the words above mentioned, and else where, he See page 39.
makes Ignorance the best hope of salvation. Much less comfort, can we expect
from the fierce d^^trine of those chief Protestants, who teach that for many
ages before Luther, Christ had no visible Church upon earth. Not these men
alone, or such as they, but even the 39. Articles, to which the English
Protestant Clergy subscribes, censure our belief so deeply, that Ignorance can
scarce, or rather not at all, excuse us from damnation. Our doctrine of
Transubstantiation, is affirmed to be repugnant to the plain words of Art. 28.
Scripture; our Masses to be blasphemous Art. 31.
Fables, with much more to be seen in the Articles themselves. In a certain
Confession of the Christian faith, at the end of their books of Psalms
collected into Meeter, and printed Cum privilegio Regis Regali, they call us
Idolaters, and limbs of Antichrist; and having set down a Catalogue of our
doctrines, they conclude, that for them we shall after the General
Resurrection be damned to unquenchable fire.

5 But yet least any man should flatter himself with our charitable
Mitigations, and thereby wax careless in search of the true Church, we desire
him to read the Conclusion of the Second Part, where this matter is more
explained.

6 And because we cannot determine, what Judgment may be esteemed rash, or
prudent, except by weighing the reasons upon which it is grounded, we will
here, under one aspect, present a Summary of those Principles, from which we
infer, that Protestancy in it self unrepented destroys Salvation: intending
afterward to prove the truth of every one of the grounds, till, by a
concatenation of sequels, we fall upon the Conclusion, for which we are charged
with Wan^ of Charity.

7 Now, this is our gradation of reasons. Almighty God, having ordained Mankind
to a supernatural End of eternal felicity, has in his holy Providence settled
competent and convenient Means, whereby that end may be attained. The
universal grand Origin of all such means, is the Incarnation and Death of our
Blessed Savior, whereby he merited internal grace for us; and founded an
external visible Church, provided and stored with all those helps which might
be necessary for Salvation. From hence it follows, that in this Church
amongst other advantages, there must be some effectual means to beget, and
conserve faith, to maintain Unity, to discover and condemn Heresies, to
appease and reduce Schisms, and to determine all Controversies in Religion.
For without such means, the Church should not be furnished with helps
sufficient to salvation, nor God afford sufficient means to attain that End,
to which himself ordained Mankind. This means to decide Controversies in
faith and Religion (whether it should be the holy Scripture, or whatsoever
else) must be endued with an Universal Infallibility, in whatsoever it
propounds for a divine truth, that is, as revealed, spoken, or testified by
Almighty God, whether the matter of its nature, be great or small. For if it
were subject to error in any one thing, we could not in any other yield it
infallible assent; because we might with good reason doubt, whether it chanced
not to err in that particular.

8 Thus far all must agree to what we have said, unless they have a mind to
reduce Faith to Opinion. And even out of these grounds alone, without further
proceeding, it undenyably follows, that of two men dissenting in matters of
faith, great or small, few or many, the one connot be saved without repentance,
unless Ignorance accidentally may in some particular person plead excuse. For
in that case of contrary belief, one must of necessity be held to oppose Gods
word, or Revelation sufficiently represented to his understanding by an
infallible Propounder; which opposition to the Testimony of God is undoubtedly
a damnable sin, whether otherwise, the thing so testified, be in it self great
or small. And thus we have already made good, what was promised in the
argument of this Chapter, that amongst men of different Religions, one is only
capable of being saved.

9 Nevertheless, to the end that men may know in particular what is the said
infallible means upon which we are to rely in all things concerning Faith, and
accordingly may be able to judge in what safety or danger, more or less they
live; and because D. Potter descends to diverse particulars about Scriptures
and the Church etc. we will go forward, and prove, that although Scripture be
in it self most sacred, infallible, and divine; yet it alone cannot be to us a
Rule, or Judge, fit an able to end all doubts and debates emergent in matters
of Religion; but that there must be some external, visible, public, living
Judge, to whom all sorts of persons both learned and unlearned, may without
danger of error, have recourse; and in whose Judgment they may rest, for the
interpreting and propounding of Gods Word or Revelation. And this living Judge,
we will most evidently prove to be no other, but that Holy, Catholic,
Apostolic, and Visible Church, which our Savior purchased with the effusion
of his most precious blood.

10 If once therefore it be granted, that the Church is that means, which God
has left for deciding all Controversies in faith, it manifestly will follow,
that she must be infallible in all her determinations, whether the matters of
themselves be great or small; because as we said above, it must be agreed on
all sides, that if that means which God has left to determine Controversies
were not infallible in all things proposed by it as truths revealed by Almighty
God, it could not settle in our minds a firm, and infallible belief of any
one.

11 From this Universal infallibility of Gods Church it follows, that
whosoever wittingly denies any one point proposed by her, as revealed by God,
is injurious to his divine Majesty, as if he could either deceive, or be
deceived in what he testifies. The averring whereof, were not a fundamental
error, but would overthrow the very foundation of all fundamental points, and
therefore without repentance could (...) possibly stand with salvation.

12 Out of these grounds, we will show, that although the distinction of points
fundamental, and not fundamental, be good and useful, as it is delivered and
applied by Catholic Divines, to teach what principal Articles of faith,
Christians are obliged explicitly to believe: yet that it is impertinent to
the present purpose of excusing any man from grievous sin, who knowingly
disbelieves, that is, believes the contrary of that which Gods Church proposes
as divine Truth. For it is one thing not to know explicitly some thing
testified by God, and another positively to oppose what we know he has
restified. The former may often be excused from sin, but never the latter,
which only is the case in Question.

13 In the same manner shall be demonstrated, that to allege the Creed, as
containing all Articles of faith necessary to be explicitly believed, is not
pertinent to free from sin the voluntary denial of any other point known to
be defined by Gods Church. And this were sufficient to overthrow all that D.
Potter alleges, concerning the Creed: though yet by way of Supererogation,
we will prove, that there are diverse important matters of Faith which are not
mentioned at all in the Creed.

14 From the aforesaid maine principle, that God has always had, and always
will have on earth, a Church Visible, within whose Communion Salvation must be
hoped, and infallible, whose definitions we ought to believe; we will prove,
that Luther, Calvin and all other, who continue the division in Communion, or
Faith, from that Visible Church, which at, and before Luther's appearance, was
spread over the world, cannot be excused from Schism and Heresy, although they
opposed her faith but in one only point; whereas it is manifest, they dissent
from her, in many and weighty matters, concerning as well belief, as practice.

15 To these reasons drawn from the virtue of Faith, we will add one other
taken from Charitas propria, the Virtue of Charity, as it obliges us, not to
expose our soul to hazard of perdition, when we can put ourselves in a way
much more secure, as we will prove, that of the Roman Catholics to be.

16 We are then to prove these points. First, that the infallible means to
determine controversies in matters of faith, is the visible Church of Christ.
Secondly, that the distinction of points fundamental, and not fundamental,
makes nothing to our present Question. Thirdly, that to say the Creed
contains all fundamental points of faith, is neither pertinent, nor true.
Fourthly, that both Luther, and all they who after him, persist in division
from the Communion, and Faith of the Roman Church, cannot be excused from
Schism. Fifthly, nor from Heresy. Sixthly and lastly, that in regard of the
precept of Charity toward ones self, Protestants be in state of sin, as
long as they remain divided from the Roman Church. And these six points, shall
be several Arguments for so many ensuing Chapters,

17 Only I will here observe, that it seems very strange, that Protestants
should charge us so deeply with Want of Charity, for only teaching, that both
they, and we cannot be saved, seeing themselves must affirm the like of
whosoever opposes any least point delivered in Scripture, which they hold to
be the sole Rule of Faith. Out of which ground they must be enforced to let all
our former Inferences pass for good. For, is it not a grievous sin, to deny
any one truth contained in holy Writ? Is there in such denial, any distinction
betwixt points fundamental, and not fundamental, sufficient to excuse from
heresy? Is it not impertinent, to allege the Creed containing all
fundamental points of faith, as if believing it alone, we were at liberty to
deny all other points of Scripture? In a word: According to Protestants; Oppose
not Scripture, there is no Error against faith. Oppose it in any least point,
the error (if Scripture be sufficiently proposed, which proposition is also
required before a man can be obliged to believe even fundamental points) must
be damnable. What is this, but to say with us, Of persons contrary in
whatsoever point of belief, one party only can be saved? And D. Potter must
not take it ill, if Catholics believe they may be saved in that Religion for
which they suffer. And if by occasion of this doctrine, men will still be
charging us with Want of Charity, and be resolved to take scandal where none
is given; we must comfort our selves with that grave, and true saying of S.
Gregory: If scandal S. Greg. Hom. 7. in Ezec.
be taken from declaring a truth, it is better to permit scandal, then forsake
the truth. But the solid grounds of our Assertion, and the sincerity of our
intention in uttering what we think, yield us confidence, that all will hold
for most reasonable the saying of Pope Gelasius to Anastasius the Emperor;
Far ^e it from the Roman Emperor that he should hold it for a wrong to have
truth declared to him! Let us therefore begin with that Point which is the
first that can be controverted betwixt Protestants and us, for as much as
concerns the present Question, and is contained in the Argument of the next
ensuing Chapter.

THE ANSWER TO THE FIRST CHAPTER.
Showing, that the Adversary grants the Former Question and proposes a New
one: And that there is no reason, why among men of different opinions and
Communions, one Side only can be saved.
1. TO the first. Your first onset is very violent. D. Potter is charged with
malice and indiscretion, for being uncharitable to you, while he is accusing
you of uncharitableness. Verily a great fault, and folly, if the accusation be
just; if unjust, a great calumny. Let us see then how you make good your
charge. The effect of your discourse, if I mistake not, is this. D. Potter
charge the Roman Church with many and great errors; judges reconciliation
between her Doctrine and ours impossible; and that for them who are convicted
in Conscience of her Errors, not to forsake her in them, or to be reconciled
unto her, is damnable: Therefore if Roman Catholics be convicted in
conscience of the Errors of Protestants, they may and must judge a
reconciliation with them damnable, and consequently, to judge so is no more
uncharitable in the^, then it is in the Doctor to judge as he does. All this I
grant; nor would any Protestant accuse you of want of Charity, if you went no
further: if you judged the Religion of Protestants damnable to them only who
profess it being, convicted in conscience that it is erroneous. For, if a man
judge some act of virtue to be a sin, in him it is a sin indeed: So you
have taught us, p. 19. So if you be convinced, or rather, to speak properly,
persuaded in conscience that our Religion is erroneous, the profession of it,
though in it self most true, to you would be damnable. This therefore I
subscribe very willingly, and withal, that if you said no more, D. Potter and
my self should not be to Papists only, but even to Protestants, as
uncharitable as you are. For I shall always profess and glory in this
uncharitableness of judging hypocrisy a damnable sin. Let Hypocrites then
and Dissemblers on both sides pass. It is not toward them, but good
Christians; not to Protestant Professors but Believers that we require your
Charity. What think you of those that believe so verily the truth of our
Religion, that they are resolved to die in it, and if occasion were, to die for
it? What Charity have you for them? What think ye of those that in the days
of our Fathers, laid down their lives for it? are you content that they shall
be saved, or do you hope they may be so? Will you grant that notwithstanding
their Errors, there is good hope they might die with repentance? and if they
did so* certainly they are saved. If you will do so, this Controversy is
ended. No man will hereafter charge you with want of Charity. This is as much
as either we give you, or expect of you, while you remain in your Religion.
But then you must leave abusing silly people, with telling them (as your
fashion is) that Protestants confess Papists may be saved, but Papists
confess not so much of Protestants; therefore yours is the safer way, and in
Wisdom and Charity to our own souls we are bound to follow it. For granting
this, you grant as much hope of salvation to Protestants, as Protestants do to
you. If you will not, but will still affirm, as C. M. does, that Protectants,
not dissemblers but believers, without a particular repentance of their
Religion cannot be saved: This I say, is a want of Charity, into the society
whereof D. Potter cannot be drawn but with palpable and transparent
Sophistry. For I pray Sir what dependence is there between these Propositions:
We that hold Protestant Religion false should be damned if we should profess
it, Therefore they also shall be damned, that hold it true? Just as if you
should conclude, Because he that doubts is damned if he eat, Therefore he that
does not doubt is damned also if he eat. And therefore though your Religion to
us, or ours to you, if professed against Conscience would be damnable; yet may
it well be uncharitable to define it shall be so, to them that profess either
this or that according to Conscience. This recrimination therefore upon D.
Potter wherewith you begin, is a plain Fallacy: And I fear your proceedings
will be answerable to these beginings!

2 Ad. 2. In this Paragraph, Protestants are thus far comforted, that they
are not sent to Hell without Company; which the Poet tells us, is the miserable
comfort of miserable Men. Then we in England are requested not to be offended
with the name of Protestants. Which is a favor I shall easily grant, if by it
be understood those that Protest, not against Imperial Edicts, but against the
Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

3 Ad. 3. 4, 5* 6. That you give us not ^ver to reprobation, That you pray and
hope for our salvation, if it be a Charity, is such a one as is common to
Turks and Jews and Pagans with us: But that which follows is extraordinary;
Neither do I know any man that requires more of you then there you pretend to.
For there you tell us, That when any man, esteemed a Protestant, dies, you do
not instantly avouch that he is lodged in Hell. Where the word esteemed is
ambiguous: For it may signify, esteemed truly, and esteemd falsely. He may be
esteemed a Protestant that is so: And he may be esteemed a Protestant that is
not so. And therefore I should have had just occasion to have laid to your
charge the transgression of your own chief prescription, which you say truth
exacts at our hands, that is, to speak clearly or distinctly, and not to walk
in darkness; but that your following words to my understanding declare
sufficiently that you speak of both sorts. For there you tell us that the
Reasons why you damn not any man that dies with the esteem of a Protestant,
are. 1. Because you are not always acquainted with what sufficiency of means
he was furnished for instruction; You must mean touching the falsehood of his
own Religion, and the truth of yours. Which reason is proper to those that are
Protestants in truth, and not only in estimation. 2. Because you do not
penetrate his capacity to understand his Cateohist; which is also peculiar to
those, who for want of capacity (as you conceive) remain Protestants indeed,
and are not only so accounted. 3. Because you have no Revelation what light
might clear his errors; which belongs to those which were esteemed Protestants,
but indeed were not so. 4. Because you have no Revelation what Contrition might
have retracted his sins: which reason being distinct from the former, and
divided from it by the disjunctive particle, Or, insinuates unto us, that
though no light did clear the errors of a dying Protestant, yet Contrition
might, for ought you know, retract his sins: which appropriates this reason
also to Protestants truly so esteemed. I wish with all my heart that in
obedience to your own prescription, you had expressed your self in this matter
more fully and plainly. Yet that which you say, does plainly enough afford us
these corollaries.

1 That whatsoever Protestant wants capacity, or having it, wants
sufficient means of instruction to convince his Conscience of the falsehood of
his own, and the truth of the Roman Religion, by the confession of his most
rigid Adversaries, may be saved, notwithstanding any error in his Religion. 2
That nothing hinders but that a Protestant dying a Protestant may dye with
contrition for all his sins. 3 That, if he do dye with Contrition, he may
and shall be saved.
4 All these acknowledgements we have from you, while you are, as you say,
stateing, but as I conceive granting the very point in question; which was, as
I have already proved out of C. M. whether without uncharitableness you may
pronounce, that Protestants dying in the belief of their Religion, and without
particular repentance and dereliction of it cannot possibly be saved. Which C.
M. affirms universally, and without any of your limitations. But this
presumption of his, you thus qualify, by saying, that this sentence cannot be
pronounced truly and therefore sure not charitably, neither of those
Protestants that want means sufficient to instruct and convince them of the
truth of your Religion and the falsehood of their own: Nor of those, who, though
they have neglected the means they might have had, dyed with contrition, that
is, with a sorrow for all their sins proceeding from the love of God. So that
according to your doctrine it shall remain upon such only, as either were, or
but for their own fault, might have been sufficiently convinced of the truth of
your Religion, and the falsehood of their own, and yet dye in it without
contrition. Which doctrine if you would stand to, and not pull down, and pull
back with one hand, what you give and build with the other, this controversy
were ended; and I should willingly acknowledge, that which follows in your
fourth paragraph; That you allow Protestants as much Charity as D. Potter
allows you. But then I must entreat you to alter the argument of this Chapter,
and not to go about to give us reasons, why amongst men of different
Religions, one side only can be saved absolutely, which your Reasons drive at:
But you must temper the crudenes of your Assertion by saying, One side only can
be saved, unless want of Conviction, or else Repentance excuse the other.
Besides you must not only abstain from damning any Protestant in particular,
but from affirming in general, that Protestants dying in their Religion cannot
be saved; for you must always remember to add this caution, unless they were
excusably ignorant of the falsehood of it, or dyed with contrition. And then
considering that you cannot know, whether or no, all things considered, they
were convinced sufficiently of the truth of your Religion and the falsehood of
their own, you are obliged by Charity to judge the best, and hope they are not.
Considering again, that notwithstanding their Errors, they may dye with
contrition, and that it is no way improbable that they do so, and the contrary
you cannot be certain of, You are bound in Charity to judge and hope they do
so. Considering thirdly and lastly, that if they dye not with Contrition, yet
it is very probable they may dye with Attritio^, and that this pretense of
yours, that Contrition will serve without actual Confession, but Attrition
will not, is but a nicety or fancy, or rather, to give it the true name, a
Device of your own, to serve ends and purposes; (God having no where declared
himself, but that wheresoever he will accept of that repentance, which you are
pleased to call Contrition, he will accept of that which you call Attrition;
For though he like best the bright flaming holocaust of Love, yet he rejects
not, he quenches not the smoking flax of that repentance (if it be true and
effectual) which proceeds from hope and fear:) These things I say, considered,
(unless you will have the Charity of your doctrine rise up in judgment
against your uncharitable practice) you must not only not be peremptory, in
damning Protestants, but you must hope well of their Salvation: and out of this
hope, you must do for them as well as others, those, as you conceive,
Charitable offices, of Praying, giving Alms and offering Sacrifice, which
usually you do, for those of whose Salvation you are well and charitably
persuaded; (for I believe you will never conceive so well of Protestants, as to
assure your selves they go directly to heaven.) These things when you do I
shall believe you think as charitably as you speak. But until then, as he said
in the Comedy, Quid verba audiam cum facta videam? so may I say to you, Quid
verba audiam cum facta non videam? To what purpose should you give us
charitable words, which presently you retract again, by denying us your
charitable actions. And as these things you must do, if you will stand to and
make good this pretended Charity, so must I tell you again and again, that one
thing you must not do; I mean, you must not affright poor people out of their
Religion, with telling them, that by the confession of both sides, your way is
safe, but in your judgment, ours undoubtedly damnable. Seeing neither you deny
Salvation to Protestants dying with repentance, nor we promise it to you, if ye
dye without it. For to deal plainly with you, I know no Protestant that has
any other hope of your salvation, but upon these grounds, that unaffected
ignorance may excuse you, or true repentance obtain pardon for you; neither do
the heavy censures which Protestants (you say) pass upon your errors, any way
hinder but they may hope as well of you, upon repentance, as I do. For the
fierce doctrine, which, God knows who, teaches, that Christ for many ages
before Luther had no visible Church upon earth; will be mild enough, if you
conceive them to mean (as perhaps they do) by no visible Church, none pure and
free from corruptions, which in your judgment is all one with no Church. But
the truth is the corruption of the Church, and the destruction of it, is not
all one. For if a particular man or Church may (as you confess they may) hold
some particular Errors, and yet be a member of the Church universal: why may
not the Church hold some universal Error, and yet be still the Church?
especially, seeing you say, it is nothing but opposing the doctrine of the
Church, that makes an error damnable, and it is impossible that the Church
should oppose the Church, I mean that the present Church should oppose it
self. And then for the English Protestants, though they censure your Errors
deeply, yet, by your favor, with their deepest censures it may well consist
that invincible ignorance may excuse you from damnation for them. For you your
self confess that ignorance may excuse Errors, even in Fundamental Articles
of faith: so that a man so erring shall not offend at all in such his ignorance
or error; they are your own words. p. 19. And again which their heaviest
censures it may well consist, that your Errors though in themselves damnable,
yet may prove not damning to you, if you dye with true repentance, for all your
sins known and unknown.

5 Thus much Charity therefore, if you stand to what you have said, is
interchangeably granted by each Side to the other, that Neither Religion is so
fatally destructive, but that by ignorance or repentance salvation may be had
on both Sides: though with a difference that keeps Papists still on the more
uncharitable side. For whereas we conceive a lower degree of repentance (that
which they call Attrition) if it be true, and effectual, and convert the heart
of the penitent, will serve in them: They pretend (even this Author which is
most charitable toward us,) that without Contrition there is no hope for us,
But though Protestants may not obtain this purchase at so easy a rare as
Papists, yet (even Papists being Judges) they may obtain it; and though there
is no entrance for them but at the only door of Contrition, yet they may
enter, Heaven is not inaccessible to them. Their errors are no such
impenetrable Istmus's between them and Salvation, but that Contrition may make
a way through them. All their Schism and Heresy is no such fatal poison, but
that if a man join with it the Antidote of a general repentance, he may dye
in it, and live for ever. Thus much then being acknowledged, I appeal to any
indifferent reader, whether C. M. be not by his Hyperaspist forsaken in the
plain field, and the point in question granted to D. Potter, viz. That
Protestancy even without a particular repentance, is not destructive of
Salvation; so that all the Controversy remaining now, is, not simply whether
Protestancy unrepented destroies salvation? as it was at first proposed, but
Whether Protestancy in it self (that is abstracting from ignorance and
contrition) destroies Salvation? So that as a foolish fellow who gave a Knight
the Lie, desiring withal leave of him to set his Knighthood aside, was
answered by him, that he would not suffer any thing to be set aside that
belonged unto him: So might we justly take it amiss, that conceiving as you
do ignorance and repentance such necessary things for us, you are not more
willing to consider us with them, then without them. For my part such is my
charity to you, that considering what great necessity You have, as much as any
Christian society in the World, that these sanctuaries of Ignorance and
Repentance should always stand open, I can very hardly persuade my self so
much as in my most secret consideration to divest you of these so needful
qualifications: But whenever your errors, superstitions and impieties come
into my mind, (and besides the general bonds of humanity and Christianity, my
own particular obligations to many of you, such and so great, that you cannot
perish without a part of my self,) my only comfort is amidst these agonies,
that the Doctrine and practice too of repentance, is yet remaining in your
Church: And that though you put on a face of confidence of your innocence in
point of Doctrine, yet you will be glad to stand in the eye of mercy as well as
your fellows, and not be so stout, as to refuse either Gods pardon or the
Kings.

6 But for the present, Protestancy is called to the bar, and though not
sentenced by you to death without mercy, yet arraigned of so much natural
malignity (if not corrected by ignorance or contrition) as to be in it self,
destructive of Salvation. Which controversy I am content to dispute with you,
tying my self to follow the Rules prescribed by you in your Preface. Only I am
to remember you, that the adding of this limitation ( in it self) has made
this a new Question; and that this is not the conclusion for which you were
charged with want of Charity. But that whereas according to the grounds of your
own Religion, Protestants may dye in their supposed errors, either with
excusable ignorance, or with Contrition, and if they do so may be saved, you
still are peremptory in pronouncing them damned. Which position supposing your
Doctrine true, and ours false, as it is far from Charity, (whose essential
character it is, to judge and hope the best,) so I believe that I shall clearly
evince this new, but more moderate assertion of yours to be far from verity,
and that it is Popery, and not Protestancy, which in it self destroies
Salvation.

7 Ad 7. and 8. In your gradation I shall rise so far with you as to grant,
that Christ founded a visible Church, stored with all helps necessary to
salvation, particularly with sufficient means to beget and conserve faith, to
maintain unity, and compose schisms, to discover and condemn haeresies, and
to determine all controversies in Religion, which were necessary to be
determined. For all these purposes, he gave at the beginning (as we may see in
the Ep. to the Ephesians) Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Doctors: who by word of mouth taught their comtemporaries, and by writings
(wrote indeed by some, but approved by all of them) taught their Christian
posterity to the worlds end, how all these ends, and that which is the end of
all these ends, Salvation, is to be archieved. And these means the Providence
of God has still preserved, and so preserved, that they are sufficient for all
these intents. I say sufficient, though, through the malice of men, not always
effectual, for that the same means may be sufficient for the compassing an
end, and not effectual, you must not deny, who hold that God gives to all men
sufficient means of Salvation, and yet that all are not saved. I said also,
sufficient to determine all controversies, which were necessary to be
determined. For if some controversies may for many ages be undetermined, and
yet in the mean while men be saved; why should, or how can the Churches being
furnished with effectual means to determine all Controversies in Religion be
necessary to Salvation, the end it self, to which these means are ordained
being as experience shows not necessary? Plain sense will teach every man,
that the necessity of the means must always be measured by, and can never
exceed the necessity of the end. As if eating be necessary, only that I may
live, then certainly if I have no necessity to live, I have no necessity to
eat. If I have no need to be at London, I have no need of a horse to carry me
thither. If I have no need to fly, I have no need of wings. Answer me then I
pray directly, and categorically, Is it necessary that all Controversies in
Religion should be determined, or is it not? If it be, why is the question of
Predetermination, of the immaculate conception, of the Popes indirect power in
temporalties, so long undetermined? if not, what is it but hypocrisy to pretend
such great necessity of such effectual means, for the atchieving that end,
which is it self not necessary. Christians therefore have and shall have means
sufficient (though not always effectual) to determine not all controversies
but all necessary to be determined. I proceed on farther with you, and grant
that this means to decide controversies in Faith and Religion must be endued
with an Universal infallibility in whatsoever it propounds for a divine
truth. For if it may be false in any one thing of this nature, in any thing
which God requires men to believe, we can yield unto it but a wavering and
fearful assent in any thing. These grounds therefore I grant very readily, and
give you free leave to make your best advantage of them. And yet, to deal
truly, I do not perceive how from the denial of any of them it would follow
that Faith is Opinion: or from the granting them, that it is not so. But for my
part, whatsoever clamor you have raised against me, I think no otherwise of
the Nature of Faith, I mean Historical Faith, then generally both Protestants
and Papists do; for I conceive it an assent to divine Revelations upon the
authority of the revealer. Which though in many things it differ from opinion,
(as commonly the word opinion is understood) yet in some things, I doubt not
but you will confess, that it agrees with it. As first, that as Opinion is an
Assent, so is faith also. Secondly that as Opinion so Faith, is always built
upon less evidence then that of sense or science. Which assertion you not only
grant but mainly contend for in your sixth Chapter Thirdly and lastly, that as
Opinion, so Faith admits degrees; and that as there may be a strong and weak
Opinion, so there may be a strong and weak Faith. These things if you will grant
(as sure if you be in your right mind you will not deny any of them) I am well
contented that this ill^sounding word, Opinion, should be discarded, and that
among the Intellectual habits you should seek out some other Genus for Faith.
For I will never contend with any man about words, who grants my meaning.

8 But though the essence of Faith exclude not all weakness and imperfection,
yet may it be enquired, whether any certainty of Faith, under the highest
degree may be sufficient to please God and attain salvation. Whereunto I
answer, that though men are unreasonable, God requires not any thing but
Reason. They will not be pleased without a down weight, but God is contented if
the scale be turned. They pretend, that heavenly things cannot be seen to any
purpose, but by the midday light: But God will be satisfied, if we receive any
degree of light which makes us leave the works of darkness and walk as
children of the light. They exact a certainty of Faith above that of sense or
science, God desires only that we believe the conclusion, as much as the
premises deserve, that the strength of our Faith be equal or proportionable to
the credibility of the motives to it. Now though I have and ought to have an
absolute certainty of this Thesis, All which God reveals for truth is true,
being a proposition that may be demonstrated, or rather so evident to any one
that understands it that it needs it not; Yet of this Hypothesis, That all the
Articles of our Faith were revealed by God, we cannot ordinarily have any
rational and acquired certainty, more then moral, founded upon these
considerations: First that the goodness of the precepts of Christianity, and
the greatness of the promises of it, shows it, of all other Religions, most
likely to come from the fountain of goodness. And then that a constant, famous
and very general Tradition, so credible, that no wise man doubts of any other,
which has but the fortieth part of the credibility of this, such and so
credible a Tradition, tell us, that God himself has set his Hand and Seal to
the truth of this Doctrine, by doing great, and glorious, and frequent miracles
in confirmation of it. Now our faith is an assent to this conclusion, that the
Doctrine of Christianity is true, which being deduced from the former Thesis,
which is Metaphysically certain, and from the former Hypothesis, whereof we can
have but a Moral certainty, we cannot possibly by natural means be more
certain of it then of the weaker of the premises; as a River will not rise
higher then the fountain from which it flows. For the conclusion always
follows the worser part, if there be any worse: and must be Negative,
Particular, Contingent, or but Morally certain, if any of the Propositions,
from whence it is derived be so: Neither can we be certain of it in the highest
degree, unless we be thus certain of all the principles whereon it is
grounded. As a man cannot go or stand strongly, if either of his legs be
weak. Or as a building cannot be stable, if any one of the necessary pillars
thereof be infirm and instable. Or as, If a message be brought me, from a man
of absolute credit with me, but by a messenger that is not so, my confidence of
the truth of the Relation, cannot but be rebated and lessened, by my diffidence
in the Relatour.

9 Yet all this I say not as if I doubted, that the spirit of God, being
implored by devout and humble prayer and sincere obedience, may, and will be
degrees, advance his servants higher, and give them a certainty of adherence,
beyond their certainty of evidence. But what God gives as a reward to
believers, is one thing: and what he requires of all men, as their duty, is
another: and what he will accept of out of grace and favor, is yet another. To
those that believe and live according to their faith, he gives by degrees the
spirit of obsignation and confirmation, which makes them know (though how they
know not) what they did but believe: And to be as fully and resolutely assured
of the Gospel of Christ, as those which heard it from Christ himself with
their ears, which saw it with their eyes, which looked upon it, and whose
hands handled the word of life. He requires of all, that their Faith should be
(as I have said) proportionable to the motives and Reasons enforcing to it; he
will accept of the weakest and lowest degree of Faith, if it be living and
effectual unto true obedience. For he it is that will not quench the smoking
flax, nor break the bruised reed. He did not reject the prayer of that
distressed man that cried unto him, Lord I believe, Lord help my unbelief. He
commands us to receive them that are weak in faith, and thereby declares that
he receives them. And as nothing availes with him, but Faith which works by
love: So any faith, if it be but as a grain of mustard seed, if it work by
love, shall certainly avail with him and be accepted of him. Some experience
makes me fear, that the faith of considering and discoursing men, is like to
be cracked with too much straining: And that being possessed with this false
Principle, that it is in vain to believe the Gospel of Christ, with such a
kind or degree of assent, as they yield to other matters of Tradition: And
finding that their faith of it, is to them undiscernable, from the belief they
give to the truth of other Stories; are in danger either not to believe at all,
thinking not at all as good as to no purpose, or else, though indeed they do
believe it, yet to think they do not, and to cast themselves into wretched
agonies and perplexities, as fearing they have not that, without which it is
impossible to pleas God and obtain eternal happiness. Consideration of this
advantage, which the Devil probably may make of this Fancy, made me willing
to insist somewhat largely upon the Refutation of it.

10 I return now thither from whence I have digressed, and assure you,
concerning the grounds afore-laid, which were, that there is a Rule of Faith,
whereby controversies may be decided, which are necessary to be decided, and
that this rule is universally infallible, That notwithstanding any opinion I
hold, touching Faith, or any thing else, I may, and do believe them, as
firmly as you pretend to do. And therefore you may build on, in Gods name,
for by Gods help, I shall always embrace, whatsoever structure is naturally
and rationally laid upon them, whatsoever conclusion may, to my understanding,
be evidently deduced from them. You say, out of them it undeniably follows,
That of two disagreeing in matter of Faith, the one cannot be saved, but by
repentance or ignorance. I answer by distinction of those terms, two
dissenting in a matter of Faith. For it may be either in a thing which is
indeed a matter of Faith, in the strictest sense, that is, something, the
Belief whereof God requires under pain of damnation: And so the conclusion is
true, though the Consequence of it from your former premises either is none at
all, or so obscure, that I can hardly discern it. Or it may be as it often
falls out concerning a thing which being indeed no matter of Faith, is yet
overvalued by the Parties at variance, and esteemed to be so. And in this sense
it is neither consequent nor true. The untruth of it I have already declared in
my examination of your Preface. The inconsequence of it is of it self evident;
for who ever heard of a wilder Collection then this --

God has provided means sufficient to decide all Controversies in Religion,
necessary to be decided;

This means is universally infallible,

Therefore of two, that differ in anything which they esteem a matter of
Faith, one cannot be saved.

He that can find any connection between these Propositions, I believe will be
able to find good coherence between the deaf Plaintiffe's accusation, in the
Greek Epigram, and the deaf Defendants Answer, and the deaf Judges sentence;
And to contriue them all into a formal Categoricall Syllogism.

11 Indeed if the matter in agitation were plainly decided, by this infallible
means of deciding Controversies, and the Parties in variance knew it to be so,
and yet would stand out in their dissension; this were in one of them, direct
opposition to the Testimony of God, and undoubtedly a damnable sin. But if
you take the liberty to suppose what you please, you may very easily conclude
what you list. For who is so foolish as to grant you these unreasonable
Postulates, that every emergent Controversy of Faith is plainly decided by the
means of decision which God has appointed, and that of the Parties lititigant,
one is always such a convicted Recusant as you pretend! Certainly, if you say
so, having no better warrant then you have, or can have for it, this is more
proper and formal uncharitableness, then ever was charged upon you. Me
thinks, with much more Reason, and much more Charity, you might suppose, that
many of these Controversies which are now disputed among Christians (all which
profess themselves lovers of Christ, and truly desirous to know his will and
do it (are either not decidable by that means which God has provided, and so
not necessary to be decided: Or if they be, yet not so plainly and evidently,
as to oblige all men to hold one way: or Lastly, if decidable, and evidently
decided, yet you may hope that the erring part, by reason of some veil before
his eyes, some excusable ignorance or unavoidable prejudice, does not see the
Question to be decided against him, and so opposes not that which He does know
to be the word of God, but only that which You know to be so, and which he
might know, were he void of prejudice. Which is a fault I confess, but a fault
which is incident even to good and honest men very often: and not of such a
gigantique disposition as you make it, to fly directly upon God Almighty, and
to give him the lie to his face.

12 Ad. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. In all this long discourse you only tell
us what you will do, but do nothing. Many Positions there are, but proofs of
them you offer none, but reserve them to the Chapters following; and there in
their proper places they shall be examined. The sum of all your Assumpts
collected by your self,. 16 is this. That the infallible means of determining
Controversies, is the visible Church.

That he distinction of points Fundamental, and not Fundamental, makes
nothing to the present Question.

That to say the Creed contains all Fundamentals, is neither pertinent nor
true.

That whosoever persist in Division from the Communion and Faith of the Roman
Church are guilty of Schism and Heresy.

That in regard of the Precept of Charity toward ones self, Protestants are
in state of sin, while they remain divided from the Roman Church.

To all these Assertions I will content my self for the present to oppose this
one, That not one of them all is true. Only I may not omit to tell you, that if
the first of them were as true as the Pope himself desires it should be, yet
the corollary which you deduce from it, would be utterly inconsequent, That
whosoever denies any point proposed by the Church, is injurious to Gods Divine
Majesty, as if He could deceive, or be deceived. For though your Church were
indeed as Infallible a Propounder of Divine Truths as it pretends to be, yet if
it appeared not to me to be so, I might very well believe God most true, and
your Church most false. As though the Gospel of S. Matthew be the word of God,
yet if I neither knew it to be so, nor believed it, I might believe in God, and
yet think that Gospel a Fable. Hereafter therefore I must entreat you to
remember, that our being guilty of this impiety, depends not only upon your
being, but upon our knowing that you are so. Neither must you argue thus, The
Church of Rome is the Infallible Propounder of Divine Verities, therefore he
that opposes Her calls Gods Truth in Question: But thus rather; The Church of
Rome is so, and Protestants know it to be so, therefore in opposing her, they
impute to God, that either he deceiues them, or is deceived himself. For as I
may deny something which you upon your knowledge have affirmed, and yet never
disparage your honesty, if I never knew that you affirmed it: So I may be
undoubtedly certain of Gods Omniscience, and Veracitie, and yet doubt of
something which he has revealed, provided I do not know, nor believe that he
has revealed it. So, that though your Church be the appointed witness of Gods
Revelations yet until you know, that we know she is so, you cannot without
foul calumny impute to us, That we charge God blasphemously with deceiving,
or being deceived. You will say perhaps, That this is directly consequent from
our Doctrine, That the Church may err, which is directed by God in all her
proposalls. True, if we knew it to be directed by him, otherwise not; much
less if we believe, and know the contrary. But then if it were consequent from
our opinion, have you so little Charity as to say, that men are justly
chargeable with all the consequences of their Opinions; Such Consequences, I
mean, as they do not own but disclaim, and if there were a necessity of doing
either, would much rather forsake their Opinion then embrace these
Consequences? What opinion is there that draws after it such a train of
portentous blasphemies, as that of the Dominicans, by the judgment of the best
Writers of your own Order? And will you say now that the Dominicans are justly
chargable with all these blasphemies? If not, seeing our case (take it at the
worst) is but the same, why should not your judgment of us be the same? I
appeal to all those Protestants that have gone over to your side; whether when
they were most averse from it, they did ever deny or doubt of Gods omniscience
or Veracitie; whether they did ever believe, or were taught, that God did
deceive them or was deceived himself. Nay, I provoke to you your self, and
desire you to deal truly, and to tell Us whether you do in your heart
believe, that we do indeed not believe the eternal Veracitie of the eternal
Verity? And if you judge so strangely of us, having no better ground for it,
then you have or can have, we shall not need any farther proof of your
uncharitablenes toward us, this being the extremity of true uncharitableness.
If not, then I hope having no other ground but this (which sure is none at all)
to pronounce us damnable Heretics, you will cease to do so; and hereafter
(as, if your ground be true, you may do with more truth and Charity) collect
thus, They only err damnably, who oppose what they know God has testified,
But Protestants sure do not oppose what they know God has testified, at
least we cannot with Charity say they do, Therefore they either do not err
damnably, or with charity we cannot say they do so.

13 Ad 17. Protestants (you say) according to their own grounds must hold that
of Persons contrary in whatsoever point of belief one part only can be saved,
therefore it is strangely done of them to charge Papists with want of Charity
for holding the same. The consequence I acknowledge, but wonder much what it
should be that lays upon Protestants any necessity to do so! You tell us it
is their holding Scripture the sole Rule of Faith: for this, you say, obliges
them to pronounce them damned, that oppose any least point delivered in
Scripture. This I grant, If they oppose it after sufficient declaration, so
that either they know it to be contained in Scripture, or have no just probable
Reason, and which may move an honest man to doubt whether or no it be there
contained. For to oppose in the first case in a man that beliues the Scripture
to be the word of God, is to give God the lie. To oppose in the second, is to
be obstinate against Reason, and therefore a sin though not so great as the
former. But then this is nothing to the purpose of the necessity of damning all
those that are of contrary belief; and that for these Reasons. First, because
the contrary belief may be touching a point not at all mentioned in Scripture;
and such points, though indeed they be not matters of Faith, yet by men in
variance are often over-valued and esteemed to be so. So that, though it were
damnable to oppose any point contained in Scripture; yet Persons of a contrary
belief (as Victor and Polycrates, S. Cyprian, and Stephen) might both be
saved, because their contrary belief was not touching any point contained in
Scripture. Secondly, because the contrary belief may be about the sense of
some place of Scripture which is ambiguous, and with probability capable of
diverse senses; and in such cases it is no marvel, and sure no sin, if
several men go several ways. Thirdly because the contrary belief may be
concerning points wherein Scripture may with so great probability be alleged
on both sides, (which is a sure note of a point not necessary) that men of
honest and upright hearts, true lovers of God and of truth, such as desire,
above all things, to know Gods will and to do it, may, without any fault at
all, some go one way, and some another, and some (and those as good men as
either of the former) suspend their judgments, and expect some Elias to solue
doubts, and reconcile repugnancies. Now in all such Questions one side or other
(which soever it is) holds that which indeed is opposite to the sense of the
Scripture, which God intended; for it is impossible that God should intend
Contradictions. But then this intended sense is not so fully declared, but that
they which oppose it may verily believe that they indeed maintain it, and have
great show of reason to induce them to believe so; and therefore are not to be
damned, as men opposing that which they either know to be a truth delivered in
Scripture, or have no probable Reason to believe the contrary; but rather in
Charity to be acquitted and absolved, as men who endeavor to find the Truth,
but fail of it through humane frailty.

This ground being laid, the Answer to your ensuing Interrogatories, which you
conceive impossible, is very obvious and easy.

14 To the first. Whether it be not in any man a grievous sin to deny any one
Truth containd'd in holy Writ? I answer, Yes, if he knew it to be so, or have
no probable Reason to doubt of it: otherwise not.

15 To the second. Whether there be in such denial any distinction between
Fundame^tall and not Fundame^tall sufficient to excuse from Heresy? I answer,
Yes, There is such a Distinction. But the Reason is, because these points,
either in themselves, or by accident, are Fundamental, which are evidently
contained in Scripture, to him that knows them to be so: Those not
Fundamental which are there-hence deducible but probably only, not evidently.

16 To the third. Whether it be not impertinent to allege the Creed as
containing all Fundamental points of Faith, as if believing it alone we were
at Liberty to deny all other Points of Scripture? I answer, It was never
alleag'd to any such purpose; but only as a sufficient, or rather more then a
sufficient Summarie of those points of Faith, which were of necessity to be
believed actually and explicitly; and that only of such which were merely
and purely Credenda, and not Agenda.

17 To the fourth, drawn as a Corollary from the former, Whether this be not to
say, that of Persons contrary in belief, one part only can be saved? I
answer, By no means. For they may differ about points not contained in
Scripture: They may differ about the sense of some ambiguous Texts of
Scripture: They may differ about some Doctrines, for and against which
Scriptures may be alleged with so great probability, as may justly excuse
either Part from Haeresie, and a self condemning obstinacy. And therefore,
though D. Potter do not take it ill, that you believe your selves may be saved
in your Religion; yet notwithstanding all that has yet been pretended to the
contrary, he may justly condemn you, and that out of your own principles, of
uncharitable presumption, for affirming as you do, that no man can be saved
out of it.

CHAP. II.
What is that means, whereby the revealed truths of God are conveyed to our
Understanding, and which must determine Controversies in Faith and Religion.
OF our estimation, respect, and reverence to holy Scripture even Protestants
themselves do in fact give testimony, while they possess it from us, and take
it upon the integrity of our custody. No cause imaginable could avert our will
from giving the function of supreme and sole Judge to holy writ, if both the
thing were not impossible in it self, and if both reason and experience did
not convince our understanding, that by this assertion Contentions are
increased, and not ended. We acknowledge holy Scripture to be a most perfect
rule, for as much as a writing can be a Rule: We only deny that it excludes
either divine Tradition, though it be unwritten, or an external Judge to keep,
to propose, to interpret in a true, Orthodoxe, and Catholic sense. Every
single book, every Chapter, yea every period of holy Scripture is infallibly
true, and wants no due perfection. But must we therefore infer, that all
other Books of Scripture, are to be excluded, least by addition of them, we may
seem to derogate from the perfection of the former? When the first Books of
the old and new Testament were written, they did not exclude unwritten
Traditions, nor the Authority of the Church to decide Controversies; and who
has then so altered their nature, and filled them with such jealousies, as
that now they cannot agree for fear of mutual disparagement? What greater
wrong is it for the written Word, to be compartner now with the unwritten, then
for the unwritten, which was once alone, to be afterward joined with the
written? Who ever heard, that sto commend the fidelity of a Keeper, were to
disauthorize the thing committed to his custody? Or that, to extol the
integrity and knowledge, and to avouch the necessity of a Judge in suits of
Law, were to deny perfection in the Law? Are there not in Common wealths
besides the Laws written and unwritten, customs, Judges appointed to declare
both the one, and the other, as several occasions may require?

2 That the Scripture alone cannot be Judge in Controversies of faith, we
gather very clearly, From the quality of a writing in general: From the nature
of holy Writ in particular, which must be beheved as true, and infallible: From
the Editions, and translations of it: From the difficulty to understand it
without hazard of Error: From the inconveniences that must follow upon the
ascribing of sole Judicature to it: and finally from the Confessions of our
Adversaries. And on the other side, all these difficulties ceasing, and all
other qualities requisite to a Judge concurring in the visible Church of Christ
our Lord, we must conclude, that she it is, to whom in doubts concerning Faith
and Religion, all Christians ought to have recourse.

3 The name, notion, nature, and properties of a Judge cannot in common reason
agree to any mere writing, which, be it otherwise in its kind, never so highly
qualified with sanctity and infallibility; yet it must ever be, as all writings
are, deaf, dumb, and inanimate. By a Judge, all wise men understand a Person
endued with life, and reason, able to hear; to examine, to declare his mind to
the disagreeing parties, in such sort as that each one may know whether the
sentence be in favor of his cause, or against his pretense, and he must be
appliable, and able to do all this, as the diversity of Controversies,
persons, occasions, and circumstances may require, There is a great and plain
distinction betwixt a Judge and a Rule. For as in a Kingdom, the Judge has
his rule to follow which are the received Laws and Customs; so are not they
fit or able to declare, or be Judges to themselves, but that office must belong
to a living Judge. The holy Scripture may be, and is a Rule, but cannot be a
Judge, because it being always the same, cannot declare it self any one time,
or upon any one occasion more particularly then upon any other; and let it be
read over an hundred times, it will be still the same, and no more fit alone to
terminate controversies in faith, then the Law would be to end suits, if it
were given over to the fancy, and gloss of every single man.

4 This difference betwixt a Judge and a Rule, D. Potter perceived, when more
then once, having styled the Scripture a Judge, by way of correcting that
term, he adds, or rather a Rule, because he knew that an inanimate writing
could not be a Judge. From hence also it was, that though Protestants in their
beginning affirmed Scripture alone to be the Judge of Controversies; yet upon a
more advised reflection, they changed the phrase, and said, that not Scripture,
but the Holy Ghost speaking in Scripture, is Judge in Controversies. A
difference without a disparity. The holy Ghost speaking only in Scripture is no
more intelligible to us, then the Scripture in which he speaks: as a man
speaking only Latin, can be no better understood, then the tongue wherein he
speaks. And therefore to say, a Judge is necessary for deciding
controversies, about the meaning of Scripture is as much as to say, he is
necessary to decide what the Holy Ghost speaks in Scripture. And it were a
conceyt, equally foolish and pernicious, if one should seek to take away all
Judges in the Kingdom, upon this nicety, that albeit Laws cannot be Judges,
yet the Lawmakers speaking in the Law, may perform that Office; as if the
Lawmakers speaking in the Law, were with more perspicuity understood, then the
Law whereby he speaks.

5 But though some writing were granted to have a privilege, to declare it
self upon supposition that it were maintained in being, and preserved entire
from corruptions; yet it is manifest, that no writing can conserve it self,
nor can complain, or denounce the falsifier of it; and therefore it stands in
need of some watchful and not erring eye, to guard it, by means of whose
assured vigilance, we may undoubtedly receive it sincere and pure.

6 And suppose it could defend it self from corruption, how could it assure us
that it self were Canonical, and of infallible verity? By saying so? Of this
very affirmation, there will remain the same Question still; how it can prove
it self to be infallibly true? Neither can there ever be an end of the like
multiplied demands, till we rest in the external Authority of some person or
persons bearing witness to the world, that such, or such a book is Scripture:
and yet upon this point according to Protestants all other Controversies in
faith depend.

7 That Scripture cannot assure us, that it self is Canonical Scripture, is
acknowledged by some Protestants in express words, and by all of them in
deeds. M. Hooker, whom D. Potter ranketh Page 131.
among men of great learning and Judgment, says: of things In his first book
of Eccles. Policy Sect. 1 ^. p. 68.
necessary, the very chiefest is to know what books we are to esteem holy;
which point is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. And
this he proves by the same argument, which we lately used, saying thus: It is
not Ibid. lib. 2. Sect. 4. p. 102.
the word of God which does, or possibly can, assure us, that we do well to
think it his word. For if any one book of Scripture did give testimony of all,
yet still that Scripture which gives testimony to the rest, would require
another Scripture to give credit unto it. Neither could we come to any pause
whereon to rest, unless besides Scripture, there were something which might
assure us etc. And this he acknowledges to be the l. 3. Sect. 8. page 1. 146.
et alibi.
Church. By the way. If, Of things necessary the very chiefest cannot possibly
be taught by Scripture, as this man of so great learning and judgment
affirms, and demonstratively proves; how can the Protestant Clergy of
England subscribe to their sixth Article? Wherein it is said of the Scripture:
Whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the faith, or
be thought requisite or necessary to salvation: and concerning their belief and
profession of this Article, they are particularly examined when they be
ordained Priests and Bishops. With Hooker, his defendant Covell does punctually
agree. Whitaker likewise confesses, that the question about Canonical
Scriptures, is defined to us, not by testimony of the private spirit, which
(faith he) being private and secret, is Advers. Stapl. l. 2. c. 6. Page 270.
and Page 357.
unfit to teach and refell others; but (as he acknowledges) by the Adversus
Stapl. l. 2. c. 4. page 300.
Ecclesiastical Tradition: An argument (says he) whereby may be argued, and
convinced, what books be Canonical, and what be not. Luther says: This lib.
de cap. Babyl. tom. 2. Wittemb. f. 88.
indeed the Church has, that she can discern the word of God, from the word
of men: as Augustine confesses, that he believed the Gospel, being moved by
the authority of the Church, which did preach this to be the Gospel. Fulk
teaches, that the Church In his answer to a cou^terfeit Catholic page 5.
has judgment to discern true writings from counterfeit, and the word of God
from the writing of men, and that this judgment she has not of her self, but
of the Holy Ghost. And to the end that you my not be ignorant, from what Church
you must receive Scriptures, hear your first Patriarch Luther, speaking against
them, who (as he says) brought in Anabaptisme, that so they might despite the
Pope. Verily (says he) these Epist. cont. Anabap. ad duos Parochos tom. 2.
Germ. Wittemb.
men build upon a weak foundation. For by this means they ought to deny the
whole Scripture, and the Office of Preaching. For, all these we have from the
Pope: otherwise we must go make a new Scripture.

8 But now in deeds, they all make good, that without the Churches authority,
no certainty can be had what Scripture is Canonical, while they cannot agree
in assigning the Canon of holy Scripture. Of the Epistle of S. James, Luther
has these words: The Praefat. in epist. lac. in edit. Ie^ensi.
Epistle of James is contentious; swelling, dry, strawy, and unworthy of an
Apostolical Spirit. Which censure of Luther, Illyricus acknowledges and
maintains. Kemnitins teaches, that the second Epistle In Euchirid. page 63.
of Peter, the second and third of John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, the
Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse of John are
Apocryphal, as not having sufficient Testimony In examine. Conc. Trid. part. 1.
page 55.
of their authority, and therefore that nothing in controversy can be proved
out of these Ibid.
Books. The same is taught by diverse other Lutherans; and if some other
amongst them, be of a contrary opinion since Luther's time, I wonder what new
infallible ground they can allege, why they leave their Master, and so many of
his prime Scholars? I kn^w no better ground, then because they may with as
much freedom abandon him, as he was bold to alter that Canon of Scripture,
which he found received in Gods Church.

9 What Books of Scripture the Protestants of England hold for Canonical, is
not easy to affirm. In their sixth Article they say In the name of the holy
Scripture, who do understand those Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church. What mean
they by these words? That by the Churches consent they are assured what
Scriptures be Canonical? This were to make the Church Judge, and not
Scriptures alone. Do they only understand the agreement of the Church to be a
probable inducement? Probability is no sufficient ground for an infallible
assent of faith. By this rule ( of whose authority was NEVER any doubt in the
Church) the whole book of Esther must quit the Canon, because some in the
Church have excluded it from the Canon, as Apud Eusebius. l. 4. hist. c. 26.
Melito Asianus, In Synop.
Athanasius, and ln carm. de. genuinis Scripturis.
Gregory Nazianzen. And Luther (if Protestanis will be content that he be in
the Church) says: The Jews lib. de servo arbitrio. cont. Etas. tom. 2. Wit.
fol. 471.
place the book of Esther in the Canon, which yet, if I might be Judge, does
rather deserve to be put out of the Canon. And of Ecclesiastes he says: This
In latinis sermonibus convivialibus Francof. in 8. impr. Anno 1571.
book is not full; there are in it many abrupt things: he wants boots and
spurs, that is, he has no perfect sentence, he rides upon a long reed like
me when I was in the Monastery. And much more is to be read in him: who In
Germanicis colloq. Lutheri ab Aurifabro editis Francosurt. tit. de libris
veteris and novi Test. fol. 379.
says further, that the said book was not written by Solomon, but by Syrach in
the time of the Machabees, and that it is like to the Talmud (the Jews bible)
out of many books heaped into one work, perhaps out of the Library of king
Ptolomeus. And further he says, that Ib. tit. de Patriarchis and Prophet. fol.
282.
he does not believe all to have been done as there is set down. And he
reaches the Tit. de lib. Ve^. and Nov. Test.
book of Job to be as it were an argument for a fable (or Comedy) to set
before us an example of Patience. And he Fol. 380.
delivers this general censure of the Prophets Books: The Sermons of no
Prophet, were written whole, and perfect, but their Disciples, and Auditors
snatched, now one sentence, and then another, and so put them all into one
book, and by this means the Bible was conserved. If this were so, the Books of
the Prophets, being not written by themselves, but promiscuously, and casually,
by their Disciples, will soon be called in question. Are not these errors of
Luther, fundamental? and yet if Protestants deny the infallibility of the
Church, upon what certain ground can they disprove these Lutherian, and
Luciferian blasphemies? o godly Reformer of the Roman Church! But to return to
our English Canon of Scripture. In the New Testament by the above mentioned
rule ( of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church) diverse Books of
the New Testament must be discanonized, to wit, all those of which some
Ancients have doubted, and those which diverse Lutherans have of late denied. It
is worth the observation how the beforementioned sixth Article, does specify by
name all the Books of the Old Testament which they hold for Canonical; but
those of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do recieue, and
account them Canonical. The mystery is easily to be unfolded. If they had
descended to particulars, they must have contradicted some of their chiefest
Brethren. As they are commonly recieued, etc. I ask: By whom? By the Church of
Rome: Then, by the same reason they must receive diverse Books of the Old
Testament, which they reject. By Lutherans? Then with Lutherans they may deny
some Books of the New Testament. If it be the greater, or less number of
voices, that must cry up, or down, the Canon of Scripture, our Roman Canon will
prevail: and among Protestants the Certainty of their Faith must be reduced to
an Uncertain Controversy of Fact, whether the number of those who reject, or
of those others who recieue such and such Scriptures, be greater. Their Faith
must alter according to years, and days. When Luther first appeared, he, and
his Disciples were the greater number of that new Church; and so this claim (
Of being commonly received) stood for them, till Zuinglius and Calvin grew to
some equal, or greater number then that of the Lutherans, and then this rule
of ( Commonly received) will canonize their Canon against the Lutherans. I
would gladly know, why in the former part of their Article, they say both of
the Old and New Testament: In the name of the holy Scripture, we do understand
those Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, of whose authority was
never any doubt in the Church. and in the latter part, speaking again of the
New Testament, they give a far different rule, saying: All the Books of the
New Testament, as they are commonly received, we do receive, and account them
Canonical. This I say is a rule much different from the former ( Of whose
authority was NEVER any doubt in the Church.) For some Books might be said to
be Commonly received, although they were sometime doubted of by some. If to be
Commonly received, pass for a good rule to know the Canon of the New
Testament; why not of the Old? Above all we desire to know, upon what
infallible ground in some Books they agree with us against Luther, and diverse
principal Lutherans, and in others jump with Luther against us? But seeing
they disagree among themselves, it is evident that they have no certain rule
to know the Canon of Scripture, in assigning whereof some of them must of
necessity err, because of contradictory propositions both cannot be true.

10 Moreover the letters, syllables, words, phrase, or matter contained in holy
Scripture have no necessary, or natural connection with divine Revelation or
Inspiration: and therefore by seeing, reading, or understanding them, we cannot
infer that they proceed from God, or be confirmed by divine authority, as
because Creatures involve a necessary relation, connection, and dependence on
their Creator, Philosophers may by the light of natural reason, demonstrate
the existence of one prime cause of all things. In Holy Wr^^ there are
innumerable truths not surpassing the sphere of humane wit, which are, or may
be delivered by Pagan Writers, in the self same words and phrase as they are
in Scripture. And as for some truths peculiar to Christians, (for Example, the
mystery of the blessed Trinity etc.) The only setting them down in Writing is
not enough to be assured that such a Writing is the undoubted word of God:
otherwise some sayings of Plato, Tris^egistus, Sybils, Ovid, etc. must be
esteemed Canonical Scripture, because they fall upon some truths proper to
Christian Religion. The internal light, and inspiration which directed and
moved the Authors of Canonical Scriptures, is a hidden Quality infused into
their understanding and will, and has no such particular sensible influence
into the external Writing, that in it we can discover, or from it demonstrate
any such secret light and inspiration; and therefore to be assured that such a
Writing is divine we cannot know from it self alone, but by some other
extrinsecall authority.

11 And here we appeal to any man of judgment, whether it be not a vain brag
of some Protestants to tell us, that they wot full well what is Scripture, by
the light of Scripture it self, or (as D. Potter words it) by Page 141.
that glorious beam of divine light which shines therein; even as our eye
distinguishes light from darkness, without any other help then light it
self; and as our ear knows a voice, by the voice it self alone. But this
vanity is refuted, by what we said even now; that the external Scripture has
no apparent or necessary connection with divine inspiration, or revelation.
Will D. Poiter hold all his Brethren for blind men, for not seeing that
glorious beam of divine light which shines in Scripture, about which they
cannot agree? Corporal light may be discerned by it self alone, as being
evident, proportionate, and connaturall to our faculty of seeing. That
Scripture is Divine, and inspired by God, is a truth exceeding the natural
capacity and compass of man's understanding, to us obscure, and to be believed
by divine faith, which according to the Apostle is; argumentum Heb. v. 1,
non apparentium; an argument, or conviction, of things not evident: and
therefore no wonder if Scripture do not manifest it self by it self alone,
but must require some other means for applying it to our understanding.
Nevertheless their own similitudes and instances, make against themselves. For
suppose a man had never read, or heard of Sun, Moon, Fire, Candle, etc. and
should be brought to behold a light, yet in such sort as that the Agent, or
Cause efficient from which it proceeded, were kept hidden from him; could such
a one, by only beholding the light, certainly know, whether it were produced by
the Sun, or Moon etc.? Or if one hear a voice, and had never known the
speaker, could he know from whom in particular that voice proceeded? They who
look upon Scripture, may well see, that some one wrote it, but that it was
written by divine inspiration, how shall they know? Nay, they cannot so much as
know who wrote it, unless they first know the writer, and what hand he writes:
as likewise I cannot know whose voice it is which I hear, unless I first both
know the person who speaks, and with what voice he uses to speak; and yet
even all this supposed, I may perhaps be deceaved. For there may be voices so
like, and Hand so counterfeited, that men may be deceaved by them, as birds
were by the grapes of that skillful Painter. Now since Protestants affirm
knowledge concerning God as our supernatural end, must be taken from
Scripture, they cannot in Scripture alone discern that it is his voice, or
writing, because they cannot know from whom a writing, or vioce proceeds,
unless first they know the person who speake^', or writes. Nay I say more: By
Scripture alone, they cannot so much as know, that any person does in it, or by
it, speak any thing at all: because one may write without intent to signify,
or affirm any thing, but only to set down, or as it were paint, such
characters, syllables, and words, as men are wont to set copies, not caring
what the signification of the words imports: or as one transcribes a writing
which himself understands not; or when one writes what another dictates, and
in other such cases, wherein it is clear, that the writer speaks, or
signifies nothing in such his writing; and therefore by it we cannot hear, or
understand his voice. With what certainty then can any man affirm, that by
Scripture it self they can see, that the writers did intend to signify any
thing at all; that they were Apostles, or other Canonical Authors; that they
wrote their own sense, and not what was dictated by some other man; and
finally, and especially, that they wrote by the infallible direction of the
Holy Ghost?

12 But let us be liberal, and for the present suppose (not grant) that
Scripture is, like to corporal light, by it self alone able to determine, and
move our understanding to assent; yet the similitude proves against themselves.
For light is not visible, except to such as have eyes, which are not made by
the light, but must be presupposed as produced by some other cause. And
therefore, to hold the similitude, Scripture can be clear only to those who
are endued with the eye of faith; or, as D. Potter above cited says, to all
that have Page 141*
eyes to discern the shining beams thereof; that is, to the believer, as
immediately after he speaks. Faith then must not originally proceed from
Scripture, but is to be presupposed, before we can see the light thereof; and
consequently there must be some other means precedent to Scripture to beget
Faith, which can be no other then the Church.

13 Others affirm, that they know Canonical Scriptures to be such, by the
Title of the Books. But how shall we know such Inscriptions, or Titles to be
infallibly true? From this their Answer our argument is strengthened, because
diverse Apocryphal writings have appeared, under the Titles, and Names of
sacred Authors, as the Gospel of Thomas mentioned by Cont. Adimantn. c. 17.
S. Augustine: the Gospel of Peter, which the Nazaraei did use, as l. 2.
haeretic. fab.
Theodoret witnesses, with which Seraphion a Catholic Bishop, was for some
time deceived, as may be read in lib. 6. cap. 10.
Eusebius who also speaks of the Apocalypse of lib. 6. cap. 11.
Peter. The like may be said of the Gospells of Barnabas, Bartholomew, and
other such writings specified by Pope Did. Can. Sancta Rom^na.
Gelasius. Protestants reject likewise some part of Esther and Daniel, which
bear the same Titles with the rest of those Books, as also both we, and they
hold for Apochryphall, the third and fourth Books which go under the name of
Esdras, and yet both of us receive his first and second book. Wherefore Titles
are not sufficient assurances what books be Canonical: which In his defense
art. 4. Page 31.
D. Covell acknowledges in these words: It is not the word of God, which does,
or possibly can assure us, that we do well to think it is the word of God: the
first outward motion leading men so to esteem of the Scripture, is the
Authority of Gods Church, which teaches us to receive Marks Gospel, who was
not an Apostle, and to refuse the Gospel of Thomas who was an Apostle: and to
retain Lukes Gospel who saw not Christ, and to reject the Gospel of Nicodemus
who saw him.

14 Another Answer, or rather Objection they are wont to bring: That the
Scripture being a principle needs no proof among Christians. So Page 234.
D. Potter. But this is either a plain begging of the question, or manifestly
untrue, and is directly against their own doctrine, and practice. If they mean,
that Scripture is one of those principles, which being the first, and the most
known in all Sciences, cannot be demonstrated by other Principles, they suppose
that which is in question, whether there be not some principle (for example,
the Church) whereby we may come to the knowledge of Scripture. If they intend,
that Scripture is a Principle, but not the first, and most known in
Christianity, then Scripture may be proved. For principles, that are not the
first, not known of themselves, may, and ought to be proved, before we can
yield assent, either to them, or to other verities depending on them. It is
repugnant to their own doctrine, and practice, in as much as they are wont to
affirm, that one part of Scripture may be known to be Canonical, and may be
interpreted by another. And since every Scripture is a principle sufficient,
upon which to ground divine faith, they must grant, that one Principle may, and
sometime must be proved by another. Yea this their Answer, upon due
ponderation, falls out to prove, what we affirm. For since all Principles
cannot be proved, we must (that our labor may not be endless) come at length
to rest in some principle; which may not require any other proof. Such is
Tradition, which involves an evidence of fact, and from hand to hand, and age
to age, bringing us up to the times, and Persons of the Apostles, and our
Savior himself comes to be confirmed by all those miracles, and other
arguments, whereby they convinced their doctrine to be true. Wherefore the
ancient Fathers avouch that we must receive the sacred Canon upon the credit of
Gods Church. In Synopsi.
S. Athanasius says, that only four Gospels are to be received, because the
Canons of the Holy, and Catholic Church have so determined. The third
Council of Can. 47.
Carthage having set down the Books of holy Scripture, gives the reason,
because, We have received from our Fathers that these are to be read in the
Church. 8. Augustine Cont. ^p. Fundam. c. 5.
speaking of the Acts of the Apostles, says: To which book I must give credit,
if I give credit to the Gospel, because the Catholic Church does a like
recommend to me both these Books. And in the same place he has also these
words: I would not believe the Gospel, unles the authority of the Catholic
Church did move me. A saying so plain, that Zuinglius, is forced to cry out:
Here I Tom. 1. fol. 135.
implore your equity to speak freely, whether this saying of Augustine seem not
overbold, or else unadvisedly to have fallen from him.

15 But suppose they were assured what Books were Canonical, this will little
avail them, unles they be likewise certain in what language they remain
uncorrupted, or what Translations be true. Calvin Instit. c. 6.. 11.
acknowledges corruption in the Hebrew Text; which if it be taken without
points, is so ambiguous, that scarcely any one Chapter, yes period, can be
securely understood without the help of some Translation. If with points: These
were after S. Hieroms time, invented by the perfidious Jews, who either by
ignorance might mistake, or upon malice force the Text, to favor their
impieties. And that the Hebrew Text still retains much ambiguity, is apparent
by the disagreeing Translation of Novelists; which also proves the Greek, for
the New Testament, not to be void of doubtfulnes, as Calvin Instit c. 7.. 12.
confesses it to be corrupted. And although both the Hebrew and Greek were
pure, what does this help, if only Scripture be the rule of faith, and so very
few be able to examine the Text in these languages. All then must be reduced to
the certainty of Translations into other tongues, wherein no private man having
any premise, or assurance of infallibility, Protestants who rely upon Scripture
alone, will find no certain ground for their faith: as accordingly Whitaker
lib. de sancta Scriptura p. 52.
affirms: Those who understand not the Hebrew and Greek do err often, and
unavoidably.

16 Now concerning the Translations of Protestants, it will be sufficient to
set down what the laborious, exact, and jucicious Author of the Protestants
Apology etc. dedicated to our late King James of famous memory, has to this
Taste. 1. Sect. 10. subd. 4: joined with tract. 2. cap. 2. Sect. 10. subd. 2.
purpose. To omit (says he) particulars, whose recital would be infinite, and
to touch this point but generally only, the Translation of the New Testament by
Luther is condemned by Andreas, O siander Keckermannus, and Zuinglius, who
says hereof to Luther. Thou do corrupt the word of God, thou art seen to be
a manifest and common corrupter of the holy Scriptures: how much are we ashamed
of thee who have hitherto esteemed thee beyond all measure, and now prove thee
to be such a man? And in like manner does Luther reject the Translation of the
Zuinglians, terming them in matter of Divinity, fools, Asses, Anuchrists,
deceavers, and of Asse-like understanding. In so much that when Froschoverus
the Zwinglian Printer of Zurich sent him a Bible translated by the Divines
there, Luther would not receive the same, but sending it back rejected it, as
the Protestant Writers Hospinianus, and Lavatherus witness. The translation
set forth by Oecolampadius, and the Divines of Basil, is reproved by Beza, who
affirms that the Basil Translation is in many places wicked, and altogether
differing from the mind of the Holy Ghost. The translation of Castalio is
condemned by Beza, as being sacrilegious, wicked, and Ethnicall. As concerning,
Calvin's translation, that learned Protestant Writer Carolus Molineus says
thereof: Calvin in his Harmony makes the text of the Gospel to leap up and
down: he uses violence to the letter of the Gospel, and besides this adds
to the Text. As touching Bezas translation (to omit the dislike had thereof by
Selneccerus the German Protestant of the University of Iena) the foresaid
Molinaeus says of him, de facto mutat textum; he actually changes the text,
and gives farther sundry instances of his corruptions: as also Castalio that
learned Calvinist, and most learned in the tongues, reprehendeth Beza in a
whole book of this matter, and says; that to note all his errors in
translation, would require a great volume. And M. Parkes says: As for the
Geneva Bibles, it is to be wished that either they may be purged from those
manifold errors, which are both in the text, and in the margent; or else
utterly prohibited. All which confirms your Majesty's grave and learned
Censure, in your thinking the Geneva translation to be worst of all; and that
in the Marginall notes annexed to the Geneva translation, some are very
partial, untrue, seditious, etc. Lastly concerning the English Translation,
the Puritans say: Our translation of the Psalms comprised in our Book of
Common Prayer, does in addition, subtraction, and alteration, differ from the
Truth of the Hebrew in two hundred places at the least. In so much as they do
therefore profess to rest doubtful, whether a man with a safe conscience may
subscribe thereunto. And M. Carlisle says of the English Translators, that they
have depraved the sense, obscured the truth, and deceived the ignorant; that in
many places they do detort the Scriptures from the right sense. And that, they
show themselves to love darkness more then light, falsehood more then truth.
And the Ministers of Lincoln Diocese give their public testimony, terming
the English Translation: A Translation that takes away from the Text; that
adds to the Text; and that, sometime to the changing, or obscuring of the
meaning of the Holy Ghost. Not without cause therefore did your Majesty
affirm, that you could never yet see a Bible well translated into English.
Thus far the Author of the Protestants Apology etc. And I cannot forbear to
mention in particular that famous corruption of Luther, who in the Text where
it is said ( Romans 3. v. 28. We account a man to be justified by faith, without
the works of the Law, in favor of Justification by faith alone, translateth (
Justified by faith ALONE.) As likewise the falsification of Zuinglius is no
less notorious, who in the Gospels of S. Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and in S.
Paul, in place of, This is my Body, This is my Blood, translates, This
signifies my Body, This signifies my blo^d. And here let Prorestants consider
duly of these points. Salvation cannot be hoped for without true faith: Faith
according to them relies upon Scripture alone: Scripture must be delivered to
most of them by the Translations: Translations depend on the skill and honesty
of men, in whom nothing is more certain then a most certain possibility to
err, and no greater evidence of truth, then that it is evident some of them
embrace falsehood, by reason of their contrary translations. What then
remains, but that truth, faith, salvation, and all, must in them rely upon a
fallible, and uncertain ground? How many poor souls are lamentably seduced,
while from preaching Ministers, they admire a multitude of Texts of divine
Scripture, but are indeed the false translations, and corruptions of erring
men? Let them therefore, if they will be assured of true Scriptures, fly to the
always visible Catholic Church, against which the gates of hell can never so
far prevail, as that she shall be permitted to deceive the Christian world
with false Scriptures. And Luther himself, by unfortunate experience, was at
length forced to confess thus much saying: If the Lib. cont. Zwingl. deverit.
corp. Christiin Euchar.
world last longer, it will be again necessary to receive the decrees of
Councels, and to have recourse to them, by reason of diverse interpretations of
Scripture which now reign. On the contrary side, the Translation approved by
the Roman Church, is commended even by our adversaries: and D. Covel in
particular says, that it was used in the Church, one thousand In his answer
unto M. John Burges page 94.
three hundred years ago, and doubts not to prefer Ibid.
that Translation before others. In so much, that whereas the English
translations be many, and among themselves disagreeing, he concludes, that of
all those the approved translation authorized by the Church of England, is that
which comes nearest to the vulgar, and is commonly called the Bishops Bible.
So that the truth of that translation which we use, must be the rule to judge
of the goodness of their Bibles: and therefore they are obliged to maintain
our Translation if it were but for their own sake.

17 But does indeed the source of their manifold uncertainties stop here? No,
The chiefest difficulty remains, concerning the true meaning of Scripture: for
attaining whereof, if Protestants had any certainty, they could not disagree so
hugely as they do. Hence M. Hooker says: We are In his Preface to his Books
of Ecclesiast^call Policy. Sect. 6. 26.
right sure of this, that Nature, Scripture, and Experience have all taught the
world to seek for the ending of contentions, by submitting it self unto some
judicial, and definitive sentence, whereunto neither part that contendeth may,
under any pretense, refuse to stand. D. Fields words are remarkable, to this
purpose: Seeing ( says he) the controversies In his treatise of the Church In
his Epistle dedicatory to the L. Archbishop.
of Religion in our times are grown in number so many, and in nature so
intricate, that few have time and leisure, fewer strength of understanding to
examine them; what remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to search out which among all the societies in the
world, is that blessed company of holy ones, that household of Faith, that
Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the Pillar and ground
of Truth, that so they may embrace her communion, follow her directions, and
rest in her judgment?

18 And now that the true Interpretation of Scripture, ought to be received
from the Church, it is also proved by what we have already demonstrated, that
she it is, who must declare what Books be true Scripture; wherein if she be
assisted by the Holy Ghost, why should we not believe her, to be infallibly
directed concerning the true meaning of them? Let Protestants therefore either
bring some proof out of Scripture, that the Church is guided by the Holy Ghost
in discerning true Scripture, and not in delivering the true sense thereof; Or
else give us leave to apply against them, the argument, which S. Augustine
opposed to the Manicheans, in these words; I would not Cont. ep. Fund. cap. 5.
believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Church did move me. Them
therefore whom I obeye^ saying, Believe the Gospel, why should I not obey
saying to me, Do not believe Manichaeus (Luther, Calvin, etc.) Choose what
thou please. If thou shall say, believe the Catholics; They warn me not to
give any credit to you. If therefore I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If
thou say, Do not believe the Catholics, thou shall not do well in forcing me
to the faith of Manichaeus, because by the preaching of Catholics I believed
the Gospel it self. If thou say, you did well to believe them (Catholics)
commending the Gospel, but you did not well to believe them, discommending
Manichaeus; Do thou think me so very foolish, that without any reason at all,
I should believe what thou will, and not believe what thou will not? And do
not Protestants perfectly resemble these men, to whom S. Augustine spoke, when
they will have men to believe the Roman Church delivering Scripture, but not to
believe her condemning Luther, and the rest? Against whom, when they first
opposed themselves to the Roman Church, S. Augustine may seem to have spoken no
less prophetically, then doctrinally, when he said: Why should I not most Lib.
de util. ^^e. cap. 14.
diligently in^uire what Christ commanded of them before all others, by whose
authority I was moved to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing? Can
thou better declare to me what he said, whom I would not have thought to have
been; or to be, if the belief thereof had been recommended by thee to me? This
therefore I believed by fame, strengthened with celebrity, consent, Antiquity.
But every one may see that you, so few, so turbulent, so new, can produce
nothing deserving authority. What madness is this? Believe them (Catholics)
that we ought to believe Christ; but learn of us what Christ said Why, I
beseech thee? Surely if they (Catholics) were not at all, and could not teach
me any thing, I would more easily persuade my self, that I were not to believe
Christ, then that I should learn any thing concerning him from any other then
them by whom I believed him. If therefore we receive the knowledge of Christ,
and Scriptures from the Church, from her also must we take his doctrine, and
the interpretation thereof.

19 But besides all this, the Scriptures cannot be Judge of Controversies; who
ought to be such, as that to him not only the learned, or Veterans, but also
the unlearned, and Novices, may have recourse: for these being capable of
salvation, and endued with faith of the same nature with that of the learned,
there must be some universal Judge, which the ignorant may understand, and to
whom the greatest Clerks must submit. Such is the Church: and the Scripture is
not such.

20 Now, the inconveniences which follow by referring all Controversies to
Scripture alone, are very clear. For by this principle, all is finally in very
deed and truth reduced to the internal private Spirit, because there is really
no middle way betwixt a publiqu^ external, and a private internal voice; and
whosoever refuses the one, must of necessity adhere to the other.

21 This Tenet also of Protestants, by taking the office of Judicature from the
Church, comes to confer it upon every particular man, who being driven from
submission to the Church, cannot be blamed if he trust himself as far as any
other, his conscience dictating, that wittingly he means not to cozen himself,
as others maliciously may do. Which inference is so manifest, that it has
extorted from diverse Protestants the open Confession of so vast an absurdity.
Hear Luther: The Governors T^m. ^. Wittemberg. fol. 375.
of Churches and Pastors of Christ's sheep have indeed power to teach, but the
sheep ought to give judgment whether they propound the voice of Christ, or of
Aliens. Lubertus says: As we have In lib. de principiis Christian. dogm lib
6^. 13.
demonstrated that all public Judges may be deceived in interpreting; so we
affirm, that they may err in judging. All faithful men are private Judges,
and they also have power to judge of doctrines and interpretations. Whitaker,
even of the unlearned, says: They De Sacra Scriptura page 529.
ought to have recourse unto the more learned; but in the mean time we must be
careful not to attribute to them overmuch, but so, that still we retain our
own freedom. Bilson also affirms; that, The people In his true differ^nce
part. 2.
must be discerners, and Judges of that which is taught. This same pernicious
doctrine is delivered by Brentius, Zanchius, Cartwright, and others exactly
cited by Tract. 2. cap, 1. Sect. 1.
Brerely; and nothing is more common in every Protestants mouth, then that he
admits of Fathers, Counsels, Church etc. as far as they agree with
Scripture; which upon the matter is himself. Thus Heresy ever falls upon
extremes: It pretends to have Scripture alone for judge of Controversies, and
in the mean time sets up as many Judges, as there are men and women in the
Christian world. What good Statesmen would they be, who should ideate, or fancy
such a Common wealth, as these men have framed to themselves a Church? They
verify what S. Augustine objecteth against certain Heretics. You see Lib.
32. cont* Faust.
that you go about to overthrow all authority of Scripture, and that every
man's mind may be to himself a Rule, what he is to allow, or disallow in every
S^^ipture.

22 Moreover what confusion to the Church, what danger to the Common wealth,
this denial of the authority of the Church, may bring, I leave to the
consideration of any judicious, indifferent man. I will only set down some
words of D. Potter, who speaking of the Proposition of revealed Truths,
sufficient to prove him that gain-saith them to be an Heretic, says thus:
This Proposition Page 247*
of revealed truths, is not by the infallible determination of Pope, or Church;
(Pope, and Church being excluded, let us hear what more secure rule he will
prescribe) but by whatsoever means a man may be convinced in conscience of
divine revelation. If a Preacher do clear any point of faith to his Hearers;
if a private Christian do make it appear to his Neighbor, that any
conclusion, or point of faith is delivered by divine revelation of Gods word;
if a man himself (without any Teacher) by reading the Scriptures, or hearing
them read, be convinced of the truth of any such conclusion: this is a
sufficient proposition to prove him that gainsaith any such proof, to be an
Heretic, and obstinate opposer of the faith. Behold what goodly safe
Propounders of faith arise in place of Gods universal visible Church, which
must yield to a single Preacher, a Neighbor, a man himself if he can read, or
at least have ears to hear Scripture read. Verily I do not see, but that
every well-governed Civil Commonwealth, ought to concur toward the
exterminating of this doctrine, whereby the Interpretation of Scripture is
taken from the Church, and conferred upon every man, who, whatsoever is
pretended to the contrary, may be a passionate seditious creature.

23 Moreover, there was no Scripture, or written word for about two thousand
years from Adam to Moses, whom all acknowledge to have been the first Author
of Canonical Scripture: And again for about two thousand years more, from
Moses to Christ our Lord, holy Scripture, was only among the people of Israel;
and yet there were Gentiles endued in those days with divine Faith, as
appears in Job, and his friends. Wherefore during so many ages, the Church
alone was the Decider of Controversies, and Instructor of the faithful.
Neither did the word written by Moses, deprive the Church of her former
Infallibility, or other qualities requisite for a Judge: yea D. Potter
acknowledges, that besides the Law, there was a living Judge in the Jewish
Church, endued with an absolutely infallible direction in cases of moment; as
all points belonging to divine Faith are. Now, the Church of Christ our Lord,
was before the Scriptures of the New Testament, which were not written
instantly, nor all at one time, but successively upon several occasions; and
some after the decease of most of the Apostles: and after they were written,
they were not presently known to all Churches: and of some there was doubt in
the Church for some Ages after our Savior. Shall we then say, that according
as the Church by little and little received holy Scripture, she was by the like
degrees divested of her possessed Infallibility, and power to decide
Controversies in Religion? That some time Churches had one Judge of
Controversies, and others another? That with months, or years, as new
Canonical Scripture grew to be published, the Church altered her whole Rule of
faith, or Judge of Controversies? After the Apostles time, and after the
writing of Scriptures, Heresies would be sure to rise, requiring in Gods Church
for their discovery and condemnation, Infallibility, either to write new
Canonical Scripture, as was done in the Apostles time by occasion of emergent
heresies; or infallibility to interpret Scriptures, already written, or,
without Scripture, by divine unwritten Traditions, and assistants of the holy
Ghost to determine all Controversies, as Tertullian says: The soul is De
test. anim. cap. 5.
before the letter; and speech before Books; and sense before style. Certainly
such addition of Scripture, with derogation, or subtraction from the former
power and infallibility of the Church, would have brought to the world
division in matters of faith, and the Church had rather lost, then gained by
holy Scripture (which ought to be far from our tongues and thoughts,) it being
manifest, that for decision of Controversies, infallibility settled in a living
Judge, is incomparably more useful and fit, then if it were conceived, as
inherent in some inanimate writing. Is there such repugnance betwixt
Infallibility in the Church, and Existence of Scripture, that the production of
the one, must be the destruction of the other? Must the Church wax dry, by
giving to her Children the milk of sacred Writ? No, No. Her Infallibility was,
and is derived from an inexhausted fountain. If Protestants will have the
Scripture alone for their Judge, let them first produce some Scripture
affirming, that by the entering thereof, Infallibility went out of the Church,
D. Potter may remember what himself teaches; That the Church is still endued
with infallibility in points fundamental, and consequently, that infallibility
in the Church does well agree with the truth, the sanctity, yea with the
sufficiency of Scripture, for all matters necessary to Salvation. I would
therefore gladly know, out of what Text he imagines that the Church by the
coming of Scripture, was deprived of infallibility in some points, and not in
others? He affirms that the Jewish Synagogue retained infallibility in her
self, notwithstanding the writing of the Old Testament; and will he so
unworthily and unjustly deprive the Church of Christ of infallibility by
reason of the New Testament? E^pecially if we consider, that in the Old
Testament, Laws, Ceremonies, Rites, Punishments, Judgments, Sacraments,
Sacrifices etc. were more particularly, and minutely delivered to the Jews,
then in the New Testament is done; our Savior leaving the determination, or
declaration of particulars to his Spouse the Church, which therefore stands in
need of infallibility more then the Jewish Synagogue, D. Potter, Page 24.
(1) against this argument, drawn from the power and infallibility of the
Synagogue, objects; that we might as well infer, that Christians must have
one sovereign Prince over all because the Jews had one chief Judge. But the
disparitie is very clear. The Synagogue was a type, and figure of the Church
of Christ (...) so their civil government of Christian Common wealths, or
kingdoms. The Church succeeded to the Synagogue, but not Christian Princes to
Jewish Magistrates: And the Church is compared to a house, or Heb. 13.
family; to an Cant. 2.
Army, to a 1. Cor. 10. Ephesians. 4.
body; to a Mat. 12.
kingdom etc. all which require one Master, on^ General, one head, one
Magistrate, one spiritual King; as our blessed Savior with fiet Vnm ovile,
Joan. c. 10.
joined Vnus Pastor. One sheepfold, one Pastor: But all distinct kingdoms, or
Commonwealths, are not one Army, Family, etc. And finally, it is necessary to
salvation, that all have recourse to one Church; but for temporal weal, there
is no need that all submit, or depend upon one temporal Prince, kingdom, or
Commonwealth: and therefore our Savior has left to his whole Church, as
being One, one Law, one Scripture, the same Sacraments, etc. Whereas kingdoms
have their several Laws, different governments, diversity of Powers,
Magistracy etc. And so this objection returns upon D. Potter. For as in the
One Community of the Jews, there was one Power and Judge, to end debates, and
resolve difficulties* so in the Church of Christ, which is One, there must be
some one Authority to decide all Controversies in Religion.

24 This discourse is excellently proved by ancient S. Irenaeus Lib. 5. c. 4.
in these words. What if the Apostles had not left Scriptures, ought we not to
have followed the order of Tradition which they delivered to those to whom they
committed the Churches? to which order many Nations yield ossent, who believe
in Christ, having salvation written in their hearts by the spirit of God,
without letters or Iuke, and diligently keeping ancient Tradition. It is easy
to receive the truth from Gods Church, seeing the Apostles have most fully
deposited in her, as in a rich storehouse, all things belonging to truth. For
what? if there should arise any contention of some small question, ought we
not to have recourse to the most ancient Churches, and from them to receive
what is certain and clear concerning the present question?

25 Besides all this, the doctrine of Protestants is destructive of it self.
For either they have certain, and infallible means not to err in
interpreting Scripture; or they have not. If not; then the Scripture (to them)
cannot be a sufficient ground for infallible faith, nor a meet Judge of
Controversies. If they have certain infallible means, and so cannot err in
their interpretations of Scriptures; then they are able with infallibility to
hear, examine, and determine all controversies of faith; and so they may be,
and are Judges of Controversies, although they use the Scripture as a Rule. And
thus, against their own doctrine, they constitute another Judge of
Controversies, besides Scripture alone.

26 Lastly, (...) D. Potter, whether this Assertion, ( Scripture alone is Judge
of all Controversies in says,) be a fundamental point of faith, or no? He
must be well advised, before he say, that it is a fundamental point. For he
will have against him, as many Protestants as teach that by Scripture alone, it
is impossible to know what Books be Scripture, which yet to Protestants is
the most necessary and chief point of all other. D. Covell expressly says:
Doubtless In his defense of M. Hookers books art. 4. p. ^1.
it is a tolerable opinion in the Church of Rome, if they go no further, as
some of them do not (he should have said as none of them do) to affirm,
that the Scriptures are holy and divine in themselves, but so esteemed by us,
for the authority of the Church. He will likewise oppose himself to those his
Brethren, who grant that Controversies cannot be ended, without some external
living authority, as we noted before. Besides, how can it be in us a
fundamental error to say, the Scripture alone is not Judge of Controversies,
seeing (notwithstanding this our belief) we use for interpreting of
Scripture, all the means which they prescribe; as Prayer, Conferring of
places, Consulting the Originals etc* and to these add the Instruction, and
Authority of Gods Church, which even by has confession cannot err damna^ly,
and may afford us more help, then can be expected from the industry, learning,
or wit of any private person: and finally D. Potter grants, that the Church of
Rome does not maintain any fundamental error against faith; and consequently,
he cannot affirm that our doctrine in this present Controversy is damnable.
If he answer, that their Tenet, about the Scriptures being the only Judge of
Controversies, is not a fundamental point of faith: then, as he ^eacheth that
the universal Church may err in points not fundamental; so I hope he will
not deny, but particular Churches, and private men, are much more obnoxious to
error in such points; and in particular in this, that Scripture alone is Judge
of Controversies: And so, the very principle upon which their whole faith is
grounded, remains to them uncertain: and on the other side, for the self
same reason, they are not certain, but that the Church is Judge of
Controversies; which if she be, then their case is lamentable, who in general
deny her this authority, and in particular controversies oppose her
definitions. Besides among public Conclusions defended in Oxford the year
1633. to the questions, Whether the Church have authority to determine
controversies in faith; And, To interpret holy Scripture? The answer to both is
Affirmative.

27 Since then, the visible Church of Christ our Lord is that infallible Means
whereby the revealed truth of Almighty God are conveyed to our understanding;
it follows that to oppose her definitions is to resist God himself; which
blessed S. Augustine plainly affirms, when speaking of the Controversy about
Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics, he says. T^is De unit.
Eccles. c. 22.
is neither openly, nor evidently read, neither by you nor by me; yet if there
were any wise man of whom our Savior had given testimony, and that he should
be consulted in this question, we should make no doubt to perform what he
should say, least we might seem to gainsay not him so much as Christ, by whose
testimony he was recommended. Now Christ bears witness to his Church. And a
little after: Whosoever refuses to follow the practice of the Church, does
resist our Savior himself, who by his testimony recommends the Church. I
conclude therefore with this argument. Whosoever resists that means which
infallibly proposes to us Gods Word or R^velation, commits a sin, which,
unrepented, excludes salvation: But whosoever resists Christ's visible Church,
does resist that means, which infallibly proposes Gods word or revelation to
us: Therefore whosoever resists Christ's visible Church, commits a sin;
which unrepented, excludes salvation. Now what visible Church was extant, when
Luther began his pretended Reformation, whethe^ it were the Roman, or
Protestant Church; and whether he, and other Protestants do not oppose that
visible Church, which was spread over the world, before, and in Luthers time,
is easy to be determined, and imports every one most seriously to ponder, as
a thing whereon eternal salvation depends. And because our Adversaries do
here most insist upon the distinction of points fundamental, and not
fundamental; and in particular teach, that the Church may err in points not
fundamental, it will be necessary to examine the truth, and weight of this
evasion, which shall be done in the next Chapter.

ANSWER TO THE SECOND CHAPTER.
Concerning the means, whereby the revealed Truths of God are conveyed to our
understanding; and which must determine Controversies in Faith and Religion.
AD. 1. He that would usurp an absolute lordship and tyranny over any people,
need not put himself to the trouble and difficulty of abrogating and
disanulling the Laws, made to maintain the common liberty; for he may
frustrate their intent, and compass his own design as well, if he can get the
power and authority to interpret them as he pleases, and add to them what he
pleases, and to have his interpretations and additions stand for Laws; if he
can rule his people by his laws, and his Laws by his Lawyers. So the Church
of Rome, to establish her tyranny over men's consciences, needed not either to
abolish or corrupt the holy Scriptures, the Pillars and supporters of Christian
liberty (which in regard of the numerous multitude of copies dispersed through
all places, translated into almost all languages, guarded with all sollicitous
care and industry, had been an impossible attempt;) But the more expedite way,
and therefore more likely to be successful, was to gain the opinion and
esteem of the public and authorized interpreter of them, and the Authority of
adding to them what doctrine she pleased under the title of Traditions or
Definitions. For by this means, she might both serve her self of all those
clauses of Scripture, which might be drawn to cast a favorable countenance
upon her ambitious pretenses, which in case the Scripture had been abolished,
she could not have done; and yet be secure enough of having either her power
limited, or her corruptions and abuses reformed by them; this being once settled
in the minds of men, that unwritten doctrines, if proposed by her, were to be
received with equal reverence to those that were written: and that the sense
of Scripture was not that which seemed to men's reason and understanding to be
so, but that which the Church of Rome should declare to be so, seemed it never
so unreasonable, and incongruous. The matter being once thus ordered, and the
holy Scriptures being made in effect not your directors and Judges (no farther
then you please) but your servants and instruments, always pressed and in
readiness to advance your designs, and disabled wholly with minds so
qualified to prejudice or impeach them; it is safe for you to put a crown on
their head, and a reed in their hands, and to bow before them, and cry, Hail
King of the Jews! to pretend a great deal of esteem, and respect, and
reverence to them, as here you do. But to little purpose is verbal reverence
without entire submission and sincere obedience; and, as our Savior said of
some, so the Scripture, could it speak, I believe would say to you, Why call ye
me Lord, Lord, and do not that which I command you? Cast away the vain and
arrogant pretense of Infallibility, which makes your errors incurable. Leave
picturing God, and worshipping him by pictures. Teach not for Doctrine the
Commandments of men. Debar not the Laity of the Testament of Christ's blood.
Let your public Prayers and Psalms and Hymmes be in such language as is for
the edification of the Assistants. Take not from the Clergy that liberty of
Marriage which Christ has left them. Do not impose upon men that Humility of
worshipping Angels which S. Paul condemns. Teach no more proper sacrifices of
Christ but one. Acknowledge them that dye in Christ to be blessed, and to rest
from their labors. Acknowledge the Sacrament after consecration, to be Bread
and Wine, as well as Christ's body and blood. Acknowledge the gift of continency
without Marriage not to be given to all. Let not the weapons of your warfare be
carnal; such as are Massacres, Treasons, Persecutions, and in a word all
means either violent or fraudulent: These and other things, which the
Scripture commands you, do, and then we shall willingly give you such
Testimony as you deserve; but till you do so, to talk of estimation, respect,
and reverence to the Scripture, is nothing else but talk.

2 For neither is that true which you pretend, That we possess the Scripture
from you, or take it upon the integrity of your Custody, but upon Universal
Tradition, of which you are but a little part. Neither, if it were true that
Protestants acknowledged, The integrity of it to have been guarded by your
alone Custody, were this any argument of your reverence toward them. For
first, you might preserve them entire, not for want of Will, but of Power to
corrupt them, as it is a hard thing to poison the Sea. And then having
prevailed so far with men, as either not to look at all into them, or but
only through such spectacles as you should please to make for them, and to see
nothing in them, though as clear as the sun, if it any way made against you,
you might keep them entire, without any thought or care to conform your
doctrine to them, or reform it by them (which were indeed to reverence the
Scriptures) but out of a persuasion, that you could qualify them well enough
with your glosses and interpretations, and make them sufficiently conformable
to your present Doctrine, at least in their judgment, who were preposses'd
with this persuasion, that your Church was to judge of the sense of Scripture,
not to be judged by it.

3. For, whereas you say, No cause imaginable could avert your will, from
giving the function of supreme and sole Judge to holy writ; but that the thing
is impossible; and that by this means controversies are increased and not
ended: you mean perhaps. That you can or will imagine no other cause but these.
But sure there is little Reason you should measure other men's imaginations by
your own, who perhaps may be so clouded and veiled with prejudice, that you
cannot, or will not see that which is most manifest. For what indifferent and
unprejudicate man may not easily conceive another cause which (I do not say
does, but certainly) may pervert your wills, and avert your understandings from
submitting your religion and Church to a trial by Scripture. I mean the great
and apparent and unavoidable danger which by this means you would fall into,
of loosing the Opinion which men have of your Infallibility, and consequently
your power and authority over men's consciences, and all that depends upon it;
so that though Diana of the Ephesians be cried up, yet it may be feared that
with a great many among you (though I censure or judge no man) the other cause
which wrought upon Demetrius and the Craftsmen, may have with you also the more
effectual, though more secret influence: and that is, that by this craft we
have our living; by this craft, I mean of keeping your Proselytes from an
indifferent trial of your Religion by Scripture, and making them yield up and
captivate their judgment unto yours. Yet had you only said de facto, that no
other cause did avert your own will from this, but only these which you
pretend; out of Charity I should have believed you: But seeing you speak not of
your self, but of all of your side, whose hearts you cannot know; and profess
not only, That there is no other cause, but that No other is imaginable, I
could not let this pass without a censure. As for the impossibility of
Scriptures being the sole judge of Controversies, that is, the sole rule for
man to Judge them by (for we mean nothing else) you only affirm it without
proof, as if the thing were evident of it self. And therefore I, conceiving
the contrary to be more evident, might well-content my self to deny it without
refutation. Yet I cannot but desire you to tell me, If Scripture cannot be the
Judge of any Controversy, how shall that touching the Church and the notes of
it be determined? And if it be the sole judge of this one, why may it not of
others? Why not of All? Those only excepted wherein the Scripture it self is
the subject of the Question, which cannot be determined but by natural reason,
the only principle, beside Scripture, which is common to Christians.

4 Then for the Imputation of increasing contentions and not ending them,
Scripture is innocent of it; as also this opinion; That controversies are to be
decided by Scripture. For if men did really and sincerely submit their
judgments to Scripture, and that only, and would require no more of any man
but to do so, it were impossible but that all controversies, touching things
necessary and very profitable should be ended: and if others were continued or
increased, it were no matter.

5 In the next words we have direct Boyes-play; a thing given with one hand
and taken away with the other; an acknowledgement made in one line, and
retracted in the next. We acknowledge (say you) Scripture to be a perfect rule,
for as much as a writing can be a Rule, only we deny that it excludes
unwritten tradition. A si^ you should have said, we acknowledge it to be as
perfect a rule as a writing can be; only we deny it to be as perfect a rule as
a writing may be. Either therefore you must revoke your acknowledgement, or
retract your retractation of it; for both cannot possibly stand together. For
if you will stand to what you have granted, That Scripture is as perfect a rule
of Faith as a writing can be: you must then grant it both so Complete, that it
needs no addition, and so evident, that it needs no interpretation: For both
these properties are requisite to a perfect rule; and a writing is capable of
both these properties.

6 That both these Properties are requisite to a perfect rule, it is apparent:
Because that is not perfect in any kind which wants some parts belonging to its
integrity: As he is not a perfect man that wants any part appertaining to the
Integrity of a Man; and therefore that which wants any accession to make it a
perfect rule, of it self is not a perfect Rule. And then, the end of a r^le is
to regulate and direct. Now every instrument is more or less perfect in its
kind, as it is more or less fit to attain the end for which it is ordained:
But nothing obscure or unevident while it is so, is fit to regulate and direct
them to whom it is so: Therefore it is requisite also to a rule (so far as it
is a Rule) to be evident; otherwise indeed it is no rule, because it cannot
serve for direction. I conclude therefore, that both these properties are
required to a perfect Rule: both to be so complete as to need no Addition; and
to be so evident as to need no Interpretation.

7 Now that a writing is capable of both these perfections, it is so plain,
that I am even ashamed to prove it. For he that denies it must say, That
something may be spoken which cannot be written. For if such a complete and
evident rule of faith may be delivered by word of mouth, as you pretend it may,
and is; and whatsoever is delivered by word of mouth may also be written; then
such a complete and evident rule of faith may also be written. If you will have
more light added to the Sun, answer me then to these Questions. Whether your
Church can set down in writing all these, which she pretends to be divine
unwritten Traditions, and add them to the verities already written? And
whether she can set us down such interpretations of all obscurities in the
Faith as shall need no farther interpretations? If she cannot, then she has
not that power which you pretend she has, of being an Infallible teacher of
all divine verities, and an infallible interpreter of obscurities in the faith:
for she cannot teach us all divine verities, if she cannot write them down;
neither is that an interpretation which needs again to be interpreted: If she
can; Let her do it, and then we shall have a writing, not only capable of,
but, actually endowed with both these perfections, of being both so complete as
to need no Addition, and so evident as to need no Interpretation. Lastly,
whatsoever your Church can do or not do, no man can without Blasphemy deny,
that Christ Jesus, if he had pleased, could have writ us a rule of Faith so
plain and perfect, as that it should have wanted neither any part to make up
its integrity, nor any cleerenesse to make it sufficiently intelligible: And if
Christ could have done this, then the thing might have been done; a writing
there might have been endowed with both these properties. Thus therefore I
conclude, a writing may be so perfect a Rule, as to need neither Addition nor
Interpretation; But the Scripture you acknowledge a perfect Rule for as much as
a writing can be a Rule, therefore it needs neither Addition nor Interpretation.

8 You will say, that though a writing be never so perfect a Rule of Faith, yet
it must be beholding to Tradition to give it this Testimony, that it is a Rule
of Faith, and the Word of God. I answer: First, there is no absolute necessity
of this. For God might, if he thought good, give it the attestation of
perpetual miracles. Secondly, that it is one thing to be a perfect Rule of
Faith, another to be proved so unto us. And thus though a writing could not be
proved to us to be a perfect rule of Faith, by its own saying so, for nothing
is proved true by being said or written in a book, but only by Tradition which
is a thing credible of it self; yet it may be so in it self, and contain all
the material objects, all the particular articles of our Faith, without any
dependence upon Tradition; even this also not excepted, that this writing does
contain the rule of Faith. Now when Protestants affirm against Papists, that
Scripture is a perfect Rule of Faith, their meaning is not, that by Scripture
all things absolutely may be proved, which are to be believed: For it can never
be proved by Scripture to a gainsayer, that there is a God, or that the book
called Scripture is the word of God; For he that will deny these Assertions
when they are spoken, will believe them never a whit the more because you can
show them written: But their meaning is, that the Scripture, to them which
presuppose it Divine, and a Rule of Faith, as Papists and Protestants do,
contains all the material objects of Faith; is a complete and total, and not
only an imperfect and a partial Rule.

9 But every Book, and Chapter, and Text of Scripture is infallible and wants
no due perfection, and yet excludes not the Addition of other books of
Scripture; Therefore the perfection of the whole Scripture excludes not the
Addition of unwritten Tradition. I answer; Every Text of Scripture though it
have the perfection belonging to a Text of Scripture, yet it has not the
perfection requisite to a perfect Rule of Faith; and that only is the
perfection which is the subject of our discourse. So that this is to abuse your
Reader with the ambiguity of the word Perfect. In effect, as if you should say,
A text of Scripture may be a perfect Text, though there be others beside it;
therefore the whole Scripture may be a perfect Rule of Faith, though there be
other parts of this Rule, besides the Scripture, and though the Scripture be
but a part of it.

10 The next Argument to the same purpose is, for Sophistry, cosen german to
the former. When the first books of Scripture were written, they did not
exclude unwritten Tradition: Therefore now also, that all the books of
Scripture are written, Traditions are not excluded. The sense of which argument
(if it have any) must be this. When only a part of the Scripture was written,
then a part of the divine doctrine was unwritten; Therefore now when all the
Scripture is written, yet some part of the divine doctrine is yet unwritten. If
you say, your conclusion is not that it is so, but without disparagement to
Scripture, may be so: without disparagement to the truth of Scripture, I grant
it; but without disparagement to the Scriptures being a perfect Rule, I deny
it. And now the Question is not of the Truth, but the perfection of it; which
are very different things, though you would feign confound them. For Scripture
might very well be all true, though it contain not all necessary Divine Truth.
But unless it do so, it cannot be a perfect Rule of Faith; for that which
wants any thing is not perfect. For I hope you do not imagine, that we
conceive any antipathy between Gods word written and unwritten, but that both
might very well stand together. All that we say is this, that we have reason to
believe that God de Facto, has ordered the matter so, that all the Gospel of
Christ, the whole covenant between God and man, is now written. Whereas if he
had pleased, he might so have disposed it, that part might have been written,
and part unwritten: but then he would have taken order, to whom we should have
had recourse, for that part of it which was not written; which seeing he has
not done (as the progress shall demonstrate) it is evident he has left no
part of it unwritten. We know no man therefore that says, It were any injury
to the written Word to be joined with the unwritten, if there were any
wherewith it might be joined; but that we deny. The fidelity of a Keeper may
very well consist with the authority of the thing committed to his custody. But
we know no one ^ociety of Christians that is such a faithful Keeper as you
pretend. The Scripture it self was not kept so faithfully by you, but that you
suffered infinite variety of Readings to creep into it; all which could not
possibly be divine, and yet, in several parts of your Church, all of them,
until the last Age, were so esteemed. The interpretations of obscure places of
Scripture, which without Question the Apostles taught the Primitive Christians,
are wholly lost; there remains no certainty scarce of any one. Those Worlds of
Miracles, which our Savior did, which were not written, for want of writing
are vanished out of the memory of men. And many profitable things which the
Apostles taught and writ not, as that which S. Paul glances at, in his second
Epistle to the Thessalon. of the cause of the hindrance of the coming of
Antichrist, are wholly lost and extinguished. So unfaithful or negligent has
been this keeper of Divine verities; whose eyes, like the keepers of Israel
(you say) have never flumbred nor slept. Lastly, we deny not but a Judge and a
Law might well stand together, but we deny that there is any such Judge of Gods
appointment. Had he intended any such Judge, he would have named him, least
otherwise (as now it is) our Judge of controversies should be our greatest
controversy.

11 Ad 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. In your second Paragraph, you sum up those arguments
wherewith you intend to prove, that Scripture alone cannot be Judge in
controversies. Wherein I profess unto you before hand, that you will fight
without an Adversary. For though Protestants, being warranted by some of the
Fathers, have called Scripture the Judge of Controversies; and you in saying
here, That Scripture alone cannot be Judge, imply that it may be called in some
sense a Judge, though not alone: Yet to speak properly (as men should speak
when they write of Controversies in Religion) the Scripture is not a Judge of
Controversies, but a Rule, only and the only Rule for Christians to judge them
by. Every man is to judge for himself with the Judgment of Discretion, and to
choose either his Religion first, and then his Church, as we say: or as you,
his Church first, and then his Religion. But by the consent of both sides,
every man is to judge and choose: and the Rule whereby he is to guide his
choice, if he be a natural man, is Reason, if he be already a Christian,
Scripture, which we say is the Rule to judge controversies by. Yet not all
simply, but all the Controversies of Christians, of those, that are already
agreed upon This first Principle that, the Scripture is the word of God. But
that there is any man, or any company of men appointed to be judge for all men,
that we deny, and that I believe you will never prove. The very truth is, we
say no more in this matter, then evidence of Truth has made you confess in
plain terms in the beginning of this chapter, viz. That Scripture is a perfect
Rule of faith, for as much as a writing can be a rule. So that all your reasons
whereby you labor to dethrone the Scripture from this office of Iudgeing, we
might let pass as impertinent to the conclusion which we maintain, and you
have already granted; yet out of curtesy we will consider them.

12 Your first is this; a Judge must be a person fit to end controversies, but
the Scripture is not a person, nor fit to end controversies, no more then the
Law would be without the Judges, therefore though it may be a Rule it cannot be
a Judge. Which conclusion I have already granted. Only my request is, that you
will permit Scripture to have the properties of a Rule, that is, to be fit to
direct every one that will make the best use of it, to that end for which it
was ordained. And that is as much as we need desire. For as if I were to go a
journey and had a guide which could not err, I needed not to know my way: so
on the other side if I know my way or have a plain rule to know it by, I shall
need no guide. Grant therefore Scripture to be such a Rule, and it will quickly
take away all necessity of having an infallible guide. But without a living
Judge it will be no fitter (you say) to end Controversies, then the Law alone
to end suits. I answer, if the Law were plain and perfect, and men honest and
desirous to understand aright, and obey it, he that says it were not fit to
end controversies, must either want understanding himself, or think the world
wants it. Now the Scripture, we pretend, in things necessary is plain and
perfect, and men, we say, are obliged, under pain of Damnation, to seek the
true sense of it, and not to wrest it to their preconceived Phansies. Such a
law therefore to such men cannot but be very fit to end all controversies,
necessary to be ended. For others that are not so, they will end when the world
ends, and that is time enough.

12 Your next encounter is with them, who acknowledging the Scripture a Rule
only and not a Judge, make the holy Ghost, speaking in Scripture, the judge of
Controversies. Which you disprove by saying, That the holy Ghost speaking only
in Scripture is no more intelligible to us, then the Scripture in which he
speaks. But by this reason neither the Pope, nor a Council can be a Judge
neither. For first, denying the Scriptures, the writings of the Holy Ghost, to
be judges, you will not I hope offer to pretend, that their decrees, the
writings of men are more capable of this function: the same exceptions at
least, if not more, and greater lying against them as do against Scripture.
And then what you object against the holy Ghost, speaking in Scripture, to
exclude him from this office, The same I return upon them and their decrees,
to debar them from it; that they speaking unto us only in their decrees, are
no more intelligible then the decrees in which they speak. And therefore if the
Holy Ghost speaking in Scripture may not be a judge for this reason; neither
may they, speaking in their decrees, be judges for the same Reason. If the
Popes decrees (you will say) be obscure, he can explain himself, and so the
Scripture cannot. But the holy Ghost, that speaks in Scripture, can do so, if
he please, and when he is pleased will do so. In the mean time it will be fit
for you to wait his leisure, and to be content, that those things of Scripture
which are plain should be so, and those which are obscure should remain
obscure, until he please to declare them. Besides he can (which you cannot
warrant me of the Pope or a Council) speak at first so plainly, that his words
shall need no farther explanation; and so in things necessary we believe he has
done. And if you say, the Decrees of Counsels touching Controversies, though
they be not the Judge, yet they are the Judges sentence: So, I say, the
Scripture, though not the Judge, is the sentence of the Judge. When therefore
you conclude, That to say a Judge is necessary for deciding controversies,
about the meaning of Scripture, is as much as to say, he is necessary to decide
what the holy Ghost speaks in Scripture: This I grant is true, but I may not
grant that a Judge (such a one as we dispute of) is necessary either to do the
one, or the other. For if the Scripture (as it is in things necessary) be
plain, why should it be more necessary to have a judge to interpret them in
plain places, then to have a judge to interpret the meaning of a Councell's
decrees, and others to interpret their Interpretations, and others to interpret
theirs, and so on for ever? And where they are not plain, there if we, using
diligence to find the truth, do yet miss of it and fall into error, there
is no danger in it. They that err, and they that do not err may both be
saved. So that those places which contain things necessary, and wherein error
were dangerous, need no infallible interpreter because they are plain: and
those that are obscure need none because they contain not things necessary,
neither is error in them dangerous.

13 The Lawmakers speaking in the Law, I grant it, is no more easily understood
then the Law it self, for his speech is nothing else but the Law: I grant it
very necessary, that besides the Lawmakers speaking in the Law, there should be
other Judges to determine civil and criminal Controversies, and to give every
man that Justice which the Law allows him. But your Argument drawn from hence
to show a necessity of a visible Judge in Controversies of Religion, I say is
Sophistical: and that for many Reasons.

14 First, Because the variety of Civil cases is infinite, and therefore there
cannot be possibly Laws enough provided for the determination of them: and
therefore there must be a Judge to supply out of the Principles of Reason the
interpretation of the Law, where it is defective. But the Scripture (we say) is
a perfect Rule of Faith, and therefore needs no supply of the defects of it.

15 Secondly, To execute the Letter of the Law, according to rigor, would be
many times unjust, and therefore there is need of a Judge to moderate it;
whereof in Religion there is no use at all.

16 Thirdly, In Civil and Criminal causes the parties have for the most part
so much interest, and very often so little honesty, that they will not submit
to a Law though never so plain, if it be against them; or will not see it to
be against them, though it be so never so plainly: whereas if men were honest,
and the Law were plain and extended to all cases, there would be little need
of Judges. Now in matters of Religion, when the Question is, whether every man
be a fit Judge and chooser for himself, we suppose men honest, and such as
understand the difference between a Moment and Eternity. And such men, we
conceive, will think it highly concerns them to be of the true Religion, but
nothing at all that this or that Religion should be the true. And then we
suppose that all the necessary points of Religion are plain and easy, and
consequently every man in this cause to be a competent Judge for himself;
because it concerns himself to judge right as much as eternal happiness is
worth. And if through his own default he judge amiss he alone shall suffer for
it.

17 Fourthly, In Civil Controversies we are obliged only to external passive
obedience, and not to an internal and active. We are bound to obey the
sentence of the Judge, or not to resist it, but not always to believe it just.
But in matters of Religion, such a judge is required whom we should be obliged
to believe, to have judged right. So that in Civil Controversies every honest
understanding man is fit to be a Judge; But in religion none but he that is
infallible.

18 Fifthly, In Civil Causes there is means and power, when the Judge has
decreed, to compel men to obey his sentence: otherwise, I believe, Laws alone,
would be to as much purpose, for the ending of differences, as Laws and Judges
both. But all the power in the world is neither fit to convince, nor able to
compel a man's conscience to consent to any thing. Worldly terror may prevail
so far as to make men profess a Religion which they believe not, (such men I
mean, who know not that there is a Heaven provided for Martyrs, and a Hell for
those that dissemble such truths as are necessary to be professed:) But to
force, either any man to believe what he belieues not, or any honest man to
dissemble what he does believe (if God commands him to profess it,) or to
profess what he does not believe, all the Powers in the World are too weak,
with all the powers of Hell, to assist them.

19 Sixthly, In Civil Controversies the case cannot be so put, but there may be
a Judge to end it, who is not a party: In Controversies of Religion, it is in a
manner impossible to be avoided but the Judge must be a party. For this must
be the first, whether he be a judge or no, and in that he must be a party.
Sure I am, the Pope, in the controversies of our time, is a chief party; for
it highly concerns him, even as much as his Popedom is worth, not to yield
any one point of his Religion to be erroneous. And he is a man subject to like
passions with other men. And therefore we may justly decline his sentence, for
fear temporal respects should either blind his judgment, or make him
pronounce against it.

20 Seaventhly, In Civil Controversies, it is impossible Titius should hold
the land in question and Sempronius too: and therefore either the Plaintiff
must injure the Defendant, by disquieting his possession, or the Defendant
wrong the Plaintiff by keeping his right from him. But in Controversies of
Religion the Case is otherwise. I may hold my opinion and do you no wrong, and
you yours and do me none. Nay we may both of us hold our opinion, and yet do
our selves no harm; provided, the difference be not touching any thing
necessary to salvation, and that we love truth so well, as to be diligent to
inform our Conscience, and constant in following it.

21 Eighthly, For the ending of Civil Controversies, who does not see it is
absolutely necessary, that not only Judges should be appointed, but that it
should be known and unquestioned who they are? Thus all the Judges of our Land
are known men, known to be Judges, and no man can doubt or question, but these
are the Men. Otherwise if it were a disputable thing, who were these Judges,
and they had no certain warrant for their Authority, but only some Topicall
congruities, would not any man say such Judges, in all likelihood, would rather
multiply Controversies, then end them?

22 Ninthly, and lastly, For the deciding of Civil Controversies men may
appoint themselves a judge. But in matters of Religion, this office may be
given to none but whom God has designed for it: who does not always give us
those things which we conceive most expedient for our selves.

23 So likewise if our Savior, the King of Heaven, had intended that all
Controversies in Religion should be by some Visible Judge finally determined,
who can doubt, but in plain terms he would have expressed himself about
this matter? He would have said plainly. The Bishop of Rome I have appointed
to decide all emergent Controversies. For that our Savior designed the Bishop
of Rome to this Office, and yet would not say so, nor cause it to be written --
ad Rei memoriam -- by any of the Evangelists or Apostles, so much as once; but
leave it to be drawn out of uncertain Principles, by thirteen or fourteen more
uncertain consequences, He that can believe it, let him. All these Reasons, I
hope, will convince you, that though we have, and have great necessity of,
Judges in Civil and Criminal causes: yet you may not conclude from thence,
that there is any public authorized Judge to determine Controversies in
Religion, nor any necessity there should be any.

24 But the Scripture stands in need of some watchful and unerring eye to
guard it, by means of whose assured vigilance, we may undoubtedly receive it
sincere and pure. Very true, but this is no other then the watchful eye of
divine providence: the goodness whereof will never suffer, that the Scripture
should be depraved and corrupted, but that in them should be always extant a
conspicuous and plain way to eternal happiness. Neither can any thing be more
palpably unconsistent with his goodness, then to suffer Scripture to be
undiscernably corrupted in any matter of moment, and yet to exact of men the
belief of those verities, which without their fault, or knowledge, or
possibility of prevention, were defaced out of them. So that God requiring of
men to believe Scripture in its purity, ingages himself to see it preserved in
sufficient purity, and you need not fear but he will satisfy his engagement.
You say, we can have no assurance of this but your Churches Vigilancie. But if
we had no other we were in a hard case; for who could then assure us that your
Church has been so vigilant, as to guard Scripture from any the least
alteration? There being various Lections in the ancient copies of your Bibles,
what security can your new railed Office of Assurance give us, that, that
reading is true which you now receive, and that false which you reject?
Certainly they that anciently received and made use of these diverse Copies,
were not all guarded by the Churches vigilance from having their Scripture
altered from the purity of the Original in many places. For of different
readings, it is not in nature impossible that all should be false, but more
then one cannot possibly be true. Yet the want of such a protection was no
hinderance to their salvation, and why then shall the having of it be necessary
for ours? But then this Vigilance of your Church, what means have we to be
ascertained of it? First, the thing is not evident of it self; which is
evident, because many do not believe it. Neither can any thing be pretended to
give evidence to it, but only some places of Scripture; of whose incorruption
more then any other what is it that can secure me? If you say the Churches
vigilance, you are in a Circle, proving the Scriptures uncorrupted by the
Churches vigilance, and the Churches vigilance by the incorruption of some
places of Scripture, and again the incorruption of those places by the
Churches vigilance. If you name any other means, then that means which
secures me of the Scriptures incorruption in those places, will also serve to
assure me of the same in other places. For my part, abstracting from Divine
Providence, which will never suffer the way to Heaven to be blocked up or made
invisible, I know no other means (I mean no other natural and rational
means) to be assured hereof, then I have that any other Book is uncorrupted.
For though I have a greater degree of rational and humane Assurance of that
then this, in regard of diverse considerations which make it more credible, That
the Scripture has been preserved from any material alteration; yet my
assurance of both is of the same kind and condition, both Moral assurances,
and neither Physical or Mathematical.

25 To the next Argument the Reply is obvious; That though we do not believe
the books of Scripture to be Canonical because they say so, For other books
that are not Canonical may say they are, and those that are so may say nothing
of it: yet we believe not this upon the authority of your Church, but upon the
Credibilitie of Universal Tradition, which is a thing Credible of it self,
and therefore fit to be rested on; whereas the Authority of your Church is not
so. And therefore your rest thereon is not rational but merely voluntary. I
might as well rest upon the judgment of the next man I meet, or upon the
chance of a Lottery for it. For by this means I only know I might err, but by
relying on you I know I should err. But yet (to return you one suppose for
another) suppose I should for this and all other things submit to her
direction, how could she assure me that I should not be misled by doing so?
She pretends indeed infallibility herein, but how can she assure us that she
has it? What, by Scripture^ That you say cannot assure us of its own
Infallibility, and therefore not of yours. What then, by Reason? That you say
may deceive in other things, and why not in this? How then will she assure us
hereof, By saying so? Of this very affirmation there will remain the same
Question still, How it can prove it self to be infallibly true. Neither can
there be an end of the like multiplied Demands, till we rest in something
evident of it self, which demonstrates to the world that this Church is
infallible. And seeing there is no such Rock for the Infallibility of this
Church to be settled on, it must of necessity, like the Island of Delos, flote up
and down for ever. And yet upon this point according to Papists all other
Controversies in faith depend.

26 To they 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.. The sum and substance of the Ten
next Paragraphs is this, That it appears, by the Confessions of some
Protestants, and the Contentions of others, that the Questions about the Canon
of Scripture, what it is: and about the Various reading and Translations of it,
which is true and which not, are not to be determined by Scripture, and
therefore that all Controversies of Religion are not decidable by Scripture.

27 To which I have already answered saying, That when Scripture is affirmed to
be the rule by which all controversies of Religion are to be decided, Those are
to be excepted out of this generality which are concerning the Scripture it
self. For as that general saying of Scripture, He has put all things under
his feet, is most true, though yet S. Paul tells us, That when it is said, he
has put all things under him, it is manifest he is excepted who did put all
things under him: So when we say that all controversies of Religion are
decidable by the Scripture, it is manifest to all, but cavillers, that we do
and must except from this generality, those which are touching the Scripture it
self. Just as a Merchant showing a ship of his own, may say, all my substance
is in this ship; and yet never intend to deny, that his ship is part of his
substance, nor yet to say that his ship is in it self. Or as a man may say,
that a whole house is supported by the foundation, and yet never mean to
exclude the foundation from being a part of the house, or to say that it is
supported by it self. Or as you your selves use to say, that the Bishop of
Rome is head of the whole Church, and yet would think us but captious
sophisters should we infer from hence, that either you made him no part of
the whole, or else made him head of himself. Your negative conclusion
therefore, that these Questions touching Scripture, are not decidable by
Scripture, you needed not have cited any Authorities, nor urged any reason to
prove it; it is evident of it self, and I grant it without more ado. But your
corollary from it, which you would insinuate to your unwary reader, that
therefore they are to be decided by your, or any visible Church, is a mere
inconsequence, and very like his collection, who because Pamphilus was not to
have Glycerium for his wife, presently concluded that he must have her; as if
there had been no more men in the world but Pamphilus and himself. For so you
as if there were nothing in the world capable of this office, but the
Scripture, or the present Church, having concluded against Scripture, you
conceive, but too hastily, that you have concluded for the Church. But the
truth is, neither the one nor the other have any thing to do with this matter.
For first, the Question whether such or such a book be Canonical Scripture,
though it may be decided negatively out of Scripture, by showing apparent and
irreconcilable contradictions between it and some other book confessedly
Canonical; yet affirmatively it cannot but only by the testimonies of the
ancient Churches: any book being to be received as undoubtedly Canonical, or
to be doubted of as uncertain, or rejected as Apocryphal, according as it was
received, or doubted of, or rejected by them. Then for the Question, of various
readings which is the true, it is in reason evident and confessed by your own
Pope, that there is no possible determination of it, but only by comparison
with ancient Copies. And lastly for controversies about different translations
of Scripture, the learned have the same means to satisfy themselves in it, as
in the Questions which happen about the translation of any other Author, that
is, skill in the language of the Original, and comparing translations with it.
In which way if there be no certainty, I would know what certainty you have,
that your Doway old, and Rhemish new Testament are true translations? And then
for the unlearned those on your side are subject to as much, nay the very same
uncertainty with those on ours. Neither is there any reason imaginable, why an
ignorant English Protestant may not be as secure of the translation of our
Church, that it is free from error; if not absolutely, yet in matters of
moment, as an ignorant English Papist can be of his Rhemist Testament, or Doway
Bible. The best direction I can give them is to compare both together, and
where there is no real difference (as in the translation of controverted
places I believe there is very little) there to be confident, that they are
right; where they differ, there to be prudent in the choice of the guides they
follow. Which way of proceeding, if it be subject to some possible error, yet
is it the best that either we, or you have; and it is not required that we use
any better then the best we have.

28 You will say, Dependence on your Churches infallibility is a better. I
answer, it would be so, if we could be infallibly certain, that your Church
is infallible, that is, if it were either evident of it self, and seen by its
own light, or could be reduced unto and settled upon some Principle that is so.
But seeing you your selves do not so much as pretend, to enforce us to the
belief hereof, by any proofs infallible and convincing, but only to induce us
to it, by such as are, by your confession, only probable, and principal
motives; certainly it will be to very little purpose, to put off your
uncertainty for the first turn, and to fall upon it at the second: to please
your selves in building your house upon an imaginary Rock, when you your selves
see and confess, that this very Rock stands it self at the best but upon a
frame of timber. I answer secondly, that this cannot be a better way, because
we are infallibly certain that your Church is not infallible, and indeed has
not the real prescription of this privilege, but only pleases her self with
a false imagination and vain presumption of it: as I shall hereafter
demonstrate by many unanswerable arguments.

29 Now seeing I make no scruple or difficulty to grant the conclusion of this
discourse, that these controversies about Scripture, are not decidable by
Scripture* and have showed, that your deduction from it, that therefore they
are to be determined by the authority of some present Church, is irrational,
and inconsequent; I might well forbear to tire my self with an exact and
punctual examination of your premises (...), which wether they be true or
false, is to the Question disputed wholly impertinent. Yet because you shall
not complain of tergiver^ation, I will run over them, and let nothing, that
is material and considerable, pass without some stricture or animadversion.

30 You pretend that M. Hooker acknowledges that, That whereon we must rest
our assurance that the Scripture is Gods word, is the Church: and for this
acknowledgement you refer us to l. 3. Sect. 8. Let the Reader consult the
place, and he shall find that he and M. Hooker have been much abused, both by
you here, and by M. Breerly and others before you, and that M. Hooker has not
one syllable to your pretended purpose, but very much directly to the contrary.
There he tells us indeed, that ordinarily the first introduction and probable
motive to the belief of the verity is the Authority of the Church, but that it
is the last Foundation whereon our belief hereof is rationally grounded, that
in the same place he plainly denies. His words are, Scripture teaches us, that
saving Truth which God has discovered unto the world by Revelation, and it
presumes us taught otherwise, that it self is divine and sacred. The Question
then being by what means we are taught this: some answer; that to learn it
we have no other way then tradition. ( Some answer so, but he does not.)
As namely that so we believe, because we from our Predecessors, and they from
theirs have so received. But is this enough? That which all men's experience
teaches them, may not in any wise be denied: and by experience we all know,
that The first outward motive, not the last assurane^ whereon we rest.
the first outward motive leading men to esteem of the Scripture, is the
Authority of Gods Church. For when we know The whole Church that he speaks of
seems to be that particular Church, wherein a man is bred and brought up; and
the authority of this he makes an argument which presses a man's modesty more
then his reason. And in saying, it seems impudent to be of a contrary mind
without cause, he implies; There may be a just cause to be of a contrary mind,
and that then it were no impudence to be so.
the whole Church of God has that opinion of the Scripture, we judge it at the
first an impudent thing for any man, bred and brought up in the Church, to be
of a contrary mind without cause. Afterward the more we bestow our labor
upon reading or hearing the mysteries thereof, Therefore the authority of the
Church is not the pause whereon we rest: we had need of more assurance, and the
intrinsecall arguments afford it.
the more we find that the thing it self does answer our received opinion
concerning it: so that the former inducement prevailing Somewhat, but not much,
until it be backed and enforced by farther reason: it self therefore is not
the farthest reason and the last resolution.
somewhat with us before, does now much more prevail, when the very thing has
ministered farther reason. If Infidels, or Atheists chance at any time to call
it in question, this gives us occasion to sift what reason there is, whereby
the testimony of the Church, concerning Scripture, and our own persuasion,
which Scripture it self has settled, may be proved a truth infallible. Observe
I pray; our persuasion, and the testimony of the Church concerning Scripture,
may be proved true, therefore neither of them was in his account the farthest
proof.
In which case the ancient Fathers, being often constrained to show what
warrant they had so much to rely upon the Scriptures, endeavored still to
maintain the Authority of the books of God by arguments, such as the
unbelievers themselves must needs think reasonable, if they judge thereof as
they should. Neither is it a thing impossible, or greatly hard, even by such
kind of proofs, so to manifest and clear that point, that no man living
shall be able to deny it, without denying some apparent principle, such as all
men acknowledge to be true. Natural reason then built on principles common to
all men, is the last resolution; unto which the Churches authority is but the
first inducement.
By this time I hope the reader sees sufficient proof of what I said in my
Reply to your Preface, that M. Breerelies great ostentation of exactness, is
no very certain argument of his fidelity.

31 But, seeing the belief of the Scripture is a necessary thing, and cannot
be proved by Scripture, how can the Church of England teach, as she does, Art.
6. That all things necessary are contained in Scripture?

32 I have answered this already. And here again I say, That all but cavillers
will easily understand the meaning of the Article to be, That all the Divine
verities, which Christ revealed to his Apostles, and the Apostles taught the
Churches, are contained in Scripture. That is, all the material objects of our
faith; whereof the Scripture is none, but only the means of conveying them
unto us: which we believe not finally, and for it self, but for the matter
contained in it. So that if men did believe the doctrine contained in
Scripture, it should no way hinder their salvation, not to know whether there
were any Scripture or no. Those barbarous nations Irenaeus speaks of were in
this case, and yet no doubt but they might be saved. The end that God aims at,
is the belief of the Gospel, the covenant between God and man; the Scripture
he has provided as a means for this end, and this also we are to believe, but
not as the last object of our faith, but as the instrument of it. When
therefore we subscribe to the 6. Art. you must understand that, by Articles of
Faith, they mean the final and ultimate objects of it, and not the means and
isntrumental objects; and then there will be no repugnance between what they
say, and that which Hooker, and D. Covell, and D. Whitaker, and Luther here say.

33 But, Protestants agree not in assigning the Canon of holy Scripture. Luther
and Illyricus reject the Epistle of S. James. Kemnitius, and other Luth. the
second of Peter, the second and third of John. The Epist. to the Heb. the
Epist. of James, of Jude, and the Apocalypse. Therefore without the Authority of
the Church, no certainty can be had what Scripture is Canonical.

34 So also the Ancient Fathers, and not only Fathers, but whole Churches
differed about the certainty of the authority of the very same books: and by
their difference showed, they knew no necessity of conforming themselves herein
to the judgment of your or any Church. For had they done so, they must have
agreed all with that Church, and consequently among themselves. Now I pray tell
me plainly, Had they sufficient certainty what Scripture was Canonical, or had
they not? If they had not, it seems there is no such great harm or danger in
not having such a certainty whether some books be Canonical or no, as you
require: If they had, why may not Protestants, notwithstanding their
differences, have sufficient certainty hereof, as well as the Ancient Fathers
and Churches, notwithstanding theirs?

35 You proceed. And whereas the Protestants of England in the 6. Art. have
these words, In the name of the Holy Scripture we do understand those Books,
of whose authority was never any doubt in the Church; you demand, what they
mean by them? Whether that by the Churches consent they are assured what
Scriptures be Canonical? I Answer for them. Yes, they are so. And whereas you
infer from hence, This is to make the Church Judge: I have told you already,
That of this Controversy we make the Church the Judge; but not the present
Church, much less the present Roman Church, but the consent and testimony of
the Ancient and Primitive Church. Which though it be but a highly probable
inducement, and no demonstrative enforcement, yet me thinks you should not
deny but it may be a sufficient ground of faith: Whose Faith, even of the
Foundation of all your Faith, your Churches Authority, is built lastly and
wholly upon Prudentiall Motives.

36 But by this Rule the whole book of Esther must quit the Canon; because it
was excluded by some in the Church: by Melito, Athanasius, and Gregory
Nazianzen. Then for ought I know he that should think he had reason to exclude
it now, might be still in the Church as well as Melito, Athanasius, Nazianzen
were. And while you thus inveigh against Luther, and charge him with Luciferian
heresies; for doing that which you in this very place confess that Saints in
Heaven before him have done, are you not partial and a Judge of evil thoughts?

37 Luther's censures of Ecclesiastes, Job, and the Prophets, though you make
such tragedies with them, I see none of them but is capable of a tolerable
construction, and far from having in them any fundamental heresy. He that
condemns him for saying, the book of Ecclesiastes is not full, That it has
many abrupt things, condemns him, for ought I can see; for speaking truth. And
the rest of the censure is but a bold and blunt expression of the same thing.
The book of Job may be a true History, and yet as many true stories are, and
have been an Argument of a Fable to set before us an example of Patience. And
though the books of the Prophets were not written by themselves, but by their
Disciples, yet it does not follow that they were written casually: (Though I
hope you will not damn all for Heretics, that say, some books of Scripture
were written casually.) Neither is there any reason they should the sooner be
called in question for being written by their Disciples, seeing being so
written they had attestation from themselves. Was the Prophecy of Jeremy the
less Canonical, for being written by Baruch? Or because S. Peter the Master
dictated the Gospel, and S. Mark the Scholar writ it, is it the more likely
to be called in Question?

38 But leaving Luther, you return to our English Canon of Scripture; And tell
us, that in the new testament, by the above mentioned rule, (of whose Authority
was never any doubt in the Church) diverse books must be canonized. Not so For I
may believe even those questioned books to have been written by the Apostles
and to be Canonical: but I cannot in reason believe this of them so
undoubtedly, as of those books which were never questioned. At least I have no
warrant to damn any man that shall doubt of them or deny them now: having the
example of Saints in Heaven, either to justify, or excuse such their doubting
or denial.

39 You observe in the next place, that our sixth Article, specifying by name
all the books of the Old Tstament, sh^ffles over these of the New with this
generality -- All the books of the New Testament, as they are commonly
received, we do receive, and account them Canonical: And in this you phansy
to your self a mystery of iniquity. But if this be all the shuffling that the
Church of England is guilty of, I believe the Church, as well as the King, may
give for her Motto, Honi soit qui mal ^ pense. For all the Bibles which since
the composing of the Articles have been used and allowed by the Church of
England, do testify and even proclaim to the World, that by- Commonly
received, they meant, received by the Church of Rome, and other Churches before
the Reformation. I pray take the pains to look in them, and there you shall
find the books which the Church of England counts Apocryphal marked out and
severed from the rest, with this title in the beginning, The books called
Apocrypha; and with this close or seal in the end, The end of the Apocrypha.
And having told you by name, and in particular, what books only she esteems
Apocryphal, I hope you will not put her to the trouble of telling you that the
rest are in her judgment Canonical.

40 But if by Commonly received, she meant, by the Church of Rome; Then by the
same reason, must she receive diverse books of the old Testament which she
reiects.

41 Certainly a very good consequence. The Church of England receives the
Books of the New Testament, which the Church of Rome receives; Therefore she
must receive the books of the old Testament which she receives. As if you
should say, If you will do as we, in one thing, you must in all things. If you
will pray to God with us, ye must pray to Saints with us. If you hold with us,
when we have reason on our side, you must do so, when we have no reason.

42 The discourse following is but a vain declamation. No man thinks that this
Controversy is to be tried by most voices, but by the Judgment and Testimony
of the ancient Fathers and Churches.

43 But, with what Coherence can we say in the former part of the Article, That
by Scripture we mean those Books that were never doubted of; and in the latter
say, We receive all the books of the new Testament, as they are commonly
received, whereas of them many were doubted? I answer. When they say, of whose
authority there was never any doubt in the Church, They mean not, those only of
whose Authority there was simply no doubt at all, by any man in the Church; But
such as were not at any time doubted of by the whole Church, or by all
Churches, but had attestation, though not universal, yet at least sufficient
to make considering men receive them for Canonical. In which number they may
well reckon those Epistles which were sometimes doubted of by some, yet whose
number and authority was not so great, as to prevail against the contrary
suffrages.

44 But, if to be commonly received, passefor a good rule to know the Canon of
the new Testament by, why not of the Old? You conclude many times very well,
but still when you do so, it is out of principles which no man grants. For who
ever told you, that to be commonly received is a good Rule to know the Canon of
the New Testament by? Have you been trained up in Schools of subtilty, and
cannot you see a great difference, between these two, We receive the books of
the new Testament as they are commonly received, and we receive those that are
commonly received, because they are so? To say this, were indeed to make, being
commonly received, a Rule or Reason to know the Canon by. But to say the
former, does no more make it a Rule, then you should make the Church of England
the rule of your receiving them, if you should say, as you may, The books of
the New Testament we receive for Canonical, as they are received by the Church
of England.

45 You demand, upon what infallible ground we agree with Luther against you,
in some, and with you against Luther in others? And I also demand upon what
infallible ground you hold your Canon, and agree neither with us, nor Luther?
For sure your differing from us both, is of it self no more apparently
reasonable, then our agreeing with you in part, and in part with Luther. If you
say, your Churches infallibility is your ground: I demand again some
infallible ground both for the Churches infallibility, and for this, that Yours
is the Church; and shall never cease multiplying demands upon demands, until
you settle me upon a Rock; I mean, give such an Answer, whose Truth is so
evident that it needs no further evidence. If you say, This is Universal
Tradition: I reply, your Churches infallibility is not built upon it, and that
the Canon of Scripture, as we receive it, is. For we do not profess our
selves so absolutely, and and undoubtedly certain; neither do we urge others
to be so, of those Books, which have been doubted, as of those that never have.

46 The Conclusion of your Tenth is, That the Divinity of a writing cannot be
known from it self alone, but by some extrinsecall authority: Which you need
not prove, for no wise man denies it. But then this authority is that of
Universal Tradition, not of your Church. For to me it is altogether as (...),
that the Gospel of Saint Matthew is the word of God, as that all which your
Church says is true.

47 That Believers of the Scripture, by considering the divine matter, the
excellent precepts, the glorious promises contained in it, may be confirmed in
their faith, of the Scriptures divine Authority; and that among other
inducements and inforcements hereunto, internal arguments have their place and
force, certainly no man of understanding can deny. For my part I profess, if
the doctrine of the Scripture were not as good, and as fit to come from the
fountain of goodness, as the Miracles, by which it was confirmed, were great,
I should want one main pillar of my faith, and for want of it, I fear should
be much staggered in it. Now this and nothing else did the Doctor mean in
saying, The Belieuer sees, by that glorious beam of divine light which shines
in Scripture, and by many internal Arguments, that the Scripture is of Divine
Authority. By this (says he) he sees it, that is, he is moved to, and
strengthened in his belief of it: and by this partly, not wholly; by this, not
alone, but with the concurrence of other Arguments. He that will quarrel with
him for saying so, must find fault with the Master of the Sentences, and all
his Scholars; for they all say the same. The rest of this Paragraph, I am as
willing it should be true^, as you are to have it: and so let it pass, as a
discourse wherein we are wholly unconcerned. You might have met with an Answerer
that would not have suffered you to have said so much Truth together, but to me
it is sufficient, that it is nothing to the purpose.

48 In the next Division, out of your liberality, you will suppose, that
Scripture, like to a corporal light, is by it self alone able to determine
and move our understanding to assent: yet notwithstanding this supposall, Faith
still (you say) must go before Scripture, because as the light is visible only
to those that have eyes: so the Scripture only to those that have the Eye of
Faith. But to my understanding, if Scripture do move and determine our
Understanding to assent, then the Scripture, and its moving must be before this
assent, as the cause must be before its own effect; now this very assent is
nothing else but Faith, and Faith nothing else then the Vnderstanding's assent.
And therefore (upon this supposall) Faith does* and must originally proceed
from Scripture, as the effect from its proper cause: and the influence and
efficacy of Scripture is to be presupposed before the assent of faith, unto
which it moves and determines, and consequently if this supposition of yours
were true, there should need no other means precedent to Scripture to beget
Faith, Scripture it self being able (as here you suppose) to determine and
move the understanding to assent, that is to believe them, and the Verities
contained in them. Neither is this to say, that the eyes with which we see, are
made by the light by which we see. For you are mistaken much, if you conceive
that in this comparison, Faith answers to the Eye. But if you will not pervert
it, the Analogy must stand thus^; Scripture must answer to light; The eye of
the soul, that is the Understanding, or the faculty of assenting, to the
bodily eye; And lastly assenting or believing to the act of seeing. As
therefore the light, determining the Eye to see, though it presupposes the Eye
which it determines, as every Action does the object on which it is employed,
yet it self is presupposed and antecedent to the act of seeing, as the cause
is always to its effect: So, if you will suppose that Scripture, like light,
moves the understanding to assent, The Understanding (that is the eye and object
on which it works) must be before this influence upon it; But the Assent, that
is the belief whereto the Scripture moves, and the understanding is moved,
which answers to the act of seeing, must come after. For if it did assent
already, to what purpose should the Scripture do that which was done before?
Nay indeed how were it possible it should be so, any more then a Father can
beget a Son that he has already? Or an Architect build an house that is
built already? Or then this very world can be made again before it be unmade?
Transubstantiation indeed is fruitful of such Monsters. But they that have not
sworn themselves to the defense of Error, will easily perceive, that I am
factum facere, and Factum infectum facere, are equally impossible. But I
digress.

49 The close of this Paragraph, is a fit cover for such a dish. There you tell
us, That if there must be some other means precedent to Scripture to beget
faith, this can be no other then the Church. By the Church, we know you do,
and must understand the Roman Church: so that in effect you say, no man can
have faith, but he must be moved to it by your Churches Authority. And that is
to say, that the King and all other Protestants, to whom you write, though they
verily think they are Christians and believe the Gospel, because they assent
to the truth of it, and would willingly dye for it, yet indeed are Infidels and
believe nothing. The Scripture tells us, The heart of man knows no man, but
the spirit of man which is in him. And who are you, to take upon you to make us
believe, that we do not believe, what we know we do? But if I may think
verily that I believe the Scripture, and yet not believe it; how know you that
you believe the Roman Church? I am as verily, and as strongly persuaded that I
believe the Scripture, as you are that you believe the Church. And if I may be
deceived, why may not you? Again, what more ridiculous, and against sense and
experience, then to affirm, That there are not millions amongst you and us
that believe, upon no other reason then their education, and the authority of
their Parents and Teachers, and the opinion they have of them? The tenderness
of the subject, and aptness to receive impressions, supplying the defect and
imperfection of the Agent! And will you proscribe from heaven all those
believers of your own Creed, who do indeed lay the foundation of their Faith
(for I cannot call it by any other name) no deeper then upon the Authority of
their Father, or Master, or parish Priest? Certainly, if these have no true
faith, your Church is very full of Infidels. Suppose Xaverius by the holiness
of his life had converted some Indians to Christianity, who could (for so I
will suppose) have no knowledge of your Church but from him, and therefore must
last of all build their Faith of the Church upon their Opinion of Xaverius: Do
these remain as very Pagans after their conversion, as they were before? Are
they brought to assent in their souls, and obey in their lives the Gospel of
Christ, only to be Tantaliz'd and not saved, and not benefited but deluded by
it, because, forsooth, it is a man and not the Church that begets faith in
them? What if their motive to believe be not in reason sufficient? Do they
therefore not believe what they do believe, because they do it upon
insufficient motives? They choose the Faith imprudently perhaps, but yet they
do choose it. Unless you will have us believe that, that which is done, is
not done, because it is not done upon good reason: which is to say, that never
any man living ever did a foolish action. But yet I know not why the Authority
of one holy man, which apparently has no ends upon me, joined with the
goodness of the Christian faith, might not be a far greater and more rational
motive to me to embrace Christianity, then any I can have to continue in
Paganism. And therefore for shame, if not for love of Truth, you must recant
this fancy when you write again: and suffer true faith to be many times, where
your Churches infallibility has no hand in the begetting of it. And be content
to tell us hereafter, that we believe not enough, and not go about to persuade
us, we believe nothing, for fear with telling us what we know to be manifestly
false, you should gain only this, Not to be believed when you speak truth. Some
pretty sophismes you may happily bring us to make us believe, we believe
nothing: but wise men know that Reason against Experience is always
Sophistical. And therefore as he that could not answer Zenoe's subtilities
against the existence of Motion, could yet confute them by doing that, which he
pretended could not be done: So if you should give me a hundred Arguments to
persuade me, because I do not believe Transubstantiation* I do not believe in
God, and the Knots of them I could not untie, yet I should cut them in pieces
with doing that, and knowing that I do so, which you pretend I cannot do.

50 In the thirteenth division, we have again much ado about nothing. A great
deal of stir you keep in confuting some, that pretend to know Canonical
Scripture to be such, by the Titles of the Books. But these men you do not
name, which makes me suspect you cannot. Yet it is possible there may be some
such men in the world; for Gusman de Alfarache has taught us that the Fools
hospital is a large place.

51 In the fourteenth. we have very artificial juggling. D. Potter had said,
That the Scripture (he desires to be understood of those books wherein all
Christians agree) is a principle, and needs not be proved among Christians. His
reason was, because that needs no farther proof which is believed already. Now
by this (you say) he means either, that the Scripture is one of these first
Principles, and most known in all sciences, which cannot be proved: which is to
suppose, it cannot be proved by the Church; and that is to suppose the
Question: Or he means, That it is not the most known in Christianity, and
then it may be proved. Where we see plainly, That two most different things,
Most known in all Sciences, and Most known in Christianity, are captiously
confounded. As if the Scripture might not be the first and most known
Principle in Christianity, and yet not the most known in all Sciences? Or as
if to be a First Principle in Christianity, and in all Sciences, were all one?
That Scripture is a Principle among Christians, that is, so received by all
that it need not be proved in any emergent Controversy to any Christian, but
may be taken for granted, I think few will deny. You your selves are of this a
sufficient Testimony; for urging against us many texts of Scripture, you offer
no proof of the truth of them, presuming we will not question it. Yet this is
not to deny that Tradition is a Principle more known then Scripture; But to
say, it is a principle not in Christianity but in Reason, nor proper to
Christians, but common to all men.

52 But, it is repugnant to our practice to hold Scripture a Principle; because
we are wont to affirm, that one part of Scripture may be known to be
Canonical, and may be interpreted by another. Where the former device is
again put in practice. For to be known to be Canonical, and to be interpreted
is not all one. That Scripture may be interpreted by Scripture, that
Protestants grant, and Papists do not deny; neither does that any way hinder
but that this assertion -- Scripture is the word of God, may be among
Christians a common Principle. But the first, ^That one part of Scripture may
prove another part Canonical, and need no proof of its own being so; for
that, you have produced diverse Protestants that deny it; but who they are that
affirm it, nondum Constat.

53 It is superfluous for you to prove out of S. Athanasius, and S. Austine
that we must receive the sacred Canon upon the credit of Gods Church.
Understanding by Church, as here you explain your self, The credit of
Tradition. And that not the Tradition of the Present Church, which we pretend
may deviate from the Ancient, but such a Tradition, which involues an evidence
of Fact, and from hand to hand, from age to age, bringing us up to the times
and persons of the Apostles, and our Savior himself, comes to be confirmed
by all these Miracles and other Arguments, whereby they convinced their
doctrine to be true. Thus you. Now prove the Canon of Scripture which you
receive by such Tradition and we will allow it. Prove your whole doctrine, or
the infallibility of your Church by such a Tradition, and we will yield to you
in all things. Take the alleged places of S. Athanasius, and S. Austine, in
this sense, (which is your own,) and they will not press us any thing at all.
We will say, with Athanasius, That only four Gospels are to be received,
because the Canons of the Holy and Catholic Church (understand of all Ages
since the perfection of the Canon) have so determined.

54 We will subscribe to S. Austin, and say, That we also would not believe the
Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church did move us, (meaning
by the Church, the Church of all Ages, and that succession of Christians which
takes in Christ himself and his Apostles.) Neither would Zwinglius have needed
to cry out upon this saying, had he conceived as you now do, that by the
Catholic Church, the Church of all Ages, since Christ, was to be understood.
As for the Council of Carthage, it may speak not of such Books only, as were
certainly Canonical, and for the regulating of Faith, but also of those which
were only profitable, and lawful to be read in the Church. Which in England
is a very slender Argument that the book is Canonical, where every body knows
that Apocryphal books are read as well as Canonical. But howsoever, if you
understand by Fathers, not only their immediate Fathers and Predecessors in the
Gospel, but the succession of them from the Apostles; they are right in the
Thesis, that whatsoever is received from these Fathers, as Canonical, is to be
so esteemed; Though in the application of it, to this or that particular book
they may happily err, and think that Book received as Canonical, which was
only received as Profitable to be read; and think that Book, received always,
and by all, which was rejected by some, and doubted of by many.

55 But we cannot be certain, in what language the Scriptures remain
uncorrupted. Not so certain, I grant, as of that which we can demonstrate: But
certain enough, morally certain, as certain as the nature of the thing will
bear. So certain we may be, and God requires no more. We may be as certain as
S. Austin was, who in his second book of Baptism, against the Donatists, c. 3.
plainly implies, the Scripture might possibly be corrupted. He means sure in
matters of little moment, such as concern not the Covenant between God and
Man. But thus he says. The same S. Austin in his 48. Epist. clearly intimates,
Neque enim sic pasuit integritas atque notitia literarum quamlibet illustris
Episcopi, custodiri, quemadmodum scriptura Canonica tot linguarum literis and
ordine and successione celebrationis Ecclesiasticae cus^oditur; contra quam non
defuerunt tamen, qui sub non^^ibus Apostol^rum multa confingere^t. Frustra
quidem; Quia illa sic commendata, sic celebrata, sic nota est. Ferum quid
po^sit adversus literas non Canonica authoritate funda^as etiam hinc
demonstrabit impiae (...) audaciae, quod and adversus eos quae tanta notitiae
mole firmatae sunt, fese erigere non praetermisit. Aug. ep. 48. ad Vincent.
contra Donat* and Rogat.
That in his judgment, the only preservatiue of the Scriptures integrity, was
the translating it into so many Languages, and the general and perpetual use
and reading of it in the Church: for want whereof the works of particular
Doctors were more exposed to danger in this kind; but the Canonical Scripture
being by this means guarded with universal care and diligence was not
obnoxious to such attempts. And this assurance of the Scripture's incorruption,
is common to us with him; we therefore are as certain hereof as S. Austin was,
and that I hope was certain enough. Yet if this does not satisfy you, I say
farther, We are as certain hereof as your own Pope Sixtus Quintus was. He in
his Preface to his Bible tells us: In hac Germani text^s pervestigatione, satis
perspicue inter omnes constat, nullum argumentum esse certius ac famius, quam
antiquorum probatorum codicum latinorum fidem etc. sic Sixtus in praefat.
That in the pervestigation of the true and genuine Text, it was perspicuously
manifest to all men, that there was no Argument more ^^rme and certain to be
relied upon, then the Faith of Ancient Books. Now this ground we have to build
upon as well as He had: and therefore our certainty is as great, and stands
upon as certain ground as his did.

56 This is not all I have to say in this matter. For I will add moreover,
that we are as certain in what Language the Scripture is uncorrupted, as any
man in your Church was, until Clement the 8th set forth your own approved
Edition of your Vulgar translation. For you do not, nor cannot, without
extreme impudence deny, that until then, there was great variety of Copies
current in diverse parts of your Church, and those very frequent in various
lections: all which Copies might possibly be false in some things, but more
then one sort of them, could not possibly be true in all things. Neither were
it less impudence to pretend, that any man in your Church, could until
Clement's time have any certainty what that one true Copy and reading was (if
there were any one perfectly true.) Some indeed that had got Sixtus his Bible,
might after the Edition of that very likely think them selves cock-sure of a
perfect true uncorrupted Translation, without being beholding to Clement; but
how fowly they were abused and deceived that thought so, the Edition of
Clemens, differing from that of Sixtus in a great multitude of places, does
sufficiently demonstrate.

57 This certainty therefore in what language the Scripture remains
uncorrupted, is it necessary to have it, or is it not? If it be not, I hope we
may do well enough without it. If it be necessary, what became of your Church
for 1500 years together? All which time you must confess she had no such
certainty: no one man being able truly and upon good ground to say, This or
that Copy of the Bible is pure, and perfect, and uncorrupted in all things. And
now at this present, though some of you are grown to a higher degree of
Presumption in this point, yet are you as far as ever, from any true and
real, and rational assurance of the absolute purity of your Authentic
Translation: which I suppose my self to have proved unanswerably in diverse
places.

58 In the sixteenth Division, It is objected to Protestants in a long
discourse transcribed out of the Protestants Apology, That their translations
of the Scripture are very different, and by each other mutually condemned*
Luthers Translation by Zwinglius, and others: That of the Zwinglians by Luther.
The Translation of Oecolampadius, by the Divines of Basil: that of Castalio by
Beza: That of Beza by Castalio. That of Calvin, by Carolus Molinaeus. That of
Geneva by M. Parks, and King James. And lastly one of our Translations by the
Puritans.

59 All which might have been as justly objected against that great variety of
Translations extant in the Primitive Church, and m^de use of by the Fathers and
Doctors of it. For which I desire not that my word, but S. Austin's may be
taken. They which have translated the Scriptures out of the Hebrew into Greek,
may be numbered, but the Latin Interpreters are innumerable. For whenever any
one, in the first times of Christianity, met with a Greek Bible, and seemed to
himself to have some ability in both Languages, he presently ventured upon an
Interpretation. So He, in his second book of Christian doctrine. Cap. 11. Of
all these, that which was called the Italian Translation was esteemed best; so
we may learn from the same S. Austin in the 15. Chap. of the same book.
Amongst all these Interpretations (says he) let the Italian be preferred: for
it keeps closer to the Letter, and is perspicuous in the sense. Yet so far
was the Church of that time from presuming upon the absolute purity and
perfection, even of this best Translation, that S. Hierome thought it necessary
to make a new Translation of the Old Testament, out of the Hebrew fountain,
(which himself testifies in his Book de Viris illustribus,) And to correct the
vulgar version of the New Testament, according to the truth of the Original
Greek; amending many errors which had crept into it, whether by the mistake of
the Author, or the negligence of the Transcribers; which work he undertook and
performed at the request of Damasus, Bishop of Rome. You constrain me (says
he) to make a new work of an old: that after the Copies of the Scriptures have
been dispersed through the whole world, I should sit as it were an Arbitratour
amongst them, and because they vary among themselves, should determine what are
those things (in them) which consent with the Greek verity. And after:
Therefore this present Preface promises the four Gospels only corrected by
collation with Greek Copies. But that they might not be very dissonant from the
custom of the Latin Reading, I have so tempered with my style, the
Translation of the Ancients, that, those things amended which did seem to
change the sense, other things I have suffered to remain as they were. So that
in this matter Protestants must either stand or fall with the Primitive Church.

60 The Corruption that you charge Luther with, and the falsification that you
impute to Zwinglius, what have we to do with them? or why may not we as justly
lay to your charge the Errors which Lyranus, or Paulus Brugensis, or
Laurentius Valla, or Cajetan, or Erasmus, or Arias Montanus, or Augustus*
Nebiensis, or Pagnine, have committed in their Translations.

61 Which yet I say not, as if these Translations of Luther and Zwinglius were
absolutely indefensible; for what such great difference is there between Faith
without the Works of the Law, and Faith alone without the Works of the Law? or
why does not, Without, Alone, signify all one with, Alone, Without? Consider
the matter a little better, and observe the use of these phrases of speech in
our ordinary talk, and perhaps you will begin to doubt whether you had
sufficient ground for this invectiue. And then for Zwinglius, if it be true
(as they say it is) that the language our Savior spoke in, had no such word
as, To signify, but used always, to be, instead of it, as it is certain the
Scripture does in a hundred places; then this Translation, which you so declaim
against, will prove no falsification in Zwinglius, but a calumny in you.

62 But the faith of Protestants relies upon Scripture alone; Scripture is
delivered to most of them by Translations; Translations depend upon the skill
and honesty of Men, who certainly may err because they are Men, and certainly
do err, at least some of them, because their Translations are contrary. It
seems then the Faith, and consequently the Salvation of Protestants relies
upon fallible and uncertain grounds.

63 This Objection, though it may seem to do you great service for the
present; yet I fear you will repent the time that ever you urged it against us
as a fault, that we make men's salvation depend upon uncertainties. For the
objection returns upon you many ways, as first thus; The salvation of many
millions of Papists (as they suppose and teach) depends upon their having the
Sacrament of Penance truly administered unto them. This again upon the
Minister's being a true Priest. That such or such a man is Priest, not
himself, much less any other can have any possible certainty: for it depends
upon a great many contingent and uncertain supposals. He that will pretend to
be certain of it, must undertake to know for a certain all these things that
follow.

64 First that he was baptized with due Matter. Secondly, with the due form of
words, (which he cannot know, unless he were both present and attentive.)
Thirdly, he must know that he was baptized with due Intention, and that is,
that the Minister of his Baptism was not a secret Jew, nor a Moore, nor an
Atheist, (of all which kinds, I fear experience gives you just cause to fear,
that Italy and Spain have Priests not a few,) but a Christian in heart, as
well as Profession; (otherwise believing the Sacrament to be nothing, in giving
it he could intend to give nothing,) nor a Sam^satenian, nor an Arrian: but one
that was capable of having due intention, from which they that believe not the
doctrine of the Trinity are excluded by you. And lastly, that he was neither
drunk nor distracted at the administration of the Sacrament, nor out of
negligence or malice omitted his intention.

65 Fourthly, he must undertake to know, that the Bishop which ordained him
Priest, ordained him completely with due Matter, Form and Intention: and
consequently, that he again was neither Jew, nor Moore, nor Atheist, nor
liable to any such exception, as is unconsistent with due Intention in giving
the Sacrament of Orders.

66 Fifthly, he must undertake to know, that the Bishop which made him Priest,
was a Priest himself, for your rule is, Nihil dat quod non habet: And
consequently, that there was again none of the former nullities in his
Baptism, which might make him incapable of Ordination; nor no invalidity in
his Ordination, but a true Priest to ordain him again, the requisite matter
and form and due intention all concurring.

67 Lastly, he must pretend to know the same of him that made him Priest, and
him that made Him Priest, even until he comes to the very fountain of
Priesthood. For take any one in the whole train and succession of Ordainers,
and suppose him, by reason of any defect, only a supposed and not a true
Priest, then according to your doctrine he could not give a true, but only a
supposed Priesthood; and they that receive it of him, and again, they that
derive it from the^, can give no better then they received; receiving nothing
but a name and shadow, can give nothing but a name and shadow: and so from age
to age, from generation to generation being equivocall Fathers, beget only
equivocall Sons; No Principle in Geometry being more certain then this, That
the unsuppliable defect of any necessary Antecedent, must needs cause a nullity
of all those Consequences which depend upon it. In fine, to know this one
thing, you must first know ten thousand others, whereof not any one is a thing
that can be known; there being no necessity that it should be true, which only
can qualify any thing for an object of Science, but only, at the best, a high
degree of probability that it is so. But then, that often thousand probables,
no one should be false; that of ten thousand requisites, whereof any one may
fail, not one should be wanting, this to me is extremely improbable, and even
cosen german to Impossible. So that the assurance hereof is like a machine
composed of an innumerable multitude of pieces, of which it is strangely
unlikely but some will be out of order; and yet if any one be so, the whole
fabric of necessity falls to the ground. And he that shall put together, and
maturely consider all the possible ways of lapsing, and nullifying a
Priesthood in the Church of Rome, I believe will be very inclinable to think,
that it is an hundred to one, that amongst a hundred seeming Priests, there is
not one true one. Nay, that it is not a thing very improbable, that amongst
those many millions, which make up the Romish Hierarchy, there are not twenty
true. But be the truth in this what it will be, once this is certain, that They
which make men's salvation (as you do) depend upon Priestly Absolution, and
this again (as you do) upon the Truth and reality of the Priesthood that gives
it, and this lastly upon a great multitude of apparent uncertainties, are not
the fittest men in the world, to object to others as a horrible crime, That
they make men's Salvation depend upon fallible and uncertain foundations. And
let this be the first retortion of your Argument.

68 But suppose this difficulty assoyled, and that an Angel from Heaven should
ascertain you (for other assurances you can have none) that the person, you
make use of, is a true Priest, and a competent Minister of the Sacrament of
Penance; yet still the doubt will remain, whether he will do you that good
which he can do, whether he will pronounce the absolving words with intent to
absolve you! For perhaps he may bear you some secret malice, and project to
himself your damnation, for a complete Italian revenge. Perhaps (as the tale
is of a Priest that was lately burnt in France) he may upon some conditions
have compacted with the Devil to give no Sacraments with Intention. Lastly, he
may be (for ought you can possibly know) a secret Jew, or Moore, or
Anti-Trinitarian, or perhaps such a one as is so far from intending your
forgiveness of sins and salvation by this Sacrament, that in his heart he
laughes at all these things, and thinks Sin nothing, and Salvation a word.
All these doubts you must have clearly resolved (which can hardly be done but
by another Revelatio^,) before you can upon good grounds assure your self,
that your true Priest gives you true and effectual absolution. So that when
you have done as much as God requires for your Salvation, yet can you by no
means be secure, but that you may have the ill luck to be damned: which is to
make Salvation a matter of chance, and not of choice, and which a man may
fail of, not only by an ill life, but by ill fortune. Verily a most
comfortable Doctrine for a considering man lying upon death bed, who either
feels or fears that his repentance is but attritio^ only, and not contrition,
and consequently believes that if he be not absolved really by a true Priest,
he cannot possibly escape damnation. Such a man for his comfort, you tell,
first (you that will have men's salvation depend upon no uncertainties,) that
though he verily believe that his sorrow for sins is a true sorrow, and his
purpose of amendment a true purpose; yet he may deceive himself, perhaps it is
not, and if it be not, he must be damned. Yet you bid him hope well: But Spes
est rei incertae nomen. You tell him secondly, that though the party he
confesses to, seem to be a true Priest, yet for ought he knows, or for ought
himself knows, by reason of some secret undiscernable invalidity in his
Baptism or Ordination, he may be none: and if he be none, he can do nothing.
This is a hard saying, but this is not the worst. You tell him thirdly, that he
may be in such a state that he cannot, or if he can, that he will not give the
Sacrament with due Intention: and if he does not, all is in vain. Put case a
man by these considerations should be cast into some agonies; what advise, what
comfort would you give him? Verily I know not what you could say to him, but
this; that first for the Qualification required on his part, he might know that
he desired to have true sorrow, and that that is sufficient. But then if he
should ask you, why he might not know his sorrow to be a true sorrow, as well
as his desire to be sorrowful, to be a true desire, I believe you would be put
to silence. Then secondly, to quiet his fears, concerning the Priest and his
intention you should tell him, by my advice, that Gods goodness (which will
not suffer him to damn men for not doing better then their best,) will supply
all such defects as to humane endeavors were unavoidable. And therefore though
his Priest were indeed no Priest, yet to him he should be as if he were one:
and if he gave Absolution without Intention, yet in doing so he should hurt
himself only and not his penitent. This were some comfort indeed, and this
were to settle men's salvation upon reasonable certain grounds. But this I fear
you will never say; for this were to reverse many Doctrines established by your
Church, and besides to degrade your Priesthood from a great part of their
honor, by lessening the strict necessity of the Laities dependence upon them.
For it were to say, that the Priests Intention is not necessary to the
obtaining of absolution; which is to say, that it is not in the Parsons power
to damn whom he will in his Parish, because by this rule, God should supply
the defect which his malice had caused. And besides it were to say, that
Infants dying without Baptism might be saved, God supplying the want of
baptism which to them is unavoidable. But beyond all this, it were to put into
my mouth a full and satisfying answer to your Argument, which I am now
returning, so that in answering my objection you should answer your own. For
then I should tell you, that it were altogether as abhorrent from the goodness
of God, and as repugnant to it, to suffer an ignorant Lay-mans soul to perish,
merely for being misled by an undiscernable false Translation, which yet was
commended to him by the Church, which (being of necessity to credit some in
this matter) he had reason to rely upon either above all other; or as much as
any other, as it is to damn a penitent sinner for a secret defect in that
desired Absolution, which his Ghostly Father perhaps was an Atheist and could
not give him, o^ was a villain and would not. This answer therefore, which
alone would serve to comfort your penitent in his perplexities, and to assure
him that he cannot fail of Salvation if he will not, for fear of
inconveniences you must forbear. And seeing you must, I hope you will come
down from the Pulpit, and preach no more against others for making men's
Salvation depend upon fallible and uncertain grounds, least by judging others,
you make your selves and your own Church inexcusable, who are strongly guilty
of this fault, above all the men and Churches of the World: whereof I have
already given you two very pregnant demonstrations, drawn from your
presumptions tying God and Salvation to your Sacraments; And the efficacy of
them to your Priests Qualifications and Intentions.

69 Your making the Salvation of Infants depend on Baptism a Casual thing,
and in the power of man to confer, or not confer, would yield me a Third of
the same nature. And your suspending the same on the Baptizer's intention a
Fourth. And lastly your making the Real presence of Christ in the Eucharist
depend upon the casualties of the consecrators true Priesthood and Intention,
and yet commanding men to believe it for certain that he is present, and to
adore the Sacrament, which according to your Doctrine, for ought they can
possibly know, may be nothing else but a piece of bread, so exposing them to
the danger of Idolatry, and consequently of damnation, does offer me a Fifth
demonstration of the same conclusion, if I thought fit to insist upon them. But
I have no mind to draw any more out of this Fountain; neither do I think it
charity to cloy the Reader with uniformity, when the subject affords variety.

70 Sixthly, therefore I return it thus. The faith of Papists relyes alone upon
their Churches infallibility. That there is any Church infallible, and that
Theirs is it, they pretend not to believe, but only upon prudentiall motives.
Dependence upon prudentiall motives they confess to be obnoxious to a
possibility of erring. What then remains but Truth, Faith, Salvation, and all
must in them rely upon a fallible and uncertain ground!

71 Seventhly, The faith of Papists relies upon the Church alone. The Doctrine
of the Church is delivered to most of them by their Parish Priest, or Ghostly
Father, or at least by a company of Priests, who for the most part sure, are
men and not Angels, in whom nothing is more certain then a most certain
possibility to err. What then remains but that Truth, Faith, Salvation and
all, must in them rely upon a fallible and uncertain ground.

72 Eighthly thus. It is apparent and undeniable, that many Thousands there are,
who believe your Religion upon no better grounds, then a man may have for the
belief almost of any Religion. As some believe it, because their forefathers
did so, and they were good People. Some, because they were Christened, and
brought up in it. Some, because many Learned and Religious men are of it. Some,
because it is the Religion of their Country, where all other Religions are
persecuted and proscribed* Some, because Protestants cannot show a perpetual
succession of Professors of all their Doctrine. Some, because the service of
your Church is more stately, and pompous, and magnificent. Some, because they
find comfort in it. Some, because your Religion is farther spread, and has
more professors of it, then the Religion of Protestants. Some, because your
Priests compass Sea and Land to gain Proselytes to it. Lastly, an infinite
number, by chance, and they know not why, but only because they are sure they
are in the right. This which I say is a most certain experimented truth, and if
you will deal ingenuously, you will not deny it. And without question he that
builds his faith upon our English Translation, goes upon a more prudent ground
then any of these can, with reason, be pretended to be. What then can you
allege but that, with you, rather then with us, Truth and Faith and Salvation
and all relies upon fallible and uncertain grounds.

73 Ninthly. Your Rhemish and Doway Translations are delivered to your
Proselytes, (such I mean that are dispen^'d with for the reading of them,) for
the direction of their Faith and lives. And the same may be said of your
Translations of the Bible into other national languages, in respect of those
that are licensed to read them. This I presume you will confess. And moreover,
that these Translations came not by inspiration, but were the productions of
humane Industry; and that not Angels, but men were the Authors of them. Men I
say, mere men, subject to the same Passions and to the same possibility of
erring with our Translatours. And then how does it not unavoidably follow, that
in them which depend upon these translations for their direction, Faith, and
Truth, and Salvation, and all relies upon fallible and uncertain grounds?

74 Tenthly and lastly (to lay the axe to the root of the tree,) the Helena
which you so fight for, your vulgar Translation, though some of you believe, or
pretend to believe, it to be in every part and particle of it, the pure and
uncorrupted word of God; yet others among you, and those as good and zealous
Catholics as you, are not so confident hereof.

75 First, for all those who have made Translations of the whole Bible or any
part of it different many times in sense from the Vulgar, as Lyranus, Cajetan,
Pagnine, Arias, Erasmus, Valla, Steuchus, and others, it is apparent and even
palpable, that they never dreamt of any absolute perfection and authentical
infallibility of the Vulgar Translation. For if they had, why did they in many
places reject it and differ from it?

76 Vega was present at the Council of Trent, when that decree was made, which
made the Vulgar Edition (then not extant any where in the world) authentical,
and not to be rejected upon any pretense whatsoever. At the forming this decree
Vega I say was present, understood the mind of the Council, as well as any
man, and professes that he was instructed in it by the President of it, the
Cardinal S. Cruce. And yet he has written that the Council in this decree,
meant to pronounce this Translation free (not simply from all error) but only
from such errors, out of which any opinion pernicious to faith and manners
might be collected. This, Andradius in his defense of that Council reports of
Vega, and assents to it himself. Driedo, in his book of the Translation of
Holy Scripture, has these words very pregnant and pertinent to the same
purpose; The Sea Apostolic, has approved or accepted Hieroms Edition, not as
so wholly consonant to the Original, and so entire and pure and restored in
all things, that it may not be lawful for any man, either by comparing it with
the Fountain to examine it, or in some places to doubt, whether or no Hierome
did understand the true sense of the Scripture; but only as an Edition to be
preferred before all others then extant, and no where deviating from the truth
in the rules of faith and good life. Mariana, even where he is a most earnest
Advocate for the Vulgar Edition, yet acknowledges the imperfection of it in
these words, The faults of the Vulgar Edition are not approved by the Decree of
the Council of Trent, Pro Edit. vulg. c. 21. p. 99.
a multitude whereof we did collect from the variety of Copies. And again, We
maintain that the Hebrew and Greek, were by no means rejected by the Trent
Fathers: And that the Latin edition is indeed approved, yet not so, as if they
did deny that some places might be translated more plainly, some more properly;
whereof it were easy to produce innumerable examples. And this he there
professes to have learnt of Laines the then General of the Society: who was a
great part of that Council, present at all the Actions of it, and of very
great authority in it.

77 To this so great authority he adds a reason of his opinion, which with all
indifferent men will be of a far greater authority. If the Council (says
he) had purposed to approve an Edition in all respects, and to make it of
equal authority and credit with the Fountains, certainly they ought with
exact care first to have corrected the errors of the Interpreter: which
certainly they did not.

78 Lastly Bellarmine himself, though he will not acknowledge any imperfection
in the Vulgar Edition, Bell. deverb^ Deil. 2. c. 11. p. 120.
yet he acknowledges that the case may, and does oft-times so fall out, that it
is impossible to discern which is the true reading of the Vulgar Edition, but
only by recourse unto the Originalls, and dependence upon them.

79 From all which it may evidently be collected, that though some of you
flatter your selves with a vain imagination of the certain absolute purity and
perfection of your Vulgar Edition; yet the matter is not so certain, and so
resolved, but that the best learned men amongst you are often at a stand, and
very doubtful sometimes whether your Vulgar translation be true, and sometimes
whether this or that be your Vulgar Translation, and sometimes undoubtedly
resolved that your Vulgar Translation is no true Translation, nor consonant to
the Original, as it was at first delivered. And what the^ can be alleged,
but that out of your own grounds it may be inferred and enforced upon you, that
not only in your Laymen, but your Clergy men and Scholars, Faith and Truth
and Salvation and all depends upon fallible and uncertain grounds? And thus by
ten several retortions of this one Argument, I have endeavored to show you,
how ill you have complied with your own advise, which was to take heed of
urging arguments that might be returned upon you. I should now by a direct
answer, show that it presses not us at all: but I have in passing done it
already, in the end of the second retortion of this argument, and thither I
refer the Reader.

80 Whereas therefore, you exhort them that will have assurance of true
Scriptures, to fly to your Church for it: I desire to know (if they should
follow your advise) how they should be assured that your Church can give them
any such assurance; which has been confessedly so negligent, as to suffer many
whole books of Scripture to be utterly lost. Again, in those that remain,
confessedly so negligent, as to suffer the Originalls of these that remain to
be corrupted. And lastly, so careless of preserving the integrity of the
Copies of her Translation, as to suffer infinite variety of Readings to come in
to them, without keeping any one perfect Copy, which might have been as the
Standard, and Polycletus his Canon to correct the rest by. So that which was
the true reading, and which the false, it was utterly undiscernable, but only
by comparing them with the Originalls, which also she pretends to be corrupted.

81 But Luther himself, by unfortunate experience, was at length enforced to
confess thus much, saying, If the world last longer, it will be again
necessary to receive the Decrees of Counsels, by reason of diverse
interpretations of Scripture which now reign.

82 And what if Luther, having a Pope in his belly, (as he was wont to say that
most men had,) and desiring perhaps to have his own interpretations pass
without examining, spoke such words in heat of Argument? Do you think it
reasonable that we should subscribe to Luther's divinations and angry speeches?
will you oblige your self to answer for all the assertions of your private
Doctors? If not; why do you trouble us with what Luther says, and what Calvin
says? Yet this I say not, as if these words of Luther made any thing at all
for your present purpose. For what if he feared, or pretended to fear, that,
the infallibility of Counsels being rejected, some men would fall into greater
errors, then were imposed upon them by the Counsels? Is this to confess that
there is any present visible Church, upon whose bare Authority we may
infallibly receive the true Scriptures and the true sense of them? Let the
Reader judge. But in my opinion, to fear a greater inconvenience may follow
from the avoiding of the less, is not to confess that the less is none at
all.

83 For D. Covels commending your Translation, what is it to the business in
hand? or how proves it the perfection of it, which is here contested, any more
then S. Augustine's commending the Italian Translation, argues the perfection
of that, or that there was no necessity that S. Hierome should correct it? D.
Covell commends your Translation, and so does the Bishop of Chichester, and so
does D. James, and so do I. But I commend it for a good Translation, not for a
perfect. Good may be good, and deserve commendations; and yet better may be
better. And though he says, that the then approved Translation of the Church
of England, is that which comes nearest the Vulgar, yet he does not say, that
it agrees exactly with it. So that whereas you infer, that the truth of your
Translation must be the Rule to judge of the goodness of ours: this is but a
vain flourish. For to say of our Translations, That is the best which comes
nearest the Vulgar, (and yet it is but one man that says so,) is not to say,
it is therefore the best because it does so. For this may be true by accident,
and yet the truth of our Translation no way depend upon the truth of yours. For
had that been their direction, they would not only have made a Translation that
should come near to yours, but such a one which should exactly agree with it,
and be a Translation of your Translation.

84 Ad 17.. In this Division you charge us with great uncertainty, concerning
the true meaning of Scripture. Which has been answered already, by saying,
That if you speak of plain places, (and in such all things necessary are
contained,) we are sufficiently certain of the meaning of them, neither need
they any Interpreter. If of obscure and difficult places, we confess we are
uncertain of the sense of many of them. But then we say there is no necessity
we should be certain. For if Gods will had been we should have understood him
more certainly, he would have spoken more plainly. And we say besides, that as
we are uncertain, so are You too; which he that doubts of, let him read your
Commentators upon the Bible, and observe their various and dissonant
interpretations, and he shall in this point need no further satisfaction.

85 But seeing there are contentions among us, we are taught by nature and
Scripture, and experience (so you tell us out of M. Hooker) to seek for the
ending of them, by submitting unto some Judicial sentence, whereunto neither
part may refuse to stand. This is very true. Neither should you need to
persuade us to seek such a means of ending all our Controversies, if we could
tell where to find it. But this we know, that none is fit to pronounce, for
all the world, a judicial definitive obliging sentence in Controversies of
Religion, but only such a Man, or such a society of Men, as is authorized
thereto by God. And besides we are able to demonstrate, that it has not been
the pleasure of God to give to any Man, or Society of Men any such authority.
And therefore though we wish heartily that all Controversies were ended, as we
do that all sin were abolisht, yet we have little hope of the one, or the
other, till the World be ended. And in the mean while, think it best to content
our selves with, and to persuade others unto an Unity of Charity and mutual
toleration; seeing God has authorized no man to force all men to Unity of
Opinion. Neither do we think it fit to argue thus, To us it seems convenient
there should be one Judge of all Controversies for the whole world, therefore
God has appointed one: But more modest and more reasonable to collect thus, God
has appointed no such judge of Controversies, therefore, though it seems to
us convenient there should be one, yet it is not so: Or though it were
convenient for us to have one, yet it has pleased God (for Reasons best known
to himself) not to allow us this convenience.

86 D. Fields words which follow, I confess, are somewhat more pressing: and
if he had been infallible, and the words had not slipped unadvisedly from him,
they were the best Argument in your Book. But yet it is evident out of his
Book, and so acknowledged by some of your own, That he never thought of any one
company of Christians invested with such authority from God, that all men were
bound to receive their Decrees without examination, though they seem contrary
to Scripture and Reason, which the Church of Rome requires. And therefore if he
have in his Preface strained too high in commendation of the subject he writes
of, (as Writers very often do in their Prefaces and Dedicatory Epistles) what
is that to us? Besides, by all the Societies of the World, it is not
impossible, nor very improbable, he might mean all that are, or have been in
the world, and so include even the Primitive Church: and her Communion we shall
embrace, her Direction we shall follow, her Judgment we shall rest in, if we
believe the Scripture, endeavor to find the true sense of it, and live
according to it.

87 Ad 18.. That the true Interpretation of the Scripture ought to be received
from the Church, you need not prove, for it is very easily granted by them, who
profess themselves very ready to receive all Truths, much more the true sense
of Scripture, not only from the Church, but from any society of men, nay from
any man whatsoever.

88 That the Churches Interpretation of Scripture is always true, that is it
which you would have said: and that in some sense may be also admitted. viz.
if your speak of that Church (which before you spoke of in the 14..) that is,
of the Church of all Ages since the Apostles. Upon the Tradition of which
Church, you there told us, We were to receive the Scripture, and to believe it
to be the Word of God. For there you teach us, that our Faith of Scripture
depends on a Principle which requires no other proof, And that, such is
Tradition, which from hand to hand, and age to age bringing us up to the Times
and Persons of the Apostles and our Savior himself, comes to be confirmed
by all those Miracles, and other Arguments whereby they convinced their
Doctrine to be true. Wherefore the Ancient Fathers avouch that we must receive
the sacred Scripture upon the Tradition of this Church. The Tradition then of
this Church you say must teach us what is Scripture: and we are willing to
believe it. And now if you make it good unto us, that the same Tradition down
from the Apostles, has delivered from age to age, and from hand to hand, any
interpretation of any Scripture, we are ready to embrace that also. But now, if
you will argue thus: The Church in one sense, tells us what is Scripture, and
we believe, therefore if the Church taken in another sense, tell us, this or
that is the meaning of the Scripture, we are to believe that also; this is too
transparent Sophistry, to take any but those that are willing to be taken.

89 If there be any Traditiue Interpretation of Scripture, produce it, and
prove it to be so; and we embrace it. But the Tradition of all ages is one
thing; and the authority of the present Church, much more of the Roman Church,
which is but a Part, and a corrupted Part of the Catholic Church, is another.
And therefore though we are ready to receive both Scripture and the sense of
Scripture upon the authority of Original Tradition, yet we receive neither the
one, nor the other, upon the Authority of your Church.

90 First for the Scripture, how can we receive them upon the Authority of
your Church: who hold now those Books to be Canonical, which formerly you
rejected from the Canon? I instance, in the Book of Macchabees, and the Epistle
to the Hebrews. The first of these you held not to be Canonical in S.
Gregory's time, or else he was no member of your Church, for it is apparent
See Greg. Mor. l. 19. c. 13.
He held otherwise. The second you rejected from the Canon in S. Hieroms time,
as it is evident out of Thus he testifies* Com in Esa. c. 6. in these words.
Vnde and Paulas Apost. in Epist. ad Heb. quam Latina consuetudo non recipit and
again in c. 8. in these, In Ep. qu^e ad Heb^aeos scribitur, licet eam Latina
Consu^ etudo inter Canoincas Scripturas no recipiat.) etc.
many places of his Works.

91 If you say (which is all you can say) that Hierom spoke this of the
particular Roman Church, not of the Roman Catholic Church; I answer, there
was none such in his time, None that was called so. Secondly, what he spoke of
the Roman Church, must be true of all other Churches, if your Doctrine of the
necessity of the Conformity of all other Churches to that Church were then
Catholic Doctrine. Now then choose whether you will, either that the
particular Roman Church, was not then believed to be the Mistress of all other
Churches (notwithstanding, Ad hanc Ecclesiam necesse est omnem convenire
Ecclesiam, hoc est, omnes qui sunt undique fideles; which Card. Perron, and his
Translatresse so often translates false:) Or if you say she was, you will
run into a greater inconvenience, and be forced to say, that all the Churches
of that time, rejected from the Canon the Epistle to the Hebrews, together with
the Roman Church. And consequently that the Catholic Church may err in
rejecting from the Canon Scriptures truly Canonical.

92 Secondly, How can we receive the Scripture upon the authority of the Roman
Church, which has delivered at several times Scriptures in many places,
different and repugnant, for Authentical and Canonical? Which is most evident
out of the place of Malachie, which is so quoted for the Sacrifice of the
Mass, that either all the ancient Fathers had false Bibles, or yours is false.
Most evident likewise from the comparing of the story of Jacob in Genesis, with
that which is cited out of it, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, according to the
vulgar Edition. But above all, to any one, who shall compare the Bibles of
Sixtus and Clement, so evident, that the wit of man cannot disguise it.

93 And thus you see what reason we have to believe your Antecedent, That your
Church it is which must declare, what Books be true Scripture. Now for the
consequence, that certainty is as liable to exception as the Antecedent. For if
it were true, that God had promised to assist you, for the delivering of true
Scripture, would this oblige Him, or would it follow from hence that He had
obliged himself, to teach you, not only sufficiently, but effectually and
irresistibly the true sense of Scripture? God is not defective in things
necessary: neither will he leave himself without witness, nor the World
without means of knowing his will and doing it. And therefore it was necessary
that by his Providence he should preserve the Scripture from any undiscernable
corruption, in those things which he would have known: otherwise it is
apparent, it had not been his will, that these things should be known, the only
means of continuing the knowledge of them being perished. But now neither is
God lavish in superfluities, and therefore having given us means sufficient
for our direction, and power sufficient to make use of these means, he will
not constrain or necessitate us to make use of these means. For that were to
cross the end of our Creation, which was to be glorified by our free
obedience: whereas necessity and freedom cannot stand together. That were to
reverse the Law which he has prescribed to himself in his dealing with men,
and that is, to set life and death before him, and to leave him in the hands of
his own Counsel. God gave the Wisemen a Star to lead them to Christ, but he
did not necessitate them to follow the guidance of this star: that was left
to their liberty. God gave the Children of Israel a Fire to lead them by night,
and a Pillar of Cloud by day, but he constrained no man to follow them: that
was left to their liberty. So he gives the Church, the Scripture: which in
those things which are to be believed or done, are plain and easy to be
followed, like the Wise men's Star. Now that which he desires of us on our
part, is the Obedience of Faith, and love of the Truth, and desire to find the
true sense of it, and industry in searching it, and humility in following, and
Constancy in professing it: all which if he should work in us by an absolute
irresistible necessity, he could no more require of us, as our duty, then he
can of the Sun to shine, of the Sea to ebb and flow, and of all other
Creatures to do those things which by mere necessity they must do, and
cannot choose. Besides, what an impudence is it to pretend that your Church is
infallibly directed concerning the true meaning of the Scripture, whereas there
are thousands of places of Scripture, which you do not pretend certainly to
understand, and about the Interpretation whereof, your own Doctors differ among
themselves? If your Church be infallibly directed concerning the true meaning
of Scripture, why do not your Doctors follow her infallible direction? And if
they do, how comes such difference among them in their Interpretations?

94 Again, why does your Church thus put her candle under a Bushel, and keep
her Talent of interpreting Scripture infallibly, thus long wrapped up in napkins?
Why sets she not forth Infallible Commentaries or Expositions upon all the
Bible? Is it because this would not be profitable for Christians, that
Scripture should be Interpreted? It is blasphemous to say so. The Scripture it
self tells us, All Scripture is profitable. And the Scripture is not so much
the Words as the Sense. And if it be not profitable, why does she employ
particular Doctors to interpret Scriptures fallibly? unless we must think that
fallible Interpretations of Scripture are profitable, and infallible
interpretations would not be so?

95 If you say the Holy Ghost, which assists the Church in interpreting, will
move the Church to interpret when he shall think fit, and that the Church will
do it when the Holy Ghost shall move her to do it: I demand whether the Holy
Ghost's moving of the Church to such works as these be resistible by the
Church, or irresistible. If resistible, then the Holy Ghost may move, and the
Church may not be moved. As certainly the Holy Ghost does always move to an
action, when he shows us plainly that it would be for the good of men, and
honor of God. As he that has any sense will acknowledge that an infallible
exposition of Scripture could not but be, and there is no conceivable reason,
why such a work should be put off a day, but only because you are conscious to
your selves, you cannot do it, and therefore make excuses. But if the moving
of the Holy Ghost be irresistible, and you are not yet so moved to go about
this work; then I confess you are excused. But then I would know, whether
those Popes which so long deferred the calling of a Council for the
Reformation of your Church, at length pretended to be effected by the Council
of Trent, whether they may excuse themselves, for that they were not moved by
the Holy Ghost to do it? I would know likewise, as this motion is irresistible
when it comes, so whether it be so simply necessary to the moving of your
Church to any such public Action, that it cannot possibly move without it?
That is, whether the Pope now could not, if he would, seat himself in
Cathedra, and fall to writing expositions upon the Bible for the directions of
Christians to the true sense of it? If you say he cannot, you will make your
self ridiculous. If he can, then I would know, whether he should be infallibly
directed in these expositions, or no? If he should, then what need he to stay
for irresistible motion? Why does he not go about this noble work presently?
If he should not, How shall we know that the calling of the Council of Trent
was not upon his own voluntary motion, or upon humane importunity and
suggestion, and not upon the motion of the Holy Ghost? And consequently how
shall we know whether he were assistant to it or no, seeing he assists none but
what he himself moves to? And whether he did move the Pope to call this
Council, is a secret thing, which we cannot possibly know, nor perhaps the
Pope himself.

96 If you say, your meaning is only, That the Church shall be infallibly
guarded from giving any false sense of any Scripture, and not infallibly
assisted positively to give the true sense of all Scripture: I put to you your
own Question, why should we believe the Holy Ghost will stay there? Or, why may
we not as well think he will stay at the first thing, that is, in teaching the
Church what Books be true Scripture? For if the Holy Ghosts assistance be
promised to all things profitable, then will he be with them infallibly, not
only to guard them from all errors, but to guide them to all profitable truths,
such as the true senses of all Scripture would be. Neither could he stay there,
but defend them irresistibly from all Vices; Nor there neither, but infuse into
them irresistibly all Virtues: for all these things would be much for the
benefit of Christians. If you say, he cannot do this without taking away their
free will in living; I say neither can he necessitate men to believe aright,
without taking away their freewill in believing and in professing their belief.

97 To the place of S. Austine, I answer, That not the authority of the
present Church, much less of a Part of it (as the Roman Church is) was that
which alone moved Saint Austine to believe the Gospel, but the perpetual
Tradition of the Church of all Ages. Which you your self have taught us to be
the only Principle by which the Scripture is proved, and which it self needs
no proof; and to which you have referred this very saying of S. Austine, Ego
vero Evangelio non crederem nisi etc. p. 55. And in the next place which you
cite out of his book De Vtil. Cred. c. 14. he shows, that his motives to
believe, were, Fame, Celebrity, Consent, Antiquity. And seeing this Tradition,
this Consent, this Antiquity did as fully and powerfully move him not to
believe Manichaeus, as to believe the Gospel, (the Christian Tradition being
as full against Manichaeus as it was for the Gospel) therefore he did well to
conclude upon these grounds, that he had as much reason to disbelieve
Manichaeus, as to believe the Gospel. Now if you can truly say, that the same
Fame, Celebrity, Consent, Antiquity, that the same Universal and Original
Tradition, lies against Luther and Calvin, as did against Manichaeus, you may
do well to apply the Argument against them; otherwise it will be to little
purpose to substitute their names in stead of Manichaeus, unless you can show
the thing agrees to them as well as him.

98 If you say, that S. Austin speaks here of the authority of the Present
Church, abstracting from consent with the Ancient, and therefore you, seeing
you have the present Church on your side against Luther and Calvin, as S.
Austin against Manichaeus, may urge the same words against them which S. Austin
did against him;

99 I answer, First that it is a vain presumption of yours that the Catholic
Church is of your side. Secondly, that if S. Austine speak here of that
present Church, which moved him to believe the Gospel, without consideration of
the Antiquity of it, and its both Personal and Doctrinall succession from the
Apostles; His argument will be like a Buskin that will serve anylegge. It will
serve to keep an Arrian, or a Grecian from being a Roman Catholic, as well
as a Catholic from being an Arrian, or a Grecian? In as much as the Arrians
and Grecians, did pretend to the title of Catholics, and the Church, as much
as the Papists now do. If then you should have come to an ancient Goth or
Vandall, whom the Arrians converted to Christianity, and should have moved him
to your Religion; might he not say the very same words to you as S. Austin to
the Manichaeans? I would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the
Church did move me. Them therefore whom I obeyed, saying believe the Gospel,
why should I not obey saying to me, do not believe the Homoousians? Choose
what thou please: if thou shall say believe the Arrians; they warn me not to
give any credit to you. If therefore I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If
thou say do not believe the Arria^s, thou shall not do well to force me to
the faith of the Homoousians, because by the preaching of the Arrians I
believed the Gospel it self. If you say, you did well to believe them,
commending the Gospel, but you did not well to believe them discommending the
Homoousians: Do thou think me so very foolish, that without any reason at
all, I should believe what thou will, and not believe what thou will not? It
were easy to put these words into the mouth of a Grecian, Abyssine, Georgian,
or any other of any Religion. And I pray bethink your selves, what you would
say to such a one in such a case, and imagine that we say the very same to you.

100 Whereas you ask, Whether Protestants do not perfectly resemble those men
to whom S. Austine spoke, when they will have men to believe the Roman Church
delivering Scripture, but not to believe her condemning Luther? I demand
again, whether you be well in your wits to say, that Protestants would have
men believe the Roman Church delivering Scripture, whereas they accuse her to
deliver many books for Scripture which are not so? and do not bid men to
receive any book which she delivers, for that reason, because she delivers it?
And if you meant only, Protestants will have men to believe some books to be
Scripture which the Roman Church delivers for such, may not we then ask, as
you do, Do not Papists perfectly resemble these men, which will have men
believe the Church of England delivering Scripture, but not to believe her
condemning the Church of Rome?

101 And whereas you say S. Austine may seem to have spoken Prophetically
against Protestants, when he said, Why should I not most diligently enquire,
what Christ commanded, of them before all others, by whose Authority I was
moved to believe, that Christ Commanded any good thing? I answer. Until you
can show that Protestants believe that Christ commanded any good thing, that
is, That they believe the truth of Christian Religion upon the Authority of the
Church of Rome, this place must be wholly impertinent to your purpose; which is
to make Protestants believe your Church to be the infallible expounder of
Scriptures and judge of Controversies: nay rather is it not directly against
your purpose? For why may not a member of the Church of England, who received
his baptism, education and Faith from the Ministry of this Church, say just
so to you as S. Austine here to the Manichees? Why should I not most diligently
inquire, what Christ commanded, of them (the Church of England) before all
others, by whose Authority I was moved to believe, that Christ commanded any
good thing, Can you, F. or K. or whosoever you are, better declare to me what
he said, whom I would not have thought to have been or to be, if the belief
thereof had been recommended by you to me? This therefore (that Christ Jesus
did those miracles, and taught that Doctrine which is contained evidently in
the undoubted Books of the New Testament) I believed by Fame, strengthened with
Celebrity and Consent, (even of those which in other things are at infinite
variance one with another,) and lastly by Antiquity (which gives an universal
and a constant attestation to them). But every one may see that you, so few (in
comparison of all those upon whose consent we ground our belief of Scripture,)
so turbulent, (that you damn all to the fire, and to Hell, that any way differ
from you; that you profess it is lawful for you, to use violence and power
whenever you can have it, for the planting of your own doctrine, and the
extirpation of the contrary;) lastly so new in many of your Doctrines, (as in
the lawfulness, and expedience of debarring the Laity the Sacramental Cup;
the lawfulness and expedience of your Latin Service, Transubstantiation,
Indulgences, Purgatory, the Popes infallibility, his Authority over Kings etc.)
so new I say, in comparison of the undoubted books of Scripture, which
evidently contains, or rather is our Religion, and the sole, and adequate
object of our faith: I say every one may see that you, so few, so turbulent, so
new, can produce nothing deserving Authority (with wise and considerate men).
What madness is this? Believe them the consent of Christians which are now,
and have been ever since Christ in the World, that we ought to believe Christ;
but learn of us what Christ said, which contradict and damn all other parts of
Christendom. Why I beseech you? Surely if they were not at all, and could not
teach me any thing, I would more easily persuade my self, that I were not to
believe in Christ, then that I should learn any thing concerning him, from any
other, then them by whom I believed him: at least, then that I should learn
what his Religion was from you, who have wronged so exceedingly his Miracles
and his Doctrine, by forging so evidently so many false Miracles for the
Confirmation of your new Doctrine; which might give us just occasion, had we no
other assurance of them but your Authority, to suspect the true ones. Who with
forging so many false Stories, and false Authors, have taken a fair way to
make the faith of all Stories questionable; if we had no other ground for our
belief of them but your Authority: who have brought in Doctrines plainly and
directly contrary to that which you confess to be the word of Christ, and
which, for the most, part make either for the honor or profit of the Teachers
of them: which (if there were no difference between the Christian and the Roman
Church) would be very apt to make suspicious men believe that Christian
Religion was a humane invention, taught by some cunning Impostors, only to make
themselves rich and powerful; who make a profession of corrupting all sorts of
Authors: a ready course to make it justly questionable whether any remain
uncorrupted. For if you take this Authority upon you, upon the six Ages last
past; how shall we know, that the Church of that time, did not usurp the same
authority upon the Authors of the six last Ages before them, and so upwards
until we come to Christ himself? Whose questioned Doctrines, none of them
came from the fountain of Apostolic tradition, but have insinuated themselves
into the Streams, by little and little, some in one age, and some in another,
some more Anciently, some more lately, and some yet are Embrio's, yet hatching,
and in the shell; as the Popes infallibility, the Blessed Virgins immaculate
conception, the Popes power over the Temporalties of Kings, the Doctrine of
Predetermination, etc. all which yet are, or in time may be imposed upon
Christians under the Title of Original and Apostolic Tradition, and that with
that necessity, that they are told, they were as good believe nothing at all,
as not believe these things to have come from the Apostles, which they know to
have been brought in but yesterday: which whether it be not a ready and likely
way to make men conclude thus with themselves -- I am told, that I were as good
believe nothing at all, as believe some points which the Church teaches me, and
not others: and somethings which she teaches to be Ancient and Certain, I
plainly see to be New and False, therefore I will believe nothing at all.
Whether I say the foresaid grounds be not a ready and likely way to make men
conclude thus, and whether this conclusion be not too often made in Italy, and
Spain, and France, and in England too, I leave it to the judgment of those
that have wisdom and experience. Seeing therefore the Roman Church is so far
from being a sufficient Foundation for our belief in Christ, that it is in
sundry regards a dangerous temptation against it; why should I not much rather
conclude, Seeing we receive not the knowledge of Christ and Scriptures from the
Church of Rome, neither from her must we take his Doctrine, or the
Interpretation of Scripture?

102 Ad.. 19. In this number, this Argument is contained. The Judge of
Controversies ought to be intelligible to learned and unlearned; The Scripture
is not so, and the Church is so; Therefore the Church is the Judge, and not the
Scripture.

103 To this I answer: As to be understandible is a condition requisite to a
Judge, so is not that alone sufficient to make a Judge; otherwise you might
make your self Judge of Controversies, by arguing; The Scripture is not
intelligible by all, but I am, therefore I am Judge of Controversies. If you
say your intent was to conclude against the Scripture, and not for the Church:
I demand why then, but to delude the simple with sophistry, did you say in the
close of this. Such is the Church, and the Scripture is not such? but that you
would leave it to them to infer in the end, (which indeed was more then you
undertook in the beginning) Therefore the Church is Judge and the Scripture
not. I say Secondly; that you still run upon a false supposition: that God
has appointed some Judge of all Controversies that may happen among
Christians, about the sense of obscure Texts of Scripture: whereas he has left
every one to his liberty herein, in those words of S. Paul, Quisque abundet in
sensu suo etc. I say thirdly. Whereas some Protestants make the Scripture Judge
of Controversies, that they have the authority of Fathers of warrant their
manner of speaking: as of Contra Parm^a. l. 5. in Prin.
Optatus.

104 But speaking truly and properly the Scripture is not a Judge nor cannot
be, but only, a sufficient Rule, for those to judge by, that believe it to be
the word of God (as the Church of England and the Church of Rome both do,)
what they are to believe, and what they are not to believe. I say sufficiently
perfect, and sufficiently intelligible in things necessary, to all that have
understanding, whether they be learned or unlearned. And my reason hereof is
convincing and Demonstrative; because nothing is necessary to be believed, but
what is plainly revealed. For to say, that when a place of Scripture, by reason
of ambiguous terms, lies indifferent between diverse senses, whereof one is
true, and the other is false, that God obliges men under pain of damnation, not
to mistake through error and humane frailty, is to make God a Tyrant, and to
say that he requires us certainly to attain that end, for the attaining whereof
we have no certain means; which is to say, that, like Pharaoh, he gives no
straw, and requires brick; that he reapes where he sowes not; that he gathers
where he strewes not, that he will not be pleased with our utmost endeavors to
please him, without full and exact and never failing performance; that his will
is we should do what he knows we cannot do; that he will not accept of us
according to that which we have, but requires of us what we have not. Which
whether it can consist with his goodness, with his wisdom, and with his word, I
leave it to honest men to judge. If I should send a servant to Paris, or Rome,
or lerusalem, and he using his utmost diligence not to mistake his way, yet
notwithstanding, meeting often with such places where the road is divided into
several ways, whereof every one is as likely to be true, and as likely to be
false as any other, should at length mistake and go out of the way; would not
any man say that I were an impotent, foolish and unjust master, if I should be
offended with him for doing so? And shall we not tremble to impute that to God,
which we would take in foul scorn, if it were imputed to our selves?
Certainly, I for my part fear I should not love God if I should think so
strangely of him.

105 Again. When you say, that unlearned, and ignor ant men cannot understand
Scripture, I would desire you to come out of the clouds, and tell us what you
mean: Whether, that they cannot understand all Scripture, or that they cannot
understand any Scripture, or that they cannot understand so much as is
sufficient for their direction to Heaven. If the first; I believe the Learned
are in the same case. If the Second; every man's experience will confute you:
for who is there that is not capable of a sufficient understanding of the
Story, the Precepts, the Promises, and the Threats of the Gospel? If the
third; that they may understand something, but not enough for their Salvations;
I ask you, first. Why then does S. Paul say to Timothy, The Scriptures are
able to make him wise unto Salvation? Why does Saint Austine say, Eaquae
manifest^ posita sunt in sacris Scripturis, omnia continent quae pertinent and
Fidem Moresque vivendi? Why does every one of the four Evangelists entitle
their book The Gospel, if any necessary and essential part of the Gospel
were left out of it? Can we imagine, that either they omitted something
necessary, out of ignorance not knowing it to be necessary? Or knowing it to be
so, maliciously concealed it? Or out of negligence' did the work they had
undertaken by halfes? If none of these things can without Blasphemy be imputed
to them, considering they were assisted by the Holy Ghost in this work, then
certainly it most evidently follows, that every one of them writ the whole
Gospel of Christ; I mean all the essential and necessary parts of it. So that
if we had no other book of Scripture, but one of them alone, we should not want
any thing necessary to Salvation. And what one of them has more then another,
it is only profitable, and not necessary. Necessary indeed to be believed,
because revealed; but not therefore revealed, because necessary to be believed.

106 Neither did they write only for the learned, but for all men. This being
one especial means of the preaching of the Gospel, which was commanded to be
preached, not only to learned men but to all men. And therefore, unless we
will imagine the Holy Ghost and them to have been wilfully wanting to their own
desire and purpose, we must conceive, that they intended to speak plain, even
to the capacity of the simplest; at least touching all things necessary to be
published by them, and believed by us.

107 And whereas you pretend it is so easy, and obvious both for the learned
and the ignorant, both to know which is the Church, and what are the Decrees of
the Church, and what is the sense of those Decrees: I say, this is a vain
pretense.

108 For first; How shall an unlearned man whom you have supposed now ignorant
of Scripture, how shall he know which of all the Societies of Christians is
indeed the Church? You will say perhaps, he must examine them by the notes of
the Church, which are perpetual Visibilitie, Succession, Conformity with the
ancient Church. etc. But how shall he know, first, that these are the notes of
the Church, unless by Scripture, which you say he understands not? You may say
perhaps, he may be told so. But seeing men may deceive, and be deceived, and
their words are no demonstrations, how shall he be assured that what they say
is true? So that at the first he meets with an impregnable difficulty, and
cannot know the Church but by such notes, which whether they be the notes of
the Church he cannot possibly know. But let us suppose this Isthmus dug
through, and that he is assured these are the notes of the true Church: How can
he possible be a competent Judge, which society of Christians has title to
these notes, and which has not? Seeing this trial of necessity requires a
great sufficiency of knowledge of the monuments of Christian Antiquity, which
no unlearned can have, because he that has it cannot be unlearned. As for
example, how shall he possibly be able to know whether the Church of Rome has
had a perpetual Succession of Visible Professors, which held always the same
Doctrine which they now hold, without holding any thing to the contrary;
unless he has first examined, what was the Doctrine of the Church in the
first age, what in the second, and so forth? And whether this be not a more
difficult work, then to stay at the first Age, and to examine the Church by the
conformity of her Doctrine, with the Doctrine of the first age, every man of
ordinary understanding may judge.

108 Let us imagine him advanced a step farther, and to know which is the
Church: how shall he know what that Church has decreed, seeing the Church has
not been so careful in keeping of her decrees, but that many are lost, and
many corrupted? Besides, when even the Learned among you are not agreed
concerning diverse things, whether they be De Fide or not; how shall the
unlearned do? Then for the sense of the Decrees, how can he be more capable of
the understanding of them, then of plain Texts of Scripture, which you will not
suffer him to understand? Especially, seeing the Decrees of diverse Popes and
Counsels are conceived so obscurely, that the Learned cannot agree about the
sense of them. And then they are written all in such languages which the
ignorant understand not, and therefore must of necessity rely herein upon the
uncertain and fallible authority of some particular men, who inform them that
there is such a Decree. And if the Decrees were translated into Vulgar
languages, why the Translators should not be as fallible as you say the
Translators of Scripture are, who can possibly imagine?

109 Lastly, how shall an unlearned man, or indeed any man, be assured of the
certainty of that Decree, the certainty whereof depends upon suppositions which
are impossible to be known whether they be true or no? For it is not the Decree
of a Council, unless it be confirmed by a true Pope. Now the Pope cannot be a
true Pope if he came in by Simony: which whether he did or no, who can answer
me? He cannot be true Pope unless he were baptized, and baptized he was not,
unless the Minister had due Intention. So likewise he cannot be a true Pope,
unless he were rightly ordained Priest, and that again depends upon the
Ordainers secret Intention, and also upon his having the Episcopal Character.
All which things, as I have formerly proved, depend upon so many uncertain
suppositions, that no humane judgment can possibly be resolved in them. I
conclude therefore, that not the learned man amongst you all, no not the Pope
himself, can, according to the grounds you go upon, have any certainty, that
any Decree of any Council is good and valid, and consequently, not any
assurance that it is indeed the Decree of a Council.

110 Ad. 20. If by a private spirit, you mean, a particular persuasion that a
Doctrine is true, which some men pretend, but cannot prove to come from the
spirit of God: I say to refer Controversies to Scripture, is not to refer
them to this kind of private Spirit. For is there not a manifest difference
between saying, the spirit of God tells me that this is the meaning of such a
Text (which no man can possibly know to be true, it being a secret thing) and
between saying, these and these Reasons I have to show, that this or that is
true doctrine, or that this or that is the meaning of such a Scripture? Reason
being a Public and certain thing and exposed to all men's trial and
examination. But now if by private spirit you understand every man's particular
Reason, then your first and second inconvenience will presently be reduced to
one, and shortly to none at all.

111 Ad. 20. And does not also giving the office of Judicature to the Church,
come to confer it upon every particular man? For before any man believes the
Church infallible, must he not have reason to induce him to believe it to be
so? and must he not judge of those reasons, whether they be indeed good and
firm, or captious and sophistical? Or would you have all men believe all your
Doctrine upon the Churches infalli^^^^^y, and the Churches infallibility they
know not why?

112 Secondly, supposing they are to be guided by the Church, they must use
their own particular reason to find out which is the Church. And to that
purpose you your selves give a great many notes, which you pretend first to be
Certain notes of the Church, and then to be peculiar to your Church, and
agreeable to none else; but you do not so much as pretend, that either of
those pretenses is evident of it self, and therefore you go about to prove
them both by reasons; and those reasons I hope every particular man is to judge
of, whether they do indeed conclude and convince that which they are alleged
for: that is, that these marks are indeed certain notes of the Church, and
then that your Church has them, and no other.

113 One of these notes, indeed the only note of a true and uncorrupted Church,
is conformity with Antiquity; I mean the most ancient Church of all, that is
the Primitive and Apostolic. Now how is it possible any man should examine
your Church by this note, but he must by his own particular judgment, find out
what was the doctrine of the Primitive Church, and what is the Doctrine of the
present Church, and be able to answer all these Arguments which are brought to
prove repugnance between them? otherwise he shall but pretend to make use of
this note for the finding the true Church, but indeed make no use of it, but
receive the Church at a venture, as the most of you do; not one in a hundred
being able to give any tolerable reason for it. So that in stead of reducing
men to particular reason, you reduce them to none at all, but to chance and
passion, and prejudice and such other ways, which if they lead one to the
truth, they lead hundreds, nay thousands to falsehood. But it is a pretty thing
to consider, how these men can blow hot and cold out of the same mouth to serve
several purposes. Is there hope of gaining a Proselite? Then they will tell
you, God has given every man Reason to follow; and if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. That it is no good reason for a man's
religion, that he was borne and brought up in it: For then a Turk should have
as much reason to be a Turk; as a Christian to be a Christian. That every man
has a judgment of Discretion; which if they will make use of they shall
easily find: that the true Church has always such and such marks, and that
their Church has them, and no other but theirs. But then if any of theirs be
persuaded to a sincere and sufficient trial of their Church* even by their own
notes of it, and to try whether they be indeed so conformable to Antiquity as
they pretend, then their note is changed: you must not use your own reason nor
your judgment, but refer all to the Church, and believe her to be
conformable to Antiquity, though they have no reason for it, nay though they
have evident reason to the contrary. For my part, I am certain that God has
given us our Reason to discern between Truth and Falsehood, and he that makes
not this use of it, but believes things he knows not why, I say it is by
chance that he believes the Truth, and not by choice: and that I cannot but
fear, that God will not accept of this Sacrifice of fools.

114 But you that would not have men follow their reason, what would you have
them to follow? their Passion? Or pluck out their eyes and go blindfold? No,
you say you would have them follow Authority. On gods name let them; we also
would have them follow Authority; for it is upon the Authority of Universal
Tradition, that we would have them believe Scripture. But then as for the
Authority which you would have them follow, you will let them see reason why
they should follow it. And is not this to go a little about? to leave reason
for a short turn, and then to come to it again, and to do that which you
condemn in others? It being indeed a plain impossibility for any man to submit
his reason but to reason: for he that does it to Authority, must of necessity
think himself to have greater reason to believe that Authority. Therefore the
confession cited by Brerely, you need not think to have been extorted from
Luther and the rest. It came very freely from them, and what they say you
practice as much as they.

115 And whereas you say that a Protestant admits of Fathers, Counsels,
Church, as far as they agree with Scripture, which upon the matter is
himself: I say you admit neither of them, nor the Scripture it self, but only
so far as it agrees with your Church: and your Church you admit because you
think you have reason to do so: so that by you as well as by Protestants all
is finally resolved into your own reason.

116 Nor do Heretics only but Romish Catholics also set up as many judges,
as there are men and women in the Christian world. For do not your men and
women judge your Religion to be true, before they believe it, as well as the
men and women of other Religions? Oh but you say, They receive it not because
they think it agreeable to Scripture, but because the Church tells them so. But
then I hope they believe the Church because their own reason tells them they
are to do so. So that the difference between a Papist and a Protestant is
this, not that the one judges and the other does not judge, but that the one
judges his guide to be infallible, the other his way to be manifest. This same
pernicious Doctrine is taught by Brentius, Zanchius, Cartwright, and others. It
is so in very deed: But it is taught also by some others, whom you little think
of. It is taught by S. Paul, where he says, Try all things, hold fast that
which is good. It is taught by S. John, in these words, Believe not every
Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God or no. It is taught by S.
Peter, in these, Be ye ready to render a reason of the hope that is in you.
Lastly, this very pernicious Doctrine is taught by our Savior, in these words,
If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. And why of your
selves judge you not what is right? All which speeches, if they do not advise
men to make use of their Reason for the choice of their Religion, I must
confess my self to understand nothing. Lastly, not to be infinite, it is
taught by M. Knot himself, not in one page only, or chapter of his Book, but
all his Book over, the very writing and publishing whereof, supposes this for
certain, that the readers are to be Judges, whether his Reasons which he
brings, be strong and convincing; of which sort we have hitherto met with
none: or else captious, or impertinences, as indifferent men shall (as I
suppose) have cause to judge them.

117 But you demand, What good Statesmen would they be, who should ideate, or
fancy such a Commonwealth, as these men have framed to themselves a Church?
Truly if this be all the fault they have, that they say, Every man is to use
his own judgment in the choice of his Religion, and not to believe this or
that sense of Scripture, upon the bare Authority of any Learned man or men,
when he conceiues he has reasons to the contrary, which are of more weight then
their Authority: I know no reason but, notwithstanding all this, they might be
as good Statesmen as any of the Society. But what has this to do with
Commonwealths, where men are bound only to external obedience, unto the Laws
and judgments of Courts, but not to an internal approbation of them, no nor
to conceal their Judgment of them, if they disapprove them? As if I conceived
I had reason to mislike the law of punishing simple theft with death, as St
Thomas Moore did, I might profess lawfully my judgment, and represent my
Reasons to the King or Commonwealth in a Parliament, as S^ Thomas Moore did,
without committing any fault, or fearing any punishment.

118 To the place of S. Austin, wherewith this Paragraph is concluded, I shall
need give no other Reply, but only to desire you to speak like an honest man,
and to say, whether it be all one for a man, to allow and disallow in every
Scripture what he pleases, which is, either to dash out of Scripture such Texts
or such Chapters, because they cross his opinion^ or to say (which is worse,)
Though they be Scripture they are not true? Whether I say for a man thus to
allow and disallow in Scripture what he pleases, be all one, and no greater
fault, then to allow that sense of Scripture which he conceiues to be true and
genuine, and deduced out of the words, and to disallow the contrary? For Gods
sake, Sr, tell me plainly; In those Texts of Scripture, which you allege for
the infallibility of your Church, do not you allow what sens^ you think true,
and disallow the contrary? And do you not this by the direction of your
private reason? If you do, why do you condemn it in others? If you do not,
I pray you tell me what direction you follow? or whether you follow none at
all? If none at all, this is like drawing Lots, or throwing the Dice for the
choice of a Religion. If any other: I beseech you tell me what it is. Perhaps
you will say, the Churches Authority; and that will be to dance finely in a
round, thus, To believe the Churches Infallible Authority, because the
Scriptures avouch it; and to believe that Scriptures say and mean so, because
they are so expounded by the Church. Is not this for a Father to beget his
Son, and the Son to beget his Father? For a foundation to support the
house, and the house to support the foundation? Would not Campian have cried
out at it, Ecce quos gyros, quos Maeandros? And to what end was this going
about, when you might as well at first have concluded the Church infallible
because she says so; as thus to put in Scripture for a mere stale, and to
say, the Church is infallible because the Scripture says so, and the Scripture
means so because the Church says so, which is infallible? Is it not most
evident therefore to every intelligent man, that you are enforced of necessity
to do that your self, which so tragically you declaime against in others? The
Church, you say, is infallible; I am very doubtful of it: How shall I know it?
The Scripture you say affirms it, as in the 59. of Esaias, My spirit that is in
thee, etc. Well I confess I find there these words: but I am still doubtful,
whether they be spoken of the Church of Christ: and if they be, whether they
mean as you pretend. You say, the Church says so, which is infallible. Yea but
that is the Question, and therefore not to be begged but proved. Neither is it
so evident as to need no proof: otherwise why brought you this Text to prove
it? Nor is it of such a strange quality, above all other Propositions, as to
be able to prove it self. What then remains but that you say, Reasons drawn
out of the Circumstances of the Text, will evince that this is the sense of it.
Perhaps they will. But Reasons cannot convince me, unless I judge of them by
my Reason; and for every man or woman to rely on that, in the choice of their
Religion, and in the interpreting of Scripture, you say is a horrible
absurdity; and therefore must neither make use of your own in this matter, nor
desire me to make use of it.

119 But Universal Tradition (you say, and so do I too,) is of it self
credible: and that has in all ages taught the Churches infallibility with full
consent. If it have, I am ready to believe it. But that it has I hope you would
not have me take upon your word: for that were to build my self upon the
Church, and the Church upon You. Let then the Tradition appear; for a secret
Tradition is somewhat like a silent Thunder. You will perhaps produce, for the
confirmation of it, some sayings of some Fathers, who in every Age taught this
Doctrine; (as Gualterius in his Chronology undertakes to do, but with so ill
success, that I heard an able Man of your Religion profess, that in the first
three Centuries, there was not one Authority pertinent:) but how will you
warrant that none of them teach the contrary? Again, how shall I be assured
that the places have indeed this sense in them? Seeing there is not one Father
for 500. years after Christ, that does say in plain terms, The Church of Rome
is infallible. What, shall we believe your Church that this is their meaning?
But this will be again to go into the Circle, which made us giddy before; To
prove the Church Infallible because Tradition says so, Tradition to say so,
because the Fathers say so, The Fathers to say so, because the Church says so,
which is infallible. Yea, but reason will show this to be the meaning of them.
Yes, if we may use our Reason, and rely upon it. Otherwise, as light shows
nothing to the blind, or to him that uses not his eyes; so reason cannot prove
any thing to him that either has not, or uses not his reason to judge of them.

120 Thus you have excluded your self from all proof of your Churches
infallibility from Scripture or Tradition. And if you fly lastly to Reason it
self for succor, may not it justly say to you, as Iephte said to his
Brethren, Ye have cast me out and banished me, and do you now come to me for
succor? But if there be no certainty in Reason, how shall I be assured of the
certainty of those which you allege for this purpose? Either I may judge of
them, or not: if not, why do you propose them? If I may, why do you say I may
not, and make it such a monstrous absurdity, That men in the choice of their
Religion should make use of their Reason? which yet, without all question, none
but unreasonable men can deny, to have been the chiefest end why Reason was
given them.

122 Ad 22. An Heretic he is (says D. Potter) who opposes any truth, which
to be a divine revelation he is convinced in conscience by any means
whatsoever: Be it by a Preacher or Layman, be it by reading Scripture, or
hearing them read. And from hence you infer, that he makes all these safe
propounders of Faith. A most strange and illogicall deduction! For may not a
private man by evident reason convince another man, that such or such a
Doctrine is divine revelation, and yet though he be a true propounder in this
point, yet propound another thing falsely, and without proof, and consequently
not be a safe propounder in every point? Your Preachers in their Sermons, do
they not propose to men divine Revelations, and do they not sometimes convince
men in conscience, by evident proof from Scripture, that the things they speak
are Divine revelations? And whosoever, being thus convinced, should oppose this
Divine revelation, should he not be an Heretic, according to your own
grounds, for calling Gods own Truth into question? And would you think your
self well dealt with, if I should collect from hence, that you make every
Preacher a safe, that is, an infallible Propounder of Faith? Be the means of
Proposal what it will, sufficient or insufficient, worthy of credit, or not
worthy, though it were, if it were possible, the barking of a Dog, or the
chirping of a Bird, or were it the discourse of the Devil himself, yet if I
be, I will not say convinced, but persuaded, though falsely, that it is a Divine
revelation, and shall deny to believe it, I shall be a formal, though not a
material Heretic. For he that believes, though falsely any thing to be Divine
revelation, and yet will not believe it to be true, must of necessity believe
God to be false, which according to your own Doctrine, is the formality of an
Heretic.

123 And how it can be any way advantageous to Civil government, that men
without warrant from God should usurp a tyranny over other men's consciences,
and prescribe unto them without reason, and sometimes against reason, what they
shall believe, you must show us plainer if you desire we should believe. For to
say, Verily I do not see but that it must be so, is no good demonstration. For
whereas you say, that a man may be a passionate and seditious creature, from
whence you would have us infer, that he may make use of his interpretation to
satisfy his passion, and raise sedition: There were some color in this
consequence, if we (as you do) made private men infallible interpreters for
others; for then indeed they might lead Disciples after them, and use them as
instruments for their vile purposes: But when we say they can only interpret
for themselves, what harm they can do by their passionate or seditious
interpretations, but only endanger both their temporal and eternal
happiness, I cannot imagine. For though we deny the Pope or Church of Rome to
be an infallible Judge, yet we do not deny, but that there are Judges which
may proceed with certainty enough against all seditious Persons, such as draw
men to disobedience either against Church or State, as well as against Rebels,
and Traitors, and Thieves, and Murderers.

124 Ad 23. The next in the beginning argues thus: For many ages there was no
Scripture in the World: and for many more, there was none in many places of the
world: yet men wanted not then and then some certain direction what to believe:
Therefore there was then an infallible Judge. Just as if I should say, York is
not my way from Oxford to London, therefore Bristol is: Or a dog is not a
horse, therefore he is a man. As if God had no other ways of revealing
himself to men, but only by Scripture and an infallible Church. S. Chrysostom
and Isidorus Pelusiota conceaved he might use other means. And S. Paul tells
us that the (...) might be known by his works; and that they had the Law
written in their hearts. Either of these ways might make some faithful men
without either necessity of Scripture or Church.

125 But D. Potter says, you say, In the Jewish Church there was a living
Judge, endowed with an absolute infallible direction in cases of moment: as all
points belonging to divine Faith are. And where was that infallible direction
in the Jewish Church when they should have received Christ for their Messiah,
and refused him? Or perhaps this was not a case of moment. D. Potter indeed
might say very well, not that the high Priest was infallible, (^or certainly he
was not) but that his determination was to be of necessity obeyed, though for
the justice of it there was no necessity that it should be believed. Besides,
it is one thing to say, that the living judge in the Jewish Church, had an
infallible direction: another, that he was necessitated to follow this
direction. This is the privilege which you challenge. But it is that, not
this, which the Doctor attributes to the Jews. As a man may truly say, the
wise men had an infallible direction to Christ, without saying or thinking that
they were constrained to follow it, and could not do^ otherwise.

126 But either the Church retains still her infallibility, or it was divested
of it upon the receiving of Holy Scripture; which is absurd. An argument me
thinks like this, Either you have horns or you have lost them: but you never
lost them, therefore you have them still. If you say you never had horns; so
say I, for ought appears by your reasons, the Church never had infallibility.

127 But some Scriptures were received in some places and not in others:
therefore if Scriptures were the Judge of Controversies, some Churches had one
Judge and some another. And what great inconvenience is there in that, that one
part of England should have one Judge, and another another? especially seeing
the books of Scripture which were received by those that received fewest, had
as much of the doctrine of Christianity in them, as they all had which were
received by any; all the necessary parts of the Gospel being contained in
every one of the four Gospells, as I have proved: So that they which had all
the books of the New Testament had nothing superfluous: For it was not
superfluous but profitable, that the same thing should be said diverse times,
and be testified by diverse witnesses: And they that had but one of the four
Gospells wanted nothing necessary: and therefore it is vainly inferred by you,
that with months and years, as new Canonical Scriptures grew to be published,
the Church altered her rule of Faith and judge of Controversies.

128 Heresies you say, would arise after the Apostles time and after the
writing of Scriptures: These cannot be discovered, condemned and avoided,
unless the Church be infallible; Therefore there must be a Church infallible.
But I pray tell me, Why cannot Heresies be sufficiently discovered, condemned,
and avoided, by them which believe Scripture to be the rule of Faith? If
Scripture be sufficient to Inform us what is the faith, it must of necessity
be also sufficient to teach us what is Heresy: seeing Heresy is nothing but a
manifest deviation from, and an opposition to the faith. That which is straight
will plainly teach us what is crooked; and one contrary cannot but manifest the
other. If any one should deny, that there is a God: That this God is
omnipotent, omniscient, good, just, true, merciful, a rewarder of them that
seek him, a punisher of them that obstinatly offend him; that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God, and the Savior of the World: that it is he by obedience to
whom men must look to be saved: If any man should deny either his Birth, or
Passion, or Resurrection, or Assention, or sitting at the right hand of God:
his having all power given him in Heaven and Earth* That it is he whom God has
appointed to be judge of the quick and the dead: that all men shall rise again
at the last day: That they which believe and repent shall be saved: That they
which do not believe or repent shall be damned: If a man should hold, that
either the keeping of the Mosaicall Law is necessary to Salvation: or that good
works are not necessary to Salvation: In a word, if any man should obstinatly
contradict the truth of any thing plainly delivered in Scripture, who does not
see, that every one which believes the Scripture, has a sufficient means to
discover, and condemn, and avoid that Heresy, without any need of an
infallible guide? If you say, that the obscure places of Scripture contain
matters of Faith: I answer, that it is a matter of faith to believe that the
sense of them, whatsoever it is, which was intended by God is true; for he that
does not do so calls Gods Truth into question. But to believe this or that to
be the true sense of them, or, to believe the true sense of them, and to avoid
the false, is not necessary either to Faith or Salvation. For if God would have
had his meaning in these places certainly known, how could it stand with his
wisdom, to be so wanting to his own will and end, as to speak obscurely? or
how can it consist with his justice, to require of men to know certainly the
meaning of those words, which he himself has not revealed? Suppose there were
an absolute Monarch, that in his own absence from one of his Kingdoms, had
written Laws for the government of it, some very plainly, and some very
ambiguously, and obscurely, and his Subjects should keep those that were
plainly written with all exactness, and for those that were obscure, use their
best diligence to find his meaning in them, and obey them according to the
sense of them which they conceived; should this King either with justice or
wisdom be offended with these Subjects, if by reason of the obscurity of them,
they mistook the sense of them, and fail of performance, by reason of their
error?

128 But, It is more useful and fit, you say, for the deciding of
Controversies, to have besides an infallible rule to go by, a living
infallible Judge to determine them: and from hence you conclude, that certainly
there is such a Judge. But why then may not another say, that it is yet more
useful for many excellent purposes, that all the Patriarchs should be
infallible, then that the Pope only should? Another, that it would be yet more
useful, that all the Archbishops of every Province should be so, then that the
Patriarchs only should be so. Another, That it would be yet more useful, if
all the Bishops of every Diocese were so. Another, that it would be yet more
available, that all the Parsons of every Parish should be so. Another, that it
would be yet more excellent, if all the Fathers of Families were so. And
lastly, another, that it were much more to be desired that every Man and every
Woman were so* just as much as the prevention of Controversies, is better then
the decision of them, and the prevention of Heresies better then the
condemnation of them; and upon this ground conclude, by your own very
consequence, That not only a general Council, nor only the Pope, but all the
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Pastors, Fathers, nay all the men in the
World are infallible. If you say now, as I am sure you will, that this
conclusion is most gross, and absurd against sense and experience, then must
also the ground be false, from which it evidently and undeniably follows, viz.
that, That course of dealing with men seems always more fit to Divine
Providence, which seems most (...) to humane reason.

129 And so likewise, That there should men succeed the Apostles, which could
show themselves to be their successors, by doing of Miracles, by speaking all
kind of languages, by delivering men to Satan, as S. Paul did Hymenaeus, and
the incestuous Corinthian, it is manifest in humane reason it were incomparably
more fit and useful for the decision of Controversies, then that the
successor of the Apostles should have none of these gifts, and for want of the
signs of Apostleship, be justly questionable whether he be his successor or
no: and will you now conclude, That the Popes have the gift of doing Miracles,
as well as the Apostles had?

130 It were in all reason very useful and requisite, that the Pope should, by
the assistance of Gods Spirit, be freed from the vices and passions of men,
lest otherwise, the Authority given him for the good of the Church, he might
employ (as diverse Popes you well know have done) to the disturbance, and
oppression and mischief of it. And will you conclude from hen^e, That Popes
are not subject to the sins and passions of other men? That there never have
been ambitious, covetous, lustful, tyrannous Popes.

131 Who sees not that for men's direction it were much more beneficial for the
Church, that Infallibility should be settled in the Popes Person, then in a
general Council: That so the means of deciding Controversies might be
speedy, easy and perpetual, whereas that of general Counsels is not so. And
will you hence infer, that not the Church Representative, but the Pope is
indeed the infallible Judge of Controversies? certainly if you should, the
Sorbon Doctors would not think this a good conclusion.

132 It had been very commodious (one would think) that, seeing either Gods
pleasure was the Scripture should be translated, or else in his Providence he
knew it would be so, that he had appointed some men for this business, and by
his Spirit assisted them in it, that so we might have Translations as
Authentical as the Original: yet you see God did not think fit to do so.

133 It had been very commodious (one would think) that the Scripture should
have been, at least for all things necessary, a Rule, plain and perfect: And
yet you say, it is both imperfect and obscure, even in things necessary.

134 It had been most requisite (one would think) that the Copies of the
Bibles, should have been preserved free from variety of readings, which makes
men very uncertain in many places, which is the word of God, and which is the
error or presumption of man: and yet we see God has not thought fit so to
provide for us.

135 Who can conceive, but that an Apostolic Interpretation of all the
difficult places of Scripture, would have been stra^gely beneficial to the
Church, especially there being such danger in mistaking the sense of them, as
is by you pretended, and God in his providence foreseeing that the greatest
part of Christians, would not accept of the Pope for the Judge of
Controversies? And yet we see God has not so ordered the matter.

136 Who does not see, that supposing the Bishop of Rome, had been appointed
Head of the Church, and ^^dge of Controversies, that it would have been
infinitely beneficial to the Church, perhaps as much as all the rest of the
Bible, that in some Book of Scripture which was to be undoubtedly received,
this one Proposition had been set down in Terms, The Bishops of Rome shall be
always Monarchs of the Church, and they either alone, or with their adherents,
the Guides of faith, and the Judges of Controversies that shall arise amongst
Christians? This, if you will deal ingenuously, you cannot but acknowledge; for
then all true Christians would have submitted to him, as willingly as to Christ
himself, neither needed you and your fellows, have troubled your self to
invent so many Sophismes for the proof of it. There would have been no more
doubt of it among Christians, then there is of the Nativity, Passion,
Resurrection or Ascension of Christ. You were best now rub your forehead
hard, and conclude upon us, that because this would have been so useful to
have been done, therefore it is done. Or if you be (as I know you are) too
ingenuous to say so, then must you acknowledge, that the ground of your
Argument, which is the very ground of all these absurdities, is most absurd;
and that it is our duty to be humbly thankful for those sufficient, nay
abundant means of Salvation, which God has of his own goonesse granted us:
and not conclude, he has done that which he has not done, because forsooth,
in our vain judgments it seems convenient he should have done so.

137 But you demand what repugnance there is betwixt infallibility in the
Church, and existence of Scripture, that the production of the one must be the
destruction of the other? Out of which words I can frame no other argument for
you the^ this. There is no Repugnance between the Scriptures existence, and the
Churches infallibility, therefore the Church is infallible. Which consequence
will then be good, when you can show, that nothing can be untrue, but that only
which is impossible; that whatsoever may be done, that also is done. Which, if
it were true, would conclude both you and me to be infallible, as well as
either your Church, or Pope: in as much as there is no more repugnance between
the Scriptures existence and our infallibility, then there is between theirs.

138 But if Protestants will have the Scripture alone for their Judge, let them
first produce some Scripture, affirming, that by the entering thereof,
infallibility went out of the Church. This Argument put in form runs thus. No
Scripture affirms that by the entering thereof, infallibility went out of the
Church: Therefore there is an infallible Church, and therefore the Scripture
alone is not Judge, that is, the Rule to judge by. But as no Scripture affirms
that by the entering of it, Infallibility went out of the Church, so neither do
we, neither have we any need to do so. But we say, that it continued in the
Church even together with the Scriptures, so long as Christ and his Apostles
were living, and then departed: God in his providence having provided a plain
and infallible Rule, to supply the defect of living and infallible Guides.
Certainly if your cause were good, so great a wit as yours is, would devise
better Arguments to maintain it. We can show no Scripture affirming
Infallibility to have gone out of the Church, therefore it is Infallible.
Somewhat like his discourse that said, It could not be proved out of
Scripture, that the King of Sweden was dead, therefore he is still living. Me
thinks in all reason, you that challenge privileges, and exemption from the
condition of Men, which is to be subject to error; You that by virtue of this
privilege usurp authority over men's consciences, should produce your
Letters Patent from the King of Heaven, and show some express warrant for
this Authority you take upon you, otherwise you know the rule is, Vbicontrarium
non manifest probatur praesumitur pro liberate.

139 But D. Potter may remember what himself teaches, That the Church is
still endued with Infallibility in points Fundamental, and consequently that
Infallibility in the Church does well agree with the Truth, the Sanctity, yea
with the sufficiency of Scripture, for all matters necessary to salvation.
Still your discourse is so far from hitting the white, that it roves quite
besides the But. You conclude that the infallibility of the Church may well
agree with the Truth, the Sanctity, the Sufficiency of Scripture. But what is
this but to abuse your Reader with the proof of that which no man denies? The
Question is not, whether an infallible Church might agree with Scripture, but
whether, there be an Infallible Church? Iam dic Posthume de tribus Capellis.
Besides, you must know there is a wide difference between, being infallible in
Fundamentals, and being an infallible Guide even in Fundamentals. D. Potter
says, that the Church is the former: that is, There shall be some men in the
world, while the world lasts, which err not in Fundamentals; for otherwise
there should be no Church: For to say, the Church, while it is the Church, may
err in Fundamentalls, implies contradiction, and is all one as to say, The
Church: while it is the Church, may not be the Church. So that to say, that the
Church is infallible in Fundamentalls, signifies no more but this, There shall
be a Church in the world for ever. But we utterly deny the Church to be the
latter; for to say so, were to oblige our selves to find some certain Society
of men, of whom we might be certain, that they neither do, nor can err in
Fundamentals, nor in declaring what is Fundamental, what is not Fundamental:
and consequently to make any Church an infallible Guide in Fundamentals, would
be to make it infallible in all things, which she proposes and requires to be
believed. This therefore we deny both to your and all other Churches of any one
denomination, as the Greek, the Roman, the Abyssine: that is indeed, we deny it
simply to any Church. For no Church can possibly be fit to be a Guide, but only
a Church of some certain denominatio^. For otherwise no man can possibly know
which is the true Church, but by a pre-examination of the doctrine
controverted, and that were not to be guided by the Church to the true
doctrine, but by the true doctrine to the Church. Hereafter therefore, when you
hear Protestants say, The Church is Infallible in Fundamentalls, you must not
conceive them, as if they meant as you do, that some Society of Christians,
which may be known by adhering to some one Head, for example, the Pope, or the
Bishop of Constantinople, is infallible in these things: but only thus, That
true Religion shall never be so far driven out of the world, but that it
shall always have some where or other, some that believe and profess it, in
all things necessary to salvation.

140 But, you would therefore gladly know out of what Text he imagines that the
Church, by the coming of Scripture, was deprived of infallibility in some
points, and not in others? And I also would gladly know, why you do thus frame
to your self vain imaginations, and the^ father them upon others? We yield
unto you, That there shall be a Church which never erreth in some points
because (as we conceive,) God has promised so much; but not, there shall be
such a Church which does or can err in no points, because we find not that
God has promised such a Church; and therefore we may not promise such a one
to our selves. But for the Churches being deprived by the Scripture of
Infallibility, in some points and not in others, that is a wild notion of your
own, which we have nothing to do with.

141 But he affirms, that the Jewish Church retained Infallibility in her
self; and therefore it is unjustly, and unworthily done of him to deprive the
Church of Christ of it. That the Jews had sometimes an infallible miraculous
direction from God, in some cases of moment, he does affirm and had good
warrant: but that the Synagogue was absolutely Infallible, he no where
affirms, and therefore it is unjustly and unworthily done of you to obtrude it
upon him. And indeed how can the Infallibility of the Synagogue be conceived,
but only by settling it in the High Priest, and the company adhering and
subordinate unto him? And whether the high Priest was Infallible, when he
believed not Christ to be the Messiah, but condemned and excommunicated the^
that so professed, and caused him to be crucified for saying so, I leave it to
Christians to judge. But then suppose God had been so pleased to do as he did
not, to appoint the Synagogue an infallible guide: Could you by your rules of
Logic constrain him, to appoint such a one to Christians also, or say unto
him, that, in wisdom he could not do otherwise? Vain man that will be thus
always tying God to your imaginations! It is well for us that he leaves us not
without directions to him, but if he will do this sometime by living Guides,
sometime by written rules, what is that to you? may not he do what he will
with his own?

142 And whereas you say for the further enforcing of this Argugument, that
there is greater reason to think the Church should be infallible, then the
Synagogue: because to the Synagogue all Laws and Ceremonies etc. were more
particularly, and minutely delivered, then in the new Testament is done, our
Savior leaving particulars to the determination of the Church. But I pray walk
not thus in generality, but tell us what particulars? If you mean particular
rites, and ceremonies, and orders for government, we grant it, and you know we
do so. Our Savior our only has left a general injunction by S. Paul, Let
All things be done decently and in Order. But what Order is fittest, i. e.
what Time, what Place, what Manner, etc. is fittest, that he has left to the
discretion of the Governers of the Church. But if you mean, that he has only
concerning matters of faith, the subject in Question, prescribed in general,
that we are to hear the Church, and left it to the Church to determine what
particulars we are to believe: The Church being nothing else but an aggregation
of Believers, this in effect is to say, He has left it to all Believers to
determine what Particulars they are to believe. Besides it is so apparently
false, that I wonder you could content your self, or think we should be
contented with a bare saying, without any show or pretense of proof.

143 As for D. Potters objection against this Argument, That as well you might
infer, that Christians must have all one King, because the Jews had so, For
ought I can perceive, notwithstanding any thing answered by you, it may stand
still in force, though the truth is, it is urged by him not against the
Infallibility but the Monarchy of the Church. For whereas you say, the
disparity is very clear: He that should urge this argument for one Monarch
over the whole world, would say that this is to deny the Conclusion, and reply
unto you, that there is disparity, as matters are now ordered, but that there
should not be so. For that there was no more reason to believe that the
Ecclesiastical government of the Jews was a Pattern for the Ecclesiastical
government of Christians, then the Civil of the Jews, for the Civil of the
Christians. He would tell you, that the Church of Christ, and all Christian
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms, are one and the same thing: and therefore he sees
no reason why the Synagogue should be a Type and Figure of the Church, and not
of the Commonwealth. He would tell you, that as the Church succeeded the Jewish
Synagogue, so Christian Princes should succeed to Jewish Magistrates: that is
the Temporal Governors of the Church should be Christians. He would tell you,
that as the Church is compared to a house, a Kingdom, an Army, a Body, so all
distinct Kingdoms might and should be one Army, one Family, etc. and that it
is not so, is the thing he complains of. And therefore you ought not to think
it enough to say it is not so, but you should show why it should not be so; and
why this argument will not follow, The Jews had one King, therefore all
Christians ought to have: as well as this, The Jews had one High Priest over
them all, therefore all Christians also ought to have. He might tell you
moreover, that the Church may have one Master, one General, one Head, one
King, and yet he not be the Pope, but Christ. He might tell you, that you beg
the Question, in saying without proof, that it is necessary to salvation, that
all (whether Christians or Churches) have recourse to one Church, if you mean
by one Church, one particular Church, which is to govern and direct all others:
and that unless you mean so, you say nothing to the purpose. And besides, he
might tell you, and that very truly, that it may seem altogether as available
for the Temporal good of Christians to be under one Temporal Prince, or
Comonwealth, as for their salvation, to be subordinate to one Visible Head. I
say as necessary, both for the prevention of the effusion of the Blood of
Christians by Christians, and for the defense of Christendom, from the hostile
invasions of Turks, and Pagans. And from all this he might infer, that though
now, by the fault of men, there were in several Kingdoms, several Laws,
Governments and Powers; yet that it were much more expedient, that there were
but one. Nay, not only expedient, but necessary; if once your ground be settled
for a general rule, that what kind of government the Jews had, that the
Christians must have. And if you limit the generality of this Proposition, and
frame the Argument thus: What kind of Ecclesiastical government the Jews had,
that the Christians must have, But They were governed by one High Priest,
therefore These must be so: He will say that the first proposition of this
syllogism, is altogether as doubtful as the conclusion; and therefore neither
fit nor sufficient to prove it, until it self be proved. And then besides,
that there is as great reason to believe this, That what kind of Civil
government the Jews had, that the Christians must have. And so D. Potters
objection remains still unanswered: That there is as much reason to conclude a
necessity of one King over all Christian Kingdoms, from the Jews having one
King; as one Bishop over all Churches, from their being under our High Priest.

144 Ad. 24. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3.
Neither is this Discourse confirmed by Irenaeus at all. Whether by this
discourse you mean that immediately forgoing, of the analogy between the Church
and the Synagogue, to which this speech of Irenaeus, alleged here by you, is
utterly and plainly impertinent; Or whether by this discourse, you mean (as I
think you do) not your discourse, but your conclusion which you discourse on,
that is, that Your Church is the infallible Judge in Controversies. For neither
has Irenaeus one syllable to this purpose; neither can it be deduced out of
what he says, with any color of consequence. For first in saying, What if the
Apostles had not left Scripture, ought we not to have followed the order of
Tradition? And in saying, That to this order many Nations yield assent, who
believe in Christ, having Salvation written in their hearts, by the Spirit of
God, without Letters or Ink, and diligently keeping ancient Tradition: Does he
not plainly show, that the Tradition he speaks of, is nothing else, but the
very same that is written: nothing but to believe in Christ? To which, whether
Scripture alone, to them that believe it, be not a sufficient guide, I leave it
to you to judge. And are not his words just as if a man should say, If God had
not given us the light of the Sun, we must have made use of candles and
torches: If we had had no eyes, we must have felt out our way: If we had no
legs, we must have used crutches. And does not this in effect import, that
while we have the Sun, we need no candles? While we have our eyes, we need
not feel out our way* While we enjoy our legs, we need not crutches? And by
like reason, Irenaeus in saying, If we had had no Scripture, we must have
followed Tradition, and they that have none, do well to do so, does he not
plainly import that to them that have Scripture, and believe it, Tradition is
unnecessary? which could not be, if the Scripture did not contain evidently the
whole tradition. Which whether Irenaeus believed or no, these words of his may
inform you, Non enim per alios etc. we have received the disposition of our
Salvation from no others, but from them, by whom the Gospel came unto us.
Which Gospel truly, the Apostles first preached, and after wards by the will
of God, delivered in writing to us, to be the Pillar and Foundation of our
faith. Bellarm. de ve^bo Dei l. 4. c* 11.
Upon which place Bellarmine's two observations, and his acknowledgment ensuing
upon them, are very considerable, and as I conceive, as home to my purpose as I
would wish them. His first Notandum is, That in the Christian Doctrine, some
things are simply necessary for the Salvation of all men; as the knowledge of
the Articles of the Apostles Creed; and besides, the knowledge of the ten
Commandments, and some of the Sacraments. Other things not so necessary, but
that a man may be saved, without the explicit knowledge, and belief, and
profession of them. His Second Note is, That those things which were simply
necessary, the Apostles were wont to preach to all men; But of other things not
all to all, but somethings to all, to wit, those things which were profitable
for all, other things only to Prelates and Priests. These things premised, he
acknowledges, That all those things were written by the Apostles, which are
necessary for all, and which they were wont openly to preach to all; But that
other things were not all written: And therefore, when Irenaeus says that the
Apostles wrote what they Preach in the World, it is true, says he, and not
against Traditions, because they preached not to the People all things, but
only those things, which were necessary or profitable for them.

145 So that at the most; you can infer from hence, but only a suppositive
necessity of having an infallible Guide, and that grounded upon a false
supposition, In case we had no Scripture, but an absolute necessity hereof, and
to them who have and believe the Scripture, which is your assumption, cannot
with any color from hence be concluded, but rather the contrary.

146 Neither because (as He says) it was then easy to receive the Truth from
Gods Church, then, in the Age next after the Apostles, Then, when all the
ancient and Apostolic Churches were at an agreement about the Fundamentalls of
Faith: Will it therefore follow that now, 1600 years after, when the ancient
Churches are divided almost into as many Religions as they are Churches, every
one being the Church to it self, and heretical to all other, that it is as
easy, but extremely difficult or rather impossible, to find the Church first
independently of the true Doctrine, and then to find the truth by the Church.

147 As for the last clause of the sentence, it will not any whit advantage,
but rather prejudice your assertion. Neither will I seek to avoid the pressure
of it, by saying, that he speaks of small Questions, and therefore not of
Questions touching things necessary to Salvation, which can hardly be called
small Questions; But I will favor you so far, as to suppose, that saying
this of small Questions, it is probable, he would have said it much more of the
Great: but I will answer that which is most certain and evident, and which I
am confident, you your self, were you as impudent as I believe you modest,
would not deny; that the ancient Apostolic Churches are not now, as they were
in Irenaeus's time: then they were all at unity about matters of faith, which
unity was a good assurance that what they so agreed in, came from some one
common Fountain, and they had no other then of Apostolic Preaching. And this
is the very ground of Tertullian's so often mistaken Prescription against
Heretics, Variasse debuerat Error Ecclesiarum, quod autem apud multos unum
est, non est erratum sed traditum: If the Churches had erred they could not but
have varied, but that which is one among so many, came not by Error but
Tradition. But now the case is altered, and the mischief is, that these
ancient Churches are divided among themselves; and if we have recourse to them,
one of them will say this is the way to heaven, another that. So that now in
place of receiving from them certain and clear truths, we must expect nothing
but certain and clear contradictions.

148 Neither will the Apostles depositing with the Church, all things belonging
to truth, be any proof that the Church shall certainly keep this depositum,
entire, and sincere, without adding to it, or taking from it; for this whole
depositum was committed to every particular Church, nay, to every particular
man, which the Apostles converted. And yet no man, I think, will say, that
there was any certainty, that it should be kept whole and inviolate by every
man, and every Church. It is apparent out of Scripture, it was committed to
Timothy, and by him consigned to other faithful men: and yet S. Paul thought
it not superfluous, earnestly to exhort him to the careful keeping of it:
which exhortation you must grant had been vain and superfluous, if the not
keeping of it had been impossible. And therefore though Irenaeus says, The
Apostles fully deposited in the Church all truth, yet he says not, neither can
we infer from what he says, that the Church should always infallibly keep
this depositum, entire without the loss of any truth, and sincere without the
mixture of any falsehood.

149 Ad. 25. But you proceed and tell us, That beside all this, the Doctrine of
Protestants is destructive of it self. For either they have certain and
Infallible means not to err in interpreting; or no^ If not, Scripture to them
cannot be a sufficient ground for infallible faith: If they have, and so cannot
err in interpreting Scripture, then they are able with infallibility to hear
and determine all controversies of faith; and so they may be, and are Judges of
Controversies, although they use the Scripture as a Rule. And thus against
their own doctrine, they constitute another Judge of Controversies beside
Scripture alone. And may not we with as much reason substitute Church and
Papists, instead of Scripture and Protestants, and say unto you, Besides all
this, the doctrine of Papists is destructive of it self. For either they have
certain and infallible means not to err, in the choice of the Church, and
interpreting her decrees, or they have not: If not, then the Church to them
cannot be a sufficient (but merely a fantastical) ground for infallible
faith, nor a meet Judge of Controversies: (For unless I be infallibly sure
that the Church is Infallible, how can I be upon her Authority infallibly sure,
that any thing she says is Infallible?) If they have certain* infallible
means, and so cannot err in the choice of their Church, and in interpreting
her decrees, then they are able with Infallibility to hear, examine, and
determine all controversies of faith, although they pretend to make the Church
their Guide. And thus against their own Doctrine, they constitute another Judge
of controversies, besides the Church alone. Nay every one makes himself a
chooser of his own Religion, and of his own sense of the Churches decrees,
which very thing in Protestants they so highly condemn: and so in judging
others, condemn themselves.

150 Neither in saying thus have I only cried quittance with you: but that you
may see how much you are in my debt, I will show unto you, that for your
Sophisme against our way, I have given you a Demonstration against yours.
First, I say, your Argument against us, is a transparent fallacy. The first
part of it lies thus: Protestants have no means to interpret, without error,
obscure and ambiguous places of Scripture; therefore plain places of Scripture
cannot be to the^ a sufficient ground of Faith. But though we pretend not to
certain means of not erring, in interpreting all Scripture, particularly such
places as are obscure and ambiguous, yet this me thinks should be no impediment
but that we may have certain means of not erring in and about the sense of
those places, which are so plain and clear that they need no Interpreters; and
in such we say our Faith is contained. If you ask me how I can be sure that I
know the true meaning of these places? I ask you again, can you be sure that
you understand what I, or any man else says? They that heard our Savior and
the Apostles preach, could they have sufficient assurance, that they understood
at any time, what they would have them do? if not, to what end did they hear
them? If they could, why may we not be as well assured, that we understand
sufficiently, what we conceive plain in their writings?

151 Again, I pray tell us, whether you do certainly know the sense of these
Scriptures, with which you pretend you are led to the knowledge of your Church?
If you do not, how know you that there is any Church Infallible, and that
these are the notes of it, and that this is the, Church that has these notes?
If you do, then give us leave to have the same means, and the same abilities
to know other plain places, which you have to know these. For if all Scripture
be obscure, how come you to know the sense of these places? If some places of
it be plain, why should we stay here?

152 And now, to come to the other part of your dilemma; in saying, If they
have certain means, and so cannot err, me thinks you forget your self very
much, and seem to make no difference, between, having certain means to do a
thing, and the actual doing of it. As if you should conclude, because all men
have certain means of Salvation, therefore all men certainly must be saved,
and cannot do otherwise; as if whosoever had a horse must presently get up and
ride; Whosoever had means to find out a way, could not neglect those means
and so mistake it, God be thanked, that we have sufficient means to be certain
enough of the truth of our Faith. But the Privilege of not being in
possibility of erring, that we challenge not, because we have as little reason
as you to do so: and you have none at all. If you ask, seeing we may possibly
err, how can we be assured we do not? I ask you again, seeing your eye-fight
may deceive you, how can you be sure you see the Sun, when you do see it?
Perhaps you may be in a dream, and perhaps you, and all the men in the World
have been so, when they thought they were awake, and then only awake, when they
thought they dreamt. But this I am sure of, as sure as that God is good, that
he will require no impossibilities of us: not an Infallible, nor a certainly --
unerring belief, unless he has given us certain means to avoid error; and if
we use those which we have, will never require of us, that we use that which we
have not.

153 Now from this mistaken ground, that it is all one to have means of
avoiding error, and to be in no danger nor possibility of error; You infer
upon us as an absurd conclusion, That we make our selves able to determine
Controversies of faith with Infallibility, and Judges of Controversies. For the
latter part of this inference, we acknowledge and embrace it. We do make our
selves Judges of controversies: that is, we do make use of our own
understanding in the choice of our Religion. But this, if it be a crime, is
common to us with you, (as I have proved above) and the difference is, not that
we are choosers, and you not choosers, but that we, as we conceive, choose
wisely, but you being wilfully blind choose to follow those that are so too;
not remembering what our Savior has told you, when the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. But then again I must tell you, you have done
ill to confound together, Judges, and infallible Judges; unless you will say,
either that we have no Judges in our Courts of Civil judicature, or that they
are all Infallible.

154 Thus have we cast off your dilemma, and broken both the horns of it. But
now my retortion lies heavy upon you, and will not be turned off. For first you
content not your selves with a moral certainty of the things you believe, nor
with such a degree of assurance of them, as is sufficient to produce obedience
to the condition of the new Covenant, which is all that we require. Gods
Spirit, if he please, may work more, a certainty of adherence beyond a
certainty of evidence. But neither God does, nor man may require of us as our
duty, to give a greater assent to the conclusion then the premises deserve; to
build an infallible Faith upon Motives that are only highly credible, and not
infallible, as it were a great and heavy building upon a foundation that has
not strength proportionable. But though God require not of us such unreasonable
things, You do, and tell men they cannot be saved, unless they believe your
proposals with an infallible Faith. To which end they must believe also your
Propounder, your Church, to be simply Infallible. Now how is it possible for
them to give a rational assent to the Churches infallibility, unless they
have some infallible means to know that she is infallible? Neither can they
infallibly know the infallibility of this means, but by some other, and so on
for ever: unless they can dig so deep as to come at length to the Rock, that
is, to settle all upon something evident of it self, which is not so much as
pretended. But the last resolution of all is into Motives, which indeed upon
examination will scarce appear probable, but are not so much as avouched to be
any more then very credible. For example, if I ask you why you do believe
Transubstantiation? What can you answer, but because it is a Revelation of the
Prime Verity. I demand again, how can you assure your self or me of that,
being ready to embrace it if it may appear to be so? And what can you say, but
that you know it to be so, because the Church says so, which is Infallible. If
I ask, what mean You by your Church? You can tell me nothing, but the company
of Christians which adhere to the Pope. I demand then lastly: Why should I
believe this company to be the infallible Propounder of Divine Revelation? And
then you tell me, that there are many Motives to induce a man to this belief.
But are these Motives lastly infallible? No say you, but very credible. Well,
let them pass for such, because now we have not leisure to examine them. Yet
me thinks seeing the Motives to believe the Churches infallibility, are only
very credible, it should also be but as credible that your Church is
Infallible, and as credible, and no more, perhaps somewhat less, that her
proposals, particularly Transubstantiation, are Divine Revelations. And me
thinks You should require only a Moral, and modest assent to them, and not a
Divine as you call it, and infallible Faith. But then of these Motives to the
Churches Infallibility, I hope you will give us leave to consider, and judge
whether they be indeed Motives, and sufficient; or whether they be not Motives
at all, or not sufficient; or whether these Motives or inducements to your
Church be not impeached, and opposed with Compulsives, and enforcements from
it; or lastly, whether these Motives which You use, be not indeed only Motives
to Christianity, and not to Popery: give me leave for distinction sake to call
your Religion so. If we may not judge of these things, how can my judgment be
moved with that which comes not within its cognizance? If I may, then at least
I am to be a Judge of all these Controversies. 1. Whether every one of these
Motives be indeed a Motive to any Church? 2. If to some, whether to Yours? 3.
If to Yours, whether sufficient, or insufficient? 4. Whether other Societies
have not as many, and as great Motives to draw me to them? 5. Whether I have
not greater reason to believe you do err, then that you cannot? And now Sir I
pray let me trouble You with a few more Questions. Am I a sufficient Judge of
these Controversies, or no? If of these, why shall I stay here, why not of
others? Why not of all? Nay does not the true examining of these few, contain
and lay upon me the examination of all? What other Motives to your Church have
you, but your Notes of it? Bellarmine gives some 14. or 15. And one of these
fifteen contains in it the examination of all controversies, and not only so,
but of all uncontroverted Doctrines. For how shall I, or can I know the Church
of Romes conformity with the Ancient Church, unless I know first what the
Ancient Church hid hold, and then what the Church of Rome does hold; and
lastly, whether they be conformable, or if in my judgment they seem not
conformable, I am then to think the Church of Rome not to be the Church, for
want of the Note which she pretends is proper, and perpetual to it. So that
for ought I can see, Judges we are and must be of all sides, every one for
himself, and God for us all.

155 Ad 26. I answer; This assertion, that Scripture alone is Judge of all
Controversies in Faith, if it be taken properly, is neither a Fundamental nor
Vnfundamentall point of Faith, nor no point of Faith at all, but a plain
falsehood. It is not a Judge of Controversies but a Rule to Judge them by; and
that not an absolutely perfect Rule, but as perfect as a written Rule can be;
which must always need something else, which is either evidently true, or
evidently credible to give attestation to it, and that in this case is
Universal Tradition. So that Universal Tradition is the Rule to judge all
Controversies by. But then because nothing besides Scripture, comes to us with
as full a stream of Tradition as Scripture, Scripture alone, and no unwritten
Doctrine, nor no Infallibility of any Church, having attestation from Tradition
truly Universal; for this reason we conceive, as the Apostles persons while
they were living were the only Judges of controversies, so their Writings, now
they are dead, are the only Rule for us to judge them by: There being nothing
unwritten, which can go in upon half so fair cards, for the title of
Apostolic Tradition, as these things which by the confession of both Sides are
not so: I mean the doctrine of the Millenaries, and of the necessity of the
Eucharist for Infants.

156 Yet when we say, the Scripture is the only Rule to judge all Controversies
by, me thinks you should easily conceive, that we would be understood of all
those that are possible to be judged by Scripture, and of those that arise
among such as believe the Scripture. For if I had a controversy with an
Atheist whether there were a God or no, I would not say, that the Scripture
were a Rule to judge this by: seeing that doubting whether there be a God or
no, he must needs doubt whether the Scripture be the word of God: or if he
does not, he grants the Question, and is not the man we speak of. So likewise,
if I had a controversy about the Truth of Christ with a lew, it would be
vainly done of me, should I press him which the Authority of the new Testament
which he believes not, until out of some principles common to us both, I had
persuaded him that it is the Word of God. The New Testament therefore while he
remains a Jew would not be a fit Rule to decide this Controversy; In as much
as that which is doubted of it self, is not fit to determine other doubts. So
likewise if there were any that believed Christian Religion, and yet believed
not the Bible to be the Word of God, though they believed the matter of it to
be true, (which is no impossible supposition, for I may believe a book of S.
Austines, to contain nothing but the Truth of God, and yet not to have been
inspired by God himself,) against such men therefore there were no disputing
out of the Bible; because nothing in question can be a proof to it self. When
therefore we say the Scripture is a sufficient means to determine all
controversies, we say not this, either to Atheists, Jews, Turks, or such
Christians (if there be any such) as believe not Scripture to be the word of
God. But among such men only, as are already agreed upon this, That the
Scripture is the Word of God, we say all controversies that arise about Faith,
are either not at all decidable and consequently not necessary to be believed
one way or other, or they may be determined by Scripture. In a Word, That all
things necessary to be believed are evidently contained in Scripture, and what
is not there evidently contained, cannot be necessary to be believed. And our
reason hereof is convincing; because nothing can challenge our belief, but
what has descended to us from Christ by Original and Universal Tradition:
Now nothing but Scripture has thus descended to us, Therefore nothing but
Scripture can challenge our belief. Now then to come up closer to you, and to
answer to your Question, not as you put it, but as you should have put it: I
say, That this position, Scripture alone is the rule whereby they which believe
it to be Gods Word are to judge all Controversies in Faith, is no fundame^tall
point. Though not for your Reasons: For your first and strongest reason you see
is plainly voided and cut off by my stating of the Question as I have done, and
supposing in it that the parties at variance are agreed about this, That the
Scripture is the word of God; and consequently that this is none of their
Controversies. To your second, That Controversies cannot be ended without some
living Authority, We have said already, that necessary Controversies may be and
are decided. And if they be not ended, this is not through defect of the Rule,
but through the default of Men. And for these that cannot thus be ended, it is
not necessary they should be ended. For if God did require the ending of them,
he would have provided some certain means for the ending of them. And to your
Third, I say, that your pretense of using these means is but hypocritical:
for you use them with prejudice, and with a settled resolution not to believe
any thing which these means happily may suggest into you, if it any way cross
your pre-conceav'd persuasion of your Churches infallibility. You give not your
selves liberty of judgment in the use of them, nor suffer your selves to be
led by them to the Truth, to which they would lead you, would you but be as
willing to believe this consequence, Our Church does oppose Scripture,
therefore it does err, therefore it is not Infallible, as you are resolute to
believe this, The Church is infallible, therefore it does not err, and
therefore it does not oppose Scripture, though it seem to do so never so
plainly.

157 You pray, but it is not that God would bring you to the true Religion, but
that he would confirm you in your own. You confer places, but it is that you
may confirm, or color over with plausible disguises your erroneous doctrine,
not that you may judge of them and forsake them if there be reason for it. You
consult the Originalls, but you regard them not when they make against your
Doctrine or Translation.

158 You add not only the Authority, but the Infallibility, not of Gods
Church, but of the Roman, a very corrupt and degenerous part of it: whereof D.
Potter never confessed, that it cannot err damnably. And which being a company
made up of particular men, can afford you no help, but the industry, learning,
and wit of private men: and that these helps may not help you out of your
error, tell you, that you must make use of none of all these to discover any
error in the Church, but only to maintain her impossibility or erring. And
lastly, D. Potter assures himself that your Doctrine and practices are
damnable enough in themselves; Only he hopes (and spes est rei incertae nomen)
he hopes, I say, that the Truths which you retain, especially the necessity of
repentance and faith in Christ, will be as an antidote to you against the
errors which you maintain; and that your superstructions may burn, yet they
amongst you, Qui sequun tur Absalonem in simplicitate cor dis may be saved, yet
so as by fire. Yet his thinking so is no reason for you or me to think so,
unless you suppose him infallible; and if you do, why do you write against
him?

159 Notwithstanding, though not for these reasons, yet for others, I conceive
this Doctrine not Fundamental: Because if a man should believe Christian
Religion wholly, and entirely, and live according to it, such a man, though he
should not know or not believe the Scripture to be a Rule of Faith, no nor to
be the word of God, my opinion is he may be saved; and my reason is, because he
performs the entire condition of the new Covenant, which is, that we believe
the matter of the Gospel, and not that it is contained in these or these
Books. So that the Books of Scripture are not so much the objects of our
faith, as the instruments of conveying it to our understanding; and not so much
of the being of the Christian Doctrine, as requisite to the well being of it.
Irenaeus tells us (as M. K. acknowledges) of some barbarous Nations, that
believed the Doctrine of Christ, and yet believed not the Scripture to be the
word of God, for they never heard of it, and Faith comes by hearing: But these
barbarous people might be saved: therefore men might be saved without believing
the Scripture to be the word of God; much more without believing it to be a
Rule, and a perfect Rule of Faith. Neither doubt I, but if the books of
Scripture had been proposed to them by the other parts of the Church, where
they had been before received, and had been doubted of, or even rejected by
those barbarous nations, but still by the bare belief and practice of
Christianity, they might be saved: God requiring of us under pain of damnation,
only to believe the verities therein contained, and not the divine Authority of
the books wherein they are contained. Not but that it were now very strange
and unreasonable, if a man should believe the matter of these books, and not
the Authority of the books: and therefore if a man should profess the not
believing of these, I should have reason to fear he did not believe that. But
there is not always an equal necessity for the belief of those things, for
the belief whereof there is an equal reason. We have I believe as great reason
to believe there was such a man as Henry the eight K. of England, as that Jesus
Christ suffered under Pontius Pila^^: yet this is necessary to be believed, and
that is not so. So that if any man should doubt of or disbelieve that, it were
most unreasonably done of of him, yet it were no mortal sin, nor no sin at
all: God having no where commanded men under pain of damnation to believe all
which reason induces them to believe. Therefore as an Executor, that should
perform the whole will of the dead; should fully satisfy the Law, though he
did not believe that Parchment to be his written Will, which indeed is so? So I
believe, that he who believes all the particular doctrines which integrate
Christianity, and lives according to them, should be saved, though he neither
believed nor knew that the Gospels were written by the Evangelists, or the
Epistles by the Apostles.

160 This discourse whether it be rational and concluding or no, I submit to
better judgment; But sure I am, that the corollary which you draw from this
position, that this point is not Fundamenta^, is very inconsequent; that is,
that we are uncertain of the truth of it, because we say the whole Church, much
more particular Churches and private men may err in points not Fundamental. A
pretty sophisme, depending upon this Principle, that whosoever possibly may
err, he cannot be certain that he does not err. And upon this ground, what
shall hinder me from concluding, that seeing you also hold, that neither
particular Churches, nor private men are Infallible even in Fundamentalls, that
even the Fundamentalls of Christianity, remain to you uncertain? A Judge may
possibly err in judgment, can he therefore never have assurance that he has
judged right? A travailer may possibly mistake his way, must I therefore be
doubtful whether I am in the right way from my Hall to my Chamber? Or can our
London carrier have no certainty, in the middle of the day, when he is sober
and in his wits, that he is in the way to London? These you see are right
worthy consequences, and yet they are as like your own, as an egg to an egg,
or milk to milk.

161 And for the self same reason (you say) we are not certain, that the
Church is not Judge of Controversies: But now this self same appears to be no
reason, and therefore, for all this, we may be certain enough that the Church
is no Judge of Controversies. The ground of this sophisme is very like the
former, viz. that we can be certain of the falsehood of no propositions, but
these only which are damnable errors. But I pray good Sir, give me your opinion
of these: The Snow is black, the Fire is cold, that M. knot is Archbishop of
Toledo, that the whole is not greater then a part of the whole, that twice two
make not four: In your opinion, good Sir, are these damnable Haeresies? or
because they are not so, have we no certainty of the falsehood of them? I
beseech you Sir to consider seriously, with what strange captions, you have
gone about to delude your King and your Country; and if you be convinced, they
are so, give glory to God, and let the world know it, by your deserting that
Religion, which stands upon such deceitful foundations.

162 Besides (you say) among public conclusions defended in Oxford, the year
1633. to the Questions, Whether the Church have authority to determine
controversies of Faith? And to interpret holy Scripture? The answer to both is
affirmative. But what now if I should tell you, that in the year 1632. among
public Conclusions defended in Doway, one was, That God predeterminates men
to all their Actions good, bad, and indifferent? Will you think your self
obliged to be of this opinion? If you will, say so: If not, do as you would be
done by. Again, me thinks so subtle a man as you are, should easily apprehend
a wide difference between Authority to do a thing, and Infallibility in doing
it: and again, between a conditional infallibility and an absolute. The
former, the Doctor together with the Article of the Church of England,
attributes to the Church, nay to particular Churches, and I subscribe to his
opinion: that is, an Authority of determining controversies of faith, according
to plain and evident Scripture and Universal Tradition, and Infallibility
while they proceed according to this Rule. As if there should arise an
Heretic, that should call in Question Christ's Passion and Resurrection, the
Church had Authority to decide this Controversy, and infallible direction how
to do it, and to excommunicate this man, if he should persist in error. I
hope you will not deny but that the Judges have Authority to determine
criminal and Civil Controversies; and yet I hope you will not say, that they
are absolutely Infallible in their determinations. Infallible while they
proceed according to Law, and if they do so: but not infallibly certain that
they shall ever do so. But that the Church should be infallibly assisted by
Gods spirit to decide rightly all emergent Controversies, even such as might be
held diversely of diverse men, Salva compage fidei, and that we might be
absolutely certain that the Church should never fail to decree the truth,
whether she used means or no, whether she proceed according to her Rule or
not; or lastly that we might be absolutely certain that she would never fail to
proceed according to her Rule, this the defender of these conclusions said not:
and therefore said no more to your purpose, then you have all this while, that
is, just nothing.

163 Ad. 27. To the place of S. Austin alleged in this paragraph. I Answer.
First that in many things you will not be tried by S. Augustines judgment,
nor submit to his authority; not concerning Appeals to Rome, not concerning
Transubstantiation, not touching the use and worshipping of Images, not
concerning the State of Saints souls before the day of judgment, not touching
the Virgin Mary's freedom from actual and original sin, not touching the
necessity of the Eucharist for Infants, not touching the damning Infants to
hell that dye without Baptism, not touching the knowledge of Saints departed,
not touching Purgatory, not touching the fallibility of Counsels, even
general Counsels, not touching perfection and perspicuity of Scripture in
matters necessary to Salvation, not touching Auricular Confession, not touching
the half Communion, not touching Prayers in an unknown tongue; In these
things, I say, you will not stand to S. Austines judgment, and therefore can
with no reason or equity require us to do so in this matter. 2. To S.
Augustine in heat of disputation against the Donatists, and ransacking all
places for arguments against them, we oppose S. Austine out of this heat,
delivering the doctrine of Christianity calmely, and mode rately; where he
says, In iis quae aperte posita sunt in sacris Scripturis, omnia ea
reperiuntur quae continent ^idem, mores'que vivendi. 3 We say, he speaks not
of the Roman but the Catholic Church, of far greater extent, and therefore
of far greater credit and authority then the Roman Church. 4 He speaks of a
point not expressed, but yet not contradicted by Scripture; whereas the errors
we charge you with, are contradicted by Scripture. 5 He says not that Christ
has recommended the Church to us for an Infallible definer of all emergent
controversies, but for a credible witness of Ancient Tradition. Whosoever
therefore refuses to follow the practice of the Church (understand of all
places and ages) though he be thought to resist our Savior, what is that to
us, who cast off no practices of the Church, but such as are evidently
post-nate to the time of the Apostles, and plainly contrary to the practice of
former and purer times. Lastly it is evident, and even to impudence it self
undeniable, that upon this ground, of beleiving all things taught by the
present Church as taught by Christ, Error was held, for example, the necessity
of the Eucharist for infants, and that in S. Austines time, and that by S.
Austine himself: and therefore without controversy this is no certain ground
for truth, which may support falsehood as well as truth.

164 To the Argument wherewith you conclude, I Answer, That though the visible
Church shall always without fail propose so much of Gods revelation, as is
sufficient to bring men to Heaven, for otherwise it will not be the visible
Church, yet it may sometimes add to this revelation things superfluous, nay
hurtful, nay in themselves damnable, though not unpardonable; and sometimes
take from it things very expedient and profitable, and therefore it is
possible, without si^ne, to resist in some things the Visible Church of Christ.
But you press us farther, and demand, what visible Church was extant, when
Luther began, whether it were the Roman or Protestant Church? As if it must of
necessity either be Protestant or Roman, or Roman of necessity, if it were not
Protestant! yet this is the most usual fallacy of all your disputers, by some
specious Arguments to persuade weak men that the Church of Protestants cannot
be the true Church; and thence to infer, that without doubt it must be the
Roman. But why may not the Roman be content to be a part of it, and the Grecian
another? And if one must be the whole, why not the Greek Church, as well as the
Roman? there being not one Note of your Church which agrees not to her as well
as to your own; unless it be, that she is poor, and oppressed by the Turk, and
you are in glory and splendour.

165 Neither is it so easy to be determined as you pretend, That Luther and
other Protestants opposed the whole visible Church in matters of Faith, neither
is it so evident that the Visible Church may not fall into such a state wherein
she may be justly opposed. And lastly for calling the distinction of points
into Fundamental and not Fundamental, an evasion, I believe you will find it
easier to call it so, then to prove it so. But that shall be the issue of the
Controversy in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
That the distinction of points fundamental and not fundamental, is neither
pertinent, nor true in our present Controversy. And that the Catholic Visible
Church cannot err, in either kind of the said points.
THIS distinction is abused by Protestants to many purposes of theirs, and
therefore if it be either untrue or impertinent (as they understand, and apply
it) the whole edifice built thereon, must be ruinous and false. For if you
object their bitter and continued discords in matters of faith, without any
means of agreement; they instantly tell you (as Charity mistaken plainly
shows) that they differ only in p^ints not fundamental. If you convince them,
even by their own Confessions, that the ancient Fathers taught diverse points
held by the Roman Church against Protestants; they reply, that those Fathers
may nevertheless be saved, because those errors were not fundamental. If you
will them to remember, that Christ must always have a visible Church on earth,
with administration of Sacraments, and succession of Pa^stors, and that when
Luther appeared there was no Church distinct from the Roman, whose Communion
and doctrine, Luther then for^ook, and for that cause must be guilty of Schism
and Herosie; they have an Answer (such as it is) that the Catholic Church
cannot perish, yet may err in points not fundamental, and therefore Luther
and other Protestants were obliged to forsake her for such errors, under pain
of Damnation; as if (forsooth) it were Damnable, to hold an error not
Fundamental, nor Damnable. If you wonder how they can teach, that both
Catholics, and Protestants may be saved in their several professions; they
salve this contradiction, by saying, that we both agree in all fundamental
points of faith, which is enough for salvation. And yet, which is prodigiously
strange, they could never be induced to give a Catalogue what points in
particular be fundamental, but only by some general description, or by
referring us to the Apostles Creed, without determining, what points therein be
fundamental, or not fundamental for the matter; and in what sense, they be,
or be not such: and yet concerning the meaning of diverse points contained, or
reduced to the Creed, they differ both from us, and among themselves. And
indeed, it being impossible for them to exhibit any such Catalogue, the said
distinction of points, although it were pertinent, and true, cannot serve them
to any purpose, but still they must remain uncertain, whether or not they
disagree from one another; from the ancient Fathers; and from the Catholic
Church, in points fundamental: which is to say, they have no certainty,
whether they enjoy the substance of Christian Faith, without which they cannot
hope to be saved. But of this more hereafter.

2 And to the end, that what shall be said concerning this distinction, may be
better understood, we are to observe; that there be two precepts, which
concern the virtue of faith, or our obligation to believe divine truths. The
one is by Divines called Affirmative, whereby we are obliged to have a positive
explicit belief of some chief Articles of Christian faith. The other is ^ermed
Negative, which strictly binds us not not to disbelieve, that is, not to
believe the contrary of any one point sufficiently represented to our
understanding, as revealed, or spoken by Almighty God. The said Affirmative
Precept (according to the nature of such commands) injoynes some act to be
performed, but not at all times, nor does it equally bind all sorts of persons,
in respect of all objects to be believed. For objects; we grant that some are
more necessary to be explicitly, and several believed then other: either
because they are in themselves more great, and weighty; or else in regard they
instruct us in some necessary Christian duty toward God, our selves, or our
Neighbor, For persons; no doubt but some are obliged to know distinctly more
then others, by reason of their office, vocation, capacity or the like. For
times; we are not obliged to be still in act of exercising acts of faith, but
according as several occasions permit, or require. The second kind of precept
called Negative, does (according to the nature of all such commands) oblige
universally, all persons, in respect of all objects; and at all times; se^per
and pro semper, as Divines speak. This general doctrine will be more clear by
examples* I am not obliged to be always helping my Neighbor, because the
Affirmative precept of Charity, binds only in some particular cases: But I am
always bound by a Negative precept, never to do him any hurt, or wrong. I am
not always bound to utter what I know to be true: yet I am obliged, never to
speak any one least untruth, against my knowledge. And (to come to our present
purpose) there is no Affirmative precept, commanding us to be at all times
actually believing any one, or all Articles of faith: But we are obliged, never
to exercise any act against any one truth, known to be revealed. All sorts of
persons are not bound explicitly, and distinctly to know all things testified
by God either in Scripture, or otherwise: but every one is obliged, not to
believe the contrary of any one point, known to be testified by God. For that
were in fact to affirm, that God could be deceived, or would deceive, which
were to overthrow the whole certainty of our faith, wherein the thing most
principal, is not the point which we believe, which Divines call the Material
Object, but the chiefest is the Motive for which we believe, to wit, Almighty
Gods infallible revelation, or authority, which they term the Formal Object
of our faith. In two senses therefore, and with a double relation, points of
faith may be called fundamental, and necessary to salvation, The one is taken
with reference to the Affirmative Precept, when the points are of such quality
that there is obligation to know and believe them explicitly and severally. In
this sense we grant that there is difference betwixt points of faith, which D.
Potter Page 209.
to no purpose labors to prove against his Adversary, who in express words
does grant and explicate Charity Mistaken cap. 8. Pag^ 75.
it. But the Doctor thought good to dissemble the matter, and not to say one
pertinent word in defense of his distinction, as it was impugned by Charity
Mistaken, and as it is wont to be applied by Protestants. The other sense,
according to which, points of faith may be called Fundamental, and necessary
to salvation, with reference to the Negative precept of faith, is such, that we
cannot without grievous sin, and forfeiture of salvation, disbelieve any one
point, sufficiently propounded, as revealed by Almighty God. And in this sense
we avouch, that there is no distinction in points of faith, as if to reject
some must be damnable, and to reject others, equally proposed as Gods word,
might stand with salvation. Yea the obligation of the Negative precept is far
more strict, then is that of the Affirmative, which God freely imposed, and may
freely release. But it is impossible, that he can dispense, or give leave to
disbelieue, or deny what he affirms: and in this sense, sin and damnation are
more inseparable from error in points not fundamental, then from ignorance in
Articles fundamental. All this I show by an example, which I wish to be
particularly noted for the present, and for diverse other occasions hereafter.
The Creed of the Apostles contains diverse fundamental points of faith, as the
Deity, Trinity of Persons, Incarnation, Passion, and Resurrection of our
Savior Christ etc. It contains also some points, for their matter, and nature
in themselves not fundamental; as under what Judge our Savior suffered, that
he was buried, the circumstance of the time of his Resurrection the third day
etc. But yet nevertheless, whosoever once knows that these points are
contained in the Apostles Creed, the denial of them is damnable, and is in
that sense a fundamental error; and this is the precise point of the present
question.

3 And all that hitherto has been said, is so manifestly true, that no
Protestant or Christian, if he do but understand the terms, and state of the
Question, can possibly deny it: In so much as I am amazed, that men who
otherwise are endued with excellent wits, should so enslave themselves to their
Predecessors in Protestantisme^, as still to harp on this distinction, and
never regard how impertinently, and untruly it was implied by them at first, to
make all Protestants seem to be of one faith, because forsooth they agree in
fundamental points. For the difference among Protestants, consists not in that
some believe some points, of which others are ignorant, or not bound expressly
to know (as the distinction ought to be applied;) but that some of them
disbelieve, and directly, wittingly, and willingly oppose what others do
believe to be testified by the word of God, wherein there is no difference
between points fundamental, and not fundamental; Because till points
fundamental be sufficiently proposed as revealed by God, it is not against
faith to reject them, or rather without sufficient proposition it is not
possible prudently to believe them; and the like is of points not fundamental,
which as soon as they come to be sufficiently propounded as divine Truths, they
can no more be denied, then points fundamental propounded after the same
manner. Neither will it avayle them to their other end, that for preservation
of the Church in being, it is sufficient that she do not err in points
fundamental. For if in the mean time she maintain any one Error against Gods
revelation, be the thing in it self never so small, her Error is damnable,
and destructive of salvation.

4 But D. Potter forgetting to what purpose Protestants make use of their
distinction, does finally overthrow it, and yields to as much as we can desire.
For, speaking of that measure Page 211*
and Quantity of faith without which none can be saved, he says: It is enough
to believe some things by a vertuall faith, or by a general, and as it were, a
negative faith, whereby they are not denied or contradicted. Now our question
is in case that divine truths, although not fundamental, be denied and
contradicted; aad therefore, even according to him, all such denial excludes
salvation. After, he speaks more plainly. It is true (says he) whatsoever Page
212*
is revealed in Scripture, or propoundid by the Church out of Scripture, is in
some sense fundamental, in regard of the divine authority of God, and his
word, by which it is recommended: that is, such as may not be de^ied, or
contradicted without Infidelity: such as every Christian is bound with
humility, and reverence to believe, whenever the knowledge thereof is offered
to him. And further: Where Page 250*
the revealed will or word of God is sufficiently propounded; there he that
opposes, is convinced of error, and he who is thus convinced is an Heretic,
and Heresy is a work of the flesh which excludes from heaven (Gal. 5. 20.
21.) And hence it follows, that it is FVNDAMENTALL to a Christians FAITH, and
necessary for his salvation, that he believe all revealed Truths of God,
whereof he may be convinced that they are from God. Can any thing be spoken
more clearly or directly for us, that it is a Fundamental error to deny any
one point, though never so small, if once it be sufficiently propounded, as a
divine truth, and that there is, in this sense, no distinction betwixt points
fundamental, and not fundamental? And if any should chance to imagine, that
it is against the foundation of faith, not to believe points Fundamental,
although they be not sufficiently propounded, D. Potter does not admit of this
Page 246.
difference betwixt points fundamental, and not fundamental. For he teaches,
that sufficient proposition of revealed truth is required before a man can be
convinced, and for want of sufficient conviction he excuses the Disciples from
heresy, although they believed not our Saviors Resurrection, Page 246.
which is a very fundamental point of faith. Thus then I argue out of D.
Potters own confession: No error is damnable unless the contrary truth be
sufficiently propounded as revealed by God: Every error is damnable, if the
contrary truth be sufficiently propounded as revealed by God: Therefore all
errors are alike for the general effect of damnation, if the difference arise
not from the manner of being propounded. And what now is become of their
distinction?

5 I will therefore conclude with this Argument. According to all Philosophy
and Divinity, the Unity, and distinction of every thing follows the Nature
and Essence thereof, and therefore if the Nature and being of faith, be not
taken from the matter which a man believes, but from the motive for which he
believes, (which is Gods word or Revelation) we must likewise affirm that the
Unity, and Diversity of faith, must be measured by Gods revelation (which is
alike for all objects) and not by the smalnesse, or greatness of the matter
which we believe. Now, that the nature of faith is not taken from the
greatness, or smalnesse of the things believed, is manifest; because otherwise
one who believes only fundamental points, and another who together with them,
does also believe points not fundamental, should have faith of different
natures, yea there should be as many differences of faith, as there are
different points which men believe, according to different capacities, or
instruction etc. all which consequences are absurd, and therefore we must say,
that Unity in Faith does not depend upon points fundamental, or not
fundamental, but upon Gods revelation equally or unequally proposed: and
Protestants pretending an Unity only by reason of their agreement in
fundamental points, do indeed induce as great a multiplicity of faith as
there is multitude of different objects which are believed by them, and since
they disagree in things Equally revealed by Almighty God, it is evident that
they forsake the very Formal motive of faith, which is Gods revelanon and
consequently loose all Faith, and Unity therein.

6 The first part of the Title of this Chapter ( That the distinction of points
fundamental and not fundamental in the sense of Protestants, is both
impertinent and untrue) being demonstrated; let us now come to the second: That
the Church is infallible in all her definitions, whether they concern points
fundamental, or not fundamental, And this I prove by these reasons.

7 It has been showed in the precedent Chapter, that the Church is Judge of
Controversies; which she could not be, if she could err in any one point, as
Doctor Potter would not deny, if he were once persuaded that she is Judge.
Because if the could err in some points, we could not rely upon her Authority
and Judgment in any one thing.

8 This same is proved by the reason we alleged before, that seeing the
Church was infallible in all her definitions ere Scripture was written (unless
we will take away all certainty of faith for that time) we cannot with any show
of reason affirm, that she has been deprived thereof by the adjoined
confort, and help of sacred writ.

9 Moreover to say, that the Catholic Church may propose any false doctrine,
makes her liable to damnable sin and error; and yet D. Potter teaches that
the Church cannot err damnably. For if in that kind of Oath, which Divines
call Assertorium, wherein God is called to witness, every falsehood is a deadly
sin in any private person whatsoever, although the thing be of it self
neither material, nor prejudicial to any; because the quantity, or greatness
of that sin is not measured so much by the thing which is affirmed, as by the
manner*; and authority whereby it is avouched, and by the injury that is
offered to Almighty God in applying his testimony to a falsehood: in which
respect it is the unanimous consent of all Divines, that in such kind of
Oaths, no levitas materiae, that is, smallnes of matter, can excuse from a
moral sacrilege, against the moral virtue of Religion which respects worship
due to God: If I say, every least falsehood be deadly sin in the foresaid kind
of Oath; much more pernicious a sin must it be in the public person of the
Catholic Church to propound untrue Articles of faith, thereby fastening Gods
prime Verity to falsehood, and inducing and obliging the world to do the same.
Besides, according to teh doctrine of all Divines, it is not only injurious to
Gods Eternal Verity, to disbelieve things by him revealed, but also to propose
as revealed truths, things not revealed: as in common wealths it is a heinous
offense to coin either by counterfeiting the metal or the stamp, or to apply
the Kings seal to a writing counterfeit, although the contents were supposed
to be true. And whereas, to show the detestable sin of such pernicious
fictions, the Church does most exemplarly punish all broachers of fained
revelations, visions; miracles, prophecies etc. as in particular appears in
the Council of Sub. Leon. ^0. Sess. 11.
Lateran, excommunicating such persons; if the Church her self could propose
false revelations, she herself should have been the first, and chiefest
deserver to have been censured, and as it were excommunicated by herself. For
(as the holy Ghost says in Cap. 13. v. ^.
Job) does God need your lie, that for him you may speak deceipts? And that of
the Apocalypse is most truly verified in fictitious revelations: If any Cap.
ult. v. 18.
shall add to these things, God will add unto him the plagues which are
written in this book: and D. Potter says, to add Page 122.
to it (speaking of the Creed) is high presumption, almost as great as to
detract from it. And therefore to say the Church may addefalse Revelations, is
to accuse her of high presumption, and of pernicious error excluding salvation.

10 Perhaps some will here reply that although the Church may err, yet it is
not imputed to her for sin, by reason she does not err upon malice, or
wittingly, but by ignorance, or mistake.

11 But it is easily demonstrated that this excuse cannot serve. For if the
Church be assisted only for points fundamental, she cannot but know, that she
may err in points not fundamental, at least she cannot be certain that she
cannot err, and therefore cannot be excused from headlong and pernicious
temerity, in proposing points not fundamental, to be believed by Christians;
as matters of faith, wherein she can have no certainty, yea which always imply
a falsehood. For although the thing might chance to be true, and perhaps also
revealed; yet for the matter, she for her part, does always expose her self
to danger of falsehood and error; and in fact does always err in the ^anner in
which she does propound any matter not fundamental; because she proposes it
as a point of faith certainly true, which yet is always uncertain, if she in
such things may be deceived.

12 Besides, if the Church may err in points not fundamental, she may err in
proposing some Scripture for Canonical, which is not such: or else not err in
keeping and conserving from corruptions such Scriptures as are already believed
to be Canonical. For I will suppose, that in such Apocrypha^^ Scripture as she
delivers, there is no fundamental error against faith, or that there is no
falsehood at all, but only want of divine testification: in which case D. Potter
must either grant, that it is a fundamental error, to apply divine revelation
to any point not revealed, or else must yield, that the Church may err in her
Proposition, or Custody of the Canon of Scripture. And so we cannot be sure
whether she have not been deceived already, in Books recommended by her, and
accepted by Christians. And thus we shall have no certainty of Scripture, if
the Church want certainty in all her definitions. And it is worthy to be
observed, that some Books of Scripture which were not always known to be
Canonical, have been afterward received for such; but never any one book, or
syllable defined by the Church to be Canonical, was afterward questioned, or
rejected for Apocryphal. A sign, that Gods Church is infallibly assisted by
the holy Ghost, never to propose as divine truth, any thing not revealed by
God: and that, O^ission to define points not sufficiently discussed is
laudable, but Commission in propounding things not revealed, inexcusable; into
which precipitation our Savior Christ never has, nor never will permit his
Church to fall.

13 Nay, to limit the general promises of our Savior Christ made to his
Church to points only fundamental, namely, that the gates Mar. 16. 18.
of hell shall not prevail against her: and that, the holy Ghost Joan. 16. 13.
shall lead her into all truth etc. is to destroy all faith. For we may by that
doctrine, and manner of interpreting the Scripture, limit the Infallibility of
the Apostles words, and preaching, only to Points fundamental: and whatsoever
general Texts of Scripture shall be alleged for their infallibility, they
may, by D. Potter example be explicated, and restrained to points fundamental.
By the same reason it may be farther affirmed, that the Apostles, and other
writers of Canonical Scripture, were endued with infallibility, only in
setting down points fundamental. For if it be urged, that all Scripture is
divinely inspired; that it is the word of God etc. D. Potter has afforded you
a ready answer, to say, that Scripture is inspired etc. only in those parts, or
parcels, wherein it delivers fundamental points. In this manner D. Fotherby
says: The Apostle In his Sermons. Sermon. 2. page 50.
twice in one Chapter professed, that this he speaks, and not the Lord, He is
very well content that where he lacks the warrant of the express word of God,
that part of his writings should be esteemed as the word of man. D. Potter also
speaks very dangerously toward this purpose, Sect. 5. where he endeavors to
prove, that the infallibility of the Church is limited to points fundamental,
because as Nature, so God is neither defective in Page 150.
necessaries, nor lavish in supers^uities. Which reason does likewise prove
that the infallibility of Scripture, and of the Apostles must be restrained to
points necessary to salvation, that so God be not accused, as defective in
necessaries, or lavish in supers^uities. In the same place he has a discourse
much tending to this purpose, where speaking of these words: The Spirit shall
lead you into all truth, and shall abide with Joan. c. 16. 13. etc. ^4. 16.
you for ever, he says: Though that promise was Page 151. 152.
directly, and primarily made to the Apostles (who had the Spirits guidance in
a more high and absolute manner, then any since them) yet it was made to
themfor the behoof of the Church, and is verified in the Church Universal. But
all truth is not simply all, but all of some kind. To be led into all truths,
is to know, and believe them. And who is so simple as to be ignorant, that
there are many millions of truths (in Nature, History, Divinity) whereof the
Church is simply ignorant. How many truths lie unrevealea in the infinite
treasury of Gods wisdom, wherewith the Church is not acquainted etc. so then,
the truth it self enforces us to understand by (all truths) not simply all,
not all which God can possibly reveal, but all pertaining to the substance of
faith, all truth absolutely necessary to salvation. Mark what he says. That
promise ( The spirit shall lead you into all truth,) was made directly to the
Apostles, and is verified in the universal Church, but by all truth is not
understood simply all, but all apperraining to the substance of faith, and
absolutely necessary to salvation. Does it not hence follow, that the promise
made to the Apostles of being led into all truth, is to be understood only of
all truth absolutely necessary to salvation? and consequently their preaching,
and writing, were not infallible in points not fundamental? or if the Apostles
were infallible in all things which they proposed as divine truth, the like
must be affirmed of the Church, because D. Potter teaches, the said promise to
be verified in the Church. And as he limits the aforesaid words to points
fundamental; so may he restrain, what other text soever that can be brought
for the universal infallibility of the Apostles or Scriptures. So he may; and
so he must, least otherwise he receive this answer of his own from himself,
How many truths lie unrevealed in the infinite treasury of Gods wisdom,
wherewith the Church is not acquainted? And therefore to verify such general
sayings, they must be understood of truths absolutely necessary to Salvation.
Are not these fearful consequences? And yet D. Potter will never be able to
avoid them, till he come to acknowledge the infallibility of the Church in all
points by her proposed as divine truths; and thus it is universally true that
she is lead into all truth, in regard that our Savior never permits her to
define, or teach any falsehood.

14 All, that with any color may be replied to this argument is; That if once
we call any one Book, or parcel of Scripture in question; although for the
matter it contain no fundamental error, yet it is of great importance and
fundamental, by reason of the consequence; because if once we doubt of one
Book received for Canonical, the whole canon is made doubtful and uncertain,
and therefore the infallibility of Scripture must be universal, and not
confined within compass of points fundamental.

15 I answer: For the thing it self it is very true, that if I doubt of any
one parcel of Scripture received for such, I may doubt of all: and thence by
the same parity I infer, that if we did doubt of the Churches infallibility
in some points, we could not believe her in any one, and consequently not in
propounding Canonical Books, of any other points fundamental, or not
fundamental; which thing being most absurd, and withal most impious, we must
take away the ground thereof, and believe that she cannot err in any point
great or small: and so this reply does much more strengthen what we intend to
prove. Yet I add, that Protestants cannot make use of this reply with any good
coherence to this their distinction, and some other doctrines which they
defend. Por if D. Potter can tell what points in particular be fundamental (as
in his 7. Sect. he pretends) then he may be sure, that whenever he meets
with such points in Scripture, in them it is infallibly true, although it might
err in others: and not only true but clear, because Protestants teach, that
in matters necessary to Salvation, the Scripture is so clear, that all such
necessary truths are either manifestly contained therein, or may be clearly
deduced from it, Which Doctrines being put together, to wit: That Scriptures
cannot err in points fundamental; that they clearly contain all such
points; and that they can tell what points in particular be such, I mean
fundamental; it is manifest, that it is sufficient for Salvation, that
Scripture be infallible only in points fundamental. For supposing these
doctrines of theirs to be true, they may be sure to find in Scripture all
points necessary to Salvation, although it were fallible in other points of
less moment. Neither will they be able to avoid this impiety against holy
Scripture, till they renounce their other doctrines. and in particular, till
they believe that Christ's promise to his Church, are not limited to points
fundamental.

16 Besides, from the fallibility of Christ's Catholic Church in some points,
it follows, that no true Protestant earned, or unlearned, does or can with
assurance believe the universal Church in any one point of doctrine. Not in
points of lesser moment, which they call not fundamental; because they believe
that in such points she may err. Not in fundamentalls; because they must know
what points be fundamental, before they go to learn of her, least otherwise
they be rather deluded, then instructed; in regard that her certain, and
infallible direction extends only to points fundamental. Now, if before they
address themselves to the Church, they must know what points are fundamental,
they learn not of her, but will be as fit to teach, as to be taught by her: How
then are all Christians so often, so seriously, upon so dreadful menaces, by
Fathers, Scriptures, and our blessed Savior himself, counseled and commanded
to seek, to hear, to obey the Church? S. Austine was of a very different mind
from Protestants: If (says he) the Epist. 118.
Church through the whole world practice any of these things, to dispute
whether that ought to be so done, is a most insolent madness. And in another
place he says, That which Lib. 4. de. Bapt. c. 24.
the whole Church holds, and is not ordained by Councels, but has always been
kept, is most rightly believed to be delivered by Apostolical authority. The
same holy Father teaches, that the custom of baptizing children cannot be
proved by Scripture alone, and yet that it is to be believed, as derived from
the Apostles. The custom of our Mother the Lib. 10. de Gene ^i ad liter. cap.
23.
Church (says he) in baptizing infants i^ in no wise to be contemned, nor to
be accounted superfluous, nor is it at all to be believed. unless it were an
Apostolical Tradition, And elsewhere. Christ Sermon. 14. de verbis Apost. c. 18.
is of profit to Children baptized; Is he therefore of profit to persons not
believing? But God forbid, that I should say infants do not believe. I have
already said, he believes in another, who finned in another. It is said, be
believes, and it is of force, and he is reckoned among the faithful that are
baptized. This the authority of our Mother the Church has; against this
strength, against this invincible wall whosoever rusheth shall be crushed in
pieces. To this argument the Protestants in the Conference at Ratishon, gave
this round answer: Nos ab Augustino See Protocoll. Mon^^ch. edit. 2. p. 307.
hac in part libere dissentimas. In this we plainly disagree from Augustine.
Now if this doctrine of baptizing Infants be not fundamental in D. Potters
sense, then according to S. Augustine, the infallibility of the Church extends
to points not fundamental. But if on the other side it be a fundamental
point; then according to the same holy Doctor, we must rely on the authority
of the Church, for some fundamental point, not contained in Scripture, but
delivered by Tradition. The like argument I frame out of the same Father about
the not rebaptizing of those who were baptized by Heretics, whereof he
excellently to our present purpose speaks in this manner. We follow Lib. 1.
cont. Crescon. cap. 32. and 34.
indeed in this matter even the most certain authority of Canonical all
Scriptures. But how? Consider his words: Although verily there be brought no
example for this point out of the Canonical Scriptures, yet even in this point
the truth of the same Scriptures is held by us, while we do that, which the
authority of Scriptures does recommend, that so, because the holy Scripture
cannot deceive us, whosoever is afraid to be deceaved by the obscurity of this
question, must have recourse to the same Church concerning it, which without
any ambiguity the holy Scripture does demonstrate to us. Among many other
points in the aforesaid words, we are to observe, that according to this holy
Father, when we prove some points not particularly contained in Scripture, by
the authority of the Church, even in that case we ought not to be said to
believe such points without Scripture, because Scripture it self recommends
the Church; and therefore relying on her we rely on Scripture, without danger
of being deceaved by the obscurity of any question defined by the Church. And
elsewhere he faithi Seeing this is De ^nit. Eccles. c. 19.
written in no Scripture, we must believe the testimony of the Church, which
Christ declares to speak the truth. But it seems D. Potter is of opinion that
this doctrine about not rebaptizing such as were baptized by Heretics, is no
necessary point of faith, nor the contrary an heresy: wherein he contradicts
S. Augustine, from whom we have now heard, that what the Church teaches, is
truly said to be taught by Scripture; and consequently to deny this particular
point, delivered by the Church, is to oppose Scripture it self. Yet if he will
needs hold, that this point is not fundamental, we must conclude out of S.
Augustine, (as we did concerning the baptizing of Children) that the
infallibility of the Church reaches to points not fundamental. The same
Father in another place, concerning this very question of the validity of
Baptism conferred by Heretics, says: The De Bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap.
23.
Apostles indeed have prescribed nothing of this, but this Custom ought to be
believed to be originally taken from their tradition, as there are many things
that the universal Church observes which are therefore with good reason
believed to have been commanded by the Apostles, although they be not written.
No less clear is S. Chrysoslome for the infallibility of the Traditions of the
Church. For treating these words (2 Thessalonians. 2. Stand, and hold the Traditions
which you have learned whether by speech or by Epistle) says: Hence it is Hom.
4.
manifest that they delivered not all things by letter, but many things also
without writing, and these also are worthy of belief. Let us therefore account
the tradition of the Church to be worthy of belief. It is a Tradition: Seek no
more. Which words are so plainly against Protestants, that Whitaker is as
plain with S. Chrysostom, saying: I answer De Sacra Script. p. 678.
that this is an inconsiderate speech, and unworthy so great a Father. But let
us conclude with S. Augustine, that the Church cannot approve any error
against faith, or good manners. The Church (says he) being ^p. 119.
Placed between much chafe and cockle, does tolerate many things; but yet she
does not approve, nor dissemble, nor do those things which are against faith,
or good life.

17 And as I have proved that Protestants, according to their grounds, cannot
yield infallibls assent to the Church in any one point: so by the same reason I
prove, that they cannot rely upon Scripture it self in any one point of faith.
Not in points of lesser moment (or not fundamental) because in such points the
Catholic Church, (according to D. Potter) and much more any Protestant may
err, and think it is contained in Scripture, when it is not. Not in points
fundamental, because they must first know what points be fundamental, before
they can be assured. that they cannot err in understanding the Scripture, and
consequently independantly of Scripture, they must foreknow all fundamental
points of faith: and therefore they do not indeed rely upon Scripture, either
for fundamental, or not fundamental points.

18 Besides, I mainly urge D. Potter, and other Protestants, that they tell us
of certain points which they call fundamental, and we cannot wrest from them a
list in particular of such points, without which no man can tell whether or no
he err in points fundamental, and be capable of salvation. And which is most
lamentable, instead of giving us such a Catalogue, they fall to wrangle among
themselves about the making of it.

19 Calvin holds the Instit. l. 4. Cap. 2,
Popes Primacy, Invocation of Saints, Free will, and such like, to be
fundamental errors overthrowing the Gospel. Others are not of his mind, as
Melancthou who says, in Cent. Ep. Theol. ep. 74.
the opinion of himself, and other his Brethren, That the Monarchy of the
Bishop of Rome is of use, or profit to this end, that Consent of Doctrine may
be retained. An agreement therefore may easily be established in this Article
of the Popes Primacy, if other Articles could be agreed upon. If the Popes
Primacy be a means, that consent of Doctrine may be retained, first submit to
it, and other articles will be easily agreed upon. Luther also says of the
Popes Primacy, it may be borne In Assertionib. art. 36,
withal. And why then, O Luther, did you not bear with it? And how can you,
and your followers be excused from damnable Schism, who chose rather to devide
Gods Church, then to bear with that, which you confess may be borne withal?
But let us go forward. That the doctrine of freewill, Prayer for the dead,
worshipping of Images, Wo^ship and Invocation of Saints, Real presence,
Transubstantiation, Receaving under one kind, Satisfaction, and Meant of works,
and the Mass, be not fundamental Errors, is taught ( respective) by diverse
Protestants carefully alleged in the Protestants Tract. 1. c. 2. Sect. 14.
after F.
Apology, etc. as namely by Perkins, Cartwright, Frith, Fulle, Spark, Goade,
Luther, Reynolds, Whitaker, Tindall, Franci Johnson, with others. Contrary to
these, is the Confession of the Christian faith, so called by Protestants,
which I mentioned Cap. 1. v. 4.
heretofore, wherein we are damned unto unquenchable fire, for the doctrine of
Mass, Prayer to Saints, and for the dead, Freewill, Presence at Idol-service,
Man's merit, with such like. Justification by faith alone is by some Protestants
affirmed to be the soul of the Chark in the Tower disputation, the 4. days
conference.
Church: The only principal origin of Fox Act. and Mon p. 402.
Salvation: of all other points of The Confession of Bohemia in the Harmony of
Consessions page 253.
doctrine the chiefest and weightiest. Which yet, as we have seen, is contrary
to other Protestants, who teach that me^ of good works is not a fundamental
Error; yea, diverse Protestants defend merit of good works, as may be seen in
Tract. 3. Sect. 7. under m. n. 15.
Breereley. One would think that the Kings Supremacy, for which some blessed
men lost their lives was once among Protestants held for a Capital point; but
now D. Andrews late of Winchester in his book against Bellarmime tells us,
that it is sufficient to reckon it among true Doctrines, And Wo^ton denies that
Protestants In his answer to a Popish pamphlet p. 68
hold the Kings Supremacy to be an essential point of faith. O freedom of the
new Gospel! Hold with Catholics, the Pope; or with Protestants, the King; or
with Puritanes, neither Pope, nor King, to be Head of the Church, all is one,
you may be saved. Some, as Castalio, Vid. Gul. Reginald. Calv. Turcis. lib. ^.
c. 6.
and the whole Sect of the Academicall Protestants, hold, that doctrines about
the Supper, Baptism, the state and office of Christ, how he is one with his
Father, the Trinity, Predestination, and diverse other such questions are not
necessary to Salvation. And (that you may observe how ungrounded, and partial
their Assertions be) Perkins teaches, that the Real presence of our Saviors
Body in the Sacrament, as it is believed by Catholics, is a fundamental
error; and yet affirms the Consubstantiation of Lutherans not to be such,
notwithstanding that diverse chief Lutherans, to their Consubstantiation join
the prodigious Heresy of Vbiquitation. D. Usher in his Sermon of the Unity of
the Catholic faith, grants Salvation to the Aethiopians, who yet with
Christian Baptism join Circumcision. D. Potter Page 113. 114. Motton in his
Treatise of the kingdom of Israel. p. 94.
cites the doctrine of some, whom he terms men of great learning and
judgment: that, all who profess to love and honor IES US CHRIST are in the
visible Christian Church, and by Catholics to be reputed Brethren. One of
these men of great learning and judgment, is Thomas Morton, by D. Potter cited
in his Margent, whose love and honor to Jesus Christ, you may perceive, by his
saying, that the Churches of Arians (who denied our Savior Christ to be God)
are to be accounted the Church of God, because they do hold the foundation of
the Gospel, which is Faith in Jesus Christ the Son of God, and Savior of
the world. And, which is more, it seems by these charitable men, that for
being a member of the Church it is not necessary to believe one only God. For
D. Potter Page 121.
among the arguments to prove Hookers and Mortons opinion, brings this: The
people of the ten Tribes after their defection, notwithstanding their gross
corruptions, and Idolatry, remained still a true Church. We may also, as it
seems by these men's reasoning, deny the Resurrection, and yet be members of
the true Chruch. For a learned man (says D. Potter Page 122.
in behalf of Hookers, and Mortons opinion) was anciently made a Bishop of the
Catholic Church, though he did professedly doubt of the last Resurre^tion of
our bodies. Dear Savior! What times do we behold? If one may be a member of
the true Church, and yet deny the Trinity of the Persons, the Godhead of our
Savior, the necessity of Baptism, if we may use Circumcision, and with the
worship of God join Idolatry, wherein do we differ from Turks, and Jews? or
rather are we not worse, then either of them? If they who deny our Saviors
divinity might be accounted the Church of God, how will they deny that favor
to those ancient Heretics, who denied our Saviors true humanity? and so the
total denial of Christ will not exclude one from being a member of the true
Church. S. Hilary Comment. in Mat. c. 16.
makes it of equal necessity for Salvation, that we believe our Savior to be
true God, and true Man, saying: This manner of Confession we are to hold, that
we remember him to be the Son of God, and the Son of Man, because the one
without the other, can give no hope of Salvation. And yet D. Potter says of
the aforesaid doctrine of Hooker and Morton: The Page 123.
Reader may be pleased to approve, or reject it, as he shall find cause. And
in another place Page 253.
he shows so much good liking of this doctrine, that he explicateth and
proves the Churches perpetual Visibility by it. And in the second Edition of
his book, he is careful to declare, and illustrate it more at large, then he
had done before: howsoever, this sufficiently shows, that they have no
certainty, what points be fundamental. As for the Arians in particular, the
Author whom D. Potter cites for a moderate Catholic, but ^s indeed a plain
Heretic, or rather Atheist, Lucian like jesting at all Religion, A moderate
examination etc. c. 1. paulo post initium.
places Arianisme among fundamental Errors: But contrarily an English
Protestant Divine masked under the name of Irenaeus Philalethes, in a little
Book in Latin entitled, Dissertatio de pace and concordia Ecclesiae,
endeavors to prove, that even the denial of the blessed Trinity may stand
with salvation. Diverse Protestants have taught, that the Roman Church, erreth
in fundamental points, But D. Potter, and others teach the contrary, which
could not happen if they could agree what be fundamental points. You brand the
Donatists with the note of an Error, in the matter Page 126.
and the nature of it properly heretical; because they taught that the Church
remained only with them, in the part of Donat^^, And yet many Protestants are
so far from holding that Doctrine to be a fundamental error, that
themselves go further, and say; that for diverse ages before Luther there was
no ^rue Visible Church at all. It is then too too apparent, that you have no
agreement in specifying, what be fundamental points; neither have you any
means to determine what they be; for if you have any such means, why do you
not agree? You tell us, the Creed contains all points fundamentall^ which
although it were true, yet you see it serves not to bring you to a particular
knowledge, and agreement in such points. And no wonder. For (besides what I
have said already in the beginning of this Chapter, and am to deliver more at
large in the next) after so much labor and spent paper to prove that the Creed
contains all fundamental points, you conclude: It remains Page 241.
very probable, that the Creed is the perfect Summary of those fundamental
truths, whereof consists the V^^ty of faith, and of the Catholic Church. Very
probable? Then, according to all good Logic, the contrary may remain very
probable, and so all remain as full of uncertainty, as before. The whole Rule,
say you, and the sole Judge of your faith, must be Scripture. Scripture does
indeed deliver divine Truths, but seldom does qualify them, or declare whether
they be, or be not, absolutely necessary to salvation. You fall P. 215.
heavy upon Charity Mistaken, because he demands a particular Catalogue of
fundamental points, which yet you are obliged in conscience to do, if you be
able. For without such a Catalogue, no man can be assured whether or no, he
have faith sufficient to Salvation. And therefore take it not in ill part, if
we again and again demand such a Catalogue. And that you may see we proceed
fairly, I will perform, on our behalf, what we request of you, and do here
deliver a Catalogue, wherein are comprised all points by us taught to be
necessary to Salvation, in these words. We are obliged, under pain of
damnation, to believe whatsoever the Catholic visible Church of Christ
proposes, as revealed by Almighty God. If any be of another mind, all
Catholics denounce him to be no Catholic. But enough of this. And I go
forward with the Infallibility of the Church in all points.

20 For, even out of your own doctrine, that the Church cannot err in points
necessary to salvation, any wise man will infer, that it behooves all, who
have care of their souls, not to forsake her in any one point. 1. Because they
are assured, that although her doctrine proved not to be true in some point,
yet even according to D. Potter, the error cannot be fundamental, nor
destructive of faith, and salvation: neither can they be accused of any least
imprudence in erring (if it were possible) with the universal Church.
Secondly, since she is, under pain of eternal damnation, to be believed, and
obeyed in some things, wherein confessedly she is endued with infallibility; I
cannot in wisdom suspect her credit in matters of less moment. For who would
trust another in matters of highest consequence, and be afraid to rely on him
in things of less moment? Thirdly, since (as I said) we are undoubtedly
obliged not to forsake her in the chiefest, or fundamental points, and that
there is no Rule to know precisely what, and how many those fundamental points
be; I cannot without hazard of my soul, leave her in any one point, least
perhaps that point, or points wherein I forsake her, prove indeed to be
fundamental, and necessary to salvation. Fourthly, that visible Church which
cannot err in points fundamental, does without distinction propound all her
Definitions concerning matters of faith to be believed under Anathema's or
Curses, esteeming all those who resist, to be deservedly cast out of her
Communion, and holding it a point necessary to salvation, that we believe she
cannot err: wherein if she speak true, then to deny any one point in
particular, which she defines, or to affirm in general, that she may err,
puts a man into state of damnation. Whereas to believe her in such points as
are not necessary to salvation, cannot endanger salvation; and likewise to
remain in her Communion, can bring no great harm, because she cannot maintain
any damnable error, or practice: but to be divided from her (she being Christ's
Catholic Church) is most certainly damnable. Fifthly, the true Church, being
in lawful, and certain possession of Superiority and Power, to command and
require Obedience, from all Christians in some things; I cannot without
grievous sin withdraw my obedience in any one, unless I evidently know, that
the thing commanded comes not within the compass of those things to which her
Power extends. And who can better inform me, how far God's Church can
proceed, then Gods Church her self? Or to what Doctor can the Children and
Scholars, with greater reason, and more security, fly for direction, then to
the Mother, and appointed Teacher of all Christians? In following her, I shall
sooner be excused, then incleaving to any particular S^ct, or Person, teaching,
or applying Scriptures against her doctrine, or interpretation. Sixthly, the
fearful examples of innumerable persons who forsaking the Church upon pretense
of her errors, have failed, even in fundamental points, and suffered shipwreck
of their Salvation, ought to deter all Christians, from opposing her in any one
doctrine, or practices as (to omit other, both ancient and modern heresies) we
see that diverse chief Protestants, pretending to reform the corruptions of the
Church, are come to affirm, that for many Ages she erred to death, and wholly
perished; which D. Potter, cannot deny to be a fundamental Error against that
Article of our Creed, I believe the Catholic Church, as he a^^irmeth it of
the Donatists, because they confined the universal Church within Africa, or
some other small tract of soil. Least therefore I may fall into some
fundamental error, it is most safe for me to believe all the Decrees of that
Church, which cannot err^ fundamentally: especially if we add; That according
to the Doctrine of Catholic Divines, one error in faith, whether it be for
the matter it self, great or small, d^stroies faith, as is showed in Charity
Mistaken; and consequently to accuse the Church of any one Error, is to
affirm, that she lost all faith, and erred damnably: which very saying is
damnable, because it leaves Christ no visible Church on earth.

21 To all these arguments I add this demonstration: D. Potter teaches, that
there neither ^as Page 75*
nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no more then
from Christ himself, But if the Church of Christ can err in some points of
faith, men not only may, but must forsake her in those, (unless D. Potter will
have them to believe one thing, and profess another:) and if such errors, and
corruptions should fall out to be about the Churches Liturgy, public Service,
administration of Sacraments, and the like; they who perceive such errors,
must of necessity leave her external Communion. And therefore if once we grant
the Church may err, i^ follows that men may, and ought to forsake her (which
is against D. Potters own words,) or else they are inexcusable who left the
Communion of the Roman Church, under pretense of Errors, which they grant, not
to be fundumentall. And if D. Potter* think good to answer this argument, he
must remember his own doctrine to be, that even the Catholic Church may err
in points not fundamental.

22 Another argument for the universal Infallibility of the Church, I take out
of D. Potters own words. If (says he) we Page 97.
did not dissent in some opinions from the present Roman Church, we could not
agree with the Church truly Catholic. These words cannot be true, unless he
presuppose that the Church truly Catholic, cannot err in points not
fundamental. For if she may err in such points, the Roman Church which he
affirms to err only in points not fundamental, may agree with the Church
truly Catholic, if she likewise may err in points not fundamental.
Therefore either he must acknowledge a plain contradiction in his own words, or
else must grant that the Church truly Catholic cannot err in points not
fundamental, which is what we intended to prove.

23 If Words cannot persuade you, that in all Controversies you must rely upon
the infallibility of the Church; at least yield your assent to Deeds. Hitherto
I have produced Arguments drawn, as it were, ex natura rei, from the Wisdom,
and Goodness of God, who cannot fail to have left some infallible means to
determine Controversies, which, as we have proved, can be no other, except a
Visible Church, infallible in all her Definitions. But because both Catholics
and Protestants, receive holy Scripture, we may thence also prove the
infallibility of the Church in all matters which concern Faith and Religion.
Our Savior speaks clearly: The gates of Hell Mat. 16.
shall not prevail against her. And; I will ask my Joan. 14.
Father, and he will give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for
ever, the Spirit of truth. And, But when he, the Spirit of Joan. 16.
truth comes, he shall teach you all truth. The Apostle says, that the
Church is the Pillar, and ground 1. Tim. c. 3.
of Truth. And, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some
Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the
Saints, unto the work of the Ministry, unto the edifying of the body of
Christ: until we meet all into the unity of faith, and knowle^ge of the Son
of God, into a perfect man, into the measure of the age of the ^ulnesse of
Christ: that now we be not Children wavering, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine in the wickedness of men, in craftiness, to the
circumvention Ephesians. 4.
of Error. All which words seem clearly enough to prove, that the Church is
universally infallible, without which, unity of faith could not be conserved
against every wind of Doctrine: And yet Doctor Potter Page 151. 153.
limits these promises and privileges to fundamental points, in which he
grants the Church cannot err. I urge the words of Scripture, which are
universal, and do not mention any such restraint. I allege that most
reasonable, and received Rule, that Scripture is to be understood literally, as
it sounds, unless some manifest absurdity force us to the contrary. But all
will not serve, to accord our different interpretations. In the mean time
diverse of Doctor Potters Brethren step in, and reject his limitation, as over
large, and somewhat tasting of Papistry: And therefore they restrain the
mentioned Texts, either to the Infallibility which the Apostles, and other
sacred Writers had in penning of Scripture: or else to the invisible Church of
the Elect; and to them, not absolutely, but with a double restriction, that
they shall not fall damnably, and finally; and other men have as much right as
these, to interpose their opinion, and interpretation. Behold we are three at
debate about the self same words of Scripture: We confer diverse places and
Text: We consult the Originalls: We examine Translations. We endeavor to pray
heartily: We profess to speak sincerely; To seek nothing but truth and
salvation of our own souls, and that of our Neighbors; and finally we use all
those means, which by Protestants themselves are prescribed for finding out
the true meaning of Scripture: Nevertheless we neither do, or have any
possible means to agree, as long as we are left to our selves; and when we
should chance to be agreed, the doubt would still remain whether the thing it
self be a fundamental point or no: And yet it were great impiety to imagine
that God, the Lover of souls, has left no certain infallible means; to
decide both this, and all other differences arising about the interpretation of
Scripture, or upon any other occasion. Our remedy therefore in these
contentions must be, to consult, and hear God's Visible Church, with
submissiue acknowledgment of her Power, and Infallibility in whatsoever she
proposes as a revealed truth: according to that divine advice of S. Augustine
in these words. If at length Deutil. cred. cap. 8.
thou seem to be sufficiently tossed* and have a desire to put an end to thy
pains, follow the way of the Catholic Discipline, which from Christ himself
by the Apostles has come down even to us, and from us shall descend to all
posterity. And though I conceave that the distinction of points fundamental,
and not fundamental has now been sufficiently confuted; yet that no shadow of
difficulty may remain, I will particularly refell a common saying of
Protestants, that it is sufficient foe salvation, to believe the Apostles
Creed, which they hold to be a Summary of all fundamental points of Faith.

THE ANSWER TO THE THIRD CHAPTER.
Wherein it is maintained, That the distinction of points Fundamental and not
Fundamental, is in this present Controversy good and pertinent: And that the
Catholic Church may err in the latter kind of the said points.
THis distinction is employed by Protestants to many purposes, and therefore if
it be pertinent and good, (as they understand and apply it) the whole edifice
built thereon, must be either firm and stable, or if it be not, it cannot be
for any default in this distinction.

2 If you object to them discords in matter of faith without any means of
agreement, They will answer you, that they want not good and solid means of
agreement in matters necessary to salvation, viz. Their belief of all those
things which are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in Scripture; which who so
belieues, must of necessity believe all things necessary to salvation: and
their mutual suffering one another, to abound in their several sense, in
matters not plainly and undoubtedly there delivered. And for their agreement in
all Controversies of Religion, either they have means to agree about them, or
not: If you say they have, why did you before deny it? If they have not means;
why do you find fault with them, for not agreeing?

3 You will say, that their fault is, that by remaining Protestants they
exclude themselves from the means of agreement, which you have, and which by
submission to your Church they might have also. But if you have means of
agreement, the more shame for you that you still disagree. For who, I pray, is
more inexcusably guilty, for the omission of any duty; they that either have no
means to do it, or else know of none they have, which puts them in the same
case as if they had none: or they which profess to have an easy and expedite
means to do it, and yet still leave it undone? If you had been blind (says
our Savior to the Pharisees) you had had no sin, but now you say you see*
therefore your sin remains.

4 If you say, you do agree in matters of Faith, I say this is ridiculous: for
you define matters of faith to be those wherein you agree. So that to say, you
agree in matters of faith, is to say, you agree in those things wherein you do
agree. And do not Protestants do so likewise? Do not they agree in those
things, wherein they do agree?

5 But you are all agreed that only those things wherein you do agree are
matters of faith. And Protestants if they were wise, would do so too. Sure I
am they have reason enough to do so: seeing all of them agree with explicit
faith in all those things, which are plainly and undoubtedly delivered in
Scripture, that is, in all which God has plainly revealed: and with an
implicit faith, in that sense of the whole Scripture which God intended
whatsoever it was. Secondly, That which you pretend is false; for else, why do
some of you hold it against faith, to take or allow the Oath of Allegiance,
others as learned and honest as they, that it is against Faith and unlawful to
refuse it and allow the refusing of it? Why do some of you hold, that it is de
Fide, that the Pope is Head of the Church by divine Law, others the contrary?
Some hold it de Fide, that the blessed Virgin was freefrom Actual sin,
others that it is not so. Some, that the Popes Indirect power over Princes in
Temporalties is de Fide, Others the contrary. Some, that it is Universal
Tradition, and consequently de Fide, that the Virgin Mary was conceived in
original sin, others the contrary.

6 But what shall we say now, if you be not agreed touching your pretended
means of agreement, how then can you pretend to Unity either Actual or
Potentiall more then Protestants may? Some of you say, the Pope alone without a
Council may determine all Controversies: But others deny it. Some, that a
General Council without a Pope may do so: Others deny this. Some, Both in
conjunction are infallible determiners: Others again deny this. Lastly, some
among you, hold the Acceptance of the decrees of Counsels by the Universal
Church to be the only way to decide Controversies: which others deny, by
denying the Church to be Infallible. And indeed what way of ending
Controversies can this be, when either part may pretend, that they are part of
the Church, and they receive not the decree, therefore the whole Church has
not received it?

7 Again, Means of agreeing differences are either Rational and well
grounded and of Gods appointment, or voluntary and taken up at the pleasure of
men. Means of the former nature, we say, you have as little as we. For where
has God appointed, that the Pope, or a Council, or a Council confirmed by
the Pope, or that Society of Christians which adhere to him, shall be the
Infallible Judge of Controversies. I desire you to show any one of these
Assertions plainly set down in Scripture, (as in all Reason a thing of this
nature should be) or at least delivered with a full consent of Fathers, or at
least taught in plain terms by any one Father for four hundred years after
Christ. And if you cannot do this (as I am sure you cannot) and yet will still
be obtruding your selves upon us for our Judges, who will not cry out, --
perisse frontem de rebus?

8 But then for means of the other kind, such as yours are, we have great
abundance of them. For besides all the ways which you have devised, which we
may make use of when we please, we have a great many more, which you yet have
never thought of, for which we have as good color out of Scripture as you have
for yours. For first, we could if we would, try it by Lots, whose doctrine is
true, and whose false. And you know it is written, Prove. 16. 33.
The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition of it is from the
Lord. 2. We could refer them to the King, and you know it is written: Prove.
16. 10.
A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King his mouth transgresses not in
judgment. Prove. 21. 1.
The Heart of the King is in the hand of the Lord. We could refer the matter
to any assembly of Christians assembled in the the name of Christ, seeing it is
written, Mat. 18. 20.
where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them. We may refer it to any Priest, because it is written, Mat. 2. 7.
The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge. Mat. 25. 2.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair etc. To any Preacher of the
Gospel, to any Pastor, or Doctor, for to every one of them Christ has
promised Mat. 28. 20.
he will be with them always even to the end of the world: and of every one of
them it is said, Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you hears me: etc. To any Bishop or Prelate, for it is
written, Heb. 13. 17.
Obey your Prelates, and again Ephesians. 4. 11.
he has given Pastors and Doctors, etc. least we should be carried about with
every wind of doctrine. To any particular Church of Christians, seeing it is a
particular Church which is called 1. Tim. 3. 15.
The house of God, a Pillar and ground of Truth: and seeing of any Particular
Church it is written Mat. 18. 17.
He that hears not the Church let him be unto thee as a Heathen or a
Public^d. We might refer it to any man that prays for Gods spirit, for it is
written, Mat. 7. 8.
Every one that asks receives: and again, Ia. 1. 5.
If any man want wisdom let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not. Lastly, we might refer it to the Jews, for without all
doubt of them it is written, Isay. 59. 21.
my spirit that is in thee etc. All these means of agreement, whereof not any
one but has as much probability from Scripture, as that which you obtrude upon
us, offer themselves upon a sudden to me: happily many more might be thought
on, if we had time, but these are enough to show, that would we make use of
voluntary and devised means to determine differences, we had them in great
abundance. And if you say these would fail us, and contradict themselves; so,
as we pretend, have yours. There have been Popes against Popes: Counsels
against Counsels: Counsels confirmed by Popes, against Counsels confirmed by
Popes: Lastly the Church of some Ages against the Church of other Ages.

9 Lastly, whereas you find fault, That Protestants upbraided with their
discords, answer that they differ only in points not Fundamental, I desire you
tell me whether they do so, or do not so; If they do so, I hope you will not
find fault with the Answer: If you say they do not so, but in points
Fundamental also; then they are not members of the same Church one with
another, no more then with you: And therefore why should you object to any of
them, their differences from each other, any more then to your selves, their
more and greater differences from you?

10 But they are convinced sometimes even by their own confessions, that the
Ancient Fathers taught diverse points of Popery: and then they reply, those
Fathers may nevertheless be saved, because those errors were not Fundamental.
And may not you also be convinced by the confessions of your own men, that the
Fathers taught diverse points held by Protestants against the Church of Rome,
and diverse against Protestants and the Church of Rome? Do not your Purging
Indexes, clip the tongues, and seal up the lips of a great many for such
confessions? And is not the above cited confession of your Doway Divines, plain
and full to the same purpose? And do not you also, as freely as we, charge the
Fathers with errors, and yet say they were saved? Now what else do we
understand by an unfundamentall error, but such a one with which a man may
possibly be saved? So that still you proceed in condemning others for your own
faults, and urging arguments against us, which return more strongly upon your
selves.

11 But your will is, we should remember that Christ must always have a
visible Church. Ans. Your pleasure shall be obeyed, on condition you will not
forget, that there is a difference between perpetual Visibility, and
perpetual Purity. As for the answer, which you make for us, true it is, we
believe the Catholic Church cannot perish, yet that she may, and did err in
points not Fundamental; and that Protestants were obliged to forsake these
errors of the Church, as they did, though not the Church for her errors, for
that they did not, but continued still members of the Church. For it is not all
one (though you perpetually confound them) to forsake the errors of the Church,
and to forsake the Church: or to forsake the Church in her Errors, and simply
to forsake the Church: No more then it is for me to renounce my Brothers or my
Friends Vices or Errors, and to renounce my Brother or my Friend. The Former
then was done by Protestants, the latter was not done. Nay not only not from
the Catholic, but not so much as from the Roman, did they separate per omnia,
but only in those practices which they conceived superstitious or impious. If
you would at this time propose a form of Liturgy, which both Sides hold
lawful, and then they would not join with you in this Liturgy, you might have
some color then to say, they renounce your communion absolutely. But as things
are now ordered, they cannot join with you in prayers, but they must partake
with you in unlawful practices, and for this reason, they ( not absolutely,
but thus far) separate from your communion. And this, I say, they were
obliged to do under pain of damnation. Not as if it were damnable to hold an
error not damnable, but because it is damnable outwardly to profess and
maintain it, and to join with others in the practice of it, when inwardly they
did not hold it. Now had they continued in your communion, that they must have
done, vid. have professed to believe and externally practiced your Errors,
whereof they were convinced that they were Errors: which, though the matters of
the Errors had been not necessary, but only profitable, whether it had not been
damnable dissimulation and hypocrisy, I leave it to you to judge. You your
self tell us within two pages after this, that you are obliged never to speak
any one least lie against your knowledge,. 2. now what is this but to live in a
perpetual lie?

12 As for that which in the next place you seem so to wonder at, That both
Catholics and Protestants, according to the opinion of Protestants, may be
saved in their several professions, because forsooth, we both agree in all
Fundamental points: I Anwere, this proposition so crudely set down, as you
have here set it down, I know no Protestant will justify. For you seem to make
them teach, that it is an indifferent thing, for the attainment of salvation,
whether a man believe the Truth or the Falsehood; and that they care not in
whether of these Religions a man live or dye, so he dye in either of them:
whereas all that they say is this, That those amongst you which want means to
find the Truth and so dye in error, or use the best means they can with
industry, and without partiality to find the truth, and yet dye in error, these
men, thus qualified, notwithstanding these errors may be saved. Secondly for
those that have means to find the Truth, and will not use them, they conceive,
though their case be dangerous, yet if they dye with a general repentance for
all their sins, known and unknown, their Salvation is not desperate. The
Truths which they hold, of Faith in Christ, and Repentance, being as it were an
antidote against their errors, and their negligence in seeking the Truth.
Especially seeing by confession of both sides we agree in much more the^ is
simply, and indispe^sably necessary to salvation.

13 But seeing we make such various use of this distinction, is it not
prodigiously strange that we will never be induced to give in a particular
Catalogue what points be fundamental? And why I pray is it so prodigiously
strange that we give no answer to an unreasonable demand? God himself has told
us, Luke 12. 48.
That where much is given, much shall be required; where little is given, little
shall be required. To Infants, Deafe-men, Madmen, nothing for ought we know,
is given, and if it be so, of them nothing shall be required. Others perhaps
may have means only given them to believe, 6. Heb. 11.
That God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him; and to whom
thus much only is given, to them it shall not be damnable, that they believe
but only thus much. Which methinks is very manifest from the Apostle, in the
Epist. to the Heb: where having first said, that without faith it is impossible
to please God, he subjoynes as his reason, for whosoever comes unto God, must
believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. Where in
my opinion, this is plainly intimated, that this is the minimum quod sic, the
lowest degree of Faith, wherewith, in men capable of Faith, God will be
pleased: and that with this lowest degree he will be pleased, where means of
rising higher are deficient. Besides, if without this belief, that God is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, God will not be pleased, then his
will is that we should believe it. Now his will it cannot be, that we should
believe a falsehood, It must be therefore true, that he is a rewarder of them
that seek him. Now it is possible that they which never heard of Christ, may
seek God, therefore it is true that even they shall please him, and be rewarded
by him; I say rewarded, not with bringing them immediately to salvation without
Christ, but with bringing them according to his good pleasure, first, to faith
in Christ, and so to salvation. To which belief the story of Cornelius in the
10. chap. of the Acts of the Apostles, and S. Peter's words to him, are to me a
great inducement. For first it is evident he believed not in Christ, but was a
mere Gentile, and one that knew not but men might be worshipped, and yet we are
assured that his prayers and alms (even while he was in that state) came up
for a memorial before God; That his prayer was heard, and his Alms had in
remembrance in the sight of God. v. 4. that upon his, Then fearing God and
working righteousness, (such as it was) he was accepted with God. But how
accepted? Not to be brought immediately to salvation, but to be promoted to a
higher degree of the knowledge of Gods will: For so it is in the 4. and 5. v.
Call for Simon whose surname is Peter, he shall tell thee what thou ought to
do, and at the 33. verse. We are all here present before God, to hear all
things that are commanded thee of God. So that though even in his Gentilisme,
he was accepted in his present state, yet if he had continued in it, and
refused to believe in Christ after the sufficient revelation of the Gospel to
him, and Gods will to have him believe it, he that was accepted before, would
not have continued accepted still; for then that condemnation had come upon
him, that light was come unto him, and he loved darkness more then light. So
that (to proceed a step farther) to whom faith in Christ is sufficiently
propounded, as necessary to Salvation, to them it is simply necessary and
Fundamental to believe in Christ, that is, to expect remission of sins and
Salvation from him, upon the performance of the conditions he requires; among
which conditions one is, that we believe what he has revealed, when it is
sufficiently declared, to have been revealed by him: For by doing so, we set to
our seal, that God is true, and that Christ was sent by him. Now that may be
sufficiently declared to one (all things considered,) which, (all things
considered) to another is not sufficiently declared: and consequently that may
be Fundamental and necessary to one, which to another is not so. Which variety
of circumstances, makes it impossible to set down an exact Catalogue of
Fundamentalls, and proves your request as reasonable, as if you should desire
us (according to the Fable) to make a coat to fit the Moon in all her changes;
or to give you a garment that will fit all statures; Or to make you a dyall to
serve all meridians; or to design particularly, what provision will serve an
army for a year: whereas there may be an army of ten thousand, there may be of
100000. And therefore without seting down a catalogue of Fundamentalls in
particular (because none that can be given, can universally serve for all men,
God requiring more of them to whom he gives more, and less of them to whom he
gives less) we must content our selves by a general description to tell you
what is Fundamental. And to warrant us in doing so, we have your own example.
19. where being engaged to give us a catalogue of Fundamentalls, in stead
thereof you tell us only in general, that all is fundamental, and not to be
disbeleeved under pain of damnation, which the Church has defined. As you
therefore think it enough to say in general, that all is Fundamental which
the Church has defined, without setting down in particular a compleat-Catalogue
of all things, which in any age the Church has defined (which I believe you
will not undertake to do, and if you do, it will be contradicted by your
Fellows:) So in reason you might think it enough for us also to say in
general, that it is sufficient for any man's salvation, to believe that the
Scripture is true, and contains all things necessary for salvation; and to do
his best endeavor to find and believe the true sense of it: without delivering
any particular catalogue of the Fundamentalls of Faith.

14 Neither does the want of such a catalogue leave us in such a perplexed
uncertainty as you pretend. For though perhaps we cannot exactly distinguish in
the Scripture, what is revealed because it is necessary, from what is necessary
consequently and accidentally, merely because it is revealed: yet we are sure
enough, that all that is necessary any way is there, and therefore in believing
all that is there, we are sure to believe all that is necessary. And if we err
from the true and intended sense of some, nay of many obscure or ambiguous
texts of Scripture, yet we may be sure enough, that we err not damnably:
because, if we do indeed desire and endeavor to find the Truth, we may be
sure we do so, and as sure that it cannot consist with the revealed goodness
of God, to damn him for error, that desires and endeavors to find the Truth.

15 Ad. 2. The effect of this Paragraph (for as much as concerns us) is this,
that for any man to deny belief to any one thing be it great or small known by
him, to be revealed by almighty God for a truth, is in effect to charge God
with falsehood: for it is to say that God affirms that to be Truth, which he
either knows to be not a Truth, or which he does not know to be a Truth: and
therefore without all controversy this is a damnable sin. To this I subscribe
with hand and heart: adding withal, that not only he which knows, but he
which believes (nay though it be erroneously) any thing to be revealed by God,
and yet will not believe it, nor assent unto it, is in the same case, and
commits the same sin of derogation from Gods most perfect and pure Veracity.

16 Ad. 3. I said purposely ( known by himself, and belieues himself) For as,
without any disparagement of a man's honesty, I may believe something to be
false, which he affirms, of his certain knowledge to be true, provided I
neither know nor believe that he has so affirmed: So without any the least
dishonor to Gods eternal neverfailing veracity, I may doubt of, or deny some
truth revealed by him, if I neither know nor believe it to be revealed by him.

17 Seeing therefore the crime of calling Gods veracity into question, and
consequently (according to your grounds) of erring Fundamentally, is chargeable
upon those only, that believe the contrary of any one point known (not by
others but themselves) to be testified by God: I cannot but fear (though I hope
otherwise) that your heart condemned you of a great calumny and egregious
sophistry, in imputing fundamental, and damnable error to disagreeing
Protestans; Because forsooth, some of them disbelieve, and directly wittingly
and willingly oppose, what others do believe to be testified by the word of
God. The sophistry of your discourse will be apparent, if it be contrived into
a syllogism: Thus therefore in effect you argue;

Whosoever disbelieves any thing known by himself to be revealed by God,
imputes falsehood to God, and therefore errs fundamentally.

But Some Protestants disbelieve these things, which Others believe to be
testified by God;

Therefore they impute falsehood to God, and err Fundamentally.

Neither can you with any color pretend, that in these words known to be
testified by God, you meant, not by himself, but by any other; Seeing he only
in fact affirms, that God does deceive or is deceived, who denies some things
which himself knows or believes to be revealed by God, as before I have
demonstrated. For otherwise if I should deny belief to some which God had
revealed secretly to such a man as I had never heard of, I should be guilty of
calling Gods veracity into Question, which is evidently false. Besides, how can
it be avoided, but the Jesuits and Dominicans, the Dominicans and Franciscans
must upon this ground differ Fundamentally, and one of them err damnably,
seeing the one of them disbelieves; and willingly opposes, what the others
believe to be the word of God?

18 Whereas you say that the difference among Protestants consists not in this,
that some believe some points of which others are ignorant, or not bound
expressly to know: I would gladly know, whether you speak of Protestants
differing in profession only, or in opinion also. If the first, why do you say
presently after, that some disbelieve, what others of them believe? If they
differ in opinion, then sure they are ignorant of the truth of each other's
opinions: it being impossible and contradictious, that a man should know one
thing to be true, and believe the contrary, or know it and not believe it. And
if they do not know the truth of each others opinions, then, I hope, you will
grant they are ignorant of it. If your meaning were, they were not ignorant,
that each other held these Opinions, or of the sense of the opinions which they
held: I Answer, this is nothing to the convincing of their understandings of
the truth of them, and these remaining unconvinced of the truth of them, they
are excusable if they do not believe.

9 But ignorance of what we are expressly bound to know, is it self a fault,
and therefore cannot be an excuse: and therefore if you could show the
Protestants differ in those points, the truth whereof (which can be but one)
they were bound expressly to know, I should easily yield that one side must of
necessity be in a mortal crime. But for want of proof of this, you content
your self only to say it; and therefore I also might be contented only to deny
it, yet I will not, but give a reason for my denial. And my reason is, because
our obligation expressly to know any divine Truth, must arise from Gods manifest
revealing of it, and his revealing unto us that he has revealed it, and that
his will is, we should believe it: Now in the points controverted among
Protestants, he has not so dealt with us, therefore he has not laid any such
obligation upon us. The major of this syllogism is evident, and therefore I
will not stand to prove it. The minor also will be evident to him that
considers, that in all the Controversies of Protestants, there is a seeming
conflict of Scripture with Scripture, Reason with Reason, Authority with
Authority: which how it can consist with the manifest revealing of the truth of
either Side, I cannot well understand. Besides, though we grant that Scripture,
Reason, and Authority, were all on one side, and the apparences of the other
side all answerable: yet if we consider the strange power that education and
prejudices instilled by it, have over even excellent understandings, we may
well imagine, that many truths which in themselves are revealed plainly enough,
are yet to such or such a man, prepossest with contrary opinions, not revealed
plainly. Neither doubt I but God, who knows whereof we are made, and what
passions we are subject unto, will compassionate such infirmities, and not
enter into judgment with us for those things, which, all things considered,
were unavoidable.

20 But till Fundamentalls ( say you) be sufficiently proposed (as revealed by
God) it is not against Faith to reject them; or rather it is not possible
prudently to believe them: And points unfundamentall being thus sufficiently
proposed as divine Truths, may not be denied; Therefore you conclude there is
no difference between them: Ans. A Circumstantiall point, may by accident
become Fundamental, because it may be so proposed that the denial of it,
will draw after it the denial of this Fundamental truth, that all which God
says is true. Notwithstanding in themselves there is a main difference between
them: Points fundamental being those only which are revealed by God, and
commanded to be preached to all, and believed by all. Points circumstantiall
being such, as though God has revealed them, yet the Pastors of the Church are
not bound under pain of damnation particularly to teach them unto all men
every where, and the people may be securely ignorant of them.

21 You say, Not erring in points Fundamental, is not sufficient for the
preservation of the Church; because any Error maintained by it against Gods
revelation is destructive. I answer. If you mean against Gods Revelation known
by the Church to be so, it is true; but impossible that the Church should do
so, for ipso Facto in doing it, it were a Church no longer. But if you mean
against some Revelation, which the Church by error thinks to be no
Revelation, it is false. The Church may ignorantly disbelieue such a
Revelation, and yet continue a Church; which thus I prove. That the Gospel was
to be preached to all Nations, was a Truth revealed before our Saviors
Ascension, in these words, Go and teach all Nations. Mat. 29. 19. Yet through
prejudice or inadvertence, or some other cause, the Church disbelieved it; as
it is apparent out of the 11. and 12. Chap. of the Acts, until the conversion
of Cornelius, and yet was still a Church. Therefore to disbelieue some divine
Revelation, not knowing it to be so, is not destructive of salvation, or of the
being of the Church. Again, It is a plain Revelation of God, that 1. Cor. 11.
28.
the Sacrament of the Eucharist should be administered in both kinds: and 1.
Cor. 14. 15. 16. 26.
that the public Hymns and Prayers of the Church should be in such a
language as is most for edification; yet these Revelations the Church of Rome
not seeing, by reason of the veil before their eyes, their Churches supposed
infallibility, I hope the denial of them shall not be laid to their charge, no
otherwise then as building hay and stubble on the Foundations, not overthrowing
the Foundation it self.

22 Ad. 2. In the beginning of this Paragraph, we have this Argument against
this Distinction; It is enough (by D. Potters confession) to believe some
things negatiuely, i. e. not to deny them; Therefore all denial of any divine
truth excludes Salvation. As if you should say: One Horse is enough for a man
to go a journey: Therefore without a horse no man can go a journey. As if
some Divine Truths, vi^. Those which are plainly revealed, might not be such,
as of necessity were not to be denied: and others for want of sufficient
declaration, deniable without danger. Indeed if D. Potter had said there had
been no divine Truth, declared sufficiently or not declared, but must upon pain
of damnation be believed, or at least not denied, then might you justly have
concluded as you do: but now, that some may not be denied, and that some may
be denied without damnation why they may not both stand together I do not yet
understand.

23 In the Remainder you in far out of D. Potters words, That all errors are
alike damnable, if the manner of propounding the contrary Truths be not
different: which for ought I know, all Protestants, and all that have sense
must grant. Yet I deny your illation from hence, That the distinction of points
into fundamental and unfundamentall is vain and uneffectuall for the purpose
of Protestants. For though being alike proposed as divine truths, they are by
accident alike necessary, yet the real difference still remains between them,
that they are not alike necessary to be proposed.

24 Ad. 5. The next Paragraph, if it be brought out of the clouds, will I
believe have in it these Propositions. 1. Things are distinguished by their
different natures. 2. The Nature of Faith is taken, not from the matter
believed, for then they that believed different matters should have different
Faiths, but from the Motive to it. 3. This Motive is Gods Revelation. 4. This
Revelation is alike for all objects. 5. Protestants disagree in things equally
revealed by God: Therefore they forsake the formal motive of faith: and
therefore have no faith nor unity therein. Which is truly a very proper and
convenient argument to close up ^ weak discourse, wherein both the Propositions
are false for matter, confused and disordered for the form, and the conclusion
utterly inconsequent. First for the second Proposition, who knows not that the
Essence of all Habits (and therefore of Faith among the rest) is taken from
their Act, and their Object? If the Habit be general, from the Act and Object
in general, if the Habit be special, from the Act and Object in special.
Then for the motive to a thing, that it cannot be of the Essence of the thing
to which it moves, who can doubt, that knows that a motive is an efficient
cause: and that the efficient is always extrinsecall to the effect? For the
fourth, that Gods Revelation is alike for all objects, It is ambiguous: and if
the sense of it be, that his Revelation is an equal Motive to induce us to
believe all objects revealed by him, it is true, but impertinent: If the sense
of it be, that all objects revealed by God are alike (that is, alike plainly
and undoubtedly) revealed by him, it is pertinent, but most untrue. Witness
the great diversity of Texts of Scripture, whereof some are so plain and
evident, that no man of ordinary sense can mistake the sense of them. Some are
so obscure and ambiguous, that to say this or this is the certain sense of
them, were high presumption. For the 5. Protestants disagree in things equally
revealed by God! In themselves perhaps, but not equally to them: whose
understandings by reason of their different Educations are fashioned, and
shaped for the entertainment of various opinions, and consequently some of
them, more inclined to believe such a sense of Scripture, others to believe
another; which to say that God will not take into his consideration in judging
men's opinions, is to disparage his goodness. But to what purpose is it, that
these things are equally revealed to both, (as the light is equally revealed to
all blind men,) if they be not fully revealed to either? The sense of this
Scripture, Why are they then baptized for the dead? and this, He shall be
saved, yet so as by fire, and a thousand others, is equally revealed to you and
to another interpreter, that is certainly to neither. He now conceiues one
sense of them, and you another; and would it not be an excellent inference, if
I should conclude now as you do; That you forsake the formal motive of faith,
which is Gods revelation, and consequently loose all faith and unity therein?
So likewise the Jesuits and Dominicans, the Franciscans and Dominicans
disagree about things equa^ly revealed by Almighty God: and seeing they do so,
I beseech you let me understand, why this reason will not exclude them as well
as Protestants from all faith and unity therein? Thus you have fayl'd of your
undertaking in your first part of your Title, and that is a very ill omen,
especially in points of so straight mutual dependence, that we shall have but
slender performance in your second assumpt. Which is, That the Church is
infallible in all her Definitions, whether concerning points Fundamental, or
not Fundamental.

25 Ad 7. and 8. The Reasons in these two paragraphs, as they were alleged
before, so they were before answered, and thither I remit the Reader.

26 Ad. 9. 10. 11. I grant that the Church cannot without damnable sin,
either deny any thing to be true, which she knows to be Gods truth: or propose
any thing as his truth, which she knows not to be so. But that she may not do
this by ignorance or mistake, and so without damnable sin, that you should
have proved, but have not. But, say you this excuse cannot serve: for if the
Church be assisted only for points fundamental, she cannot but know that she
may err in points not fundamental. Ans. It does not follow, unless you
suppose, that the Church knows that she is assisted no farther. But if, being
assisted only so far, she yet did conceive by error her assistance absolute
and unlimited, or if knowing her assistance restrained to fundamentalls, she
yet conceived by error, that she should be guarded, from proposing any thing
but what was fundamental, then the consequence is apparently false. But at
least she cannot be certain that she cannot err, and therefore cannot be
excused from headlong and pernicious temerity in proposing points not
fundamental, to be believed by Christians as matters of faith. Ans. Neither is
this deduction worth any thing; unless it be understood of such
unfundamentall points, as she is not warranted to propose by evident Text of
Scripture. Indeed if she propose such, as matters of faith certainly true, she
may well be questioned, Quo Warranto? She builds without a foundation, and
says thus says the Lord, when the Lord does not say so: which cannot be
excused from rashness and high presumption; such a presumption, as an
Ambassador should commit, who should say in his Masters name that for which
he has no commission. Of the same nature, I say, but of a higher strain: as
much as the King of Heaven, is greater then any earthly King. But though she
may err in some points not fundamental, yet may she have certainty enough in
proposing others; as for example, these, That Abraham begat Isaac, that S. Paul
had a Cloak, that Timothy was sick; because these* though not Fundamental. i.
e. no essential parts of Christianity, yet are evidently, and undeniably set
down in Scripture, and consequently, may be without all rashness proposed by the
Church as certain divine Revelations. Neither is your Argument concluding when
you say, If in such things she may be deceived, she must be always uncertain
of all such things. For my sense may sometimes possibly deceive me, yet I am
certain enough that I see what I see, and feel what I feel. Our Judges are not
infallible in their judgments, yet are they certain enough, that they judge
aright, and that they proceed according to the evidence that is given, when
they condemn a thief, or a murderer to the gallows. A Traveller is not
always certain of his way, but often mistaken: and does it therefore follow
that he can have no assurance that Charing cross is his right way from the
Temple to White Hall? The ground of your error here, is your not
distinguishing, between Actual certainty and Absolute infallibility.
Geometricians are not infallible in their own science: yet they are very
certain of those things, which they see demonstrated. And Carpenters are not
infallible, yet certain of the straightness of those things which agree with
their rule and square. So though the Church be not infallibly certain, that in
all her Definitions, whereof some are about disputable and ambiguous matters,
she shall proceed according to her Rule, yet being certain of the infallibility
of her rule, and that in this or that thing she does manifestly proceed
according to it, she may be certain of the Truth of some particular decrees,
and yet not certain that she shall never decree but what is true.

27 Ad 12. But if the Church may err in points not fundamental, she may err
in proposing Scripture, and so we cannot be assured whether she have not been
deceived already. The Church may err in her Proposition or custody of the
Canon of Scripture, if you understand by the Church, any present Church of one
denomination, for example, the Roman, the Greek, or so. Yet have we sufficient
certainty of Scripture, not from the bare testimony of any present Church, but
from Universal Tradition, of which the testimony of any present Church is but
a little part. So that here you fall into the Fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter. For in effect this is the sense of your Argument: Unless
the Church be infallible, we can have no certainty of Scripture from the
authority of the Church: Therefore unless the Church be infallible, we can
have no certainty here of at all. As if a man should say; If the vintage of
France miscarry, we can have no wine from France: Therefore if that Vintage
miscarry we can have no Wine at all. And for the incorruption of Scripture, I
know no other rational assurance we can have of it, then such as we have of
the incorruption of other ancient Books, that is, the consent of ancient
Copies: such I mean for the kind, though it be far greater for the degree of
it. And if the spirit of God give any man any other assurance hereof, this is
not rational and discursive, but supernatural and infused. An assurance it
may be to himself, but no argument to another. As for the infallibility of the
Church, it is so far from being a proof of the Scriptures incorruption, that
no proof can be pretended for it, but incorrupted places of Scripture: which
yet are as subject to corruption as any other, and more likely to have been
corrupted (if it had been possible) then any other, and made to speak as they
do, for the advantage of those men, whose ambition it has been a long time,
to bring all under their authority. Now then, if any man should prove the
Scriptures uncorrupted, because the Church says so which is infallible: I
would demand again touching this very thing, that there is an infallible
Church, seeing it is not of it self evident, how shall I be assured of it? And
what can he answer, but that the Scripture says so in these and these places?
Hereupon I would ask him, how shall I be assured, that the Scriptures are
incorrupted in thse places? seeing it is possible, and not altogether
improbable, that these men, which desire to be thought infallible, when they
had the government of all things in their own hands, may have altered them for
their purpose. If to this he answer again, that the Church is infallible, and
therefore cannot do so, I hope it would be apparent, that he runs round in a
circle, and proves the Scriptures incorruption, by the Churches infallibility,
and the Churches infallibility by the Scriptures incorruption, and that is in
effect the Churches infallibility, by the Churches infallibility, and the
Scriptures incorruption by the Scriptures incorruption.

28 Now for your observation, that some Books, which were not always known to
be Canonical, have been afterward received for such. But never any book or
syllable defined for Canonical, was afterward questioned or rejected for
Apocryphal: I demand, touching the first sort, whether they were commended to
the Church by the Apostles as Canonical or not? If not, seeing the whole faith
was preached by the Apostles to the Church, and seeing after the Apostles, the
Church pretends to no new Revelations, how can it be an Article of faith to
believe them Canonical? And how can you pretend, that your Church which makes
this an article of faith, is so assisted as not to propose any thing as a
divine truth which is not revealed by God? If they were, how then is the Church
an infallible keeper of the Cano^ of Scripture, which has suffered some Books
of Canonical Scripture, to be lost? and others to loose for a long time their
being Canonical, at least, the necessity of being so esteemed, and afterward,
as it were by the law of Post liminium has restored their Authority and
Canonicalnesse unto them? If this was delivered by the Apostles to the Church,
the point was sufficiently discussed, and therefore your Churches omission to
teach it for some ages, as an article of faith, nay degrading it from the
number of articles of faith, and putting it among disputable problems, was
surely not very laudable. If it were not revealed by God to the Apostles, and
by the Apostles to the Church, then can it be no Revelation, and therefore her
presumption in proposing it as such, is inexcusable.

19 And then for the other part of it, that never any book or syllable defined
for Canonical, was afterward questioned or rejected for Apocryphal:
Certainly it is a bold asseveration, but extremely false. For I demand; The
Book of Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom, the Epistle of Saint James, and to the Heb.
were they by the Apostles appoved for Canonical, or no? If not, with what face
dare you approve them, and yet pretend that all your doctrine is Apostolical?
Especially seeing it is evident that this point is not deducible by rational
discourse from any other defined by them. If they were approved by them, this I
hope was a sufficient definition: and therefore you were best rub your forehead
hard, and say, that these Books were never questioned. But if you do so, then
I shall be bold to ask you, what books you meant in saying before, Some
books which were not always known to be Canonical, have been afterward
received? Then for the book of Macchabes, I hope you will say, it was defined
for Canonical before S. Gregory's time: and yet he, lib. 19. Moral, c. 13.
citing a testimony out of it, prefaceth to it after this manner, Concerning
which matter we do not amiss if we produce a testimony out of Books although
not Canonical, yet set forth, for the edification of the Church. For Eleazar
in the Book of Machabees. etc. Which if it be not to reject it from being
Canonical, is without question, at least to question it. Moreover, because you
are so punctual, as to talk of words and syllables, I would know whether
before Sixtus Quint us his time, your Church had a defined Canon of Scripture,
or not? If not, then was your Church surely a most Vigilant keeper of
Scripture, that for 1500 years had not defined what was Scripture, and what
was not. If it had, then I demand, was it that, set forth by Sixtus, or that,
set forth by Clement, or a third different from both? If it were that set forth
by Sixtus, then is it now condemned by Clement: if that of Clement, it was
condemned I say, but sure you will say contradicted and questioned by Sixtus;
If different from both, then was it questioned and condemned by both, and still
lies under the condemnation. But then lastly, suppose it had been true, That
both some Book not known to be Canonical had been received, and that never any
after receiving had been questioned: How had this been a sign that the Church
is infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost? In what mood or figure, would this
conclusion follow out of these Premises? Certainly your flying to such poor
signs, as these are, is to me a great sign, that you labor with penury of
better arguments: and that, thus to catch at shadows and bul^ushes, is a
shrewd sign of a sinking cause.

30 Ad. 13. We are told here, That the general promises of Infallibility to
the Church, must not be restrained only to points fundamental: Because then
the Apostles words and writings may also be so restrained. The Argument put in
form, and made complete by supply of the concealed Proposition runs thus;

The Infallibility promised to the present Church of any age, is as absolute
and unlimited, as that promised to the Apostles in their Preaching and Writings:

But the Apostles Infallibility is not to be limited to Fundamentalls:

Therefore neither is the Churches Infallibility thus to be limited.

Or thus;

The Apostles Infallibility in their Preaching and writing may be limited to
Fundamentalls as well as the Infallibility of the present Church: But that is
not to be done: Therefore this also is not to be done.

Now to this Argument, I answer, that if by may be as well, in the major
Proposition, be understood, may be as possibly: it is true, but impertinent. If
by it we understand, may be as justly and rightly, It is very pertinent but
very false. So that as D. Potter limits the infallibility of the Present Church
unto Fundamentalls, so another may limit the Apostles unto them also. He may
do it de facto, but de iure he cannot; that may be done and done lawfully:
this also may be done, but not lawfully. That may be done, and if it be done
cannot be confuted: This also may be done, but if it be done, may easily be
confuted. It is done to our hand in this very Paragraph, by five words taken
out of Scripture, All Scripture is divinely inspired. Show but as much for the
Church: Show where it is written, That all the decrees of the Church are
divinely inspired; and the Controversy will be at an end. Besides, there is not
the same reason for the Churches absolute infallibility, as for the Apostles
and Scriptures. For if the Church fall into error, it may be reformed by
comparing it with the rule of the Apostles doctrine and Scripture. But if the
Apostles have erred in delivering the doctrine of Christianity, to whom shall
we have recourse, for the discovering and correcting their error? Again, there
is not so much strength required in the Edifice as in the Foundation: and if
but wisemen have the ordering of the building, they will make it much a surer
thing, that the foundation shall not fail the building, then that the building
shall not fall from the foundation. And though the building be to be of Brick
or Stone, and perhaps of wood, yet if it may be possibly, they will have a rock
for their foundation, whose stability is a much more indubitable thing, then
the adherence of the structure to it. Now the Apostles and Prophets, and
Canonical Writers, are the foundation of the Church, according to that of S.
Paul, built upon the foundation of Apostles and Prophets; therefore their
stability, in reason ought to be greater then the Churches, which is built upon
them. Again, a dependent Infallibility (especially if the dependence be
voluntary) cannot be so certain, as that on which it depends: But the
Infallibility of the Church, depends upon the Infallibility of the Apostles, as
the straightness of the thing regulated, upon the straightness of the Rule:
and besides this dependence is voluntary, for it is in the power of the Church
to deviate from this Rule; being nothing else but an aggregation of men, of
which every one has free will, and is subject to passions and error: Therefore
the Churches infallibility, is not so certain as that of the Apostles.

31 Lastly, Quid verba audiam, cum fact a videam? If you be so Infallible as
the Apostles were, show it as the Apostles did; They went forth (says S.
Mark) and Preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming
their words with Signs following. It is impossible that God should lie, and
that the eternal Truth should set his hand and seal to the confirmation of a
falsehood, or of such Doctrine as is partly true and partly false. The Apostles
Doctrine was thus confirmed, therefore it was entirely true, and in no part
either false or uncertain. I say in no part of that which they delivered
constantly, as a certain divine Truth, and which had the Atte^tation of Divine
Miracles. For that the Apostles themselves, even after the sending of the holy
Ghost, were, and through inadvertence or prejudice, continued for a time in an
error, repugnant to a revealed Truth, it is as I have already noted
unanswerably evident, from the story of the Acts of the Apostles. For
notwithstanding our Saviors express warrant and injunction, to go and Preach
to all Nations, yet until S. Peter was better informed by a vision from
Heaven, and by the conversion of Cornelius, both he and the rest of the Church,
held it unlawful for them, to go or preach the Gospel to any but the Jews.

32 And for those things which they profess to deliver as the dictates of
humane reason and prudence, and not as divine Revelations, why we should take
them to be divine revelations, I see no reason; nor how we can do so, and not
contradict the Apostles, and God himself. Therefore when S. Paul says, in the
1. Epist. to the Cor. 7. 12. To the rest speak I, not the Lord; And again,
concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, but I deliver my
Judgment: If we will pretend, that the Lord did certainly speak, what S. Paul
spoke, and that his judgment was Gods commandment, shall we not plainly
contradict S. Paul, and that spirit by which he wrote? which moved him to
write, as in other places divine Revelations, which he certainly knew to be
such, so in this place, his own judgment, touching some things which God had
not particularly revealed unto him. And if D. Potter did speak to this purpose
( that the Apostles were Infallible only in these things which they spoke of
certain knowledge) I cannot see what danger there were in saying so. Yet the
truth is, you wrong D. Potter. It is not he, but D. Stapleton in him, that
speaks the words you cavil at. D. Stapleton* says he, p. 140. is full and
punctual to this purpose: then sets down the effect of his discourse l. 8.
Princ. Doct. 4. c. 15. and in that, the words you cavil at, and then, p. 150.
he shuts up this paragraph with these words, thus D. Stapleton. So that if
either the Doctrine, or the reason be not good, D. Stapleton, not D. Potter is
to answer for it.

33 Neither do D. Potter's ensuing words limit the Apostles infalbilitie to
truths absolutely necessary to salvation, if you read them with any candor: for
it is evident, he grants the Church infallible in Truths absolutely necessary;
and as evident, that he ascribes to the Apostles, the spirits guidance, and
consequently infallibility in a more high and absolute manner then any since
them. From whence, thus I argue: He that grants the Church infallible in
Fundamentals, and ascribes to the Apostles the infallible guidance of the
Spirit, in a more high and absolute manner then to any since them, limits not
the Apostles infallibility to Fundamentals; But D. Potter grants to the Church
such a limited infallibility, and ascribes to the Apostles, The Spirits
infallible guidance in a more high and absolute manner; therefore he limits
not the Apostles infallibility to Fundamentals. I once knew a man out of
courtesy, help a lame dog over a style, and he for requital bit him by the
fingers: Just so you serve D. Potter. He out of courtesy grants you, that those
words, The Spirit shall lead you into all Truth, and shall abide with you ever,
though in their high and most absolute sense, they agree only to the Apostles,
yet in a conditional, limited, moderate, secundary sense, they may be
understood of the Church. But says, that if they be understood of the Church,
All, must not be simply all, No, nor so large an All, as the Apostles All, but
all necessary to salvation. And you to requite his courtesy, in granting you
thus much cavil at him, as if he had prescribed these bounds to the Apostles
also, as well as the present Church. Whereas, he has explained himself to the
contrary, both in the clause forementioned, The Apostles, who had the spirits
guidance in a more high and absolute manner then any since them, and in these
words ensuing, whereof the Church is simply ignorant, and again, w^erewith the
Church is not acquainted. But most clearly in those which being most
incompatible to the Apostles, you with an etc, I cannot but fear craftily,
have concealed: How many obscure Texts of Scripture which she understands not?
How many School Questions which she has not, happily cannot determine? And
for matters of fact it is apparent that the Church may err; and then
concludes, That we must understand by, All truths, not simply All, But (if you
conceive the words as spoken of the Church) All Truth absolutely necessary to
salvation. And yet beyond all this, the negative part of his answer, agrees
very well to the Apostles themselves, for that All which they were led into,
was not simply All, otherwise S. Paul erred in saying, we know in part; but
such an All, as was requisite to make them the Churches Foundations. Now such
they could not be without freedom from error in all those things which they
delivered constantly, as certain revealed Truths. For if we once suppose they
may have erred in some things of this nature, it will be utterly undiscernable
what they have erred in, and what they have not. Whereas though we suppose the
Church has erred in somethings, yet we have means to know, what she has
erred in, and what she has not. I mean by comparing the Doctrine of the
present Church, with the doctrine of the Primitive Church delivered in
Scripture. But then last of all, suppose the Doctor had said (which I know he
never intended) that this promise in this place made to the Apostles, was to
be understood only of a Truth absolutely necessary to salvation; Is it
consequent that he makes their Preaching and Writing not Infallible in points
not fundamental? Do you not blush for shame at this Sophistry? The Dr says,
no more was promised in this place; Therefore he says no more was promised!
Are there not other places besides this? And may not that be promised in other
places, which is not promised in this?

34 But if the Apostles were Infallible, in all things proposed by them as
Divine Truths, the like must be affirmed of the Church, because Doctor Potter
teaches the said promise to be verified in the Church. True, he does so, but
not in so absolute a manner. Now what is opposed to Absolute, but limited, or
restrained? To the Apostles then it was made, and to them only, yet the words
are true of the Church. And this very promise might have been made to it,
though here it is not. They agree to the Apostles in a higher, to the Church in
a lower sense: to the Apostles in a more absolute, to the Church in a more
limited sense. To the Apostles absolutely, for the Churches direction: to the
Church Conditionally by adherence to that direction, and so far as she does
adhere to it. In a word, the Apostles were led into all Truths by the Spirit,
efficaciter: The Church is led also into all truth by the Apostles writings,
sufficienter. So that the Apostles and the Church, may be fitly compared to the
Star and the Wisemen. The Star was directed by the finger of God, and could
not but go right to the place where Christ was: But the Wise men were led by
the Star to Christ; led by it, I say, not efficaciter, or irresistibiliter,
but sufficienter, so that if they would they might follow it, if they would
not, they might choose. So was it between the Apostles writing Scriptures, and
the Church. They in their writing were Infallibly assisted to propose nothing
as a divine Truth, but what was so. The Church is also led into all Truth, but
it is by the intervening of the Apostles writings: But it is, as the Wisemen
were led by the Star, or as a Traveller is directed by a Mercuriall statue,
or as a Pilot by his Card and Compass* led sufficiently, but not irresistibly:
led so that she may follow, not so that she must. For seeing the Church is a
society of men, whereof every one (according to the Doctrine of the Romish
Church) has freewill in believing; it follows, that the whole aggregate has
freewill in believing. And if any man say that at least it is morally
impossible, that of so many w^ereof all may believe aright, not any should do
so: I answer, It is true, if they did all give themselves any liberty of
judgment. But if all (as the case is here) captivate their understandings to
one of them, all are as likely to err as that one. And he more likely to err
then any other, because he may err and thinks he cannot, and because he
conceiues the Spirit absolutely promised to the succession of Bishops, of which
many have been notoriously and confessedly wicked men, Men of the World:
whereas this Spirit is the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because he sees him not, neither knows him. Besides, let us suppose, that
neither in this nor in any other place, God had promised any more unto them,
but to lead them into all Truth, necessary for their own and other men's
salvation: Does it therefore follow that they were de facto, led no farther?
God indeed is obliged by his Veracity to do all that he has promised, but is
there any thing that binds him to do no more? May not he be better then his
word, but you will quarrel at him? May not his Bounty exceed his Promise? And
may not we have certainty enough that oftimes it does so? God did not promise
to Solomon, in his vision at Gibeon, any more then what he asked, which was
wisdom to govern his people, and that he gave him. But yet I hope you will not
deny that we have certainty enough that he gave him something which neither God
had promised, nor he had asked. If you do, you contradict God himself: For
Behold (says God) because thou have asked this thing, I have done according to
thy word. Lo, I have given thee a Wise and an Understanding heart, so that
there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like
unto thee. And I have also given thee that which thou have not asked, both
riches and honor, so that there shall not be any among the Kings like unto
thee in all thy days. God, for ought appears, never obliged himself by
promise, to show S. Paul those Unspeakable mysteries, which in the third Heaven
he showed unto him: and yet I hope we have certainty enough, that he did so.
God promises to those that seek his Kingdom and the righteousness thereof,
that all things necessary shall be added unto them, and in rigor by his
promise he is obliged to do no more, and if he give them necessaries he has
discharged his obligation: Shall we therefore be so injurious to his bounty
toward us, as to say it is determined by the narrow bounds of mere necessity?
So though God had obliged himself by promise, to give his Apostles
infallibility only in things necessary to salvation; nevertheless it is
utterly inconsequent, that he gave them no more, then by the rigor of his
promise he was engaged to do; or that we can have no assurance of any farther
assistance that he gave them: especially when he himself, both by his word,
and by his works has assured us, that he did assist them farther. You see by
this time that your chain of fearful consequences (as you call them) is
turned to a rope of sand, and may easily be avoided without any flying to your
imaginary infallibility of the Church in all her proposalls.

35 Ad 14. and 15. Doubting of a Book received for Canonical, may signify,
either doubting whether it be Canonical; or supposing it to be Canonical,
whether it be True. If the former sense were yours, I must then again
distinguish of the term, received; For it may signify, either received by some
particular Church, or by the present Church Universal, or the Church of all
Ages. If you meant the word in either of the former senses, that which you say
is not t^^e. A man may justly and reasonably doubt of some Texts, or some Book
received by some particular Church, or by the Universal Church of this present
time, whether it be Canonical or no: and yet have just reason to believe, and
no reason to doubt, but that other Books are Canonical. As Eusebius perhaps,
had reason to doubt of the Epistle of S. James; the Church of Rome in Hierom's
time of the Epistle to the Hebr. And yet they did not doubt of all the Books of
the Canon, nor had reason to do so. If by Received, you meant, Received by the
Church of all Ages, I grant he that doubts of any one such Book, has as much
reason to doubt of all. But yet here again I tell you, that it is possible a
man may doubt of one such book, and yet not of all: because it is possible men
may do not according to reason. If you meant your words in the latter sense;
then I confess he that belieues such a Book to be Canonical, i. e. the word
of God, and yet (to make an impossible supposition) believes it not to be true,
if he will do according to reason, must doubt of all the rest, and believe
none. For there being no greater reason to believe any thing true, then because
God has said it, nor no other reason to believe the Scripture to be true, but
only because it is Gods word; he that doubts of the Truth of any thing said by
God, has as much reason to believe nothing that he says: and therefore if he
will do according to reason, neither must nor can believe any thing he says.
And upon this ground you conclude rightly, that the infallibility of true
Scripture must be Universal, and not confined to points fundamental.

36 And this Reason why we should not refuse to believe any part of Scripture,
upon pretense that the matter of it is not Fundamental, you confess to be
convincing. But the same reason you say is as convincing for the Universal
infallibility of the Church. For (say you) unless she be Infallible in all
things, we cannot believe her in any one. But by this reason your Proselytes,
knowing you are not Infallible in all things, must not, nor cannot believe you
in any thing. Nay you your self must not believe your self in any thing,
because you know that you are not Infallible in all things. Indeed if you had
said we could not rationally believe her for her own sake, and upon her own
word and authority in any thing, I should willingly grant the consequence. For
an authority subject to error can be no firm or stable foundation of my
belief in any thing: and if it were in any thing, then this authority being
one and the same in all proposalls, I should have the same reason to believe
all, that I have to believe one, and therefore must either do unreasonably, in
believing any one thing, upon the sole warrant of this authority, or
unreasonably in not believing all things equally warranted by it. Let this
therefore be granted; and what will come of it? Why then, you say, we cannot
believe her in propounding Canonical Books. If you mean still (as you must do
unless you play the Sophister) not upon her own Authority, I grant it: For we
believe Canonical Books not upon the Authority of the present Church, but upon
Universal Tradition. If you mean, Not at all, and that with reason we cannot
believe these Books to be Canonical, which the Church proposes, I deny it.
There is no more consequence i^ ^he Argument then in this, The Devil is not
infallible, therefore if he says there is one God, I cannot believe him. No
Geometritian is Infallible in all things, therefore not in these things which
the domonstrates. M. Knot is not Infallible in all things, therefore he may not
believe that he wrote a Book, entitled Charity Maintained.

37 But though the reply be good, Protestants cannot make use of it, with any
good coherence to this distinction, and some other Doctrine of theirs: because
they pretend to be able to tell, what points are Fundamental and what not; and
therefore though they should believe Scripture erroneous in others, yet they
might be sure it erred not in these. To this I answer. That if without
dependence on Scripture, they did know what were Fundamental, and what not,
they might possibly believe the Scripture true in Fundamentalls, and erroneous
in other things. But seeing they ground their belief, that such and such
things only are Fundamentalls, only upon Scripture, and go about to prove
their assertion true, only by Scripture, then must they suppose the Scripture
true absolutely and in all things, or else the Scripture could not be a
sufficient warrant to them, to believe this thing, that these only points are
Fundamental. For who would not laugh at them if they should argue thus, The
Scripture is true in something; the Scripture says that these points only are
Fundamental, therefore this is true, that these only are so! For every
Fresh-man in Logic knows that from mere particulars nothing can be certainly
concluded. But on the other side, this reason is firm, and demonstrative, The
Scripture is true in all things; But the Scripture says, that these only
points are the Fundamentalls of Christian Religion, therefore it is true, that
these only are so. So that the knowledge of Fundamentalls being it self drawn
from Scripture, is so far from warranting us to believe the Scripture is, or
may be in part True, and in part False; that it self can have no foundation,
but the Universal truth of Scripture. For to be a Fundamental truth,
presupposes to be a truth; now I cannot know any Doctrine to be a divine and
supernatural Truth, on a true part of Christianity, but only because the
Scripture says so, which is all true: Therefore, much more can I not know it,
to be a Fundamental truth.

33 Ad. 16. To this Parag. I answer. Though the Church being not Infallible, I
cannot believe her in every thing she says, yet I can and must believe her in
every thing she proves, either by Scripture, Reason, or universal Tradition,
be it Fundamental, or be it not Fundamental. This you say, we cannot, in
points not Fundamental, because in such we believe she may err. But this I
know, we can: because though she may err in some things, yet she does not err
in what she proves, though it be not Fundamental. Again you say, we cannot do
it in Fundamentalls, because we must know what points be Fundamental, before
we go to learn of her. Not so, but I must learn of the Church, or of some part
of the Church, or I cannot know any thing Fundamental or not Fundamental. For
how can I come to know, that there was such a man as Christ, that he taught
such Doctrine, that he and his Apostles did such miracles in confirmation of
it, that the Scripture is Gods word, unless I be taught it. So then the Church
is, though not a certain Foundation and proof of my Faith, yet a necessary
introduction to it.

39 But the Churches infallible direction, extending only to Fundamentalls,
unless I know them before I go to learn of her, I may be rather deluded then
instructed by her. The reason and connection of this consequence, I fear neither
I nor you do well understand. And besides I must tell you, you are too bold in
taking that which no man grants you, that the Church is an infallible direction
in Fundamentalls. For if she were so, then must we not only learn Fundamentalls
of her, but also learn of her what is fundamental, and take all for
fundamental which she delivers to be such. In the performance whereof, if I
knew any one Church to be infallible, I would quickly be of that Church. But
good Sir, you must needs do us this favor, to be so acute, as to distinguish
between, being infallible in fundamentalls, and being an infallible guide in
fundamentalls. That she shall be always a Church infallible in fundamentalls,
we easily grant; for it comes to no more but this, that there shall be always
a Church. But that there shall be always such a Church, which is an infallible
Guide in fundamentalls, this we deny. For this cannot be without settling a
known infallibility in some one known society of Christians, (as the Greek or
the Roman, or some other Church) by adhering to which Guide, men might be
guided to believe aright in all Fundamentalls. A man that were destitute of all
means of communicating his thoughts to others, might yet in himself, and to
himself be infallible, but he could not be a Guide to others. A man or a
Church that were invisible, so that none could know how to repair to it for
direction, could not be an infallible guide, and yet he might be in himself
infallible. You see then there is a wide difference between these two, and
therefore I must beseech you not to confound them, nor to take the one for the
other.

40 But they that know what points are Fundamental, otherwise then by the
Churches authority, learn not of the Church: Yes, they may learn of the Church,
that the Scripture is the word of God, and from the Scripture, that such points
are fundamental, others are not so; and consequently learn, even of the
Church, even of your Church, that all is not fundamental, nay all is not true,
which the Church teaches to be so. Neither do I see what hinders, but a man
may learn of a Church, how to confure the errors of that Church which taught
him: as well as of my Master in Physic, or the Mathematics, I may learn those
rules and principles, by which I may confute my Masters erroneous conclusions.

41 But you ask, If the Church be not an infallible teacher, why are we
commanded to hear, to seek, to obey the Church? I Answer. For commands to seek
the Church, I have not yet met with any, and I believe you, if you were to show
them, would be your self to seek. But yet if you could produce some such, we
might seek the Church to many good purposes, without supposing her a Guide
infallible. And then for hearing and obeying the Church, I would fain know,
whether none may be heard and obeyed, but those that are infallible? Whether
particular Churches, Governors, Pastors, Parents, be not to be heard and
obeyed? Or whether all these be Infallible? I wonder you will thrust upon us so
often, these worn out-objections, without taking notice of their Answers.

42 Your Argument from S. Austine's first place, is a fallacy, Adicto secundum
quid ad dictum simpliciter. If the whole Church practice any of these things
(matters of order and decency, for such only there he speaks of,) to dispute
whether that ought to be done, is insolent madness. And from hence you
infer, If the whole Church practice any thing, to dispute whether it ought to
be done, is insolent madness. As if there were no difference between any
thing, and any of these things? Or as if I might not esteem it pride and folly,
to contradict and disturb the Church for matter of order, pertaining to the
time and place, and other circumstances of Gods worship; and yet account it
neither pride nor folly, to go about to reform some errors, which the Church
has suffered to come in, and to vitiate the very substance of Gods worship. It
was a practice of the whole Church in S. Austines time, and esteemed an
Apostolic Tradition, even by Saint Austine himself, That the Eucharist should
be administered to infants: Tell me Sir, I beseech you; Had it been insolent
madness to dispute against this practice, or had it not? If it had, how
insolent and mad are yo^, that have not only disputed against it, but utterly
abolished it? If it had not, then as I say, you must understand S. Austines
words, not simply of all things, but (as indeed he himself restrained them) of
these things, of matter of Order, Decency, and Uniformity.

43 In the next place, you tell us out of him, That that which has been always
kept, is most rightly esteemed to come from the Apostles: Very right, and what
then? Therefore the Church cannot err in defining of Controversies. Sir I
beseech you, when you write again, do us the favor to write nothing but
syllogismes, for I find it still an extreme trouble, to find out the concealed
propositions, which are to connect the parts of your enthymemes. As now for
example, I profess unto you, I am at my wits end, and have done my best
endeavor, to find some glue, or sodder, or cement, or chain, or thread, or
anything to tie this antecedent and this consequent together, and at length am
enforced to give it over, and cannot do it.

44 But the Doctrines, that Infants are to be baptized, and those that are
baptized by Heretics, are not to be rebaptized, are neither of them to be
proved by Scripture: And yet according to S. Austine they are true Doctrines,
and we may be certain of them upon the Authority of the Church, which we could
not be, unless the Church were Infallible; therefore the Church is infallible.
I answer, that there is no repugnance but we may be certain enough, of the
Universal Traditions of the ancient Church, such as in S. Austin's account,
these were which here are spoken of, and yet not be certain enough, of the
definitions of the present Church. Unless you can show (which I am sure you
can never do) that the Infallibility of the present Church, was always a
Tradition of the ancient Church. Now your main business is to prove the
present Church infallible, not so much in consigning ancient Traditions, as in
defining emergent controversies. Again, it follows not, because the Churches
Authority, is warrant enough for us to believe some doctrine, touching which
the Scripture is silent, therefore it is Warrant enough to believe these, to
which the Scripture seems repugnant. Now the Doctrines which S. Austine
received upon the Churches Authority, were of the first sort; the Doctrines for
which we deny your Churches infallibility are of the second. And therefore
though the Churches authority, might be strong enough, to bear the weight which
S. Austine laid upon it, yet happily if may not be strong enough, to bear that
which you lay upon it. Though it may support some Doctrines without Scripture,
yet surely not against it. And last of all, to deal ingeniously with you and
the World, I am not such an Idolater of S. Austine, as to think a thing proved
sufficiently because he says it, nor that all his sentences are oracles; and
particularly in this thing, that whatsoever was practiced or held by the
Universal Church of his time, must needs have come from the Apostles. Though
considering the neerenesse of his time to the Apostles, I think it a good
probable way, and therefore am apt enough to follow it, when I see no reason to
the contrary. Yet I profess I must have better satisfaction, before I can
induce my self to hold it certain and infallible. And this, not because Popery
would come in at this door, as some have vainly feared, but because by the
Church Universal of some time, and the Church Universal of other times, I see
plain contradictions held and practiced. Both which could not come from the
Apostles, for then the Apostles had been teachers of falsehood. And therefore
the belief or practice of the present Universal Church, can be no infallible
proof, that the Doctrine so believed, or the custom so practiced came from the
Apostles. I instance in the doctrine of the Millenaries, and the Eucharists
necessity for infants: both which Doctrines have been taught by the consent of
the eminent Fathers of some ages, without any opposition from any of their
Contemporaries: and were delivered by them, not as Doctors, but as Witnesses,
not as their own opinions, but as Apostolic Traditions. And therefore
measuring the doctrine of the Church by all the Rules which Cardinal Perron
gives us for that purpose, both these Doctrines must be acknowledged to have
been the doctrines of the Ancient Church of some age, or ages; And that the
contrary* Doctrines were Catholic at some other time, I believe you will not
think it needful for me to prove. So that either I must say, the Apostles were
fountains of contradictious doctrines, or that being the Universal Doctrine
of the present Church, is no sufficient proof that it came originally from the
Apostles. Besides, who can warrant us, that the Universal Traditions of the
Church were all Apostolical? seeing in that famous place for Traditions, in
Tertullian, De Corona Militis c. 3. and 4. Where having recounted sundry
unwritten Traditions then observed by Christ^ans, many whereof, by the way,
(notwithstanding the Council of Trents profession, to receive them and the
written word with like affection of Piety) are now rejected and neglected by
the Church of Rome: For example Immersion in Baptism; Tasting a mixture of
milk and honey presently after; Abstaining from Bathes for a week after;
Accounting it an impiety to ^ray kneeling on the Lords day, or between Easter
and Pentecost: I say, having reckoned up these and other Traditions in the 3.
chapt. He adds another in the fourth, of the Veiling of Women; And then adds,
Since I find no law for this, it follows that Tradition must have given this
observation to custom, which shall gain in time, Apostolic authority by the
interpretation of the reason it. By these examples therefore it is declared,
that the observing of unwritten Tradition, being confirmed by custom, may be
defended. The perseverance of the observation being a good testimo^y of the
goodness of the Tradition. Now custom even in civil affairs where a Law is
wanting, passes for a law. Neither is it material whether it be grounded on
Scripture, or reason; seeing reason is commend^tion enough for a law. Moreover
if law be grounded on reason, all that must be law, which is so grounded -- A
quocanq productum -- Whosoever is the producer of it. Do ye think it is not
lawful, Omni fideli, for every faithful man to conceive and constitute?
Provided he constitute only what is not repugnant to Gods will, what is
conducible for discipline and available to salvation? seeing the Lord says,
why even of our selves, judge ye nor what is right? And a little after, This
reason now demand* saving the respect of the Tradition, -- A quocunque
Traditore ce^se^ur, nec auctorem respiciens sed Auctoritatem: From whatsoever
Tradition it comes; neither regard the Author but the Authority.
Quicunque traditor, any author whatsoever is founder good enough for them. And
who can secure us, that Humane inventions, and such as came a quocunque
Traditore, might not in a short time, gain the reputation of Apostolic!
Seeing the direction then was, Hier.
Precepta ma^orum Apostolicas Traditiones quisque existimat.

45 No less you say is S. Chrysostom. for the infallible Traditions of the
Church. But you were to prove the Church infallible, not in her Traditions
(which we willingly grant, if they be as universal as the Tradition of the
undoubted books of Scripture is, to be as infallible as the Scripture is; for
neither does being written make the word of God the more infallible, nor being
unwritten make it the less infallible:) Not therefore in her universal
Traditions, were you to prove the Church infallible, but in all her Decrees and
definitions of Controversies. To this point when you speak you shall have an
answer, but hitherto you do but wander.

46 But let us see what S. Chrysostom says, They (the Apostles) delivered not
all things in writing (who denies it?) but many things also without writing,
(who doubts of it?) and these also are worthy of belief. Yes, if we knew what
they were. But many things are worthy of belief, which are not necessary to be
believed: As that Julius Caesar was Emperor of Rome is a thing worthy of
belief, being so well testified as it is, but yet it is not necessary to be
believed; a man may be saved without it. Those many works which our Savior
did (which S. John supposes, would not have been contained in a world of
books) if they had been written, or if God by some other means had preserved
the knowledge of them, had been as worthy to be believed, and as necessary as
those that are written. But to show you how much a more faith full keeper
Records are then report, those few that were written are preserved and
believed, those infinitely more that were not written, are all lost and vanished
out of the memory of men. And seeing God in his providence, has not thought
fit to preserve the memory of them, he has freed us from the obligation of
believing them: for every obligation ceases, when it becomes impossible. Who
can doubt but the Primitive Christians, to whom the Epistles of the Apostles
were written, either of themselves understood, or were instructed by the
Apostles, touching the sense of the obscure places of them? These Traditive
interpretations, had they been written and dispersed, as the Scriptures were,
had without question been preserved, as the Scriptures are. But to show how
excellent a keeper of the Tradition, the Church of Rome has been, or even the
Catholic Church* for want of writing they are all lost, nay were all lost,
within a few ages after Christ. So that if we consult the ancient Interpreters,
we shall hardly find any two of them agree about the sense of any one of them.
Cardinal Perron, in his discourse of Traditions, having alleged this place
for them, Hold the Traditions etc. tells us we must not answer that S. Paul
speaks here, only of such Traditions, which (though not in this Epist. to the
These.) yet were afterward written, and in other books of Scripture: because
it is upon occasion of Tradition (touching the cause of the hinderance of the
coming of Antichrist,) which was never written, that he lays this iniunction
upon them, to hold the Traditions. Well, let us grant this Argument good, and
concluding; and that the Church of the Thessalonians, or the Catholic Church
(for what S. Paul writ to one Church he writ to all,) were to hold some
unwritten Traditions, and among the rest, what was the cause of the hinderance
of the coming of Antichrist. But what if they did not perform their duty in
this point, but suffered this Tradition to be lost out of the memory of the
Church? Shall we not conclude, that seeing God would not suffer any thing
necessary to salvation to be lost, and he has suffered this Tradition to be
lost, therefore the knowledge or belief of it, though it were a profitable
thing, yet it was not necessary? I hope you will not challenge such authority
over us, as to oblige us to impossibilities, to do that which you cannot do
your selves. It is therefore requisite that you make this command possible to
be obeyed, before you require obedience unto it. Are you able then to instruct
us so well; as to be fit to say unto us, Now ye know what withholdeth? Or do
you your selves know that ye may instruct us? Can ye, or dare you say, this or
this was this hindrance which S. Paul here meant, and all men under pain of
damnation are to believe it? Or if you cannot, (as I am certain you cannot) go
then, and vaunt your Church, for the only Watchful, Faithful, Infallible
keeper of the Apostles Traditions; when here this very Tradition, which here in
particular was deposited with the Thessalonians and the Primitive Church, you
have utterly lost it, so that there is no footstep or print of it remaining,
which with Divine faith we may rely upon. Blessed therefore be the goodness of
God, who seeing that what was not written, was in such danger to be lost, took
order, that what was necessary should be written! Saint Chrysostomes counsel
therefore, of accounting the Churches Traditions worthy of belief, we are
willing to obey: And if you can of any thing make it appear, that it is
Tradition, we will seek no farther. But this we say withal, that we are
persuaded you cannot make this appear in any thing, but only the Canon of
Scripture, and that there is nothing now extant, and to be known by us, which
can put in so good plea, to be the unwritten word of God, as the unquestioned
Books of Canonical Scripture, to be the written word of God.

47 You conclude this Parag. with a sentence of S. Austin's who says, The
Church does not approve, nor dissemble, nor do these things which are against
Faith or good life: and from hence you conclude, that it never has done so,
nor ever can do so. But though the argum^^^ hold in Logic a non posse, ad non
esse, yet I never heard, that it would hold back again, a no nesse, ad non
posse. The Church cannot do this, therefore it does it not, follows with good
consequence: but the Church does not this, therefore it shall never do it, nor
can never do it, this I believe will hardly follow. In the Epistle next before
to the same Ianuarius, writing of the same matter, he has these words, It
remains that the things you enquire of, must be of that third kind of things,
which are different in diverse places. Let every one therefore do, that which
he finds done in the Church to which he comes, for none of them is against
Faith or good manners. And why do you not infer from hence, that no
particular Church can bring up any Custom that is against faith or good
manners? Certainly this consequence has as good reason for it as the former. If
a man say of the Church of England, (what S. Austine of the Church) that she
neither approves, nor dissembles, nor does any thing against faith or good
manners, would you collect presently, that this man did either make or think
the Church of England infallible? Furthermore, it is observable out of this,
and the former Epistle, that this Church which did not (as S. Austine according
to you, thought) approve or dissemble, or do any thing against faith or good
life, did yet tolerate and dissemble vain superstitions, and humane
presumptions, and suffer all places to be full of them, and to be exacted, as,
nay more severely then the commandments of God himself. This S. Austine
himself professes in this very Epistle. This (says he) I do infinitely
grieve at, that many most wholesome precepts of the divine Scripture, are little
regarded; and in the mean time, all is so full of so many presumptions, that he
is more grievously found fault with, who during his octaves, touches the earth
with his naked foot, then he that shall bury his soul in drunkenness. Of these
he says, that they were neither contained in Scripture, decreed by Counsels,
nor corroborated by the Custom of the Universal Church. And though not
against faith, yet unprofitable burdens of Christian liberty; which made the
condition of the Jews more tolerable then that of Christians. And therefore he
professes of them, Approbare non possum, I cannot approve them. And ubi facult
as tribuitur, resecanda existimo, I think they are to be cut off, wheresoever
we have power. Yet so deeply were they rooted, and spread so far, through the
indiscreet devotion of the people, always more prone to superstition then true
piety, and through the connivence of the Governors, who should have strangled
them at their birth, that himself, though he grieved at them, and could not
allow them, yet for fear of offense he durst not speak against them, multa
hujusmodi propter nonnu^aru^ vel sanctaru^ vel turbulentarum personarum
scandala devitanda liberius improbare no^ audeo. Many of these things for fear
of scandalizing many holy persons, or provoking those that are turbulent, I
dare not freely d^sallow. Nay, the Catholic Church it self, did see and
dissemble, and tolerate them; for these are the things of which he presently
says after, the Church of God (and you will have him speak of the true
Catholic Church) placed between Chafe and Tares, tolerates many things.
Which was directly against the command of the holy spirit, given the Church by
S. Paul; To stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made her free, and
not to suffer her self to be brought in bondage to these servile burdens. Our
Savior tells the Scribes and Pharisees, that in vain they worshipped God,
teaching for Doctrines men's Commandments: For that laying aside the
Commandments of God, they held the Traditions of men, as the washing of pots,
and cups, and many other such like things. Certainly that which S. Austine
complains of, as the general fault of Christians of his time, was parallel to
this: Multa (says he) quae in divinis libris saluberrima praecepta sunt, minus
curantur; This I suppose I may very well render in our Saviors words, The
commandments of God are laid aside; and then; tam multis presumptionibus sic
plena sunt omnia, all things, or all places, are so full of so many
presumptions, and those exacted with such severity, nay with Tyranny, that he
was more severely censured, who in the time of his Octaves touched the earth
with his naked feet, then he which dr^wned and buried his soul in drink.
Certainly, if this be not to teach for Doctrines men's Commandments, I know not
what is. And therefore these superstitious Christians might be said, to worship
God in vain, as well as Scribes and Phraises. And yet great variety of
superstitions of this kind, were then already spread over the Church, being
different in diverse places. This is plain from these words of S. Austin of
them, diversorum locorum diversis moribus innumerabiliter variantur; and
apparent, because the stream of them was grown so violent, that he durst not
opopose it, liberius improbare non aude^, I dare not freely speak against them.
So that to say, the Catholic Church tolerated all this, and for fear of
offense, durst not abrogate or condemn it, is to say (if we judge rightly of
it) that the Church with silence and connivence generally tolerated Christians
to worship God in vain. Now how this tolerating of Universal superstition in
the Church, can consist with the assistance and direction of Gods omnipotent
spirit to guard it from superstition, and with the accomplishment of that
pretended prophecy of the Church, I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night; besides how these
superstitions being thus noutished, cherished, and strengthened by the practice
of the most, and urged with great violence upon others as the commandments of
God, and but fearfully opposed or contradicted by any, might in time take such
deep root, and spread their branches so far, as to pass for universal
Customs of the Church, he that does not see, sees nothing. Especially,
considering the catching and contagious nature of this sin, and how fast ill
weeds spread, and how true and experimented that rule is of the Historian,
Exempla non consistunt ubi incipiunt, sed quamlib^t in tenuem recepta tramitem
latissime evagandi sibi faciunt potestatem. Nay that some such superstition had
not already even in S. Austins time, prevailed so far, as to be Cons^etudine
universae Ecclesiae roboratum, who can doubt that considers, that the practice
of Communicating Infants, had even then got the credit, and authority, not only
of an uniuersall Custom, but also of an Apostolic Tradition.

48 But (you will say) notwithstanding all this, S. Austin here warrants us,
that the Church can never either approve or dissemble or practice any thing
against faith or goodlife, and so long you may rest securely upon it. Yea, but
the same S. Austine tells us in the same place, that the Church may tolerate
humane presumptions, and vain superstitions, and those urged more severely then
the Commandments of God: And whether superstition be a sin or no, I appeal
to our Saviors words before cited, and to the consent of your Schoolmen.
Besides if we consider it rightly, we shall find, that the Church is not truly
said only to tolerate these things, but rather, that a part and far the
lesser, tolerated and dissembled them in silence, and a part, and a far
greater publicly vowed and practiced them, and urged them upon others with
great violence, and that continued still a part of the Church. Now why the
whole Church might not continue the Church, and yet do so, as well as a part
of the Church might continue a part of it, and yet do so, I desire you to
inform me.

49 But now after all this ado, what if S. Austine says not this which is
pretended of the Church, viz. That she neither approues, nor dissembles, nor
practices any thing against Faith or good life, but only of good men in the
Church? Certainly, though some Copies read as you would have it, yet you should
not have dissembled, that others read the place otherwise. viz. Ecclesia multa
tolerat, and tamen quae sunt contra Fidem and bonam vitam, nec bonus approbat,
etc. The Church tolerates many things; and yet what is against faith or good
life, a good man will neither approve, nor dissemble, nor practice.

50 Ad 17. That Abraham begat Isaac, is a point very far from being
Fundamental; and yet I hope you will grant, that Protestants believing
Scripture to be the word of God, may be certain enough of the truth and
certainty of it. For what if they say that the Catholic Church, and much more
themselves may possibly err in some unfundamentall points, is it therefore
consequent, they can be certain of none such? What if a wiser man then I may
mistake the sense of some obscure place of Aristotle, may I not therefore
without any arrogance or inconsequence, conceive my self certain that I
understand him in some plain places, which carry their sense before them? And
then for points Fundamental, to what purpose do you say, That we must first
know what they be, before we can be assured that we cannot err in
understanding the Scripture; when we pretend not at all to any assurance that
we cannot err, but only to a sufficient certainty, that we do not err, but
rightly understand those things that are plain, whether Fundamental or not
Fundamental? That God is, and is a rewarder of them that seek him: That there
is no salvation but by faith in Christ: That by repentance and faith in Christ
Remission of sins may be obtained: That there shall be a Resurrection of the
Body: These we conceive both true, because the Scripture says so, and Truths
Fundamental, because they are necessary parts of the Gospel, whereof our
Savior says, Qui non crediderit, damnabitur. All which we either learn from
Scripture immediately, or learn of those that learn it of Scripture, so that
neither Learned nor Unlearned pretend to know these things independently of
Scripture. And therefore in imputing this to us, you cannot excuse your self
from having done us a palpable injury.

51 Ad 18. And I urge you as mainly as you urge D. Potter and other
Protestants, that you tell us that all the Traditions, and all the Definitions
of the Church are Fundame^tal points, and we cannot wrest from you a list in
particular of all such Traditions and Definitions; without which, no man can
tell whether or no he err in points fundamental, and be capable of salvation;
(For I hope erring in our fundamentals is no more exclusive of salvation the^
erring in yours.) And which is most lamentable, instead of giving us such a
Catalogue, you also fall to wrangle among your selves about the making of it;
Some of you, as I have said above, holding somethings to be matters of Faith,
which others deny to be so.

52 Ad 19. I answ. That these differences between Protestants, concerning
Errors damnable and not damnable, Truths fundamental and not fundamental,
may be easily reconciled. For either the Error they speak of may be purely and
simply involuntary, or it may be in respect of the cause of it voluntary. If
the cause of it be some voluntary and avoidable fault, the Error is it self
sinful, and consequently in its own nature damnable; As if by negligence in
seeking the Truth, by unwillingnesse to find it, by pride, by obstinacy, by
desiring that Religion should be true which suits best with my ends, by fear
of men's ill opinion, or any other worldly fear, or any other worldly hope, I
betray my self to any error contrary to any divine revealed Truth, that Error
may be justly styled a sin, and consequently of it self to such a one
damnable. But if I be guilty of none of these faults, but be desirous to know
the Truth, and diligent in seeking it, and advise not at all with flesh and
blood about the choice of my opinions, but only with God, and that Reason that
he has given me, if I be thus qualified, and yet through humane infirmity fall
into error, that error cannot be damnable. Again, the party erring may be
conceived either to dye with contrition for all his sins known and unknown, or
without it; If he dye without it, this error in it self damnable, will be
likewise so unto him: If he dye with contrition (as his error can be no
impediment but he may) his error though in it self damnable, to him according
to your doctrine, will not prove so. And therefore some of those Authors whom
you quote, speaking of Errors whereunto men were betrayed, or wherein they
were kept by their Fault, or Vice, or Passion (as for the most part men are:)
Others speaking of them, as errors simply and purely involuntary, and the
effects of humane infirmity; some as they were retracted by Contrition (to use
your own phrase) others, as they were not, no marvel though they have past
upon them, some a heavier, and some a milder, some an absolving, and some a
condemning sentence. The best of all these errors, which here you mention,
having malice enough too frequently mixed with it, to sink a man deep enough
into hell: and the greatest of them all, being according to your Principles,
either no fault at all, or very Venial, where there is no malice of the will
conjoined with it. And if it be, yet as the most malignant poison, will not
poison him that receives with it a more powerful Antidote: so I am confident
your own Doctrine will force you to confess, that whosoever dies with Faith in
Christ, and Contrition for all sins known and unknown (in which heap all his
sinful errors must be comprised,) can no more be hurt by any the most
malignant and pestilent error, then S. Paul by the viper which he shook of
into the fire. Now touching the necessity of Repentance from dead works, and
Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God, and Savior of the World, they all
agree; and therefore you cannot deny, but they agree about all that is simply
necessary. Moreover, though, if they should go about to choose out of
Scripture all these Propositions and Doctrines which integrate and make up the
body of Christian Religion, peradventure there would not be so exact agreement
amongst them, as some say there was between the 70. Interpreters, in
translating the Old Testament; yet thus far without controversy they do all
agree, that in the Bible all these things are contained, and therefore, that
whosoever does truly and sincerely believe the Scripture, must of necessity
either in hypothesi, or at least in thesi, either formally, or at least
virtually, either explicitly, or at least implicitly, either in Act or at
least in preparation of mind, believe all things Fundamental: It being not
Fundamental, nor required of Almighty God, to believe the true sense of
Scripture in all places, but only that we should endeavor to do so, and be
prepared in mind to do so, whenever it shall be sufficiently propounded to
us. Suppose a man in some disease were prescribed a medicine consisting of
twenty ingredients, and he advising with Physicians should find them differing
in opinion about it, some of them telling him, that all the ingredients were
absolutely necessary; some, that only some of them were necessary, the rest
only profitable, and requisite ad melius esse, lastly some, that some only were
necessary, some profitable, and the rest superfluous, yet not hurtful; Yet all
with one accord agreeing in this, That the whole receipt had in it all things
necessary for the recovery of his health, and that if he made use of it, he
should infallibly find it successful: what wise man would not think they
agreed sufficiently for his direction to the recovery of his health? lust so,
these Protestant Doctors, with whose discords you make such Tragedies, agreeing
in Thesi thus far, that the Scripture evidently contains all things necessary
to Salvation, both for matter of Faith and of practice, and that whosoever
believes it, and endeavors to find the true sense of it, and to conform his
life unto it, shall certainly perform all things necessary to salvation, and
undoubtedly be saved; agreeing I say thus far, what matters it for the
direction of men to salvation, though they differ in opinion, touching what
points are absolutely necessary, and what not? What Errors absolutely
repugnant to Salvation, and what not? Especially considering that although they
differ about the Question of the necessity of these Truths, yet for the most
part they agree in this that Truths they are, and profitable at least, though
not simply necessary. And though they differ in the Question, whether the
contrary Errors be destructive of salvation, or no, yet in this they consent,
that Errors they are, and hurtful to Religion, though not destructive of
Salvation. Now that which God requires of us is this; That we should believe
the Doctrines of the Gospel to be Truths, not all, necessary Truths, for all
are not so, and consequently, the repugnant Errors to be falsehoods; yet not
all such falsehoods, as unavoidably draw with them damnation upon all that hold
them, for all do not so.

53 Yea but you say, it is very requisite we should agree upon a particular
Catalogue of Fundamental points, for without such a Catalogue, no man can be
assured whether or no, he has faith sufficient to salvation. This I utterly
deny as a thing evidently false, and I wonder you should content your self
magisterially to say so, without offering any proof of it. I might much more
justly, think it enough barely to deny it, without refutation, but I will not.
Thus therefore I argue against it.

Without being able to make a Catalogue of Fundamentals, I may be assured of
the Truth of this Assertion, if it be true, That the Scripture contains all
necessary points of faith, and know that I believe explicitly all that is
expressed in Scripture, and implicitly all that is contained in them: Now he
that belieues all this, must of necessity believe all things necessary;
Therefore without being able to make a Catalogue of Fundamentals, I may be
assured that I believe all things necessary, and consequently that my faith is
sufficient.

I said, of the truth of this Assertion, if it be true: Because I will not here
enter into the Question of the truth of it, it being sufficient for my present
purpose, that it may be true, and may be believed without any dependence upon a
Catalogue of Fundamentalls. And therefore if this be all your reason, to demand
a particular Catalogue of Fundamentalls, we cannot but think your demand
unreasonable. Especially having your self expressed the cause of the
difficulty of it, and that is, Because Scripture does deliver Divine Truths,
but seldom qualifies them, or declares whether they be or be not absolutely
necessary to salvation. Yet not so seldom, but that out of it I could give you
an abstract of the Essential part of Christianity, if it were necessary, but I
have showed it not so, by confuting your reason, pretended for the necessity of
it, and at this time I have no leisure to do you courtesies that are so
troublesome to my self. Yet thus much I will promise, that when you deliver a
particular Catalogue of your Church Proposals with one hand, you shall receive
a particular Catalogue of what I conceive Fundamental, with the other. For as
yet, I see no such fair proceeding as you talk of, nor any performance on
your own part of that which so clamorously you require on ours. For as for the
Catalogue which he^e you have given us, in saying. You are obliged under pain
of damnation to believe whatsoever the Catholic visible Church of Christ
proposes as revealed by Almighty God, it is like a covey of one Patridg, or a
flock of one sheep, or a Fleet composed of one ship, or an Army of one man. The
Author of Charity mistaken, demands a particular Catalogue of Fundamental
points; And We (say you) again and again demand such a Catalogue. And surely,
if this one Proposition, which here you think to stop our mouths with, be a
Catalogue, yet at least such a Catalogue it is not, and therefore as yet you
have not performed what you require. For if to set down such a Proposition,
wherein are comprised all points taught by us to be necessary to salvation,
will serve you instead of a Catalogue, you shall have Catalogues enough. As, we
are obliged to believe all under pain of damnation which God commands us to
believe. There Is one Catalogue. We are obliged under pain of damnation, to
believe all, whereof we may be sufficiently assured, that Christ taught it his
Apostles, his Apostles the Church. There Is another. We are obliged under pain
of damnation to believe Gods word, and all contained in it to be true. There Is
a third. If these generalities will not satisfy you, but you will be
importuning us to tell you in particular, what they are which Christ taught his
Apostles, and his Apostles the Church, what points are contained in Gods word;
Then I beseech you do us reason, and give us a particular and exact Inventory
of all your Church Proposalls, without leaving out, or adding any, such a one
which all the Doctors of your Church will subscribe to, and if you receive not
then a Catalogue of Fundamentals, I for my part will give you leave to proclaim
us Banckrupts.

54 Besides this deceitful generality of your Catalogue (as you call it,)
another main fault we find with it, that it is extremely ambiguous; and
therefore to draw you out of the clouds, give me leave to propose some
Questions to you concerning it. I would know therefore, whether by believing,
you mean explicitly or implicitly? If you mean implicitly, I would know
whether your Churches infallibility be under pain of damnation to be believed
explicitly, or no? Whether any other point or points besides this, be under
the same penalty, to be believed explicitly, or no? And if any, what they be?
I would know what you esteem the Proposalls of the Catholic visible Church? In
particular, whether the Decree of a Pope ex Cathedra, that is, with an intent
to oblige all Christians by it, be a sufficient and an obliging proposal?
Whether men without danger of damnation may examine such a Decree, and if they
think they have just cause, refuse to obey it? Whether the Decree of a
Council, without the Popes confirmation, be such an obliging proposal, or no?
Whether it be so in case there be no Pope, or in case it be doubtful who is
Pope? Whether the Decree of a general Council confirmed by the Pope, be such
a Proposal, and whether he be an Heretic that thinks otherwise? Whether the
Decree of a particular Council confirmed by the Pope, be such a proposal?
Whether the General uncondemn'd practice of the Church for some ages be such a
sufficient Proposition? Whether the consent of the most eminent Fathers of any
age, agreeing in the affirmation of any doctrine, not contradicted by any of
their Contemporaries, be a sufficient Proposition? Whether the Fathers
testifying such or such a doctrine or practice to be Tradition, or to be the
Doctrine or practice of the Church, be a sufficient assurance that it is so?
Whether we be bound under pain of damnation, to believe every Text of the
vulgar Bible, now authorized by the Roman Church, to be the true translation
of the Originalls of the Prophets, and Evangelists, and Apostles, without any
the least alteration? Whether they that lived when the Bible of Sixtus was set
forth, were bound under pain of damnation to believe the same of that? And if
not of that, of what Bible they were bound to believe it? Whether the
Catholic visible Church be always that Society of Christians which adheres
to the Bishop of Rome? Whether every Christian, that has ability and
opportunity, be not bound to endeavor to know explicitly the Proposalls of the
Church? Whether Implicit Faith in the Churches Veracity, will not save him
that Actually and Explicitly disbelieves some doctrine of the Church, not
knowing it to be so; and Actually belieues some damnable Heresy, as that God
has the shape of a man? Whether an ignorant man be bound to believe any point
to be decreed by the Church, when his Priest or Ghostly Father assures him it
is so? Whether his Ghostly Father may not err in telling him so, and whether
any man can be obliged under pain of damnation, to believe an Error? Whether
he be bound to believe such a thing defined, when a number of Priests, perhaps
ten or twenty tell him it is so? And what assurance he can have, that they
neither err, nor deceive him in this matter? Why Implicit Faith in Christ, or
the Scriptures should not suffice for a man's salvation, as well as implicit
faith in the Church? Whether when you say, Whatsoever the Church proposes, you
mean all that ever she proposed, or that only which she now proposes; and
whether she now proposes all that ever she did propose? Whether all the Books
of Canonical Scripture were sufficiently declared to the Church to be so, and
proposed as such by the Apostles? And if not, from whom the Church had this
declaration afterward? If so, whether all men ever since the Apostles time,
were bound under pain of damnation to believe the Epistle of S. James, and the
Epistle to the Hebrews to be Canonical; at least, not to disbelieve it, and
believe the contrary? Lastly, why it is not sufficient for any man's salvation
to use the best means he can to inform his conscience, and to follow the
direction of it? To all these demands when you have given fair and ingenuous
answers, you shall hear further from me.

55 Ad 20. At the first entrance into this Parag. from our own Doctrine, That
the Church cannot err in Points necessary, it is concluded if we are wise, we
must for sake it is nothing, least we should for sake it in something
necessary. To which I answer, First, that the supposition as you understand it,
is falsely imposed upon us, and as we understand it will do you no service.
For when we say, that there shall be a Church always, some where or other,
unerring in Fundamentalls, our meaning is but this, that there shall be always
a Church, to the very being whereof it is repugnant that it should err in
fundamentals; for if it should do so, it would want the very essence of a
Church, and therefore cease to be a Church. But we never annexed this privilege
to any one Church of any one Denomination, as the Greek or the Roman Church:
which if we had done, and set up some settled certain Society of Christians,
distinguishable from all others by adhering to such a Bishop for our Guide in
fundamentals, then indeed, and then only might you with some color, though
with no certainty, have concluded that we could not in wisdom, forsake this
Church in any point, for fear of forsaking it in a necessary point. But now
that we say not this of any one determinate Church, which alone can perform the
office of Guide or Director, but indefinitely of the Church, meaning no more
but this, That there shall be always in some place or other, some Church that
erres not in Fundamentalls; will you conclude from hence, that we cannot in
wisdom forsake this or that, the Roman or the Greek Church, for fear of
erring in Fundamentalls?

56 Yea, but you may say (for I will make the best I can of all your
Arguments,) That this Church thus unerring in Fundamentalls, when Luther arose,
was by our confession the Roman; and therefore we ought not in wisdom to have
departed from it in any thing. I answer: First, that we confess no such thing,
that the Church of Rome was then this Church, but only a Part of it, and that
the most corrupted and most incorrigible. Secondly, that if by adhering to the
church, we could have been thus far secured, this Argument had some show of
reason. But seeing we are not warranted thus much by any privilege of that
Church, that She cannot err fundamentally, but only from Scripture, which
assures us that she does err very haynously* collect our hope, that the Truths
she retains and the practice of them, may prove an Antidote to her, against
the Errors which she maintains in such Persons, as in simplicity of heart
follow this Absalom; we should then do against the light of our conscience,
and so sin damnably if we should not abandon the profession of her Errors
though not Fundamental. Neither can we thus conclude, we may safely hold with
the church of Rome in all her points, for she cannot err damnably; For this is
false, she may, though perhaps she does not: But rather thus, These points of
Christianity, which have in the^ the nature of Antidotes against the poison of
all sins and errors, the Church of Rome, though otherwise much corrupted,
still retains; therefore we hope she erres not fundamentally, but still
remains a Part of the Church. But this can be no warrant to us to think with
her in all things: seeing the very same Scripture, which puts us in hope she
erres not fundamentally, assures us that in many things, and those of great
moment she erres very grievously. And these Errors though to them that believe
them, we hope they will not be pernicious, yet the professing of them against
conscience, could not but bring to us certain damnation. As for the fear of
departing from some fundamental truths withal, while we depart from her
errors, Happily it might work upon us, if adhering to her might secure us from
it, and if nothing else could: But both these are false. For first, adhering to
her in all things cannot secure us from erring in Fundamentals: Because though
de facto we hope she does not err, yet we know no privileges she has but she
may err in them herself: and therefore we had need have better security
hereof then her bare Authority. Then secondly, without dependence on her at
all, we may be secured that we do not err fundamentally; I mean by believing
al those things plainly set down in Scripture, wherein all things necessary,
and most things profitable are plainly delivered. Suppose I were traveling to
London, and knew two ways thither, the one very safe and convenient, the other
very inconvenient, and dangerous, but yet a way to London: and that I overtook
a Passenger on the way, who himself believed, and would fain persuade me,
there was no other way but the worse, and would persuade me to accompany him in
it, because I confessed his way, though very inconvenient, yet a way; so that
going that way we could not fail of our journies end, by the consent of both
parties: but he believed, my way to be none at all; and therefore I might
justly fear, least out of a desire of leaving the worst way, I left the true,
and the only way: If now I should not be more secure upon my own knowledge,
then frighted by this fallacy, would you not beg me for a fool? Just so might
you think of us, if we would be frighted out of our own knowledge by this
bugbeare. For the only and the main reason why we believe you not to err in
Fundamentalls, is your holding the Doctrines of faith in Christ and Repentance:
which knowing we hold as well as you, notwithstanding our departure from you,
we must needs know that we do not err in Fundamentalls, as well as we know
that you do not err in some Fundamentals, and therefore cannot possibly fear
the contrary. Yet let us be more liberal to you, and grant that which can
never be proved, that God had said in plain terms, The Church of Rome shall
never destroy the Foundation, but with all had said, that it might and would
lay much hay and stubble upon it; That you should never hold any Error
destructive of salvation, but yet many that were prejudicial to Edification: I
demand, might we have dispensed with our selves in the believing and professing
these Errors in regard of the smalnesse of them? Or had it not been a damnable
sin to do so, though the Errors in themselves were not damnable? Had we not
had as plain direction to depart from you in some things profitable, as to
adhere to you in things necessary? In the beginning of your Book, when it was
for your purpose to have it so, the greatness or smalnesse of the matter was
not considerable, the Evidence of the Revelation was all in all. But here we
must err with you in small things, for fear of loosing your direction in
greater: and for fear of departing too far from you, not go from you at all,
even where we see plainly that you have departed from the Truth.

57 Beyond all this, I say, that this which you say in wisdom we are to do,
is not only unlawful, but, if we will proceed according to reason, impossible.
I mean to adhere to you in all things, having no other ground for it, but
because you are (as we will now suppose) Infallible in some things, that is, in
Fundamentalls. For, whether by skill in Architecture a large structure may be
supported by a narrow foundation, I know not* but sure I am, in reason, no
conclusion can be larger then the Principles on which it is founded. And
therefore if I consider what I do, and be persuaded, that your infallibility,
is but limited, and particular, and partial, my adherence upon this ground,
cannot possibly be Absolute and Universal and Total. I am confident, that
should I meet with such a man amongst you (as I am well assured there be many)
that would grant your Church infallible only in fundamentalls, which what they
are he knows not, and therefore upon this only reason adheres to you in all
things: I say that I am confident, that it may be demonstrated, that such a man
adheres to you, with a fiduciall and certain assent in nothing. To make this
clear (because at the first hearing it may seem strange) give me leave, good
Sir, to suppose you the man, and to propose to you a few questions, and to give
for you such answers to them, as upon this ground you must of necessity give,
were you present with me. First, supposing you hold your Church infallible in
fundamentalls, obnoxious to error in other things, and that you know not what
points are fundamental, I demand, C. Why do you believe the doctrine of
Transubstantiation? K. because the Church has taught it, which is infallible.
C. What? Infallible in all things, or only in Fundamentalls? K. in Fundamentals
only. C. Then in other points She may err? K. she may. C. and do you know
what Points are Fundamental, what not? K. No, and therefore I believe her in
all things, least I should disbelieve her in fundamentalls. C. How know you
then, whether this be a fundamental Point or no? K. I know not. C. It may be
then (for ought you know) an unfundamentall point? K. yes, it may be so. C. And
in these you said the Church may err? K. yes I did so. C. Then possibly it may
err in this? K. It may do so. C. Then what certainty have you, that it does
not err in it? K. None at all, but upon this supposition, that this is a
fundamental. C. And this supposition you are uncertain of? K. Yes, I told you
so before. C. And therefore, you can have no certainty of that, which depends
upon this uncertainty, saving only a suppositive certainty, if it be a
fundamental truth, which is in plain English to say, you are certain it is
true, if it be both true and neccessary. Verily Sir, if you have no better
faith then this, you are no Catholic. K. Good words I pray! I am so, and God
willing will be so. C. You mean, in outward profession and practice, but in
belief you are not, no more then a Protestant is a Catholic. For every
Protestant yields such a kind of assent to all the proposalls of the Church,
for surely they believe them true, if they be fundamental truths. And
therefore you must either believe the Church Infallible in all her proposalls,
be they foundations, or be they superstructions, or else you must believe all
Fundamental which she proposes, or else you are no Catholic. K. But I have
been taught, that seeing I believed the Church infallible in points necessary,
in wisdom I was to believe her in every thing. C. That was a pretty plausible
inducement, to bring you hither, but now you are here, you must go farther,
and believe her infallible in all things, or else you were as good go back
again, which will be a great disparagement to you, and draw upon you both the
bitter and implacable hatred of our Part, and even with your own, the
imputation of rashness and levitie. You see, I hope, by this time, that though
a man did believe your Church infallible in Fundamentalls, yet he has no reason
to do you the curtesy, of believing all her proposalls; nay if he be ignorant
what these Fundamentalls are, he has no certain ground to believe her, upon her
Authority in any thing. And whereas you say, it can be no imprudence to err
with the Church; I say, it may be very great imprudence, if the question be,
Whether we should err with the present Church, or hold true with God Almighty.

58 But we are under pain of Damnation to believe and obey her in greater
things, and therefore cannot in wisdom suspect her credit in matters of less
moment, Ans. I have told you already, that this is falsely to suppose, that we
grant that in some certain points, some certain Church is infallibly assisted,
and under pain of damnation to be obeyed: whereas all that we say is this, that
in some place or other, some Church there shall be, which shall retain all
necessary Truths. Yet if your supposition were true, I would not grant your
conclusion, but with this exception, unless the matter were past suspicion,
and apparently certain, that in these things, I cannot believe God, and believe
the Church. For then I hope you will grant, that be the thing of never so
little moment, were if, for instance, but that S. Paul left his cloak at Troas,
yet I were not to gratify the Church so far, as for her sake to disbelieve
what God himself has revealed.

59 Whereas you say, Since we are undoubtedly obliged to believe her in
Fundamentalls, and cannot know precisely, what those fundamentalls be, we
cannot without hazard of our souls leave her in any point; I ans. First, that
this argument proceeds upon the same false ground with the former. And then,
that I have told you formerly, that you fear where no fear is; And though we
know not precisely, just how much is Fundamental, yet we know, that the
Scripture contains all Fundamentalls and more too; and therefore that in
believing that, we believe all Fundamentalls and more too. And consequently in
departing from you, can be in no danger of departing from that which may prove
a Fundamental truth: For we are well assured that certain Errors can never
prove Fundamental Truths.

60 Whereas you add, That that visible Church which cannot err in
Fundamental, propounds all her definitions without distinction to be believed
under Anathema's: Ans. Again you beg the question, supposing untruly, that
there is, any that Visible Church, I mean any Visible Church of one
Denomination, which cannot err in points Fundamental. Secondly, proposing
definitions to be believed under Anathema's, is no good argument, that the
Propounders conceive themselves infallible; but only, that they conceive the
Doctrine they condemn is evidently damnable. A plain proof hereof is this,
that particular Counsels, nay Particular men, have been very liberal of their
Anathema's, which yet were never conceived infallible, either by others or
themselves. If any man should now deny Christ to be the Savior of the world,
or deny the Resurrection, I should make no great scruple of Anathematizing his
doctrine, and yet am very far from dreaming of Infallibility.

61 And for the Visible Churches holding it a point necessary to Salvation,
that we believe she cannot err, I know no such tenet; unless by the Church,
you mean the Roman Church, which you have as much reason to do, as that petty
King in Africa has, to think himhimself King of all the world. And therefore
your telling us, if she speak true, what danger is it not to believe her? and
if false, that it is not dangerous to believe her, Is somewhat like your Popes
setting your Lawyers to dispute whether Constantines Donation were valid or no;
whereas the matter of fact was the far greater question, whether there were
any such Donation, or rather when without question there was none such. That
you may not seem to delude us in like manner, make it appear, that the visible
Church does hold so as you pretend: and then whether it be true or false, we
will consider afterward. But for the present, with this invisible tenet of the
Visible Church, we will trouble our selves no farther.

62 The effect of the next Argument is this, I cannot without grievous sin
disobey the Church, unless I know she commands those things which are not in
her power to command: and how far this power extends, none can better inform
me then the Church. Therefore I am to obey, so far as the Church requires my
obedience. I answer, First, that neither has the Catholic Church, but only a
corrupt part of it declared her self, nor required our obedience, in the
points contested among us. This therefore is falsely, and vainly supposed here
by you, being one of the greatest questions amongst us. Then secondly, that God
can better inform us, what are the limits of the Churches power, then the
Church her self, that is, then the Roman Clergy, who being men subject to the
same passions with other men, why they should be thought the best Judges in
their own cause, I do not well understand! But yet we oppose against them, no
humane decisive Judges, not any Sect or Person, but only God and his Word. And
therefore it is in vain to say, That in following her, you shall be sooner
excused, then in following any Sect or Man applying Scriptures against her
Doctrine: In as much as we never went about to arrogate to our selves that
infallibility or absolute Authority, which we take away from you. But if you
would have spoken to the purpose, you should have said, that in following her
you should sooner have been excusd, then in cleaving to the Scripture, and to
God himself.

63 Whereas you say, The fearful examples of innumerable persons, who for
saking the Church, upon pretense of her errors, have failed even in
fundamental points, ought to deter all Christians from opposing her in any
one doctrine or practice; This is, just as if you should say, diverse men have
fallen into Scylla, with going too far from Charybdis, be sure therefore ye
keep close to Charybdis: diverse leaving Prodigality, have fallen into
covetousness, therefore be you constant to prodigality; Many have fallen from
worshipping God perversely and foolishly, not to worship him at all, from
worshipping many Gods, to worshipping none; this therefore ought to deter
men, from leaving superstition or Idolatry, for fear of falling into Atheism
and Impiety. This is your counsel and Sophistry: but God says clean contrary;
Take heed you swerve not, either to the right hand or to the left: you must not
do evil that good may come thereon; therefore neither that you may avoid a
greater evil, you must not be obstinate in a certain error, for fear of an
uncertain. What if some, forsaking the Church of Rome, have forsaken
Fundamental truths? Was this because they forsook the Church of Rome? No sure,
this is causa pro non causa: for else all that have forsaken that Church should
have done so, which we say they have not. But because they went too far from
her, the golden mean, the narrow way is hard to be found, and hard to be kept;
hard, but not impossible: hard, but yet you must not please your self out of
it, though you err on the right hand, though you offend on the milder part,
for this is the only way that leads to life, and few there be that find it. It
is true if we said, there were no danger in being of the Roman Church, and
there were danger in leaving it, it were madness to persuade any man to leave
it. But we protest and proclaim the contrary, and that we have very little
hope of their Salvation, who either out of negligence in seeking the truth, or
unwillingnesse to find it, live and dye in the errors and impieties of that
Church: and therefore cannot but conceive those fears to be most foolish, and
ridiculous, which persuade men to be constant in one way to hell, least happily
if they leave it, they should fall into another.

64 But, Not only others, but even Protestants themselves, whose example ought
most to move us, pretending to reform the Church are come to affirm that she
perished for many ages: which D. Potter cannot deny to be a fundamental
error, against the Article of the Creed, I believe the Catholic Church,
seeing he affirms, the Donatists erred Fundamentally in confining it to
Africa. To this I Answer, First, that the error of the Donatists was not, that
they held it possible that some, or many, or most parts of Christendom, might
fall away from Christianity, and that the Church may loose much of her
amplitude, and be contracted to a narrow compass in comparison of her former
extent: which is proved not only possible but certain, by irrefragable
experience. For who knows not, that Gentilisme, and Mahumetisme, man's
wickedness deserving it, and Gods providence permitting it, have prevailed, to
the utter extirpation of Christianity, upon far the greater part of the
world? And S. Austin when he was out of the heat of Disputation, confesses the
Militant Church to be like the Moon, sometimes increasing, and sometimes
decreasing. This therefore was no error in the Donatists, that they held it
possible, that the Church, from a larger extent, might be contracted to a
lesser: nor that they held it possible to be reduced to Africa; (For why not to
Africa then, as well as within these few ages, you pretend it was to Europe?
But their error was, that they held de facto, this was done when they had no
just ground or reason to do so: and so upon a vain pretense which they could
not justify, separated themselves from the communion of all other parts of the
Church: and that they required it as a necessary condition to make a man a
member of the Church, that he should be of their communion, and divide himself
from all other Communions from which they were divided: which was a condition
both unnecessary and unlawful to be required, and therefore the exacting of it
was directly opposite to the Churches Catholicisme* in the very same nature
with their Errors who required Circumcision, and the keeping of the Law of
Moses as necessary to salvation. For whosoever requires harder or heavier
conditions of men, then God requires of them, he it is that is properly an
Enemy of the Churches Universality, by hindering either Men or Countries from
adjoining themselves to it; which, were it not for these unnecessary and
therefore unlawful conditions, in probability would have made the^ members of
it. And seeing the present Church of Rome persuades men they were as good (for
any hope of Salvation they have) not to be Christians as not to be Roman
Catholics, believe nothing at all, as not believe all which they impose upon
them: Be absolutely out of the Churches Communion, as be out of their
Communion, or be in any other, whether they be not guilty of the same crime,
with the Donatists and those Zelots of the Mosaicall Law, I leave it to the
judgment of those that understand reason! This is sufficient to show the
vanity of this Argument. But I add moreover, that you neither have named those
Protestants who held the Church to have perished for many ages; who perhaps
held not the destruction but the corruption of the church; not that the true
Church, but that the pure Church perished: or rather that the Church perished
not from its life and existence, but from its purity and integrity, or perhaps
from its splendor and visibility. Neither have you proved by any one reason,
but only affirmed it, to be a fundamental Error, to hold, that the Church
militant may possibly be driven out of the world, and abolished for a time
from the face of the earth.

65 But to accuse the Church of any Error in faith, is to say, she lost all
faith: For this is the Doctrine of Catholic Divines, that one Error in faith
destroys faith. To which I answer, that to accuse the Church of some Error in
faith, is not to say she lost all faith: For this is not the doctrine of
Catholic Divines; But that he which is an Heretic in one Article, may have
true faith of other Articles. And the contrary is only said and not showed in
Charity Mistaken.

66 Ad 21. D. Potter says, We may not depart from the Church absolutely, and
in all things: and from hence you conclude: Therefore we may not depart from it
in any thing. And this Argument you call a Demonstration. But a Fallacy, a
dicto simpliciter ad dictum secundum quid, was not used heretofore to be called
a Demonstration. D. Potter says not, that you may not depart from any opinion
or any practice of the Church: for you tell us in this very place, that he
says, even the Catholic may err: and every man may lawfully depart from
Error. He only says, you may not cease to be of the Church, nor depart from
those things which make it so to be; and from hence you infer a necessity of
forsaking it in nothing. Just as if you should argue thus: You may not leave
your friend or brother, therefore you may not leave the Vice of your friend, or
the Error of your brother. What he says of the Catholic Church, p. 75. the
same he extends presently after, to every true, though never so corrupted part
of it. And why do you not conclude from hence, that no particular Church
(according to his judgment) can fall into any Error, and call this a
Demonstration too? For as he says, p. 75. That there can be no just cause to
depart from the whole Church of Christ, no more then from Christ himself; So
p. 76. He tells you, that whosoever forsakes any one true member of this body,
for sakes the whole. So that what he says of the one, he says of the other;
and tells you, that neither Universal nor Particular Church, so long as they
continue so, may be forsaken, he means, Absolutely, no more then Christ
himself may be forsaken absolutely: For the Church is the body of Christ, and
whosoever forsakes either the Body, or his coherence to any one part of it,
must forsake his subordination, and relation to the Head. Therefore whosoever
forsakes the Church, or any Christian, must forsake Christ himself.

67 But then he tells you plainly in the same place, That it may be lawful and
necessary to depart from a Particular Church in some Doctrines and Practices:
And this he would have said even of the Catholic Church, if there had been
occasion, but there was none. For there he was to declare and justify our
departure, not from the Catholic Church, but the Roman, which we maintain to
be a particular Church. But in other places, you confess his doctrine to be,
that even the Catholic church may err in points not Fundamental; which you
do not pretend that he ever imputed to Christ himself. And therefore you
cannot with any candor interpret his words, as if he had said, We may not
forsake the Church in any thing, no more then Christ himself: but only thus,
We may not cease to be of the Church, nor forsake it absolutely and totally, no
more then Christ himself. And thus we see sometimes a mountain may travail,
and the production may be a mouse.

68 Ad 22. But D. Potter, either contradicts himself, or else must grant the
Church infallible; Because he says, if we did not differ from the Roman, we
could not agree with the Catholic: which saying supposes the Catholic
Church cannot err. Answer, This Argument, to give it the right name, is an
obscure and intricate nothing. And to make it appear so, let us suppose, in
contradiction to your supposition, either that the Catholic Church may err,
but does not, but that the Roman actually does: or that the Catholic Church
does err in some few things, but that the Roman erres in many more. And is it
not apparent in both these cases (which yet both suppose the Churches
Fallibility) a man may truly say, unless I dissent in some opinions from the
Roman Church, I cannot agree with the Catholic? Either therefore you must
retract your imputation laid upon D. Potter, or do that which you condemn in
him, and be driven to say, that the same man may hold some errors with the
Church of Rome, and at the same time with the Catholic Church not hold but
condemn them. For otherwise in neither of these cases is it possible for the
same man at the same time, to agree both with the Roman and the Catholic.

69 In all these Texts of Scripture, which are here alleged in this last
Section of this Chapter, or in any one of them, or in any other, does God say
clearly and plainly, The Bishop of Rome and that Society of Christians which
adheres to him shall be ever the infallible guide of Faith? You will confess,
I presume, he does not, and will pretend, it was not necessary. Yet if the King
should tell us the Lord Keeper should judge such and such causes, but should
either not tell us at all, or tell us but doubtfully who should be Lord Keeper,
should we be any thing the nearer for him to an end of contentions? Nay rather
would not the dissentions about the Person who it is, increase contentions,
rather then end them? Just so it would have been, if God had appointed a Church
tobe judge of Controversies, and had not told us which was that Church. Seeing
therefore God does nothing in vain and seeing it had been in vain, to appoint a
judge of Controversies, and not to tell us plainly who it is, and seeing
lastly, he has not told us plainly, no not at all who it is, is it not evident
he has appointed none? Ob. But (you will say perhaps) if it be granted once,
that some Church of one denomination, is the infallible guide of faith, it will
be no difficult thing to prove, that yours is the Church, seeing no other
Church pretends to be so. Ans. Yes, the Primitive and the Apostolic Church
pretends to be so. That assures us, that the spirit was promised, and given to
them, to lead them into all saving truth, that they might lead others. Ob. But
that Church is not now in the world, and how then, can it pretend to be the
guide of Faith? Ans. It is now in the world sufficiently, to be our guide: not
by the Persons of those men that were members of it, but by their Writings
which do plainly teach us, what truth they were led into, and so lead us into
the same truth. Ob. But these writings, were the writings of some particular
men, and not of the Church of those times: how then does that Church guide us
by these writings? Now these places show that a Church is to be our guide,
therefore they cannot be so avoided. Ans. If you regard the conception and
production of these writings, they were the writings of particular men: But if
you regard the Reception, and approbation of them, they may be well called the
writings of the Church, as having the attestation of the Church, to have been
written by those that were inspired, and directed by God. As a statute, though
penned by some one man, yet being ratified by the Parliament, is called the Act,
not of that man, but of the Parliament. Ob. But the words seem clearly enough
to prove, that the Church, the Present Church of every Age, is Universally
infallible. Ans. For my part, I know I am as willing and desirous, that the
Bishop or Church of Rome should be infallible, (provided I might know it) as
they are to be so esteemed. But he that would not be deceived must take heed,
that he take not his desire that a thing should be so, for a reason that it is
so. For if you look upon Scripture, through such spectacles as these, they will
appear to you, of what color pleases your fancies best: and will seem to say,
not what they do say, but what you would have them. As some say the Manna,
wherewith the Israelites were fed in the Wilderness, had in every man's mouth,
that very taste which was most agreeable to his palate. For my part I profess,
I have considered them a thousand times, and have looked upon them (as they
say,) on both sides, and yet to me they seem to say no such matter.

70 Not the First. For the Church may err, and yet the gates of Hell not
prevail against her. It may err, and yet continue still a true Church, and
bring forth Children unto God, and send souls to Heaven. And therefore this
can do you no service, without the plain begging of the point of Question.
viz. That every error is one of the gates of Hell. Which we absolutely deny,
and therefore, you are not to suppose, but to prove it. Neither is our denial
without reason. For seeing you do, and must grant, that a particular Church,
may hold some error, and yet be still a true member of the Church: why may not
the Universal Church, hold the same error, and yet remain the true Universal?

71 Not the Second or Third. For the spirit of Truth, may be with a Man, or a
Church for ever, and teach him all Truth: And yet he may fall into some error,
if this, all, be not simply all, but all of some kind: which you confess to be
so unquestioned and certain, that you are offended with D. Potter, for offering
to prove it. Secondly, he may fall into some error, even contrary to the truth
which is taught him, if it be taught him only sufficiently, and not
irresistibly, so that he may learn it if he will, not so that he must and
shall, whether he will or no. Now who can ascertain me, that the spirits
teaching is not of this nature? Or how can you possibly reconcile it, with your
doctrine of freewill in believing, if it be not of this nature? Besides, the
word in the Original is (...), which signifies, to be a guide and director
only, not to compel or necessitate. Who knows not, that a guide may set you
in the right way, and you may either negligently mistake, or willingly leave
it? And to what purpose does God complain so often, and so earnestly of some,
that had eyes to see and would not see, that stopped their ears, and closed
their eyes, least they should hear and see? Of others that would not
understand, least they should do good: that the light shined, and the
darkness comprehended it not: That he came unto his own, and his own received
him not: That light came into the world, and men loved darkness more then
light? To what purpose should he wonder, so few believed his report, and that
to so few his arm was revealed: And that when he comes, he should find no
faith upon earth; If his outward teaching were not of this nature, that it
might be followed, and might be resisted? And if it be, then God may teach, and
the Church not learn: God may lead, and the Church be refractory and not
follow. And indeed, who can doubt, that has not his eyes veiled with prejudice
that God has taught the Church of Rome plain enough in the Ep. to the
Corinthians, that all things in the Church are to be done for edification, and
that, in any public Prayers, or Thanks-givings, or Hymns, or Lessons of
instruction, to use a language, which the assistants generally understand not,
is not for edification? Though the Church of Rome will not learn this, for
fear of confessing an error, and so overthrowing her Authority, yet the time
will come, when it shall appear, that not only by Scripture, they were taught
this sufficiently, and commanded to believe, but by reason and common sense.
And so for the Communion* in both kinds, who can deny but they are taught it
by our Savior John 6. in these words, according to most of your own
expositions, Unless you eat the Flesh of the son of Man, and drink his
Blood, you have no life in you. (If our Savior speak there of the Sacrament,
as to them he does, because they conceive he does so.) Though they may pretend,
that receiving in one kind, they receive the blood together with the body, yet
they can with no face pretend that they drink it: And so obey not our Saviors
injunction according to the letter, which yet they profess is literally,
always to be obeyed, unless some impiety, or some absurdity force us to the
contrary: and they are not yet arrived to that impudence to pretend, that
either there is impiety or absurdity in receiving the Communion in both kinds.
This therefore they if not others, are plainly taught by our Savior in this
place. But by S. Paul all without exception, when he says, Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this Chalice. This ( a
Man) that is to examine himself, is every man, that can do it: as is
confessed on all hands. And therefore it is all one, as if he had said, let
every man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup. They which acknowledge Saint Paul's Epistles, and S. John's Gospel to be
the Word of God, one would think should not deny, but that they are taught
these two Doctrines plain enough. Yet we see they neither do, nor will learn
them. I conclude therefore, that the spirit may very well teach the Church, and
yet the Church fall into and continue in Error, by not regarding what she is
taught by the Spirit.

72 But all this I have spoken upon a supposition only, and showed unto you,
that though these promises, had been made unto the present Church of every age
(I might have said though they had been to the Church of Rome by name,) yet no
certainty of her Universal infallibility could be built upon them. But the
plain truth is, that these Promises are vainly arrogated by you, and were never
made to you, but to the Apostles only. I pray deal ingenuously and tell me,
who were they of whom our Savior says, These things have I spoken unto you,
being present with you. c. 14. 25. But the comforter, shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have told you v.
26? Who are they to whom he says, I go away and come again unto you; and I
have told you before it come to pass: v. 28. 29. You have been with me from
the beginning: c. 15. v. 27? And again, these things I have told you, that when
the time shall come, you may remember that I told you of them: and these things
I said not to you at the beginning, because I was with you. c. 16. 4. And
because I said these things unto you, sorrow has filled your hearts. v. 6?
Lastly, who are they of whom he says v. 12. I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now? Do not all these circumstances appropriate
this whole discourse of our Savior to his Disciples, that were then with him,
and consequently, restrain the Promises of the spirit of truth, which was to
lead them into all truth, to their Persons only? And seeing it is so, is it not
an impertinent arrogance and presumption, for you to lay claim unto them, in
the behalf of your Church? Had Christ been present with your Church? Did the
Comforter bring these things to the Remembrance of your Church, which Christ
had before taught and she had forgotten? Was Christ then departing from your
Church? And did he tell of his departure before it came to pass? Was your
Church with him from the beginning? Was your Church filled with sorrow, upon the
mentioning of Christ's departure? Or lastly, did he, or could he have said to
your Church, which then was not extant, I have yet many things to say unto you,
but ye cannot bear them now? as he speaks in the 13. v. immediately before the
words by you quoted. And then goes on, Howbeit when the spirit of truth is
come, he will guide you into all Truth. Is it not the same You he speaks to, in
the 13. v. and that he speaks to in the 14? And is it not apparent to any one
that has but half an eye, that in the 13. he speaks only to them that then
were with him? Besides in the very text by you alleged, there are things
promised, which your Church cannot with any modesty pretend to. For there it is
said, the spirit of Truth, not only will guide you into all Truth, but also
will show you things to come. Now your Church (for ought I could ever
understand) does not so much as pretend to the spirit of Prophecy, and
knowledge of future events: And therefore has as little cause to pretend to
the former promise, of being led by the spirit into all truth. And this is the
Reason, why both You in this place, and generally, your Writers of
Controversies, when they entreat of this Argument, cite this Text perpetually
by halfes, there being in the latter part of it, a clear, and convincing
Demonstration, that you have nothing to do with the former. Unless you will
say, which is most ridiculous, that when our Savior said, He will teach you
etc. and he will show you etc. He meant one You in the former clause, and
another You in the latter.

73 Ob. But this is to confine Gods spirit to the Apostles only, or to the
Disciples, that then were present with him: which is directly contrary to many
places of Scripture. Ans. I confess, that to confine the Spirit of God to
those that were then present with Christ is against Scripture. But I hope it is
easy to conceive a difference, between confining the Spirit of God to them: and
confining the promises made in this place to them. God may do many things
which he does not promise at all: much more, which he does not promise in such
or such a place.

74 Ob. But it is promised in the 14. Chap. that this spirit shall abide with
them for ever: Now they in their persons were not to abide for ever, and
therefore the Spirit could not abide with them, in their Persons for ever,
seeing the coexistence of two things, supposes of necessity; the existence of
either. Therefore the promise was not made to them only in their Persons, but
by them to the Church, which was to abide for ever. Ans. Your Conclusion is,
not to them only, but your Reason concludes, either nothing at all, or that
this Promise of abiding with them for ever, was not made to their Persons at
all; or if it were, that it was not performed. Or if you will not say (as I
hope you will not) that it was not performed, nor that it was not made to their
Persons at all; then must you grant, that the word for ever, is here used in a
sense restrained, and accommodated to the subject here entreated of; and that
it signifies, not eternally, without end of time, but perpetually without
interruption, for the time of their lives. So that the force, and sense of the
Words is, that they should never want the Spirits asstance, in the performance
of their function: And that the Spirit would not (as Christ was to do,) stay
with them for a time, and afterward leave them, but would abide with them, if
they kept their station, unto the very end of their lives, which is man's for
ever. Neither is this use of the word, for ever, any thing strange, either in
our ordinary speech, wherein we use to say, this is mine for ever, this shall
be yours for ever, without ever dreaming of the Eternity, either of the thing
or Persons. And then in Scripture, it not only will bear, but requires this
sense very frequently, as Exodus 21. 6. Deuteronomy. 15. 17. his master shall boar his
ear through with an awle, and he shall serve him for ever. Ps. 52. 9. I will
praise thee for ever. Ps. 61. 4. I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever. Ps.
119. 111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as mine heritage for ever: and lastly in
the Epist. to Philemon, He therefore departed from thee for a time, that thou
should receive him for ever.

75 And thus, I presume, I have showed sufficiently, that this for ever,
hinders not, but that the promise may be appropriated to the Apostles, as by
many other circumstances I have evinced it must be. But what now, if the place
produced by you, as a main pillar of your Churches infallibility, prove upon
trial, an engine to batter and overthrow it, at least, (which is all one to my
purpose) to take away all possibility of our assurance of it? This will seem
strange news to you at first hearing, and not far from a prodigy. And I
confess, as you here in this place, and generally all your Writers of
controversy, by whom this text is urged, order the matter, it is very much
disabled, to do any service against you in this question. For with a bold
sacrilege, and horrible impiety, somewhat like Procrustes his cruelty, you
perpetually cut off the head and foot, the beginning and end of it; and
presenting to your confidents, who usually read no more of the Bible, then is
alleged by you, only these words, I will ask my Father, and he shall give you
another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, even the spirit of
Truth, conceal in the mean time, the words before, and the words after; that
so, the promise of Gods Spirit, may seem to be absolute, whereas it is indeed
most clearly and expressly conditional: being both in the words before,
restrained to those only, that love God and keep his Commandments: and in the
words after, flatly denied to all, whom the Scriptures style by the name of the
World, that is, as the very Atheists give us plainly to understand, to all
wicked and worldly men. Behold the place entire, as it is set down in your own
Bible. If ye love me keep my Commandments, and I will ask my Father, and he
shall give you another Paraclete, that he may abide with you for ever, even the
spirit of the Truth, whom the world cannot receive. Now from the place there
restored and vindicated from your mutilation, thus I argue against your
pretense. We can have no certainty of the infallibility of your Church, but
upon this supposition, that your Popes are infallible in confirming with the
Decrees of General Counsels: we can have no certainty hereof, but upon this
supposition, that the Spirit of truth is promised to him, for his direction in
this work. And of this again we can have no certainty, but upon supposall, that
he performs the condition, whereunto the promise of the spirit of truth is
expressly limited, viz. That he love God and keep his Commandments; and of this
finally, not knowing the Popes heart, we can have no certainty at all;
therefore from the first to the last, we can have no certainty at all of your
Churches infallibility. This is my first argument: From this place another
follows, which will charge you as home as the former. If many of the Roman
See, were such men as could not receive the spirit of Truth, even men of the
World, that is Worldly, Wicked, Carnal, Diabolical men, then the Spirit of
Truth, is not here promised, but flatly denied them: and consequently we can
have no certainty, neither of the Decrees of Counsels, which these Popes
confirm, nor of the Churches infallibility, which is guided by these decrees:
But many of the Roman See, even by the confession of the most zealous defenders
of it, were such men: therefore the spirit of truth is not here promised but
denied them, and consequently we can have no certainty, neither of the Decrees
which they confirm, nor of the Churches infallibility, which guides herself
by these Decrees.

76 You may take as much time as you think fit, to answer these Arguments. In
the mean while I proceed to the consideration of the next text alleged for
this purpose by you: out of S. Paul 1. Ep. to Timothy: where he says, as you
say the Church is the Pillar and ground of truth. But the truth is you are
somewhat to bold with S. Paul. For he says not in formal terms, what you
make him say, the Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, neither is it
certain that he means so: for it is neither impossible nor improbable, that
these words the pillar and ground of truth, may have reference not to the
Church, but to Timothy, the sense of the place that thou may know how to
behave thy self, as a pillar and ground of truth, in the Church of God, which
is the house of the living God, which exposition offers no violence at all to
the words, but only supposes an Ellipsis of the Particle (...), in the greek
very ordinary. Neither wants it some likelihood, that S. Paul comparing the
Church to a house, should here exhort Timothy, to carry himself, as a Pillar in
that house should do, according as he had given other Principal men in the
Church, the name of Pillars; rather then, having called the Church a House, to
call it presently a Pillar; which may seem somewhat heterogeneous. Yet if you
will needs have S. Paul refer this not to Timothy but the Church, I will not
contend about it any farther, then to say, possibly it may be otherwise. But
then secondly, I am to put you in mind, that the Church which S. Paul here
speaks of, was that in which Timothy conversed, and that was a Particular
Church, and not the Roman; and such you will not have to be Universally
Infallible.

77 Thirdly, if we grant you out of curtesy (for nothing can enforce us to it)
that he both speaks of the Universal Church, and says this of it, then I am
to remember you, that many Attributes in Scripture, are not notes of
performance, but of duty, and teach us not what the thing or Person is of
necessity, but what it should be. Ye are the salt of the Earth, said our
Savior to his disciples: not that this quality was inseparable from their
Persons, but because it was their office to be so. For if they must have been
so of necessity, and could not have been otherwise, in vain had he put them in
fear of that which follows, If the salt has lost his savor, wherewith shall
it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast forth, and to
be trodden under foot. So the Church may be by duty, the pillar and ground,
that is, the Teacher of Truth, of all truth, not only necessary but profitable
to salvation; and yet she may neglect and violate this duty, and be in fact the
teacher of some Error.

78 Fourthly and lastly, if we deal most liberally with you, and grant that the
Apostle here speaks of the Catholic Church, calls it the Pillar and ground of
Truth, and that not only because it should, but because it always shall and
will be so, yet after all this, you have done nothing; your bridge is too
short, to bring you to the bank where you would be, unless you can show that
by truth here, is certainly meant, not only all necessary to salvation, but all
that is profitable, absolutely and simply All. For that the true Church always
shall be the maintainer and teacher of all necessary truth, you know we grant
and must grant, for it is of the essence of the Church to be so, and any
company of men were no more a Church without it, then any thing can be a man,
and not be reasonable. But as a man may be still a man, though he want a hand
or an eye, which yet are profitable parts, so the Church may be still a Church,
though it be defective in some profitable truth. And as a man may be a man,
that has some biles and botches on his body, so the Church may be the Church,
though it have many corruptions both in doctrine and practice.

79 And thus you see we are at liberty from the former places; having showed
that the sense of them, either must or may be such as will do your Cause no
service. But the last you suppose, will be a Gordian knot, and ties us fast
enough: The words are, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets etc. to the
consummation of Saints, to the work of the Ministry etc. Until we all meet
into the Unity of faith etc. That we be not hereafter Children, wavering and
carried up and down with every wind of Doctrine. Out of which words, this is
the only argument which you collect, or I can collect for you.

There is no means to conserve unity of Faith, against every wind of Doctrine,
unless it be a Church universally infallible.

But it is impious to say there is no means to conserve unity of faith against
every wind of Doctrine:

Therefore there must be a Church Universally Infallible.

Whereunto I answer, that your major is so far from being confirned, that it
is plainly confuted, by the place alleged. For that tells us of another means
for this purpose, to wit, the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and
Pastors, and Doctors, which Christ gave upon his Ascension, and that their
consummating the Saints, doing the work of the Ministry, and Edifying the body
of Christ, was the means to bring those (which are there spoken of, be they
who they will,) to the unity of Faith, and to perfection in Christ, that they
might not be wavering, and carried about, with every wind of false Doctrine.
Now the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and Pastors, and Doctors, are
not the present Church; therefore the Church is not the only means for this
end, nor that which is here spoken of.

80 Peradventure by, he gave, you conceive, is to be understood, he promised
that he would give unto the worlds end. But what reason have you for this
conceit? Can you show that the word, (...), has this signification in other
places, and that it must have it in this place? Or will not this interpretation
drive you presently to this blasphemous absurdity, that God has not performed
his promise? Unless you will say, which for shame I think you will not, that
you have now, and in all ages since Christ have had Apostles, and Prophets, and
Evangelists: for as for Pastors, and Doctors alone, they will not serve the
turn. For if God promised to give all these, then you must say he has given
all, or else that he has broke his promise. Neither may you pretend, that the
Pastors and Doctors were the same with the Apostles, and Prophets, and
Evangelists, and therefore having Pastors and Doctors, you have all. For it is
apparent, that by these names, are denoted several Orders of men, clearly
distinguished and diversified by the Original Text; but much more plainly by
your own Translations, for so you read it, some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and other some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors: and yet more
plainly in the parallel place, 1. Cor. 12. to which we are referred by your
Vulgar Translation, God has set some in the Church, first Apostles,
secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, therefore this subterfuge is stopped
against you. Ob. But how can they, which died in the first Age, keep us in
Unity, and guard us from Error, that live now, perhaps in the last? This
seems to be all one; as if a man should say, that Alexander, or Julius Caesar
should quiet a mutiny in the King of Spaines Army. Ans. I hope you will grant,
that Hippocrates, and Galen, and Euclid, and Aristotle, and Salust, and Caesar,
and Livie, were dead many ages since; and yet that we are now preserved from
error by them, in a great part of Physic, of Geometry, of Logic, of the Roman
story. But what if these men had writ by divine Inspiration, and writ complete
bodies of the Sciences they professed, and writ them plainly and perspicuously?
You would then have granted, I believe, that their works had been sufficient to
keep us from error, and from dissension in these matters. And why then should
it be incongruous to say, that the Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, and
Pastors, and Doctors, which Christ gave upon his ascension, by their writings,
which some of them writ but all approved, are even now sufficient means, to
conserve us in Unity of faith, and guarde us from error? Especially seeing
these writings are, by the confession of all parts, true and divine, and as we
pretend and are ready to prove, contain a plain and perfect Rule of Faith; and
as the Person.
Chiefest of you acknowledge, contain immediately, all the Principal, and
Fundamental points of Christianity, referring us to the Church and Tradition
only for some minute particularities. But tell me I pray, the Bishops that
composed the Decrees of the Council of Trent, and the Pope that confirmed
them, are they means to conserve you in Unity, and keep you from Error, or
are they not? Peradventure you will say, their Decree^ are, but not their
Persons: but you will not deny I hope, that you owe your Unity, and freedom
from Error, to the Persons that made these Decrees: neither will you deny, that
the writings which they have left behind them, are sufficient for this purpose.
And why may not then the Apostles writings be as fit for such a purpose, as the
Decrees of your Doctors? Surely their intent in writing was to conserve us in
Unity of Faith, and to keep us from error, and we are sure God spoke in them;
but your Doctors from whence they are, we are not so certain. Was the
Holy Ghost then unwilling, or unable to direct them so, that their writings
should be fit and sufficient to attain that end they aimed at in writing? For
if he were both able and willing to do so, then certainly he did do so. And
then their writings may be very sufficient means, if we would use them as we
should do, to preserve us in Unity, in all necessary points of Faith, and to
guard us from all pernicious Error.

81 If yet you be not satisfied, but will still pretend that, all these words
by you cited, seem clearly enough to prove, that the Church is Universally
infallible, without which Unity of Faith could not be conserved against every
wind of Doctrine: I Ans. That to you, which will not understand, that there can
be any means to conserve the Unity of Faith, but only that which conserves
your authority over the Faithful, it is no marvel that these words seem to
prove, that the Church, nay that your Church is universally infallible. But we
that have no such end, no such desires, but are willing to leave all men to
their liberty, provided they will not improve it to a Tyranny over others, we
find it no difficulty to discern between dedit and promisit, he gave at his
Ascension, and he Promised to the worlds end. Besides, though you whom it
concerns, may happily flatter your selves, that you have not only Pastors, and
Doctors, but Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists, and those distinct from
the former still in your Church; yet we that are disinteressed persons, cannot
but smile at these strange imaginations. Lastly, though you are apt to think
your selves such necessary instruments for all good purposes, and that nothing
can be well done unless you do it; that no unity or constancy in Religion can
be maintained, but inevitably Christendom must fall to ruin, and confusion,
unless you support it: yet we that are indifferent and impartial, and well
content, that God should give us his own favors, by means of his own
appointment, not of our choosing, can easily collect out of these very words,
that not the infallibility of your, or of any Church, but the Apostles, and
Prophets, and Evangelists etc. which Christ gave upon his Ascension, were
designed by him, for the compasing all these excellent purposes, by their
preaching while they lived, and by their writings for ever. And if they fail
hereof, the Reason is not any insufficiency or invalidity in the means, but
the voluntary perverseness of the subjects they have to deal with: who, if
they would be themselves, and be content that others should be, in the choice
of their Religion the servants of God and not of men; if they would allow, that
the way to heaven is no narrower now, then Christ left it, his yoke no heavier
then he made it; that the belief of no more difficulties, is required now to
Salvation, then was in the Primitive Church; that no error is in it self
destructive, and exclusive from Salvation now, which was not then; if instead
of being zealous Papists, earnest Calvinists, rigid Lutherans, they would
become themselves, and be content that others should be plain and honest
Christians; if all men would believe the Scripture, and freeing themselves from
prejudice and passion, would syncerely endeavor to find the true sense of it,
and live according to it, and require no more of others, but to do so; nor
denying their* Communion to any that do so, would so order their public
service of God, that all which do so may without scruple, or hypocrisy, or
protestation against any part of it, join with them in it: who does not see
that (seeing as we suppose here, and shall prove hereafter,) all necessary
truths, are plainly and evidently set down in Scripture, there would of
necessity be among all men, in all things necessary, Unity of Opinion? And
notwithstanding any other differences that are or could be, Unity of Communion
and Charity and mutual toleration? By which means, all Schism and Heresy,
would be banished the world, and those wretched contentions which now rend and
tear in pieces, not the coat, but the members and bowels of Christ, which
mutual pride and Tyranny, and cursing, and killing, and damning, would fain
make immortal, should speedily receive a most blessed catastrophe. But of this
hereafter, when we shall come to the question of Schism, wherein I persuade my
self, that I shall plainly show, that the most vehement accusers, are the
greatest offenders, and that they are indeed at this time, the greatest
Schismatiques, who make the way to heaven narrower, the yoke of Christ heavier,
the differences of Faith greater, the conditions of Ecclesiastical government
harder, and stricter, then they were made at the beginning by Christ and his
Apostles: they who talk of Unity, but aim at Tyranny, and will have peace with
none, but with their slaves and vassals. In the mean while, though I have
showed how Unity of Faith, and Unity of Charity too, may be preserved without
your Churches infallibility, yet seeing you modestly conclude from hence, not
that your Church is, but only seems to be universally infallible, meaning to
your self, of which you are a better judge then I: Therefore I willingly grant
your conclusion, and proceed.

82 Whereas you say, That D. Potter limits those promises and privileges to
fundamental points: The truth is, with some of them he meddles not at all,
neither does his Adversary give him occasion: Not with those out of the Epistle
to Timothy, and to the Ephesians. To the rest he gives other answer besides
this.

83 But the words of Scripture by you alleged are Universal, and mention no
such restraint to Fundamentals, as D. Potter applies to them: I answer, That of
the five Texts which you allege, four are indefinite, and only one universal,
and that you confess is to be restrained, and are offended with D. Potter for
going about to prove it. And Whereas you say, they mention no restraint,
intimating that therefore they are not to be restrained, I tell you, this is no
good consequence; for it may appear out of the matter and circumstances, that
they are to be understood in a restrained sense, notwithstanding no restraint
be mentioned. That place quoted by S. Paul, and applied by him to our Savior,
He has put all things under his feet, mentions no exception; yet S. Paul tells
us, not only that it is true or certain, but it is manifest, that He is
excepted which did put all things under him.

84 But your interpretation is better then D. Potters, because it is literal.
I answer, His is Literal as well as yours: and you are mistaken if you think a
restrained sense may not be a literal sense; for to Restrained, Literal is
not opposed but unlimited or absolute, and to Literal, is not opposed
Restrained, but Figurative.

85 Whereas you say D. Potters Brethren rejecting his limitation, restrain the
mentioned Texts to the Apostles, implying hereby a contrariety between them and
him: I answer, So does D. Potter restrain all of them which he speaks of, in
the pages by you quoted, to the Apostles, in the direct and primary sense of
the words. Though he tells you there, the words in a more restrained sense are
true, being understood of the Church Universal.

86 As for your pretense, That to find the meaning of those places, you
confer diverse Texts, you consult Originals, you examine Translations, and use
all the means by Protestants appointed, I have told you before, that all this
is vain and hypocritical, if (as your manner and your doctrine is) you give
not your self liberty of judgment in the use of these means; if you make not
your selves Judges of* but only Advocats for the doctrine of your Church,
refusing to see what these means show you, if it any way make against the
doctrine of your Church, though it be as clear as the light at noone. Remove
prejudice, Even the balance, and hold it even, make it indifferent to you
which way you go to heaven, so you go the true, which Religion be true so you
be of it, then use the means and pray for Gods assistance, and as sure as God
is true, you shall be lead into all necessary Truth.

87 Whereas you say, you neither do, nor have any possible means to agree, as
long as you are left to your selves: The first is very true, That while you
differ, you do not agree. But for the second, That you have no possible means
of agreement, as long as you are left to your selves, i. e. to your own reasons
and judgment, this sure is very false, neither do you offer any proof of it,
unless you intended this, that you do not agree, for a proof that you cannot;
which sure is no good consequence, not half so good as this which I oppose
against it: D. Potter and I by the use of these means by you mentioned do
agree concerning the sense of these places, therefore there is a possible
means of agreement, and therefore you also if you would use the same means,
with the same minds, might agree so far as it is necessary, and it is not
necessary that you should agree further. Or if there be no possible means to
agree about the sense of these Texts, whilst we are left to our selves, then
sure it is impossible that we should agree in your sense of them which was:
That the Church is universally infallible. For if it were possible for us to
agree in this sense of them, then it were possible for us to agree. And why
then said you of the self same Texts but in the page next before, These words
seem clearly enough to prove that the Church is Universally infallible, A
strange forgetfulness, that the same man, almost in the same breath should say
of the same words, They seem clearly enough to prove such a conclusion true,
and yet that three indifferent men, all presumed to be lovers of Truth, and
industrious searchers of it should have no possible means, while they follow
their own reason to agree in the Truth of this Conclusion!

88 Whereas you say, that it were great impiety to imagine that God, the lover
of Souls, has left no certain infallible means to decide both this and all
other differences arising about the interpretation of Scripture, or upon any
other occasion: I desire you to take heed, you commit not an impiety in making
more impieties then Gods Commandments make. Certainly God is no way obliged
either by his promise or his Love to give us all things, that we may imagine
would be convenient for us, as formerly I have proved at large. It is
sufficient that he denies us nothing necessary to Salvation. Deus non deficit
in necessariis, nec redundat in superfluis: So D. Stapleton. But that the
ending of all Controversies, or having a certain means of ending them, is
necessary to Salvation, that you have often said and supposed, but never
proved, though it be the main pillar of your whole discourse. So little care
you take how slight your Foundations are, so your building make a fair show.
And as little care, how you commit those faults your self, which you condemn
in others. For you here charge them with great impiety, who imagine that God
the lover of Souls has left no infallible means to determine all differences
arising about the interpretation of Scripture, or upon any other occasion: And
yet afterward being demanded by D. Potter, why the Questions between the
Jesuits and Dominicans remain undetermined? You return him this cross
interrogatory, Who has assured you that the point wherein these learned men
differ, is a revealed Truth, or capable of definition, or is not rather by
plain Scripture indeterminable, or by any Rule of faith? So then when you say,
it were great impiety to imagine that God has not left infallible means to
decide all differences; I may answer, It seems you do not believe your self.
For in this controversy which is of as high consequence as any can be, you
seem to be doubtful whether there be any means to determine it. On the other
side, when you ask D. Potter, who assured him that there it any means to
determine this Controversy? I answer for him, that you have, in calling it a
great impiety to imagine that there is not some infallible means to decide
this and all other differences arising about the Interpretation of Scripture,
or upon any other occasion. For what trick you can devise to show that this
difference, between the Dominicans and Jesuits, which includes a difference
about the sense of many Texts of Scripture, and many other matters of moment,
was not included under this and all other differences, I cannot imagine. Yet if
you can find out any, thus much at least we shall gain by it, that general
speeches are not always to be understood generally, but sometimes with
exceptions and limitations.

89 But if there be any infallible means to decide all differences, I beseech
you name them. You say it is to consult and hear Gods Visible Church with
submissive acknowledgment of her Infallibility. But suppose the difference be
(as here it is) whether your Church be infalli^le, what shall decide that? If
you would say (as you should dot) Scripture and Reason, then you foresee that
you should be forced to grant that these are fit means to decide this
Controversy, and therefore may be as fit to decide others. Therefore to avoid
this, you run into a most ridiculous absurdity, and tell us that this
difference also, whether the Church be infallible, as well as others, must be
agreed by a submissiue acknowledgment of the Churches infallibility. As if you
should have said, My Brethren I perceive this is a great contention amongst
you, whether the Roman Church be infallible? If you will follow my advice, I
will show you a ready means to end it; you must first agree that the Roman
Church is infallible, and then your contention whether the Roman Church be
infallible, will quickly be at an end. Verily a most excellent advice, and most
compendious way of ending all Controversies, even without troubling the Church
to determine them* For why may not you say in all other differences, as you
have done in this? Agree that the Pope is supreme head of the Church: That the
substance of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament is turned into the body, and blood
of Christ: That the Communion is to be given to Laymen but in one kind: That
Pictures may be worshipped: That Saints are to be invocated; and so in the
rest, and then your differences about the Popes Supremacy, Transubstantiation,
and all the rest will speedily be ended. If you say, the advice is good in
this, but not in other cases, I must request you not to expect always, to be
believed upon your word, but to show us some reason, why any one thing, namely
the Churches infallibility, is fit to prove it self; and any other thing, by
name the Popes Supremacy, or Transubstantiation is not as fit? Or if for shame
you will at length confess, that the Churches infallibility is not fit to
decide this difference, whether the Church be infallible, then you must
confess it is not fit to decide all: Unless you will say, it may be fit to
decide all, and yet not fit to decide this, or pretend that this is not
comprehended under all. Besides if you grant that your Churches infallibility
cannot possibly be well grounded upon, or decided by it self, then having
professed before, that there is no possible means besides this, for us to
agree hereupon, I hope you will give me leave to conclude, that it is
impossible upon good ground for us to agree that the Roman Church is
infallible. For certainly light it self, is not more clear then the evidence
of this syllogism;

If there be no other means to make men agree upon your Churches
infallibility, but only this, and this be no means, then it is simply
impossible for men upon good grounds to agree that your Church is infallible:

But there is (as you have granted) no other possible means to make men agree
hereupon, but only a submissive acknowledgment of her Infallibility, And this
is apparently no means;

Therefore it is simply impossible for men upon good grounds to agree that your
Church is infallible.

90 Lastly to the place of S. Austine, wherein we are advised to follow the way
of Catholic discipline, which from Christ himself by the Apostles has come
down even to us, and from us shall descend to all posterity: I answer, That the
way which S. Austine spoke of, and the way which you commend, being diverse
ways, and in many things clean contrary, we cannot possibly follow them both;
and therefore for you to apply the same words to them is a vain equivocation.
Show us any way, and do not say, but prove it to have come from Christ and his
Apostles down to us; and we are ready to follow it. Neither do we expect
demonstration hereof, but such reasons as may make this more probable then the
contrary. But if you bring in things into your now Catholic Discipline, which
Chistians in S. Austins time held abominable, (as the picturing of God,) and
which you must confess to have come into the Church seven hundred years after
Christ: if you will bring in things, as you have done the half Communion, with
a non obstante, notwithstanding Christ's Institution, and the practice of the
Primitive Church were to the contrary: If you will do such things as these,
and yet would have us believe, that your whole Religion came from Christ and
his Apostles, this we conceive a request too unreasonable for modest men to
make, or for wise men to grant.

CHAP. IIII.
To say, that the Creed contains all points necessarily to be believed, is
neither pertinent to the Question in hand, nor in it self true.
I SAY, neither pertinent, nor true. Not pertinent: Because our Question is
not, what points are necessary to be explicitly believed; but what points may
be lawfully disbelieved, or rejected after sufficient Proposition that they are
divine Truths. You say, the Creed contains all points necessary to be
believed. Be it so. But does it likewise contain all points not to be
disbelieved? Certainly it does not. For how many truths are there in holy
Scripture not contained in the Creed, which we are not obliged distinctly, and
particularly to know and believe, but are bound under pain of damnation not to
reject, as soon as we come to know that they are found in holy Scripture? And
we having already showed, that whatsoever is proposed by Gods Church as a point
of faith, is infallibly a truth revealed by God; it follows that whosoever
denies any such point, opposes Gods sacred testimony whether that point be
contained in the Creed, or no. In vain then was your care employed to prove
that all points of faith necessary to be explicitly believed, are contained in
the Creed. Neither was that the Catalogue which Charity Mistaken demanded. His
demand was (and it was most reasonable) that you would once give us a list of
all fundamentals, the denial whereof destroys Salvation; whereas the denial
of other points not fundamental, may stand with salvation, although both these
kinds of points be equally proposed as revealed by God. For if they be not
equally proposed, the difference will arise from diversity of the Proposal,
and not of the Matter fundamental, or not fundamental. This Catalogue only,
can show how far Protestants may disagree without breach of Unity in faith;
and upon this many other matters depend, according to the ground of
Protestants. But you will never adventure to publish such a Catalogue. I say
more: You cannot assign any one point so great, or fundamental, that the
denial thereof will make a man an Heretic, if it be not sufficiently
propounded, as a divine Truth: Nor can you assign any one point so small, that
it can without heresy be rejected, if once it be sufficiently represented as
revealed by God.

2. Nay, this your instance in the Creed, is not only impertinent but directly
against you. For all points in the Creed are not of their own nature
fundamental, as I showed Cap. 3. n. 3.
before: And yet it is damnable to deny any one point contained in the Creed.
So that it is clear, that to make an error damnable, it is not necessary that
the matter be of it self fundamental.

3 Moreover you cannot ground any certainty upon the Creed it self, unless
first you presuppose that the authority of the Church is universally
infallible, and consequently that it is damnable to oppose her declarations,
whether they concern matters great, or small, contained, or not contained in
the Creed. This is clear. Because we must receive the Creed it self upon the
credit of the Church, without which we could not know that there was any such
thing as that which we call the Apostles Creed: and yet the arguments whereby
you endeavor to prove, that the Creed contains all fundamental points, are
grounded upon supposition, that the Creed was made either by the Apostles
themselves, or by the Page 216.
Church of their times from them: which thing we could not certainly know, if
the succeeding and still continued Church, may err in her Traditions: neither
can we be assured, whether all fundamental Articles which you say were out of
the Scriptures, summed, and contracted into the Apostles Creed, were faithfully
summed, and contracted, and not one pretermitted, altered, or mistaken, unless
we undoubtedly know that the Apostles composed the Creed; and that they
intended to contract all fundamental points of faith into it; or at least that
the Church of their times (for it seems you doubt whether indeed it were
composed by the Apostles themselves) did understand the Apostles aright; and
that the Church of their times, did intend that the Creed should contain all
fundamental points. For if the Church may err in points not fundamental, may
she not also err in the particulers which I have specified? Can you show it to
be a fundamental point of faith, that the Apostles intended to comprize all
points of faith necessary to Salvation in the Creed? Your self say no more then
that it is very Page* 24^.
probable; which is far from reaching to a fundamental point of faith. Your
prohability is grounded upon the Judgment of Antiquity, and even of the Roman
Doctors, as you say in the same place. But if the Catholic Church may err,
what certainty can you expect from Antiquity, or Doctors? Scripture is your
total Rule of faith. Cite therefore some Text of Scripture, to prove that the
Apostles, or the Church of their times composed the Creed, and composed it with
a purpose that it should contain all fundamental points of faith. Which being
impossible to be done, you must for the Creed it self rely upon the
infallibility of the Church.

4. Moreover, the Creed consists not so much in the words, as in their sense
and meaning. All such as pretend to the name of Christians, recite the Creed,
and yet many have erred fundamentally, as well against the Articles of the
Creed, as other points of faith. It is then very frivolous to say, the Creed
contains all fundamental points, without specifying, both in what sense the
Articles of the Creed be true, and also in what true sense, they be
fundamental. For, both these taskes, you are to perform, who teach that all
truth is not fundamental: and you do but delude the ignorant, when you say,
that the Creed, taken in a Catholic Page 216.
sense, comprehends all points fundamental; because with you, all Catholic
sense is not fundamental: for so it were necessary to salvation that all
Christians should know the whole Scripture, wherein every least point has a
Catholic sense. Or if by Catholic sense, you understand that sense which is
so universally to be known, and believed by all, that whosoever fails therein
cannot be saved, you trifle and say no more then this: All points of the Creed
in a sense necessary to salvation, are necessary to salvation. Or: All points
fundamental, are fundamental. After this manner it were an easy thing to
make many trve Prognostications, by saying it will certainly rain, when it
raineth. You say the Creed Page 216.
was opened and explained, in some parts in the Creeds of Nice, etc. but how
shall we understand the other parts, not explained in those Creeds?

5. For what Article in the Creed is more fundamental, or may seem more
clear, then that, wherein we believe JESUS CHRIST to be the Mediator,
Redeemer, and Savior of mankind, and the founder, and foundation of a
Catholic Church expressed in the Creed? And yet about this Article, how many
different doctrines are there, not only of old Heretics, as Arius, Nestorius,
Eutiches, etc. but also of Protestants, partly against Catholics, and partly
against one another? For the said maine Article of Christ's being the only
Savior of the world etc. according to different senses of disagreeing Sects,
does involve these, and many other such questions; That Faith in JESUS CHRIST
does justify alone; That Sacraments have no efficency in Justification; That
Baptism does not avail Infants for salvation, unless they have an Act of
faith; That there is no Sacerdotall Absolution from sins; That good works
proceeding from Gods grace are not meritorious; That there can be no
Satisfaction for the temporal punishment due to sin after the guilt, or
offense is pardoned; No Purgatory; No prayers for the dead; No Sacrifice of the
Mass; No Invocation; No Mediation, or intercession of Saints; No inherent
Justice: No supreme Pastor, yea no Bishop by divine Ordinance; No Real
presence; no Transubstantiation, with diverse others. And why? Because
(forsooth) these Doctrines derogate from the Titles of Mediator, Redeemer,
Advocate, Foundation, etc. Yea, and are against the truth of our Saviors
humane nature, if we believe diverse Protestants, writing against
Transubstantiation. Let then any judicious man consider, whether Doctor
Potter, or others do really satisfy, when they send men to the Creed for a
perfect Catalogue, to distinguish points fundamental, from those which they
say are not fundamental. If he will speak indeed to some purpose, let him say:
This Article is understood in this sense; and in this sense it is fundamental.
That other is to be understood in such a meaning; yet according to that
meaning, it is not so fundamental, but that men may disagree, and deny it
without damnation, But it were no policy for any Protestant to deal so
plainly.

6. But to what end should we use many arguments? Even your self are forced to
limit your own Doctrine, and come to say, that the Creed is a perfect
Catalogue of fundamental points, taken as it was further opened and explained
in some parts (by occasion of emergent Heresies) in the other Catholic Creeds
of Nice, Constantinople, Page 216.
Ephesus, Chalcedon, and Athanasius. But this explication, or restriction
overthrows you assertion: For as the Apostles Creed was not to us a
sufficient Catalogue, till it was explained by the first Council, nor then
till it was declared by another, etc. so now also, as new Heresies may arise,
it will need particular explanation against such emergent errors; and so it is
not yet, nor ever will be of it self alone, a particular Catalogue, sufficient
to distinguish betwixt fundamental, and not fundamental points.

7. I come to the second part: That the Creed does not contain all maine and
principal points of faith. And to the end we may not strive about things
either granted by us both, or no thing concerning the point in question, I must
premise these observations.

8. First: That it cannot be denied, but that the Creed is most full and
complete, to that purpose for which the holy Apostles, inspired by God, meant
that it should serve, and in that manner as they did intend it, which was, not
to comprehend all particular points of faith, but such general heads, as were
most befitting, and requisite for preaching the faith of Christ to Jews, and
Gentiles, and might be briefly, and compendiously set down, and easily learned,
and remembered. And therefore, in respect of Gentiles, the Creed does mention
God, as Creator of all things; and and for both Jews and Gentiles, the
Trinity, the Messiah, and Savior, his birth, life, death, resurrection, and
glory, from whom they were to hope remission of sins, and life everlasting,
and by whose sacred Name they were to be distinguished from all other
professions, by being called Christians. According to which purpose S. Thomas
of Aquine 2. 2, q. 1. Art. 8.
does distinguish all the Articles of the Creed into these general heads: That
some belong to the Majesty of the God head; others to the Mystery of our
Savior Christ's Humane nature: Which two general objects of faith, the holy
Ghost does express, and conjoyne, Joan. 17. Haec est vita aeterna etc. This is
life everlasting, that they know thee true GOD, and whom thou have sent JESUS
CHRIST. But it was not their meaning to give us as it were a course of
Divinity, or a Catechism, or a particular expression of all points of Faith,
leaving those things to be performed, as occasion should require, by their own
word or writing, for their time, and afterward for their Successors in the
Catholic Church. Our question then is not, whether the Creed be perfect, as
far as the end for which it was composed, did require; For we believe and are
ready to give our lives for this: but only we deny, that the Apostles did
intend to comprise therein all particular ^oints of belief, necessary to
salvation, as even by D. Potters own Page 235, 215.
confession, it does not comprehend agenda, or things belonging to practice, as
Sacraments, Commandments, the acts of Hope, and duties of Charity, which we
are obliged not only to practice, but also to believe by divine infallible
faith. Will he therefore infer that the Creed is not perfect, because it
contains not all those necessary, and fundamental Objects of faith? He will
answer, No: because the Apostles intended only to express credenda, things to
be believed, not practiced. Let him therefore give us leave to say, that the
Creed is perfect, because it wants none of those Objects of belief which
were intended to be set down, as we explicated before.

9. The second observation is, that to satisfy our question what points in
particular be fundamental, it will not be sufficient to allege the Creed,
unless it contains all such points either expressly and immediately; or else
in such manner, that by evident, and necessary consequence they may be deduced
from Articles both clearly, and particularly contained therein. For if the
deduction be doubtful, we shall not be sure, that such Conclusions be
fundamental: or if the Articles themselves which are said to be fundamental,
be not distinctly, and particularly expressed, they will not serve us to know,
and distinguish all points fundamental, from those which they call, not
fundame^tall. We do not deny, but that all points of faith, both fundamental
and not fundamental, may be said to be contained in the Creed, in some sense;
as for example, implicitly, generally, or in such involved manner. For when we
explicitly believe the Catholic Church, we do implicitly believe whatsoever
she proposes as belonging to faith: Or else by way of reductio^, that is, when
we are once instructed in the belief of particular points of faith, not
expressed, nor by necessary consequence deducible from the Creed; we may
afterward, by some analogy, or proportion, and resemblance, reduce it to one,
or more of those Articles which are explicitly contained in the Symbol. Thus
S. Thomas the Cherubim among Divines teaches 2, 2. q. 1. art. 8. ad 6:
that the miraculous existence of our Blessed Saviors body in the Eucharist,
as likewise all his other miracles, are reduced to Gods Omnipotency, expressed
in the Creed. And Doctor Potter says: The Eucharist, Page 231.
being a seal of that holy Union which we have with Christ our head, by his
spirit and Faith, and with the Saints his members by Charity, is evidently
included in the communion of Saints. But this reductive way, is far from
being sufficient to infer out of the Articles of Gods Omnipotency, or of the
Communion of Saints, that our Saviors body is in the Eucharist, and much less
whether it be only in figure, or else in reality; by Transubstantiation, or
Consubstantiation, etc. and least of all, whether or no these points be
fundamental. And you hyperbolize, in saying, the Eucharist is evidently
included in the Communion of Saints, as if there could not have been, or was
not a Communion of Saints, before the Blessed Sacrament was instituted. Yet it
is true, that after we know, and believe, there is such a Sacrament, we may
refer it to some of those heads expressed in the Creed, and yet so, as S.
Thomas referres it to one Article, and D. Potter to another; and in respect of
different analogies or effects, it may be referred to several Articles. The
like I say of other points of faith, which may in some sort be reduced to the
Creed, but nothing to D. Potters purpose: But contrarily it shows, that your
affirming such and such points to be fundamental or not fundamental, is
merely arbitrary, to serve your turn, as necessity, and your occasions may
require. Which was an old custom amongst Heretics, as we read in De Pe^cat.
Orig. lib. 2. c. 22*
S. Augustine; Pelagius and Celessius, desiring fraudulently to avoid the the
hateful name of Heresies, affirmed that the question of Original sin may be
disputed without danger of faith. But this holy Father affirms that it belongs
to the foundation of Faith. We may (says he) endure a disputant who erres in
other questions not yet diligently examined, not yet diligently established by
the whole authority of the Church; their error may be borne with: but it must
not pass so far as to attempt to shake the foundation of the church. We see
S. Augustine places the being of a point fundamental or not fundamental, in
that it has been examined, and established by the Church, although the point
of which he speaks, namely Original Sin, be not contained in the Creed.

10. Out of that which has been said, I infer, that Dostor Potters pains
in alleging Catholic Doctors, the ancient Fathers, and the Council of
Trent, to prove that the Creed contains all points of faith, was needless;
since we grant it in manner aforesaid. But Doctor Potter, cannot in his
conscience believe, that Catholic Divines, or the Council of Trent and the
holy Fathers did intend, that all points in particular which we are obliged to
believe, are contained explicitly in the Creed; he knowing well enough, that
all Catholics hold themselves obliged, to believe all those points which the
said Council defines to be believed under an Anathema, and that all Christians
believe the commandments, Sacraments etc. which are not expressed in the Creed.

11. Neither must this seem strange. For who is ignorant, that Summaries,
Epitomes, and the like brief Abstracts, are not intended to specify all
particulars of that Science, or Subject to which they belong. For as the Creed
is said to contain all points of Faith; so the Decalogue comprehends all
Articles, (as I may term them) which concern Charity, and good life: and yet
this cannot be so understood, as if we were disobliged from performance of any
duty, or the eschewing. of any vice, unless it be expressed in the ten
Commandments. For, (to omit the precepts of receaving Sacraments, which belong
to practice, or manners, and yet are not contained in the Decalogue) there are
many sins, even against the law of nature, and light of reason, which are not
contained in the ten Commandments, except only by similitude, analogy,
reduction, or some such way. For example, we find not expressed in the
Decalogue, either diverse sins, as Gluttony, Drunkenness, Pride, Sloth,
Covetousness in desiring either things superfluous, or with too much
greediness; or diverse of our chief obligations, as Obedience to Princes, and
all Superiors, not only Ecclesiastical but also Civil, whose laws Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin; and some other Protestants do dangerously affirm not to
oblige ^n conscience, and yet these men think they know the ten Commandments:
as likewise diverse Protestants defend Usury, to be lawful; and the many
Treatises of Civilians, Canonists, and Casuists, are witnesses, that diverse
sins against the light of reason, and Law of nature, are not distinctly
expressed in the ten Commandments; although when by other diligences they are
found to be unlawful, they may be reduced to some of the Commandments, and
yet not so evidently, and particularly, but that diverse do it in diverse
manners.

12. My third Observation is: That our present question being, whether or no
the Creed contain so fully all fundamental points of faith, that whosoever
do not agree in all, and every one of those fundamental Articles, cannot have
the same substance of faith, nor hope of Salvation; if I can produce one, or
more points, not contained in the Creed, in which if two do not agree, both
of them cannot expect to be saved, I shall have performed as much as I intend;
and D. Potter must seek our some other Catalogue for points fundamental, then
the Creed. Neither is it material to the said purpose, whether such
fundamental points rest only in knowledge, and speculation, or belief, or
else be farther referred to work and practice. For the habit, or virtue of
Faith, which inclines, and enableth us to believe both speculative, and
practical verities, is of one and the self same nature, and essence. For
example, by the same Faith, whereby I speculatively believe there is a God, I
likewise believe, that he is to be adored, served, and loved; which belong to
practice. The reason is, because the Formal Object, or motive, for which I
yield assent to those different sorts of material objects, is the sai^^ in
both, to wit, the revelation, or word of God. Where, by the way I note, that if
the Unity, or Distinction, and nature of faith, were to be taken from the
diversity of things revealed, by one faith I should believe speculative
verities, and by another such as tend to practice, which I doubt whether D.
Potter himself will admit.

13 Hence it follows, that whosoever denies any one main practical revealed
truth, is no less an Heretic, then if he should deny a Point resting in
belief alone. So that when D. Potter, (to avoid our argument, that all
fundamental points are not contained in the Creed, because in it there is no
mention of the Sacraments, which yet are points of so main importance, that
Protestants make the due administration of them, to be necessary and essential
to constitute a Church) answers, that the Sacraments are to be Pap. 235.
reckoned, rather among the Agenda of the Church, then the Credenda; they are
rather divine rites and ceremonies, then Doctrines, he either grants what we
affirm, or in effect says, Of two kinds of revealed truths, which are
necessary to be believed, the Creed contains one sort only, ergo, it contains
all kind of revealed truths necessary to be believed. Our question is not, de
nomine but re; not what be called points of faith, or of practice, but what
points indeed be necessarily to be believed, whether they be termed Agenda, or
Credenda: especially the chiefest part of Christian perfection consisting more
in Action, then in barren Speculation; in good works, then bare belief; in
doing, then knowing. And there are no less contentions concerning practical;
then speculative truths: as Sacraments, obtaining remission of sin,
Invocation of Saints, Prayers for dead, Adoration of Christ in the Sacrament,
and many other: all which do so much the more import, as on them, beside righ^
belief, does also depend our practice, and the ordering of our life. Though D.
Potter could therefore give us (as he will never be able to do) a minute, and
exact Catalogue of all truths to be believed; that would not make me able
enough to know, whether or no I have faith sufficient for salvation; till he
also did bring in a particular List, of all believed truths, which tend to
practice, declaring which of them be fundamental, which not; that so every man
might know, whether he be not in some Damnable Error, for some Article of
faith, which farther might give influence into Damnable works.

14 These Observations being premised, I come to prove, that the Creed does not
contain all points of Faith necessary to be known and believed. And, to omit
that in general it does no^ tell us, what points be fundamental, or not
fundamental, which in the way of Protestants, is most necessary to be known;
in particular, there is no mention of the greatest evils, from which man's
calamity proceeded, I mean, the sin of the Angels, of Adam, and of Original
sin in us: nor of the greatest good from which we expect all good, to wit,
the necessity of Grace for all works tending to piety. Nay, there is no mention
of Angels, good, or bad. The meaning of that most general head ( Oporter
accedentem etc. It behooves Heb. 11. 6.
him that comes to God, to believe that he is, and is a remunerator,) is
questioned, by the denial of Merit, which makes God a Giver, but not a
Rewarder. It is not expressed whether the Article of Remission of sins be
understood by faith alone, or else may admit the efficiency of Sacraments.
There is no mention of Ecclesiastical, Apostolical, Divine Traditions, one
way or other; or of holy Scriptures in general, and much less of every book
in particular; nor of the Name, Nature, Number, Effects, Matter, Form,
Minister, Intention, Necessity of Sacraments, and yet the due Administration of
Sacraments, is with Protestants an essential Note of the Church. There is
nothing for Baptism of Children, nor against Rebaptization. There is no
mention in favor, or against the Sacrifice of the Mass, of Power in the
Church to institute Rites, Holy days, etc. and to inflict Excommunication, or
other Censures: of Priesthood, Bishops, and the whole Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, which are very fundamental points; of S. Peter's Primacy, which to
Calvin seems a fundamental error; nor of the possibility, or impossibility
to keep Gods commandments; of the procession of the holy Ghost from the Father
and the Son; of Purgatory, or Prayer for the dead, in any sense: And yet D.
Potter does not deny, but that Aerius was esteemed an Heretic, for denying
Page 35^
all sort of Commemoration for the dead. Nothing of the Churches Visibility or
Invisibility, Fallibility or Infallibility; nor of other points controverted
betwixt Protestants themseves, and between Protestants and Catholics, which
to D. Potter seem so heinous corruptions, that they cannot without damnation
join with us in profession thereof. There is no mention of the Cessation of
the Old Law, which yet is a very main point of faith. And many other might be
also added.

15. But what need we labor to specify particulars? There are as many
important points of faith not expressed in the Creed, as since the worlds
beginning, now, and for all future times, there have been, are and may be
innumerable, gross, damnable Heresies, whose contrary truths are not contained
in the Creed. For, every fundamental Error must have a contrary fundamental
truth; because of two contradictory propositions in the same degree, the one is
false, the other must be true. As for example, if it be a damnable error to
deny the B^. Trinity, or the Godhead of our Savior, the belief of them must be
a truth necessary to Salvation; or rather, if we will speak properly, the Error
is damnable, because the opposite Truth is necessary, as death is frightfull,
because life is sweet; and according to Philosophy, the Privation is measured
by the Form to which it is repugnant. If therefore the Creed contain in
particular all fundamental points of faith, it must explicitly, or by clear
consequence, comprehend all truths opposite to innumerable Heresies of all ages
past, present, and to come, which no man in his wits will affirm it to do.

16 And here I cannot omit to signify how you Page 255.
applaud the saying of D. Usher. That in those propositions which without all
controversy are universally received in the whole Christian world, so much
truth is contained, as being joined with holy Obedience, may be sufficient to
bring a man to everlasting salvation, neither have we cause to doubt, but that
as many as walk according to this Rule (neither overthrowing that which they
have builded, by superinducing any damnable heresies thereupon, nor otherwise
vitiating their holy faith, with a lewd and wicked conversation) peace shall be
upon them, and upon the Israel of God. Now D Potter knows, that the Mystery of
the B. Trinity is not universally received in the whole Christian world, as
appears in very many Heretics, in Polony, Hungary, and Transylvania, and
therefore according to this Rule of D. Usher, approved by D. Potter, the
denial of the B. Trinity, shall not exclude Salvation.

17 Let me note by the way, that you might easily have espied a foul
contradiction in the said words of D. Usher, by you recited, and so much
applauded. For he supposes, that a man agrees with other Churches in belief,
which joined with holy Obedience may bring him to everlasting salvation, and
yet, that he may superinduce damnable heresies. For how can he superinduce
damnable heresies, who is supposed to believe all Truths necessary to
salvation? Can there be any damnable heresy, unless it contradict some
necessary truth, which cannot happen in one who is supposed to believe all
necessary Truths? Besides if one believing all fundamental Articles in the
Creed, may superinduce damnable heresies; it follows that the fundamental
truths contrary to those damnable heresies, are not contained in the Creed.

18 According to this Model of D. Potters foundation, consisting in the
agreement of scarceone point of faith; what a strange Church would he make of
men concurring in some one of few Articles of belief, who yet for the rest
should be holding conceits plainly contradictory: so patching up a Religion of
men, who agree only in the Article, that Christ is our Savior, but for the
rest, are like to the parts of a Chimaera; having the head of a man, the neck
of a horse, the shoulders of an Ox, the foot of a Lion etc. I wrong them not
herein. For in good Philosophy there is greater repugnancy between assent and
dissent, affirmation and negation, est est, non non, (especially when all these
contradictories pretend to rely upon one and the self same Motive, the
infallible Truth of Almighty God) then between the integrall parts, as head,
neck, etc. of a man, horse, lion, etc. And thus Protestants are far more bold
to disagree even in matters of faith, then Catholic Divines in questions
merely Philosophical, or not determined by the Church. And wh^e thus they
stand only upon fundamental Articles, they do by their own confession destroy
the Church, which is the house of God. For the foundation alone of a house, is
not a house, nor can they in such an imaginary Church any more expect
Salvation, then the foundation alone of a house is fit to afford a man
habitation.

19 Moreover, it is most evident that Protestants by this Chaos rather then
Church, do give unavoidable occasion of desperation to poor souls. Let some
one who is desirous to save his soul repair to D. Potter, who maintains
these grounds, to know upon whom he may rely, in a matter of so great
consequence; I suppose the Doctors answer will be: Upon the truly Catholic
Church. She cannot err damnably. What understand you by the Catholic Church?
Cannot general Counsels, which are the Church representative, err? Yes, they
may weakly, or Page 167.
wilfully misaply, or misunderstand, or neglect Scripture, and so err
damnably. To whom then shall I go for my particular instruction? I cannot
confer with the united body of the whole Church about my particular
difficulties, as your self affirms, that the Catholic Church cannot be told
Page 27.
of private injuries. Must I then consult with every particular person of the
Catholic Church? So it seems, by what you write in these words: The whole
Page 150.
militant Church (that is all the members of it) cannot possibly err, either
in the whole faith, or any necessary Article of it. You say, M. Doctor, I
cannot for my instruction acquaint the universal Church with my particular
scruples: You say, the Prelates of Gods Church meeting in a lawful general
Council may err damnably: It remains then, that for my necessary instruction,
I must repair to every particular member of the universal Church spread over
the face of the earth: and yet you teach that the promises Page 151.
which our Lord has made unto his Church for his assistance, are intended not
to any particular persons or Churches, but only to the Church Catholic, with
which (as I said) it is impossible for me to confer. Alas! O most uncomfortable
Ghostly Father, you drive me to desperation! How shall I confer with every
Christian soul, man and woman, by sea and by land, close prisoner, or at
liberty? etc. Yet upon supposall of this miraculous Pilgrimage for Faith,
before I have the faith of Miracles, how shall I proceed at our meeting? Or how
shall I know the man on whom I may securely rely? Procure (will you say) to
knew whether he believe all fundamental points of faith. For if he do, his
faith, for point of belief, is sufficient for salvation, though he err in a
hundred things of less moment. But how shall I know whether he hold all
fundamental points or no? For till you tell me this, I cannot know whether or
no his belief be sound in all fundamental points. Can you say the Creed? Yes.
And so can many damnable Heretics. But why do you ask me this question?
Because the Creed contains all fundamental points of faith. Are you sure of
that? not sure: I hold it very probable. Page 241.
Shall I hazard my soul on probabilities, or even wagers? This yields a new
cause of despair. But what? does the Creed contain all points necessary to be
believed, whether they rest in the understanding, or else do further extend to
practice? No. It was composed to deliver Credenda, not Agenda to us; Faith, not
Practice. How then shall I know what points of belief, which direct my
practice, be necessary to salvation? S^ll you chalk our new paths for
Desperation. Well, are all Articles of the Creed, for their nature and matter,
fundamental? I cannot say so. How then shall I know which in particular be,
and which be not fundamental? Read my Answer to a late Popish Pamphlet
entitled Charity Mistaken etc. there you shall find, that fundamental
doctrines are such Catholic Verities, as principally and essentially pertain
Page 211. 213* 214.
to the Faith, such as properly constitute a Church, and are necessary (in
ordinary course) to be distinctly believed by every Christian that will be
saved. They are those grand, and capital doctrines which make up our Faith in
Christ; that is, that common faith which is alike precious in all, being one
and the same in the highest Apostle, and the meanest believer, which the
Apostle elsewhere calls the first principles of the oracles of God, and the
form of sound words. But how shall I apply these general definitions, or
descriptions, or (to say the truth) these only varied words, and phrases (for I
understand the word, fundamental, as well as the words, principal, essential
grand, and capital doctrines, etc.) to the particular Articles of the Creed,
in such sort, as that I may be able precisely, exactly, particularly, to
distinguish fundamental Articles from points of less moment? You labor to
tell us what fundamental points be, but not which they be: and yet unless you
do this, your Doctrine serves only, either to make men despair, or else to
have recourse to those whom you call Papists, and which give one certain Rule,
that all points defined by Christ's visible Church belong to the foundation of
Faith, in such sense, as that to deny any one cannot stand with salvation. And
seeing your self acknowledges that these men do not err in points
fundamental, I cannot but hold it most safe for me to join with them, for the
securing of my soul, and the avoiding of desperation, into which this your
doctrine must cast all them who understand, and believe it. For the whole
discourse, and inferences which here I have made, are either your own direct
Assertions, or evident consequences clearly deduced from them.

20 But now let us answer some few Objections of D. Potters, against that which
we have said before, to avoid our argument. That the Scripture is not so much
as mentioned in the Creed, he says: The Creed is an abstract of such Page 234.
necessary Doctrines as are delivered in Scripture, or collected out of it; and
therefore needs not express the authority of that which it supposes.

21 This answer makes for us. For by giving a reason why it was needless that
Scripture should be expressed in the Creed, you grant as much as we desire,
namely that the Apostles judged it needless to express all necessary points
of faith in their Creed. Neither does the Creed suppose, or depend on
Scripture, in such sort as that we can by any probable consequence, infer from
the Articles of the Creed, that there is any Canonical Scripture at all; and
much less that such Books in particular be Canonical. Yea the Creed might
have been the same although holy Scripture had never been written; and, which
is more, the Creed even in priority of time, was before all the Scripture of
the new Testament, except the Gospel of S. Matthew. And so according to this
reason of his, the Scripture should not mention Articles contained in the
Creed. And I note in a word, how little connection D. Potters arguments have,
while he tells us, that the Creed Page 234.
is an Abstra^^ of such necessary doctrines as are delivered in Scripture, or
collected out of it, and therefore needs not express the authority of that
which it supposes; it does not follow: The Articles of the Creed are delivered
in Scripture: therefore the Creed supposes Scripture. For two distinct
writings may well deliver the same truths, and yet one of them not suppose the
other, unless D. Potter be of opinion that two Doctors cannot, at one time,
speak the same truth.

22 And notwithstanding, that D. Potter has now told us, it was needless that
the Creed should express Scripture, whose Authority it supposes, he comes at
length to say, that the Nicene Fathers in their Creed confessing that the holy
Ghost spoke by the Prophets, does thereby sufficiently avow the divine
Authority of all Canonical Scripture. But I would ask him, whether the Nicene
Creed be not also an Abstract of Doctrines delivered in Scripture, as he said
of the Apostles Creed, and thence did infer, that it was needless to express
Scripture, whose authority it supposes? Besides, we do not only believe in
general, that Canonical Scripture is of divine authority but we are also
bound under pain of damnation to believe, that such and such particular Books^
not mentioned in the Nicene Creed, are Canonical. And lastly D. Potter in this
Answer grants as much as we desire, which is, that all points of faith are not
contained in the Apostles Creed, even as it is explained by other Creeds. For
these words ( who spoke by the Prophets) are no ways contained in the Apostles
Creed, and therefore contain an Addition, not an Explanation thereof.

23 But, how can it be necessary (says D. Potter) for any Christian to have
more in his Creed then the Page 221*
Apostles had, and the Church of their times? I answer; You trifle, not
distinguish between the Apostles belief, and that abridgment of some Articles
of faith, which we call the Apostles Creed; and withal you beg the question,
by supposing that the Apostles believed no more, then is contained in their
Creed, which every unlearned person knows and belieues: and I hope you will
not deny but the Apostles were endued with greater knowledge then ordinary
persons.

24 Your pretended proof out of the Acts, that the Apostles revealed to the
Church the whole counsel of God, keeping Acts 20. 2^*
back nothing, with your gloss ( needful for our salvation) is no proof,
unless you still beg the question, and do suppose, that whatsoever the
Apostles revealed to the Church, is contained in the Creed. And I wonder you
do not reflect that those words were by S, Paul particularly directed to
Pastors, and Governors of the Church, as is clear by the other words; He
called the Ancients of the Church. And afterward: Take heed to your selves, and
to the whole flock wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops, to rule the
Church. And your self say, that more knowledge is Page 244*
necessary in Bishops, and Priests, to whom is committed the government of the
Church, and the care of souls, then in vulgar Laics. Do you think that the
Apostles taught Christians nothing but their Creed? Said they nothing of the
Sacraments, Commandments, Duties of Hope, Charity, etc.

25 Upon the same affected ambiguity is grounded your other objection: To say
the whole faith of those times Page 225* 223.
is not contained in the Apostles Creed, is all one, as if a man should say,
this is not the Apostles Creed* but a part of it: For the faith of the Apostles
is not all one with that which we commonly call their Creed. Did not, I pray
you, S. Matthew, and S. John believe their writings to be Canonical Scripture?
and yet their writings are not mentioned in the Creed. It is therefore more
then clear, that the Faith of the Apostles is of larger extent, then the
Apostles Creed.

26 To your demand, why amongst many things of equal necessity to be believed,
the Apostles should Page 223*
so di^tinctly set down some, and be altogether silent of others? I answer:
That you must answer your own demand. For in the Creed there be diverse points
in their nature, not fundamental or necessary to be explicitly and distinctly
believed, (...) above we shew^d; why are these points which are not
fundamental expressed, rather then other (...) the same quality? Why our
Saviors descent to Hell, and Burial expressed, and not his Circumcision, his
Manifestation to the three Kings, working of Miracles, etc. Why did they not
express Scriptures, Sacraments, and all fundamental points of Faith tending
to practice, as well as those which rest in belief? Their intention was,
particularly to deliver such Articles as were fittest for those times,
concerning the Deity, Trinity, and Messiah (as heretofore I have declared)
leaving many things to be taught by the Catholic Church, which in the Creed
we all profess to believe. Neither does it follow, as you infer, That as well,
nay better, they might have given no Article, but that (of the Church) and sent
us to the Church for all the rest. For in setting down others besides that, and
not all, they make us believe we have all, when Page 223*
we have not all. For by this kind of arguing, what may not be deduced? One
might, quite contrary to your inference, say: If the Apostles Creed contain all
points necessary to salvation, what need we any Church to teach us? and
consequently what need of the Article concerning the Church? What need we the
Creeds of Nice, Constantinople, etc. Superfluous are your Catechismes, wherein
besides the Articles of the Creed, you add diverse other particulars. These
would be poor consequences, and so is yours. But shall I tell you news? For
so you are pleased to esteem it. We grant your inference, thus far: That our
Savior Christ referred us to his Church, by her to be taught, and by her
alone. For, she was before the Creed, and Scriptures; And she to discharge this
imposed office of instructing us, has delivered us the Creed, but not it
alone, as if nothing else were to be believed. We have besides it, holy
Scripture, we have unwritten, Divine, Apostolical, Ecclesiastical Traditions.
It were a childish argument: The Creed contains not all things which are
necessary to be believed: Ergo, it is not profitable. Or; The Church alone is
sufficient to teach us by some convenient means: Ergo, she must teach us
without all means, without Creeds, without Councels, without Scripture etc. If
the Apostles had expressed no Article, but that of the Catholic Church, she
must have taught us the other Articles in particular, by Creeds, or other
means, as in fact we have even the Apostles Creed from the Tradition of the
Church. If you will believe you have all in the Creed, when you have not all,
it is not the Apostles, or the Church, that makes you so believe, but it is
your own error, whereby you will needs believe, that the Creed must contain
all. For neither the Apostles, nor the Church, nor the Creed it self tell you
any such matter; and what necessity is there, that one means of instruction,
must involve whatsoever is contained in all the rest? We are not to recite the
Creed with anticipated persuasion, that it must contain what we imagine it
ought, for better maintaining some opinions of our own; but we ought to say,
and believe that it contains what we find in it; of which one Article is to
believe the Catholic Church, surely to be taught by her, which presupposes
that we need other instruction beside the Creed: and in particular we may learn
of her, what points be contained in the Creed, what otherwise; and so we shall
not be deceaved, by believing we have all in the Creed, when we have not all:
and you may in the same manner say: As well, nay better, the Apostles might
have given us no Articles at all, as have left out Articles tending to
practice. For in setting down one sort of Articles, and not the others, they
make us believe we have all, when we have not all.

27 To our argument, that Baptism is not contained in the Creed, D. Potter,
besides his answer, that Sacraments belong rather to practice then faith,
(which I have already confuted, and which indeed makes against himself, and
serves only to show that the Apostles intended not to comprize all points in
the Creed which we are bound to believe) adds, that the Creed of Page 237.
Nice expressed Baptism by name, confess one Baptism for the remission of
sins. Which answer is directly against himself, and manifestly proves that
Baptism is an Article of faith, and yet is not contained in the Apostles
Creed, neither explicitly, nor by any necessary consequence from other
Articles expressed therein. If to make it an Article of faith be sufficient
that it is contained in the Nicene Council; he will find that Protestants
maintain many errors against faith, as being repugnant to definitions of
General Councels: as in particular, that the very Council of Nice (which
says M. Whitgift, In his defense. page 330.
is of all wise and learned men reverenced, esteemed and embraced, next unto
the Scriptures themselves) decreed that, to those who were chosen to the
Ministry unmarried, it was not lawful to take any wife afterward, is affirmed
by Protestants. And your grand Reformer Luther (lib. de Conciliis part prima)
says, that he understand not the Holy Ghost in that Council. For in one Canon
it says that those who have gelded themselves are not fit to be made Priests,
in another it forbids them to have wives. Has (says he) the Holy Ghost
nothing to do in Counsels, but to bind, and load his Ministers with
impossible, dangerous, and unnecessary laws? I forbear to show that this very
Article I confess one Baptism for the Remission of sins, will be understood
by Protestants in a far different sense from Catholics, yea Protestants among
themselves do not agree, how Baptism forgiues sins, nor what grace it
conferres. Only concerning the Unity of Baptism against rebaptization of such
as were once baptized (which I noted as a point not contained in the Apostles
Creed) I cannot omit an excellent place of S. Augustine, where speaking of the
Donatists he has these words. They are so bold as Lib. de Here Is. in 69.
to rebaptize Catholics, wherein they show themselves to be the greater
Heretics, since it has pleased the universal Catholic Church not to make
Baptism void even in the very Heretics themselves. In which few words this
holy Father delivers against the Donatists these points which do also make
against Protestants: That to make an Heresy, or an Heretic, known for such,
it is sufficient, to oppose the definition of Gods Church: That a proposition
may be Heretical though it be not repugnant to any Texts of Scripture. For S.
Augustine teaches that the doctrine of rebaptization, is heretical* and yet
acknowledges it cannot be convinced for such out of Scripture. And that
neither the Heresy of rebaptization of those who were baptized by Heretics,
nor the contrary Catholic truth being expressed in the Apostles Creed, it
follows that it does not contain all points of faith necessary to salvation.
And so we must conclude that to believe the Creed is not sufficient for Unity
of faith, and Spirit in the same Church, unless there be also a total
agreement both in belief of other points of faith, and in external
profession, and Communion also (whereof we are to speak in the next Chapter)
according to the saying of S. Augustine: You are Aug. ep. ^8.
with us in Baptism, and in the Creed, but in the Spirit of Unity, and bond of
peace, and lastly in the Catholic Church you are not with us.

THE ANSWER TO THE FOVRTH CHAPTER.
Wherein is showed, that the Creed contains all necessary points of mere
belief.
1 AD.. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Concerning the Creeds containing the Fundamentalls of
Christianity, this is D. Potters assertion, delivered in the 207. p. of his
book. The Creed of the Apostles (as it is explained in the latter Creeds of the
Catholic Church) is esteemed a sufficient summary or Catalogue of
Fundamentalls, by the best learned Romanists and by Antiquity.

2 By Fundamentalls he understands not the Fundamental rules of good life and
action, (though every one of these is to be believed to come from God, and
therefore vertually includes an Article of Faith;) but the Fundamental
doctrines of Faith; such, as though they have influence upon our lives, as
every essential doctrine of Christianity has, yet we are commanded to believe
them, and not to do them. The assent of our understandings is required to
them, but no obedience from our wills.

3 But these speculative Doctrines again he distinguishes out of Aquinas,
Occham, and Canus and others, into two kinds: of the first are those which are
the objects of Faith, in, and for themselves, which by their own nature and
Gods prime intention, are essential parts of that Gospel: such as the
teachers in the Church, cannot without Mortal sin omit to teach the
learners: such as are intrinsecall to the Covenant between God and man; and not
only plainly revealed by God, and so certain truths, but also commanded to be
preached to all men, and to be believed distinctly by all, and so necessary
truths. Of the second sort are Accidental, Circumstantiall, Occasional
objects of faith; millio^s whereof there are in holy Scripture; such as are to
be believed* not for themselves, but because they are joined with others, that
are necessary to be believed, and delivered by the same Authority which
delivered these. Such as we are not bound to know to be divine Revelations,
(for without any fault we may be ignorant hereof, nay believe the contrary;)
such as we are not bound to examine, whether or no they be divine Revelations:
such as Pastors are not bound to teach their Flock, nor their Flock bound to
know and remember: no nor the Pastors themselves to know them or believe them,
or not to disbelieve them absolutely and always; but then only when they do
see, and know them to be delivered in Scripture, as divine Revelations.

4 I say when they do so, and not only when they may do. For to lay an
obligation upon us of believing, or not disbelieving any Verity, sufficient
Revelation on Gods part, is not sufficient: For then seeing all the express
Verities of Scripture are either to all men, or at least to all learned men
sufficiently revealed by God, it should be a damnable sin, in any learned man
actually to disbelieve any one particular Historical verity contained in
Scripture, or to believe the contradiction of it, though he knew it not to be
there contained. For though he did not, yet he might have known it; it being
plainly revealed by God, and this revelation being extant in such a Book,
wherein he might have found it recorded, if with diligence he had perused it.
To make therefore any points necessary to be believed, it is requisite, that
either we actually know them to be divine Revelations: and these though they be
not Articles of faith, nor necessary to be believed, in and for themselves, yet
indirectly, and by accident, and by consequence, they are so: The necessity of
believing them, being enforced upon us, by a necessity of believing this
Essential, and Fundamental article of Faith, That all Divine Revelations are
true, which to disbelieve, or not to believe, is for any Christian not only
impious, but impossible. Or else it is requisite that they be, First actually
revealed by God. Secondly, commanded under pain of damnation, to be
particularly known (I mean known to be divine Revelations,) and distinctly to
be believed. And of this latter sort of speculative divine Verities, D. Potter
affirmed, that the Apostles Creed was a sufficient summary: yet he affirmed it,
not as his own opinion, but as the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and your
own Doctors. And besides, he affirmed it not as absolutely certain, but very
probable.

5 In brief, all that he says is this: It is very probable, that according to
the judgment of the Roman Doctors, and the Ancient Fathers, the Apostles Creed
is to be esteemed a sufficient summary of all those doctrines which being
merely Credenda, and not Agenda, all men are ordinarily, under pain of
Damnation, bound particularly to believe.

6 Now this assertion ( you say) is neither pertinent to the question in hand,
nor in it self true. Your Reasons to prove it impertinent, put into form and
divested of impertinencies are these. 1. Because the question was not, what
points were necessary to be explicitly believed, but what points were necessary
not to be disbelieved after sufficient proposal. And therefore to give a
Catalogue of points, necessary to be explicitly believed is impertinent.

7 Secondly, because errors may be damnable, though the contrary truths be not
of themselves fundamental; as that Pontius Pilate was our Saviors Judge, is
not in it self a Fundamental truth, ^et to believe the contrary were a
damnable error. And therefore to give a Catalogue of Truths in themselves
fundamental, is no pertinent satisfaction to this demand, what errors are
damnable?

8 Thirdly, because if the Church be not Universally infallible, we cannot
ground any certainty upon the Creed, which we must receive upon the Credit of
the Church: and if the Church be Universally infallible, it is damnable to
oppose her declaration in any thing, though not contained in the Creed.

9 Fourthly, Because not to believe the Articles of the Creed in the true sense
is damnable, therefore it is frivolous to say the Creed contains all
Fundamentalls, without specifying in what sense the Articles of it are
Fundamental.

10 Fifthly, because the Apostles Creed (as D. Potter himself confesses) was
not a sufficient Catalogue, till it was explained by the first Council; nor
then until it was declared in the second etc. by occasion of emergent
Heresies: Therefore now also as new Heresies may arise, it will need particular
explanation, and so is not yet, nor ever will be a complete Catalogue of
Fundamentalls.

11 Now to the first of these objections I say: Frist, that your distinction
between points necessary to be believed, and necessary not to be disbelieved,
is more subtle then sound, a distinction without a difference: There being no
point necessary to be believed, which is not necessary not to be disbelieved:
Nor no point to any man, at any time, in any circumstances necessary not to be
disbelieved, but it is to the same man, at the same time, in the same
circumstances, necessary to be believed. Yet that which (I believe) you would
have said, I acknowledge true, that many points which are not necessary to be
believed absolutely, are yet necessary to be believed upon a supposition, that
they are known to be revealed by God: that is, become then necessary to be
believed, when they are known to be Divine Revelations. But then I must needs
say, you do very strangely, in saying, that the question was, what points
might lawfully be disbelieved, after sufficient Proposition that they are
divine Revelations. You affirm, that none may, and so does D. Potter, and with
him all Protestants, and all Christians. And how then is this the question? Who
ever said or thought, that of Divine Revelations, known to be so, some might
safely and lawfully be rejected, and disbelieved, under pretense that they are
not Fundamental? Which of us ever taught, that it was not damnable, either to
deny, or so much as doubt of the Truth of any thing, whereof we either know, or
believe that God has revealed it? What Protestant ever taught that it was not
damnable, either to give God the lie, or to call his Veracity into question?
Yet you say, The demand of Charity mistaken was, and it was most reasonable,
that a list of Fundame^talls, should be given, the denial whereof destroies
Salvation, whereas the denial of other points may stand with Salvation,
although both kinds be equally proposed, as revealed by God.

12 Let the Reader peruse Charity Mistaken, and he shall find that this
qualification, although both kinds of points be equally proposed as revealed by
God, is your addition, and no part of the demand. And if it had, it had been
most unreasonable, seeing he and you know well enough, that (though we do not
presently without examination, fall down and worship all your Churches
proposals, as divine Revelations) yet, we make no such distinction of known
divine Revelations, as if some only of them were necessary to be believed, and
the rest might safely be rejected. So that to demand a particular minute
Catalogue of all points that may not be disbelieved after sufficient
Proposition, is indeed to demand a Catalogue of all points that are or may be,
in as much as none may be disbelieved, after sufficient Proposition, that it is
a divine Revelation. At least it is to desire us, First, to transcribe into
this catalogue, every Text of the whole Bible. Secondly, to set down
distinctly, those innumerous millions of negative and positive consequences,
which may be evidently deduced from it: For these we say, God has revealed.
And indeed you are not ashamed in plain terms to require this of us. For
having first told us, that the demand was, what points were necessary not to be
disbelieved, after sufficient proposition that they are Divine Truths: you come
to say, Certainly the Creed contains not all these. And this you prove by
asking, how many Truths are thero in holy Scripture, not contained in the
Creed, which we are not bound to know and believe, but are bound under pain of
damnation not to reject, as soon as we come to know that they are found in holy
Scripture? So that in requiring a particular Catalogue of all points, not to be
disbelieved, after sufficient Proposal, you require us to set you down all
points contained in Scripture, or evidently deducible from it. And yet this you
are pleased to call a reasonable, nay, a most reasonable Demand: whereas having
engaged your self to give a Catalogue of your Fundamentalls, you conceive your
engagement very well satisfied by saying, all is Fundamental which the Church
proposes, without going about, to give us an endless Inventory of her
Proposalls. And therefore from us, in stead of a perfect particular of Divine
Revelations of all sorts, (of which with a less hyperbole then S. John uses,
we might say, If they were to be written, the world would not hold the books
that must be written;) me thinks you should accept of this general, All
Divine Revelations are true, and to be believed.

13 The very truth is, the main Question in this business is not, what divine
Revelations are necessary to be believed, or not rejected when they are
sufficiently proposed: for all without exception, all without question are so;
But what Revelations are simply and absolutely necessary to be proposed to the
belief of Christians, so that that Society, which does propose, and indeed
believe them, has for matter of Faith, the essence of a true Church; that
which does not, has not. Now to this question, though not to yours, D. Potter's
assertion (if it be true) is apparently very pertinent. And though not a full
and total satisfaction to it, yet very effectual, and of great moment toward
it. For the main question being, what points are necessary to Salvation: and
points necessary to Salvation, being of two sorts, some of simple belief, some
of Practice and obedience, he that gives you a sufficient summary, of the first
sort of necessary points, has brought you half way toward your journies end.
And therefore that which he does, is no more to be slighted, as vain and
impertinent, then an Architects work is to be thought impertinent toward the
making of a house, because he does it not all himself. Sure I am, if his
assertion be true, as I believe it is, a corollary may presently be deduced
from it, which if it were embraced, cannot in all reason, but do infinite
service, both to the truth of Christ, and the peace of Christendom. For seeing
falsehood and error could not long stand against the power of truth, were they
not supported by tyranny and worldly advantages, he that could assert
Christians to that liberty which Christ and his Apostles left them, must needs
do Truth a most Heroical service. And seeing the overvaluing of the
differences among Christians, is one of the greatest maintainers of the Schism
of Christendom, he that could demonstrate that only these points of Belief,
are simply necessary to salvation, wherein Christians generally agree, should
he not lay a very fair and firm foundation of the peace of Christendom? Now
the Corollary which I conceive would produce these good effects, and which
flows naturally from D. Potters Assertion, is this, That what Man or Church
soever believes the Creed, and all the evident consequences of it sincerely and
heartily, cannot possibly (if also he believe the Scripture) be in any Error
of simple belief which is offensive to God; nor therefore deserve for any such
Error to be deprived of his life, or to be cut off from the Churches
Communion, and the hope of Salvation. And the production of this again would
be this (which highly concerns the Church of Rome to think of,) That
whatsoever Man or Church does for any error of simple belief, deprive any man
so qualified as above, either of his temporal life, or liuelyhood or liberty,
or of the Churches Communion, and hope of salvation, is for the first unjust,
cruel, and tyrannous: Schismatic, presumptuous, and uncharitable for the
second.

13 Neither yet is this (as you pretend) to take away the necessity of
believing those verities of Scripture, which are not contained in the Creed,
when once we come to know that they are written in Scripture, but rather to lay
a necessity upon men of believing all things written in Scripture, when once
they know them to be there written. For he that believes not all known Divine
Revelations to be true, how does he believe in God? Unless you will say, that
the same man, at the same time may not believe God, and yet believe in him. The
greater difficulty is, how it will not take away the necessity of believing
Scripture to be the word of God? But that it will not neither. For though the
Creed be granted a sufficient summary of Articles of mere Faith, yet no man
pretends that it contains the Rules of obedience, but for them, all men are
referred to Scripture. Besides, he that pretends to believe in God, obliges
himself to believe it necessary to obey that which reason assures him to be
the Will of God. Now reason will assure him that believes the Creed, that it is
the Will of God he should believe the Scripture: even the very same Reason
which moves him to believe the Creed: Universal, and never failing Tradition,
having given this Testimony both to Creed and Scripture, that they both by the
works of God were sealed, and testified to be the words of God. And thus much
be spoken in Answer to your first Argument; the length whereof will be the
more excusable, If I oblige my self to say but little to the Rest.

14 I come then to your second. And in Answer to it, deny flatly, as a thing
destructive of it self, that any Error can be damnable, unless it be
repugnant immediately or mediatly, directly or indirectly, of it self or by
accident, to some Truth for the matter of it fundamental. And to your example
of Pontius Pilat's being Judge of Christ, I say the denial of it in him that
knows it to be revealed by God, is manifestly destructive of this fundamental
truth, that all Divine Revelations are true. Neither will you find any error
so much as by accident damnable, but the rejecting of it will be necessarily
laid upon us, by a real belief of all Fundamentals, and simply necessary
Truths. And I desire you would reconcile with this, that which you have said
15. Every Fundamental Error must have a contrary Fundamental Truth, because,
of two Contradictory propositions, in the same degree, the one is false, the
other must be true, etc.

15 To the Third I Answer; That the certainty I have of the Creed, That it was
from the Apostles, and contains the principles of Faith, I ground it not upon
Scripture, and yet not upon the Infallibility of any present, much less of
your Church, but upon the Authority of the Ancient Church, and written
Tradition, which (as D. Potter has proved) gave this constant Testimony unto
it. Besides I tell you, it is guilty of the same fault which D. Potter's
Assertion is here accused of: having perhaps some color toward the proving it
false, but none at all to show it impertinent.

16 To the Fourth, I Answer plainly thus, That you find fault with D. Potter
for his Virtues: you are offended with him for not usurping the Authority which
he has not; in a word for not playing the Pope. Certainly if Protestants be
faulty in this matter, it is for doing it too much, and not too little. This
presumptuous imposing of the senses of men upon the words of God, the special
senses of men upon the general words of God, and laying them upon men's
consciences together, under the equal penalty of death, and damnation; this
Vain conceit that we can speak of the things of God, better then in the word
of God: This Deifying our own Interpretations, and Tyrannous enforcing them
upon others; This restraining of the word of God from that latitude and
generality, and the understandings of men from that liberty, wherein Christ and
Apostles left them, This persuasion is no singularity of mine, but the doctrine
which I have learned from Divines of great learning and judgment, Let the
Reader be pleased to peruse the seventh book of Acontius de Stratag. Satanae.
And Zanchius his last Oration delivered by him after the composing of the
discord between him and Amerbachius, and he shall confess as much.
is, and has been the only fountain of all the Schisms of the Church, and
that which makes them continue the common incendiary of Christendom, and that
which (as I said before) tears into pieces, not the coat, but the bowels, and
members of Christ: Ridente Turca nec dolente Iudae^. Take away these Walls of
separation, and all will quickly be one. Take away this Persecuting, Burning,
Cursing, Damning of men for not subscribing to the words of men, as the words
of God; Require of Christians only to believe Christ, and to call no man master
but him only; Let those leave claiming Infallibility that have no title to it,
and let them that in their words disclaim it, disclaim it likewise in their
actions; In a word, take away tyranny, which is the Devils instrument to
support errors, and superstitions, and impieties, in the several parts of the
world, which could not otherwise long withstand the power of Truth, I say take
away tyranny, and restore Christians to their just and full liberty of
captivating their understanding to Scripture only, and as Rivers when they have
a free passage, run all to the Ocean, so it may well be hoped by Gods
blessing, that Universal Liberty thus moderated, may quickly reduce
Christendom to Truth and Unity. These thoughts of peace (I am persuaded) may
come from the God of peace, and to his blessing I commend them, and proceed.

18 Your fifth and last objection stands upon a false and dangerous supposition:
That new Heresies may arise. For an Heresy being in it self nothing else but
a Doctrine Repugnant to some Article of the Christian Faith, to say that new
Heresies may arise, is to say, that new Articles of Faith may arise: and so
some great ones among you stick not to profess in plain terms, who yet at
the same time are not ashamed to pretend that your whole Doctrine is Catholic
and Apostolic. So Salmeron: Non omnibus omnia dedit Deus, ut quaelibetaetas
suis gaudeat veritatibus, quas prior aetas ignoravit. God has not given all
things to All* So that every age has its proper verities, which the former age
was ignorant of: Disp. 57. In Ep. ad Rom: And again in the Margent: Habet
Vnumquodque saeculum peculiares revelationes divinas, Every age has its
peculiar Divine Revelations. Where that he speaks of such Revelations as are,
or may by the Church be made matters of Faith, no man can doubt that reads him;
an example whereof, he gives us a little before in these words. Vnius Augustini
doctrina Assumptionis B. Deiparae cultum in Ecclesiam introduxit. The Doctrine
of Augustine only, has brought in to the Church the Worship of the Assumption
of the Mother of God. etc. Others again mince and palliate the matter with
this pretense, that your Church undertakes not to coin new Articles of faith,
but only to declare those that want sufficient declaration. But if sufficient
declaration be necessary to make any doctrine an Article of Faith, then this
doctrine which before wanted it, was not before an Article of faith; and your
Church by giving it the Essential form, and last complement of an Article of
faith, makes it, though not a Truth, yet certainly an Article of faith. But I
would feign know, whether Christ and his Apostles knew this Doctrine, which you
pretend has the matter, but wants the form of an Article of faith, that is,
sufficient declaration, whether they knew it to be a necessary Article of the
faith, or no! If they knew it not to be so; then either they taught what they
knew not, which were very strange; or else they taught it not: and if not, I
would gladly be informed, seeing you pretend to no new Revelations, from whom
you learned it? If they knew it, then either they concealed or declared it. To
say they concealed any necessary part of the Gospel, is to charge them with
far greater sacrilege, then what was punished in Ananias and Saphira. It is
to charge these glorious Stewards, and dispensers of the Mysteries of Christ,
with want of the great virtue requisite in a Steward, which is Fidelity. It is
to charge them with presumption for denouncing Anathema's, even to Angels, in
case they should teach any other doctrine, then what they had received from
the^, which sure could not merit an Anathema, if they left any necessary part
of the Gospel untaught. It is in a word, in plain terms to give them the
lie, seeing they profess plainly and frequently, that they taught Christians
the whole doctrine of Christ. If they did know and declare it, then was it a
full and formal Article of faith; and the contrary a full and formal Heresy,
without any need of further declaration: and then their Successors either
continued the declaration of it, or discontinued: If they did the latter, how
are they such faithful depositaries of Apostolic Doctrine as you pretend? Or
what assurance can you give us, that they might not bring in new and false
Articles, as well as suffer the old and true ones to be lost? If they did
continue the declaration of it, and deliver it to their Successors, and they
to theirs, and so on perpetually, then continued it still a full and formal
Article of faith, and the repugnant doctrine a full and formal Heresy,
without and before the definition or declaration of a Council. So that
Counsels, as they cannot make that a truth or falsehood, which before was not
so: so neither can they make or declare that to be an Article of Faith, or an
Heresy, which before was not so. The supposition therefore on which this
argument stands, being false and runious, whatsoever is built upon it, must
together with it fall to the ground. This explication therefore, and
restriction of this doctrine, (whereof you make your advantage) was to my
understanding unnecessary. The Fathers of the Church in after times might have
just cause to declare their judgment, touching the sense of some general
Articles of the Creed: but to oblige others to receave their declarations under
pain of damnation, what warrant they had I know not. He that can show, either
that the Church of all Ages was to have this Authority; or that it continued in
the Church for some Ages, and then expired: He that can show either of these
things let him: for my part I cannot. Yet I willingly confess the judgment of
a Council, though not infallible, is yet so far directive, and obliging,
that without apparent reason to the contrary, it may be sin to reject it, at
least not to afford it an outward submission for public peace-sake.

19 Ad 7. 8. 9. Were I not peradventure more fearful then I need to be of the
imputation of tergiversation, I might very easily rid my hands of the remainder
of this Chapter: For in the Question there discussed, you grant (for ought I
see) as much as D. Potter desires; and D. Potter grants as much as you desire,
and therefore that I should disease my self, or my Reader with a punctual
examination of it, may seem superfluous. First, that which you would have, and
which your Arguments wholly drive at, is this, That the Creed does not contain
all maine and principal points of faith of all sorts, whether they be
speculacive, or practical, whether they contain matter of simple belief, or
whether they contain matter of practice and obedience. This D. Potter grants,
page 215. 235. And you grant that he grants it,. 8. Where your words are, as
even by D. Potters own confession, it (the Creed) does not comprehend Agenda,
or things belonging to practice, as Sacraments, Commandments, the Acts of
hope, and duties Charity. And if you will infer from hence, that therefore C.
M. has no reason to rest in the Apostles Creed, as a perfect Catalogue of
Fundamentalls, and a full satisfaction to his demand, I have without any
offense of D. Potter, granted as much, if that would content you. But seeing
you go on, and because his assertion is not (as neither is it pretended to
be,) a total satisfaction to the demand, casheere it as impertinent, and
nothing toward it, here I have been bold to stop your proceeding, as unjust
and unreasonable. For as if you should request a Friend to lend you, or demand
of a debtor to pay you a hundred pounds, and he could or should let you have
but fifty, this were not fully to satisfy your demand, yet sure it were not to
do nothing toward it: Or as this rejoinder of mine, though it be not an
answer to all your Books, but only to the First considerable Part of it, and
so much of the Second as is material, and falls into the first, yet I hope you
will not deal so unkindly with me, as for this reason, to condemn it of
impertinence: So D. Potter, being demanded a Catalogue of Fundamentals of
Faith, and finding them of two kinds, and those of one kind summed up to his
hand in the Apostles Creed, and this Creed* consigned unto him for such a
summary by very great Authority, if upon these considerations he has entreated
his Demander to accept of thus much in part of payment, of the Apostles Creed,
as a sufficient summary of these Articles of faith, which are merely Credenda,
me thinks he has little reason to complain, that he has not been fairly,
and squarely dealt with. Especially, seeing for full satisfaction, by D. Potter
and all Protestants he is referred to Scripture, which we affirm contains
evidently all necessary points of Faith and rules of obedience: and seeing D.
Potter, in the very place has subjoyned, though not a Catalogue of
Fundamentalls, which (because to some more is Fundamental, to others less, to
others nothing at all) had been impossible, yet such a comprehension of them,
as may serve every one, that will make a conscionable use of it, in stead of a
Catalogue. For thus he says, It seems to be fundamental to the faith, and
for the Salvation of every member of the Church, that he acknowledge and
believe all such points of faith, whereof he may be sufficiently convinced that
they belong to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. This general rule if I should
call a Catalogue of Fundamentalls, I should have a President for it with you
above exception, I mean your Self; for, chapter 3.. 19. just such another
proposition you have called by this name. Yet because it were a strange figure
of speech, I forbear it; only I will be bold to say, that this Assertion is as
good a Catalogue of Fundamentalls, as any you will bring of your Church
proposalls, though you takes as much time to do it, as he that undertook to
make an Asse^speak.

20 I come now to show that you also have requited D. Potter with a mutual
courteous acknowledgement of his assertion, That the Creed is a sufficient
summary of all the necessary Articles of Faith, which are merely Credenda.

21 First then,. 8. you have these words, That it cannot be denied that the
Creed is most full and complete to that purpose, for which the holy Apostles,
inspired by God, meant that it should serve, and in that manner as they did
intend it, which was, not to comprehend all particular points of faith, but
such general heads as were most befitting and requisite for preaching the
faith of Christ, to Jews and Gentiles, and might be briefly, and compendiously
set down, and easily learnt and remembered. These words I say, being fairly
examined, without putting them on the rack, will amount, to a full
acknowledgement of D. Potters Assertion. But before I put them to the question,
I must crave thus much right of you, to grant me this most reasonable
postulate, that the doctrine of repentance from dead works, which S. Paul
says, was one of the two only things which he preached, and the doctrine of
Charity, without which ( the same S. Paul assures us that) the knowledge of all
mysteries, and all faith is nothing, were doctrines more necessary and
requisite, and therefore more fit to be preached to Jews and Gentiles, then
these, under what judge our Savior suffered, that he was buried, and what time
he rose again: which you have taught us cap. 3.. 2. for their matter and nature
in themselves not to be Fundamental.

22 And upon this grant, I will ask no leave to conclude, that, whereas you
say, the Apostles Creed was intended for a comprehension, of such heads of
faith, as were most befitting and requisite, for preaching the faith of Christ,
etc. You are now, for fear, of too much debasing those high doctrines of
Repentance and Charity, to restrain your assertion, as D. Potter does his, and
(though you speak indefinitely) to say you meant it, only of those heads of
faith, which are merely Credenda. And then the meaning of it, (if it have
any,) must be this, That the Creed is full for the Apostles intent, which was
to comprehend all such general heads of faith, which being points of simple
belief, were most fit and requisite, to be preached to Jews and Gentiles, and
might be briefly and compendiously set down, and easily learned and remembered.
Neither I nor you, I believe, can make any other sense of your words then this.
And upon this ground thus I subsume. But all the points of belief, which were
necessary, under pain of damnation, for the Apostles to preach, and for those
to whom the Gospel was preached, particularly to know and believe, were most
fit and requisite, nay more then so, necessary to be preached to all both Jews
and Gentiles, and might be briefly and compendiously set down, and easily
learnt and remembered: Therefore the Apostles intent by your confession was in
this Creed, to comprehend all such points. And you say, the Creed is most full
and complete, for the purpose which they intended. The Major of this Syllogism
is your own. The Minor I should think needs no proof, yet because all men may
not be of my mind, I will prove it by its parts; and the first part thus,

There is the same necessity, for the doing of these things, which are
commanded to be done, by the same Authority, under the same penalty:

But the same Authority viz. Divine, under the same penalty, to wit, of
damnation, commanded the Apostles, to preachall these Doctrines which we speak
of, and those to whom they were preached, particularly to know and believe
them: For we speak of those only, which were so commanded, to be preached and
believed:

Therefore all these points were alike necessary to be preaced to all both
Jews and Gentiles.

Now that all these doctrines we speak of, may be briefly and compendiously set
down, and easily learned and remembered, He that remembers, that we spoke only
of such Doctrines as are necessary to be taught and learned, will require
hereof no farther demonstration. For, (not to put you in mind of what the Poet
says, Non sunt longa quibus nibilest quod demere possis,) who sees not, that
seeing the greatest part of men are of very mean capacities, that it is
necessary that that ^ay be learnt easily, which is to be learned of all? What
then can hinder me from concluding thus,

All the Articles of simple belief, which are fit and requisite to be preached,
and may easily be remembered, are by your confession comprised in the Creed:

But all the necessary Articles of faith are requisite to be preached, and easy
to be remembered;

Therefore they are all comprised in the Creed?

Secondly, from grounds granted by you, I argue thus,

Points of belief in themselves fundamental, are more requisite to be preached
then those which are not so: (this is evident.)

But the Apostles have put into their Creed some points that are not in
themselves Fundamental: (so you confess, ubisupra.)

Therefore if they have put in all, most requisite to be preached, they have
put in all, that in themselves are fundamental.

Thirdly and Lastly, from your own words. 26. thus I conclude my purpose,

The Apostles intention was, particularly to deliver in the Creed such Articles
as were fittest for those times, concerning the Deity, Trinity, and Messiah; (
Thus you, now I subsume,)

But all points simply necessary, by virtue of Gods command, to be preached and
believed in particular, were as fit for those times as these here mentioned;

Therefore their intention was, to deliver in it particularly all the necessary
points of belief.

23 And certainly, he that considers the matter advisedly, either must say that
the Apostles were not the Authors of it, or that this was their design in
composing it, or that they had none at all. For whereas you say, their intent
was, to comprehend in it, such general heads as were most befitting and
requisite for preaching the faith; and elsewhere, Particularly to deliver such
Articles as were fittest for those times; Every wise man may easily see that
your desire here was, to escape away in a cloud of inde finiteremes. For
otherwise, in stead of such general heads, and such Articles, why did not you
say plainly, all such, or some such? This had been plain dealing, but I fear,
cross to your design: which yet you have failed of. For that which you have
spoken (though you are loath to speak out,) either signifies nothing at all; or
that which I and D. Potter affirm: viz. That the Apostles Creed contains all
those points of belief, which were by Gods command, of necessity to be preached
to all, and believed by all. Neither when I say so, would I be so mistaken; as
if I said, that all points in the Creed are thus necessary: For Punies in
Logic, know that universal affirmatives, are not simply converted. And
therefore it may be true, that all such necessary points, are in the Creed;
though it be not true, that all points in the Creed are thus necessary: which I
willingly grant, of the points by you mentioned. But this rather confirms,
then any way invalidates my assertion. For how could it stand with the Apostles
wised^^e, to put in any points circumstantiall and not necessary, and at the
same time, to leave out any that were essential and necessary for that end,
which you say, they proposed to themselves, in making the Creed, that is, The
preaching of the faith, to Jews and Gentiles?

24 Neither may you hope, to avoid the pressure of these acknowledgements, by
pretending as you do. 10. that you do indeed, acknowledge the Creed to
contain, all the necessary articles of faith; but yet so, that they are not
either there expressed in it, or de ducible from it, by evident consequence,
but only by way of implication or Reduction. For first, not to tell you, that
no proposition, is implied in any other, which is not deducible from it; nor
secondly, that the article of the Catholic Church, wherein you will have all
employed, implies nothing to any purpose of yours, unless out of mere favor
we will grant the sense of it to be, that the Church is infallible, and that
yours is the Church: to pass by all this, and require no answer to it, this
one thing I may not omit; that the Apostles intent was (by your own confession)
particularly to deliver in the Creed, such articles of belief as were fittest
for those times (and all necessary articles I have proved were such:) now to
deliver particularly, and to deliver only implicitly, to be delivered
particularly in the Creed, and only to be reducible to it, I suppose are
repugnances hardly reconcilable. And therefore though we desire you, not to
grant, that the Creed contains all points of Faith of all sorts, any other way
then by implication or reduction, no nor so neither; yet you have granted, and
must grant, of the Fundamental points of simple belief, those which the
Apostles were commanded in particular to teach all men, and all men in
particular to know and believe, that these are delivered in the Creed, after a
more particular and punctual manner, then implication or reduction comes to.

25 Ad. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. It is vain for you to hope, that the
testimonies of the Ancient and Modern Doctors, alleged to this purpose by D.
Potter in great abundance, will be turned off, with this general deceitful
Answer, That the Allegation of them was needless to prove, that the Creed
contains all points of faith, under pretense that you grant it in manner
aforesaid. For what if you grant it in manner aforesaid, yet if you grant it
not (as indeed you do but inconstantly) in the sense which their testimonies
require, then for all this their testimonies may be alleged to very good
purpose. Now let any man read them, with any tolerable indifference, and he
shall find they say plainly, that all points of faith, necessary to be
particularly believed, are explicitly contained in the Creed; and that your
gloss of implication and reduction, had it been confronted with their
sentences, would have been much out of countenance, as having no ground nor
color of ground in them. For example. If Azorius had thought thus of it, how
could he have called it, A. or. part. 1^. 5.
A brief comprehension of the faith, and a sum of all things to be believed,
and as it were, a sign, or cognizance whereby Christians are to be differenced
and distinguished, from the impious and misbelievers, who profess either no
faith, or not the right? If Huntly had been of this mind, how could he have
said of it with any congruity, Cont. 2. ^. 10. n. 10.
That the rule of faith is expressly contained in it, and all the prime
foundations of faith: And that the Apostles were not so forgetful as to omit
any prime principal foundation of faith in that Creed which they delivered to
be believed by all Christians. The words of Filiucius are pregnant to the same
purpose, Moral. quaest. Tr. 22. c. 2. n. 34.
There cannot be a fitter Rule, from whence Christians may learn what they are
explicitly to believe, then that which is contained in the Creed. Which words
cannot be justified, if all points necessary to be believed explicitly, be not
comprised in it. To this end (says Putean) I^ 2. 2. qu. 2. Art. 3. Dub. Vit.
was the Creed composed by the Apostles, that Christians might have a form
whereby they might profess themselves Catholics. But certainly the Apostles
did this in vain, If a man might profess this, and yet for matter of faith be
not a Catholic.

26 The words of Cardinal Richelieu Instruction du Chrestien Lecon premiere.
exact this sense, and refuse your gloss as much as any of the former: The
Apostles Creed is the Summary and Abridgment of that faith which is necessary
for a Christian; These holy persons being by the Commandment of Jesus Christ
to disperse themselves over the world, and in all parts by preaching the
Gospel to plant the faith, esteemed it very necessary to reduce into a short
sum all that which Christians ought to know, to the end that being dispersed
into diverse parts of the world, they might preach the same thing in a short for
me, that it might be the easier remembered. For this effect they called this
Abridgment a Symbol, which signifies a mark or sign, which might serve to
distinguish true Christians, which embraced it from Infidels which rejected it.
Now I would fain know how the composition of the Creed could serve for this
end, and secure the Preachers of it, that they should preach the same thing, if
there were other necessary Articles not comprised in it. Or how could it be a
sign to distinguish true Christians from others, if a man might believe it
all, and for want of believing something else, not be a true Christian?

27 The words of the Chapter 3. Consid. ^. 5. p. 119.
Author of the consideration of four heads propounded King James, require the
same sense and utterly renounce your qualification. The Symbol is a brief yet
entire Methodicall sum of Christian Doctrine, including all points of faith
either to be preached by the Apostles, or to be believed by their Disciples:
Delivered both for a direction unto them, what they were to preach and others
to believe, as also to discern and put a difference betwixt all faithful
Christians and misbelieving Infidels:

28 Lastly, 2. 2. dis. 1. ^. 2. p. 4. in sin.
Gregory of Valence affirms our Assertion even in terms: The Articles of
faith contained in the Creed are as it were the first principles of the
Christian faith, in which is contained the sum of Evangelicall doctrine,
which all men are bound explicitly to believe.

29 To these Testimonies of your own Doctors, I should have added the
concurrent suffrages of the ancient Fathers, but the full and free
acknowledgment of the same Valentia in the place above quoted will make this
labor unnecessary. So judge (says he) the holy Fathers affirming that his
Symbol of faith was composed by the Apostles, that all might have a short
sum of those things which are to be believed, and are dispersedly contained
in Scripture.

30 Neither is there any discord between this Assertion of your Doctors, and
their holding themselves obliged to believe all the points which the Council
of Trent defines. For Protestants and Papists may both hold, that all points of
belief necessary to be known and believed, are summed up in the Creed: and yet
both the one and the other think themselves bound to believe whatsoever other
points, they either know or believe to be revealed by God. For the Articles
which are necessary to be known that they are revealed by God, may be very
few; and yet those which are necessary to be believed, when they are revealed
and known to be so, may be very many.

31 But Summaries and Abstracts are not intended to specify all the
particulars of the science or subject to which they belong. Yes if they be
intended for perfect Summaries, they must not omit any necessary doctrine of
that Science whereof they are Summaries; though the Illustration and Reasons of
it they may omit. If this were not so, a man might set down forty or fifty of
the Principal definitions and divisions, and rules of Logic, and call it a
Summary or Abstract of Logic. But sure, this were no more a Summary, then that
were the picture of a man in little, that wanted any of the parts of a man; or
that a total sum wherein all the particulars were not cast up. Now the
Apostles Creed you here intimate that it was intended for a Summary: otherwise
why talk you here of Summaries, and tell us that they need not contain all the
particulars of their science? And of what I pray may it be a Summary, but of
the Fundamentals of Christian faith? Now you have already told us, That it is
most full and complete to that purpose for which it was intended. Lay all this
together, and I believe the product will be; That the Apostles Creed is a
perfect Summary of the Fundamentalls of the Christian faith: and what the duty
of a perfect Summary is, I have already told you.

32 Whereas therefore to disprove this Assertion, in diverse particles of this
Chapter, but especially the fourteenth, you muster up whole armies of
doctrines, which you pretend are necessary, and not contained in the Creed; I
answer very briefly thus: That the doctrines you mention, are either concerning
matters of practice, and not simple belief; or else they are such doctrines
wherein God has not so plainly revealed himself, but that honest and good men,
true Lovers of God and of Truth, those that desire above all things to know his
will and do it, may err, and yet commit no sin at all, or only a sin of
infirmity, and not destructive of salvation; or lastly, they are such Doctrines
which God has plainly revealed, and so are necessary to be believed when they
are known to be divine, but not necessary to be known and believed, not
necessary to be known for divine, that they may be believed. Now all these
sorts of doctrines are impertinent to the present Question. For D. Potter never
affirmed either that the necessary duties of a Christian, or that all Truths
piously credible, but not necessary to be believed, or that all Truths
necessary to be believed upon the supposall of divine Revelation, were
specified in the Creed. For this he affirms, only of such speculatiue divine
veriries, which God has commanded particularly to be preached to all, and
believed by all. Now let the doctrines objected by you be well considered, and
let all those that are reducible to the three former heads be discarded, and
then of all these Instances against D. Potters Assertion, there will not remain
so much as one.

33 First the Questions touching the conditions to be performed by us to
obtain remission of sins; the Sacraments; the Commandments, and the
possibility of keeping them, the necessity of imploring the Assistance of Gods
Grace and Spirit for the keeping of them: how far obedience is due to the
Church: Prayer for the Dead: The cessation of the old Law: are all about
Agenda, and so cut off upon the first consideration.

34 Secondly, the Question touching Fundamentalls, is profitable but not
fundamental. He that belieues all Fundamentals, cannot be damned for any
error in faith, though he believe more or less to be fundamental then is so.
That also of the procession of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son: of
Purgatory: of the Churches Visibility: of the Books of the new Testament which
were doubted of by a considerable part of the Primitive Church: (until I see
better reason for the contrary then the bare authority of men,) I shall esteem
of the same condition.

35 Thirdly, These Doctrines that Adam and the Angels sinned: that there are
Angels good and bad: that those books of Scripture which were never doubted of
by any considerable part of the Church, are the word of God: that S. Peter had
no such primacy as you pretend: that the Scripture is a perfect rule of faith,
and consequently that no necessary doctrine is unwritten: that there is no one
Society or succession of Christians absolutely infallible: These to my
understanding are truths plainly revealed by God, and necessary to be believed
by them who know they are so. But not so necessary, that every man and woman is
bound under pain of damnation particularly to know the^ to be divine
Revelations, and explicitly to believe them. And for this reason, these with
innumerable other points, are to be referred to the third sort of doctrines
above mentioned, which were never pretended to have place in the Creed. There
remains one only point of all that Army you mustred together, reducible to
none of these heads, and that is, that God is, and is a Remunerator, which you
say is questioned by the denial of merit. But if there were such a necessary
indissoluble coherence between this point and the doctrine of merit, me thinks
with as much reason, and more charity you might conclude, That we hold merit,
because we hold this point; Then that we deny this point, because we deny
merit. Besides, when Protestants deny the doctrine of Merits, you know right
well, for so they have declared themselves a thousand times, that they mean
nothing else, but with David, that their well doing extends not, is not truly
beneficial to God: with our Savior, when they have done all which they are
commanded, they have done their duty only, and no courtesy: And lastly, with S.
Paul, that all which they can suffer for God (and yet suffering is more then
doing) is not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed. So
that you must either misunderstand their meaning in denying Merit, or you must
discharge their doctrine of this odious consequence, or you must charge it upon
David and Paul and Christ himself. Nay you must either grant their denial of
true Merit just and reasonable, or you must say, that our good actions are
really profitable to God: that they are not debts already due to him, but
voluntary and undeserved Favors: and that they are equal unto and well worthy
of eternal glory which is prepared for them. As for the inconvenience which
you so much fear, That the denial of Merit makes God a Giver only, and not a
Rewarder, I tell you, good Sir, you fear where no fear is, and that it is
both most true on the one side, that you in holding good Works meritorious of
eternal glory make God a rewarder only and not a giver, contrary to plain
Scripture, affirming that The gift of God is eternal life; And that it is most
false on the other side, that the doctrine of Protestants makes God a giver
only and not a rewarder: In as much as their doctrine is, That God gives not
Heaven but to those which do something for it, and so his gift is also a
Reward; but withal that whatsoever they do is due unto God before hand, and
worth nothing to God, and worth nothing in respect of Heaven, and so man's work
is no Merit, and Gods reward is still a Gift.

36 Put the case the Pope, for a reward of your service done him in writing
this Book, had given you the honor and means of a Cardinal, would you not,
not only in humility but in sincerity have professed, that you had not merited
such a Reward? And yet the Pope is neither your Creator nor Redeemer, nor
Preserver, nor perhaps your very great Benefactour, sure I am, not so great as
God Almighty, and therefore has no such right and title to your service as God
has in respect of precedent obligations. Besides, the work you have done him
has been really advantageous to him: and lastly, not altogether
unproportionable to the forementioned Reward. And therefore if by the same
work you will pretend that either you have or hope to have deserved immortal
happiness, I beseech you consider well whether this be not to set a higher
value upon a Cardinal's cap, then a Crown of immortal glory, and with that
Cardinal to prefer a part in Paris before a part in Paradise.

37 In the next Paragraph you beat the air again, and fight manfully with your
own shadow. The point you should have spoken to, was this, That there are some
points of simple belief necessary to be explicitly believed, which yet are
not contained in the Creed. Instead hereof you trouble your self in vain to
demonstrate, That many important points of faith, are not contained in it,
which yet D. Potter had freely granted, and you your self take particular
notice of his granting of it. All this pains therefore you have employed to no
purpose: saving that to some negligent Reader you may seem to have spoken to
the very point, because that which you speak to, at the first hearing, sounds
somewhat near it. But such a one I must entreat to remember, there be many
more points of faith then there be Articles of Simple belief, necessary to be
explicitly believed: And that though all of the former sort are not contained
in the Creed, yet all of the latter sort may be. As for your distinction,
between Heresies that have been, and Heresies that are, and Heresies that may
be, I have already proved it vain; and that whatsoever may be an Heresy, that
is so; and whatsoever is so, that always has been so, ever since the
publication of the Gospel of Christ. The doctrine of your Church may like a
snow-ball increase with rolling, and again if you please melt away and
decrease: But as Christ Jesus, so his Gospel, is yesterday and to day, and the
same for ever.

38 Our Savior sending his Apostles to preach, gave them no other commission
then this: Go teach all nations, Baptizing them in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I
have commanded you. These were the bounds of their commission. If your Church
have any larger, or if she have a commission at large, to teach what she
pleases, and call it the Gospel of Christ, let her produce her Letters Patent
from heaven for it. But if this be all you have, then must you give me leave to
esteem it both great sacrilege in you to forbid any thing, be it never so
small or ceremonious, which Christ has commanded: as the receiving of the
Communion in both kinds: and as high a degree of presumption, to enjoyne men
to believe, that there are or can be any other fundamental Articles of the
Gospel of Christ, then what Christ himself commanded his Apostles to teach
all men; or any damnable Heresies, but such as are plainly repugnant to these
prime Verities.

39 Ad. 16. 17. The saying of the most learned Prelate, and excellent man, the
Archbishop of Armach, is only related by D. Potter p. 155. and not applauded:
though the truth is, both the Man deserves as much applause as any man, and his
saying as much as any saying; it being as great, and as good a truth, and as
necessary for these miserable times, as possibly can be uttered. For this is
most certain, and I believe you will easily grant it, that to reduce Christians
to unity of Communion, there are but two ways that may be conceived probable:
The one, by taking away diversity of opinions touching matters of Religion: The
other by showing that the diversity of opinions, which is among the several
Sects of Christians, ought to be no hinderance to their Unity in Communion.

40 Now the former of these is not to be hoped for without a miracle, unless
that could be done, which is impossible to be performed, though it be often
pretended; that is, unless it could be made evident to all men, that God has
appointed some visible Judge of Controversies, to whose judgment all men are
to submit themselves. What then remains, but that the other way must be taken,
and Christians must be taught to ser a higher value upon these high points of
faith and obedience wherein they agree, then upon these matters of less moment
wherein they differ, and understand that agreement in those, ought to be more
effectual to join them in one Communion, then their difference in other
things of less moment to divide them? When I say, in one Communion, I mean, in
a common Profession of those articles of faith, wherein all consent: A joint
worship of God, after such a way as all esteem lawful; and a mutual
performance of all those works of charity, which Christians own one to another.
And to such a Communion what better inducement could be thought of, then to
demonstrate that what was universally believed of all Christians, if it were
joined with a love of truth, and with holy obedience, was sufficient to bring
men to heaven? For why should men be more rigid then God? Why should any error
exclude any man from the Churches Communion, which will not deprive him of
eternal salvation? Now that Christians do generally agree in all those points
of doctrine, which are necessary to Salvation, it is apparent, because they
agree with one accord, in believing all those Books of the Old and New
Testament, which in the Church were never doubted of to be the undoubted word
of God. And it is so certain that in all these Books, all necessary doctrines
are evidently contained, that of all the four Evangelists this is very
probable, but of S. Luke most apparent, that in every one of their Books they
have comprehended the whole substance of the Gospel of Christ. For what reason
can be imagined, that any of them should leave out any thing which he knew to
be necessary, and yet (as apparently all of them have done) put in many things
which they knew to be only profitable and not necessary? What wise and honest
man that were now to write the Gospel of Christ, would do so great a work of
God after such a negligent ^ashon? Suppose Xaverius had been to write the
Gospel of Christ for the Indians, think you he would have left out any
Fundamental doctrine of it? If not, I must beseech you to conceive as well of
S. Matthew, and S. Mark, and S. Luke, and S. John, as you do of Xaverius.
Besides, if every one of them have not in them all necessary doctrines, how
have they complied with their own design, which was, as the titles of their
Books show, to write the Gospel of Christ, and not a part of it? Or how have
thy not deceived us, in giving them such titles? By the whole Gospel of
Christ, I understand not the whole History of Christ, but all that makes up the
Covenant between God and man. Now if this be wholly contained in the Gospel of
S. Mark and S. John, I believe every considering man will be inclinable to
believe that then without doubt, it is contained, with the advantage of many
other very profitable things, in the larger Gospells of S. Matthew, and S.
Luke. And that S. Marks Gospel wants no necessary Article of this Covenant, I
presume you will not deny, if you believe Irenaeus when he says, Matthew to the
Hebrews in their tongue published the Scripture of the Gospel: When Peter and
Paul did preach the Gospel, and found the Church or a Church at Rome, or of
Rome, and after their departure Mark the scholar of Peter, delivered to us in
writing those things which had been preached by Peter; and Luke, the follwer of
Paul, compiled in a book the Gospel which was preached by him: And afterward
John, residing in Asia, in the City of Ephesus, did himself also set forth a
Gospel.

41 In which words of Irenaeus, it is remarkable that they are spoken by him
against some Heretics, that pretended (as you know who do now adays) that
some necessary Doctrines of the Gospel were unwritten, Lib. 3. c. ^.
and that out of the Scriptures, truth (he must mean sufficient truth,) cannot
be found by those which know not Tradition. Against whom to say, that part of
the Gospel which was preached by Peter was written by S. Mark, and some other
necessary parts of it omitted, had been to speak impertinently, and rather to
confirm then confute their error. It is plain therefore, that he must mean,
as I pretend, that all the necessary doctrine of the Gospel, which was
preached by S. Peter, was written by S. Mark. Now you will not deny, I
presume, that S. Peter preached all, therefore you must not deny that S. Mark
wrote all.

42 Our next inquiry let it be touching S. John's intent in writing his Gospel,
whether it were to deliver so much truth, as being believed and obeyed would
certainly bring men to eternal life, or only part of it, and to leave part
unwritten? A great man there is, but much less then the Apostle, who says,
that writing last, he purposed to supply the defects of the other Evangelists,
that had wrote before him: which (if it were true) would sufficiently justify
what I have undertaken, that at least all the four Evangelists have in them,
all the necessary parts of the Gospel of Christ. Neither will I deny, but S.
John's secondary intent might be to supply the defects of the former three
Gospels, in some things very profitable. But he that pretends, that any
necessary doctrine is in S. John which is in none of the other Evangelists,
has not so well considered them as he should do, before he pronounce sentence
of so weighty a matter. And for his prime intent in writing his Gospel, what
that was, certainly no Father in the world understood it better then himself.
Therefore let us hear him speak: Many other signs (says he) also did Jesus in
the sight of his Disciples, which are not written in this Book: But these are
written, that you may believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that
believing you may have life in his name. By ( these are written) may be
understood, either these things are written, or these signs are written. Take
it which way you will, this conclusion will certainly follow, That either all
that which S. John wrote in his Gospel, or less then all, and therefore all
much more was sufficient to make them believe that which being believed with
lively faith, would certainly bring them to eternal life.

43 This which has been spoken (I hope) is enough to justify my undertaking to
the full, that it is very probable that every one of the four Evangelists has
in his book the whole substance, all the necessary parts of the Gospel of
Christ. But for S. Luke, that he has written such a perfect Gospel, in my
judgment it ought to be with them that believe him, no manner of question.
Consider first the introduction to his Gospel, where he declares what he
intends to write, in these words, For as much as many have taken in hand to set
forth in order a declaration of those things, which are most surely believed
amongst us, even as they delivered unto us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word, it seemed good to me also, having had
perfect understanding of things from the first, to write to thee in order, most
excellent Theophilus, that thou might know the certainty, of those things
wherein thou have been instructed. Add to this place, the entrance to his
History of the Acts of the Apostles: The former treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach, until the day in
which he was taken up. Weigh well these two places, and then answer me freely
and ingenuously to these demands. 1. Whether S. Luke does not undertake the
very same thing which he says, many had taken in hand? 2. Whether this were
not to set forth in order, a declaration of those things which are most surely
believed amongst Christians? 3. Whether the whole Gospel of Christ, and every
necessary doctrine of it, were not surely believed among Christians? 4. Whether
they which were Eyewitnesses and ministers of the word from the beginning,
delivered not the whole Gospel of Christ? 5. Whether he does not undertake to
write in order these things whereof he had perfect understanding from the
first? 6. Whether he had not perfect understanding of the whole Gospel of
Christ? 7. Whether he does not undertake to write to Theophilus of all those
things wherein he had been instructed? 8. And whether he had not been
instructed in all the necessary parts of the Gospel of Christ? 9. Whether in
the other Text, All things which Jesus began to do and teach, must not at
least imply, all the Principal and necessary things? 10. Whether this be not
the very interpretation of your Rhemish Doctors, in their Annotation upon this
place? 11. Whether all these Articles of the Christian faith, without the
belief whereof, no man can be saved, be not the Principal and most necessary
things which Jesus taught. 12. And lastly, whether many things which S. Luke
has wrote in his Gospel, be not less principal, and less necessary then all
and every one of these? When you have well considered these proposalls, I
believe you will be very apt to think (if S. Luke be of credit with you) That
all things necessary to salvation, are certainly contained in his writings
alone. And from hence you will not choose but conclude, that seeing all the
Christians in the world, agree in the belief of what S. Luke has written, and
not only so, but in all other Books of Canonical Scripture, which were never
doubted of in and by the Church, the Learned Archbishop had very just, and
certain ground to say, That in these Propositio^s, which without Controversy
are universally received in the whole Christian world, so much truth is
contained, as being joined with holy obedience, may be sufficient to bring a
man to everlasting Salvation; and that we have no cause to doubt, but that as
many as walk according to this rule, neither overthrowing that which they have
builded, by superinducing any damnable Heresy thereupon, nor otherwise
vitiating their holy faith, with a lewd and wicked conversation, peace shall be
upon them, and upon the Israel of God.

44 Against this, you object two things. The one, that by this Rule, seeing the
Doctrine of the Trinity is not received universally among Christians, the
denial of it shall not exclude Salvation. The other; that the Bishop
contradicts himself, in supposing a man may believe all necessary Truths, and
yet superinduce some damnable Heresies.

45 To the first I answer, what I conceive he would, whose words I here
justify, that he has declared plainly in this very place, that he meant, not
an absolute, but a limited Universality, and speaks not of propositions
universally believed by all Professions of Christianity that are, but only, by
all those several Professions of Christiany, that have any large spread in any
part of the world. By which words he excludes from the universality here spoken
of, the denyers of the Doctrine of the Trinity, as being but a handful of men,
in respect of all, nay in respect of any of these professions which maintain
it. And therefore it was a great fault in you, either willingly to conceal
these words, which evacuate your objection, or else negligently to oversee
them. Especially seeing your friend, to whom you are so much beholding, Paulus
Veridicus, in his scurrilous and sophistical Pamphlet, against B. Vshers
Sermon, has so kindly offered to lead you by the hand to the observation of
them, in these words: To consider of your Coinopista, or communiter Credenda,
Articles, as you call them, universally believed of all these several
Professions of Cristianity, which have any large spread in the World: These
Articles for example, may be the Unity of the Godhead, the Trinity of persons,
the immortality of the Soul, etc. Where you see that your friend, whom you so
much magnify, has plainly confessed that, notwithstanding the Bishops words,
the denial of the doctrine of the Trinity, may exclude Salvation; and
therefore in approving and applauding his Answer to the Bishops Sermon, you
have unawares allowed this Answer of mine to your own greatest objection.

46 Now for the foul contradiction, which you say the Doctor might easily have
espied in the Bishops saying, he desires your pardon for his oversight, for
Paulus Veridicus his sake; who though he set him self to find faults with the
Bishops Sermon, yet it seems this he could not find, or else questionless
we should have heard of it from him. And therefore if D. Potter, being the
Bishops friend, have not been more sharp-sighted then his enemies, this he
hopes to indifferent judges, will seem no unpardonable offense. Yet this I say,
not as if there were any contradiction at all, much less any foul
contradiction in the Bishops words; but as Antipherons picture, which he
thought he saw in the air before him, was not in the air but in his disturbed
phansie^ so all the contradiction which here you descant upon, is not indeed in
the Bishops saying, but in your imagination. For wherein, I pray, lies this
foul contradiction? In supposing (say you) a man may believe all Truths
necessary to salvation, and yet superinduce a damnable Heresy. I answer, It is
not certain that his words do suppose this: neither if they do, does he
contradict himself. I say it is not certain that his words import any such
matter. For ordinarily men use to speak and write so, as here he does, when
they intend not to limit or restrain, but only to repeat and press and
illustrate what they have said before. And I wonder, why with your Eagles eyes
you did not espy another foul contradiction in his words as well as this; and
say, that he supposes a man may walk according to the rule of holy obedience,
and yet vitiate his holy faith with a lewd and wicked conversation? Certainly a
lewd conversation is altogether as contradictious to holy obedience, as a
damnable heresy to necessary truth. What then was the reason that you espied
not this foul contradiction in his words, as well as that? Was it because,
according to the spirit and Genius of your Church, your zeal is greater to that
which you conceive true doctrine, then holy obedience; and think simple error
a more capital crime, then sins committed against knowledge and conscience? Or
was it because your Reason told you, that herein he meant only to repeat and
not to limit what he said before? And why then had you not so much candor to
conceave, that he might have the same meaning in the former part of the
disjunction; and intend no more but this, Whosoever walks according to this
rule of believing all necessary Truths and holy obedience, (neither poisoning
his faith of those Truths which he holds, with the mixture of any damnable
Heresy, nor vitiating it with a wicked life) Peace shall be upon him! In which
words what man of any ingenuity will not presently perceive that the words
within the parenthesis, are only a repetition of, and no exception from those
that are without? S. Athanasius in his Creed tells us, The Catholic Faith is
this, that we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither
confounding the Persons nor dividing the Substance; and why now do you not
tell him that he contradicts himself, and supposes that we may worship a
Trinity of Persons, and one God in substance, and yet confound the Persons, or
divide the substance; which yet is impossible, because Three remaining Three,
cannot be confounded, and One remaining One cannot be divided? If a man should
say unto you, he that keeps all the Commandments of God, committing no sin
either against the love of God, or the love of his neighbor, is a perfect man:
Or thus, he that will live in constant health had need be exact in his diet,
neither eating too much, nor too little: Or thus, he that will come to London
must go on straight forward in such a way, and neither turn to the right hand
or to the left; I verily believe you would not find any contradiction in his
words, but confess them as coherent and consonant as any in your Book. And
certainly if you would look upon this saying of the Bishop with any
indifference, you would easily perceive it to be of the very same kind, and
capable of the very same construction. And therefore one of the grounds of your
accusation is uncertain. Neither can you assure us, that the Bishop supposes
any such matter as you pretend. Neither if he did suppose this (as perhaps he
did) were this to contradict himself. For though there can be no damnable
Heresy, unless it contradict some necessary Truth, yet there is no
contradiction but the same man may at once believe this Heresy and this Truth;
because there is no contradiction that the same man, at the same time, should
believe contradictions. For, first, whatsoever a man believes true, that he may
and must believe; But there have been some who have believed and taught that
contradictions might be true, against whom Aristotle disputes in the third of
his Metaphysics; Therefore it is not impossible that a man may believe
Contradictions. Secondly, they which believe there is no certainty in Reason,
must believe that contradictions may be true: For otherwise there will be
certainty in this Reason; This contradicts Truth therefore it is false. But
there be now diverse in the world who believe there is no certainty in reason,
(and whether you be of their mind or no, I desire to be informed;) Therefore
there be diverse in the world who believe contradictions may be true. Thirdly,
They which do captivate their understandings to the belief of those things
which to their understanding seem irreconcilable contradictions, may as well
believe real contradictions: (For the difficulty of believing arises not from
their being repugnant, but from their seeming to be so:) But you do captivate
your understandings to the belief of those things which seem to your
understandings irreconcilable contradictions; Therefore it is as possible and
easy for you to believe those that indeed are so. Fourthly, some men may be
confuted in their errors, and persuaded out of them; but no man's error can be
confuted, who together with his error does not believe and grant some true
principle that contradicts his Error: for nothing can be proved to him who
grants nothing, neither can there be (as all men know) any rational discourse
but out of grounds agreed upon by both parts. Therefore it is not impossible but
absolutely certain, that the same man at the same time may believe
contradictions. Fifthly, It is evident, neither can you without extreme madness
and uncharitableness, deny, that we believe the Bible, those Books I mean
which we believe Canonical: Otherwise why dispute you with us out of them, as
out of a common Principle? Either therefore you must retract your opinion, and
acknowledge that the same man at the same time may believe co^tradictions, or
else you will run into a greater inconvenience, and be forced to confess, that
no part of our Doctrine contradicts the Bible. Sixthly, I desire you to
vindicate from contradiction these following Assertions: That there should be
Length and nothing long: Breadth, and nothing broad: Thickness, and nothing
thick: Whiteness, and nothing white: Roundnesse, and nothing round: Weight,
and nothing heavy: Sweetness, and nothing sweet: Moisture, and nothing moist:
Fluidnesse, and nothing flowing: many Actions, and no Agent: Many Passions, and
no Patient: That is, that there should be a Long, broad, thick, white, round,
heavy, sweet, moist, flowing, active, passive, nothing! That Bread should be
turned into the substance of Christ, and yet not any thing of the Bread become
any thing of Christ; neither the matter, not the form, not the Accidents of
Bread, be made either the matter or the Form, or the Accidents of Christ. That
Bread should be turned into nothing, and at the same time with the same action
turned into Christ, and yet Christ should not be nothing. That the same thing
at the same time should have its just dimensions, and just distance of its
parts, one from another, and at the same time not have it, but all its parts
together in one and the self same point. That the body of Christ, which is
much greater, should be contained wholly and in its full dimensions without any
alteration, in that which is lesser, and that not once only, but as many times
over as there are several points in the Bread and Wine. That the same thing at
the same time should be wholly above it self, and wholly below it self,
within it self, and without it self, on the right hand, and on the left hand,
and round about it self. That the same thing at the same time should move to
and from it self, and lie still: Or that it should be carried from one place
to another through the middle space, and yet not move. That it should be
brought from heaven to earth, and yet not come out of Heaven, nor be at all in
any of the middle space between Heaven and Earth. That to be one, should be to
be undivided from it self, and yet that one and the same thing should be
divided from it self. That a thing may be, and yet be no where. That a Finite
thing may be in all places at once. That a Body may be in a place, and have
there its dimensions, and color, and all other qualities, and yet that it is
not in the power of God to make it visible, and tangible there, nor capable of
doing or suffering any thing. That there should be no certainty in our senses,
and yet that we should know something certainly, and yet know nothing but by
our se^ses. That that which is, and was long ago, should now begin to be. That
that is now to be made of nothing, which is not nothing but something. That the
same thing should be before and after it self. That it should be truly and
really in a place, and yet without Locality. Nay, that he which is Omnipote^t
should not be able to give it Locality in this place, where it is, as some of
you hold: or if he can, as others say he can, that it should be possible, that
the same man, for example You or I, may at the sametime, be awake at London,
and not awake but asleep at Rome: There run or walk, here not run or walk, but
stand still, sit, or lie along: There study or write, here do neither, but
dine or sup: There speak, here be silent. That he may in one place freez for
cold, in another burn with heat. That he may be drunk in one place, and sober
in another: Valiant in one place, and a Coward in another: A thief in one
place, honest in another. That he may be a Papist and go to Mass in Rome; A
Protestant and go to Church in England. That he may dye in Rome, and live in
England: or 'dying in both places may go to Hell from Rome, and to Heaven from
England. That the Body and Soul of Christ should cease to be where it was, and
yet not go to another place, nor be destroyed. All these, and many other of
the like nature are the unavoidable, and most of them the acknowledged
consequences of your doctrine of Transubstantiation, as is explained one where
or other by your Schoolmen. Now I beseech you, Sir, to try your skill, and if
you can compose their repugnance, and make peace between them; Certainly, none
but you shall be Catholic Moderator. But if you cannot do it, and that after
an intelligible manner, then you must give me leave to believe, that either you
do not believe Transubstantiation, or else that it is no contradiction, that
men should subjugate their understandings to the belief of contradictions.

47 Lastly, I pray tell me whether you have not so much Charity in store for
the Bishop of Armach, and D. Potter, as to think that they themselves believe
this saying, which the one preached and printed, the other reprinted, and as you
say applauded? If you think they do, then certainly you have done unadvisedly,
either in charging it with a foul contradiction, or in saying, it is
impossible, that any man should at once believe contradictions. Indeed that men
should not assent to contradictions, and that it is unreasonable to do so, I
willingly grant: But to say it is impossible to be done, is against every man's
experience, and almost as unreasonable, as to do the thing which is said to be
impossible. For though perhaps it may be very difficult, for a man in his ^ight
wits, to believe a contradiction expressed in terms, especially if he believe
it to be a contradiction, yet for men being cowed and awed by superstition, to
persuade themselves upon slight and trivial grounds, that these or these,
though they seem contradictions, yet indeed are not so, and so to believe them:
or if the plain repugnance of them, be veiled and disguised a little, with some
empty unintelligible nonsense distinction; or if it be not expressed but
employed, not direct but by consequence, so that the parties, to whose faith the
propositions are offered, are either innocently, or perhaps affectedly ignorant
of the contrariety of them: for men in such cases, easily to swallow and digest
contradictions, he that denies it possible, must be a mere stranger in the
world.

48 Ad. 18. This Paragraph consists of two immodest untruths, obtruded upon us
without show, or shadow of Reason: and an evident sophisme, grounded upon an
affected mistake of the sense of the word Fundamental.

49 The first untruth is, that D. Potter makes a Church, of men agreeing
scarcely in one point of faith: of men concurring in some one or few Articles
of belief, and in the rest holding conceits plainly contradictory: Agreeing
only in this one Article, that Christ is our Savior; but for the rest, like to
the parts of a Chimaera etc. Which I say is a shameless calumny, not only
because D. Potter in this point delivers not his own judgment, but relates the
opinion of others, M. Hooker, and M. Morton; but especially, because even these
men (as they are related by D. Potter) to the constituting of the very essence
of a Church, in the lowest degree, require not only Faith in Christ Jesus the
son of God and Savior of the World, but also submission to his Doctrine in
mind and will. Now I beseech you Sir, tell me ingenuously, whether the doctrine
of Christ may be called without blasphemy, scarcely one point of Faith? or
whether it consists only, of some one or few Articles of belief? Or whether
there be nothing in it, but only this Article, That Christ is our Savior? Is
it not manifest to all the world, that Christians of all Professions do agree
with one consent, in the belief of all those Books of Scripture, which were
not doubted of in the ancient Church, without danger of damnation? Nay is it
not apparent, that no man at this time, can without hypocrisy, pretend to
believe in Christ, but of necessity he must do so? Seeing he can have no
reason to believe in Christ, but he must have the same to believe the
Scripture. I pray then read over the Scripture once more, or if that be too
much labor, the New Testament only: and then say whether there be nothing
there, but scarcely one point of Faith? But some one or two Articles of belief?
Nothing but this Article only, that Christ is our Savior? Say whether there
be not there an infinite number of Divine Verities, Divine precepts, Divine
promises, and those so plainly and undoubtedly delivered, that if any sees them
not, it cannot be because he cannot, but because he will not! So plainly, that
whosoever submits syncerely to the doctrine of Christ, in mind and will, cannot
possibly but submit to these in act and performance. And in the rest, which it
has pleased God, for reasons best known to himself, to deliver obscurely or
ambiguously, yet thus far at least they agree, that the sense of them
intended by God, is certainly true, and that they are without passion or
prejudice to endeavor to find it out: The difference only is, which is that
true sense which God intended. Neither would this long continue, if the walls
of separation, whereby the Devil hopes to make their Divisions eternal, were
pulled down; and error were not supported against Truth, by humane advantages.
But for the present, God forbid the matter should be so ill as you make it! For
whereas you looking upon their points of difference and agreement, through I
know not what strange glasses, have made the first innumerable, and the other
scarce a number: the truth is clean contrary; That those divine Verities,
Speculative and Practical, wherein they universally agree (which you will have
to be but a few, or but one, or scarcely one) amount to many millions, (i^ an
exact account were taken of them:) And on the other side, the Ponts in
variance, are in comparison but few, and those not of such a quality, but the
Error in them may well consist with the belief and obedience of the entire
Covenant, ratified by Christ between God and man. Yet I would not be so
mistaken, as if I thought the errors even of some Protestants unconsiderable
things, and matters of no moment. For the truth is, I am very fearful, that
some of their opinions, either as they are, or as they are apt to be mistaken,
(though not of themselves so damnable, but that good and holy men may be saved
with the^, yet) are too frequent occasions of our remisnes, and slacknesse, in
running the race of Christian Profession, of our deferring Repentance, and
conversion to God, of our frequent relapses into sin, and not seldom of
security in sinning; and consequently, though not certain causes, yet too
frequent occasions of many men's damnation: and such I conceive all these
doctrines, which either directly or obliquely, put men in hope of eternal
happiness, by any other means saving only the narrow way of sincere and
universal obedience, grounded upon a true and lively faith. These Errors
therefore, I do not elevate or extenuate: and on condition the ruptures made
by them might be composed, do heartily wish, that the cement were made of my
dearest blood, and only not to be an Anathema from Christ! Only this I say,
that neither are their points of agreement so few, nor their differences so
many, as you make them; nor so great as to exclude the opposite Parties from
being members of one Church Militant, and joint heirs of the glory of the
Church Triumphant.

50 Your other palpable untruth is, that Protestants are far more bold to
disagree even in matters of faith, then Catholic Divines (you mean your own,)
in Questions merely Philosophical, or not determined by the Church. For
neither do they differ at all, in matters of faith, if you take the word in
the highest sense, and mean by matters of faith, such doctrines as are
absolutely necessary to Salvation, to be believed or not to be disbelieved. And
then in those wherein they do differ, with what color or shadow of Argument,
can you make good, that they are more bold to disagree, then you are in
Questions merely Philosophical, or not determined by the Church? For is there
not as great repugnancy between your assent and dissent, your affirmation and
negation, your Est Est, Non Non, as there is between theirs? You follow your
Reason, in those things which are not determined by your Church; and they
theirs, in things not plainly determined in Scripture. And wherein then
consists their greater, their far greater boldness? And what if they in
their contradictory opinions, pretend both to rely upon the truth of God, does
this make their contradictions ever a whit the more repugnant? I had always
thought, that all contradictions had been equally contradictions, and equally
repugnant; because the least of them are as far asunder, as Est and Non Est
can make them, and the greatest are no farther. But then you in your
differences, (by name, about Predetermination, the Immaculate Conception, the
Popes Infallibility,) upon what other motive do you rely? Do not you cite
Scripture, or Tradition, or both, on both sides? And do you not pretend, that
both these are the infallible Truths of Almighty God?

51 You close up this Section with a fallacy, proving forsooth, that we
destroy, by our confession, the Church which is the house of God, because we
stand only upon Fundamental Articles, which cannot make up the whole fabric
of the faith, no more then the foundation of a house alone can be a house.

52 But I hope, Sir, you will not be difficult in granting, that that is a
house which has all the necessary parts belonging to a house: Now by
Fundamental Articles, we mean all those which are necesry. And you your self,
in the very leaf after this, take notice that D. Potter does so. Where to this
Question: How shall I know in particular which points be, and which be not
Fundamental? You scurrilously bring him in making this ridiculous answer, Read
my Answer to a late Pamphlet entitled Charity Mistaken etc. There you shall
find that Fundamental doctrines are such Catholic Verities, as principally,
and essentially pertain to the faith, such as properly constitute a Church, and
are necessary (in ordinary course) to be distinctly believed by every Christian
that will be saved. All which words he used, not to tell you what points be
fundamental, as you dishonestly impose upon him, but to explain what he meant
by the word Fundamental. May it please you therefore now at last, to take
notice, that by Fundamental we mean all and only that which is necessary; and
then I hope you will grant, that we may safely expect salvation in a Church
which has all things fundamental to Salvation! Unless you will say, that
more is necessary, then that which is necessary.

53 This long discourse, so full of un-ingenious dealing with your adversary,
perhaps would have done reasonably in a Fair or a Comedy, and I doubt not but
you have made your self and your courteous Readers good sport with it. But if
D. Potter or I, had been by when you wrote it, we should have stopped your carere
at the first starting, and have put you in mind of these old School Proverbs,
Exfalso supposito sequitur quodlibet, and Vno absurdo dato, seq^untur mill.
For whereas you suppose, first, that to a man desirous to save his soul, and
requiring, whose direction he might rely upon? the Doctors answer would be,
Upon the truly Catholic Church: I suppose upon better reason, because I know
his mind, that he would advise him to call no man Master on Earth, but
according to Christ's command, to rely upon the direction of God himself. If he
should enquire where he should find this direction? He would answer him; In his
word contained in Scripture. If he should enquire what assurance he might have,
that the Scripture is the word of God? He would answer him, that the doctrine
it self is very fit and worthy to be thought to come from God, nec vox hominem
sonat, and that they which wrote and delivered it, confirmed it to be the word
of God, by doing such works as could not be done, but by power from God
himself. For assurance of the Truth hereof, he would advise him to rely upon
that, which all wise men, in all matters of belief rely upon; and that is, the
Consent of Ancient Records, and Universal Tradition. And that he might not
instruct him as partial in this advise, he might farther tell him, that a
gentleman that would be namelesse, that has written a book against him, called
Charity maintained by Catholics, though in many things he differ from him,
yet agrees with him in this, that Tradition is such a principle as may be
rested in, and which requires no other proof. As indeed no wise man doubts but
there was such a man as Julius Caesar, or Cicero, that there are such Cities
as Rome or Constantinople, though he have no other assurance for the one or the
other, but only the speech of people. This tradition therefore he would
counsel him to rely upon, and to believe that the book which we call
Scripture, was confirmed abundantly by the works of God, to be the word of
God. Believing it the word of God, he must of necessity believe it true: and if
he believe it true, he must believe it contains all necessary directions unto
eternal happiness, because it affirms it self to do so. Nay he might tell
him, that so far is the whole book, from wanting any necessary direction to
his eternal Salvation, that one only Author, that has writ but two little
books of it, S. Luke by name in the beginning of his Gospel, and in the
beginning of his Story, shows plainly that he alone has written at least so
much as is necessary. And what they wrote, they wrote by Gods direction, for
the direction of the world, not only for the Learned, but for all that would
do their true endeavor to know the will of God, and to do it; therefore you
cannot but conceive, that writing to all and for all, they wrote so as that in
things necessary they might be understood by all. Besides that, here he should
find, that God himself has engaged himself by promise, that if he would love
him, and keep his Commandments, and pray earnestly for his spirit, and be
willing to be directed by it, he should undoubtedly receive it, even the Spirit
of Truth which shall lead him into all truth; that is certainly, into all
necessary Truths, and suffer him to fall into no pernicious error. The sum
of his whole direction to him briefly would be this, Believe the Scripture to
be the word of God, use your true endeavor to find the true sense of it, and
to live according to it, and then you may rest securely that you are in the
true way to eternal happiness. This is the substance of that Answer which the
Doctor would make to any man in this case; and this is a way so plain, that
fools, unless they will, cannot err from it. Because not knowing absolutely
all truth, nay not all profitable truth, and not being free from error; but
endeavoring to know the truth and obey it, and endeavoring to be free from
error, is by this way made the only condition of salvation. As for your
supposition, That he would advise such a man to rely upon the Catholic Church
for the finding out the doctrine of Christ, he utterly disclaimes it, and
truly very justly: There being no certain way to know that any company is a
true Church, but only by their professing the true doctrine of Christ. And
therefore as it is impossible I should know such a company of Philosophers are
Peripateticks, or Stoics, unless I first know what was the doctrine of the
Peripateticks, and Stoics; so is it impossible that I should certainly know
any company to be the Church of Christ, before I know what is the doctrine of
Christ, the Profession whereof constitutes the visible Church, the Belief and
Obedience the invisible. And therefore whereas you would have him be directed
by the Catholic Church to the doctrine of Christ; the contrary rather is most
certain and necessary, that by the foreknowledge of the doctrine of Christ, he
must be directed to a certain assurance, which is, if he mean not to choose
at a venture, but desire to have certain direction to it. This supposition
therefore, being the hinge whereon your whole discourse turns, is the Minerva
of your own Brain; and therefore were it but for this, have we not great
reason to accuse you of strange immodesty, in saying as you do, That The whole
discourse and inferences which here you have made, are either D. Potters own
direct assertions, or evident consequences clearly deduced from them?
Especially seeing your proceeding in it is so consonant to this ill beginning,
that it is in a manner wholly made up, not of D. Potters assertions, but your
own fictions obtruded on him.

54 Ad 19. To the next Question, Cannot General Councels err? You pretend he
answers 19. They may err damnably. Let the Reader see the place, and he shall
find, damnably is your addition. To the third demand, Must I consult (about my
difficulties) with every particular person of the Catholic Church? You answer
for him, (that which is most false) that it seems so by his words; The whole
militant Church, that is, all the members of it cannot possibly err either in
the whole faith, or any necessary Article of it. Which is very certain, for
should it do so, it should be the Church no longer. But what sense is there
that you should collect out of these words, that every member of the militant
Church must be consulted with? By like reason, if he had said that all men in
the world cannot err; If he had said that God in his own person, or his
Angels, could not err in these matters, you might have gathered from hence,
that he laid a necessity upon men in doubt, to consult with Angels, or with God
in his own person, or with all men in the world. Is it not evident to all sober
men, that to make any man or men fit to be consulted with, besides the
understanding of the matter, it is absolutely requisite that they may be
spoken with? And is it not apparently impossible, that any man should speak
with all the members of the Militant Church?. Or if he had spoken with them
all, know that he had done so? Nay does not D. Potter say as much in plain
terms? Nay more, do not you take notice that he does so in the very next
words before these, where you say, he affirms that the Catholic Church
cannot be told of private injuries: unless you will persuade us there is a
difference between the Catholic Church, and the whole Militant Church. For
whereas you make him deny this of the Catholic Church united, and affirm it
of the Militant Church dispersed into particulars; The truth is, he speaks
neither of united nor dispersed, but affirms simply (as appears to your shame
by your own quotations) that the Catholic Church cannot be told of private
injuries: and then, that the whole Militant Church cannot err. But then
besides, that the united Church cannot be consulted, and the dispersed may,
what a wild imagination is it? and what a strange injustice was it in you to
father it upon him? I beseech you Sir, to consider seriously how far blind
zeal to your superstition has transported you beyond all bounds of honesty and
discretion, and made you careless of speaking either truth or sense, so you
speak against D. Potter!

55 Again, you make him say, The Prelates of Gods Church meeting in a lawful
Council may err damnably: and from this collect, It remains then for your
necessary instruction you must repair to every particular member of the
Universal Church, spread over the face of the earth. And this is also
Pergulapictoris, very nihil, omnia ficta. The Antecedent false, (not for the
matter of it, but) that D. Potter says it; And the consequence as far from it,
as Gades from Gange; and as coherent as a rope of sand. A general Council may
err; therefore you must travel all the world over, and consult with every
particular Christian* As if there were nothing else to be consulted with: nay,
as if according to the doctrine of Protestants, (for so you must say,) there
were nothing to be consulted with, but only a General Council, or all the
world! Have you never heard that Protestants say, That men for their direction
must consult with Scripture? Nay, does not D. Potter say it often in this very
Book which you are confuting? Nay more, in this very page out of which you take
this piece of your Cento, A General Council may err damnably? are there not
these plain words, In searches of Truth, the Scripture? With what conscience
then or modesty can you impose upon him this unreasonable consequence, and yet
pretend that your whole discourse, is either his own direct assertion, or
evident consequences, clearly deduced from them? You add, that yet he teaches
(as if he contradicted himself) that the promises of God made to the Church
for his assistance, are not intended to particular persons, but only to the
Catholic Church: which sure agrees very well with any thing said by D.
Potter. If it be repugnant to what you said for him falsely, what is that to
him?

56 Neither yet is this to drive any man to desperation: unless it be such a
one, as has such a strong affection to this word, Church, that he will not go
to heaven, unless he has a Church to lead him thither. For what though a
Council may err, and the whole Church cannot be consulted with, yet this is
not to send you on the Fools Pilgrimage for faith, and bid you go and
confer with every Christian soul, man and woman, by Sea and by Land, close
prisoner, or at liberty, as you dilate the matter: But to tell you very
briefly, that Universal Tradition directs you to the word of God, and the word
of God directs you to Heaven. And therefore here is no cause of desperatio^, no
cause for you to be so vain, and tragical, as here you would seeeme. Yet upon
supposall (you say) of this miraculous pilgrimage for faith, before I have the
faith of Miracles, how shall I proceed at our meeting? Or how shall I know the
man on whom I may securely rely? And hereunto, you frame this answer for the
Doctor; Procure to know whether he believe all Fundamental points of faith:
Whereas in all the Doctors book, there is no such answer to any such question,
or any like it. Neither do you as your custom is, note any page where it may
be found; which makes me suspect, that sure you have some private license to
use Heretics (as you call them) at your pleasure, and make them answer any
thing to anything.

57 Wherein I am yet more confirmed by the answer you put in his mouth to your
next demand, How shall I know whether he hold all Fundamental points or no?
For whereas hereunto D. Potter having given one Answer fully satisfactory to
it, which is, If he truly believe the undoubted books of Canonical Script^re,
he cannot but believe all Fundamentalls; and another which is but somethings
toward a full satisfaction of it, That the Creed contains all the
fundamentalls of simple Belief: you take no notice of the former, and pervert
the latter, and make him say, The Creed contains all fundamentalls of faith.
Whereas you know, and within six or seven lines after this confess, that he
never pretended it to contain all simply, but all of one sort, all necessary
points of simple belief. Which assertion because he modestly delivers as very
probable (being willing to conclude rather less then more then his reasons
require,) hereupon you take occasion to ask: Shall I hazard my soul on
probabilities, or even wagers! As if whatsoever is but probable, though in the
highest degree of probability, were as likely to be false as true! Or because
it is but Morally, not Mathematically certain that there was such a Woman as Q.
Elizabeth, such a man as H. the 8. that is in the highest degree probable,
therefore it were an even wager there were none such! By this reason, seeing
the truth of your whole Religion depends finally upon Prudentiall motives,
which you do but pretend to be very credible, it will be an even wager that
your Religion is false. And by the same reason, or rather infinitely greater,
seeing it is impossible for any man (according to the grounds of your Religion)
to know himself, much less another to be a true Pope, or a true Priest; nay
to have a Moral certainty of it, because these things are obnoxious to
innumerable secret and undiscernable nullities, it will be an even wager, nay
(if we proportion things indifferently,) a hundred to one, that every
Consecration and Absolution of yours is void, and that whenever you adore the
Host, you and your Assistants commit Idolatry: That there is a nullity in any
Decree that a Pope shall make, or any Decree of a Council which he shall
confirm: Particularly it will be at least an even wager, that all the Decrees
of the Council of Trent are void, because it is at most but very probable that
the Pope which confirmed them was true Pope. If you mistake these inferences,
then confess you have injured D. Potter in this also, that you have confounded
and made all one, Probabilities, and even wagers. Whereas every ordinary
Gamester can inform you, that though it be a thousand to one that such a thing
will happen, yet it is not sure, but very probable.

58 To make the measure of your injustice yet fuller, you demand, If the Creed
contains only points of simple belief, how shall you know what points of
belief are necessary which direct our practice? D. Potter would have answered
you in our Saviors words, search the Scriptures. But you have a great mind it
seems to be a despairing, and therefore having proposed your Question, will
not suffer him to give you Answer, but shut your ears and tell him, still he
chalkes out new paths for desperation.

59 In the rest of your interlude, I cannot but commend one thing in you, that
you keep a decorum, and observe very well the Rule given you by the great
Master of your Art, -- Servetur adimum
Qualis ab incepto processerat and sibi constet:
One vein of scurrility and dishonesty runs clean through it, from the beginning
to the end. Your next demand then is, Are all the Articles of the Creed for
their nature and matter Fundamental? and the Answer, I cannot say so. Which
Answer (though it be true) D. Potter no where gives it, neither has he
occasion, but you make it for him, to bring in another question; and that is,
How then shall I know, which in particular be, and which be not Fundamental?
D. Potter would have answered, It is a vain question: believe all, and you
shall be sure to believe all that is Fundamental.

60 But what says now his prevaricating Proxy? What does he make him say? This
which follows: Read my answer to a late Popish Pamphlet, entitled Charity
Mistaken: There you shall find, that Fundamental doctrines, are such
Catholic verities, as principally and essentially pertain to the faith, such
as properly constitute a Church, and are necessary in ordinary course, to be
distinctly believed by every Christian that will be saved. They are those Grand
and Capital Doctrines which make up our Faith, that is, the common faith,
which is alike precious in all; being one and the same, in the highest Apostle,
and the meanest believer, which the Apostle elsewhere calls the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, and the form of sound words.

61 But in earnest, Good Sir, does the Doctor in these places by you quoted,
make to this question this same sottish answer? Or do you think that against
an Heretic nothing is unlawful? Certainly if he does answer thus, I will
make bold to say he is a very fool. But if he does not, (as indeed he does
not) then: -- But I forbear you, and beseech the Reader to consult the places
of D. Potters book; and there he shall find, that in the former half of these
(as you call them) varied words and phrases, he declared only what he meant by
the word Fundamental, which was needful to prevent mistakes, and cavilling
about the meaning of the word, which is metaphorical, and therefore ambiguous;
and that the latter half of them, are several places of Scripture employed by
D. Potter, to show that his distinction of Fundamental and not Fundamental
has express ground in it. Nay of these two places, very pertinent unto two
very good purposes, you have exceeding fairly patcht together a most
ridiculous answer, to a question that D. Potter never dreamed of. But the
words, you will say, are in D. Potters Book, though in diverse places, and to
other purposes. Very true: And so the words of Ausonius his obscene Fescennine,
are taken out of Virgil, yet Virgil surely was not the Author of this Poem.
Besides, in D. Potters book, there are these words, Dread Sovereign, amongst
the many excellent virtues which have made your Majesty's person so dear unto
God, etc. And why now may you not say as well, that in these he made Answer to
your former question, what points of the Creed were, and what were not
Fundamentalls?

62 But unless this question may be answered, his doctrine you say serves
only, either to make men despair, or else to have recourse to these whom we
call Papists. It seems a little thing will make you despair, if you be so
sullen as to do so, because men will not trouble themselves to satisfy your
curious questions. And I pray be not offended with me for so esteeming it,
because as before I told you, if you will believe all the points of the Creed,
you cannot choose but believe all the points of it that are fundamental,
though you be ignorant which are so, and which are not so. Now I believe your
desire to know which are Fundamentalls, proceeds only from a desire to be
assured that you do believe them; which seeing you may be assured of, without
knowing which they be, what can it be but curiosity to desire to know it?
Neither may you think to mend your self herein one whit by having recourse to
them whom we call Papists; for they are as far to seek as we in this point,
which of the Articles of the Creed are, for their nature and matter,
fundamental, and which are not. Particularly, you will scarce meet with any
amongst their Doctors, so adventurous, as to tell you for a certain, whether or
no the conception of Christ by the Holy Ghost, his being born of a Virgin, his
Burial, his descent into Hell, and the Communion of Saints, be points of their
own nature and matter fundamental. Such I mean, as without the distinct and
explicit knowledge of them no man can be saved.

63 But you will say, at least they give this certain rule, that all points
defined by Christ's visible Church, belong to the foundation of faith, in such
sense, as to deny any such, cannot stand with Salvation. So also Protestants
give you this more certain rule, That whosoever believes heartily those books
of Scripture, which all the Christian Churches in the world acknowledge to be
Canonical, and submits himself indeed to this, as to the rule of his belief,
must of necessity believe all things fundamental, and if he live according to
his faith, cannot fail of Salvation. But besides, what certainty have you, that
that rule of Papists is so certain? By the visible Church it is plain, they
mean only their own: and why their own only should be the Visible Church, I do
not understand: and as little, why all points defined by this Church should
belong to the foundation of faith. These things you had need see well and
substantially proved, before you rely upon them, otherwise you expose your
self to danger of embracing damnable errors instead of Fundamental truth's.
But you will say D. Potter himself acknowledges, that we do not err in
Fundamentalls. If he did so, yet me thinks you have no reason to rest upon his
acknowledgement with any security, whom you condemn of error in many other
matters. Perhaps excess of Charity to your persons, may make him censure your
errors more favorably then he should do. But the truth is, and so I have
often told you, though the Doctor hope that your errors are not so unpardonably
destructive, but that some men, who ignorantly hold them may be saved, yet in
themselves, he professes and proclaims them damnable, and such as he fears,
will be certainly destructive to such as you are, that is, to all those, who
have eyes to see and will not see them.

64 Ad. 20. 21. 22. 23. In the Remainder of this Chapter, you promise to answer
D. Potters Arguments, against that which you said before. But presently
forgetting your self, in stead of answering his Arguments, you fall a
confuting his Answers to your own. The arguments objected by you which here you
vindicate, were two. 1. The Scripture is not so much as mentioned in the Creed,
therefore the Creed contains not all things necessary to be believed. 2.
Baptism is not contained in the Creed, therefore not all things necessary. To
both which Arguments my Answer shortly is this, that they prove something, but
it is that which no man here denies. For D. Potter (as you have also confessed)
never said, not undertook to show, that the Apostles intended to comprize in
the Creed, all points absolutely, which we are bound to believe, or after
sufficient proposal, not to disbelieve; which yet here and every where you are
obtruding upon him: But only that they purposed to comprize in it, all such
doctrines purely speculative, all such matters of simple belief, as are in
ordinary course, necessary to be distinctly and explicitly believed by all men.
Neither of these objections do any way infringe or impeach the truth of this
Assertion. Not the first, because according to your own doctrine, all men are
not bound to know explicitly what books of Scripture are Canonical. Nor the
second, because Baptism is not a matter of Faith, but practice: not so much to
be believed, as to be given, and received. And against these Answers, whether
you have brought any considerable new matter, let the indifferent Reader judge.
As for the other things, which D. Potter rather glanceth at, then buil^s upon,
in answering these objections, as the Creed's being collected out of Scripture,
and supposing the Authority of it, which Gregory of Valentia in the place above
cited, seems to me to confess, to have been the Judgment of the Ancient
Fathers: and the Nicene Creed's intimating the authority of Canonical
Scripture, and making mention of Baptism: These things were said ex abundanti;
and therefore I conceive it superfluous to examine your exceptions against
them. Prove that D. Potter did affirm that the Creed contains all things
necessary to be believed of all sorts, and then these objections will be
pertinent, and deserve an answer. Or produce some point of simple belief,
necessary to be explicitly believed, which is not contained either in terms,
or by consequence in the Creed, and then I will either answer your Reasons, or
confess I cannot. But all this while you do but trifle, and are so far from
hitting the mark, that you rove quite beside the But.

65 Ad. 23. 24. 25. D. Potter ^emands, How it can be necessary for any
Christian to have more in his Creed then the Apostles had, and the Church of
their times? You Answer That he trifles, not distinguishing between the
Apostles belief, and that abridgement of some Articles of faith, which we call
the Apostles Creed. I reply, that it is you which trifle, affectedly
confounding (what D. Potter has plainly distinguished) the Apostles belief of
the whole Religion of Christ, as it comprehends both what we are to do, and
what we are to believe, with their belief of that part of it, which contains
not duties of obedience, but only the necessary Articles of si^ple ^aith. Now
though the Apostles Belief be, in the former sense, a larger thing then that
which we call the Apostles Creed: yet in the latter sense of the word, the
Creed (I say) is a full comprehension of their belief, which you your self
have formerly confessed, though somewhat fearfully, and inconstantly: and here
again unwillingnesse to speak the truth, makes you speak that which is hardly
sense, and call it an abridgement of some Articles of Faith. For I demand,
these some Articles which you speak of, which are they? Those that are out of
the Creed, or those that are in it? Those that are in it, it comprehends at
large, and therefore it is not an abridgement of them: Those that are out of
it, it comprehends not at all, and therefore it is not an abridgement of them.
If you would call it now an abridgement of the Faith, this would be sense, and
signify thus much, That all the necessary Articles of the Christian faith are
comprised in it. For this is the proper duty of abridgements, to leave out
nothing necessary, and to take in nothing unnecessary.

66 Moreover, in answer to this demand you tell us, that the Doctor beggs the
Question, supposing that the Apostles believed no more then is contained in
their Creed. I Answer, He supposes no such matter; but only that they knew no
more necessary Articles of simple belief, then what are contained in their
Creed. So that here you abuse D. Potter and your Reader, by taking
sophistically without limitation, that which is delivered with limitation.

67 But this demand of D. Potters, was equivalent to a Negation, and intended
for one: How can it be necessary for any Christian, to have more in his Creed,
then the Apostles had? All one with this, It cannot be necessary etc. And this
negation of his, he inforces with many arguments, which he proposes by way of
interrogation, thus. May the Church of after Ages make the narrow way to
heaven, narrower then our Savior left it? Shall it be a fault to straiten and
encumber the Kings high way with public nuisances; and is it lawful by
adding new Articles to the faith, to retrench any thing from the Latitude of
the King of Heavens high way to eternal happiness? The yoke of Christ, which
he said was easy, may it be justly made heavier by the Governors of the Church
in after Ages? The Apostles profess they revealed to the Church the whole
Counsel of God, keeping back nothing needful for our Salvation. What tyranny
then to impose any new unnecessary matters on the faith of Christians,
especially (as the late Popes have done) under the high commanding form, Qui
non crediderit, damnabitur? If this may be done, why then did our Savlour
reprehend the Pharisees so sharply, for binding heavy burdens, and laying them
on men's shoulders? And why did he teach them, that in vain they worshipped God,
teaching for doctrines men's Traditions? And why did the Apostles call it
tempting of God, to lay those things upon the necks of Christians, that were
not necessary?

68 All which interrogations seem to me to contain so many plain and
convincing Arguments of the premised Assertion; to all which (one excepted,)
according to the advice of the best Masters of Rhetorique in such Cases, you
have answered very discreetly; by saying O. But when you write again, I pray
take notice of them: and if you can devise no fair, and satisfying answer to
them, then be so ingenuous as to grant the Conclusion, That no more can be
necessary for Christians to believe now, then was in the Apostles time. A
conclusion of great importance, for the decision of many Controversies, and the
disburdening of the faith of Christ from many encumbrances.

69 As for that one, which you thought you could fasten upon, grounded on the
20. Act. 27. let me tell you plainly, that by your Answering this, you have
showed plainly that it was wisely done of you to decline the rest. You tell D.
Potter, That needful for salvation is his gloss, which perhaps you intended
for a piece of an Answer. But good Sir, consult the place, and you shall find,
that there S. Paul himself says that he kept back (...), not any thing that
was profitable: and I hope you will make no difficulty to grant, that
whatsoever is needful for salvation, is very profitable.

70 But then you say, This is no proof unless he beg the Question, and
suppose, that whatsoever the Apostles revealed to the Church is contained in
the Creed. I Answer, it is not D. Potter that beggs the Question, but you that
mistake it: which is not here in this particular place, Whether all points of
simple Belief necessary for the salvation of the Primitive Christians, were
contained in the Apostles Symbol? (for that and the proofs, of it follow
after, in the next,. p. 223. of D. Potters Book:) but, whether any thing can
be necessary for Christians to believe now, which was not so from the
beginning? D. Potter maintains the negative; and to make good his opinion,
thus he argues, S. Paul declared to the Ephesians the whole Counsel of God
touching their Salvation; Therefore that which S. Paul did not declare, can be
no part of the Counsel of God, and therefore not necessary. And again: S.
Paul kept back nothing from the Ephesians that was profitable; Therefore he
taught them all things necessary to salvation. Consider this I pray a little
better, and then I hope you will acknowledge, that here was no Petitio
principij, in D. Potter, but rather Ignoratio Elenchi, in you.

71 Neither is it material, that these words were particularly directed by S.
Paul, to the Pastors of the Church: For (to say nothing that the point here
issuable, is not, Whom he taught, whether Priests or Laymen? But how much he
taught, and whether all things necessary?) it appears plainly out of the Text,
and I wonder you should read it so negligently as not to observe it, that
though he speaks now to the Pastors, yet he speaks of what he taught not only
them, but also the Laity as well as them. I have kept back nothing (says S.
Paul) that was profitable, but have showed, and have taught you publicly, and
from house to house; Testifying (I pray observe) both to the Jews, and also to
the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
And a little after, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone Preaching the
Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. Wherefore I take you to record this
day, that I am innocent from the blood of all men; for I have kept nothing
back, but have showed you all the Counsel of God. And again, Remember that by
the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day with
tears. Certainly though he did all these things to the Pastors among the
rest, nay above the rest, yet without controversy, they whom he taught
publicly, and from house to house: The Jews and Greeks to whom he testified,
(1.) preached Faith and Repentance* Those all, amongst whom he went preaching
the kingdom of Cod: Those, Every one, whom for three years together he
warned, were not Bishops and Pastors only.

72 Neither is this to say, that the Apostles taught Christians nothing but
their Creed, nothing of the Sacraments, Comandements, etc. for that is not here
the point to be proved: but only, that they taught them all things necessary,
so that nothing can be necessary which they did not teach them. But how much of
this they put into their Creed, whether all the necessary points of simple
belief, as we pretend, or only as you say, I know not what, is another
Question, and which comes now to be farther examined. D. Potter, in
confirmation of it, besides the authorities which you formerly shifted of, with
so egregious tergiversation, urges five several Arguments.

73 The sense of the first is this, If all the necessary points of simple
belief be not comprised in the Creed, it can no way deserve the name of the
Apostles Creed, as not being their Creed in any sense, but only a part of it.
To this you answer 2 5. Upon the same affected ambignity, etc. Answ. It is very
true that their whole faith was of a larger extent, but that was not the
Question: But whether all the points of simple belief which they taught as
necessary to be explicitly believed, be not contained in it? And if thus much
at least of Christian Religion be not comprised in it, I again desire you to
inform me how it could be called the Apostles Creed!

74 Four other Reasons D. Potter urges to the same purpose, grounded upon the
practice of the Ancient Church; The last whereof you answer in the second part
of your Book. But to the rest, drawn from the ancient Churches appointing her
Infants to be instructed (for matters of simple belief,) only in the Creed:
From her admitting Catechumens unto Baptism: and of Strangers to her Communion
upon their only profession of the Creed, you have not, for ought I can
perceive, thought fit to make any kind of answer.

75 The difficulties of the 27. and last of this Chapter, have been satisfied.
So that there remains unexamined only the 26. Section, wherein you exceed
your self in sophistry: Especially in that trick of Cavillers, which is to
answer objections by other objections; an excellent way to make controversies
endless! D. Potter desires to be resolved, Why amongst many things of equal
necessity to be believed, the Apostles should distinctly set down some in the
Creed, and be altogether silent of others? In stead of resolving him in this
difficulty, you put another to him, and that is, Why are some points not
Fundamental expressed in it, rather then other of the same quality? Which
demand is so far from satisfying the former doubt, that it makes it more
intricate. For upon this ground it may be demanded, How was it possible that
the Apostles should leave out any Articles simply necessary, and put in others
not necessary, especially if their intention were (as you say it was) to
deliver in it such Articles as were fittest for those times? Unless (which
were wondrous strange) unnecessary Articles were fitter for those times, then
necessary. But now to your Question, the Answer is obvious: These unnecessary
things might be put in, because they were circumstances of the necessary,
Pontius Pilate of Christ's Passion, The third day of the Resurrection; neither
does the adding of the^ make the Creed ever a whit the less portable, the
less fit to be understood, and remembered. And for the contrary reasons, other
unnecessary things might be left out. Besides, who sees not that the addition
of some unnecessary circumstances is a thing that can hardly be avoided without
affectation! And therefore not so great a fault, nor deserving such a censure,
as the omission of any thing essential to the work undertaken, and necessary
to the end proposed in it.

76 You demand again (as it is no hard matter to multiply demands,) why our
Saviors descent to Hell, and Burial was expressed, and not his circumcision,
his manifestation to the three Kings, and working of Miracles? I answer: His
Resurrection, Ascension, and sitting at the right hand of God, are very great
Miracles, and they are expressed. Besides, S. John. assures us, That the
Miracles which Christ did, were done and written not for themselves that they
might be believed, but for a farther end, that we might believe that Jesus was
the Christ, and believing have eternal life. He therefore that belieues this
may be saved, though he have no explicit and distinct faith of any Miracle
that our Savior did. His Circumcision and Manifestation to the Wise men (for I
know not upon what grounds you call them Kings) are neither things simply
necessary to be known, nor have any near relation to those that are so. As for
his Descent into Hell, it may (for ought you know) be put in as a thing
necessary of it self to be known. If you ask why more then his Circumcision, I
refer you to the Apostles for an answer, who put that in, and left this out of
their Creed: and yet sure, were not so forgetful after the receiving of the
holy Ghost, as to leave out any prime and principal foundation of the faith,
which are the very words of your own Gordonius Huntlaeus, Cont. 2. c. 10. number.
10. Likewise his Burial was put in perhaps as necessary of it self to be
known. But though it were not, yet has it manifestly so near relation to these
that are necessary, (his Passion and Resurrection, being the Consequent of the
one, and the Antecedent of the other,) that it is no marvel if for their sakes
it was put in. For though I verily believe that there is no necessary point of
this nature, but what is in the Creed, yet I do not affirm, because I cannot
prove it, that there is nothing in the Creed but what is necessary. You demand
thirdly, Why did they not express Scriptures, Sacraments, and all Fundamental
points of faith tending to practice, as well as those which rest in Belief? I
answer; Because their purpose was to comprize in it only those necessary points
which rest in belief: which appears, because of practical points there is
not in it so much as one.

77 D. Potter subjoynes to what is said above, That as well, nay better they
might have given no Article but that of the Church, and sent us to the Church
for all the rest: For in setting down others besides that, and not all, they
make us believe we have all, when we have not all. This consequence you deny:
and neither give reason against it, nor satisfy his reason for it, which yet
in my judgment is good and concluding. The Proposition to be proved is this,
That if your Doctrine were trve, this short Creed, I believe the Roman Church
to be infallible, would have been better, that is, more effectual to keep the
believers of it from Heresy, and in the true faith, then this Creed which now
we have. A proposition so evident, that I cannot see how either you, or any of
your Religion, or indeed any sensible man can from his heart deny it. Yet
because you make show of doing so, or else, which I rather hope, do not
rightly apprehend the force of the Reason, I will endeavor briefly to add
some light and strength to it, by comparing the effects of these several
supposed Creeds.

78 The former Creed therefore would certainly produce these effects in the
believers of it: An impossibility of being in any formal Heresy: A necessity
of being prepared in mind to come out of all Errourin faith, or material
Heresy; which certainly you will not deny, or if you do, you pull down the
only pillar of your Church and Religion, and deny that which is in effect the
only thing you labor to prove through your whole Book.

79 The latter Creed which now we have, is so un-effectuall for these good
purposes, that you your self tell us of innumerable, gross, damnable Heresies,
that have been, are, and may be, whose contrary Truths are neither explicitly,
nor by consequence comprehended in this Creed: So that no man by the belief of
this Creed without the former, can be possibly guarded from falling into them,
and continuing obstinate in them. Nay, so far is this Creed from guarding them
from these mischiefs, that it is more likely to ensnare the^ into them, by
seeming and yet not being a full comprehension of all necessary points of
faith: which is apt (as experience shows,) to mis-guide men into this
pernicious error, That believing the Creed, they believe all necessary points
of faith, whereas indeed they do not so. Now upon these grounds I thus
conclude: That Creed which has great commodities and no danger, would
certainly be better then that which has great danger, and wants many of these
great commodities; But the former short Creed proposed by me, I believe the
Roman Church to be infallible, (if your doctrine be true,) is of the former
condition, and the latter, that is, the Apostles Creed, is of the latter,
Therefore the former (if your doctrine be true) would without controversy be
better then the latter.

80 But (say you) by this kind of arguing, one might infer quite contrary. If
the Apostles Creed contain all points necessary to Salvation, what need have
we of any Church to teach us? And consequently what need of the Article of the
Church? To which I answer: that having compared your inference and D. Potter
together, I cannot discover any shadow of resemblance between them, nor any
show of Reason, why the perfection of the Apostles Creed, should exclude a
necessity of some body to deliver it. Much less why the whole Creed's
containing all things necessary should make the belief of a part of it
unnecessary. As well (for ought I understand) you might avouch this inference
to be as good as D. Potters: The Apostles Creed contains all things necessary,
therefore there is no need to believe in God. Neither does it follow so well as
D. Potters argument follows, That if the Apostles Creed contains all things
necessary, that all other Creeds and Catechismes, wherein are added diverse
other Particulars, are superfluous. For these other Particulars may be the
duties of obedience, they may be profitable points of Doctrine, they may be
good expositions of the Apostles Creed, and so not superfluous, and yet for all
this the Creed may still contain all points of belief that are simply
necessary. These therefore are poor consequences, but no more like D. Potters
then an apple is like an oister.

81 But this consequence after you have sufficiently slighted and disgraced it,
at length you promise us news, and pretend to grant it. But what is that which
you mean to grant? That the Apostles did put no Article in their Creed but only
that of the Church? Or that, if they had done so, they had done better then now
they have done? This is D. Potters inference out of your Doctrine; and truly if
you should grant this, this were news indeed? Yes, say you I will grant it,
but only thus far, that Christ has referred us only to his Church. Yea, but
this is clean another thing, and no news at all, that you should grant that,
which you would fain have granted to you. So that your dealing with us is just
as if a man should profer me a curtesy, and pretend that he would oblige
himself by a note under his hand, to give me twenty pound, and in stead of it
write, that I owe him forty, and desire me to subscribe to it and be thankful.
Of such favors as these it is very safe to be liberal.

82 You tell us afterward (but how it comes in I know not) that it were a
childish argument, The Creed contains not all things necessary; Ergo, It is
not Profitable! Or, the Church alone is sufficient to teach us by some
convenient means: Ergo, She must teach us without means. These indeed are
childish arguments, but for ought I see, you alone are the father of them: for
in D. Potters book, I can neither meet with them, nor any like them. He indeed
tells you, that if (by an impossible supposition) your Doctrine were true,
another and a far shorter Creed would have been more expedient: even this
alone, I believe the Roman Church to be infallible. But why you should
conclude, he makes this Creed unprofitable, because he says another that might
be conceived upon this false supposition, would be more profitable: or, that he
lays a necessity upon the Church, of teaching without means: or, of not
teaching this very Creed which now is taught; these things are so subtle that
I cannot apprehend them. To my understanding, by those words, And sent us to
the Church for all the rest, he does rather manifestly imply, that the rest
might be very well, not only profitable but necessary, and that the Church was
to teach this by Creeds, or Catechismes, or Counsels, or any other means
which she should make choice of, for being Infallible she could not choose
amiss.

83 Whereas therefore you say, If the Apostles had expressed no Article but that
of the Catholic Church, she must have taught us the other Articles in
particular by Creeds, or other means: This is very true, but no way repugnant
to the truth of this which follows, that the Apostles (if your doctrine be
true) had done better service to the Church; though they had never made this
Creed of theirs which now we have, if instead thereof, they had commanded in
plain terms that for men's perpetual direction in the faith, this short Creed
should be taught all men, I believe the Roman Church shall be for ever
infallible. Yet you must not so mistake me, as if I meant, that they had done
better not to have taught the Church the substance of Christian Religion; For
then the Church not having learnt it of them, could not have taught it us. This
therefore I do not say: but supposing they had written these Scriptures as
they have written, wherein all the Articles of their Creed are plainly
delivered, and preached that Doctrine which they did preach, and done all
otherthings as they have done, besides the composing their Symbole^ I say, if
your doctrine were true, they had done a work infinitely more beneficial to
the Church of Christ, if they had never composed their Symbol, which is but an
imperfect comprehension of the necessary points of simple belief, and no
distinctiue mark (as a Symbol should be) between those that are good
Christians, and those that are not so; But instead thereof, had delivered this
one Proposition, which would have been certainly effectual for all the
aforesaid good intents and purposes, The Roman Church shall be forever
infallible in all things, which she proposes as matters of faith.

84 Whereas you say, If we will believe we have all in the Creed when we have
not all, it is not the Apostles fault but our own: I tell you plainly, if it be
a fault, I know not whose it should be but theirs. For sure it can be no fault
in me to follow such Guides whether ^oever they lead me; Now I say, they have
led me into this persuasion, because they have given me great reason to believe
it, and none to the contrary. The reason they have given me to believe it, is,
because it is apparent and confessed, they did propose to themselves in composing
it, some good end or ends: As that Christians might have a form, by which (for
matter of faith) they might profess themselves Catholics, So Putean out of
Th. Aquinas: That the faithful might know, what the Christian people is to
believe explicitly, So Vincent Filiucius: That being separated into diverse
parts of the world, they might preach the same thing: And that* that might
serve as a mark to distinguish true Christians from Infidels, So Cardinal
Richlieu. Now for all these and for any other good intent, I say, it will be
plainly uneffectuall, unless it contain at least all points of simple belief,
which are in ordinary course, necessary to be explicitly known by all men. So
that if it be fault in me to believe this, it must be my fault to believe the
Apostles, wise and good men: which I cannot do if I believe not this. And
therefore what Richardus de sancto Victore says of God himself, I make no
scruple at all to apply to the Apostles, and to say, Si error est quod credo, a
vobis deceptus sum: If it be an error which I believe, it is you, and my
reverend esteem of you and your actions that has led me into it. For as for
your suspicion, That we are led into this persuasion, out of a hope that we may
the better maintain by it some opinions of our own, It is plainly uncharitable.
I know no opinion I have, which I would not as willingly forsake as keep, if I
could see sufficient reason to enduce me to believe, that it is the will of God
I should forsake it. Neither do I know any opinion I hold against the Church
of Rome, but I have more evident grounds then this whereupon to build it. For
let but these Truths be granted: That the authority of the Scripture is
independent on your Church, and dependent only in respect of us upon universal
Tradition; That Scripture is the only Rule of faith: That all things necessary
to salvation are plainly delivered in Scripture: Let I say these most certain
and divine Truths be laid for foundations, and let our superstructions be
consequent and coherent to them; and I am confident Peace would be restored,
and Truth maintained against you, though the Apostles Creed were not in the
world.

CHAP. V.
That Luther, Calvin, their Associates, and all who began, or continue the
separation from the external Communion of the Roman Church, are guilty of the
proper, and formal sin of Schism.
THE Searcher of all Hearts, is witness with how unwilling minds, we
Catholics are drawn to fasten the denomination of Schismatiques, or
Heretics, on them, for whose souls, if they employed their best blood, they
judge that it could not be better spent! If we rejoice, that they are
contistated at such titles, our joy rises not from their trouble or grief,
but, as that of the Apostles did, from the fountain of Charity, because they
are cont^^stated to repentance; that so after unpartiall examination, they
finding themselves to be what we say, may by Gods holy grace, begin to dislike,
what themselves are. For our part, we must remember that our obligation is, to
keep within the mean, betwixt uncharitable bitterness, and pernicious
flattery, not yielding to worldly respects, nor offending Christian Modesty,
but uttering the substance of truth in so Charitable manner, that not so much
we, as Truth, and Charity may seem to speak, according to the wholesome advise
of S. Gregory Nazianzen in these divine words: We do not affect peace with
Orat. 32.
prejudice of the true doctrine, that so we may get a name of being gentle, and
mild, and yet we seek to conserve peace, fighting in a lawful manner, and
containing our selves within our compass, and the rule of Spirit. And of these
things my judgment is, and for my part I prescribe the same law to all that
deal with souls, and treat of true doctrine, that neither they exasperate
men's minds by harshnesse, nor make them haughty or insolent, by submission; but
that in the cause of faith they behave themselves prudently, and advisedly, and
do not in either of these things exceed the mean. With whom a^greeth S. Leo
saying: It behooves us in such causes to be Epist. 8*
most careful, that without noise of contentions, both Charity be conserved,
and Truth maintained.

2. For better Method, we will handle these points in order. First we will set
down the nature, and essence, or as I may call it, the Quality of Schism. In
the second place, the greatness and grievousnesse, or (so to term it) the
Quantity thereof. For the Nature, or Quality will tell us who may without
injury be judged Schismatiques: and by the greatness, or quantity, such as
find themselves guilty thereof, will remain acquainted with the true state of
their soul, and and whether they may conceive any hope of salvation or no. And
because Schism will be found to be a division from the Church, which could not
happen, unless there were always a visible Church; we will, Thirdly prove, or
rather take it as a point to be granted by all Christians, that in all ages
there has been such a Visible Congregation of Faithful People. Fourthly, we
will demonstrate, that Luther, Calvin, and the rest, did separate themselves
from the Communion of that always visible Church of Christ, and therefore were
guilty of Schism. And fifthly we will make it evident, that the visible true
Church of Christ, out of which Luther and his followers departed, was no other
but the Roman Church, and consequently that both they, and all others who
persist in the same division, are Schismatiques by reason of their separation
from the Church of Rome.

3 For the first point touching the Nature, 1. Point.
or Quality of Schism: As the natural perfection of man consists in his being
the Image of God his Creator, by the powers of his soul; so his supernatural
perfection is placed in fimilitude with God, The nature of Schism.
as his last End and Felicity; and by having the said spiritual faculties, his
Understanding and Will linked to him. His Understanding is united to God by
Faith; his Will, by Charity. The former relies upon his infallible Truth: The
latter carries us to his infinite Goodness. Faith has a deadly opposite,
Heresy. Contrary to the Union, or Unity of Charity, is Separation and
Division. Charity is twofold. As it respects God, his Opposite Vice is Hatred
against God: as it uniteth us to our Neighbor, his contrary is Separation or
division of affections and will, from our Neighbor. Our Neighbor may be
considered, either as one private person has a single relation to another, or
as all concur to make one Company or Congregation, which we call the Church;
and this is the most principal reference and Union of one man with another:
because the chiefest Unity is that of the Whole, to which the particular Unity
of Parts is subordinate. This Unity, or Oneness (if so I may call it) is
effected by Charity, uniting all the members of the Church in one Mystical
Body; contrary to which, is Schism, from the Greek word signifying Scissure,
or Division. Wherefore upon the whole matter, we find that Schism, as the
Angellicall Doctor S. Thomas defines it, is; A voluntary separation 2. 2. q.
39. art* in corp. and ad 3.
from the Unity of that Charity, whereby all the members of the Church are
united. From hence he deduceth, that Schism is a special and particular vice,
distinct from Heresy, because they are opposite to two different Virtues:
Heresy, to Faith: Schism, to Charity. To which purpose he fitly alleges S.
Hierome upon these words, ( Tit. 3.) A man that is an Heretic after the first
and second admonition avoid, saying: I conceive that there is this difference
betwixt Schism and Heresy, that Heresy involves some perverse assertion:
Schism for Episcopal dissension does separate men from the Church. The same
doctrine is delivered by S. Austine in these words: Heretics Lib. 1. de^id.
and Symb. cap. 10.
and Schismatiques call their Congregations, Churches: but Heretics corrupt
the Faith by believing of God false things: but Schismatiques by wicked
divisions break from fraternall Charity, although they believe what we
believe. Therefore the Heretic belongs not to the Church, because she loves
God: nor the Schismatique, because she loves her Neighbor. And in another
place he says. It is wont to be demanded Quest. Evangel. ex Mat. q. 11.
How Schismatiques be distinguished from Heretics: and this difference is
found, that not a diverse faith, but the divided Society of Communion does make
Schismatiques. It is then evident that Schism is different from Heresy.
Nevertheless (says S. Thomas Vbi supra.
as he who is deprived of faith must needs want Charity: so every Heretic is
a Schismatique, but not conversively every Schismatique is an Heretic; though
because want of Charity disposes and makes way to the destruction of faith
(according to those words of the Apostle, Which (a good conscience) some
casting off, have suffered shipwreck in their faith) Schism speedily
degenerates to Heresy, as S. Hierome after the rebearsed words teaches,
saying: Though Schism in the beginning may in some sort be understood
different from Heresy; yet there is no Schism which does not faigne some
heresy to it self, that so it may seem to have departed from the Church upon
good reason. Nevertheless when Schism proceeds originally from Heresy, Heresy
as being in that case the predominant quality in these two peccant humors,
gives the denomination of an Heretic; as on the other side we are wont,
especially in the beginning, or for a while, to call Schismatiques, those men
who first began with only Schism, though in process of time they fell into
some Heresy, and by that means are indeed both Schismatiques and Heretics.

4. The reason why both Heresy and Schism are repugnant to the being of a good
Catholic, is Because the Catholic, or Universal Church signifies One
Congregation, or Company of faithful people, and therefore implies not only
Faith, to make them Faithful believers, but also Communion, or Common Union,
to make them One in Charity, which excludes Separation, and Division: and
therefore in the Apostles Creed, Communion of Saints is immediately joined to
the Catholic Church.

5. From this definition of Schism may be inferred, that the guilt thereof is
contracted, not only by division from the Universal Church; but also, by a
Separation from a particular Church or Diocese which agrees with the
Universal. In this manner Meletius was a Schismatique, but not an Heretic,
because as we read in S. Epiphanius, Here Is. 68.
he was of the right Faith: for his faith was not altered at any time from the
holy Catholic Church etc. He made a Sect, but departed not from Faith. Yet
because he made to himself a particular Congregation against S. Peter
Archbishop of Alexandria his lawful superior, and by that means brought in a
division in that particular Church, he was a Schismatique. And it is well worth
the noting, that the Meletians building new Churches put this title upon them,
The Church of Martyrs: and upon the ancient Churches of those who succeeded
Peter, was inscribed, The Catholic Church. For so it is. A new Sect must have
a new name, which though it be never so gay and specious, as the Church of
Martyrs: the Reformed Church etc. yet the Novelty shows that it is not the
Catholic, nor a true Church. And that Schism may be committed by division
from a particular Church, we read in Optatus Milevitanus Lib. 1. cont. Parmen.
these remarkable words, (which do well declare who be schismatiques)
brought by him to prove that not c^cilianus but parmenianas was a Schismatique:
For Caecilianus went not out from Majorinus thy Grandfather (he means his
next predeces^our but one, in the Bishop^icke,) but Majorinus from Caecilianus:
neither did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or of Cyprian (who was
but a particular Bishop,) but Majorinus, in whose Chair thou sit which had
no beginning before Majorinus himself. Seeing it is manifestly known that
these things were so done, it evidently appears, that you are heirs both of
Traditors (that is, of those who delivered up the holy Bible to be burned) and
of Schismatiques. And it seems that this kind of Schism must principally be
admitted by Protestants, who acknowledge no one visible Head of the whole
Church, but hold that every particular Diocese, Church, or Country is
governed by it self independently of any one Person, or General Council, to
which all Christians have obligation to submit their judgments, and wills.

6. As for the grievousnesse or quantity of Schism (which was the second point
proposed) S. Thomas teaches, that amongst sins against our Neighbor, 2.
Point. The grievousnesse of Schism.
Schism Supra. art. 2. ad 3.
is the most grievous; because it is against the spiritual good of the
multitude, or Community. And therefore as in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, there
is as great difference between the crime of rebellion or sedition, and debates
among private men, as there is inequality betwixt one man, and a whole
kingdom; so in the Church, Schism is as much more grievous then sedition in a
Kingdom, as the spiritual good of souls surpasses the civil and political
weal. And S. Thomas adds further, and they loose the spiritual Power of
Jurisdiction; and if they go about to absolve from sins, or to
excommunicate, their actions are invalid; which he proves out of the Canon
Novatianus. Causa 7. quest. 1. which says: He that keeps neither the Unity
of spirit, nor the peace of agreement, and separates himself from the bond of
the Church, and the Colleage of Priests, can neither have the Power, nor
dignity of a Bishop. The Power also of Order (for example to consecrate the
Eucharist, to ordain Priests etc.) they cannot lawfully exercise.

7. In the judgment of the holy Fathers, Schism is a most grievous offense.
S. Chrysostom Hom. 11. in ep. ad Epk.
compares these Schismatic dividers of Christ's mystical body, to those who
sacrilegiously pietced his natural body, saying: Nothing does so much incense
God, as that the Church should be divided. Although we should do innumerable
good works, if we divide the full Ecclesiastical. Congregation, we shall be
punished no less then they who tore his (natural) body. For that was done to
the gain of the whole world, although not with that intention: but this has
no profit at all, but there arises from it most great harm. These things are
spoken, not only to those who bear office, but also to those who are governed
by them. Behold how neither a moral good life (which conceit deceives many)
nor authority of Magistrates, nor any necessity of Obeying Superiors can
excuse Schism from being a most heinous offense. Optatus Milevitanus Lib.
cent. Parmen.
calls Schism, Inge^s stagitium: a huge crime. And speaking to the Donatists,
says; that Schism is evil in the highest degree, even you are not able to
deny. No less patheticall is S. Augustine upon this subject. He reckons
Schismatiques amongst Pagans, Heretics, and Jews, saying: Religion is to be
sought, neither in the con^usion of Pagans, nor Lib. de vera Relig. cap. 6.
in the filth of Heretics, nor in the languishing of Schismatiques, nor in
the Age of the Jews; but amongst those alone who are called Christian
Catholics, or Orthodox, that is, lovers of Unity in the whole body, and
followers of truth. Nay he esteems them worse then Infidels and Idolaters,
saying: Those whom the Donatists Cont. Donatist. l. 1. cap. 8.
heal from the wound of Infidelity and Idolatry, they hurt more grievously
with the wound of Schism. Let there those men who are pleased untruely to call
us Idolaters, reflect upon themselves, and consider, that this holy Father
judges Schismatiques (as they are) to be worse then Idolaters, which they
absurdly call us. And this he proves by the example of Core, and Dathan,
Abiron and other rebellious Schismatiques of the old Testament, who were
convayed alive down into Hell, and punished more openly then Idolaters. No
doubt (says this holy Father) but Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 6.
that was committed most wickedly, which was punished most severaly. In another
place he yoaketh Schism with Heresy, saying upon the Eight Beatitude: Many De
sermon. Dom. in monte c. 5.
Heretics, under the name of Christians, deceiving men's souls, do suffer
many such things; but therefore they are excluded from this reward, because it
is not only said, Happy are they who suffer persecution, but there is added,
for Justice. But where there is not sound faith, there cannot be justice.
Neither can Schismatiques promise to themselves any part of this reward,
because likewise where there is no Charity, there cannot be justice. And in
another place, yet more effectually he says: Being out of Epist. 204.
the Church, and divided from the heap of Unity, and the bond of Charity, thou
should be punished with eternal death, though thou should he burned
alive for the name of Christ. And in another place, he has these words: If he
hear not the Church let him be to Cont. advers. Leg. and Prophet. l, 2. cap.
17.
thee, as an Heathen or Publican; which is more grievous then if he were
smitten with the sword, consumed with flames, or cast to wild beasts. And else
where: Out of the Catholic Church (says he) one De gest. cum Emerit.
may have Faith, Sacraments, Orders, and in sum, all things except Salvation.
With S. Augustine, his Countreyman and second self in sympathy of spirit, S.
Fulgentius agrees, saying: Believe this De side ad Pet.
steadfastly without doubting, that every Heretic, or Schismatique, baptized
in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, if before the end of
his life, he be not reconciled to the Catholic Church, what Alms soever he
give, yea though he should shed his blood for the name of Christ, he cannot
obtain Salvation. Mark again how no moral honesty of life, no good deeds,
no Martyrdom, can without repentance avail any schismatique for salvation.
Let us also add that D. Potter says: Schism is no less Page 42.
damnable, then Heresy.

8. But o you Holy, Learned, Zealous Fathers, and Doctors of Gods Church; out
of these premises, of the grievousnesse of schism, and of the certain
damnation which it brings (if unrepented) what conclusion draw you for the
instruction of Christians? S. Augustine makes this wholesome inference. There
is Cont. Parm. lib. 2. cap. 62.*
no just necessity to divide Unity. S. Irenaeus concludes: They cannot Cont.
haeres. lib. 4. cap. 62.
make any so important reformation, as the evil of the Schism is pernicious.
S. Denis of Alexandria says: Certainly Apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6.
all things should rather be endured, then to consent to the division of the
Church of God: those Martyrs being no less glorious, that expose themselves to
hinder the dismembring of the Church; then those that suffer rather then they
will offer sacrifice to Idols. Would to God all those who divided themselves
from that visible Church of Christ, which was upon earth when Luther appeared,
would rightly consider of these things! and th^s much of the second Point.

9 We have just and necessary occasion, eternally to bless almighty God, who
has vouchsafed to make us members of the Catholic Roman Church, 3. Point.
Perpetual visibility of the Church.
from which while men fall, they precipitate themselves into so vast
absurdities, or rather sacrilegious blasphemies, as is employed in the doctrine
of the total deficiency of the visible Church, which yet is maintained by
diverse chief Protestants, as may at large be seen in Brerely, and others; out
of whom I will here name Jewel saying: The truth was unknown Apolog. part, 4.
cap. 4. divis. 2, And in his defense printed Ann. 1571. Page 426.
at that time, and unheard of, when Martin Luther, and Vlderick Zuinglius first
came unto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel. Perkins says: We say,
that In his exposition upon the Creed. Page 400.
before the days of Luther for the space of many hundred years, an universal
Apostasy overspread the whole face of the earth, and that our (Protestant)
Church was not then visible to the world. Napper upon the Revelations teaches,
that from the year of Pro^os. 37. Page 68.
Christ three hundred and sixteen, the Antichristian and Papisticall reign
has begun, reigning universally, and without any debatable contradiction, one
thousand two hundred sixty years (that is, till Luthers time:) And that, from
the year of Ibid. in cap. 1^. Page 161. col. 3.
Christ three hundred and sixteen, God has withdrawn his visible Church from
open Assemblies, to the hearts of particular godly men etc. during the space of
one thousand two hundred three score years: And that, the Ibid. in. cap. 11.
Page 145.
Pope and Clergy have possessed the outward visible Church of Christians, even
one thousand two hundred three score years. And that, the Ibid. Page 191.
true Church abode latent, and invisible. And Brocard Fol. 110. and 123.
upon the Revelations, professes to join in opinion with Napper. Fulke
affirms, that in the Answer to a counterfeit Catholic. Page 16.
time of Boniface the third, which was the year 607. the Church was invisible,
and fled into the wilderness, there to remain a long season. Luther says:
Pri^^ solus eram: At the first In praefat. operu^ suorum.
I was alone. Jacob Hail^ronerus one of the Disputants for the Protestant
Party, in the conference at Ratisbone, affirms In suo Acacatholico. volum. a.
15. cap. 9. p. 479^
that the true Church was interrupted by Apostasy from the true Faith. Calvin
says: It is absurd in the very Ep. 141.
beginning to break one from another, after we have been forced to make a
separation from the whole world. It were overlong to allege the words of
Ioannes Regius, Daniel Chamierus, Beza, Ochimus, Castalio, and others to the
same purpose. The reason which cast them upon this wicked doctrine, was a
desperate voluntary necessity: because they being resolved not to acknowl^dge
the Roman Church to be Christ's true Church, and yet being convinced by all
manner of evidence, that for diverse Ages before Luther there was no other
Congregation of Christians, which could be the Church of Christ; there was no
remedy but to affirm, that upon earth Christ had no visible Church: which they
would never have avouched, if they had known how to avoid the foresaid
inconvenience (as they apprehended it) of submitting themselves to the Roman
Church.

10 Against these exterminating spirits, D. Potter, and other more moderate
Protestants, profess, that Christ always had, and always will have upon
earth a visible Church: otherwise (says he) our Lords Page 154.
promise of her stable Mat. 16. 18.
edification should be of no value. And in another place, having affirmed that
Protestants have not left the Church of Rome, but her corruptions, and
acknowledging her still to be a member of Christ's body, he seeks to clear
himself and others from Schism, because (says he) the property Page ^6.
of Schism is (witness the Donatists and Luci^erian^) to cut off from the
Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation, the Church from which it separates.
And if any Zelots amongst us have proceeded to heavier ce^sures, their zeal
may be excused, but their Charity and wisdom cannot be justified. And
elsewhere he acknowledges, that the Roman Church has those main, and Page 83.
essential truths, which give her the name and essence of a Church.

11 It being therefore granted by D. Potter, and the chiefest and best learned
English Protestants, that Christ's visible Church cannot perish, it will be
needless for me in this occasion to prove it. S. Augustine doubted not to say:
The Prophets In Psalm. 30. Co^. 2.
spoke more obscurely of Christ, then of the Church: because, as I think, they
did foresee in spirit, that men were to make parties against the Church, and
that they were not to have so great strife concerning Christ: therefore that
was more plainly foretold, and more openly prophesied about which greater
contentions were to rise, that it might turn to the condemnation of them* who
have see^e it, and yet gone forth. And in another place he says: How do we
confide Epist. 48.
to have received manifestly Christ himself from holy Scriptures, if we have
not also manifestly received the Church from them? And indeed to what
congregation shall a man have recourse for the affairs of his soul, if upon
earth there be no visible Church of Christ? Besides, to imagine a company of
men believing one thing in their heart, and with their mouth professing the
contrary, (as they must be supposed to do; for if they had professed what they
believed, they would have become visible) is to dream of a damned crew of
dissembling Sycophants, but not to conceive a right notion of the Church of
Christ our Lord. And therefore S. Augustine says: We cannot be saved, unless
laboring also for the S. Aug. de fide and Symbolo, c. 1.
salvation of others, we profess with our mouths, the same faith which we
bear in our hearts. And if any man hold it lawful to dissemble, and deny
matters of faith, we cannor be assured, but that they actually dissemble, and
hide Anabaptisme, Arianisme, yea Turcisme, and even Atheism, or any other
false belief, under the outward profession of Calvinisme. Do not Protestants
teach that preaching of the word, and administration of Sacraments (which
cannot but make a Church visible) are inseparable notes of the true Church? And
therefore they must either grant a visible Church, or none at all. No wonder
then if S. A^stine account this Heresy so gross, that he says against those
who in his time defended the like error: But this Church which In Psalm. 101.
has been of all Nations is no ^ore, she (...) perished, so say they that are
not in her. O impudent speech! And afterward (...), so detestable, so full of
presumption and falsehood, which is sust^ined with no truth, enlightened with no
wisdom, seasoned with no falt, vain, rash, beady, (...) etc. And Peradventure
some De ovib. cap. 1.
one may say, there are other sheep I know not where, with which I am not
dequ^inted, yet God has care of them. But he is too absurd in (...) sense,
that (...) imagine such things. And these men do not consider, that while they
deny the perpe^uity of a visible Church, they destroy their own present Church,
according to the argument which S. Augustine urged against the Donatists in
these words: De Bapt. cont. Donat.
If the Church were lost in Cyprians (we may say in Gregory's) time, from
whence did Donatus (Luther) appear? From what earth did he spring? from what
sea is he come? From what heaven did he drop? And in another place; How can
they ^^unt Lib. 3. cont. Parm.
to have any Church, if he have ceased ever since those times? And all Divines
by defining Schism to be a division from the true Church, suppose, that there
must be a known Church, from which it is possible for men to depart. But enough
of this in these few words.

12 Let us now come to the fourth, 4. Point. Luthe^ and all that follow him are
Schismatiques.
and chiefest point, which was, to examine whether Luther, ^^lvin, and the rest
did not depar^ from the external Communion of Christ's visible Church, and by
that sepa^ation became g^^lty of Schism. And that they are properly
Schismatiques clearly follows from the grounds which we have laid;
concerning the nature of Schism, which (...) in leaving the external
Communion of the visible Church of Christ our Lord: and it is clear by
evidence of fact, that Luther and his followers forsook the Communion of that
Anci^nt Church* For they did not so much as pretend to join with any
Congregation, which had a being before their time* for they would needs
conceive that no visible company was free from errors in doctrine, and
corruption in practice: And therefore they opposed the doctrine; they withdrew
their obedience from the Prel^tes; they left participation in Sacraments; they
ch^nged the Liturgy of public service of whatsoever Church then extant. And
these things they pre^^nded to do out of a persuasion, that they were bound
(forsooth) in conscience so to do, unless they would particip^te with ^rrors,
corruptions, and superstitions. We dare not (says D. Potter) communicate Page
68.
with Rome either in her public Lit^rgy, which is manifestly polluted with
gross superstition etc. or in those corrupt and ungrounded opinions, which she
has added to the Faith of Catholics. But now (...) D. Potter tell me with
what visible Church extant before Luther, he would have adventured to
communicate in her public Liturgy and Doctrine, since he durst not
communicate with Rome* He will not be able to assign any, even with any little
color of common sense. If then they departed from all visible Communities
professing Christ, it follows that they also left the Communion of the true
visible Church, whichsoever it was, whether that of Rome, or any other; of
which Point I do not for the present dispute. Yea this the Lutherans do not
only acknowledge, but prove, and brag of. If (faith a learned Lutheran) there
had (...) right Georgi^^ Milius in Augustan. Confess. art. 7. de Eccles. Page
137.
^elievers which went before Luther in his office, there had then been no need
of a Lutheran Reformation. Another affirms it to be ridiculous, to think that
in the time Benedict. M^rgenstern. tract. de Eccles. Page 145.
before Luther; any had the purity of Doctrine; and that Luther should receive
it from them, and not they from Luther. Another speaks roundly, and says it
is impudency to say, that many learned men Conrad. Schlusselb. in Theolog.
Calvinist. lib. ^, fol. 130*
in Germany before Luther, did hold the Doctrine of the Gospel. And I add:
That far greater impudency, it were to affirm, that Germany did not agree
with the rest of Europe, and other Christian Catholic Nations, and
consequently, that it is the greatest impudency to deny, that he departed from
the Communion of the visible Catholic Church, spread over the whole world, We
have heard Calvin saying of Protestants in general; We were, even, forced Ep.
141.
to make a separation from the whole world. And, Luther of himself in
particular: In the beginning In praefat. operum suorum.
I was alone. Ergo (say I, by your good leave) you were at least a
Schismatique, divided from the Ancient, Church, and a member of no new Church.
For no sole man can constitute a Church; and though he could; yet such a Church
could not be, that glorious company, of whose number, greatness, and
amplitude, so much has been spoken both in the old Testament, and in the New.

13 D. Potter endeavors to avoid this evident Argument by diverse evasions; but
by the confutation, thereof I will (with Gods holy assistance) take occasion,
even out of his own Answers and grounds, to bring unanswerable reasons to
convince them of Schism.

14 His chief Answer is: That they have not left the Church, but her Corruption.

15 I reply. This answer may be given either by those furious people, who teach
that those abuses, and corruptions in the Church were so enormous, that they
could not stand with the nature, or being of a true Church of Christ: Or else
by those other more calm Protestants, who affirm, that those errors did not
destroy the being, but only deforme the beauty of the Church. Against both
these sorts of men. I may fitly use that unanswerable Dilemma, which S.
Augustine brings against the Donatists in these concluding words: Tell me
whether the Lib. 2. cont. Epist. Gaudent. c. 7.
Church at that time when you say she entertained those who were guilty of all
crimes, by the contagion of those sinful persons* perished, or perished not?
Answer; whether the Church perished, or perished not? Make choice of what you
think. If then she perished, what Church brought forth D^natus? (we may say
Luther.) But if she could not perish; because so many were incorporated into
her (without Baptism (that is, without a second baptism, or rebaptization,
and I may say, without Luthers Reformation) answer me I pray you, what madness
did move the Sect of Don^tus to separate themsel^es from her upon pretense to
avoid the Communion of ^ad men. I beseech the Reader to ponder every one of S.
Augustines words; and to consider whether any thing could have been spoken more
directly against Luther, and his followers of what sort soever.

16 And now to answer more in particular; I say to those who reach, that the
visible Church of Christ perished for many Ages, that I can easily afford them
the cur^esie, to free them from mere Schism: but all men touched with any
spark of zeal to vindicate the wisdom, and Goodness of our Savior from
blasphemous injury, cannot choose but believe and proclaim them to be
superlative Arch-heretiques. Nevertheless, if they will needs have the honor
of Singularity, and desire to be both formal Heretics, and properly
Schismatiques, I will tell them, that while they dream of an invisible Church
of men, which agree with them in Faith, they will upon due reflection find
themselves to be Schismatiques, from those corporeal Angels, or invisible men*
because they held external Communion with the visible Church of those times,
the outward Communion of which visible Church these modern hot-spurs forsaking,
were thereby divided from the outward Communion of their hidden Brethren, and
so are Separatists from the external Communion of them, with whom they agree
in faith, which is Schism in the most formal, and proper signification
thereof. Moreover according to D. Potter, these boisterous Creatures are
properly Schismariques. For, the reason why he thinks himself, and such as he
is, to be cleared from Schism, notwithstanding their division from the Roman
Church, is because (according to his Divinity) the property of Page 76.
Schism, is (witness the Donatists and Luciferians) to cut off from the Body
of Christ, and the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates: But
those Protestants of whom we now speak, cut off from the Body of Christ, and
the hope of Salvation, the Church from which they separated themselves; and
they do it directly as the Donatists (in whom you exemplify) did, by affirming
that the true Church had perished: and therefore they cannot be cleared from
Schism, if you may be their Judge. Consider, I pray you, how many prime
Protestants both domestical and foreign, you have at one blow struck off from
hope of Salvation, and condemned to the lowest pit, for the grievous sin of
Schism. And withal it imports you to consider, tha^ you also involve your
self, and other moderate Protestants in the self, same crime and punishment,
while you communicate with those, who, according to your own principles, are
properly, and formally Schismatiques. For if you held your self obliged under
pain of damnation to forsake the Communion of the Roman Church, by reason of
her Errors and Corr^ptions, which yet you confess were not fundamental; shall
it not be much more damnable for you, to live in Communion and Confraternity,
with those who defend an error of the failing of the Church, which in the
Donatists you confess Page 126.
to have been properly heretical against the Article of our Creed; I believe
the Church? And I desire the Reader, here to apply an authority of S. Cyprian
(epist. 76.) which he shall find alleged in the next number. And this may
suffice for confutation of the aforesaid Answer, as it might have relation to
the rigid Calvinists.

17 For Confutation of these Protestants, who hold that the Church of Christ
had always a being, and cannot err in points fundamental, and yet teach,
that she may err in matters of less moment, wherein if they forsake her, they
would be accounted not to leave the Church, but only her corruptions; I must
say, that they change the state of our present Question, not distinguishing
between internal Faith, and external Communion, nor between Schism, and
Heresy. This I demonstrate out of D. Potter himself; who in express words
teaches, that the promises which our Lord has made Page 151.
unto his Church for his assistance, are intended not to any particular Persons
or Churches, but only to the Church Catholic: and they are to be extended not
to every parcel, or particularity of truth, but only to points of Faith, or
fundamental. And afterward speaking of the Universal Church, he s^^th: It Is
comfort Page 155.
enough for the Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure her from all capital
dangers, and conserve her on earth against all enemies; but she may not hope
to triumph over all sin and error, till she be in heaven. Out of which words
I observe, that, according to D. Potter, the self same Church, which is the
Universal Church, remaining the universal true Church of Christ, may fall
into errors and corruptions: from whence it clearly follows that it is
impossible to leave the External communion of the Church so corrupted, and
retain external communion with the Catholic Church; since the Church
Catholic, and the Church so corrupted is the self same one Church, or
company of men. And the contrary imagination talks in a dream, as if the
errors and infections of the Catholic Church were not inherent in her, but
were separate from her, like to Accidents, without any Subject, or rather
indeed, as if they were not Accidents, but Hypostases, or Persons subsisting by
themselves. For men cannot be said to live, in, or out of the Communion of any
dead creature, but with Persons, endued with life and reason; and much less
can men be said to live in the Communion of Accidents, as errors and
corruptions are, and therefore it is an absurd thing to affirm, that
Protestants divided themselves from the corruptions of the Church, but not from
the Church her self, seeing the corruptions of the Church were inherent in the
Church. All this is made more clear, if we consider, that when Luther appeared,
there were not two distinct visible true Catholic Churches, holding contrary
Doctrines, and divided in external Communion; one of the which two Churches
did triumph over all error, and corruption in doctrine and practice; but the
other was stained with both. For to faign this diversity of two Churches cannot
stand with record of histories, which are silent of any such matter. It is
against D. Potters own grounds, that the Church may err in points not
fundamental, which were not true, if you will imagine a certain visible
Catholic Church free from error even in points not fundamental. It
contradicts the words in which he said, the Church may not hope to triumph
over all error, till she be in heaven, It evacuateth the brag of Protestants,
that Luther reformed the whole Church: and lastly it makes Luther a
Schismatique, for leaving the Communion of all visible Churches, seeing (upon
this supposition) there was a visible Church of Christ free from all
corruption, which therefore could not be forsaken without just imputation of
Schism. We must therefore truly affirm, that since there was but one visible
Church of Christ, which was truly Catholic, and yet was (according to
Protestants) stained with corruption; when Luther left the external Communion
of that corrupted Church, he could not remain in the Communion of the
Catholic Church, no more then it is possible to keep company with D.
Christopher Potter, and not keep company with the Provost of Queens College
in Oxford, if D. Potter and the Provost be one, and the self same man: For so
one should be, and not be with him at the same time. This very argument drawn
from the Unity of God's Church, S. Cyprian urges to convince, that Novatianus
was cut off from the Church in these words: The Church is Epist. 76* ad Mag.
One, which being One cannot be both within and without. If she ^e with
Novatianus, she was not with Cornelius; But if she were with Cornelius, who
succeeded Fabianus, by lawful ordination, Novatianus is not in the Church. I
purposely here speak only of external Communion with the Catholic Church.
For in this point there is great difference between internal acts of our
understanding, and will; and of external deeds. Our Understanding and Will,
are faculties (as Philosophers speak) abstractive, and able to distinguish, and
as it were, to part things, though in themselves they be really conjoined. But
real external deeds do take things in gross as they find them, not
separating things which in reality are joined together. Thus, one may consider
and love a sinner as he is a man, friend, benefactor, or the like; and at the
same time not consider him, nor love him as he is a sinner; because these are
acts of our Understanding and will, which may respect their objects under some
one formality, or consideration, without reference to other things contained in
the self same objects. But if one should strike, or kill a sinful man, he
will not be excused, by alleging, that he killed him, not as a man, but as a
sinner; because the self same person being a man, and the sinner, the
external act of murder fell jointly upon the man, and the sinner. And for the
same reason one cannot avoid the company of a sinner, and at the same time be
really present with that man who is a sinner. And this is our case: and in this
our Adversaries are egregiously, and many of them affectedly, mistaken. For one
may in some points believe as the Church believes, and disagree from her in
other. One may love the truth which she holds, and detest her (pretended)
corruptions. But it is impossible that a man should really separate himself
from her external Communion, as she is corrupted, and be really within the
same external Communion as she is sound; because she is the self same Church
which is supposed to be sound in some things, and to err in others. Now, our
question for the present does concern only this point of external Communion:
because Schism, as it is distinguished from Heresy, is committed when one
divides himself from the External Communion of that Church with which he
agrees in Faith; Whereas Heresy does necessarily imply a difference in matter
of Faith, and belief: and therefore to say, that they left not the visible
Church, but her errors, can only excuse them from Heresy (which shall be
tried in the next Chapter) but not from Schism, as long as they are really
divided from the External Communion of the self same visible Church, which,
notwithstanding those errors wherein they do in judgment dissent from her,
does still remain the true Catholic Church of Christ; and therefore while
they forsake the corrupted Church, they forsake the Catholic Church. Thus
then it remains clear, that their chiefest Answer changes the very state of
the Question; confounds internal acts of the Understanding with external
Deeds; does not distinguish between Schism and Heresy; and leaves this
demonstrated against them: That they divided themselves from the Communion of
the visible Catholic Church, because they conceived that she needed
Reformation. But whether this pretense of Reformation will acquit them of
Schism, I refer to the unpartiall judges, heretofore Numb. 8*
alleged; as to S. Irenaeus who plainly says: They cannot make any so
important REFORMATION, as the Evil of the Schism is pernicious. To S. Denis
of Alexandria, saying: Certainly all things should be endured rather then to
consent to the division of the Church of God: those Martyrs being no less
glorious that expose themselves to hinder the dismembring of the Church, then
those that suffer rather then they will offer sacrifice to Idols. To S.
Augustine, who tells us: That not to hear the Church, is a more grievous thing
then if he were stricken with the sword, consumed with flames, exposed to wild
beasts. And to conclude all in few words, he gives this general prescription:
There is no just necessity to divide unity, And D. Potter may remember his own
words: There neither was Page 7^*
nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ; no more then
from Christ himself. But I have showed that Luther, and the rest departed from
the Church of Christ (if Christ had any Church upon earth:) Therefore there
could be no just cause (of Reformation, or what else soever) to do as they
did; and therefore they must be contented to be held for Schismatiques.

18 Moreover; I demand whether those corruptions which moved them to forsake
the Communion of the visible Church, were in manners, or doctrine? Corruption
in manners yields no sufficient cause to leave the Church, otherwise men must
go not only out of the Church, but out of the world, as the Apostle 1. Cor. 5.
10.
says. Our blessed Savior foretold that there would be in the Church cares
with choice corn, and ^inners with just men. If then Protestants wax zealous,
with the Servants to pluck up the weeds, let them first harken to the wisdom
of the Master: Let both grow up. And they ought to imitate them, who as S.
Augustine says, tolerate for the good of Ep. 162.
Unity, that which they detest for the good of equity. And to whom the more
frequent, and foul such scandals are; by so much the more is the merit of
their perseverance in the Communion of the Church, and the Martyrdom of their
patience, as the same Saint calls it. If they were offended with the life of
some Ecclesiastical persons, must they therefore deny obedience to their
Pastors, and finally break with Gods Church? The Pastor of Pastors teaches
us another lesson: Upon the Chair of Moses Mat. 33.
have sitten the Scribes and Pharisees. All things threfore whatsoever they
shall say to you, observe ye, and do ye: but according to their works do
ye not. Must people except against laws, and revolt from Magistrates, because
some are negligent, or corrupt in the execution of the same laws, and
performance of their office? If they intended Reformation of manners, they used
a strange means for the achieving of such an end, by denying the necessity of
Confession, laughing at aufferity of penance, condemning the vows of
Chastity, poverty, obedience, breaking fasts, etc. And no less unfit were the
Men, then the Means. I love not recrimination. But it is well known to how
great crimes, Luther, Calvin, Zwinglius, Beza, and other of the prime Reformers
were notoriously obnoxious; as might be easily demonstrated by the only
transcribing of what others have delivered upon that subject; whereby it would
appear, that they were very far from being any such Apostolical men as God
is wont to use in so great a work. And whereas they were wont, especially in
the beginning of their revolt, maliciously to exaggerate the faults of some
Clergy men, Erasmus said well ( Epist ad fratres inferior is Germaniae,) Let
the riot, lust, ambition, avarice of Priests and what soever other crimes be
gathered together, Heresy a^one does exceed all this filthy lake of vices.
Besides, nothing at all was omitted by the sacred Council of Trent which might
tend to reformation of manners. And finally the vices of others are not
hurtful to any but such as imitate, and consent to them; according to the
saying of S. Augustine: We conserve innocence, not by knowing the ill deeds of
men, but by not yielding consent to such as we know, and by not judging rashly
of such faults as we know not. If you answer; that, not corruption in manners,
but the approbation of them, does yield sufficient cause to leave the Church; I
reply with S. Augustine, that the Church does (as the pretended Reformers ought
to have done) tolerate or bear with scandals and corruptions, but neither
does, nor can approve them. The Church (says he) being placed Ep. 116.
betwixt much chafe and cockle, does bear with many things; but does not
approve, nor dissemble, nor act those things which are against faith, and good
life. But because to approve corruption in manners as lawful, were an error
against Faith, it belongs to corruption in doctrine, which was the second part
of my demand.

19 Now then, that corruptions in doctrine (I still speak upon the untrue
supposition of our Adversaries) could not afford any sufficient cause, or
colorable necessity to depart from that visible Church, which was extant when
Luther rose, I demonstrate out of D. Potters own confession; that the
Catholic Church neither has, nor can err in points fundamental, as we
showed out of his own express words, which he also of set purpose delivers
in diverse other places; and all they are obliged to maintain the same, who
teach that Christ had always a visible Church upon earth: because any one
fundamental error overthrowes the being of a true Church. Now (as Schoolmen
speak) it is, implicatio in terminis (a contradiction so plain, that one word
destroys the other, as if one should say, a living dead man) to affirm, that
the Church does not err in points necessary to salvation, or damnably; and yet
that it is damnable to remain in her Communion because she teaches errors
which are confessed not to be damnable. For if the error be not damnable, nor
against any fundamental Article of Faith, the belief thereof cannot be
damnable. But D. Potter teaches, that the Catholic Church cannot, and that
the Roman Church has not erred against any fundamental Article of Faith:
Therefore, it cannot be damnable to remain in her Communion; and so the
pretended corruptions in her doctrine could not induce any obligation to depart
from her Communion, nor could excuse them from Schism, who upon pretense of
necessity in point of conscience, forsook her. And D. Potter will never be
able to salve a manifest contradiction in these his words: To depart from the
Church Page 75.
of Rome in some Doctrine, and practices, there might be necessary cause,
though she wanted nothing necessary to salvation. For if, notwithstanding these
Doctrines and practices, she wanted nothing necessary to salvation; how could
it be necessary to salvation to forsake her? And therefore we must still
conclude that to forsake her, was properly an act of Schism.

20 From the self same ground of the infallibility of the Church in all
fundamental points, I argue after this manner. The visible Church cannot be
forsaken, without damnation, upon pretense that it is damnable to remain in her
Communion, by reason of corruption in doctrine; as long as, for the truth of
her Faith and belief, she performs the duty which she dweth to God, and her
Neighbor: As long as she performs what our Savior exacts at her hands: as
long as she does, as much as lies in her power to do. But (even according to
D. Potters Assertions) the Church performs all these things, as long as she
erreth not in points fundamental, although she were supposed to err in other
points not fundamental: Therefore, the Communion of the visible Church cannot
be forsaken without damnation, upon pretense that it is damnable to remain in
her Communion, by reason of corruption in doctrine. The Major, or first
Proposition of it self is evident. The Minor, or second Proposition does
necessarily follow out of D. Potters own doctrine above-rehearsed, that, the
promises of our Lord made to his Church for his assistance, are to be Page* 151.
extended only to points of faith, or fundamental: (Let me note here by the
way that by his ( Or,) he seems to exclude from Faith all points which are not
fundamental, and so we may deny innumerable Texts of Scripture:) That It is
Page 155*
comfort enough for the Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure her from all
capital dangers etc. but she may not hope to triumph over all sin and
error, till she be in heaven. For it is evident, that the Church (for as much
as concerns the truth of her doctrines and belief) owes no more duty to God
and her Neighbor; neither does our Savior exact more at her hands, nor is it
in her power to do more then God does assist her to do; which assistance is
promised only for points fundamental; and con^equently as long as she teaches
no fundamental error, her communion cannot without damnation be forsaken. And
we may fitly apply against D. Potter a Concionatory declamation which he makes
against us, where he says: Page 221.
May the Church of after Ages make the narrow way to heaven, narrower then our
Savior left it etc? since he himself obliges men under pain of damnation to
forsake the Church, by reason of errors against which our Savior thought it
needless to promise his assistance, and for which he neither demeth his grace
in this life, or glory in the next. Will D. Potter oblige the Church to do
more then she may even hope for? or to perform on earth that which is proper
to heaven alone?

21 And as from your own doctrine concerning the infallibility of the Church in
fundamental points, we have proved that it was a grievous sin to forsake
her: so do we take a strong arg^ment from the fallibility of any who dare
pretend to reform the Church, which any man in his wits will believe to be
endued with at least as much infallibility as private men can challeng; and D.
Potter expressly affirms that Christ's promises of his assistance are not
intended Page 151.
to any particular persons or Churches: and therefore to leave the Church by
reason of errors, was at best hand b^t to flit from one erring company to
another, without any new hope of triumphing over errors, and without
necessity, or utility to forsake that Communion of which S. Augustine says,
There is Ep. cont. Parmen. lib, 2, 2 cap. 11.
no just necessity to divide Unity. Which will appear to be much more evident
if we consider that though the Church had maintained some false doctrines, yet
to leave her Communion to remedy the old, were but to add a new increase of
errors, arising from the innumerable disagreements of Sectaries, which must
needs bring with it a mighty mass of falsehoods, because the truth is but one,
and indivisible. And this reason is yet stronger* if we still remember, that
even according to D. Potter the visible Church has a blessing not to err in
points fundamental, in which any private Reformer may fail: and therefore
they could not pretend any necessity to forsake that Church, out of whose
communion they were exposed to danger of falling into many more, and even into
damnable errors. Remember I pray you, what your self affirms ( page 69.)
where speaking of our Church and yours, you say: All the difference is from the
weeds, which remain there, and here are taken away; Yet neither here perfectly,
nor every where alike. Behold a fair confession of corruptions, still remaining
in your Church, which you can only excuse by saying they are not fundamental,
as likewise those in the Roman Church are confessed to be not fundamental.
What man of judgment will be a Protestant, since that Church is confessedly a
corrupt one?

22 I still proceed to impugn you expressly upon your own grounds. You say,
that it is comfort enough for the Church, that the Lord in mercy will secure
her from all capital dangers: but she may not hope to triumph over all sin,
and error till she be in heaven. Now if it be comfort enough to be secured
from all capital dangers, which can arise only from error in fundamental
points: why were not your first reformers content with enough, but would needs
dismember the Church, out of a pernicious greediness of more then enough? For,
this enough, which according to you is attained by not erring in points
fundamental, was enjoyed before Luthers reformation, unless you will now
against your self affirm, that long before Luther there was no Church free
from error in fundamental points. Moreover if (as you say) no Church may hope
to triumph over all error till she be in heaven; You must either grant, that
errors not fundamental cannot yield sufficient cause to forsake the Church, or
else you must affirm that all community may, and ought to be forsaken, and so
there will be no end of Schisms: or rather indeed there can be no such thing
as Schis^e because according to you, all communities are subject to errors not
fundamental, for which if they may be lawfully forsaken, it follows clearly
that it is not Schism to forsake them. Lastly, since it is not lawful to
leave the Communion of the Church for abuses in life and manners, because such
miseries cannot be avoided in this world of temptation: and since according to
your Assertion no Church may hope to triumph over all sin and error; You must
grant that as she ought not to be left by reason of sin; so neither by reason
of errors not fundamental; because both sin, and error are (according to
you) impossible to be avoided till she be in heaven.

23 Furthermore, I ask whether it be the Q^antity or Number; or Quality, and
Greatness of doctrinall errors that may yield sufficient cause to relinquish
the Churches Communion? I prove that neither. Not the Quality, which is
supposed to be beneath the degree of points fundamental, or necessary to
salvation. Not the Quantity or Number: for the foundation is strong enough to
support all such unnec^ssary additions, as you term them. And if they once
weighed so heavy as to overthrow the foundation, they should grow to
fundamental errors, into which your self teach the Church cannot fall. Hay
and stubble (say you) and such Page 15^*
unprofitable st^ff, laid on the roof, destroies not the house, whilst the
main pillars are standing on the foundation. And tell us, I pray you, the
precise number of errors which cannot be tolerated? I know you cannot do it;
and therefore being uncertain, whether or no you have cause to leave the
Church, you are certainly obliged not to forsake her. Our blessed Savior has
declared his will, that we forgive a private offender seaventy seven times,
that is, without limitation of quantity of time, or quality of trespasses; and
why then dare you allege his command, that you must not pardon his Church for
errors, acknowledged to be not fundamental? What excuse can you feign to your
selves; who for points not necessary to salvation, have been occasions, causes,
and authors of so many mischiefs, as could not but unavoidably accompany so
huge a breach, in kingdoms, in commonwealths, in private persons, in public
Magistrates, in body, in soul, in goods, in life, in Church, in the state, by
Schisms, by rebellions, by war, by famine, by plague, by bloodshed, by all
sorts of imaginable calamities upon the whole face of the earth, wherein as in
a map of Desolation, the heaviness of your crime appears, under which the
world does pant?

24 To say for your excuse, that you left not the Church, but her errors, does
not extenuate, but aggravate your sin. For by this devise, you sow seeds of
endless Schisms, and put into the mouth of all Separatists, a ready answer how
to avoid the note of Schism from your Protestant Church of England, or from
any other Church whatsoever. They will, I say, answer, as you do prompt, that
your Church may be forsaken, if she fall into errors, though they be not
fundamental: and further that no Church must hope to be free from such errors;
which two grounds being once laid, it will not be hard to infer the
consequence, that she may be forsaken.

25 From some other words of D. Potter I likewise prove, that for Errors not
fundamental, the Church ought not to be forsaken, There neither was (says he)
nor can be Page 75.
any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no more then from Christ
himself. To depart from a particular Church, and namely from the Church of
Rome, in some doctrines and practices, there might be just and necessary cause,
though the Church of Rome wanted nothing necessary to salvation. Mark his
doctrine, that there can be no just cause to depart from the Church of Christ:
and yet he teaches, that the Church of Christ, may err in points not
fundamental; Therefore (say I) we cannot forsake the Roman Church for points
not fundamental, for then we might also forsake the Church of Christ, which
your self deny: and I pray you consider, whether you do not plainly
contradict your self, while in the words above recited, you say there can be
no just cause to forsake the Catholic Church; and yet that there may be
necessary cause to depart from the Church of Rome, since you grant that the
Church of Christ may err in points not fundamental: and that the Roman Church
has erred only in such points; as by and by we shall see more in particular.
And thus much be said to disprove their chiefest Answer, that they left not the
Church, but her corruptions.

26 Another evasion D. Potter brings, to avoid the imputation of Schism, and
it is, because they still acknowledge the Church of Rome to be a Member of the
body of Christ, and not cut off from the hope of salvation. And this ( says
he) cleeres us from Page 76.
the imputation of Schism, whose property it is, to cut off from the Body of
Christ, and the hope of salvation, the Church from which it separates.

27 This is an Answer which perhaps you may get some one to approve, if first
you can put him out of his wits. For what prodigious doctrines are these? Those
Protestants who believe that the Church erred in points necessary to salvation,
and for that cause left her, cannot be excused from damnable Schism: But
others who believed that she had no damnable errors, did very well, yea were
obliged to forsake her: and (which is more miraculous, or rather monstrous)
they did well to forsake her formally and precisely, because they judged. that
she retained all means necessary to salvation, I say, because they so judged,
For the very reason for which he acquitteth himself, and condemns those
others as Schismatiques, is because he holds that the Church which both of
them forsook, is not cut off from the Body of Christ, and the hope of
Salvations whereas those other Zelots deny her to be a member of Christ's body,
or capable of salvation, wherein alone they disagree from D. Potter: for in the
effect of separation they agree, only they do it upon a different motive or
reason. were it not a strange excuse, if a man would think to cloak his
rebellion, by alleging that he held the person against whom he rebelled to be
his lawful Sovereign? And yet D. Potter thinks himself free from Schism,
because he forsook the Church of Rome, but yet so, as that still he held her to
be the true Church, and to have all necessary means to Salvation. But I will
no further urge this most solemn foppery, and do much more willingly put all
Catholics in mind, what an unspeakeable comfort it is, that our Adversaries
are forced to confess, that they cannot clear themselves from Schism,
otherwise then by acknowledging that they do not, nor cannot cut off from the
hope of Salvation our Church. Which is as much as if they should in plain
terms say: They must be damned, unless we may be saved. Moreover this evasion
does indeed condemn your zealous brethren of Heresy, for denying the Churches
perpetuity, but does not clear your self from Schism, which consists in
being divided from that true Church, with which a man agrees in all points of
faith, as you must profess your self to agree with the Church of Rome in all
fundamental Articles. For otherwise you should cut her off from the hope of
salvation, and so condemn your self of Schism. And lastly even according to
this your own definition of Schism, you cannot clear your self from that
crime, unless you be content to acknowledge a manifest contradiction in your
own Assertions. For if you do not cut us off from the Body of Christ, and the
hope of Salvation; how come you to say in another place, that you judge a
reconciliation with us to be Page ^0.
damnable! That to depart from the Church of Rome, there might be just and
necessary Page 75.
canse? That, they that have the understanding and means to discover their
error, and neglect to use them Page 79.
we dare not flatter them (say you) with so easy a censure, of hope of
salvation? If then it be (as you say) a property of Schism, to cut off from
the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates: how will you clear
your self from Schism, who dare not flatter us with so easy a censure? and
who affirm that a reconciliation with us is damnable? But the truth is, there
is no constancy in your Assertions, by reason of difficulties which press you
on all sides. For, you are loath to affirm clearly, that we may be saved,
least such a grant might be occasion (as in all reason it ought to be) of the
conversion of Protestants to the Roman Church: And on the other side, if your
affirm, that our Church erred in points fundamental, or necessary to
salvation, you knew not how, not where, not among what company of men, to find
a perpetual visible Church of Christ, before Luther: And therefore your best
shift is to say, and unsay, as your occasion command. I do not examine your
Assertion, that it is the property of Schism, to cut off from the Body of
Christ, and the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates: wherein
you are mightily mistaken, as appears by your own example of the Donatists, who
were most formal and proper Heretics, and not Schismatiques, as Schism is a
vice distinct from Heresy. Besides, although the Donatists, and Luciferians
(whom you also allege) had been mere Schismatiques, yet it were against all
good Logic, from a particular to infer a general Rule, to determine what is
the property of Schism.

28 A third device I find in D. Potter to clear his brethren from Schism.
There is (says he) great difference between Page 75.
a Schism from them, and a Reformation of our selves.

29 This I confess is a quaint subtilty, by which all Schism, and Sin may
be as well excused. For what devil incarnate could merely pretend a
separtion, and not rather some other motive of virtue, truth, profit, or
pleasure? But now since their pretended Reformation consisted, as they ga^e
out, in forsaking the corruptions of the Church: the Reformation of themselves,
and their division from us, falls out to be one, and the self same thing. Nay
we see, that although they infinitely disagree in the particulars of their
reformation, yet they symbolize, and consent in the general point of forsaking
our pretended corruptions: An evident sign, that the thing, upon which their
thoughts first pitched, was not any particular Model, or Idea of Religion, but
a settled resolution to forsake the Church of Rome. Wherefore this Metaphysicall
speculation, that they intended only to reform themselves, cannot possible
excuse them from Schism, unless first they be able to prove, that they were
obliged to depart from us. Yet for as much as concerns the fact it self; it
is clear, that Luthers revolt did not proceed from any zeal of reformation.
The motives which put him upon so wretched, and unfortunate a work, were
Covetousness, Ambition, Lust, Pride, Envy, and grudging that the promulgation
of Indulgences, was not committed to himself, or such as he desired. He himself
takes God to witness, that he fell into these troubles casually, and Casu non
voluntate in has turbas incidi Deum ipsum testor.
against his will (not upon any intention of Reformation) not so much as
dreaming or suspecting any change which might Act. and. mon. page 404.
happen. And he began to preach (against Indulgences) when he knew not what
Sleidan. lib. 16. sol. 232.
the matter meant. For (says he) I scarcely understood Sleid. lib. 13. fol.
177.
then what the name of Indulgences meant. In so much as afterward Luther did
much mistake of his own undertaken course, oftentimes (says he) wishing Luth.
in colloq. mensal.
that I had never begun that business. And Fox says: It is apparent that
Act. mon. page 404.
Luther promised Cardinal Caietan to keep silence, provided also his
adversaries would do the like. M. Cowper reports further, that Luther by his
letter submitted Cowp. in his Chronicle.
himself to the Pope, so that he might not be compelled to recant. With much
more, which may be seen in Tract 2. cap. 2, Sect. 11. subd. 2.
Brereley. But this is sufficient to show, that Luther was far enough, from
intending any Reformation. And if he judged a Reformation to be necessary, what
a huge wickedness was it in him, to promise silence if his adversaries would
do the like? Or to submit himself to the Pope, so that he might not be
compelled to recant? Or if the Reformation were not indeed intended by him, nor
judged to be necessary, how can he be excused from damnable Schism? And this
is the true manner of Luthers revolt, taken from his own acknowledgments, and
the words of the more ancient Protestants themselves, whereby D. Potters
faltring, and mincing the matter, is clearly discovered, and confuted. Upon
what motives our Country was divided from the Roman Church by king Henry the
Eight, and how the Schism was continued by Queen Elizabeth, I have no hear
to rip up. The world knows, it was not upon any zeal of Reformation.

30 But you will prove your former evasion by a couple of similitudes: If a
Monastery Page 81. 82*
should reform it self, and should reduce into practice, ancient good
discipline, when others would not; in this case could it is reason be charged
with Schism from others, or with Apostasy from its rule and order? Or as in a
society of men universally infected with some disease, they that should free
themselves from the common disease, could not be therefore said to separate
from the society: so neither can the reformed Churches be truly accused for
making a Schism from the Church, seeing all they did, was to reform
themselves.

31 I was very glad to find you in a Monastery, but sorry when I perceived that
you were inventing ways how to forsake your Vocation, and to maintain the
lawfulness of Schism from the Church, and Apostasy from a Religious Order.
Yet before you make your final resolution, hear a word of advise. Put case;
That a Monastery did confessedly observe their substantial vows, and all
principal Statutes, or Constitutions of the Order, though with some neglect of
lesser Monastical Observances: And that a Reformation were undertaken, not by
authority of lawful Superiors, but by some One, or very few in comparison of
the rest: And those few known to be led, not with any spirit of Reformation,
but by some other sinister intention: And that the Statutes of the house were
even by those busy fellows confessed, to have been time out of mind
understood, and practiced as now they were: And further that the pretended
Reformers acknowledged that themselves as soon as they were gone out of their
Monastery, must not hope to be free from those or the like errors and
corruptions, for which they left their Brethren: And (which is more) that they
might fall into more enormous crimes then they did, or could do in their
Monastery, which we suppose to be secured from all substantial corruptions,
for the avoiding of which they have an infallible assistance. Put (I say)
together all these my And's, and then come with your If's, If a Monastery
should reform it self, etc. and tell me, if you could excuse such Reformers
from Schism, Sedition, Rebellion, Apostasy, etc? what would you say of such
Reformers in your College? or tumultuous persons in a kingdom? Remember now
your own Tenets, and then reflect how fit a similitude you have picked out, to
prove your self a Schismatique. You teach that the Church may err in points
not fundamental, but that for all fundamental points she is secured from
error: You teach that no particular person, or Church has any promise of
assistance in points fundamental. You, and the whole world can witness that
when Luther began, he being but only One, opposed himself to All, as well
subjects, as superiors; and that even then, when he himself confessed that he
had no intention of Reformation: You cannot be ignorant but that many chief
learned Protestants are forced to confess the Antiquity of our doctrine and
practice, and do in several, and many Controversies, acknowledge that the
Ancient Fathers stood on our Side: Consider I say these points, and see whether
your similitude do not condemn your Progenitors of Schism from God's visible
Church, yea and of Apostasy also from their Religious Orders, if they were
vowed Regulars, as Luther, and diverse of them were.

32 From the Monastery you are f^ed into an Hospital of persons universally
infected with some disease, where you find to be true what I supposed, that
after your departure from your Brethren you might fall into greater
inconveniences, and more infectious diseases, then those for which you left
them. But you are also upon the point to abandon these miserable needy persons,
in whose behalf for Charities sake, let me set before you these considerations.
If the disease neither were, nor could be mortal, because in that Company of
men God had placed a Tree of life: If going thence, the sick man might by
curious tasting the Tree of Knowledge eat poison under pretense of bettering
his health: If he could not hope thereby to avoid other diseases like those for
which he had quitted the company of the first infected men: If by his departure
innumerable mischiefs were to ensue; could such a man without sencelesnesse be
excused by saying, that he sought to free himself from the common disease, but
not forsooth to separate from the society? Now your self compare the Church to
a man deformed with Page 154.
superfluous fingers and toes, but yet who has not lost any vital part: you
acknowledge that out of her society no man is secured from damnable error, and
the world can bear witness what unspeakable mischiefs and calamities ensued
Luthers revolt from the Church* Pronounce then concerning them, the same
sentence which even now I have showed them to deserve, who in the manner
aforesaid should separate from persons universally infected with some disease.

33 But alas, to what pass has Heresy brought men, who term themselves
Christians, and yet blush not to compare the beloved Spouse of our Lord, the
one Dove, the pur^hase of our Saviors most precious blood, the holy Catholic
Church, I mean that visible Church of Christ which Luther found spread over the
whole world; to a Monastery so disordered that it must be forsaken; to the
Giant in Gath much deformed with superfluous fingers and toes; to a society of
men universally infected with some disease! And yet all these comparisons, and
much worse, are neither injurious, nor undeserved, if once it be granted, or
can be proved, that the visible Church of Christ may err in any one point of
Faith, although not fundamental.

34 Before I part from these similitudes, one thing I must observe against the
evasion of D. Potter, that they left not the Church, but her Corruptions. For
as those Reformers of the Monastery, or those other who left the company of men
universally infected with some disease, would deny themselves to be
Schismatiques, or any way blameworthy, but could not deny, but that they left
the said Communities: So Luther and the rest cannot so much as pretend, not to
have left the visible Church, which according to them was infected with many
diseases, but can only pretend that they did not sin in leaving her. And you
speak very strangly when you say: In a society of men universally infected with
some disease, they that should free themselves from the Common disease, could
not be therefore said to separate from the Society. For if they do not
separate themselves from the Society of the infected persons; how do they free
themselves and depart from the common disease? Do they at the same time remain
in the company, and yet depart from those infected creatures? We must then say,
that they separate themselves from the persons, though it be by occasion of the
disease: Or if you say, they free their own persons from the common disease,
yet so, that they remain still in the Company infected, subject to the
Superiors and Governors thereof, eating and drinking and keeping public
Assemblies with them; you cannot but know, that Luther and your Reformers the
first pretended free persons from the supposed common infection of the Roman
Church, did not so: for they endeavored to force the Society whereof they were
parts, to be healed and reformed as they were: and if it refused, they did,
when they had forces, drive the^ away, even their Superiors both spiritual
and temporal, as is notorious. Or if they had no: power to expel that
supposed infected Community, or Church of that place, they departed from them
corporally, whom mentally they had forsaken before. So that you cannot deny,
but Luther forsook the external Communion, and company of the Catholic
Church, for which as your self Page 75.
confess, There neither was nor can be any just cause, no more then to depart
from Christ himself. We do therefore infer, that Luther and the rest who
for^ook that visible Church which they found upon earth, were truly, and
properly Schismatiques.

35 Moreover, it is evident that there was a division between Luther and that
Church which was Visible when he arose: but that Church cannot be said to have
divided her self from him, before whose time she was, and in comparison of whom
she was a Whole, and he but a part: therefore we must say, that he divided
himself and went out of her; which is to be a Schismatique, or Heretic, or
both. By this argument, Optatus Milevitanus proves, that not Caecilianus, but
Par menianus was a Schismatique, saying: For, Caecilianus went Lib. 1. Cont*
Parm.
not out of Maiorinu^ thy Grana^ather, but Maiorinus, from Caecilianus: neither
did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or Cyprian, but Maiorinus, in
whose Chair thou sit, which had no beginning before Maiorinus. Since it
manifestly appears that these things were acted in this manner, it is clear
that you are beyres both of the deliverers up (of the holy Bible to be burned)
and also of Schismatiques. The whole argument of this holy Father makes
directly both against Luther, and all those who continue the division which he
begun; and proves, That, going out, convinces those who go out to be
Schismatiques; but not those from whom they depart: That to forsake the Chair
of Peter is Schism; yea, that it is Schism to erect a Chair which had no
origin, or as it were predecessou^, before it self: That to continue in a
division begun by others, is to be Heirs of Schismatiques; and lastly; that to
depart from the Communion of a particular Church (as that of S. ^yprian was) is
sufficient to make a man incur the guilt of Schism, and consequently, that
although Protestants, who deny the Pope to be supreme Head of the Church, do
think by that Heresy to clear Luther from Schism, in disobeying the Pope: Yet
that w^ll not serve to free him from Schism, as it imports a division from
the obedience, or Communion of the particular Bishop, Diocese, Church, and
Country, where he lived.

36 But it is not the Heresy of Protestants, or any other Sectaries, that can
deprive S. Peter, and his Successors, of the authority which Christ our Lord
conferred upon them over his whole militant Church: which is a point confessed
by learned Protestants to be of great Antiquity, and for which the judgment of
diverse most ancient holy Fathers is reproved by them, as may be seen at large
in Brerely Tract. 1. Sect. 3. subd. 10.
exactly citing the places of such chief Protestants. And we must say with S.
Cyprian: Heresies Ep. 55.
have sprung, and Schisms been bred from no other cause then for that the
Priest of God is not obeyed, nor one Priest and Judge is considered to be for
the time in the Church of God. Which words do plainly condemn Luther,
whether he will understand them as spoken of the Universal, or of every
particular Church. For he withdrew himself both from the obedience of the
Pope, and of all particular Bishops, and Churches. And no less clear is the
said Optatus Milevitanus, saying: Thou caust not deny Lib. 2, Cont* Parm.
but that thou know, that in the City of Rome, there was first an Episcopal
Chair placed for Peter, wherein Peter the head of all the Apostles sat,
whereof also he was called Cephas; in which one Chair, Un was to be kept by
all, least the other Apostles might attribute to themselves, each one his
particular chair; and that he should be a Schismatique and sinner, who against
that one single Chair should erect another. Many other Authorities of Fathers
might be alleged to this purpose, which I omit; my intention being not to
handle particular controversies.

37 Now, the arguments which hitherto I have brought, prove that Luther, and
his followers were Schismatiques, without examining (for as much as belongs to
this point) whether or no the Church can err in any one thing great or small,
because it is universally true, that there can be no just cause to forsake the
Communion of the Visible Church of Christ, according to S. Augustine, saying:
It is not possible Ep. 48.
that any may have just cause to separate their Communion, from the Communion
of the whole world, and call themselves the Church of Christ, as if they had
separated themselves from the Communion of all Nations upon just cause. But
since indeed the Church cannot err in any one point of doctrine, nor can
approve any corruption in manners; they cannot with any color avoid the just
imputation of eminent Schism, according to the verdict of the same holy Father
in these words: The most manifest De Bapt. lib. 5. c* 1.
sacrilege of Schism is eminent when there was no cause of separation.

38 Lastly, I prove that Protestants cannot avoid the note of Schism, at least
by reason of their mutual separation from one another. For most certain it is
that there is very great difference, for the outward face of a Church, and
profession of a different faith, between the Lutherans, the rigid Calvinists,
and the Protestants of England. So that if Luther were in the right, those
other Protestants who invented Doctrines far different from his, and divided
themselves from him, must be reputed Schismatiques: and the like argument may
proportionably be applied to their further divisions, and subdivisions. Which
reason I yet urge more strongly out of D. Potter, Page 20.
who affirms, that to him and to such as are convicted in conscience of the
errors of the Roman Church, a reconciliation is impossible, and damnable: And
yet he teaches, that their difference from the Roman Church, is not in
fundamental points. Now, since among Protestants there is such diversity of
belief, that one denies what the other affirms, they must be convicted in
conscience that one part is in error (at least not fundamental,) and, if D.
Potter will speak consequently, that a reconciliation between them is
impossible and damnable: and what greater division, or Schism can there be,
then when one part must judge a reconciliation with the other to be impossible,
and damnable?

39 Out of all which premises, this Conclusion follows: That, Luther and his
followers were Schismatiques; from the universal visible Church; from the Pope
Christ's Vicar on earth, and Successor to S. Peter; from the particular
Diocese in which they received Baptism; from the Country or Nation to which
they belonged; from the Bishop under whom they lived; many of them from the
Religious Order in which they were professed; from one another; And lastly from
a man's self (as much as is possible) because the self same Protestant to day
is convicted in conscience, that his yesterday's Opinion was an error (as D.
Potter knows a man in the world who from a Puritan was turned to a moderate
Protestant) with whom therefore a reconciliation, according to D. Potters
grounds, is both impossible, and damnable.

40 It seems D. Potters last refuge to excuse himself and his Brethren from
Schism, is because they proceeded according to their conscience, dictating an
obligation under damnation to forsake the errors maintained by the Church of
Rome. His words are: Although we confess the Page 81.
Church of Rome to be (in some sense) a true Church, and her errors to some men
not damnable^ yet for us who are convinced in conscience, that she erres in
many things, a necessity lies upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake
her in those errors.

41 I answer: It is very strange, that you judge us extremely Uncharitable, in
saying, Protestants cannot be saved; while your self avouch the same of all
learned Catholics, whom ignorance cannot excuse. If this your pretense of
conscience may serve, what Schismatique in the Church, what popular seditious
brain in a kingdom, may not allege the dictamen of conscience to free
themselves from Schism, or Sedition? No man wishes them to do any thing
against their conscience, but we say, that they may, and ought to rectify, and
depose such a conscience, which is easy for them to do, even according to
your own affirmation* that we Catholics want no means necessary to
salvation. Easy to do? Nay not to do so, to any man in his right wits must
seem impossible. For how can these two apprehensions stand together: In the
Roman Church I enjoy all means necessary to salvation, and yet I cannot hope
to be saved in that Church? or, who can conjoyn in one brain (not cracked)
these assertions* After due examination I judge the Roman errors not to be in
themselves fundamental, or damnable; and yet I judge that according to true
reason, it is damnable to hold them? I say according to true reason. For if you
grant your conscience to be erroneous, in judging that you cannot be saved in
the Roman Church, by reason of her errors; there is no other remedy, but that
you must rectify your erring conscience, by your other judgment, that her
errors are not fundamental, nor damnable. And this is no more Charity, then
you daily afford to such other Protestants as you term Brethren, whom you
cannot deny to be in some errors, (unless you will hold, That of contradictory
propositions both may be true) and yet you do not judge it damnable to live in
their Communion, because you hold their errors not to be fundamental. You
ought to know, that according to the Doctrine of all Divines, there is great
difference between a speculatiue persuasion, and a practical dictamen of
conscience; and therefore although they had in speculation conceived the
visible Church to err in some doctrines, of themselves not damnable; yet with
that speculatiue judgment they might, and ought to have entertained this
practical dictamen, that for points not substantial to faith, they neither
were bound, nor lawfully could break the bond of Charity, by breaking unity in
Gods Church. You say that* hay and stubble Page 155.
and such unprofitable stuff (as are corruptions in points not fundamental)
laid on the roof, destroys not the house, whilst the main pillars are
standing on the foundation. And you would think him a mad man who to be rid of
such stuff, would set his house on fire, that so he might walk in the light,
as you teach that Luther was obliged to forsake the house of God, for an
unnecessary light, not without a combustion formidable to the whole Christian
world; rather then bear with some errors, which did not destroy the
foundation of faith. And as for others who entered in at the breach first made
by Luther, they might, and ought to have guided their consciences by that most
reasonable rule of Vincentius Lyrinensis, delivered in these words; Indeed it
is a matter of great Advers. haeres. c. 27.
moment, and both most profitable to be learned, and necessary to be remembered,
and which we ought again and again to illustrate, and inculcate with weighty
heaps of examples, that almost all Catholics may know, that they ought to
receive the Doctors with the Church, and not forsake the faith of the Church
with the Doctors: And much less should they forsake the faith of the Church to
follow Luther, Calvin, and such other Novelists. Moreover though your first
Reformers had conceived their own opinions to be true; yet they might, and
ought to have doubted, whether they were certain: because your self affirm,
that infallibility was not promised to any particular Persons, or Churches. And
since in cases of uncertainties, we are not to leave our Superior, nor cast
off his obedience, or publicly oppose his decrees; your Reformers might
easily have found a safe way to satisfy their zealous conscience, without a
public breach: especially if with this their uncertainty, we call to mind the
peaceable possession, and and prescription which by the confession of your own
Brethren, the Church, and Pope of Rome did for many ages enjoy. I wish you
would examine the works of your Brethren, by the words your self sets down to
free S. Cyprian from Schism: every syllable of which words convinces Luther,
and his Copartners to be guilty of that crime, and shows in what manner they
might with great ease, and quietness have rectified their consciences about
the pretended errors of the Church. S. Cyprian (say you) was a peaceable Page
124.
and modest man, dissented from others in his judgment, but without any breach
of Charity; condemned no man (much less any Church) for the contrary opinion.
He believed his own opinion to be true, but believed not, that it was
necessary, and therefore did not proceed rashly and peremptorily to censure
others, but left them to their liberty. Did your Reformers imitate this manner
of proceeding? Did they censure no man, much less any Church? S. Cyprian
believed his own Opinion to be true, but believed not that it was necessary,
and THEREFORE did not proceed rashly, and peremptorily to censure others. You
believe the points wherein Luther differs from us, not to be fundamental, or
necessary; and why do you not thence infer the like THEREFORE, he should not
have proceeded to censure others? In a word, since their disagreement from us
concerned only points which were not fundamental, they should have believed
that they might have been deceived, as well as the whole visible Church, which
you say may err in such points; and therefore their doctrines being not
certainly true, and certainly not necessary, they could not give sufficient
cause to depart from the Communion of the Church.

42 In other places you write so much, as may serve us to prove, that Luther,
and his followers ought to have deposed, and rectified their consciences: As
for example, when you say: When the Church Page 105.
has declared her self in any matter of opinion* or of Rites, her declaration
obliges all her children to peace, and external obedience. Nor is it fit, or
lawful for any private man to oppose his judgment to the public; (as Luther
and his fellows did) He may offer his opinion to be considered of, so he do it
with evidence, or great probability of Scripture, or reason, and very modestly,
still containing himself within the dutiful respect which he owes: but if he
will factiously advance his own conceits (his own conceits? and yet grounded
upon evidence of Scripture) and despise the Church so far as to cut of her
Communion; he may be justly branded and condemned for a Schismatique, yea and
an Heretic also in some degree, and in foro exteriori, though his opinion
were true, and much more if it be false. Could any man, even for a Fee, have
spoken more home to condemn your Predecessors of Schism, or Heresy? Could they
have stronger Motives to oppose the doctrine of the Church, and leave her
Communion, then evidence of Scripture? And yet, according to your own words,
they should have answered, and rectified their conscience, by your doctrine,
that though their opinion were true, and grounded upon evidence of Scripture,
or reason; yet it was not lawful for any private man to oppose his judgment
to the public, which obliges all Christians to peace and external
obedience: and if they cast off the Communion of the Church for maintaining
their own Conceits, they may be branded for Schismatiques, and Heretics in
some degree, and in foro exteriori, that is, all other Christians ought so to
esteem of them, (and why then are we accounted uncharitable for judging so of
you?) and they also are obliged to behave themselves in the face of all
Christian Churches, as if indeed they were not Reformers, but Schismatiques,
and Heretics, or as Pagans, and Publicans. I thank you for your ingenuous
confession, in recompense whereof, I will do a deed of Charity, by putting you
in mind, into what labyrinths you are brought, by teaching that the Church may
err in some points of faith, and yet that it is not lawful for any man to
oppose his judgment, or leave her Communion, though he have evidence of
Scripture against her. Will you have such a man dissemble against his
conscience, or externally deny a truth, known to be contained in holy
Scripture? How much more coherently do Catholics proceed, who believe the
universal infallibility of the Church, and from thence are assured, that there
can be no evidence of Scripture; or reason, against her definitions, nor any
just cause to forsake her Communion? M. Hooker, esteemed by many Protestants an
incomparable man, yields as much as we have alleged out of you. The will of
God is (says he) to have In his preface to his Books of Ecclesiastical
policy. Sect. 6. p. 28.
them do whatsoever the sentence of judicial and final decision shall
determine, yea though it seem in their private opinion, to swarve utterly from
that which is right. Does not this man tell Luther, what the will of God was,
which he transgressing, must of necessity be guilty of Schism? And must not
M. Hooker either acknowledge the universal infallibility of the Church, or
else drive men into the perplexities and labyrinths of dissembling against
their conscience, whereof now I speak? Not unlike to this, is your doctrine
delivered elsewhere. Before the Nicene Council (say you) many Page 131*
good Cotholique Bishops, were of the same opinion with the Donatists, that the
Baptism of Heretics was ineffectuall; and with the Novatians, that the
Church ought not to absolve some grievous sinners. These errors therefore (if
they had gone no further) were not in themselves Heretical, especially in the
proper, and most heavy, or bitter sense of that word; neither was it in the
Churches intention (or in her power) to make them such by her declaration. Her
intention was, to silence all disputes, and to settle peace and unity in her
government: to which all wise and peaceable men submitted, whatsoever their
opinion was. And those factious people, for their unreasonable and uncharitable
opposition, were very justly branded for Schismatiques. For us, the Mistaker
will never prove that we oppose any declaration of the Catholic Church etc.
and therefore he does uniustlie charge us either with Schism, or Heresy.
These words manifestly condemn your Reformers; who opposed the visible Church
in many of her declarations, Doctrines, and Commands imposed upon them, for
silencing all disputes, and settling peace and Unity in the government, and
therefore they still remaining obstinately disobedient, are justly charged with
Schism, and Heresy. And it is to be observed, that you grant the Donatists to
have been very justly branded for Schismatiques, although their opposition
against the Church, did concern (as you hold) a point not fundamental to the
Faith, and which according to S. Augustine, cannot be proved out of Scripture
alone; and therefore either does evidently convince that the Church is
universally infallible, even in points not fundamental; or else that it is
Schism, to oppose her declarations, in those very things wherein she may err;
and consequently that Luther, and his fellows were Schismatiques, by opposing
the visible Church, for points not fundamental, though it were (untruely)
supposed that she erred in such points. But by the way, how come you on the
sudden to hold the determination of a General Council (of Nice) to be the
declaration of the Catholic Church, seeing you teach, That General Councels
may err even fundamentally? And do you now say, with us, that to oppose the
declaration of the Church, is sufficient that one may be branded with Heresy,
which is a point so often impugned by you?

43 It is therefore most evident, that no pretended scruple of conscience could
excuse Luther; which he might, and ought to have rectified by means enough; if
Pride, Ambition, Obstinacy etc. had given him leave. I grant he was touched
with scruple of conscience, but it was because he had forsaken the visible
Church of Christ; and I beseech all Protestants for the love they bear to that
sacred ransom of their souls, the Blood of our blessed Savior, attentively
to ponder, and unpartially to apply to their own Conscience, what this Man
spoke concerning the feelings, and remorse of his. How often (says he) did my
trembling heart Tom. 2. Germ. Ien. fol. 9. and tom. 2. Wit. of anno 1562. de
abrog. Miss. private. fol. 244.
beat within me, and reprehending me, object against me that most strong
argument; Art thou only wise? Do so many worlds err? Were so many ages
ignorant? What if thou errest, and drawest so many into hell to be damned
eternally with thee? And in another place he says: Do thou who art but One,
and of no Tom. 5. An^ot. brevis.
account, take upon thee so great matters? What, if thou, being but one,
offendest? If God permit such, so many, and all to err; why may he not permit
thee to err? To this belong those arguments, the Church, the Church, the
Fathers, the Fathers, the Councels, the Customs, the multitudes, and greatness
of wise men: Whom do not these Mountains of arguments, these clouds, yea
these seas of Examples overthrow? And these thoughts wrought so deep in his
soul, that he often wished and desired that he had Colloq. mensal. fol. 158.
never begun this business: wishing yet further that his Writings were burned
and buried Praefat. in tom. German. Ien.
in eternal oblivion. Behold what remorse Luther felt, and how he wanted no
strength of malice to cross his own conscience: and therefore it was no
scruple, or conceived obligation of conscience, but some other motives which
induced him to oppose the Church. And if yet you doubt of his courage to
encounter, and strength to master all reluctations of conscience, hear an
example or two for that purpose. Of Communion under both kinds, thus he says:
If the Council De formula ^issae.
should in any case decree this, least of all would we then use both kinds, yea
rather in despite of the Council, and the Decree, we would use either but one
kind only, or neither, or in no case both. Was not Luther persuaded in
Conscience, that to use, neither kind was against our Saviors command? Is this
only to offer his opinion to be considered of, as you said all men ought to
do? And that you may be sure that he spoke from his heart, and if occasion had
been offered, would have been as good as his word; mark what he says of the
Elevation of the Sacrament: I did know In parva Con^ess.
the Elevation of the Sacrament to be Idolatricall; yet nevertheless I did
retain it in the Church at Wittemberg, to the end I might vex the devil
Carolostadius. Was not this a conscience large and capacious enough, that could
swallow Idolatry? Why would he not tolerate Idolatry in the Church of Rome (as
these men are wont to blaspheame) if he could retain it in his own Church at
Wittemberge? If Carolostadius, Luthers of spring, was the Devil, who but
himself must be his damme? Is Almighty God wont to send such furies to preach
the Gospel? And yet further (which makes most directly to the point in hand)
Luther in his Book of abrogating the Private Mass, exhorts the Augustine
Friars of Wittemberg, who first abrogated the Mass, that, even against their
conscience accusing them, they should persist in what they had begun,
acknowledging that in some things he himself had done the like. And Ioannes
Mathesius a Lutheran Preacher says: Antonius Musa the Parish Priest In orat.
Germ. 12. de Luth.
of Rocklitz, Vid. Tan. tom. 2. disput. 1. q. 2 dub. 4. n. 108.
recounted to me that on a time he heartily moaned himself to the Doctor (he
means Luther) that he himself could not believe what he preached to others:
And that D. Luther answered; praise and thanks be to God, that this happens
also to others, for I had thought it had happened only to me. Are not these
conscionable, and fit Reformers? And can they be excused from Schism, under
pretense that they held themselves obliged to forsake the Roman Church? If then
it be damnable to proceed against ones conscience, what will become of Luther
who against his conscience, persisted in his division from the Roman Church?

44 Some are said to flatter themselves with another pernicious conceit, that
they (forsooth) are not guilty of sin; Because they were not the first
Authors, but only are the continuers of the Schism, which was already begun.

45 But it is hard to believe, that any man of judgment, can think this excuse
will subsist, when he shall come to give up his final account. For according
to this reason, no Schism will be damnable, but only to the Beginners: Whereas
contrarily, the longer it continues the worse it grows to be, and at length
degenerates to Heresy; as wine by long keeping grows to be Vinegar, but not by
continuance, returns again to his former nature of wine. Thus S. Augustine
says, that Heresy is Lib. 2. cont. Cresc. c. 7.
Schism in veterate. And in another place: We object to you only the Ep. 164.
crime of Schism, which you have also made to become Heresy, by evil
persevering therein. And S. Hierom says: Though Schism Upon these words ad
Tit. 3. H^ereticum hominem etc.
in the beginning may be in some sort understood to be defferent from heresy;
yet there is no Schism, which does not feig^e to it self some Heresy, that it
may seem to have departed from the Church upon just cause, And so indeed it
falls out. For men may begin ^po^ passion, but afterward by instinct of
corrupt nature seeking to maintain their Schism as lawful, they fall into
some Heresy, without which their Separation could not be justified with any
color: as in our present case the very affirming that it is lawful to
continue a Schism unlawfully begun, is an error against the main principle of
Christianity, that it is not lawful for any Christian, to live out of Gods
Church, within which alone Salvation can be had; Or, that it is not damnable to
disobey her decrees, according to the words of our Savior: If he shall not
hear Mat. 18.
the Church, let him be to thee as a Pagan or Publican. And, He Luke 10. 16.
that despises you, despises me. We heard above Optatus Milevitanus saying
to Parmenianus, that both he, and all those other who continued in the Schism
begun by Majorinus, did inherit their Forefathers Schism; and yet Parmenianus
was the third Bishop after Majorinus in his Sea, and did not begin, but only
continue the Schism. For (says this holy Father) Caecilianus Lib. 1. cont.
Parm.
went not out of Majorinus thy Grandfather, but Majorious from Caecilianus:
neither did Caecilianus depart from the Chair of Peter, or Cyprian, but
Majorinus, in whose Chair thou fittest, which before Majorinus (Luther) had no
beginning. Seeing it is evident that these things passed in this manner (that,
for example, Luther departed from the Church, and not the Church from Luther)
it is clear that you be HEIRS both of the givers up of the Bible to be
burned, and of SCHISMATIQVES. And the Regal Power, or example of Henry the
Eight could not excuse his subjects from Schism, according to what we have
heard out of S. Crysostome saying: Nothing does so much provoke Hom. 11. in
epist. ad Ephesians.
the wrath of Almighty God, as that the Church should be divided. Although we
should do innumerable good deeds, if we divide the full Ecclesiastical
Congregation, we shall be punished no less, then they who did rend his
(natural) Body; for that was done to the gain of the whole world, though not
with that intention: but this has ^o good in it at all, but that the greatest
hurt rises from it. These things are spoken not only to those who bear office,
but to such also as are governed by them. Behold therefore, how liable both
Subjects, and Superiors are to the sin of Schism, if they break the unity
of Gods Church. The words of S. Paul can in no occasion be verified more then
in this of which we speak. They who do such things Romans 1. 3^
are worthy of death: and not only they that do them, but they also that
consent with the doers. In things which are indifferent of their own nature,
Custom may be occasion, that some act not well begun, may in time come to be
lawfully continued. But no length of Time, no Quality of Persons, no
Circumstance of Necessity can legitimate actions which are of their own nature
unlawful: and therefore division from Christ's mystical body, being of the
number of those Actions, which Divines teach to be intrinsece malas, evil of
their own nature and essence, no difference of Persons or Time can ever make it
lawful. D. Potter says: There neither was, nor can be any cause to depart
from the Church of Christ, no more then from Christ himself. And who dares
say, that it is not damnable to continue a Separation from Christ? Prescription
cannot in conscience run, when the first beginner, and his Successors are
conscious that the thing to be prescribed, for example goods or lands, were
unjustly possessed at the first* Christians are not like straies, that after a
certain time of wandering from their right home, fall from their owner to the
Lord of the Soil; but as long as they retain the indelible Character of
Baptism, and live upon earth, they are obliged to acknowledge subjection to
Gods Church. Humane* Laws may come to nothing by discontinuance of time, but
the Law of God, commanding us to conserve Unity in his Church, does still
remain. The continued disobedience of Children cannot deprive Parents of their
paternall right, nor can the Grandchild be undut^full to his Grandfather,
because his Father was unnatural to his own parent. The longer Gods Church is
disobeyed; the profession of her Doctrine denied; her Sacraments neglected; her
Liturgy condemned; her Unity violated; the more grievous the fault grows to
be: as the longer a man withholds a due debt, or retains his neighbors
goods, the greater injustice he commits. Constancy in evil does not extenuate,
but aggravate the same, which by extension of time, receives increase of
strength, and addition of greater malice. If these men's conceits were true, the
Church might come to be wholly divided by wicked Schisms, and yet after some
space of time, none could be accused of Schism, nor be obliged to return to
the visible Church of Christ: and so there should remain no One true visible
Church. Let therefore these men who pretend to honor, reverence, and believe
the Doctrine, and practice of the visible Church, and to condemn their
forefathers who forsook her, and say they would not have done so, if they had
lived in the days of their Fathers, and yet follow their example in remaining
divided from her Communion; consider, how truly these words of our Savior fall
upon them. Woe be to you, because you build Mat 23. v. 29. etc.
the Prophets sepulchers, and garnish the monuments of just men, and say: If we
had been in our Fathers days, we had not been their fellows in the blood of
the Prophets. Therefore you are a testimony to your own selves, that you are
the sons of them that killed the Prophets; and fill up the measure of your
Fathers.

46 And thus having demonstrated that Luther, his Associates, and all that
continue in the Schism by them begun, are guilty of Schism, by departing from
the visible true Church of Christ; it remains that we examine what in
particular was that Visible true Church, from which they departed, 5. Point.
Luther and the rest departed from the Roman Church.
that so they may know to what Church in particular they ought to return: and
then we shall have performed what was proposed to be handled in the fifth Point.

47 That the Roman Church (I speak not for the present, of the particular
Diocese of Rome, but of all visible Churches dispersed throughout the whole
world, agreeing in Faith with the Chair of Peter, whether that Sea were
supposed to be in the City of Rome or in any other place:) That (I say) the
Church of Rome, in this sense, was the visible Catholic Church out of which
Luther departed, is proved by your own confession, who assign for notes of the
Church, the true Preaching of Gods word, and due administration of Sacraments,
both which for the substance you cannot deny to the Roman Church, since you
confess that she wanted nothing fundamental, or necessary to salvation; and
for that very cause you think to clear your self from Schism, whose
property, as you say, is to cut off from the Page 76.
Body of Christ and the hope of Salvation, the Church from which it separates.
Now that Luther and his fellows were born and baptized in the Roman Church,
and that she was the Church out of which they departed, is notoriously known:
and therefore you cannot cut her off from the Body of Christ, and hope of
Salvation, unless you will acknowledge your self to deserve the just
imputation of Schism. Neither can you deny her to be truly Catholic by
reason of (pretended) corruptions, not fundamental. For your self avouch, and
endeavor to prove, that the true Catholic Church may err in such points.
Moreover, I hope you will not so much as go about to prove, that when Luther
rose, there was any other true visible Church, disagreeing from the Roman, and
agreeing with Protestants in their particular doctrines: and you cannot deny
but that England in those days agreed with Rome, and other Nations with
England: And therefore either Christ had no visible Church upon Earth, or else
you must grant that it was the Church of Rome. A truth so manifest, that those
Protestants who affirm the Roman Church to have lost the nature and being of a
true Church, do by inevitable consequence grant, that for diverse ages Christ
had no visible Church on earth: from which error, because D. Potter
disclaimeth, he must of necessity maintain, that the Roman Church is free from
fundamental, and damnable error, and that she is not cut off from the Body of
Christ, and the Hope of Salvation: And if (says he) any Zelots amongst us have
proceeded Ibid.
to heavier censures, their zeal may be excused, but their Charity and wisdom
cannot be justified.

48 And to touch particulars which perhaps some may object. No man is ignorant
that the Grecians, even the Schismatic Grecians, do in most points agree
with Roman Catholics, and disagree from the Protestant Reformation. They
teach Transubstantiation (which point D. Potter also Page 225.
confesses;) Invocation of Saints and Angels; veneration of Relics, and
Images; Auricular Confession; enjoined Satisfaction; Confirmation with Chrisme;
Extreme unction; All the seven Sacraments; Prayer, Sacrifice, Alms for the
dead; Monachisme; That Priests may not marry after their Ordination. In which
points that the Grecians agree with the Roman Church appears by a Treatise
published by the Protestant Divines of Wittemberg, entitled, Acta Theologorum
Wittembergensium, and I^remiae Patriarchae Constantinop. de Augustana
confessione etc. Wittembergae anno 1584. by the Protestant De statu Eccles.
Page 253.
Crispinus, and by Sir Edwin Sands in the Relation of the State of Religion of
the West. And I wonder with what color of truth (to say no worse) D. Potter
could affirm that the Doctrines debated between the Protestants Page 225.
and Rome, are only the partial and particular fancies of the Roman Church;
unless happily the opinion of Transubstantiation may be excepted, wherein the
latter Grecians seem to agree with the Romanists. Beside the Protestant Authors
already cited, Petrus Arcudi^s a Grecian, and a learned Catholic Writer, has
published a large Volume, the Argument and Title whereof is: Of the agreement
of the Roman, and Greek Church in the seven Sacraments. As for the Heresy of
the Grecians, that the Holy Ghost proceeds not from the Some, I suppose that
Protestants dissvow them in that error, as we do.

49 D. Potter will not (I think) so much wrong his reputation, as to tell us,
that the Waldenses, Wiccliffe, Husse, or the like were Protestants, because in
some things they disagreed from Catholics. For he well knows that the
example of such men is subject to these manifest exceptions, They were not of
all Ages, not in all Countries, But confined to certain places, and were
interrupted in Time, against the notion and nature of the word Catholic. They
had no Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, nor Succession of Bishops, Priests, and
Pastors. They differed among themselves, and from Protestants also. They agreed
in diverse things with us against Protestants. They held doctrines manifestly
absurd and damnable heresies.

50 The Waldenses began not before the year 1218, so far were they from
Universality of all Ages. For their doctrine: first, they denied all Judgments
which extended to the drawing of blood, and the Sabbath, for which cause they
were called In-sabbatists. Secondly, they taught that Lay men, and women might
consecrate the Sacrament, and preach (no doubt but by this means to make their
Master, Waldo, a mere lay man, capable of such functions.) Thirdly, that
Clergy men ought to have no possessions, or proprieties. Fourthly, that there
should be no division of Parishes, nor Churches, for a walled Church they
reputed as a barn. Fifthly, that men ought not to take an oath in any case.
Sixthly, that those persons sinned mortally, who accompanied without hope of
issue. Seaventhly, they held all things done above the girdle, by kissing,
touching, words, compression of the breasts, etc. to be done in Charity, and
not against Continency. Eighthly, that neither Priest, nor civil Magistrate,
being guilty of mortal sin did enjoy their dignity, or were to be obeyed.
Ninthly, they condemned Princes, and Judges. Tenthly, they affirmed singing in
the Church to be an hellish clamor. Eleaventhly, they taught that men might
dissemble their Religion, and so accordingly they went to Catholic Churches,
dissembling their faith, and made Offertories, confessions, and communions
after a dissembling manner. Waldo was so unlearned, that (says Act. Mon. Page
628.
Fox) he gave rewards to certain learned men to translate the holy Scripture
for him, and being thus helped did (as the same Fox there reports) confer the
form of religion in his time, to the infallible word of God. A goodly example,
for such as must needs have the Scripture in English, to be read by every
simple body, with such fruit of Godly doctrine, as we have seen in the foresaid
gross heresies of Waldo. The followers of Waldo, were like their Master, so
unlearned, that some of them (^aith Ibid.
Fox) expounded the words, Joan. 1. Sui eum non receperunt: Swine did not
receive him. And to conclude, they agreed in diverse things with Catholics
against Protestants, as may be seen in Tract. ^. cap 2. sect. subd. 3.
Brerely.

51 Neither can it be pretended, that these are slanders, forged by
Catholics. For, for besides that the same things are testified by Protestant
writers, as I^^yricus, Co^per, and others, our Authors cannot be suspected of
partiality in disfavour of Protestants, unless you will say perhaps, that they
were Prophets, and some hundred years ago, did both foresee that there were
to be Protestants in the world, and that such Protestants were to be like the
Waldenses. Besides, from whence, but from our Histories are Protestants come to
know; that there were any such men as the Waldenses? and that in some points
they agreed with the Protestants, and disagreed from them in others? And upon
what ground can they believe our Authors for that part wherein the Waldenses
were like to Protestants, and imagine they lied in the rest?

52 Neither could Wiccliffe continue a Church never interrupted from the time
of the Waldenses, after whom he lived more then one hundred and fifty years;
to wit, the year 1371. He agreed with Catholics about the worshipping of
Relics and Images: and about the Intercession of our blessed Lady, the ever
Immaculate Mother of God, he went so far as to say, It seems to me In sermon. d^
Assump. Mari^.
impossible, that we should be rewarded without the intercession of the Virgin
Mary. He held seven Sacraments, Purgatory, and other points. And against both
Catholics and Protestants he maintained sundry damnable doctrines, as diverse
Protestant Writers relate. As first: If a Bishop or Priest be in deadly sin,
he does not indeed either give Orders, Consecrate, or Baptize. Secondly, That
Ecclesiastical Ministers ought not to have any temporal possessions, nor
propriety in any thing, but should beg; and yet he himself brake into heresy
because he had been deprived by the Archbishop of Canterbury of a certain
Benefice; as all Schisms, and heresies begin upon passion, which they seek
to cover with the cloak of Reformation. Thirdly he condemned lawful Oaths,
like the Anabaptists. Fourthly, he taught that all things came to pass by
absolute necessity. Fifthly, he defended human merits as the wicked Pelagians
did, namely, as proceeding from natural forces, without the necessary help of
God's grace. Sixthly, that no man is a Civil Magistrate, while he is in mortal
sin; and that the people may at their pleasure correct Princes, when they
offend: by which doctrine he proves himself both an Heretic, and a Traitor.

53 As for Husse, his chiefest Doctrines were: That Lay people must receive in
both kinders and, That Civil Lords, Prelates and Bishops loose all right, and
authority, while they are in mortal sin, For other things he wholly agreed
with Catholics against Protestants; and the Bohemians his followers being
demanded, in what points they disagreed from the Church of Rome, propounded
only these: The necessity of Communion under both kinds; That all Civil
Dominion was forbidden to the Clergy; That Preaching of the word, was free for
all men, and in all places; That open Crimes were in no wise to be permitted
for avoiding of greater evil. By these particulars, it is apparent, that Husse
agreed with Protestants against us, in one only point of both kinds, which
according to Luther is a thing indifferent; because he teaches that Christ in
this matter In epist. ad Bohemos.
commanded nothing as necessary. And he says further: If thou come to a place
De utreque specie Sacram,
where one only kind is administered, use one kind only, as others do.
Melancthon likewise holds it a thing In Cent. epist. Theol. Page 225.
indifferent: and the same is the opinion of some other Protestants. All which
considered, it is clear that Protestants cannot challenge the Waldenses,
Wickliffe, and Husse for members of their Church: and although they could, yet
that would advantage them little toward the finding out a perpetual visible
Church of theirs; for the reasons above Numb. 49.
specified.

54 If D Potter would go so far off, as to fetch the Muscovites, Armenians*
Georgians. Aethiopians, or Abissines into his Church, they would prove over
dear bought: For they either hold the damnable heresy of Eu^iches, or use
Circumcision, or agree with the Greek, or Roman Church. And it is most certain
that they have nothing to do with the doctrine of the Protestants.

55 It being therefore granted that Christ had a visible Church in all ages,
and that there can be none assigned but the Church of Rome; it follows that
she is the true Cath. Church; and that those pretended Corruptions for which
they forsook her, are indeed divine truths, delivered by the visible Catholic
Church of Christ: And, that Luther and his followers departed from her, and
consequently are guilty of Schism, by dividing themselves from the Communion
of the Roman Church. Which is clearly convinced out of D. Potter himself,
although the Roman Church were but a particular Church. For he says: Whosoever
professes Page 7^.
himself to forsake the Communion of any one member of the body of Christ, must
confess himself consequently to forsake the whole. Since therefore in the same
place he expressly acknowledges the Church of Rome to be a member of the body
of Christ, and that it is clear they have forsaken her; it evidently follows,
that they have forsaken the whole, and therefore are most properly
Schismatiques.

56 And lastly, since the crime of Schism is so grievous, that according to
the doctrine of holy Fathers rehearsed above, no multitude of good works, no
moral honesty of life, no cruel death endured even for the profession of some
Article of faith can excuse any one who is guilty of that sin from damnation,
I leave it to be considered, whether it be not true Charity to speak as we
believe, and to believe as all Antiquity has taught us, That whosoever either
begins, or continues a division for the Roman Church, which we have proved to
be Christ's true Militant Church on earth, cannot without effectual repentance
hope to be a member of his Triumphant Church in heaven. And so I conclude with
these words of blessed S. Augustine: It is common Co^t. Parm. live. 2. c. 3.
to all Heretics to be unable to see that thing which in the world is the
most manifest, and placed in the light of all Nations, out of whose Unity
whatsoever they work, though they seem to do it with great care and diligence,
can no more avail them against the wrath of God, then the Spiders web against
the extremity of cold But now it is high time that we treat of the other sort
of Division from the Church, which is by Heresy.

THE ANSWER TO THE FIFTH CHAPTER.
The separation of Protestants from the Roman Church, being upon just and
necessary causes, is not any way guilty of Schism.
1 AD 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. In the seven first Sections of this Chapter, there
be many things said and many things supposed by you which are untrue, and
deserve a censure. As,

2 First, That Schism could not be a Division from the Church, or that a
Division from the Church could not happen, unless there always had been and
should be a visible Church. Which Assertion is a manifest falsehood; For
although there never had been any Church Visible or Invisible before this age,
nor should be ever after, yet this could not hinder, but that a Schism might
now be, and be a Division from the present visible Church. As though in France
there never had been until now a lawful Monarch, nor after him ever should
be, yet this hinders not, but that now there might be a Rebellion, and that
Rebellion might be an Insurrection against Sovereign authority.

3 That it is a point to be granted by all Christians, that in all ages there
has been a visible Congregation of faithful people. Which Proposition
howsoever you understand it, is not absolutely certain. But if you mean by
Faithful, (as it is plain you do) free from all error in faith, then you
know all Protestants with one consent affirm it to be false; and therefore
without proof to take it for granted is to beg the Question.

4 That supposing Luther and they which did first separate from the Roman
Church were guilty of Schism, it is certainly consequent, that all who persist
in this division must be so likewise. Which is not so certain as you pretend.
For they which alter without necessary cause the present government of any
state Civil or Ecclesiastical, do commit a great fault; whereof
notwithanding they may be innocent who continue this alteration, and to the
utmost of their power oppose a change though to the former state, when
continuance of time has once settled the present. Thus have I known some of
your own Church, condemn the Low Country men who first revolted from the King
of Spain, of the sin of Rebellion, yet absolve them from it who now being of
your Religion there, are yet faithful maintainers of the common liberty
against the pretenses of the K. of Spain.

5 Fourthly, That all those which a Christian is to esteem neighbors do
concur to make one company, which is the Church. Which is false; for a
Christian is to esteem those his neighbors, who are not members of the true
Church.

6 Fifthly, That all the members of the Visible Church, are by charity united
into one Mystical body. Which is manifestly untrue; for many of them have no
Charity.

7 Sixthly, That the Catholic Church, signifies one company of faithful
people, which is repugnant to your own grounds. For you require, not true
faith, but only the Profession of it, to make men members of the visible Church.

8 Seaventhly, That every Heretic is a Schismatique. Which you must
acknowledge false in those, who though they deny, or doubt of some point
professed by your Church, and so are Heretics; yet continue still in the
Communion of the Church.

9 Eighthly, That all the members of the Catholic Church, must of necessity be
united in external Communion. Which though it were much to be desired it were
so, yet certainly cannot be perpetually true. For a man unjustly
excommunicated, is not in the Churches communion, yet he is still a member of
the Church: and diverse times it has happened, as in the case of Chrysostom
and Epiphanius, that particular men, and particular Churches, have upon an
overvalued difference, either renounced Communion mutually, or one of them
separated from the other, and yet both have continued members of the Catholic
Church. These things are in those seven Sections, either said or supposed by
you untruly, without all show, or pretense of proof. The rest is an
impertinent common place, wherein Protestants and the cause in hand, are
absolutely unconcerned. And therefore I pass to the eighth Section.

10 Ad. 8. Wherein you obtrude upon us, a double Fallacy; One, in supposing
and taking for granted, that whatsoever is affirmed by three Fathers, must be
true; whereas your selves make no scruple of condemning many things of
falsehood, which yet are maintained, by more then thrice three Fathers.
Another, in pretending their words to be spoken absolutely, which by them are
limited and restrained to some particular cases. For whereas you say S.
Austine. c. 62. l. 2. cont. Parm. infers out of the former premises, That there
is no necessity to divide Unity: to let pass your want of diligence, in
quoting the 62. chapter of that Book, which has but 23. in it: to pass by
also, that these words which are indeed in the 11. Chapt. are not inferred out
of any such premises as you pretend, this I say is evident, that he says not
absolutely, that there never is, or can be any necessity to divide Unity (which
only were for your purpose,) but only in such a special cale, as he there sets
down: That is, When good men tolerate bad men, which can do the^ no spiritual
hurt, to the intent they may not be separated from those, who are spiritually
good: Then (says he) there is no necessity to divide Unity. Which very words
do clearly give us to understand, that it may fall out (as it does in our
case,) that we cannot keep Unity with bad men, without spiritual hurt, i. e.
without partaking with them in their impieties, and that then there is a
necessity to divide Unity from them: I mean, to break off conjunction with them
in their impieties. Which that it was S. Austines mind, it is most evident out
of the 21. c. of the same book: where to Parmenian demanding, how can a man
remain pure, being joined with those that are corrupted? He answers, Very true,
this is not possible, if he be joined with them, that is, if he commit any
evil with them, or favor them which do commit it. But if he do neither of
these, he is not joined with them. And presently after, these two things
retained, will keep such men pure and uncorrupted; that is, neither doing ill,
nor approving it. And therefore seeing you impose upon all men of your
Communion, a necessity of doing or at least approving many things unlawful,
certainly there lies upon us an unavoidable necessity of dividing unity, either
with you, or with God; and whether of these is rather to be done, be ye judges.

11 Irenaeus also says not simply (which only would do you service,) there
cannot possibly be any so important Reformation, as to justify a separation
from them who will not reform: But only, they cannot make any corruption so
great, as is the pernitiousnesse of a Schism: Now, They, here, is a relative,
and has an antecedent expressed in Irenaeus, which if you had been pleased to
take notice of, you would easily have seen, that what Irenaeus says, falls
heavy upon the Church of Rome, but touches Protestants nothing at all. For the
men he speaks of, are such as Propter modicas and quaslibet causas, for
trifling or small causes, divide the body of Christ; such as speak of peace and
make war; such as strain at gnatts, and swallow Camels. And these faith he,
can make no reformation of any such importance, as to countervaile the danger
of a division. Now seeing the causes of our separation from the Church of Rome,
are (as we pretend, and are ready to justify,) because we will not be partakers
with her in Superstition, Idolatry, Impiety, and most cruel Tyranny, both upon
the bodies and souls of men. Who can say, that the causes of our separation,
may be justly esteemed Modicae and quaelibet causae? On the other side, seeing
the Bishop of Rome, who was contemporary to Irenaeus, did as much (as in him
lay) cut off from the Churches unity, many great Churches, for not conforming
to him in an indifferent matter, upon a difference, Non de Catholico dogm^te,
sed de Ritu, vel Ritus potius tempore, not about any Catholic doctrine, but
only a Ceremony, or rather about the time of observing it; so Petavius values
it: which was just all one, as if the Church of France should excommunicate
those of their own Religion in England, for not keeping Christmas upon the same
day with them: Eusch. hist. l. 5 c. 24.
And seeing he was reprehended sharply and bitterly for it, by most of the
Bishops of the world, as Eusebius testifies, and (as Cardinal Perron though
mincing the matter, Perron. Replic. 3. l. 2. c.
yet confesses) by this very Ierenaeus himself in particular admonished, that
for so small a cause ( propter tam modicam causam,) he should not have cut off
so many Provinces from the body of the Church: and lastly, seeing the
Ecclesiastical story of those times, mentions no other notable example of any
such Schismatic presumption, but this of Victor: certainly we have great
inducement to imagine, that Irenaeus in this place by you quoted, had a
special aim at the Bishop and Church of Rome. Once, this I am sure of, that
the place fits him, and many of his successors, as well as if it had been made
purposely for them. And this also, that he which finds fault with them who
separate upon small causes, implies clearly, that he conceived, there might be
such causes as were great and sufficient: And that then a Reformation was to be
made, notwithstanding any danger of division that might ensue upon it.

12 Lastly, S. Denis of Alexandria, says indeed and very well, that all things
should be rather endured, then we should consent to the division of the Church:
I would add, Rather then consent to the continuation of the division, if it
might be remedied. But then, I am to tell you, that he says not All things
should rather be done, but only, All things should rather be endured or
suffered: wherein he speaks not of the evil of sin, but of Pain and Misery:
Not of tolerating either Error or Sin in others (though that may be lawful,)
much less of joining with others for quietness sake, (which only were to your
purpose) in the profession of Error and practice of sin: but of suffering
any affliction, nay even martyrdom in our own persons, rather then consent to
the division of the Church. Omnia incommoda, so your own Christophorson,
enforced by the circumstances of the place, translates Dionysius his words, All
miseries should rather be endured, then we should consent to the Churches
division.

13 Ad. 9. In the next Paragraph you affirm two things, but prove neither,
unless a vehement Asseveration, may pass for a weak proof. You tell us
first, that the Doctrine of the total deficiency of the visible Church, which
is maintained by diverse chief Protestants, implies in it vast absurdity, or
rather sacrilegious Blasphemy. But neither do the Protestants alleged by you,
maintain the deficiency of the Visible Church, but only of the Churches
visibility, or of the Church as it is Visible, which so acute a man as you, now
that you are minded of it, I hope will easily distinguish: Neither do they
hold, that the visible Church has failed totally and from its essence, but
only from its purity: and that it fell into many corruptions, but yet not to
nothing. And yet if they had held, that there was not only no pure visible
Church, but none at all: surely they had said more then they could justify, but
yet you do not show, neither can I discover any such Vast absurdity or
Sacrilegious Blasphemy in this Assertion. You say secondly, that the Reason
which cast them upon this wicked Doctrine, was a desperate voluntary necessity,
because they were resolved not to acknowledge the Roman to be the true Church,
and were convinced by all manner of evidence, that for diverse ages before
Luther there was no other. But this is not to dispute but to divine, and take
upon you the property of God which is to know the hearts of men. For why I
pray, might not the Reason hereof rather be, because they were convinced by all
manner of evidence, as Scripture, Reason, Antiquity, that all the visible
Churches in the world, but above all the Roman, had degenerated from the purity
of the Gospel of Christ, and thereupon did conclude there was no visible
Church, meaning by no Church, none free from corruption, and conformable in all
things to the doctrine of Christ.

14 Ad. 10. Neither is there any repugnance (but in words only) between these
(as you are pleased to style them) exterminating Spirits, and those other, whom
out of Curtesy you entitle, in your 10.. more moderate Protestants. For these
affirming the Perpetual Visibility of the Church, yet neither deny, nor doubt
of her being subject to manifold and grievous corruptions, and those of such a
nature, as were they not mitigated by invincible, or at least a very probable
ignorance, none subject to them could be saved. And they on the other side,
denying the Churches Visibility, yet plainly affirm, that they conceive very
good hope of the Salvation of many, of their ignorant and honest Forefathers.
Thus declaring plainly, though in words they denied the Visibility of the true
Church, yet their meaning was not to deny the perpetuity, but the perpetual
purity and incorruption of the Visible Church.

15 Ad. 11. Let us proceed therefore to your 11. Sect. where though D. Potter
and other Protestants granting the Churches perpetual Visibility, make it
needless for you to prove it, yet you will needs be doing that which is
needless. But you do it so coldly and negligently, that it is very happy for
you, that D. Potter did grant it.

16 For what if the Prophets spoke more obscurely of Christ, then of the
Church? What if they had foreseen, that greater contentions would arise about
the Church then Christ? Which yet, he that is not a mere stranger in the story
of the Church, must needs know to be untrue, and therefore not to be foreseen
by the Prophets. What if we have manifestly received the Church from the
Scriptures? Does it follow from any, or all these things, that the Church of
Christ must be always Visible?

17 Besides, what Protestant ever granted (that which you presume upon so
confidently,) that every man for all the affairs of his soul must have
recourse to some congregation? If some one Christian lived alone among Pagans
in some country, remote from Christendom, shall we conceive it impossible for
this man to be saved, because he cannot have recourse to any congregation, for
the affairs of his soul? Will it not be sufficient, for such a ones
Salvation, to know the doctrine of Christ, and live according to it? Such
fancies as these, you do very wisely to take for granted, because you know
well, it is hard to prove them.

18 Let it be as unlawful as you please, to deny and dissemble matters of
faith. Let them that do so, not be a Church, but a damned Crew of Sycophants:
What is this to the Visibility of the Church? May not the Church be Invisible,
and yet these that are of it profess their faith? No, say you: Their
profession will make them visible. Very true, visible in the places where, and
in the times when they live, and to those persons, unto whom they have
necessary occasion, to make their profession: But not visible to all, or any
great, or considerable part of the world while they live, much less
conspicuous to all Ages after them. Now it is a Church thus illustriously and
conspicuously visible that you require: by whose splendor, all men may be
directed and drawn to repair to her, for the affairs of their souls: Neither
is it the Visibility of the Church absolutely, but this degree of it, which the
most rigid Protestants deny: which is plain enough out of the places of
Napper, cited by you in your 9. Part. of this chapt. Where his words are, God
has withdrawn his visible Church from open Assemblies, to the hearts of
particular godly men. And this Church which had not open Assemblies, he calls
The latent and Invisible Church. Now I hope Papists in England will be very apt
to grant, men may be so far Latent and Invisible, as not to profess their
faith in open Assemblies, nor to proclaim it to all the world, and yet not
deny, nor dissemble it; nor deserve to be esteemed a damned crew of dissembling
Sycophants.

19 But preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, cannot but
make a Church visible: and these are inseparable notes of the Church. I answer,
they are so far inseparable, that wheresoever they are, there a Church is: But
not so, but that in some cases there may be a Church, where these notes are
not. Again, these notes will make the Church visible: But to whom? certainly
not to all men, nor to most me^: But to them only to whom the word is preached,
and the Sacraments are administered. They make the Church visible to whom
themselves are visible, but not to others. As where your Sacraments are
administered, and your doctrine preached, it is visible, that there is a Popish
Church. But this may perhaps be visible to them only, who are present at these
performances, and to others as secret, as if they had never been performed.

20 But S. Austine says, it is an impudent, abominable, detestable speech, and
so forth, to say the Church has perished. I answer; 1. All that S. Austine
says, is not true. 2. Though this were true, it were nothing to your purpose,
unless you will conceive it all one not to be, and not to be conspicuously
visible. 3. This very speech that the Church perished, might be false and
impudent in the Donatists, and yet not so in the Protestants. For there is no
incongruity, that what has lived 500. years, may perish in 1600. But S.
Austin denied not only the Actual perishing, but the possibility of it: and
not only of it is falling to nothing, but of it is falling into corruption. I
answer: though no such thing appears out of those places, yet I believe hear
of disputation against the Donatists, and a desire to over-confute them,
transported him so far, as to urge against them more then was necessary, and
perhaps more then was true. But were he now revived, and did but confront the
doctrine of after-ages, with that, his own experience would enforce him to
change his opinion. As concerning the last speech of S. Austine, I cannot but
wonder very much, why he should think it absurd for any man to say, There are
sheep which he knows not, but God knows: and no less at you, for obtruding
this sentence upon us as pertinent proof of the Churches visibility.

21 Neither do I see, how the Truth of any present Church depends the
Perpetual Visibility, nay nor upon the perpetuity of that which is past or
future. For what sense is there, that it should not be in the power of God
Almighty, to restore to a flourishing estate, a Church which oppression has
made Invisible? to repair that which is ruined; to reform that which was
corrupted, or to reviue that which was dead? Nay what Reason is there, but that
by ordinary means this may be done, so long as the Scriptures by Divine
Providence are preserved in their integrity and Authority? As a Commonwealth
though never so far collapsed and overrunne with disorders, is yet in
possibility of being reduced unto its Original state, so long as the Ancient
Laws, and Fundamental Constitutions are extant, and remain inviolate, from
whence men may be directed how to make such a Reformation. But S. Austine urges
this uery Argument against the Donatists, and therefore it is good. I answer,
that I doubt much of the Consequence, and my Reason is, because you your selves
acknowledge, that even general Councels (and therefore much more particular
Doctors) though infallible in their determinations* are yet in their Reasons
and Arguments, where upon they ground them, subject to like Passions and
Errors with other men.

22 Lastly, whereas you say, That all Divines define Schism a Division from
the true Church, and from thence collect, That there must be a known Church
from which it is possible for men to depart: I might very justly question your
Antecedent, and desire you to consider, whether Schism be not rather, or at
least be not as well a division of the Church, as from it? A separation not of
a part from the whole, but of some parts from the other. And if you liked not
this definition, I might desire you to inform me in those many Schisms, which
have happened in the Church of Rome, which of the parts was the Church, and which
was divided from it. But to let this pass, certainly your consequence is most
unreasonable. For though whenever there is a Schism, it must necessarily
suppose a Church existent there, yet sure we may define a Schism, that is,
declare what the word signifies (for Defining is no more) though at this
present there were neither Schism nor Church in the world. Unless you will
say, that we cannot tell what a Rose is, or what the word Rose signifies, but
only in the Summer when we have Roses: or that in the world to come, when men
shall not marry, it is impossible to know, what it is to marry: or that the
Plague is not a disease, but only when some body is infected: or that Adultery
is not a sin, unless there be Adulterers: or that before Adam had a Child, he
knew not, and God could not have told him, what it was to be a Father.
Certainly Sr, you have forgot your Metaphysics, which you so much glory in, if
you know not, that the connexions of essential predicates with their subjects,
are eternal, and depend not at all upon the actual existence of the thing
defined. This Definition therefore of Schism, concludes not the existence of a
Church, even when it is defined* much less the perpetual continuance of it,
and least of all the continuance of it in perpetual visibility and purity,
which is the only thing that we deny, and you are to prove. By this time, you
perceive I hope, that I had reason to say, that it was well for you, that D.
Potter granted the Churches Perpetual Visibility: for, for ought I can
perceive, this Concession of his, is the best stake in your hedge, the best
pillar upon which this Conclusion stands; which yet is the only groundwork of
your whole Accusation.

23 Ad 12. 47. 48. 49. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. The remainder of this Chapter,
to convince Luther and all that follow him to be Schismatiques, affords us
Arguments of two sorts: The first drawn from the nature of the thing: the
second from D. Potters words and acknowledgments. So that the former if they be
good, must be good against all Protestants: the latter only against D. Potter.
I will examine them all, and doubt not to make i^ appear even to your self,
if you have any indifference, that there is not any sound and concluding reason
amongst them, but that they are all poor and miserable Sophismes.

24 First then to prove us Schismatiques, you urge from the nature of Schism
this only Argument.

Whosoever leave the external Communion of the visible Church, are
Schismatiques: But Luther and his followers left the external Communion of the
visible Church of Christ: Therefore they are Schismatiques.

The Major of this Syllogism you leave naked without proof; and conceive it,
as it should seem, able enough to shift for it self. The Minor or second
Proposition of this Argument, you prove by two other. The first is this.

They which forsook the external Communion of all visible Churches, must needs
forsake the external Communion of the true visible Church of Christ: But
Luther and his followers forsook the external Communion of all visible
Churches: Therefore they forsook the external Communion of the true visible
Church.

The Major of this Syllogism you take for granted (as you have reason:) The
Minor you prosecute with great pomp of words, and prove with plenty of Reasons,
built upon the Confessions of D. Potter, Luther, Calvin, and other Protestants;
and this you do in the 12 of this Chapter.

The second Argument to prove the Assumption of your first Syllogism, stands
thus.

The Roman Church, when Luther and his followers made the separation, was the
true visible Church of Christ: But Luther and his followers forsook the
external Communion of the Roman Church: Therefore they forsook the external
Communion of the true visible Church of Christ.

The Assumption of this Syllogism needs no proof: The Proposition which needs
it very much, you endeavor to confirm by these Reasons.

1 The Roman Church had the notes of the Church assigned by Protestants, 1. The
true preaching of the Word, and due administration of the Sacraments: Therefore
she was the true Church.

The Antecedent is proved: Because D. Potter confesses she wanted nothing
Fundamental or necessary to salvation: Therefore for the Substance of the
matter she had these notes.

2 Either the Roman Church was the true visible Church, or Protestants can name
and prove some other disagreeing from the Roman, and agreeing with Protestants,
in their particular Doctrine: or else they must say, there was no visible
Church: But they will not say there was no Church: They cannot name and prove
any other disagreeing from the Roman, and agreeing with Protestants in their
particular Doctrines; because this cannot be the Greek Church, nor that of the
Waldenses, Wicklifites, Hussites, nor that of the Muscovites, Armenians,
Georgians, Aethiopians, which you confirm by several Arguments: Therefore
they must grant, that the Roman Church was the true visible Church.

And this is the business of your 47. 48. 49. 50. 51, 52. 53. 54. and 55.
Sections of this Chapter.

25 Now to all this, I answer very briefly thus: That you have played the
unwise builder, and erected a stately structure upon a false foundation. For
whereas you take for granted as an undoubted Truth, That whosoever leave the
external communion of the visible Church, are Schismatic, I tell you Sir,
you presume too much upon us, and would have us grant, that which is the main
point in Question. For either you suppose the external Communion of the Church
corrupted, and that there was a necessity for them, that would communicate with
this Church, to communicate in her corruptions: Or you suppose her Communion
uncorrupted. If the former, and yet will take for granted, that all are
Schismatiques, that leave her Communion though it be corrupted, you beg the
Question in your proposition. If the latter, you beg the Question in your
supposition, for Protestants, you know, are Peremptory and Unanimous in the
Denial of both these things: Both that the Communion of the Visible Church,
was then uncorrupted; And that they are truly Schismatiques, who leave the
Communion of the Visible Church, if corrupted; especially, if the case be so
(and Luthers was so) that they must either leave her Communion, or of necessity
Communicate with her in her corruptions. You will say perhaps, that you have
already proved it impossible, that the Church, or her Communion should be
corrupted. And therefore that they are Schismatiques, who leave the external
Communion of the Visible Church, because she cannot be corrupted. And that
hereafter you will prove, that corruptions in the Churches communion, though
the belief and profession of them be made the condition of her communion,
cannot justify a separation from it: And therefore that they are Schismatiques,
who leave the Churches communion though corrupted. I Answer, that I have
examined your proofs of the former, and found that a vein of Sophistry runs
clean through them: And for the latter, it is so plain and palpable a
falsehood, that I cannot but be confident, whatsoever you bring in proof of
it, will like the Apples of Sodom, fall to Ashes upon the first touch. And this
is my first and main exception against your former discourse: that accusing
Protestants of a very great and horrible crime, you have proved your accusation
only with a fallacy.

26 Another is, that although it were granted Schism, to leave the external
Communion of the visible Church in what state or case so ever it be, and that
Luther and his followers were Schismatiques, for leaving the external
Communion of all visible Churches: yet you fail exceedingly of clearing the
other necessary point undertaken by you, That the Roman Church was then the
Visible Church. For neither do Protestants (as you mistake) make the true
preaching of the word, and due administration of the Sacraments, the notes of
the visible Church, but only of a visible Church: now these you know are very
different things, the former signifying the Church Catholic, or the whole
Church: the Latter a Particular Church, or a part of the Catholic. And
therefore suppose out of curtesy, we should grant, what by argument you can
never evince, that your Church had these notes, yet would it by no means
follow, that your Church were the Visible Church, but only a Visible Church:
not the whole Catholic, but only a part of it. But then besides, where does
D. Potter acknowledge any such matter as you pretend? Where does he say, that
you had for the substance the true Preaching of the word, or due Administration
of the Sacraments? Or where does he say, that (from which you collect this) you
wanted nothing Fundamental, or necessary to Salvation? He says indeed, that
though your Errors were in themselves damnable, and full of great impiety, yet
he hopes, that those amongst you, who were invincibly ignorant of the truth,
might by Gods great mercy, have their errors pardoned, and their souls saved:
And this is all he says, and this you confess to be all he says, See c. 1..
3.
in diverse places of your book: which is no more, then you your self do, and
must affirm of Protestants: and yet I believe, you will not suffer us to
infer from hence, that you grant Protestants to have, for the substance, the
true preaching of the word, and due administration of the Sacraments, and want
nothing fundamental, or necessary to salvation. And if we should draw this
consequence from your concession, certainly we should do you injury, in regard
many things may in themselves, and in ordinary course be necessary to
salvation, to those that have means to attain them, as your Church generally
has: which yet, by accident, to these which were by some impregnable
impediment, debarred of these means, may by Gods mercy be made unnecessary.

27 Lastly, whereas you say, that Protestants must either grant that your
Church then was the visible Church, or name some other, disagreeing from yours
and agreeing with Protestants in their particular doctrine, or acknowledge
there was no visible Church. It is all one as if (to use S. Paul's similitude)
the head should say to the foot, either you must grant that I am the whole
body, or name some other member that is so, or confess that there is no body.
To which the foot might answer; I acknowledge there is a body: and yet, that no
member beside you is this body: nor yet that you are it, but only a part of it.
And in like manner say we. We acknowledge a Church there was, corrupted indeed
universally, but yet such a one as we hope by Gods gracious acceptance, was
still a Church. We pretend not to name any one Society that was this Church,
and yet we see no reason, that can enforce us to confess that yours was the
Church, but only a part of it, and that one of the worst then extant in the
World. In vain therefore have you troubled your self in proving, that we
cannot pretend, that either the Greeks, Waldenses, Wickliffites, Hussites,
Muscovites, Armenians, Georgians, Abyssines, were then the Visible Church. For
all this dicourse proceeds from a false and vain supposition, and beggs another
point in Question between us, which is, that some Church of one denomination
and one Communion (as the Roman, the Greek etc.) must be always, exclusively
to all other Communions, the whole visible Church. And though perhaps some weak
Protestant having this false principle settled in him, that there was to be
always some Visible Church of one denomination, pure from all error in
doctrine, might be wrought upon, and prevailed with by it, to forsake the
Church of Protestants: yet why it should induce him to go to yours, rather
then the Greek Church, or any other, which pretends to perpetual succession
as well as yours, that I do not understand; Unless it be for the reason which
Aeneas Syluius gave, why more held the Pope above a Council, then a Council
above the Pope: which was because Popes did give Bishoprics, and
Archbishopricks, but Counsels gave none, and therefore suing in Forma
Pauperis, were not like to have their cause very well maintained. For put the
case, I should grant of mere favor, that there must be always some Church of
one Denomination and Communion, free from all errors in doctrine, and that
Protestants had not always such a Church: it would follow indeed from thence,
that I must not be a Protestant: But that I must be a Papist, certainly it
would follow by no better consequence then this; If you will leave England, you
must of necessity go to Rome. And yet with this wretched fallacy, have I been
sometimes abused my self, and known many other poor souls seduced, not only
from their own Church, and Religion, but unto yours. I beseech God to open the
eyes of all that love the truth, that they may not always be held captive,
under such miserable delusions.

28 We see then, how unsuccessefull you have been in making good your
accusation, with reasons drawn from the nature of the thing, and which may be
urged in common against all Protestants. Let us come now to the Arguments of
the other kind, which you build upon D. Potters own words, out of which you
promise unanswerable reasons to convince Protestants of Schism.

29 But let the understanding Reader, take with him but three or four short
remembrances, and I dare say he shall find them upon examination, not only
answerable, but already answered. The memorandums I would commend to him, are
these.

30 That not every separation, but only a causeless separation from the
external Communion of any Church, is the Sin of Schism.

31 That imposing upon men under pain of Excommunication a necessity of
professing known errors, and practicing known corruptions, is a sufficient and
necessary cause of separation: and that this is the cause which Protestants
allege to justify their separation from the Church of Rome.

32 That to leave the Church, and to leave the external Communion of a Church,
at least as D. Potter understands the words, is not the same thing: That being
done by ceasing to be a member of it, by ceasing to have those requisites which
constitute a man a member of it, as faith and obedience: This by refusing to
communicate with any Church in her Liturgies and public worship of God. This
little Armor if it be rightly placed, I am persuaded, will repel all those
Batteries which you threaten shall be so furious.

33 Ad 13. 14. 15. The first is a sentence of S. Austine against Donatus,
applied to Luther thus. If the Church perished, what Church brought forth
Donatus, (you say Luther?) If she could not perish, what madness moved the
sect of Donatus to separate, upon pretense to avoid the Communion of bad men?
Whereunto, one fair answer (to let pass many others) is obvious out of the
second observation: That this sentence though it were Gospel, as it is not, is
impertinently applied to Luther and Lutherans. Whose pretense of separation (be
it true or be it false,) was not (as that of the Donatists,) only to avoid the
Communion of bad men: but to free themselves from a necessity (which but by
separating was unavoidable,) of joining with bad men in their impieties. And
your not substituting Luther in stead of Donatus in the latter part of the
Dilemma as well as in the former, would make a suspicious man conjecture that
you your self took notice of this exception of disparitie between Donatus and
Luther.

34 Ad 16. Your second onset drives only at those Protestants, who hold the
true Church was invisible for many ages. Which Doctrine (if by the true Church
be understood, the pure Church, as you do understand it) is a certain truth,
and it is easier for you to declaime (as you do) then to dispute against it.
But these men you say must be Heretics because they separated from the
Communion of the visible Church: and therefore also from the Communion of that
which they say was invisible: In as much as the invisible Church communicated
with the visible.

35 Ans. I might very justly desire some proof of that which so confidently
you take for granted: That, there were no persecuted and oppressed maintainers
of the Truth in the days of our Forefathers, but only such as dissembled
their opinions, and lived in your Communion. And truly if I should say there
were many of this condition, I suppose I could make my Affirmative much more
probable, then you can make your Negative. We read in Scripture, that Elias
conceived There was none left besides himself in the whole kingdom of
Israel, who had not revolted from God: and yet God himself assures us that he
was deceived. And if such a man, a Prophet, and one of the greatest, erred in
his judgment touching his own time, and his own country, why may not you, who
are certainly but a man, and subject to the same passions as Elias was, mistake
in thinking, that in former ages, in some country or other, there were not
always some good Christians, which did not so much as externally bow their
knees to your Baal? But this answer I am content you shall take no notice of,
and think it sufficient to tell you, that if it be true, that this supposed
invisible Church did hypocritically communicate with the visible Church, in her
corruptions, then Protestants had cause, nay necessity, to forsake their
Communion also, for otherwise they must have joined with the^ in the practice
of impieties: and seeing they had such cause to separate, they presume their
separation cannot be schismatic.

36 Yes, you reply, to forsake the external Communion of them with whom they
agree in faith, is the most formal and proper sin of Schism. Ans. Very true,
but I would fain know wherein. I would gladly be informed, whether I be bound
for fear of Schism, to communicate with those that believe as I do, only in
lawful things, or absolutely in every thing: whether I am to join with them in
superstition and Idolatry, and not only in a common profession of the faith
wherein we agree, but in a common dissimulation or abjuration of it. This is
that which you would have them do, or else, forsooth, they must be
Schismatiques. But hereafter I pray remember, that there is no necessity of
communicating even with true Believers in wicked actions. Nay, that there is a
necessity herein to separate from them. And then I dare say, even you being
their judge, the reasonableness of their cause to separate shall, according to
my first observation, justify their separation from being schismatic.

37 Arg: But the property of Schism according to D. Potter is to cut off from
the hope of salvation, the Church from which it separates: And these
Protestants have this property, Therefore they are Schismatiques.

38 Ans. I deny the Syllogism, it is no better then this: One Symptom of the
Plague is a Fever,
But such a man has a Fever,
Therefore he has the Plague.
The true conclusion which issues out of these Premises, should be this.
Therefore he has one Symptom of the plague. And so likewise in the former,
therefore they have one property or one quality of Schismatiques. And as in the
former instance, The man that has one sign of the plague, may by reason of
the absence of other requisites, not have the plague: So these Protestants may
have something of Schismatiques, and yet not be Schismatiques. A Tyrant
sentencing a man to death for his pleasure, and a just judge that condemns a
malefactor, do both sentence a man to death, and so for the matter do both
the same thing: yet the one does wickedly, the other justly. What Is the reason?
because the one has cause, the other has not. In like manner Schismatiques,
either always or generally denounce damnation to them from whom they separate.
The same do these Protestants, and yet are not Schismatiques. The Reason:
because Schismatiques do it, and do it without cause, and Protestants have
cause for what they do. The impieties of your Church, being, generally
speaking, damnable, unless where they are excused by ignorance, and expiated
at least by a general repentance. In fine, though perhaps it may be true, that
all Schismatiques do so: yet universal affirmatiues are not converted, and
therefore it follows not by any good Logic, that all that do so, when there
is just cause for it, must be Schismatiques. The cause in this matter of
separation is all in all, and that for ought I see, you never think of. But if
these rigid Protestants have just cause to cut off your Church from the hope of
salvation: How can the milder sort allow hope of salvation to the Members of
this Church? Ans. Distinguish the quality of the Persons censured, and this
seeming repugance of their censures will vanish into nothing. For your Church
may be considered either in regard of those, in whom, either negligence, or
pride, or worldly fear, or hopes, or some other voluntary sin, is the cause
of their ignorance, which I fear is the case of the generality of men amongst
you: or in regard of those who owe their Errors from Truth, to want of
capacity, or default of instruction; either in respect of those that might know
the truth and will not, or of those who would know the truth but (all things
considered) cannot: In respect of those that have eyes to see, and will not
see, or those that would gladly see, but want eyes, or light. Consider the
former sort of men, (which your more rigid censurers seem especially to reflect
upon,) and the heaviest sentence will not be too heavy. Consider the latter,
and the mildest will not be too mild. So that here is no difference but in
words only, neither are you flattered by the one; nor uncharitably censured by
the other.

39 Your next blow is directed against the milder sort of Protestants, who you
say involve themselves in the sin of Schism by communicating with those (as
you call them) exterminating Spirits, whom you conceive your self to have
proved Schismatiques: And now load them further with the crime of Heresy. For,
say you, if you held your selves obliged under pain of damnation, to forsake
the Communion of the Roman Church by reason of her Errors, which yet you
confess were not fundamental: shall it not be much more damnable, to live in
confraternity with these, who defend an Error of the failing of the Church,
which in the Donatists you confess to have been properly Heretical?

40 Answ: You mistake in thinking that Protestants hold themselves obliged not
to communicate with you, only or principally by reason of your Errors and
Corruption. For the true reason according to my third observation, is not so
much because you maintain Errors and Corruptions, as because you impose them:
and will allow your Communion to none but to those that will hold them with
you; and have so ordered your Communion, that either we must communicate with
you in these things, or nothing. And for this very reason, though it were
granted, that these Protestants held this doctrine which you impute to them;
And though this Error were as damnable and as much against the Creed as you
pretend: Yet after all this, this disparity between you and them, might make it
more lawful for us to communicate with them then you: because what they hold,
they hold to themselves, and refuse not (as you do) to communicate with them
that hold the contrary.

41 Thus we may answer your Argument, though both your former Suppositions were
granted. But then for a second answer, I am to tell you that there is no
necessity of granting either of them. For neither do these Protestants hold
the failing of the Church from its being, but only from its visibility: which
if you conceive all one, then must you conceive that the stars fail every
day, and the Sun every night. Neither is it certain that the doctrine of the
Churches failing is repugnant to the Creed. For as the truth of the Article of
the Remission of sins, depends not upon the actual remission of any man's
sins, but upon Gods readiness and resolution to forgive the sins of all that
believe and repent; so that, although unbeleef or impenitence should be
universal, and the Faithful should absolutely fail from the children of men,
and the son of man should find no faith on the earth, yet should the Article
still continue true, that God would forgive the sins of all that repent: In
like manner, it is not certain that the truth of the Article of the Catholic
Church depends upon the actual existence of a Catholic Church, but rather
upon the right, that the Church of Christ, or rather (to speak properly) the
Gospel of Christ has to be universally believed. And therefore the Article
may be true, though there were no Church in the world. In regard, this
notwithstanding, it remains still true that there ought to be a Church, and
this Church ought to be Catholic. For as, of these two Propositions, There is
a Church in America, and, There should be a Church in America, The truth of
the latter depends not upon the truth of the former, so neither does it in
these two: There is a Church diffused all the world over, and, There should be
a Church diffused all the world over.

42 Thirdly, if you understand by Errors not fundamental, such as are not
damnable, it is not true, as I have often told you, that we confess your
errors not fundamental.

43 Lastly, for your desire that I should here apply an authority of S. Cyprian
alleged in your next number, I would have done so very willingly, but indeed I
know not how to do it: for in my apprehensio^ it has no more to do with your
present business of proving it unlawful, to communicate with these men, who
hold the Church was not always visible, then In nova fert animus. Besides, I
am here again to remember you, that S. Cyprians words, were they never so
pertinent yet are by neither of the parts litigant esteemed any rule of faith.
And therefore the urging of them and such like authorities, serves only to
make Books great, and Controversies endless.

44 Ad 17. The next Section in three long leaves delivers us this short sense.
That those Protestants which say they have not left the Churches external
Communion, but only her corruptions pretend to do that which is impossible.
Because these corruptions were inherent in the Churches external Communion:
and therefore he that forsakes them cannot but forsake this.

45 Ans. But who are they that pretend, they forsook the Churches corruptions,
and not her external communion? Some there be that say, they have not left the
Church, that is, not ceased to be members of the Church, but only left her
corruptions: some, that they have not left the communion, but the corruptions
of it; meaning the internal communion of it, and conjunction with it by faith
and obedience: which disagree from the former only in the manner of speaking:
for he that is in the Church, is in this kind of communion with it: and he
that is not in this internal communion, is not in the Church. Some perhaps,
that they left not your external communion in all things; meaning, that they
left it not voluntarily being not fugitivi but fugati, as being willing to
join with you in any act of piety; Casaubon. i^ Ep. ad Card. Perron.
but were by you necessitated and constrained to do so, because you would not
suffer them to do well with you, unless they would do ill with you. Now to
do ill that you may do well, is against the will of God, which to every good
man is a high degree of necessity. But for such Protestants, as pretend that de
facto, they forsook your corruptions only and not your external communion,
that is, such as pretend to communicate with you in your confessions and
Liturgies, and participation of Sacraments, I cannot but doubt very much, that
neither you nor I have ever met with any of this condition. And if perhaps you
were led into error, by thinking that to leave the Church, and to leave the
external communion of it, was all one in sense and signification, I hope by
this time you are disabus'd, and begin to understand, that as a man may leave
any fashion or custom of a College, and yet remain still a member of the
College; so a man may possibly leave some opinion or practice of a Church
formerly common to himself and others, and continue still a member of that
Church: Provided that what he forsakes be not one of those things wherein the
essence of the Church consists. Whereas peradventure this practice may be so
involved with the external communion of this Church, that it may be simply
impossible, for him to leave this practice, and not to leave the Churches
external communion.

46 You will reply perhaps, That the difficulty lies as well against those who
pretend to forsake the Churches corruptions and not the Church: as against
those who say, they forsook the Churches corruptions, and not her external
communion. And that the reason is still the same: because these supposed
corruptions, were inherent in the whole Church, and therefore by like reason
with the former, could not be forsaken, but if the whole Church were forsaken.

47 Ans. A pretty Sophisme, and very fit to persuade men that it is impossible
for them, to forsake any error they hold, or any vice they are subject to,
either peculiar to themselves, or in common with others: Because forsooth, they
cannot forsake themselves, and Vices and Errors are things inherent in
themselves. The deceit lies, in not distinguishing between a Local and a
Moral forsaking of any thing. For as it were an absurdity, fit for the
maintainers of Transubstantiation to defend, that a man may Locally and
properly depart from the Accidents of a subject, and not from the subject it
self: So is it also against reason to deny, that a man may (by an usual
phrase of speech) forsake any custom, or quality, good or bad, either proper
to himself, or common to himself with any company, and yet never truly or
properly forsake either his company or himself. Thus if all the Jesuits in the
Society, were given to write Sophistically, yet you might leave this ill
custom, and yet not leave your Society. If all the Citizens of a City, were
addicted to any vanity, they might either, all, or some of them forsake it, and
yet not forsake the city. If all the parts of a man's body were dirty or filthy,
nothing hinders but that all or some of them might cleanse themselves, and yet
continue parts of the body. And what reason then in the world is there, if the
whole Visible Church were overcome with tares and weeds of superstitions, and
corruptions, but that some members of it might reform themselves, and yet
continue still true members of the body of the Church, and not be made no
members, but the better by their Reformation? Certainly it is so obvious and
sensible a Truth, that this thing is possible, that no man in his wits, will be
persuaded out of it, with all the Quirks and Metaphysics in the World. Neither
is this to say, that a man may keep company with Christopher Potter, and not
keep company with the Provost of Q. College: Nor that a man can avoid the
company of a sinner, and at the same time, be really present with the man who
is the sinner: which we leave to those Protestants of your invention, who are
so foolish, as to pretend, that a man, may really separate himself from the
Churches external communion, as she is corrupted, and yet continue in that
Churches external Communion, which in this external Communion is corrupted.
But we that say only the whole Church being corrupted, some parts of it might
and did reform themselves, and yet might and did continue parts of the Church,
though separated from the external communion of the other parts, which would
not reform, need not trouble our selves to reconcile any such repugnance. For
the case put by you, of keeping D. Potters company, and leaving the company of
the Provost of Queens College; and of leaving a sinners company, and not the
man's: are nothing at all like ours. But if you would speak to the point, you
must show, that D. Potter cannot leave being Provost of Q. College, without
ceasing to be himself: or, that a sinner cannot leave his sin, without
ceasing to be a man: or that he that is part of any society, cannot renounce
any Vice of that society, but he must relinquish the society. If you would show
any of these things, then indeed (I dare promise) you should find us apt enough
to believe, that the particular parts of the visible Church, could not reform
themselves, but they must of necessity become no parts of it. But until we see
this done, you must pardon us, if we choose to believe sense rather then
Sophistry.

48 In this Paragraph you bring in the sentence of S. Cyprian, whereto you
referred us in the former: but why in a co^troversy of faith, do you cite any
thing, which is confessed on all hands, not to be a rule of faith? Besides, in
my apprehension, this sentence of S. Cyprian, is in this place, and to this
purpose, merely impertinent. S. Cyprians words are, The Church (he speaks of
the particular Church, or Diocese of Rome) being one, cannot be within and
without: If she be with Novatianus, she was not with Cornelius: But if she were
with Cornelius who succeeded Fabianus by lawful Ordination, Novatianus is not
in the Church. And now having related the words, I am only to remember the
Reader, that your business was to prove it impossible, For a man to forsake
the Churches corruptions and not the Church, and then to request him to tell me
whether, as I said, In nova fert animus, had not been as much to the purpose?

49 Toward the conclusion of this Section, you number up your Victories, and
tell us, That out of your discourse it remains clear, that this our chiefest
Answer changes the very state of the Question: confounds internal Acts of
the under standing, with externoll deeds: does not distinguish between Schism
and Heresy, and leaves this demonstrated against us, that they (Protestants)
divided themselves from the communion of the Visible Catholic Church, because
they conceived that she needed Reformation. To which Triumphs, if any reply be
needful, then briefly thus: We do not change the state of the Question, but
you mistake it. For the Question was not whether they might forsake the
corruptions of the Church, and continue in her external communion, which we
confess impossible, because these corruptions were in her communion. But the
Question was, whether they might forsake the corruptions of the Church, and not
the Church, but continue still the Members of it. And to this Question, there
is not in your whole discourse one pertinent syllable.

50 We do not confound internal Acts of understanding with external deeds,
but acknowledge (as you would have us) that we cannot (as matters now stand)
separate from your corruptions, but we must depart from your External
communion. For you have so ordered things, that whosoever will Communicate with
you at all, must communicate with you, in your corruptions. But it is you that
will not perceive the difference, between, being a part of the Church, and
being in external Communion with all the other parts of it: taking for
granted, that which is certainly false, that no two men or Churches, divided in
external communion, can be both true parts of the Catholic Church.

51 We are not to learn the difference between Schism and Heresy, for Heresy
we conceive, an obstinate defense of any Error, against any necessary Article
of the Christian faith: And Schism, a causeless separation of one part of the
Church from another. But this we say, That if we convince you of errors and
corruptions, professed and practiced in your Communion, then we cannot be
Schismatiques, for refusing to join with you in the profession of these
Errors, and the practice of these corruptions. And therefore you must free your
selves from Error, or us from Schism.

52 Lastly, whereas you say, That you have demonstrated against us, that
Protestants divided themselves from the external communion of the Visible
Church, add, which external communion was corrupted, and we shall confess
the accusation, and glory in it. But this is not that Quod erat demonstrandum,
but that we divided our selves from the Church, that is, made ourselves
out-lawes from it, and no members of it. And moreover, in the Reason of your
separation from the external communion of your Church you are mistaken: for it
was not so much because she, your Church, as because your Churches external
communion was corrupted, and needed Reformation.

53 That a pretense of Reformation will acquit no man from Schism, we grant
very willingly, and therefore say, that it concerns every man who separates
from any Churches communion, even as much as his Salvation is worth, to look
most carefully to it, that the cause of his separation be just and necessary:
For unless it be necessary, it can very hardly be sufficient. But whether a
true Reformation of our selves from Errors, superstitions and impieties, will
not justify our separation in these things; our separation, I say, from them
who will not reform themselves, and as much as in them lies, hinder others
from doing so: This is the point you should have spoken to, but have not. As
for the sentences of the Fathers to which you refer us, for the determination
of this Question, I suppose by what I have said above, the Reader understands,
by alleging them you have gained little credit to your cause or person. And
that, if they were competent Judges of this controversy, their sentence is
against you much rather then for you.

54 Lastly, whereas you desire D. Potter to remember his own words: There
neither was nor can be any just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no
more then from Christ himself, and pretend that you have showed that Luther
did so: The Doctor remembers his words very well, and has no reason to be
ashamed of them. Only he desires you to remember that hereafter you do not
confound, as hitherto you have done, departing from the Church ( i. e. ceasing
to be a member of it,) with departing from the Churches external communion;
and then he is persuaded it will appear to you, that against Luther and his
followers you have said many things, but showed nothing.

55 But the Church Universal, remaining the Church Universal, according to D.
Potter may fall into error: And from hence it clearly follows, that it is
impossible to leave the external communion of the Church so corrupted, and
retain external communion with the Catholic Church. Ans. The reason of this
consequence which you say is so clear, truly I cannot possibly discern; But
the conclusion inferred, methinkes is evident of it self, and therefore
without proof I grant it. I mean, that it is impossible to leave the
external communion of the Catholic Church corrupted, and to retain external
communion with the Catholic Church. But what use you can make of it, I do
not understand: Unless you will pretend, that to say a man may forsake the
Churches corruptions, and not the Church, is all one as to say, he may forsake
the Churches external Communion and not forsake it. If you mean so, sure you
mistake the meaning of Protestants when they say, They forsook not the Church
but her corruptions* For in saying so, they neither affirm, nor deny that they
forsook the external communion of the Church, nor speak at all of it: But
they mean only, that they ceased not to be still members of the Church, though
they ceased to believe and practice some things which the whole Church formerly
did believe and practice. And as for the external Communion of the Visible
Church, we have without scruple formerly granted, that Protestants did forsake
it, that is, renounce the practice of some observances, in which the whole
visible Church before the^ did communicate. But this we say they did without
Schism, because they had cause to do so, and no man can have cause to be a
Schismatique.

56 But your Argument you conceive, will be more convincing, if we consider
that when Luther appeared, there were not two distinct Visible true Churches,
one Pure, the other Corrupted, but one Church only. Ans. The ground of this is
no way certain, nor here sufficiently proved. For, whereas you say, Histories
are silent of any such matter; I answer, there is no necessity, that you or I
should have read all Histories, that may be extant of this matter; nor that all
should be extant that were written, much less extant uncorrupted: especially
considering your Church, which had lately all power in her hands, has been so
pernitiously industrious, in corrupting the monuments of Antiquity that made
against her; nor that all Records should remain which were written; nor that
all should be recorded which was done. Neither secondly, to suppose a Visible
Church before Luther, which did not err, is it to contradict this ground of D.
Potters, that the Church may err. Unless you will have us believe, that May
be, and Must be is all one, and that all which may be true, is true: which rule
if it were true, then sure all men would be honest, because all men may be so,
and you would not make so bad Arguments, unless you will pretend you cannot
make better. Nor thirdly, is it to contradict these words, The Church may not
hope to triumph over all error, till she be in Heaven: For to triumph over
error, is to be secure from it, to be out of danger of it, not to be obnoxious
to it. Now a Church may be free from error, and yet not secure from it, and
consequently in this sense, not triumph over it. Fourthly, whereas you say, it
evacuateth the brag of Protestants, that Luther reformed the whole Church;
perhaps (though I know not who they be that say so;) by a frequent synecdoche,
they may mean by the whole, the greatest, and most illustrious part of it, the
luster whereof did much obscure the other, though it were not wholly invisible.
Besides, if their brag be evacuated, (as you call it) let it be so, I see no
harm will come of it. Lastly whereas you say, that supposing a visible pure
Church, Luther must be a Schismatique, who separated from all visible Churches:
I tell you, if you will suppose a visible Church extant before and when Luther
arose, conformable to him in all points of Doctrine, necessary and profitable,
then Luther separated not from this Church, but adjoined himself to it: Not
indeed in place, which was not necessary, not in external communion which was
impossible, but by the Union of faith and charity. Upon these grounds I say,
that the ground of this Argument is no way made certain, yet because it is not
manifestly false, I am content to let it pass. And for ought I see, it is very
safe for me to do so: for you build nothing upon it, which I may not fairly
grant. For what do you conclude from hence, but that seeing there was no
Visible Church but corrupted, Luther forsaking the external communion of the
corrupted Church, could not but forsake the external communion of the
Catholic Church? Well, let this also be granted, what will come of it? What,
that Luther must be a Schismatique? By no means: For not every separation, but
only a causeles separation from the communion of the Church we maintain to be
Schismatic. Hereunto may be added, that though the whole Church were
corrupted, yet properly speaking, it is not true, that Luther and his Followers
forsook the whole corrupted Church, or the external communion of it: But only
that he forsook that Part of it which was corrupted, and still would be so, and
forsook not, but only reformed another Part, which Part they themselves were,
and I suppose you will not go about to persuade us, that they forsook
themselves or their own communion. And if you urge that they joined themselves
to no other part, therefore they separated from the whole: I say it follows
not, in as much as themselves were a part of it, and still continued so: and
therefore could no more separate from the whole then from themselves. Thus
though there were no part of the people of Rome, to whom the Plebeians joined
themselves, when they made their Secession into the Aventine Hill, yet they
divided themselves from the Patricians only, and not from the whole people,
because themselves were a part of this people, and they divided not from
themselves.

57 Ad. 18. In the 18.. you prove that which no man denies, that corruption in
manners yields no sufficient cause to leave the Church: yet sure it yields
sufficient cause to cast them out of the Church, that are after the Churches
public admonition obstinate in notorious impieties. Neither does the cutting
off such men from the Church, lay any necessity upon us, either to go out of
the world, or out of the Church, but rather puts these men out of the Church
into the world, where we may converse with them freely, without scandal to the
Church. Our Blessed Savior foretold, you say, that there should be in the
Church tares with choice corn. Look again I pray, and you shall see, that the
field he speaks of, is not the Church, but the world: and therefore neither do
You obey our Saviors command, Let both grow up till the harvest, who teach it
to be lawful to root these tares (such are Heretics) out of the world:
neither do Protestants disobey it, if they eject manifest Heresies and
notorious sinners out of the Church.

58 Ad. 19. in the 19. you are so courteous as to suppose corruptions in your
doctrine, and yet undertake to prove that, neither could they afford us any
sufficient cause, or colorable necessity to depart from them. Your reason is,
because damnable errors there were none in your Church, by D. Potters
confession, neither can it be damnable in respect of error, to remain in any
Churches communion, whose errors are not damnable. For if the error be not
damnable, the belief thereof cannot. Ans. D. Potter confesses no such matter:
but only that he hopes that your errors, though in themselves sufficiently
damnable, yet by accident did not damn all that held them: such he means and
says, as were excusably ignorant of the Truth, and amongst the number of their
unknown sins, repented daily of their unknown errors. The truth is, he thinks
as ill of your errors and their desert, as you do of ours: only he is not so
peremptory and presumptuous in judging your persons, as you are in judging
ours, but leaves them to stand or fall to their own Master, who is infinitely
merciful, and therefore will not damn them for mere errors, who desire to
find the truth and cannot: and withal infinitely just, and therefore (is it to
be feared) will not pardon them, who might easily have come to the knowledge of
the truth, and either through Pride, or obstinacy, or negligence would not.

59 To your minor also, I answer almost in your own words,. 42. of this Chap. I
thank you for your courteous supposall, that your Church may err, and in
recompense thereof, will do you a charity, by putting you in mind, into what
Labyrinths you cast your self, by supposing that the Church may err in some
of her Proposalls, and yet denying it lawful for any man though he know this,
which you suppose, to oppose her judgment, or leave her communion. Will you
have such a man dissemble against his conscience, or externally deny that which
he knows true? No, that you will not, for them that do so, you your self
have pronounced A. damned Cr^w of dissembling Sycophants. Or would you have him
continue in your Communion, and yet profess your Church to err? This you your
selves have made to him impossible. Or would you have him believe those things
true, which together with him you have supposed to be Errors? This in such a
one, as is assured or persuaded of that, which you here suppose, that your
Church does err, (and such only we say, are obliged to forsake your
communion,) is, as Schoolmen speak, Implicatio in terminis, a contradiction so
plain, that one word destroieth another; as if one should say, a living dead
man. For it is to require that they which believe some part of your Doctrine
false, should withal believe it all true. Seeing therefore, for any man to
believe your Church in error, and profess the contrary, is damnable
Hypocrisy; to believe it and not believe it, a manifest repugnancy; and
thirdly, to profess it and to continue in your Communion (as matters now
stand) a plain impossibility; what remains, but that whosoever is supposed to
have just reason to disbelieve any doctrine of your Church, must of necessity
forsake her Communion? Unless you would remit so far from your present
rigor, as to allow them your Churches communion, who publicly profess that
they do not believe every article of her established Doctrine. Indeed, if you
would do so, you might with some coherence suppose your Church in error, and
yet find fault with men for abandoning her communion, because they might
continue in it, and suppose her in error. But to suppose your Church in error,
and to excommunicate all those that believe your own supposition, and then to
complain that they continue not in your communion, is the most ridiculous
incongruity that can be imagined. And therefore though your corruptions in
doctrine, in themselves (which yet is false) did not, yet your obliging us, to
profess your doctrine uncorrupted against knowledge and conscience, may induce
an obligation to depart from your communion. As if there were any society of
Christians, that held there were no Antipodes; notwithstanding this error I
might communicate with them. But if I could not do so, without professing my
self of their belief in this matter, then I suppose I should be excused from
Schism, if I should forsake their communion, rather then profess my self to
believe that which I do not believe. Neither is there any contradiction, or
shadow of contradiction, that it may be necessary for my Salvation to depart
from this Churches communion: And that this Church (though erring in this
matter) wants nothing necessary to Salvation. And yet this is that manifest
contradiction, which D. Potter (you say) will never be able to salve, viz. That
there might be necessary cause to depart from the Church of Rome in some
Doctrines and practices, though she wanted nothing necessary to Salvation.

60 And your Reason wherewith you prove, that there is in these words such a
plain contradiction, is very notable. For (say you) if she wanted nothing
necessary to Salvation, how could it be necessary to Salvation to forsake her?
Truly Sir, if this be a good manner of proving, it is a very ready way to prove
any thing; for what is there that may not be proved, if it be proof enough to
ask how it can be otherwise? Me thinks if you would convince, D. Potter's
words of manifest contradiction, you should show, that he affirms and denies
the same of the same. From which fault me thinks he should be very innocent,
who says only, that that may be damnable to one, which is not so to another:
and that may be necessary for one, which is not necessary for another. And this
is all that D. Potter says here: viz. That the profession of a falsehood to
him that believes it, may be not damnable: and yet damnable to him that
believes the contrary. Or that, not to profess a falsehood in him that knows
it to be so, is necessary to Salvation: and yet not so, in him that by error
conceives it to be a truth. The words by you cited, and charged with unsalvable
contradiction are in the 75. page But in the progress of the same particular
discourse, in the next page but one, he gives such evident reason of them,
(which can hardly be done to prove implicancy true) that whereas you say, he
will never be able to salve them from contradiction, I believe any indifferent
reader, having considered the place, will be very apt to think, that you
(whatsoever you pretend) were very able to have done this curtesy for him, if
your will had been answerable to your ability. I will set down the words, and
leave the Reader to condemn or absolve them. To forsake the errors of that
Church, and not to join with her in those practices which we account
erroneous, we are enforced by necessity. For though in the issue they are not
damnable to them which believe as they profess, yet for us to profess and
avow by oath (as the Church of Rome enioynes) what we believe not, were without
question damnable. And they with their errors, by the grace of God might go
to Heaven, when we for our hypocrisy and dissimulation (he might have added,
and Perjury) should certainly be condemned to Hell.

61 Ad 20. But a Church not erring in Fundamentalls, though erring in other
matters, does what our Savior exacts at her hands, does as much as lies in her
power to do: Therefore the Communion of such a Church is not upon pretense of
Error to be forsaken. The consequence is manifest. The Antecedent is proved,
because God, by D. Potters confession, Page 151. 155.
has promised his assistance no further, nor is it in her power to do more
then God does assist her to do. Ans. The promise of Divine Assistance is two
fold: Absolute, or Conditional. That there shall be by Divine providence
preserved in the world to the worlds end, such a company of Christians, who
hold all things precisely and indispensably necessary to salvation, and nothing
inevitably destructive of it: This and no more the Doctor affirms that God
has promised absolutely. Yet he neither doubts nor denies, but that a farther
assistance is conditionally promised us, even such an assistance as shall lead
us, if we be not wanting to it and our selves, into all not only necessary, but
very profitable truth, and guard us from all not only destructive, but also
hurtful Errors. This, I say, he neither denies nor questions. And should he
have done so, he might have been confuted by evident and express Text of
Scripture. When therefore you say, That a Church not erring in Fundamentalls,
does as much as by Gods assistance lies in her power to do; This is manifestly
untrue. For Gods assistance is always ready to promote her farther. It is
ready, I say, but on condition the Church does implore it: on condition, that
when it is offered in the divine directions of Scripture and reason, the Church
be not negligent to follow it. If therefore there be any Church, which
retaining the foundation, builds hay and stubble upon it: which believing what
is precisely necessary, erres shamefully and dangerously in other things very
profitable: This by no means argues defect of divine assistance in God, but
neglect of this assistance in the Church. Neither is there any reason, why such
a Church should please her self too much, for retaining Fundamental truths,
while she remains so regardlesse of others. For though the simple defect of
some truths profitable only and not simply necessary, may consist with
salvation; Yet who is there that can give her sufficient assurance, that the
neglect of such truths is not damnable? Besides, who is there that can put her
in sufficient caution, that these Errors about profitable matters may not
according to the usual fecunditie of error, bring forth others of a higher
quality, such as are pernicious and pestilent, and undermine by secret
consequences the very foundations of Religion and piety? Lastly, who can say
that she has sufficiently discharged her duty to God and man by avoiding only
Fundamental Heresies, if in the mean time she be negligent of others, which
though they do not plainly destroy salvation, yet obscure and hinder, and only
not block up the way to it? Which though of themselves and immediately they
damn no man, yet are causes and occasions that many men run the race of
Christian piety more remisly then they should, many defer their repentance,
many go on securely in their sins, and so at length are damned by means and
occasion of these Errors, though not for them. Such Errors as these (though
those of the Roman Church be much worse, even in themselves damnable, and by
accident only pardonable) yet I say such Errors as these, if any Church should
tolerate, dissemble and suffer them to reign, and neglect to reform them, and
not permit them to be freely, yet peaceably, opposed and impugned; will any
wise man say, that she has sufficiently discharged her duty to God and man?
That she has with due fidelity dispensed the Gospel of Christ? That she
has done what she could, and what she ought? What shall we say then, if these
errors be taught by her, and commanded to be taught? What if she thunder out
her curses against those that will not believe them? What if she rave and rage
against them, and persecute them with fire and sword, and all kinds of most
exquisite torments? Truly I do much fear, that from such a Church (though it
hold no error absolutely unconsistent with salvation,) the candlestick of God,
either is already removed, or will be very shortly, and because she is
negligent of profitable truths, that she will lose those that are Necessary,
and because she will not be led into all truths, that in short time she shall
be led into none. And although this should not happen, yet what mortal man
can secure us, that not only a probable unaffected ignorance, nor only a mere
neglect of profitable truths, but also a retchlesse supine negligence, manifest
contempt, Dissimulation, Opposition, Oppression of them, may consist with
salvation? I truly for my part, though I hope very well of all such as seeking
all truth, find that which is necessary; who endeavoring to free themselves
from all Errors, any way contrary to the purity of Christianity, yet fail of
performance and remain in some: yet if I did not find in my self a love and
desire of all profitable truth; If I did not put away idleness, and prejudice,
and worldly affections, and so examine to the bottom all my opinions of divine
matters, being prepared in mind to follow God, and God only which way soever
he shall lead me; If I did not hope, that I either do, or endeavor to do
these things, certainly I should have little hope of obtaining salvation.

62 But to oblige any man under pain of damnation to forsake a Church by reason
of such errors, against which Christ thought it superfluous to promise his
assistance, and for which he neither denies his grace here, nor his glory
hereafter, what is it but to make the narrow way to heaven, narrower then
Christ left it? Ans. It is not: For Christ himself has obliged us hereunto:
He has forbad us under pain of damnation to profess what we believe not, and
consequently under the same penalty, to leave that Communion, in which we
cannot remain without this hypocritical profession of those things, which we
are convinced to be erroneous. But then besides, it is here falsely supposed,
(as has been showed already) that Christ has not promised assistance to those
that seek it, but only in matters simply necessary. Neither is there any
reason, why any Church, even in this world, should despair of victory over all
errors pernicious or noxious; provided she humbly and earnestly implore divine
assistance, depend wholly upon it, and be not wanting to it. Though a Triumph
over all sin and error, that is, security that she neither does nor can err,
be rather to be desired then hoped for on earth, being a felicity reserved for
heaven.

63 Ad. 21. But at least the Roman Church is as infallible as Protestants, and
Protestants as fallible as the Roman Church: therefore to forsake the Roman
Church for errors, what is it but to flit from one erring Society to another?
Ans. The inconsequence of this Argument is too apparent: Protestants may err
as well as the Church of Rome, therefore they did so! Boys in the Schools
know, that a Posse ad Esse, the Argument follows not. He is equally fallible
who believes twice two to be four, as he that believes them to be twenty: yet
in this, he is not equally deceived, and he may be certain that he is not so.
One Architect is no more infallible then another, and yet he is more secure
that his work is right and straight who has made it by the level, then he
which has made it by guess and by chance. So he that forsakes the errors of
the Church of Rome, and therefore renounceth her communion, that he may
renounce the profession of her errors, though he knows himself fallible, as
well as those whom he has forsaken, yet he may be certain (as certain as the
nature of the thing will bear) that he is not herein deceived: because he may
see the Doctrine forsaken by him repugnant to Scripture, and the doctrine
embraced by him consonant to it. At least, this he may know, that the doctrine
which he has chosen to him seems true, and the contrary which he has
forsaken, seems false: And therefore without remorse of conscience, he may
profess that, but this he cannot.

64 But we are to remember, that according to D. Potter the visible Church has
a blessing not to err in Fundamentalls, in which any private Reformer may
fail, therefore there^ was no necessity of forsaking the Church, out of whose
communion they were exposed to danger of falling into many more, and even into
damnable errors. Ans. The visible Church is free indeed from all errors
absolutely destructive and unpardonable, but not from all error which in it
self is damnable: not from all which will actually bring damnation upon them,
that keep themselves in them, by their own voluntary and avoidable fault. From
such errors which are thus damnable D. Potter does no where say, that the
visible Church has any privilege or exemption. Nay you your self teach, that
he plainly teaches the contrary, and thereupon will allow him to be no more
charitable to Papists, then Papists are to Protestants: and yet upon this
affected mistake your discourse is founded in almost forty places of your Book.
Besides, any private man who truly believes the Scripture, and seriously
endeavors to know the will of God, and to do it, is as secure as the visible
Church, more secure then your Church from the danger of erring in
fundamentalls: for it is impossible, that any man so qualified should fall into
any error which to him will prove damnable. For God requires no more of any man
to his Salvation, but his true endeavor to be saved. Lastly, abiding in your
Churches Communion is so far from securing me or any man from damnable error,
that if I should abide in it, I am certain I could not be saved. For abide in
it I cannot, without professing to believe your entire doctrine true: profess
this I cannot, but I must lie perpetually, and exulcerate my conscience. And
though your errors were not in themselves damnable, yet to resist the known
Truth, and to continue in the profession of known errors and false. hoods, is
certainly a capital sin, and of great affinity with the sin which shall
never be forgiven.

95 But neither is the Church of Protestants perfectly free from errors and
corruptions: so the Doctor confesses p. 69. which he can only excuse, by
saying, they are not fundamental, as likewise those in the Roman Church, are
confessed not to be fundamental. And what man of Judgment will be a
Protestant, since that Church is confessedly a corrupted one? Ans. And yet you
your self make large discourses in this very Chapter, to persuade Protestants
to continue in the Church of Rome, though supposed to have some corruptions.
And why I pray, may not a man of judgment continue in the Communion of a
Church confessedly corrupted, as well as in a Church supposed to be corrupted?
Especially when this Church supposed to be corrupted, requires the belief and
profession of her supposed corruptions, as the condition of her Communion:
which this Church confessedly corrupted, does not. What man of judgment will
think it any disparagement, to his judgment to prefer the better, though not
simply the best, before that which is stark naught? To prefer indifferent
good health, before a diseased and corrupted state of Body? To prefer a field
not perfectly weeded, before a field that is quite over-runne with weeds and
thorns? And therefore though Protestants have some Errors, yet seeing they are
neither so great as yours, nor imposed with such tyranny, nor maintained with
such obstinacy; he that conceives it any disparagement to his judgment, to
change your Communion for theirs, though confessed to have some corruptions, it
may well be presumed that he has but little judgment. For, as for your
pretense that yours are confessed not to be fundamental, it is an affected
mistake, as already I have often told you.

66 Ad. 22. But D. Potter says it is comfort enough for the Church, that the
Lord in mercy will secure her from all capital dangers: but she may not hope
to triumph over all sin and error, till she be in heaven. Now if it be
comfort enough, to be secured from all capital dangers, which can arise only
from error in fundamental points, Why were not our first Reformers content
with enough, but would needs dismember the Church, out of apernitious
greediness of more then enough? Ans. I have already showed sufficiently, how
capital danger may arise from errors, though not fundamental. I add now,
that what may be enough for men in ignorance, may be to knowing men not enough:
according to that of the Gospel, to whom much is given, of him much shall be
required: That the same error may be not capital to those who want means of
finding the truth, and capital to others who have means, and neglect to use
them: That to continue in the profession of error discovered to be so, may be
damnable, though the error be not so. These I presume are reasons enough, and
enough why the first Reformers might think; and justly, that not enough for
themselves, which yet to some of their Predecessors they hope might be enough.
This very Argument was objected to S. Cyprian: Ep. 63. In these words, S^quis
de antecessoribus nostris, vel ^gnoranteivel simpliciter non hoc observavit,
and tenuit quod nos Dominus facere exemplo and Magisterio suo docuit potest
simplicitati ejus de indulgentia Domini, venia concedi: nobis vero non potest
ignosci, qui nunc a Domino admoniti and instructi sumus.
S. Cyprian upon another occasion, and also by the Wilfridu^, to Abbat Colman
alleging that he followed the example of his predecessors famous for
holiness; and famous for miracles, in these words, De Patre vestr^ Columba and
sequacibus eius, quorum sanctitatem vos ^mitari and regulam ac praecepta
caelestibus signis confirmata sequi perhibetis, possum respondere; Quia multis
in judicio dicentibus Domino quod in nomine eius prophetaverint and daemonia
ejecerint, and virtutes multas fecerint, responsurus sit Dominus, quia nunquam
eos noverit. Sed absit ut de patribas vestris hoc dicam, quia iustius multo est
de incognitis bonum credere quam malum. Vnde and illos Dei famulos and Deo
dilectos esse non nego, qui simplicitate rustica sed intention pia Deum
dilexerunt: Neque illis multum obesse Paschae talem reor observantiam, quandiu
^ullus advenerat qui ei^ instituti perfectioris deoreta quae sequerentur,
ostenderet. Quos uti credo, fi qui tunc ad eos Catholicus calculator adveniret,
sic eius mo^ita fuisse secuturos, quomodoea quae noverant ac didicerunt Dei
mandata, probantu^ fuisse secuti. Tu autem and socij ^ui si audita decreta
sedis Apostolicae, imo universalis Ecclesiae and haec literis sacris confirmata
contemnitis, a^sque ulla dubietate peccatis.
British Quartodecimans, to the maintainers of the Doctrine of your Church; and
Beda: lib. 3. Eccl. Hist. c. 25.
by both this very answer was returned; and therefore I cannot but hope that
for their sakes you will approve it.

67 But if (as the Doctor says) no Church may hope to triumph over all error
ti^ she be in heaven, then we must either grant, that errors not fundamental
cannot yield sufficient cause to forsake the Church, or you must affirm that
all Communities may and ought to be forsaken. Answ. The Doctor does not say,
that no Church may hope to be free from all error, either pernicious, or any
way noxious: But that no Church may hope to be secure from all error simply,
for this were indeed truly totriumph over all. But then we say not, that the
communion of any Church is to be forsaken for errors unfundamentall, unless it
exact withal either a dissimulation of the being noxious; or a Profession of
them against the dictate of conscience, if they be mere errors. This if the
Church does (as certainly yours does,) then her communion is to be forsaken,
rather then the sin of hypocrisy to be committed. Whereas to forsake the
Churches of Protestants for such errors, there is no necessity, because they
err to themselves, and do not under pain of Excommunication exact the
profession of their errors.

68 But the Church may not be left by reason of sin, therefore neither by
reason of errors not fundamental: in as much as both sin and error are
impossible to be avoided till she be in heaven. Ans. The reason of the
consequence does not appear to me: But I answer to the Antecedent: Neither for
sin nor errors, ought a Church to be forsaken, if she does not impose and
injoyne them: but if she do, (as the Roman does,) then we must forsake men
rather then God; leave the Churches communion rather then commit sin, or
profess known errors, to be divine truths. For the Prophet EZechiel has
assured us, that to say, the Lord has said so, when the Lord has not said so,
is a great sin, and a high presumption, be the matter never so small.

69 Ad. 23. But neither the Quality nor the number of your Churches errors,
could warrant our forsaking of it. Not the Quality, because we suppose them not
Fundamental. Not the number, because the foundation is strong enough to
support them. Ans. Here again you vainly suppose, that we conceive your
errors in themselves not damnable: Though we hope they are not absolutely
unpardonable: but to say they are pardonable, is indeed to suppose them
damnable. Secondly, though the errors of your Church did not warrant our
departure, yet your Tyrannous imposition of them, would be our sufficient
justification. For this lays necessity on us, either to forsake your company,
or to profess what we know to be false.

70 Our Blessed Savior has declared his will, that we forgive a private
offender seventy seven times, that is, without limitation of quantity of time,
or quality of Trespasses; and thou how dare we allege his command, that we
must not pardon his Church for errors acknowledged to be not fundamental? Ans.
He that commands us to pardon our Brother sinning against us so often, will not
allow us for his sake to sin with him, so much as once. He will have us do
any thing but sin, rather then offend any man. But his will is also, that we
offend all the World, rather then sin in the least matter. And therefore
though his will were, and it were in our power (which yet is false) to pardon
the errors of an erring Church; yet certainly it is not his will, that we
should err with the Church, or if we do not, that we should against
conscience profess the errors of it.

71 Ad. 24. But Schismatiques from the Church of England or any other Church,
with this very Answer, that they forsake not the Church but the errors of it,
may cast off from themselves the imputation of Schism. Ans. True, they may
make the same Answer, and the same defense as we do, as a murderer can cry
not guilty, as well as an innocent person, but not so truly nor so justly. The
question is, not what may be pretended, but what can be proved by
Schismatiques. They may object errors to other Churches, as well as we do to
yours, but that they prove their accusation so strongly as we can, that
appears not. To the Priests and elders of the Jews, imposing that sacred
silence mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, S. Peter and S. John answered
they must obey God rather then men. The three Children to the King of Babylon,
gave in effect the same answer. Give me now any factious Hypocrite, who makes
religion the pretense and cloak of his Rebellion, and who sees not that such a
one may answer for himself, in those very formal words, which the holy
Apostles and Martyrs made use of. And yet I presume no Christian will deny, but
this answer was good, in the mouth of the Apostles and Martyrs, though it were
obnoxious to be abused, by Traitors and Rebels. Certainly therefore, it is no
good consequence to say, Schismatiques may make use of this Answer, therefore
all that do make use of it are Schismatiques. But moreover, it is to be
observed, that the chief part of our defense, that you deny your communion to
all that deny or doubt of any part of your doctrine, cannot with any color be
employed against Protestants: who grant their Communion to all who hold with
them, not all things, but things necessary, that is, such as are in Scripture
plainly delivered.

72 But the forsaking the Roman Church opens a way to innumerable Sects and
Schisms, and therefore it must not be forsaken. Ans. We must not do evil to
avoid evil: neither are all courses presently lawful, by which inconveniences
may be avoided. If all men would submit themselves to the chief Mufty of the
Turks, it is apparent, there would be no divisions; yet unity is not to be
purchased at so dear a rate. It were a thing much to be desired, that there
were no divisions: yet difference of opinions touching points controverted, is
rather to be chosen, then unanimous concord in damned errors: As it is better
for men to go to heaven by diverse ways, or rather by diverse paths of the
same way, then in the same path to go on peaceably to hell. Amica Pax, magis
amica Veritas!

73 But there can be no just cause to forsake the Church, so the Doctor grants:
who notwithstanding teaches that the Church may err in points not
fundamental; therefore neither is the Roman Church to be forsaken for such
errors. Ans. There can be no just cause to forsake the Church absolutely and
simply in all things, that is, to cease being a member of the Church: This I
grant, if it will do you any service. But that there can be no just cause to
forsake the Church in some things, or (to speak more properly) to forsake some
opinions and practices, which some true Church retains and defends; this I
deny, and you mistake the Doctor if you think he affirms it.

74 Ad 26. 27. What prodigious doctrines (say you) are these? Those Protestants
who believe that your Church erred in points necessary to salvation, and for
that cause left her, cannot be excused from damnable Schism: But others, etc.
Prodigious doctrines indeed! But who I pray are they that teach them? Where
does D. Potter accuse those Protestants of damnable Schism, who left your
Church because they hold it erroneous in necessary points? What Protestant is
there that holds not that you taught things contrary to the plain precepts of
Christ; both Ceremonial, in mutilating the Communion; and Moral, in points of
superstition and Idolatry, and most bloody tyranny? which is without question
to err in necessary matters. Neither does D. Potter accuse any man of Schism
for holding so: if he should, he should call himself a Schismatique. Only he
says, such (if there be any such) as affirm, that ignorant souls among you,
who had no means to know the truth, cannot possibly be saved, that their
wisdom and charity cannot be justified. Now you your self have plainly
affirmed, That ignorant Protestants dying with contrition may be saved; and
yet would be unwilling to be thought to say, that Protestants err in no points
necessary to salvation. For that may be in it self, and in ordinary course,
where there are means of knowledge, necessary, which to a man invincibly
ignorant, will prove not necessary. Again, where does D. Potter suppose (as you
make him) that there were other Protestants, who believed that your Church had
no errors? Or, where does he say they did well to forsake her, upon this
ridiculous reason, because they judged that she retained all means necessary to
salvation? Do you think us so stupid, as that we cannot distinguish between
that which D. Potter says, and that which you make him say? He vindicates
Protestants from Schism two ways: The one is, because they had just and great
and necessary cause to separate, which Schismatiques never have; because they
that have it are no Schismatiques: For schism is always a causeless
separation. The other is, because they did not join with their separation, an
uncharitable damning of all those from whom they did divide themselves, as the
manner of Schismatiques is. Now that which he intends for a circumstance of our
separation, you make him, make the cause of it, and the motive to it. And
whereas he says, though we separate from you in some things, yet we
acknowledge your Church a member of the body of Christ, and therefore are not
Schismatiques: You make him say most absurdly, we did well to forsake you,
because we judged you a member of the body of Christ. Just as if a brother
should leave his Brothers company in some ill courses, and should say to him,
Herein I forsake you, yet I leave you not absolutely, for I acknowledge you
still to be my brother, and shall use you as a brother: And you perverting his
speech, should pretend that he had said, I leave your company in these ill
courses, and I do well to do so, because you are my Brother: so making that
the cause of his leaving him, which indeed is the cause that he left him no
farther.

75 But you say, The very reason for which he acquitteth himself from
Schism, is because he holds that the Church which they forsook, is not cut off
from the Body of Christ. Ans. This is true: But can you not perceive a
difference between justifying his separation from Schism by this reason, and
making this the reason of his separation? If a man denying obedience in some
unlawful matter to his lawful Sovereign, should say to him, herein I disobey
you, but yet I am no Rebel, because I acknowledge you my Sovereign Lord, and
am ready to obey you in all things lawful, should not he be an egregious
sycophant, that should accuse him as if he had said, I do well to disobey you,
because I acknowledge you my lawful Sovereign? Certainly he that joins this
acknowledgment with his necessitated disobedience, does well; but he that makes
this consideration the reason of his disobedience, does ill. Urge therefore
this (as you call it) most solemn foppery as far as you please: For every
understanding Reader will easily perceive that this is no foppery of D.
Potters, but a calumny of yours; from which he is as far, as he is from holding
yours to be the true Church: whereas it is a sign of a great deal of Charity
in him, that he allows you to be a Part of it.

76 And whereas you pretend to find such unspeakable comfort here* in, that we
cannot clear our selves from Schism, otherwise then by acknowledging that
they do not, nor cannot cut off your Church from the hope of salvation: I
beseech you to take care that this false comfort cost you not too dear. For
why this good opinion of God Almighty, that he will not damn men for error,
who were without their own fault ignorant of the truth, should be any
consolation to them, who having the key of knowledge, will neither use it
themselves, nor permit others to use it; who have eyes to see and will not see,
who have cares to hear and will not hear! this I assure you passes my
capacity to apprehend. Neither is this to make our salvation depend on yours,
but only ours and yours not desperately inconsistent. Nor to say we must be
damned unless you may be saved; but that we assure our selves, if our lives be
answerable, we shall be saved by our knowledge. And that we hope (and I tell
you again Spes est reiincertae nomen,) that some of you may possibly be the
rather saved by occasion of their unaffected Ignorance.

77 For our Brethren whom you say we condemn of heresy for denying the
Churches perpetuity, we know none that do so: unless you conceive a corrupted
Church to be none at all; and if you do, then for ought I know, in your
account we must be all Heretics; for all of us acknowledge that the Church
might be corrupted even with errors in themselves damnable, and not only might,
but has been.

78 But Schism consists in being divided from that true Church, with which a
man agrees in all points of faith: Now we must profess you agree with the
Church of Rome in all Fundamental Articles; Therefore we are Schismatiques.
Ans. Either in your Major, by all points of faith, you mean all fundamental
points only, or all simply and absolutely. If the former, I deny your Major:
for I may without all schism divide from that Church which erres in any point
of faith Fundamental or otherwise, if she require the profession of this
Error among the conditions of her Communion. Now this is our case. If the
latter, I deny the syllogism, as having manifestly four terms, and being
cosen German to this, He that obeys God in all things, is innocent;
Titius obeys God in some things;
Therefore he is innocent.


79 But they who judge a reconciliation with the Church of Rome to be damnable,
they that say there might be just and necessary cause to depart from it, and
that they of that Church which have understanding and means to discover their
Error, and neglect to use them, are not to be flattered with hope of
salvation; they do cut off that Church from the body of Christ and the hope of
salvation, and so are Schismatiques: But D. Potter does the former; therefore
is a Schismatique. Ans. No, he does not: not cut off that whole Church from the
hope of salvation, not those members of it who were invincibly, or excusably
ignorant of the truth; but those only who having understanding and means to
discover their error, neglect to use them. Now these are not the whole Church;
and therefore he that, supposing their impenitence, cuts these off from hope of
salvation, cannot be justly said to cut off that whole Church from the Body of
Christ, and the hope of salvation.

80 Ad 28. 29. Whereas D. Potter says, There is a great difference between a
Schism from them, and a Reformation of our selves: this you ^ay is a quaint
subtilty by which all Schism and sin may be as well excused. It seems then
in your judgment, that thieves and adulterers, and murderers, and traitors
may say with as much probability as Protestants, that they did no hurt to
others, but only reform themselves. But then me thinks it is very strange,
that all Protestants should agree with one consent in this defense of
themselves from the imputation of Schism: and that to this day, never any
Thief or Murderer should have been heard of to make use of this Apology! And
then for Schismatiques I would know, whether Victor Bishop of Rome, who
excommunicated the Churches of Asia for not conforming to his Church in keeping
Easter; whether Novatian that divided from Cornelius, upon pretense that
himself was elected Bishop of Rome, when indeed he was not; whether
Felicissimus and his Crew, that went out of the Church of Carthage, and set up
altar against altar, because having fallen in persecution, they might not be
restored to the peace of the Church presently, upon the intercession of the
Confessors; whether the Donatists, who divided from, and damned all the world,
because all the world would not excommunicate them who were accused only and
not convicted to have been Traditors of the sacred Books; whether they which
for the slips and infirmity of others, which they might and ought to tolerate,
or upon some difference in matters of Order and Ceremony, or for some error in
doctrine, neither pernicious nor hurtful to faith or piety, separate
themselves from others, or others from themselves; or lastly, whether they that
put themselves out of the Churches unity and obedience, because their opinions
are not approved there, but reprehended and confuted, or because being of
impious conversation, they are impatient of their Churches censure: I would
know I say, whether all, or any of these, may with any face or without extreme
impudency, put in this plea of Protestants, and pretend with as much likelihood
as they, that they did not separate from others, but only reform themselves?
But suppose they were so impudent as to say so in their own defense falsely,
does it follow by any good Logic, that therefore this Apology is not to be
employed by Protestants, who may say so truly? We make (say they) no Schism
from you, but only a reformation of our selves: This, you reply, is no good
justification, because it may be pretended by any Schismatique. Very true, any
Schismatique that can speak may say the same words, (as any Rebel that makes
conscience the cloak of his impious disobedience, may say with S. Peter and S.
John, we must obey God rather then men;) But then the question is, whether any
Schismatique may say so truly? And to this question you say just nothing: but
conclude, because this defense may be abused by some, it must be used by none.
As if you should have said, S. Peter and S. John did ill to make such an answer
as they made, because impious Hypocrites might make use of the same to palliate
their disobedience and Rebellion against the lawful commands of lawful
Authority.

81 But seeing their pretended Reformation consisted in forsaking the Churches
corruptions, their Reformation of themselves, and their dividivision from you,
falls out to be one and the same thing.) Just as if two men having been a long
while companions in drunkenesse, one of them should turn sober; this
Reformation of himself, and disertion of his companion, in this ill custom,
would be one and the same thing, and yet there is no necessity that he should
leave his love to him at all, or his society in other things. So Protestants
forsaking their own former corruptions, which were common to them with you,
could not choose but withal forsake you in the practice of these corruptions:
yet this they might, and would have done without breach of Charity toward you;
and without a renunciation of your company in any act of piety and devotion,
confessedly lawful. And therefore though both these were by accident joined
together, yet this hinders not but that the end they aimed at, was not a
separation from you, but a reformation of themselves.

82 Neither does their disagreement in the particulars of the Reformation,
(which yet when you measure it without partiality, you will find to be far
short of infinite) nor their symbolizing in the general of forsaking your
corruptions, prove any thing to the contrary, or any way advantage your design
or make for your purpose. For it is not any sign at all, much less an evident
sign, that they had no settled design, but only to forsake the Church of Rome:
for nothing but malice can deny, that their intent at least was, to reduce
Religion to that original purity from which it was fallen. The declination
from which, some conceiving to have begun (though secretly) in the Apostles
times, ( the mystery of iniquity being then in work;) and after their
departure to have showed it self more openly: others again believing, that the
Church continued pure for some Ages after the Apostles, and then declined: And
consequently some aiming at an exact conformity with the Apostolic times:
Others thinking they should do God and men good service, could they reduce the
Church to the condition of the fourth and fifth ages: Some taking their
direction in this work of Reformation, only from Scripture; others from the
writings of Fathers, and the Decrees of Counsels of the first five Ages:
certainly it is no great marveile, that there was, as you say, disagreement
between them, in the particulars of their Reformation; nay morally speaking, it
was impossible it should be otherwise. Yet let me tell you, the difference
between them (especially in comparison of your Church and Religion,) is not the
difference between good and bad, but between good and better: And they did best
that followed Scripture, interpreted by Catholic written Tradition: which
rule the reformers of the Church of England, proposed to themselves to follow.

83 Ad 30. 31. 32. To this effect D. Potter, p. 81. 82. of his book, speaks
thus. If a Monastery should reform it self, and should reduce into practice
ancient good discipline, when others would not: In this case could it be
charged with Schism from others, or with Apostasy from its rule and order? So
in a society of men universally infected with some disease; they that should
free themselves from it, could they be therefore said to separate from the
society? He presumes they could not, and from hence concludes, that neither can
the Reformed Churches be truly accused for making a Schism, (that is
separating from the Church, and making themselves no members of it) if all they
did was (as indeed it was) to reform themselves. Which cases I believe any
understanding man will plainly see to have in them an exact parity of Reason,
and that therefore the Argument drawn from them is pressing and un-answerable.
And it may well be suspected, that you were partly of this mind, otherwise you
would not have so presumed upon the simplicity of your Reader as, pretending to
answer it, to put another of your own making in place of it, and then to answer
that.

84 This you do. 31. 32. of this Chapter, in these words, I was very glad to
find you in a Monastery, etc. Where I beseech the Reader to observe these
things to detect the cunning of your tergiversation: First, That you have no
Reason to say, That you found D. Potter in a Monastery: and as little, that you
find him inventing ways how to forsake his vocation, and to maintain the
lawfulness of Schism from the Church, and Apostasy from a Religious Order.
Certainly the innocent case put by the Doctor, of a Monastery reforming it
self, has not deserved such grievous accusations. Unless Reformation with
you be all one with Apostasy: and to forsake sin and disorder, be to forsake
ones vocation. And surely if it be so, your vocations are not very lawful, and
your Religious orders not very religious. Secondly, that you quite pervert and
change D. Potters cases, and in stead of the case, of a whole Monastery
reforming it self, when other Monasteries of their Order would not; and of
some men freeing themselves from the common disease of their society, when
others would not: you substitute two others, which you think you can better
deal with; of some particular Monks, upon pretense of the neglect of lesser
monastical observances, going out of their Monastery, which Monastery yet did
confessedly observe their substantial Vows, and all Principal Statutes: And
of a diseased Person, quitting the company of those that were infected with the
same disease: though in their company, there was no danger from his disease, it
being impossible that should be mortal: and out of it, no hope of escaping
others like that for which he forsook the first infected Company. I appeal now
to any indifferent judge, whether these cases be the same or near the same
with D. Potters? Whether this be fair and ingenuous dealing, in stead of his
two instances, which plainly showed it possible in other societies, and
consequently in that of the Church, to leave the faults of a society, and not
leave being of it, to foist in two others, clean cross to the Doctors purpose,
of men under color of faults, abandoning the society wherein they lived? I
know not what others may think of this dealing, but to me, this declining D.
Potters cases and conveying others into their place, is a great assurance, that
as they were put by him, you could say nothing to them.

85 But that no suspicion of tergiversation may be fastened upon me, I am
content to deal with you a little, at your own weapons. Put the case then,
though not just as you would have it, yet with as much ^avour to you, as in
reason you can expect, That a Monastery did observe her substantial vows, and
all Principal statutes, but yet did generally practice, and also enjoyne the
violation of some lesser, yet obliging observances, and had done so time out of
mind. And that some inferior Monks more conscientious then the rest,
discovering this abuse, should first with all earnestness solicit their
Superiors for a general and orderly reformation of these, though small and
venial corruptions, yet corruptions: But finding they hoped and labored in
vain to effect this, should reform these faults in themselves, and refuse to
join in the practice of them, with the rest of their Con^raternity, and
persisting resolutely in such a refusal, should by their Superiors be cast
out of their Monastery, and being not to be readmitted without a promise of
remitting from their stiffenesse in these things, and of condescending to
others in the practice of their small faults, should choose rather to continue
exiles, then to re-enter upon such conditions: I would know whether you would
condemn such men of Apostasy from the Order? Without doubt if you should, you
would find the stream of your Casuists against you, and besides, involve S.
Paul in the same condemnation, who plainly tells, that we may not do the least
evil, that we may do the greatest good. Put case again, you should be part of
a Society universally infected with some disease, and discovering a certain
remedy for this disease, should persuade the whole company to make use of it,
but find the greatest part of them so far in love with their disease, that
they were resolved to keep it and besides, should make a decree, that
whosoever would leave it, should leave their company. Suppose now that your
self and some few others, should notwithstanding their injunction to the
contrary, free your selves from this disease, and thereupon they should
absolutely forsake and reject you: I would know in this case who deserves to be
condemned, whether you of uncharitable desertion of your company, or they of a
tyrannical peevishness? And if in these cases you will (as I verily believe
you will,) acquit the inferiors and condemn the superiors, absolve the minor
part and condemn the major, then can you with no reason condemn Prote^tants,
for choosing rather to be ejected from the communion of the Roman Church, then
with her to persist (as of necessity they were to do, if they would continue
in her communion) in the profession of Errors, though not destructive of
salvation, yet hindering edification, and in the Practice, or at least
approbation of many, (suppose not mortal) but venial corruptions.

86 Thirdly, that you censure too partially the corrupt estate of your Church,
in comparing it to a Monastery, which did confessedly observe their
substantial vows, and all Principal Statutes of their order, and moreover
was secured by an infallible assistance, for the avoiding of all substantial
corruptions: for of your Church we confess no such matter, but say plainly,
That she not only might fall into substantial corruptions, but did so; that
she did not only generally violate, but of all the members of her communion,
either in act or approbation, require and exact the violation of many
substantial laws of Christ, both Ceremonial and Moral, which though we hope
it was pardonable in them, who had not means to know their error, yet of its
own nature, and to them who did or might have known their error, was certainly
damnable. And that it was not the tything of Mint, and Annise, and Cummin, the
neglect whereof we impute unto you, but the neglect of judgment, justice, and
the weightier matters of the Law.

87 Fourthly, I am to represent unto you, that you use Protestants very
strangely, in comparing them to a company, who all were known to be led to
their pretended reformation, not with an intent of Reformation, but with some
other sinister intention; which is impossible to be known of you, and therefore
to judge so, is against Christian Charity, and common equity: and to such a
Company as acknowledge that themselves, as soon as they were gone out from the
Monastery that deferred to reform, must not hope to be free from those or the
like Errors, and Corruptions for which they left their Brethren: seeing this
very hope and nothing else, moved them to leave your Communion: and this speech
of yours, so far as it concerns the same errors, plainly destroies itself.
For how can they possibly fall into the same errors by forsaking your
Communion, which that they may forsake they do forsake your Communion? And
then for other errors of the like nature and quality, or more enormous then
yours, though they deny it not possible, but by their negligence and
wickedness they may fall into them, yet they are so far from acknowledging
that they have no hope to avoid this mischief, that they proclaim to all the
world, that it is most prone and easy to do so, to all those that fear God
and love the truth; and hardly possible for them to do otherwise, without
supine negligence and extreme impiety.

88 To fit the reddition of your perverted Simile, to the Proposition of it,
you tell us that we teach that for all fundamental points, the Church is
secured from error. I Answer, Fundamental errors may signify, either such as
are repugnant to Gods command, and so in their own nature damnable, though to
those which out of invincible ignorance practice them, not unpardonable: or
such as are not only meritoriously, but remedilessely pernicious and
destructive of Salvation. We hope that yours and the Greek and other Churches
before the Reformation, had not so far apostated from Christ, as to be guilty
of errors of the latter sort. We say that not only the Catholic Church, but
every Particular true Church, so long as it continues a Church, is secured from
Fundamental errors of this kind, but secured not absolutely by any promise of
divine assistance, which being not ordinarily irresistible, but tempered to the
nature of the Receivers, may be neglected, and therefore withdrawn: but by the
Repugnance of any error in this sense fundamental to the essence and nature
of a Church. So that to speak properly, not any set known company of men is
secured, that, though they neglect the means of avoiding error, yet certainly
they shall not err, which were necessary for the constitution of an infallible
guide of faith: But rather they which know what is meant by a Church, are
secured or rather certain that a Church remaining a Church, cannot fall into
fundamental error, because when it does so, it is no longer a Church. As they
are certain that men cannot become unreasonable creatures, because when they
do so, they are no longer men. But for fundamental errors of the former sort,
which yet I hope will warrant our departure from any Communion infected with
them, and requiring the Profession of them, from such fundamental errors, we
do not teach so much as that the Church Catholic, much less, (which only
were for your purpose,) that your Church has any protection or security, but
know for a certain, that many errors of this nature, had prevailed against you;
and that a vain presumption of an absolute divine assistance (which yet is
promised but upon conditions,) made both your present errors incurable, and
exposed you to the imminent danger of more and greater. This therefore is
either to abuse what we say, or to impose falsely upon us what we say not. And
to this you presently add another manifest falsehood, viz. that we say, that
no particular person or Church, has any promise of assistance in points
fundamental. Whereas cross to this in diameter, there is no Protestant but
holds, and must hold, that there is no particular Church, no nor person, but
has promise of divine assistance to lead them into all necessary truth; if
they seek it as they should, by the means which God has appointed. And
should we say otherwise, we should contrary plain Scripture, which assures us
plainly, that every one that seeks finds, and every one that asks
receives: and that if we being evil, can give good gifts to our children,
much more shall our heavenly Father, give his spirit to them that ask it: and
that if any man want wisdom (especially spiritual wisdom) he is to ask of
God, who gives to all men, and upbraideth not.

89 You obtrude upon us thirdly, That when Luther began, he being but one,
opposed himself to all, as well Subjects as Superiors. Ans. If he did so in
the cause of God, it was heroically done of him. This had been without
hyperbolizing, Mundus contra Athanasium, and Athanasius contra Mundum: neither
is it impossible, that the whole world should so far lie in wickedness (as
S. John speaks) that it may be lawful and noble for one man to oppose the
world. But yet were we put to our oaths, we should surely not testify any such
thing for you; for how can we say properly and without streining, that he
opposed himself to All, unless we could say also, that All opposed themselves
to him? And how can we say so, seeing the world can witness, that so many
thousands, nay millions followed his standard as soon as it was advanced?

90 But, none that lived immediately before him thought or spoke as he did. This
is first nothing to the purpose. The Church was then corrupted, and sure it was
no dishonor to him to begin the Reformation. In the Christian warfare, every
man ought to strive to be foremost. Secondly, it is more then you can justify.
For though no man before him lifted up his voice like a trumpet, as Luther did,
yet who can assure us, but that many before him, both thought and spoke in
lower voice of petitions and remonstrances, in many points, as he did?

91 Fourthly and lastly, whereas you say that many chief learned Protestants,
are forced to confess the Antiquity of your Doctrine and Practice: I Answer,
of many Doctrines and Practices of yours, this is not true, not pretended to be
true by those that have dealt in this Argument. Search your storehouse M.
Brerely, who has travailed as far in this Northwest discovery, as it was
possible for humane industry, and when you have done so, I pray inform me,
what confessions of Protestants have you, for the Antiquity of the Doctrine of
the Communion in one kind: the lawfulness and expedience of the Latin
service: For the present use of Indulgences: For the Popes power in
Temporalties over Princes: For the picturing of the Trinity: For the
lawfulness of the worship of Pictures: For your Beads and Rosary, and Ladies
Psalter; and in a word, for your whole worship of the B. Virgin: For your
oblations by way of consumption, and therefore in the quality of Sacrifices to
the Virgin Mary and other Saints: For your saying of Pater-nosters, and Creeds
to the honor of Saints, and of Ave-Maries to the honor of other Saints
besides the Blessed Virgin: For infallibility of the Bishop or Church of Rome:
For your prohibiting the Scripture to be read publicly in the Church, in such
languages as all may understand: For your Doctrine of the Blessed Virgins
immunity from actual sin; and for your doctrine and worship of her
immaculate conception: For the necessity of Auricular Confession: For the
necessity of the Priests Intention to obtain benefit by any of your Sacraments:
And lastly (not to trouble my self with finding out more) for this very
doctrine of Licentiousness, That though a man live and dye without the
practice of Christian virtues, and with the habits of many damnable sins
unmortified, yet if he in the last moment of life, have any sorrow for his
sins, and join confession with it, certainly he shall be saved? Secondly,
they that confess some of your doctrines to have been the Doctrine of the
Fathers, may be mistaken, being abused by may words and phrases of the Fathers,
which have the Roman sound, when they are far from the sense. Some of them I
am sure are so, I will name Goulartius, who in his Commentaries on S. Cyprian's
35. Ep. grants that the sentence Heresies have sprung, etc. quoted by you. 36.
of this Chapter* was meant of Cornelius: whereas it will be very plain to any
attentive reader, that S. Cyprian speaks there of himself. Thirdly, though
some Protestants confess some of your doctrine to be Ancient, yet this is
nothing, so long as it is evident, even by the confession of all sides, that
many errors, I instance in that of the Millenaries, and the communicating of
Infants, were more ancient. Not any antiquity therefore, unless it be absolute
and primitive, is a certain sign of true Doctrine. For if the Church were
obnoxious to corruption (as we pretend it was,) who can possibly warrant us
that part of this corruption, might not get in and prevail in the 5. or 4. or
3. or 2. age? Especially seeing the AApostles assure us that the mystery of
iniquity was working, though more secretly eve^ in their times. If any man ask
how could it become universal in so short a time? Let him tell me how the
Error of the Millenaries, and the communicating of Infants, became so soon
universal, and then he shall acknowledge, what was done in some, was possible
in others. Lastly, to cry quittance with you: As there are Protestants who
confess the antiquity, but always post-na^e to Apostolic, of some points of
your Doctrine: so there want not Papists who acknowledge as freely, the novelty
of many of them, and the Antiquity of ours. A collection of whose testimony, we
have (without thanks to you) in your Indices expurgatorij: The divine
Providence, blessedly abusing for the readier manifestation of the Truth this
engine intended by you for the subversion and suppression of it. Here is no
place to stand upon particulars: only one general ingenuous confession of
that great Erasmus, may not be passed over in silence. Non de sunt magni
Theologi, qui non verentur affirmare, nihil esse in Luthero, quin per probatos
authors defendi possit. Erasm. Ep. lib. 15. Ep. ad Good schalcum. Ros.
There want not great Divines, which stick not to affirm, that there is
nothing in Luther, which may not be defended by good and allowed authors.
Whereas therefore you close up this Simile with, consider these points, and see
whether your similitude do not condemn your Progenitors of Schism from Gods
visible Church: I assure you, I have well considered them, and do plainly see
that this is not D. Potters similitude, but your own; and besides, that it is
wholly made up of mistakes and falsehoods, and is at no hand a sufficient
proof of this great Accusation.

92 Let us come now to the second similitude of your making, in the entrance
whereunto you tell us, that from the Monastery D. Potter is fled to an
Hospital of persons Universally infected with some disease, where he finds to
be true, what you supposed, that after his departure from his Brethren, he
might fall into greater inconveniences, and more infectious diseases then those
for which he left them. Thus you. But to deal truly with you, I find nothing
of all this, nor how it is consequent from any thing said by you, or done by D.
Potter. But this I find, that you have composed this your similitude as you
did the former, of a heap of vain suppositions, pretended to be grounded on
our confessions. As first, that your diseases which we for sook, neither were
nor could be mortal: whereas we assure our selves, and are ready to justify,
that they are and were mortal in themselves, and would have been so to us, if
when light came to us we had loved darkness more then light. And D. Potter
though he hope your Church wanted no necessary vital part, that is, that some
in your Church by ignorance might be saved; yet he nothing doubts but that it
is full of ulcers without, and diseases within, and is so far from extenuating
your errors as to make them only like the superfluous fingers of the giant of
Gath. Secondly, that we had no hope to avoid other diseases like those for
which we forsook your company, nor to be secure out of it from damnable
errors: whereas the hope hereof was the only motive our departure; and we
assure our selves that the means to be secured from damnable error, is not to
be secure as you are, but carefully to use those means of avoiding it, to which
God has promised, and will never fail to give a blessing. Thirdly, that those
innumerable mischiefs which followed upon the departure of Protestants, were
caused by it as by a proper cause: whereas their doctrine was no otherwise the
occasion of them, then the Gospel of Christ of the division of the world. The
only fountain of all these mischiefs, being indeed no other then your pouring
out a flood of persecutions against Protestants, only because they would not
sin and be damned with you for company. Unless we may add the impatience of
some Protestants, who not enduring to be torn in pieces like sheep by a
company of wolves without resistance, chose rather to dye like soldiers then
Martyrs.

93 But you proceed, and falling into a fit of admiration, cry out and say
thus, To what pass has Heresy brought men, who blush not to compare the
beloved Spouse of the Lord, the only Dove, etc. to a Monastery that must be
forsaken; to the giant in Gath with superfluous fingers! but this Spouse of
Christ, this only Dove, this purchase of our Saviors blood, this Catholic
Church, which you thus almost deifie, what is it but a Society of men, whereof
every particular, and by consequence, the whole company is or may be guilty of
many sins daily committed against knowledge and conscience? Now I would feign
understand why one error in faith, especially if not fundamental, should not
consist with the holiness of this Spouse, this Dove, this Church, as well as
many and great sins committed against knowledge and conscience? If this be
not to strain at gnats and swallow camels, I would fain understand what it is!
And hereby the way I desire you to consider whether as it were with one stroke
of a sponge you do not wipe out all that you have said, to prove Protestants
Schismatiques for separating from your Church, though supposed to be in some
errors not fundamental! For if any such error may make her deserve to be
compared to a Monastery so disordered that it must be forsaken; then if you
suppose (as here you do) your Church in such errors, your Church is so
disordered that it must, and therefore without question may be forsaken, I mean
in those her disorders and corruptions, and no farther.

94 And yet you have not done with those similitudes, But must observe (you
say) one thing, and that is, that as these Reformers of the Monastery, and
others who left the diseased company, could not deny but that they left the
said communities: So Luther and the rest cannot pretend, not to have left the
visible Church. And that D. Potter speaks very strangely when he says, In a
society of men universally infected with some disease, they that should free
themselves from the common disease, could not be therefore said to separate
from the society. For if they do not separate themselves from the society of
the infected persons, how do they free themselves from the common disease? To
which I answer: That indeed if you speak of the Reformers of a Monastery and of
the Deserors of the diseased company, as you put the cases, that is, of those
which left these communities, then is it as true as Gospel, that they cannot
deny but that they left the said communities. But it appears not to me how it
will ensue hereupon: that Luther and the rest cannot pretend not to have left
the visible Church. For to my apprehension this Argument is very weak,

They which left some communities cannot truly deny but that they left them;
Therefore Luther and his followers cannot deny but that they left the visible
Church.

Where me thinks you prove little, but take for granted that which is one of
the greatest Questions amongst us, that is, That the Company which Luther left,
was the whole Visible Church: whereas you know we say, it was but a part of it,
and that corrupted, and obstinate in her corruptions. Indeed that Luther and
his followers left off the Practice of those Corruptions wherein the whole
Visible Church did communicate formerly, (which I meant when I acknowledged
above that they forsook the external Communion of the Visible Church,) or that
they left that part of the Visible church in her corruptions which would not be
reformed: These things, if you desire, I shall be willing to grant; and that by
a Synecdoche of the whole for the part, he might be said to forsake the Visible
Church, that is, a part of it, and the greater part. But that properly
speaking, he forsook the whole Visible Church, I hope you will excuse me if I
grant not this, until you bring better proof of it, then your former
similitude. And my Reason is his, because he and his Followers were a part of
this Church, and ceased not to be so by their Reformation. Now he and his
followers certainly forsook not themselves, Therefore not every part of the
Church, therefore not the whole Church. But then if you speak of D. Potters
cases, according as he put them, and answer not your own Arguments, when you
make show of answering his: me thinks it should not be so unreasonable as you
make it, for the Persons he speaks of to deny that they left the communities
whereof they were Members. For example, That the Monks of S. Benets Order make
one Body, whereof their several Monasteries are several members, I presume it
will be easily granted. Suppose now that all these Monasteries being quite out
of Order, some 20. or 30. of them should reform themselves, the rest
persisting still in their irregular couses: were it such a mon. strous
impudence as you make it, for these Monasteries, which we suppose reformed, to
deny that they forsook their Order or Community whereof they were parts? In my
Opinion it is no such matter. Let the world judge. Again, whereas the Dr
says, that in a Society of men Universally infected with some disease, they
that should free themselves from the common disease, could not therefore be
said to separate from the Society: It is very strange to me that you should
say, he speaks very strangely. Truly Sr I am extremely deceaved if his words be
not plain English, and plain sense, and contain such a manifest Truth as
cannot be denied with modesty, nor gone about to be proved without vanity. For
whatsoever is proved must be proved by something more evident: Now what can be
more evident then this; That if some whole Families were taken with Agues, if
the Father of this Family should free himself from his, that he should not
therefore deservedly be thought to abandon and desert his Family? But (say you)
if they do not separate themselves from the Society of the wicked persons, how
do they free themselves from the common disease? Do they at the same time
remain in the company and yet depart from those infected creatures? Me thinks
a Writer of Controversies should not be ignorant how this may be done without
any such difficulty! But if you do not know, I Will tell you. There is no
necessity they should leave the company of these infected persons at all: much
less, that they should at once depart from it and remain with it, which I
confess were very difficult. But if they will free themselves from their
disease, let them stay where they are, and take physic. Or if you would be
better informed how this strange thing may be done, learn from your self,
They may free their own persons from the common disease, yet so that they
remain still in the company infected, eating and drinking with them, etc. Which
are your own words within four or five lines after this: plainly showing that
your mistaking D. Potters meaning, and your wondering at his words as at some
strange monsters, was all this while affected, and that you are conscious to
your self of perverting his Argument that you may seem to say something, when
indeed you say nothing. Whereas therefore you add, we must then say that they
separate themselves from the persons, though it be by occasion of the disease,
I assure you good Sir, you must not do so at any hand; for then you alter and
spoil D. Potters case quite, and fight not with his reason but your own
shadow. For the instance of a man freeing himself from the disease of his
company, and not leaving his company, is very fit to prove, by the parity of
reason, that it is very possible, a man may leave the corruptions of a Church,
and not leave the Church, that is, not cease to be a member of it: But yours of
a man leaving his company by occasion of their disease, has no analogy at all
with this business.

95 But Luther and his followers did not continue in the company of those from
whose diseases they pretend to free themselves. Very true, neither was it said
they did so. There is no necessity that that which is compared to another thing
should agree with it in all things: it is sufficient if it agree in that
wherein it is compared. A man freeing himself from the common disease of a
society, and yet continuing a part of it, is here compared to Luther and his
followers, freeing themselves from the corruptions of the visible Church, and
continuing a part of the Church. As for accompanying the other parts of it in
all things, it was neither necessary, nor, without destroying our supposition
of their forsaking the corruptions of the Church, possible. Not necessary; for
they may be parts of the Church which do not join with other parts of it in
all observances. Nor possible, for had he accompanied them in all things, he
had not freed himself from the common corruptions.

96 But they endeavored to force the society whereof they were parts to be
healed and reformed as they were; and if it refused, they did, when they had
power drive them away, even their superiors both Spiritual and Temporal as
is notorious. The proofs hereof are wanting and therefore I might defer my
answer until they were produced; yet take this before hand: If they did so,
then herein, in my opinion, they did amiss; for I have learnt from the ancient
Fathers of the Church, that nothing is more against Religion then to force
Religion, and of S. Paul, the weapons of the Christian warfare are not carnal.
And great reason: For humane violence may make men counterfeit, but cannot make
them believe, and is therefore fit for nothing but to breed form without, and
Atheism within. Besides, if this means of bringing men to embrace any
Religion were generally used (as if it may be justly used in any place by those
that have power, and think they have truth, certainly they cannot with reason
deny but that it may be used in every place, by those that have power as well
as they, and think they have truth as well as they,) what could follow but the
maintenance perhaps of truth, but perhaps only of the profession of it in one
place, and the oppression of it in a hundred? What will follow from it but the
preservation peradventure of unity, but peradventure only of uniformity in
particular States and Churches; but the immortalizing the greater and more
lamentable divisions of Christendom and the world? And therefore what can
follow from it, but perhaps in the judgment of carnal policy, the temporal
benefit and tranquillity of temporal States and Kingdoms, but the infinite
prejudice, if not the desolation of the kingdom of Christ? And therefore it
well becomes the^ who have their portions in this life, who serve no higher
State then that of England, or Spain, or France, nor this neither any further
then they may serve themselves by it; who think of no other happiness but the
preservation of their own fortunes and tranquillity in this world; who think of
no other means to preserve States, but humane power and Machiavillian policy;
and believe no other Creed but this, Regi aut Civitati imperium habenti nihil
iniustum, quod utile! Such men as these it may become to maintain by worldly
power and violence their State instrument, Religion. For if all be vain and
false, (as in their judgment it is) the present whatsoever, is better then
any, because it is already settled: and alteration of it may draw with it change
of States, and the change of State the subversion of their fortune. But they
that are indeed servants and lovers of Christ, of truth, of the Church, and of
mankind, ought with all courage to oppose themselves against it, as a common
enemy of all these. They that know there is a King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
by whose will and pleasure Kings and Kingdoms stand and fall, they know, that
to no King or state any thing can be profitable which is unjust; and that
nothing can be more evidently unjust, then to force weak men by the profession
of a religion which they believe not, to loose their own eternal happiness,
out of a vain and needless fear, least they may possibly disturb their
temporal quietness. There is no danger to any state from any man's opinion;
unless it be such an opinion by which disobedience to authority, or impiety is
taught or licensed, which sort, I confess may justly be punished as well as
other faults; or unless this sanguinary doctrine be joined with it, that it
is lawful for him by humane violence to enforce others to it. Therefore if
Protestants did offer violence to other men's consciences and compel them to
embrace their Reformation, I excuse them not: much less if they did so to the
sacred Persons of Kings, and those that were in authority over them, who ought
to be so secured from violence, that even their unjust and tyrannous violence,
though it may be avoided (according to that of our Savior, When they persecute
you in one City fly into another,) yet may it not be resisted by opposing
violence against it. Protestants therefore that were guilty of this crime are
not to be excused, and blessed had they been had they chosen rather to be
Martyrs then murderers, and to dye for their religion rather then to fight for
it. But of all the men in the world you are the most unfit to accuse them
hereof, against who^ the souls of the Martyrs from under the Altar cry much
louder then against all their other Persecutors together: Who for these many
ages together have daily sacrificed Hecatombes of innocent Christians, under
the name of Heretics, to your blind zeal and furious superstition. Who teach
plainly, that you may propagate your Religion whenever you have power by
deposing of Kings and invasion of Kingdoms, and think when you kill the
adversaries of it, you do God good service. But for their departing corporally
from them, whom mentally they had forsaken: For their forsaking the external
Communion and company of that part of the unreformed part of the Church, in
their superstitions and impieties: thus much of your accusation we embrace and
glory in it; And say though some Protestants might offend in the manner or the
degree of their separation, yet certainly their separation it self was not
Schismatic, but innocent, and not only so, but just and necessary. And as
for your obtruding upon D. Potter that he should say, There neither was nor
could be just cause to do so, no more then to depart from Christ himself. I
have showed diverse times already, that you sdeal very injuriously with him,
confounding together, Departing from the Church, and Departing from some
general opinions and practices, which did not constitute but vitiate, not make
the Church but mar it. For though he says, that which is most true, that
there can be no just cause to depart from the Church, that is, to cease being a
member of the Church, no more then to depart from Christ himself, in as much as
these are not diverse but the same thing, yet he no where denies, but there
might be just and necessary cause to depart from some opinions and practices of
your Church, nay of the Catholic Church. And therefore you do vainly to
infer, that Luther and his followers for so doing, were Schismatiques.

97 Ad 35. I answer in a word, that neither are Optatus his sayings rules of
Faith, and therefore not fit to determine Controversies of Faith: And then that
Majorinus might well be a Schismatique for departing from Ca cilianus, and the
Chair of Cyprian and Peter without cause, and yet Luther and his followers who
departed from the Communion of the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop of their own
Diocese be none, because they had just and necessary cause of their departure.
For otherwise they must have continued in the profession of known Errors and
the practice of manifest corruptions.

98 Ad 36. In the next Section you tell us, that Christ our Lord gave S. Peter
and his successors authority over his whole Militant Church. And for proof
hereof you first refer us to Brerely, citing exactly the places of such
chief Protestants as have confessed the antiquity of this point. Where first
you fall into the Fallacy which is called Ignoratio elenchi, or mistaking the
Question; for being to prove this point true, you only prove it ancient.
Which, to what purpose is it, when both the parties litigant are agreed that
many errors were held by many of the ancient Doctors, much more ancient then
any of those who are pretended to be confessed by Protestants to have held with
you in this matter: and when those whom you have to do with, and whom it is
vain to dispute against but out of Principles received by them, are all
peremptory, that though novelty be a certain note of falsehood, yet no antiquity
less then Apostolical is a certain note of truth? Yet this I say not as if I
did acknowledge what you pretend, that Protestants did confess the Fathers
against them in this point. For the point here issuable is not, whether S.
Peter were head of the Church? Nor whether the Bishop of Rome had any priority
in the Church? Nor whether he had authority over it given him by the Church?
But whether by Divine right, and by Christ's appointment he were Head of the
Catholic Church? Now having perused Brerely, I cannot find any one Protestant
confessing any one Father to have concurred in opinion with you in this point.
And the Reader has reason to suspect, that you also out of all the Fathers
could not find any one authority pertinent to this purpose: for otherwise you
were much to blame, citing so few, to make choice of such as are impertinent.
For let the understanding Reader peruse the 55. Epist. of S. Cyprian, with any
ordinary attention, out of which you take your first place, and I am confident
he shall find that he means nothing else by the words quoted by you, But
that in one particular Church at one time there ought to be but one Bishop,
and that he should be obeyed in all things lawful: The nonperformance whereof
was one of the most ordinary causes of heresies against the Faith, and Schism
from the Communion of the Church Universal. He shall find secondly, and that
by many convincing Arguments, that though he write to Cornelius Bishop of Rome,
yet he speaks not of him, but of himself then Bishop of Carthage, against
whom a faction of Schismatiques had then set up another. And therefore here
your ingenuitie is to be commended above many of your side: For whereas they
ordinarily abuse this place to prove, that in the whole Church there ought to
be but one Priest and one Judge; you seem somewhat diffident hereof, and
thereupon say, that these words plainly condemn Luther, whether he will
understand them as spoken of the Universal or of every particular Church. But
whether they condemn Luther is another Question. The question here is, whether
they plainly prove the Popes Supremacy over al other Bishops? which certainly
they are as far from proving, as from proving the supremacy of any other
Bishop: seeing it is evident they were intended not of one Bishop over the
whole Catholic Church, but of one Bishop in one particular Church.

99 And no less impertinent is your saying out of Optatus, if it be well looked
into, though at the first sight it may seem otherwise; because Optatus his
scene happened to be Rome, whereas S. Cyprians was Carthage. The truth is the
Donatists had set up at Rome a Bishop of their faction: not with intent to make
him Bishop of the whole Church but of that Church in particular. Now Optatus
going upon S. Cyprians above mentioned ground of one Bishop in one Church,
proves them Schismatiques for so doing, and he proves it by this Argument: S.
Peter was first Bishop of Rome, neither did the Apostles attribute to
themselves each one his particular Chair, (understand in that City, for in
other places others I hope had Chaires besides S. Peter) and therefore he is a
Schismatique, who against that one single Chair erects another (understand as
before, in that place) making another Bishop of that Diocese besides him who
was lawfully elected to it.

100 But yet by the way he styles S. Peter head of the Apostles, and says that
from thence he was called Cephas. Ans. Perhaps he was abused into this opinion,
by thinking Cephas derived from the greek word (...) a head: whereas it is a
Syriack word and signifies a stone. Besides S. Peter might be head of the
Apostles, that is, first in order and honor among them, and not have supreme
Authority over them. And indeed that S. Peter should have authority overall the
Apostles, and yet exercise no one act of Authority over any one of them, and
that they should show to him no sign of subjection, me thinks is as strange,
as that a King of England for twenty five years should do no Act of Regality,
nor receive any one acknowledgement of it. As strange me thinks it is, that you
so many ages after, should know this so certainly, as you pretend to do, and
that the Apostles (after that those words were spoken in their hearing, by
virtue whereof S. Peter is pretended to have been made their head,) should
still be so ignorant of it, as to question which of them should be the
greatest? yet more strange, that our Savior should not bring them out of their
error, by telling them S. Peter was the man, but rather confirm it by saying,
the Kings of the Gentiles exercise authority over them, but it should not be so
among them. No less a wonder was it that S. Paul should so far forget S.
Peter and himself, as that first mentioning him often, he should do it
without any title of Honor. Secondly, speaking of the several degrees of men
in the Church, he should not give S. Peter the highest, but place him in
equipage with the rest of the Apostles, and say, God has appointed (not first
Peter, then the rest of the Apostles, but) first Apostles, secondly Prophets.
Certainly if the Apostles were all first, to me it is very probable, that no
one of them was before the rest. For by First, all men understand either that
which is before all, or that before which is nothing. Now in the former sense,
the Apostles could not be all first, for then every one of them must have been
before every one of the rest. And therefore they must be First in the other
sense. And therefore No man, and therefore not S. Peter, must be before any of
them. Thirdly and Lastly, that speaking of himself in particular, and perhaps
comparing himself with S. Peter in particular, rather then any other, he
should say in plain terms, I am in nothing inferior to the very chiefest
Apostles. But besides all this, Though we should grant against all these
probabilities and many more, that Optatus meant that S. Peter was head of the
Apostles, not in our but in your sense, and that S. Peter indeed was so; yet
still you are very far from showing, that in the judgment of Optatus, the
Bishop of Rome, was to be at all, much less by divine right, successor to S.
Peter in this his Headship and Authority. For what inco^gruity is there, if we
say, that he might succeed S. Peter in that part of his care, the government of
that particular Church, (as sure he did even while S. Peter was living,) and
yet that neither he nor any man was to succeed him in his Apostleship, nor in
his government of the Church Universal? Especially seeing S. Peter and the
rest of the Apostles, by laying the foundations of the Church, were to be the
Foundations of it, and accordingly are so called in Scripture. And therefore as
in a building it is incongruous that foundations should succeed foundations: So
it may be in the Church, that any other Apostle should succeed the first.

101 Ad. 37. The next Paragraph I might well pass over, as having no Argument
in it. For there is nothing in it but two sayings of S. Austine, which I have
great reason to esteem no Argument, until you will promise me, to grant
whatsoever I shall prove by two sayings of S. Austine. But moreover, the second
of these sentences seems to me, to imply the contradiction of the first. For
to say, That the Sacrilege of Schism is eminent, when there is no cause of
separation, implies to my understanding, that there may be a cause of
Separation. Now in the first, he says plainly That this is impossible. Neither
does any reconciliation of his words occur to me, but only this, that in the
former he speaks upon supposition, that the Public service of God, where in
men are to communicate is unpolluted, and no unlawful thing practiced in their
communion, which was so true of their communion, that the Donatists who
separated did not deny it. And to make this Answer no improbable evasion, it is
observable out of S. Austine and Optatus, that though the Donatists, at the
beginning of their Separation, pretended no cause for it, but only that the men
from whom they separated, were defiled with the contagion of Traditors; yet
afterward, to make the continuance of it more justifiable, they did invent and
spread abroad this calumny against Catholics, that they set pictures upon
their Altars: which when S. Austine comes to Answer, he does not deny the
possibility of the thing, for that had been to deny the Catholic Church to be
made up of men, all which had free will to evil, and therefore might possibly
agree in doing it, and had he denied this, the Action of after Ages had been
his refutation: Neither does he say, (as you would have done,) that it was
true, they placed pictures there, and moreover worshipped them, but yet not for
their own sakes, but for theirs who were represented by them: Neither does he
say, (as you do in this Chapter) that though this were granted a Corruption,
yet were they not to separate for it. What then does he? certainly nothing
else, but abhor the thing, and deny the imputation: Which way of answering,
does not I confess plainly show, but yet it somewhat intimates that he had
nothing else to answer; and that if he could not have denied this, he could not
have denied the Donatists separation from them to have been just. If this
Answer, to this little Argument seem not sufficient, I add moreover, that if
it be applied to Luthers separation, it has the common fault of all your
Allegations out of Fathers, impertinence. For it is one thing to separate from
the Communion of the whole world, another to separate from all the Communions
in the world: One thing to divide from them who are united among themselves,
another to divide from them who are divided among themselves. Now the Donatists
separated from the whole World of Christians, united in one Communion,
professing the same Faith, serving God after the same manner, which was a very
great Argument, that they could not have just cause to leave them: according to
that of Tertullian, Variasse debuerat error Ecclesiarum, quod autem apud multos
unumest, non est Erratum sed Traditum. But Luther and his followers did not so.
The world, I mean of Christians and Catholics, was divided and subdivided
long before he divided from it; and by their divisions had much weakened their
own Authority, and taken away from you this plea of S. Austine, which stands
upon no other Foundation, but the Unity of the whole worlds Communion.

102 Ad. 38. If Luther were in the right, most certain those Protestants that
differed from him were in the wrong: But that either he or they were
Schismatiques, it follows not. Or if it does, then either the Jesuits are
Schismatiques from the Dominicans, or they from the Jesuits; The Canonists from
the Jesuits, or the Jesuits from the Canonists: The Scotists from the
Thomists, or they from the Scotists: The Franciscans from the Dominicans, or
the Dominicans from the Franciscans. For between all these the world knows;
that in point of Doctrine, there is plain and irreconcilable contradiction,
and therefore one Part must be in error, at least not Fundamental. Thus your
Argument returns upon your self, and if it be good, proves the Roman Church
in a manner to be made up of Schismatiques. But the Answer to it is, that it
begges this very false and vain supposition; That whosoever erres in any point
of doctrine is a Schismatique.

103 Ad. 39. In the next place you number up your victories, and tell us, that
out of these premises, this conclusion follows, That Luther and his followers
were Schismatiques from the Visible Church, the Pope, the Diocese wherein they
were baptized, from the Bishop under whom they lived, from the country to which
they belonged, from their Religious order, wherein they were professed, from
one another, and lastly, from a man's self: Because the selfsame Protestant is
convicted to day, that his yesterdaies opinion was an error. To which I Answer,
that Luther and his followers separated from many of these, in some opininions
and practices* But that they did it without cause, which only can make them
Schismatiques, that was the only thing you should have proved, and to that you
have not urged one reason of any moment. All of them for weight and strength,
were cosen-germans to this pretty device, wherewith you will prove them
Schismatiques from themselves, because the selfsame Protestant to day is
convicted in conscience, that his yesterdaies opinion was an error. It seems
then that they that hold errors, must hold them fast, and take special care of
being convicted in conscience, that they are in error, for fear of being
Schismatiques! Protestants must continue Protestants, and Puritans Puritans,
and Papists Papists, nay Jews, and Turks, and Pagans, must remain Jews, and
Turks, and Pagans, and go on constantly to the Devil, or else forsooth they
must be Schismatiques, and that from themselves. And this perhaps is the cause
that makes Papists so obstinate, not only in their common superstition, but
also in adhering to the proper phancies of their several Sects, so that it is
a miracle to hear of any Jesuit, that has forsaken the opinion of the
Jesuits: or any Dominican that has changed his for the Jesuits. Without
question, this Gentleman my Adversary knows none such, or else methinkes he
should not have objected it to D. Potter (That he knew a man in the world who
from a Puritan, was turned to a moderate Protestant, which is likely to be
true. But sure if this be all his fault, he has no reason to be ashamed of
his acquaintance. For possibly it may be a fault to be in error, because many
times it proceeds from a fault: But sure the forsaking of error cannot be a
sin, unless to be in error be a virtue. And therefore, to do as you do, to
damn men for false opinions, and to call them Schismatiques for leaving them;
to make pertinacy in error, that is, an unwillingnesse to be convicted, or a
resolution not to be convicted, the form of Heresies, and to find fault with
men, for being convicted in conscience that they are in error, is the most
incoherent and contradictious injustice that ever was heard of. But Sir, if
this be a strange matter to you, that which I shall tell you will be much
stranger. I know a man that of a moderate Protestant turned a Papist, and the
day that he did so, (as all things that are done are perfected some day or
other,) was convicted in conscience, that his yesterdaies opinion was an error,
and yet thinks he was no Schismatique for doing sos, and desires to be
informed by you, whether or no he was mistaken? The same man afterward upon
better consideration, became a doubting Papist, and of a doubting Papist, a
confirmed Protestant. And yet this man thinks himself no more to blame for all
these changes, then a Travailer, who using all diligence to find the right way
to some remote City, where he never had been, (as the party I speak of had
never been in Heaven,) did yet mistake it, and after find his error, and amend
it. Nay he stands upon his justification so far, as to maintain that his
alterations, not only to you, but also from you by Gods mercy, were the most
satisfactory actions to himself, that ever he did, and the greatest victories
that ever he obtained over himself, and his affections to those things which
in this world are most precious; as wherein for Gods sake and (as he was verily
persuaded,) out of love to the Truth, he went upon a certain expectation of
those inconveniences, which to ingenuous natures are of all most terrible. So
that though there were much weakness in some of these alterations, yet
certainly there was no wickedness. Neither does he yield his weakness
altogether without apology, seeing his deductions were rational, and out of
Principles commonly received by Protestants as well as Papists, and which by
his education had got possession of his understanding.

104 Ad. 40. 41. D. Potter p. 81. of his book, to prove our separation from
you, not only lawful but necessary, has these words, Although we confess the
Church of Rome (in some sense) to be a true Church, and her error (to some men)
not damnable; yet for us who are convinced in conscience, that she erres in
many things, a necessity lies upon us, even under pain of damnation, to forsake
her in those errors. He means not, in the belief of those errors; for that is
presupposed to be done already: for whosoever is convinced in conscience that
she erres, has for matter of belief forsaken, that is, ceased to believe those
errors. This therefore he meant not, nor could not mean: but that whosoever is
convinced in conscience, that the Church of Rome erres, cannot with a good
conscience but forsake her in the profession and practice of these errors: and
the reason hereof is manifest; because otherwise, he must profess what he
believes not, and practice what he approves not. Which is no more then you
self in thesi have diverse times affirmed. For in one place you say, It is
unlawful to speak any the least untruth: Now he that professes your Religion,
and believes it not, what else does he but live in a perpetual lie! Again in
another, you have called them that profess one thing and believe another, a
damned crew of dissembling Sycophants: And therefore in inveighing against
Protestants for forsaking the Profession of these errors, the belief whereof
they had already forsaken, what do you but rail at them for not being a
damned crew of dissembling Sycophants? And lastly. 42. of this chap. within
three leaves after this, whereas D. Potter grants but only a necessity of
peaceable external obedience to the Declaration of the Church, though perhaps
erroneous, (provided it be in matter not of faith, but of opinions or Rites,)
condemning those men who by occasion of errors of this quality, disturb the
Churches peace, and cast off her communion: Upon this occasion you come upon
him with this bitter sarcasme, I thank you for your ingenuous confession, in
recompense whereof I will do a deed of Charity, by putting you in mind into
what Labyrinths you are brought, by teaching that the Church may err in some
points of faith, and yet that it is not lawful for any man to oppose his
judgment or leave her Communion, though he have evidence of Scripture against
her! Will you have such a man dissemble against his Conscience, or externally
deny Truth known to be contained in holy Scripture? I Answer for him, no: It is
not he but you, that would have men do so: not he, who says plainly, that
whosoever is convinced in conscience that any Church erres, is bound under pain
of damnation to forsake her in her Profession and practice of these errors: but
you, who find fault with him, and make long discourse against him, for thus
Affirming. Not he who can easily wind himself out of your Imaginary
Labyrinth, by telling you, that he no where denies it lawful for any man to
oppose any Church, erring in matter of faith, for that he speaks not of matters
of faith at all, but only of Rites and Opinions. And in such matters, he says
indeed at first, It is not lawful for any man to oppose his judgment to the
public: But he presently explaines himself by saying, not only that he may
hold an opinion contrary to the Public resolution, but besides that he may
offer it to be considered of, (so far is he from requiring any sinful
dissimulation,) Provided, he do it with great Probability of Reason, very
modestly and respectfully, and without separation from the Churches communion.
It is not therefore in this case, opposing a man's private judgment to the
public simply, which the Doctor finds fault with: But the degree only and
malice of this opposition, opposing it factiously. And not holding a man's own
conceit, different from the Church absolutely, which here he censures: But a
factious advancing it, and despising the Church, so far as to cast off her
Communion, because forsooth she erres in some opinion, or uses some
inconvenient, though not impious rites and ceremonies. Little reason therefore
have you to accuse him there, as if he required that men should dissemble
against their conscience, or externally deny a truth known to be contained in
holy Scripture. But certainly a great deal less, to quarrel with him, for
saying (which is all that here he says,) that men under pain of demnation, are
not to dissemble, but if they be convinced in conscience, that your, or any
other Church (for the reason is alike for all,) erres in many things, are of
necessity to forsake that Church, in the Profession and practice of those
errors.

105 But to consider your exception to this speech of the Doctors, somewhat
more particularly: I say your whole discourse against it, is compounded of
falsehoods and impertinencies. The first falsehood is, that he in these words
avoucheth, that no learned Catholics can be saved: Unless you will suppose,
that all learned Catholics are convinced in conscience, that your Church
erres in many things. It may well be feared that many are so convinced, and yet
profess what they believe not. Many more have been, and have stifled their
consciences, by thinking it an act of humility, to do so. Many more would have
been, had they with liberty and indifference of judgment, examined the
grounds of the Religion which they profess. But to think that all the Learned
of your side, are actually convinced of errors in your Church, and yet will not
forsake the profession of them, this is so great an uncharitableness, that I
verily believe, D. Potter abhorres it. Your next falsehood is, That the Doctor
affirms, that you Catholics want no means to Salvation: and that he judges
the Roman errors not to be in themselves fundamental or damnable. Which
calumny I have very often confuted: and in this very place it is confuted by D.
Potter, and confessed by your self. For in the beginning of this Answer you
tell us, that the Doctor avouches of all Catholics whom ignorance cannot
excuse, that they cannot be saved. Certainly then he must needs esteem them to
want something necessary to Salvation. And then in the Doctors saying, it is
remarkable that he confesses your errors to some men not damnable: which
clearly imports, that according to his judgment, they were damnable in
themselves, though by accident to them who lived and died in invincible
ignorance, and with repentance, they might prove not damnable. A third is, that
these Assertions, the Roman Errors are in themselves not damnable, and yet it
is damnable for me (who know them to be errors,) to hold and confess them, are
absolutely inconsistent; which is false; for be the matter what it will, yet
for a man to tell a lie, especially in matter of Religion, cannot but be
damnable. How much more then, to go on in a course of lying by professing to
believe these things divine Truths, which he verily believes to be falsehoods
and fables? A fourth is, that if we erred in thinking that your Church holds
errors, this error or erroneous conscience might be rectifyed and deposed, by
judging those errors not damnable. For what repugnance is there between these
two suppositions, that you do hold some errors, and that they are not
damnable? And if there be no repugnance between them, how can the belief of
the latter remove or destroy, or if it be erroneous, rectify the belief of the
former? Nay seeing there is a manifest consent between them, how can it be
avoided, but the belief of the latter, will maintain and preserve the belief
of the former? For who can conjoyne in one brain not cracked, (pardon me, if I
speak to you in your own words,) these Assertions: In the Roman Church there
are errors not damnable, and, in the Roman Church there are no errors at all?
Or what sober understanding would ever think this a good collection, I esteem
the errors of the Roman Church not damnable, therefore I do amiss to think
that she erres at all? If therefore you would have us alter our judgments,
that your Church is erroneous, your only way is to show, your doctrine
consonant, at least not evidently repugnant to Scripture and Reason. For as for
this device, this short cut, of persuading our selves that you hold no errors,
because we believe your errors are not damnable, assure your self it will
never hold.

106 A fifth falsehood is, That we daily do this favor for Protestants, you
must mean (if you speak consequently) to judge they have no errors, because we
judge they have none damnable. Which the world knows to be most untrue. And
for our continuing in their communion notwithstanding their errors, the
justification hereof, is not so much, that their errors are not damnable: as
that they require not the belief and profession of these errors, among the
conditions of their communion. Which puts a main difference between them and
you: because we may continue in their communion without professing to believe
their opinions, but in yours we cannot. A sixth is, that according to the
Doctrine of all Divines, there is any difference between a speculative
persuasion of conscience, of the unlawfulness of any thing, and a practical
Dictamen that the same thing is unlawful. For these are but diverse words
signifying the same thing, neither is such a persuasion wholly speculative, but
tending to practice: nor such a dictame^ wholly practical, but grounded upon
speculation. A Seventh is, That Protestants did only conceive in speculation,
that the Church of Rome erred in some doctrines, and had not also a practical
dictamen, that it was damnable for them to continue in the profession of these
errors. An eighth is, that it is not lawful to separate from any Churches
communion, for errors not appertaining to the substance of Faith: which is not
universally true, but with this exception, unless that Church requires the
belief and profession of them. The ninth is, that D. Potter teaches that
Luther was bound to forsake the house of God, for an unnecessary light.
Confuted manifestly by D. Potter in this very place, for by the house of God
you mean the Roman Church, and of her the Doctor says: that a necessity did
lie upon him, even under pain of damnation, to forsake the Church of Rome in
her errors. This sure is not to say, that he was obliged to forsake her, for an
unnecessary light. The tenth is covertly vented in your intimation, that Luther
and his followers were the proper cause of the Christian worlds combustion:
Whereas indeed the true cause of this lamentable effect, was your violent
persecution of them, for serving God according to their conscience, which if it
be done to you, you condemn of horrible impiety, and therefore may not hope to
be excused, if you do it to others.

107 The eleaventh is, that our first reformers ought to have doubted whether
their opinions were certain. Which is to say, that they ought to have doubted
of the certainty of Scripture: which in formal and express terms, contains
many of these opinions. And the reason of this assertion is very vain: for
though they had not an absolute infallibility promised unto them, yet may they
be of some things infallibly certain. As Euclide sure was not infallible, yet
was he certain enough, that twice two were four, and that every whole was
greater then a part of that whole. And so though Calvin and Melanctho^ were not
infallible in all things, yet they might and did know well enough, that your
Latin Service was condemned by S. Paul, and that the communion in both kinds
was taught by our Savior. The twelfth and last is this, that your Church was
in peaceable possession (you must mean of her doctrine, and the Professors of
it,) and enjoyed prescription for many ages. For besides, that doctrine is not
a thing that may be possessed: And the professors of it were the Church it
self, and in nature of possessors, (If we may speak improperly,) rather then
the thing possessed, with whom no man has reason to be offended, if they think
fit to quit their own possession: I say that the possession, which the
governors of your Church held for some ages, of the party governed, was not
peaceable, but got by fraud, and held by violence.

108 These are the Falsehoods which in this answer offer themselves to any
attentive Reader, and that which remains is mere impertinence. As first, that
a pretense of conscience will not serve to justify separation from being
Schismatic. Which is true: but little to the purpose, seeing it was not an
erroneous persuasion, much less an Hypocritical pretense, but a true and well
grounded conviction of conscience, which D. Potter alleged to justify
Protestants from being Schismatic. And therefore though seditious men in
Church and State, may pretend conscience, for a cloak of their rebellion: yet
this I hope hinders not, but that an honest man ought to obey his rightly
informed conscience, rather then the unjust commands of his tyrannous
Superiors. Otherwise with what color can you defend either your own refusing
the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? Or the ancient Martyrs, and Apostles,
and Prophets, who oftentimes disobeyed the commands of men in authority, and
for their disobedience made no other but this Apology, We must obey God
rather then men? It is therefore most apparent that this answer must be merely
impertinent: seeing it will serve against the Martyrs and Apostles and
Prophets, and even against your selves, as well as against Protestants. To as
little purpose is your rule out of Lyrinensis against them that followed
L^ther, seeing they pretend and are ready to justify, that they forsook not,
with the Doctors, the faith, but only the corruption of the Church. As vain
altogether is that which follows: That in cases of uncertainty we are not to
leave our Superior, or cast off his obedience, nor publicly oppose his
decrees. From whence it will follow very evidently, that seeing it is not a
matter of faith, but a disputed question among you, whether the Oath of
Allegiance be lawful: that either you acknowledge not the King your Superior,
or do against conscience, in opposing his and the kingdoms decree, requiring
the taking of this Oath. This good use I say may very fairly be made of it,
and is by men of your own religion. But then it is so far from being a
confutation, that it is rather a confirmation of D. Potters assertion. For he
that uses these words, does he not plainly import (and such was the case of
Protestants,) that we are to leave our Superiors, to cast off obedience to
them, and publicly to oppose their Decrees, when we are certain (as
Protestants were,) that what they command, God does countermand* Lastly, S.
Cyprians example is against Protestants impertinently and even ridiculously
alleged. For what if S. Cyprian holding his opinion true but not necessary,
condemned no man (much less any Church) for holding the contrary? Yet me
thinks this should lay no obligation upon Luther to do so likewise: seeing he
held his own opinions not only true but also necessary, and the doctrine of
the Roman Church not only false but damnable. And therefore seeing the
condition and state of the parties censured by S. Cyprian and Luther was so
different, no marvel though their censures also were different according to
the supposed merit of the parties delinquent. For as for your obtruding again
upon us, that we believe the points of difference not Fundamental or
nenessary, you have been often told that it is a calumny. We hold your errors
as damnable in themselves as you do ours, only by accident through invincible
ignorance, we hope they are not unpardonable: and you also profess to think
the same of ours.

109 Ad 42. The former part of this discourse, grounded on D. Potters words p.
105. I have already in passing examined and confuted: I add in this place. 1.
That though the Doctor say, It is not fit for any private man to oppose his
judgment to the public, That is, his own judgment and bare authority: yet
he denies not, but occasions may happen wherein it may be very warrantable, to
oppose his reason or the authority of Scripture against it. And is not then to
be esteemed to oppose his own judgment to the public, but the judgment of
God to the judgment of men. Which his following words seem to import, He may
offer his opinion to be considered of, so he do it with evidence or great
probability of Scripture or reason. Secondly, I am to tell you that you have no
ground from him, to enterline his words with that interrogatory ( His own
conceits, and yet grounded upon evidence of Scripture?) For these things are in
his words opposed, and not confounded, and the latter, not intended for a
repetition (as you mistake it) but for an Antithesis of the former. He may
offer (says he) his opinion to be considered of, so he do it with evidence of
Scripture. But if he will factiously advance his own conceits, (that is, say
I, clean contrary to your gloss,) Such as have not evident nor very probable
ground in Scripture, (for these conceits are properly his own) he may justly
be branded, etc. Now that this of the two is the better gloss, it is proved
by your own interrogation. For that imputes absurdity to D. Potter, for calling
them a man's own conceits, which were grounded upon evidence of Scripture. And
therefore you have showed little candor or equity, in fastening upon them this
absurd construction. They not only bearing, but even requiring another more
fair and more sensible. Every man ought to be presumed to speak sense, rather
then nonsense, coherently, rather then contradictiously, if his words be
fairly capable of a better construction. For M. Hooker, if writing against
Puritans, he had said something unawares that might give advantage to Papists
it were not inexcusable: seeing it is a matter of such extreme difficulty, to
hold such a temper in opposing one extreme opinion, as not to seem to favor
the other. Yet if his words be rightly considered, there is nothing in them
that will do you any service. For though he says that men are bound to do
whatsoever the sentence of final decision shall determine, as it is plain men
are bound to yield such an obedience to all Courts of civil judicature: yet he
says not, they are bound to think that determination lawful, and that
sentence just. Nay it is plain he says, that they must do according to the
Judges sentence, though in their private opinion it seem unjust. As if I be
cast wrongfully in a suit at law, and sentenced to pay an hundred pound, I am
bound to pay the money, yet I know no law of God or man, that binds me in
conscience to acquit the Judge of error in his sentence. The question
therefore being only what men ought to think, it is vain for you to tell us
what M. Hooker says at all. For M. Hooker, though an excellent man, was but a
man. And much more vain, to tell us out of him, what men ought to do, for
point of external obedience. When in the very same place, he supposes and
allows, that in their private opinion they may think, this sentence to which
they yield a passive obedience, to swarve utterly from that which is right. If
you will draw his words to such a construction, as if he had said, they must
think the sentence of judicial and final decision just and right, though it
seem in their private opinion to swerve utterly from what is right; It is
manifest you make him contradict himself, and make him say in effect, They
must think thus, though at the same time they think the contrary. Neither is
there any necessity, that he must either acknowledge the universal
infallibility of the Church, or drive men into dissembling against their
conscience, seeing nothing hinders, but I may obey the sentence of a Judge,
paying the money he awards me to pay, or forgoing the house or land which he
has judged from me, and yet withal plainly profess, that in my conscience I
conceive his judgment erroneous. To which purpose they have a saying in
France, that whosoever is cast in any cause, has liberty for ten days after,
to rail at his Judges.

110 This answer to this place, the words themselves offered me, even as they
are alleged by you: But upon perusal of the place in the Author himself, I
find that here, as elsewhere you and M. Brerely wrong him extremely. For
mutilating his words, you make him say that absolutely, which he there expressly
limits to some certain cases. In litigious and controverted causes of such a
quality (says he) the will of God, is to have them do whatsoever the sentence
of judicial and final decision shall determine. Observe, I pray, He says not
absolutely and in all causes, this is the will of God: But only in litigious
causes, of the quality of those whereof he there entreats. In such matters, as
have plain Scripture or reason, neither for them nor against them, and wherein
men are persuaded this or that way, Upon their own only probable collection; In
such cases, This persuasion (says he) ought to be fully settled in men's
hearts, that the will of God is, that they should not disobey the certain
commands of their lawful superiors, upon uncertain grounds: But do that which
the sentence of judicial and final decision shall determine. For the purpose,
a Question there is, whether a Surplice may be worn in Divine service: The
authority of Superiors injoynes this Ceremony, and neither Scripture nor reason
plainly forbids it. Sempronius notwithstanding, is by some inducements, which
he confesses to be only probable, lead to this persuasion that the thing is
unlawful. The quaere is, whether he ought for matter of practice follow the
injunction of authority, or his own private and only probable persuasion? M.
Hooker resolves for the former, upon this ground, that the certain commands of
the Church we live in, are to be obeyed in all things, not certainly unlawful.
Which rule is your own, and by you extended to the commands of all Superiors,
in the very next Section before this, in these words, In cases of uncertainty
we are not to leave our Superior, nor cast off his obedience, or publicly
oppose his decrees. And yet if a man should conclude upon you, that either you
make all Superiors universally infallible, or else drive men into perplexities
and labyrinths of doing against conscience, I presume you would not think your
self fairly dealt with; but allege, that your words are not extended to all
cases, but limited to cases of uncertainty. As little therefore ought you to
make this deduction from M. Hookers words, which are apparently also restrained
to cases of uncertainty. For as for requiring a blind and an unlimited
obedience, to Ecclesiastical decisions universally and in all cases, even when
plain Text or reason seems to control them, M. Hooker is as far from making
such an Idol of Ecclesiastical Authority, as the Puritans whom he writes
against. I grant (says he,) that proof derived from the authority of man's
judgment, is not able to work that assurance which does grow by a stronger
proof. And therefore although ten thousand General Councels would set down
one and the same definitive sentence, concerning any point of religion
whatsoever, yet one demonstrative reason alleged, or one manifest testimony
cited from the word of God himself, to the contrary, could not choose, but
over-weigh them all: in as much as for them to be deceived it is not
impossible, it is that Demonstrative Reason, or Divine Testimony should
deceive. And again, Whereas it is thought, that especially with the Church, and
those that are called, man's authority ought not to prevail: It must and does
prevail even with them, yea with them especially, as far as equity requires,
and farther we maintain it not. For men to be tied and led by authority, as it
were with a kind of captivity of judgment, and though there be reason to
the contrary, not to listen to it, but to follow like beasts, the first in the
Heard, this were brutish. Again, that authority, of men should prevail with
men either against or above reason, is no part of our belief. Companies of
learned men, be they never so great and reverend, are to yield unto reason, the
weight whereof, is no whit preiudic'd by the simplicity of his person which
does allege it, but being found to be sound and good, the bare opinion of men
to the contrary, must of necessity stoop and give place. Thus M. Hooker in his
7. Sect. of his Second Book: which place because it is far distant from that
which is alleged by you, the oversight of it might be excusable, did you not
impute it to D. Potter as a fault, that he cites some clauses of some Books,
without reading the whole. But besides, in that very Section, out of which you
take this corrupted sentence, he has very pregnant words to the same effect.
As for the Orders established, since equity and reason favor that which is in
being, till orderly judgment of decision be given against it, it is but
justice to exact of you, and perverseness in you it should be to deny thereunto
your willing obedience. Not that I judge it a thing allowable, for men to
observe those Laws, which in their hearts they are steadfastly persuaded, to
be against the Law of God: But your persuasion in this case, ye are all bound
for the time to suspend, and in otherwise doing, ye offend against God, by
troubling his Church without just and necessary cause. Be it that there are
some reasons inducing you to think hardly of our Laws: Are those Reasons
demonstrative, are they necessary, or but mere probabilities only? An argument
necessary and demonstratiue is such, as being proposed to any man and
understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly assent. Any one such reason
discharges, I grant, the conscience, and sets it at full liberty. For the
public approbation given by the body of this whole Church, unto those things
which are established, does make it but probable that they are good. And
therefore unto a necessary proof that they are not good, it must give place.
This plain declaration of his judgment in this matter, this express
limitation of his former resolution, he makes in the very same Section, which
affords your former quotation; and therefore what Apology can be made for you,
and your storehouse M. Brerely, for dissembling of it, I cannot possibly
imagine.

111 D. Potter p. 131. says, That the errors of the Donatists and Novatians,
were not in themselves Heresies, nor could be made so by the Churches
determination. But that the Churches intention was only to silence disputes,
and to settle peace and unity in her government: which because they factiously
opposed, they were justly esteemed Schismatiques. From hence you conclude, that
the same condemnation must pass against the first Reformers, seeing they also
opposed the commands of the Church, imposed on them, for silencing all
disputes, and settling Peace and Unity in government. But this collection is
deceitful, and the reason is: Because though the first Reformers, as well as
the Donatists and Novatians, opposed herein the Commands of the Visible Church,
that is, of a great part of it: yet the Reformers had reason, nay, necessity to
do so, the Church being then corrupted with damnable errors: which was not
true of the Church, when it was opposed by the Novatians and Donatists. And
therefore though they, and the Reformers, did the same action, yet doing it
upon different grounds, it might in these merit applause, and in them
condemnation.

112 Ad. 43. The next. has in it some objections against Luthers person, but
none against his cause, which alone I have undertaken to justify, and therefore
I pass it over. Yet this I promise, that when you, or any of your side, shall
publish a good defense, of all that your Popes have said and done, especially
of them whom Bellarmin believes, in such a long train to have gone to the
Devil: then you shall receive an ample Apology for all the actions and words
of Luther. In the mean time, I hope all reasonable and equitable judges, will
esteem it not unpardonable in the great and Heroical spirit of Luther, if
being opposed, and perpetually baited with a world of Furies, he were
transported sometimes, and made somewhat furious. As for you, I desire you to
be quiet, and to demand no more, whether God be wont to send such Furies to
preach the Gospel? Unless you desire to hear of your killing of Kings:
Massacring of Peoples; Blowing up of Parliaments: and have a mind to be ask't,
whether it be probable, that that should be Gods cause, which needs to be
maintained by such Divellish means?

112 Ad. 44. 45. In the two next Particles, which are all of this Chapter, that
remain unspoken to, you spend a great deal of reading, and wit, and reason,
against some men, who pretending to honor and believe the Doctrine and
practice of the visible Church, (you mean your own,) and condemning their
Forefathers who forsook her, say they would not have done so, yet remain
divided from her Communion. Which men in my judgment cannot be defended. For
if they believe the Doctrine of your Church, then must they believe this
doctrine, that they are to return to your Communion. And therefore if they do
not so, it cannot be avoided but they must be (...), and so I leave them, only
I am to remember you, that these men cannot pretend to be Protestants, because
they pretend to believe your doctrine, which is opposite in Diameter unto the
doctrine of Protestants; and therefore in a work which you profess to have
written merely against Protestants, all this might have been spared.

CHAP. VI.
That Luther, and the rest of Protestants, have added Heresy unto Schism.
BECAUSE Vice is best known by the contrary Virtue, we cannot well determine
what Heresy is, nor who be Heretics, but by the opposite virtue of Faith,
whose Nature being once understood as far as belongs to our present purpose,
we shall pass on with ease to the definition of Heresy, and so be able to
discern who be Heretics. And this I intend to do, not by entering into such
particular Questions as are controverted between Catholics and Protestants,
but only by applying some general grounds, either already proved, or else
yielded to, on all sides.

2 Almighty God having ordained Man to a supernatural End of Beatitude by
supernatural means, it was requisite that his Understanding should be enabled
to apprehend that End, and means by a supernatural knowledge. And because if
such a knowledge were no more then probable, it could not be able sufficiently
to overbeare our Will, and encounter with human probabilities, being backed
with the strength of flesh and blood; It was further necessary, that this
supernatural knowledge should be most certain and infallible; and that Faith
should believe nothing more certainly then that it self is a most certain
Belief, and so be able to beat down all g^y probabilities of humane Opinion.
And because the aforesaid Means and end of Beatificall Vision, do far exceed
the reach of natural wit, the certainty of faith could not always be joined
with such evidence of reason, as is wont to be found in the Principles, or
Conclusions of humane natural Sciences; that so all flesh might not glory in
the arm of flesh, but that he, who glories, should glory 2. Cor. 10.
in our Lord, Moreover, it was expedient that our belief, or assent to divine
truths should not only be unknown, or inevident by any humane discourse, but
that absolutely also it should be obscure in it self, and (ordinarily speaking)
be void even of supernatural evidence; that so we might have occasion to
actuate, and testify the obedience which we owe to our God, no^ only by
submitting our Will to this Will and Commands, but by subjecting also our
Understanding to this Wisdom and Words, captivating (as the Apostle speaks)
the same Understanding 2. Cor. 10. 5.
to the Obedience of Faith: Which occasion had been wanting, if Almighty God
had made ^^^ere to us, the truths which now are certainly, but not evidently
presented to our minds. For where Truth does manifestly open it self; not
obedience, but necessity commands our assent. For this reason, Divines teach,
that the Objects of Faith being not evident to humane reason, it is in man's
power not only to abstain from believing, by suspending our Judgments, or
exercising no act one way or other; but also to disbelieve, that is, to believe
the contrary of that which Faith proposes; as the examples of innumerable
Arch-heretiques can bear witness. This obscurity of faith we learn from holy
Scripture, according to those words of the Apostle. Faith is the Heb. 11.
substance of things to be hoped for, the argument of things not appearing.
And, We see by a glass 1. Cor. 13. v. 12.
in a dark manner: but then face to face. And, accordingly S. Peter says:
Which you do well attending unto, as to 2. Pet. 1. ^. 19.
a Candle shining in a dark place.

3 Faith being then obscure (whereby it differs from natural Sciences) and
yet being most certain and infallible (wherein it surpasses humane Opinion) it
must rely upon some motive and ground, which may be able to give it certainty,
and yet not release it from obscurity. For if this motive, ground, or formal
Object of Faith, were any thing evidently presented to our understanding: and
if also we did evidently know, that it had a necessary connection with the
Articles which we believe, our assent to such Articles could not be obscure,
but evident; which, as we said, is against the nature of our Faith. If likewise
the motive or ground of our faith were obscurely propounded to us, but were not
in it self infallible, it would leave our assent in obscurity, but could not
endue it with certainty. We must therefore for the ground of our Faith, find
out a motive obscure to us, but most certain in it self, that the act of faith
may remain both obscure, and certain. Such a motive as this, can be no other
but the divine authority of almighty God, revealing, or speaking those truths
which our faith believes. For it is manifest, that God's infallible testimony
may transfuse Certainty to our faith, and yet not draw it out of obscurity;
because no humane discourse, or demonstration can evince, that God reveals
any supernatural Truth, since God had been no less perfect then he is,
although he had never revealed any of those objects which we now believe.

4 Nevertheless, because Almighty God out of his infinite wisdom and
sweetness, does concur with his Creatures in such sort as may be fit the
temper, and exigence of their natures; and because Man is a Creature endued
with reason, God does not exact of his Will or Understanding any other then, as
the Apostle says, rationabile Rom, (...) 1.
obs^^uium, an Obedience, sweetened with good reason; which could not so
appear, if our Understanding were summoned to believe with certainty, things
no way represented as infallible and certain. And therefore Almighty God
obliging us under pain of eternal damnation to believe with greatest
certainty diverse verities, not known by the light of natural reason, cannot
sayl^ to furnish our Understanding, with such inducements, motives, and
arguments as may sufficiently persuade any mind which is not partial or
passionate, that the objects which we believe, proceed from an Authority so
Wise, that it cannot be deceived, so Good that it cannot deceive; according to
the words of David: Thy Testimonies are made Psalm. 92.
credible exceedingly. These inducements are by Divines, called argume^ta
credibilitatis, arguments of credibility, which though they cannot make us
evidently see what we believe, yet they evidently convince that in true
wisdom, and prudence, the objects of ^aith deserve credit, and ought to be
accepted as things revealed by God. For without such reasons and induceme^ts
our judgment of faith could not be conceived prudent, holy Scripture telling
us, that, he who soon Eccles. 19. 4.
believes, is light of heart. By these arguments and inducements our
Understanding is both satisfied with evidence of credibility, and the objects
of faith retain their obscurity: because it is a different thing to be
evidently credible, and evidently true; as those who were present at the
Miracles wrough^ by our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, did not evidently
see their doctrine to be true (for then it had not been Faith but Science, and
all had been necessitated to believe, which we see fell out otherwise,) but
they were evidently convinced, that the things confirmed by such Miracles, were
most credible, and worthy to be embraced as truths revealed by God.

5. These evident Arguments of Credibility are in great abundance found in the
Visible Church of Christ, perpetually existing on earth. For, that there has
been a company of men professing such and such doctrines, we have from our next
Predecessors, and these from theirs upward, till we come to the Apostles, and
our Blessed Savior; which gradation is known by evidence of sense, by reading
books, or hearing what one man delivers to another. And it is evident that
there was neither cause, nor possibility, that men so distant in place, so
different in temper, so repugnant in private ends, did, or could agree to tell
one and the self same thing, if it had been but a fiction invented by
themselves, as ancient Tertullian well says: How is it likely that so many
Praescript. cap. 28.
and so great Churches should err in one faith? Among many events there is not
one issue, the error of the Churches must needs have varied. But that which
among many is found to be One, is not mistaken, but delivered. Dare then any
body say, that they erred who delivered it? With this never interrupted
existence of the Church are joined the many and great miracles wrought by men
of that Congregation or Church; the sanctity of the persons; the renowned
victories over so many persecutions, both of all sorts of men, and of the
infernal spirits; and lastly, the perpetual existence of so holy a Church,
being brought up to the Apostles themselves, she comes to partake of the same
assurance of truth, which They by so many powerful ways, did communicate to
their Doctrine, and to the Church of their times, together with the divine
Certainty which they received from our Blessed Savior himself, revealing to
Mankind what he heard from his Father; and so we conclude with Tertullian: We
receive it from the Churches, the Churches Praesc. c. 21. and 37.
from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, Christ from his Father, And if we
once interrupt this line of succession, most certainly made known by means of
holy Tradition, we cannot conjoyn the present Church, and doctrine, with the
Church, and doctrine of the Apostles, but must invent some new means, and
arguments sufficient of themselves to find out, and prove a true Church, and
faith independently of the preaching, and writing of the Apostles; neither of
which can be known but by Tradition; as is truly observed by Tertullian
saying: I will prescribe, that Praes. c. 21.
there is no means to prove what the Apostles preached, but by the same Church
which they founded.

6 Thus then we are to proceed: By evidence of manifest and incorrupt
Tradition, I know that there has always been a never-interrupted Succession
of men from the Apostles time, believing, professing, and practicing such and
such doctrines: By evident arguments of credibility, as Miracles, Sanc^^ty,
Unity, etc. and by all those ways whereby the Apostles, and our Blessed
Savior himself confirmed their doctrine, we are assured that what the said
never-interrupted Church proposes, does deserve to be accepted and
acknowledged as a divine truth: By evidence of Sense, we see that the same
Church proposes such and such doctrines as divine truths, that is, as revealed
and testified by Almighty God. By this divine Testimony we are infallibly
assured of what we believe: and so the last period, ground, motive, and formal
object of our Faith, is the inf^llible testimony of that supreme Verity, which
neither can deceive, nor be deceived.

7 By this orderly deduction our Faith comes to be endued with these
qualities which we said were ^equisite thereto; namely Certainty, Obscurity,
and Prudence. Certainty proceeds from the infallible Testimony of God
propounded and conveyed to our understanding by such a mean as i^ infallible
in it self, and to us is evidently known that it proposes this point or
that, and which can manifestly declare in what sense it proposes them; which
means we have proved to be only the visible Church of Christ. Obscurity from
the manner in which God speaks to Mankind, which ordinarily is such, that it
does not manifestly show the person who speaks, nor the truth of the thing
spoken. Prudence is not wanting, because our faith is accompanied with so many
arguments of Credibility, that every well disposed Understanding, may and ought
to judge, that the doctrines so confirmed deserve to be believed, as proceeding
from divine Authority.

8. And thus from what has been said, we may easily gather the particular
nature, or definition of Faith. For, it is a voluntary, or free, infallible,
obscure assent to some truth, because it is testifed by God, and is
sufficiently propounded to us for such: which proposal is ordinarily made by
the Visible Church of Christ. I say, Sufficiently proposed by the Church; not
that I purpose to dispute whether the proposal of the Church enter into the
^ormall Object, or moti^^ of Faith: or whether an error be any heresy,
formally and precisely, because it is against the proposition of the Church, as
if such proposal were the formal Object of Faith, which D. Potter to no
purpose a^ all, labors so very hard to disprove: But I only affirm, that when
the Church propounds any Truth, as revealed by God, we are assured that it is
such indeed; and so it instantly grows, to be a fit Object for Christian
faith, which enclines and enables us to believe whatsoever is d^ely presented,
as a thing revealed by Almighty God. And in the same manner we are sure, that
whosoever opposes any doctrine proposed by the Church, does thereby contradict
a truth, which is testified by God: As when any lawful Superior notifies his
will, by the means, and as it were proposal of some faithful messenger, the
subject of such a Superior in performing, or neglecting what is delivered by
the Messenger, is said to obey, or disobey his own lawful Superior. And
therefore because the testimony of God is notified by the Church, we may, and
we do most truly say, that not to believe what the Church proposes, is to
deny God's holy word or testimony, signified to us by the Church, according to
that saying of S. Irenae^s. We need not go Lib. 3 (...) haeres. cap. (...)
to any other to seek the truth, which we may easily receive from the Church.

9. From this definition of faith we may also know what Heresy is, by taking
the contrary terms, as Heresy is contrary to Faith, and saying: Heresy is a
voluntary error against that which God has revealed, and the Church has
proposed for such. Neither does it import, whether the error concern points in
themselves great or small, fundamental or not fundamental. For more being
required to an act of Virtue, then of Vice, if any truth though never so small
may be believed by Faith as soon as we know it to be testified by divine
revelation; much more will it be a formal Heresy to deny any least point
sufficiently propounded as a thing witnessed by God.

10. This divine Faith is divided into Actual, and Habitual. Actual faith,
or faith actuated is when we are in act of consideration, and belife of some
mystery of Faith; for example, that our Savior Christ, is true God, and Man,
etc. Habitual faith, is that from which we are denominated Faithful, or
Believers, as by Actual faith they are styled, Believing. This Habit of faith
is a Quality enabling us most firmly to believe Objects above humane discourse,
and it remains permanently in our Soul, even when we are sleeping, or not
thinking of any Mystery of Faith, This is the first among the three
Theological Virtues. For Charity unites us to God, as he is infinitely Good in
himself; Hope ties us to him, as he is unspeakably Good to us. Faith joins us
to him, as he is the Supreme immovable Verity. Charity relies on his
Goodness; Hope on his Power; Faith on his divine Wisdom. From hence it
follows, that Faith being one of the Virtues which Divines term Infused
(that is, which cannot be acquired by human wit, or industry, but are in their
Nature and Essence, supernatural,) it has this property; that it is not
destroyed by little and little, (contrarily to the Habits, called acquisiti,
that is, gotten by human ende^vour, which as they are successively produced, so
also are they lost successively, or by little and little) but it must either be
conserved entire, or wholly destroyed: And since it cannot stand entire with
any one act which is directly contrary, it must be totally overthrown, and as
it were demolished, and razed by every such act. Wherefore, as Charity, or the
Love of God is expelled from our soul by any one act of Hatred, or any other
mortal sin against his divine Majesty: and as Hope is destroyed by any one
act of voluntary Desperation: so Faith must perish by any one act of Heresy;
because every such act is directly, and formally opposite thereunto. I know
that some sins which (as Divines speak) are exgenere suo, in their kind,
grievous and mortal, may be much lessened, and fall to be venial, ob
levitatem materiae; because they may happen to be exercised in a matter of
small consideration; as for example, to steal a penny, is venial, although
Theft in his kind be a deadly sin. But it is likewise true, that this Rule is
not general for all sorts of sins; there being some so inexcusably wicked of
their own nature, that no smalnesse of matter, not paucity in number, can
defend them from being deadly sins. For, to give an instance, what Blasphemy
against God, or voluntary false Oath is not a deadly sin? Certainly, none at
all, although the salvation of the whole world should depend upon swearing such
a falsehood. The li^e happens in our present case of Heresy, the iniquity
whereof redounding to the injury of God's supreme wisdom and Goodness, is
always great, and enormous. They were no precious stones which David (...)
picket out of the water, to encounter Goli^^; and yet if a man take from the
number but one, and say they were but four, against the Scripture affirming
them to have been five; he is instantly guilty of a damnable sin. Why?
Because by this subtraction of One, he does deprive Gods word and Testimony of
all credit and infallibility. For if either he could deceive, or be deceived in
any one thing, it were but wisdom to suspect him in all. And seeing every
Here^y opposes some Truth revealed by God; it is no wonder that no one can be
excused from deadly, and damnable sin. For if voluntary Blasphemy, and
Perjury, which are opposite only to the in^used Moral Virtue of Religion, can
never be excused from mortal sin: much less can Heresy be excused, which
opposes the Theological Virtue of Faith.

11 If any object, that Schism may seem to be a greater sin then Heresy;
because the Ver^ue of Charity (to which Schism is opposite) is greater then
Faith, according to the Apostle, saying: Now there remain 1 Cor. 13. 13.
Faith, Hope, Charity; but the great^r of these is Charity. S. Thomas answers
in these words: Charity has two Objects, one principal, to wit, the (...) 2.
2. q. 39. (...)
Goodness; and another secondary, namely the good of our Neighbor; But
Schism and other sins which are committed against our Neighbor, are
opposite to Charity in respect of this secondary good, which is less, then the
object of Faith, which is God, as he is the Prime Verity, on which Faith does
rely; and therefore these sins are less then Infidelity. He takes
Infidelity after a general manner, as it comprehends Heresy, and other vices
against Faith.

12. Having therefore sufficiently declared, wherein Heresy consists; Let us
come to prove that which we proposed in this Chapter. Where I desire, it be
still remembered: That the visible Catholic Church cannot err damnably, as D.
Potter confesses: And, that when Luther appeared, there was no other visible
true Church of Christ disagreeing from the Roman, as we have demonstrated in
the next precedent Chapter.

13 Now, that Luther and his followers cannot be excused from formal Heresy, I
prove by these reasons. To oppose any truth propounded by the visible true
Church as revealed by God, is formal Heresy, as we have showed out of the
definition of Heresy: But Luther, Calvin, and the rest did oppose diverse
truths propounded by the visible Church as revealed by God; yea they did
therefore oppose her, because she propounded as divine revealed truths, things
which they judged either to be falls, or human inventions: Therefore they
committed formal Heresy.

14 Moreover, every Error against any doctrine revealed by God, is damnable
Heresy, whether the matter in it self be great or small, as I proved before:
and therefore either the Protestants, or the Roman Church must be guilty of
formal Heresy; because one of them must err against the word and testimony of
God: but you grant (perfor^e) that the Roman Church does not err damnably, and
I add that she cannot err damnably, because she is the truly Catholic
Church, which you confess cannot err damnably: Therefore Protestants must be
guilty of formal Heresy.

15 Besides, we have showed that the visible Church is Judge of Controversies,
and therefore must be infallible in all her Proposals; which being once
supposed, it manifestly follows, that to oppose what she delivers as
revealed by God, is not so much to oppose her, as God himself, and therefore
cannot be excused from grievous Heresy.

16 Again, if Luther were an Heretic, for those points wherein he disagreed
from the Roman Church; All they who agree with him in those very points, must
likewise be Heretics. Now, that Luther was a formal Heretic I demonstrate
in this manner. To say, that Gods visible true Church is not universal, but
confined to one only place or corner of the world, is according to your own
express words ^ag. 1^6.
properly Heresy, against that Article of the Creed, wherein we profess to
believe the holy Catholic Church: And you brand Donatus with heresy, because
he limited the universal Church to Africa. But it is manifest, and
acknowledged by Luther himself, and other chief Protestants that Luthers
Reformation when it first began (and much more for diverse Ages before) was not
Universal, nor spread over the world, but was confined to that compass of
ground which did contain Luthers body. Therefore his Reformation cannot be
excused from formal Heresy. If S. Augustine in those times said to the
Donatists, There are innumerable testimonies Epist. 50.
of holy Scripture in which it appears that the Church of Christ is not only
in Africa, as these men with most impudent vanity do rave, but that she is
spread over the whole earth: much more may it be said; It appears by
innumerable testimonies of holy Scripture that the Church of Christ cannot be
confined to the Ci^ty of Wittemberg, or to the place where Luthers feet stood,
but must be spread over the whole world. It is therefore most impudent vanity,
and dotage to limit her to Luthers Reformation. In another place also this holy
Father writes no less effectually against Luther then against the Donatists.
For having out of those words, In thy ^eed all Nations shall be blessed, proved
that Gods Church must be universal, he says: Why De Unit Eccles. cap. 6.
do you superadde, by saying that Christ remains heir in no part of the
earth, except where he may have Donatus for his Coheire. Give me this
(Universal) Church if it be among you: show your selves to all Nations, which
we already show to be blessed in this Seed: Give us this (Church) or else
laying aside all fury, receive her from us. But it is evident, that Luther
could not, when he said, At the beginning I was alone, give us an universal
Church: Therefore happy had he been, if he had then, and his followers would
now, receive her from us. And therefore we must conclude with the same holy
Father, saying in another place of the universal Church: She has this Cont.
lit. Pe^il. lib. 1. cap. 104.
most certain mark, that she cannot be bidden: She is then known to all
Nations. The Sect of Donatus is unknown to many Nations; therefore that cannot
be she. The Sect of Luther (at least when he began, and much more before his
beginning) was unknown to many Nations, therefore that cannot be she.

17 And that it may yet further appear how perfectly Luther agreed with the
Donatists: It is to be noted, that they never taught, that the Catholic
Church ought not to extend it self further then that part of Africa, where
their faction reigned, but only that in fact it was so confined, because all
the rest of the Church was profaned, by communicating with Caecili^^us, whom
they falsely affirmed to have been ordained Bishop by those who were Traditours,
or gives up of the Bible to the Persecutors to be burned: yea at that very time
they had some of their Sect residing in Rome, and sent thither one Victor, a
Bishop, under color to take care of the Brethren in that City, but indeed as
Baronius Anno 3^1. ^u. 2, Sp^nd.
observes, that the world might account them Catholics by communicating with
the Bishop of Rome, to communicate with whom was ever taken by the Ancient
Fathers as an assured sign of being a true Catholic. They had also, as S.
Augustine (...), a pretended De V^^. Eccle^* 3.
Church in the house and territory of a Spanish Lady called Lucilla, who went
flying out of the Catholic Church, because she had been justly checked by
Caecilianus. And the same Saint speaking of the conference he had with
Fortunius the Donatist, saith^ Here did he first Ep. 163.
attempt to affirm that his Communion was spread over the whole Earth etc. but
because the thing was evidently false, they got out of this discourse by
confusion of language whereby nevertheless they sufficiently declared, that
they did not hold, that the true Church ought necessarily to be confined to one
place, but only by mere necessity were forced to yield that it was so in fact,
because their Sect which they held to be the only true Church was not spread
over the world: In which point Fortunius, and the rest were more modest, then
he who should affirm that Luther's reformation in the very beginning was
spread over the whole Earth; being at that time by many degrees not so far
diffused as the Sect of the Dou^tists. I have no desire to prosecute the
similitude of Protestants with Donatists, by remembering that the Sect of these
men was begun and promoted by the passion of Lucilla; and who is ignorant what
influence two women, the Mother, and Daughter, ministered to Protestancy in
England? Nor will I stand to observe their very likeness of phrase with the
Donatists, who called the Chair of Rome, the Chair of pestilence, and the
Roman Church an Harlot, which is D. Potter's own phrase, wherein he is less
excusable then they, because he maintains her to be a true Church of Christ:
and therefore let him duly ponder these words of S. Augustine against the
D^^atists. If I persecute him justly who detracts Conc. super. gest. cum E^^rit.
from his Neighbor, why should I not persecute him who detracts from the
Church of Christ, and says, this is not she, but this is an Harlot? And least
of all, will I consider, whether you may not be well compared to one Ticonius a
Donatist, who wrote against P^rmenianus likewise a Donatist, who blasphemed,
that the Church of Christ had perished (as you do even in this your Book writ
against some of your Protestant Brethren, or as you call them Zelo^s among you,
who hold the very same or rather a worse Heresy) and yet remained among them,
even after Parmenianus had excommunicated him, (as those your Zealous Brethren
would proceed against you if it were in their power,) and yet like Ticonius you
remain in their Communion, and come not into that Church which is, has been,
and shall ever be universal: For which very cause S. Augustine complains of
Ticonius, that although he wrote against the Donatists, yet he was of an heart
De doct^. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 30.
so extremely absurd, as not to forsake them altogether. And speaking of the
same thing in another place he observes, that although Ti^onius did manifestly
confute them who affirmed that the Church had perished; yet, he saw not (says
this holy Father) that which in good consequence Cont. Part. l. 1. cap. 1.
he should have seen, that those Christians of Africa belonged to the Church
spread over the whole world, who remained united, not with them who were
divided from the communion and unity of the same world, but with such as did
communicate with the whole world. But Parmenianus, and the rest of the
Donatists saw that consequence and resolved rather to settle their mind in
obstinacy against the most manifest truth which Tico^us maintained, then by
yielding thereto, to be overcome by those Churches in Africa, which enjoyed the
Communion of that unity which Ticonius defended, from which they had divided
themselves. How fitly these words agree to Catholics in England in respect of
the Protestants, I desire the Reader to consider. But these and the like
resemblances of Protestants to the Donatists, I willingly let pass, and only
urge the main point: That since Luthers Reformed Church was not in being for
diverse Centuries before Luther, and yet was (because so forsooth they will
needs have it) in the Apostles time, they must of necessity affirm heretically
with the Donatists, that the true and unspotted Church of Christ perished; and
that she which remained on earth was (O b^asphemy^) (...) Harlot. Moreover the
same heresy follows out of the doctrine of D. Potter, and other Protestants,
that the Church may err in points not fundamental; because we have showed
that every error against any one revealed truth, is Heresy and damnable,
whether the matter be otherwise of it self, great or small. And how can the
Church more truly be said to perish, then when she is permitted to maintain a
damnable Heresy? Besides, we will hereafter prove, that by any act of Heresy
all divine faith is lost; and to imagine a true Church of faithful persons
without any faith, is as much as to fancy a living man without life. It is
therefore clear, that Donatist-like they hold that the Church of Christ
perished: yea they are worse then the Donatists, who sa^d, that the Church
remained at least in Africa; whereas Protestants must of necessity be forced to
grant, that for along space before Luther, she was no where at all. But let us
go forward to other reasons.

18 The holy Scripture, and Ancient Fathers do assign Separation from the
Visible Church as a mark of Heresy; according to that of S. John: They went
out 2* Joan. 19.
from us. And, Some who Act. 15. 2^*
went out from us. And, Out of you shall Act. 20. 30.
arise men speaking perverse things. And accordingly Vincentius Lyrinensis
says: Who ever Lib. adversus haer. c. 3^.
began heresies, who did not first separate himself from the Universality,
Antiquity, and Consent of the Catholic Church? But it is manifest, that when
Luther appeared, there was no visible Church distinct from the Roman, out of
which she could depart, as it is likewise well known that Luther, and his
followers departed out of her: Therefore she is no way liable to this Mark of
Heresy, but Protestants cannot possibly avoid it. To this purpose S. Prosper
has these pithy words: A Christian communicating Dimi^. temp. cap. 5.
with the universal Church is a Catholic, and he who is divided from her, is
an Heretic; and Antichrist. But Luther in his first Reformation could not
communicate with the visible Catholic Church of those times, because he began
his Reformation by opposing the supposed Errors of the then visible Church: we
must therefore say with S. Prosper, that he was an Heretic etc. Which
likelikewise is no less clearly proved out of S. Cypri^n, saying: Not we (g)
departed from them, but they from us, and since Heresies and Schisms are bred
afterward, while they make to themselves diverse Conventicles, they have
forsaken the head and origin of Truth.

19 And that we might not remain doubtful what separation it is, which is the
mark of Heresy, the ancient Fathers tell us more in particular, that it is
from the Church of Rome, as it is the Sea of Peter. And therefore D. Potter
need not to be so hot with us, because we say and write that the Church of
Rome, in that sense as she is the Mother Church of all others, and with which
all the rest agree, is truly called the Catholic Church. S. Hierome writing
to Pope Damasus says: I am in the Communion Ep. 57. ad Damas.
of the Chair of Peter; I know that the Church is built upon that Rock
Whosoever shall eat the Lamb out of this house, he is profane. If any shall
not be in the Ark of Noah, he shall perish in the time of the deluge: Whosoever
does not gather with thee, does scatter, that is, he that is not of Christ is
of Antichrist. And elsewhere, Which does he Lib. 1. Apoleg.
call his faith? That of the Roman Church? Or that which is contained in the
Books of Origin? If he answer, the Roman, then we are Catholics, who have
translated nothing of the error of Origin. And yet farther: Know thou, that the
Ibid. lib. 3.
Roman faith commended by the voice of the Apostle does not receive these
delusions, though an Angel should denounce otherwise, then it has once been
preached. S* Ambrose recounting how his Brother Satyrus inquiring for a Church
wherein to give thanks for his delivery from shipwreck, says: he called unto
him De obitu Satyri fratris.
the Bishop, neither did he esteem any favor to be true, except that of the
true faith, and he asked of him whether he agreed with the Catholic Bishops;
that is, with the Roman Church? And having understood that he was a
Schismatique, that is, separated from the Roman Church, he abstained from
communicating with him. Where we see the privilege of the Roman Church
confirmed both by word and deed, by doctrine and practice. And the same Saint
says of the Roman Church: From thence the Rights Lib. 1 cp. 4. ad I^pera^ores.
of Venerable Communion do flow to all. S. Cyprian says: They are bold Epist.
55. ad Cornel.
to sail to the Chair of Peter, and to the principal Church, from whence
Priestly Unity has sprung. Neither do they consider, that they are Romans,
whose faith was commended by the preaching of the Apostle, to whom falsehood
cannot have access. Where we see this holy Father joins together the
principal Church, and the Chair of Peter; and affirms that falsehood not
only has not had, but cannot have access to that Sea. And elsewhere: Thou
wrotest that I should send Epist. 52.
a Copy of the same letters to Cornelius our Colleague, that laying aside all
solicitude, he might now be assured that thou did Communicate with him, that
is, with the Catholic Church. What think you M. Doctor of these words? Is it
so strange a thing to take for one and the same thing, to communicate with the
Church and Pope of Rome, and to communicate with the Catholic Church! S.
Ireneus says: Because it were long to number the successions of all Churches,
Lib. 3. cont. (...). ^. 3.
we declaring the Tradition (and faith preached to men, and coming to us by
Tradition) of the most great, most ancient, and most known Church, founded by
the two most glorious Apostles Peter and Paul; which Tradition it has from the
Apostles, coming to us by succession of Bishops; we confound all those who any
way either by evil complacence of themselves, or vain glory, or by blindness,
or ill Opinion do gather otherwise the they ought. For to this Church for a
more powerful Principality, it is necessary that all Churches resort, that is,
all faithful people of what place soever: in which (Roman. Ch.) the Tradition
which is from the Apostles has always been conserved from those who are every
where. S. Augustine says: It grieves us Ia Psalm. cont. patrem Donati.
to see you so to lie cut off. Number the Priests even from the Sea of Peter;
and consider in that order of Fathers who succeeded to whom. She is the Rock
which the proud Gates of Hell do not overcome. And in another place, speaking
of Caecilianus, he says: He might contemn the conspiring Ep. 162.
multitude of his Enemies, because he knew himself to be united, by
Communicatory letters both to the Roman Church in which the Principality of the
Sea Apostolic did always flourish; and to other Countries from whence the
Gospel came first into Africa. Ancient Tertullian says: If thou be near
Italy, thou have Rome, whose Praeser. cap. 36.
Authority is near at hand to us: a happy Church, into which the Apostles have
powered all Doctrine, together with their blood. S. Basil in a letter to the
Bishop of Rome ^aith, In very deed that which was given Epist. ad Pont. Rom
by our Lord to thy Piety, is worthy of that most excellent voice which
proclaimed thee Blessed, to wit, that thou may discern betwixt that which is
counterfeit, and that which is lawful and pure, and without any diminution
may preach the Faith of our Ancestors. Maximinianus Bishop of Constantin^ple
about twelve hundred years ago, said: All the bounds of the earth who have
sincerely acknowledged our Lord, and Catholics through the whole world
professing the true Faith, look upon the power of the Bishop of Rome, as upon
the sun etc. For the Creator of the world, amongst all men of the world
elected him, (he speaks of S. Peter) to whom he granted the Chair of Doctor
to be principally possessed by a perpetual right of Privilege; that whosoever
is desirous to know any Divine and profound thing, may hau^ recourse to the
Oracle, and Doctrine of this instruction. John Patriarck of Constantinople,
more then eleven hundred years ago in an Epistle to Pope Hormisda, writes
thus: Because Epist. ad H^rmis. P. P.
the beginning of salvation is to conserve the rule of right Faith, and in no
wise to swerve from the tradition of our Forefathers; because the words of.
our Lord cannot fail, saying: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build
my Church; the proofs of deeds have made good those words, because in the Sea
Apostolical the Catholic Religion is always conserved inviolable. And
again: We promise hereafter not to recite in the sacred Mysteries the names of
them who are excluded from the Communion of the Catholic Church, that is to
say, who consent not fully with the Sea Apostolic. Many other Authorities of
the ancient Fathers might be produced to this purpose; but these may serve to
show, that both the Latin, and Greek Fathers held for a Note of being a
Catholic, or an Heretic, to have been united, or divided from the Sea of
Rome. And I have purposely alleged only such Authorities of Fathers, as speak
of the privileges of the Sea of Rome, as of things permanent, and depending on
our Saviors promise to S, Peter, from which a general rule, and ground ought
to be taken for all Ages, because Heaven and Earth shall Mat. 24. 35.
pass, but the word of our Lord shall remain for ever. So that I here
conclude, that seeing it is manifest that Luther and his followers divided
themselves from the Sea of Rome, they bear the inseparable Mark of Heresy.

20 And though my meaning be not to treat the point of Ordination, or
Succession in the Protestants Church, because the Fathers alleged in the last
reason, assign Succession as one mark of the true Church; I must not omit to
say, that according to the grounds of Protestants themselves, they can neither
pretend personal Succession of Bishops, nor Succession of doctrine. For
whereas Succession of Bishops signifies a never-interrupted line of Persons,
endued with an indelible Quality, which Divines call a Character, which cannot
be taken away by deposition, degradation, or other means whatsoever; and
endued also with Jurisdiction and Authority to teach, to preach, to govern the
Church by laws, precepts, censures, etc. Protestants cannot pretend Succession
in either of these. For (besides that there was never Protestant Bishop before
Luther, and that there can be no continuance of Succession, where there was no
beginning to succeed,) they commonly acknowledge no Character, and consequently
must affirm that when their pretended Bishops or Priests are deprived of
Jurisdiction, or degraded, they remain mere lay Persons as before their
Ordination; fulfilling what Tertullian objects as a mark of Heresy: To ^ay a
Priest, to morrow Praes^r. cap. 41.
a Layman. For if here be no immovable Character, their power of Order must
consist only in Jurisdiction, and authority, or in a kind of moral
deputation to some function, which therefore may be taken away by the same
power, by which it was given. Neither can they pretend Succession in Authority,
or Jurisdiction. For all the Authority, or Jurisdiction which they had, was
conferred by the Church of Rome, that is, by the Pope: Because the whole Church
collectively does not meet to ordain Bishops or Priests, or to give them
Authority. But according to their own doctrine, they believe that the Pope
neither has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, or Authority Ecclesiassicall, or Spiritual within this Realm,
which they swear even when they are ordained Bishops, Priests, and Deacons:
How then can the Pope give Jurisdiction where they swear he neither has, nor
OUGHT to have any? Or if yet he had, how could they without Schism withdraw
themselves from his obedience? Besides, the Roman Church never gave them
Authority to oppose Her, by whom it was given. But grant, their first Bishops
had such Authority from the Church of Rome: after the decease of those men, who
gave Authority to their pretended Successors? The Primate of England? But from
whom had he such Authority? And after his decease, who shall confer Authority
upon his Successors? The temporal Magistrate? King Henry, neither a
Catholic, nor a Protestant? King Edward, a Child? Queen Elizabeth, a Woman?
An Infant of one hours Age, is true King in case of his Predecessors decease:
But shall your Church lie fallow till that Infant-King, and green Head of the
Church come to years of discretion? Do your Bishops, your Hierarchy, your
Succession, your Sacraments, your being or not being Heretics for want of
Succession, depend on this newfound Supremacy-doctrine brought in by such a
man merely upon base occasions, and for shameful ends; impugned by Calvin, and
his followers; derided by the Christian world; and even by chief Protestants
as D. Andrews, Wotton, etc. not held for any necessary point of faith? And
from who^ I pray you, had Bishops their Authority, when there were no Christian
Kings? Must the Greek Patriarchs receive spiritual Jurisdiction from the
Greek Turk? Did the Pope, by the Baptism of Princes, loose the spiritual
Power he formerly had of conferring spiritual Jurisdiction upon Bishops? Has
the temporal Magistrate authority to preach, to assoile from sins, to
inflict excommunications, and other Censures? Why has he not Power to
excommunicate, as well as to dispense in Irregularity, as our late Sovereign
Lord King James, either dispensed with the late Archbishop of Canterbury, or
else gave commission to some Bishops to do it? and since they were subject to
their Primate, and not he to them, it is clear, that they had no Power to
dispense with him, but that power must proceed from the Prince, as Superior to
them all, and head of the Protestants Church in England. If he have no such
authority, how can he give to others what himself has not? Your Ordination,
or Consecration of Bishops and Priests imprinting no Character, can only
consist in giving a Power, Authority, Jurisdiction, or (as I said before) some
kind of Deputation to exercise Episcopal, or Priestly functions: If then, the
temporal Magistrate conferres this Power etc. he can, nay he cannot choose but
Ordain, and consecrate Bishops, and Priests, as often as he confers Authority
or Jurisdiction: and your Bishops as soon as they are designed and confirmed
by the King, must ip so facto be Ordained and Consecrated by him without
intervention of Bishops, or Matter and Form of Ordination: Which absurdities
you will be more unwilling to grant, then well able to avoid, if you will be
true to your own doctrines. The Pope from whom originally you must beg your
Succession of Bishops, never received, nor will, nor can acknowledge to receive
any Spiri^uall Jurisdiction from any Temporal Prince, and therefore if
Jurisdiction must be derived from Princes, he has none at all: and yet either
you must acknowledge, that he has true spiritual Jurisdiction, or that
yourselves can receive none from him.

21 Moreover, this new Reformation, or Reformed Church of Protestants, will by
them be pretended to be Catholic, or Universal, and not confined to England
alone, as the Sect of the Donatists was to Africa: and therefore it must
comprehend all the Reformed Churches in Germany, Holland, Scotland. France etc.
In which number, they of Germany, Holland, and France are not governed by
Bishops, nor regard any personal succession, unless of such fat-benefi^ed
Bishops as Nicolaus Amsfordius, who was consecrated by Luther, (though Luther
himself was never Bishop) as witnesses In Millenario sexto Page 187.
Dresserus. And though Scotland has of late admitted some Bishops, I much
doubt whether they hold them to be necessary, or of divine Institution; and so
their enforced admitting of them, does not so much furnish that kingdom with
personal Succession of Bishops, as it does convince them to want Succession of
Doctrine; since in this their neglect of Bishops they disagree both from the
milder Protestants of England, and the true Catholic Church: And by this want
of a continued personal Succession of Bishops, they retain the note of
Schism, and Heresy. So that the Church of Protestants, must either not be
Universal, as being confined to England; Or if you will needs comprehend all
those Churches which want succession, you must confess, that your Church does
not only communicate with Schismatic and Heretical Churches, but is also
compounded of such Churches; and your selves cannot avoid the note of
Schismatiques, or Heretics, if it were but for participating with such
heretical Churches. For it is impossible to retain Communion with the true
Catholic Church, and yet agree with them who are divided from her by Schism,
or Heresy; because that were to affirm, that for the self same time, they
could be within, and without the Catholic Church, as proportionably I
discoursed in the next precedent Chapter, concerning the communicating of
moderate Protestants with those who maintain that Heresy of the Latency and
Invisibility of Gods Church, where I brought a place of S. Cyprian to this
purpose, which the Reader may be pleased to review in the fifth Chapter, and 17.
Number.

22 But besides this defect in the personal Succession of Protestant Bishops,
there is another of great moment; which is, that they want the right Form of
ordaining Bishops, and Priests, because the manner which they use is so much
different from that of the Roman Church (at least according to the common
opinion of Divines) that it cannot be sufficient for the Essence of Ordination;
as I could demonstrate if this were the proper place of such a Treatise, and
will not fail to do if D. Potter give me occasion. In the mean time the
Reader may be pleased to read the Author See Adamum Ta^^erum tom. 4. disp. 7.
quaest. 2. du^. 3. and 4.
cited here in the margent, and then compare the form of our Ordination with
that of Protestants; and to remember, that if the form which they use either
in Consecrating Bishops, or in ordaining Priests be at least doubtful, they
can neither have undoubted Priests, nor Bishops. For Priests cannot be ordained
but by true Bishops, nor can any be a true Bishop, unless he first be Priest.
I say, their Ordination is at least doubtful; because that suffices for my
present purpose. For Bishops and Priests, whose Ordination is notoriously known
to be but doubtful, are not to be esteemed Bishops, or Priests: and no man
without Sacrilege can receive Sacraments from them; all which they administer
unlawfully: And (if we except Baptism, with manifest danger of invalidity, and
with obligation to be at least conditionally repeated) so Protestants must
remain doubtful of Remission of sins, of their Ecclesiastical Hierarchy,
and may not pretend to be a true Church, which cannot subsist without undoubted
true Bishops and Priests, not without due administration of Sacraments, which
(according to Protestants) is an essential note of the true Church. And it is
a world to observe the proceeding of English Protestants in this point of their
Ordinations. For first, Ann. 3. Edw. 6. cap. 2. when he was a Child about
twelve years of age, It was enacted, that such Dyer. fol. 234. term. Mich. 6.
and ^. Eliz.
form of making, and consecrating of Bishops and Priests, as by six Prelates,
and six other to be appointed by the King, should be devised (mark this word
devised) and set forth under the great Seal; should be used, and none other.
But after this Act was repealed 1. Mar. Sess. 2. in so much as that when
afterward An. 6. and 7 Reg. Eliz. Bishop Bonner being endicted upon a
certificate made by D. Horn a Protestant Bishop of Winchester, for his
refusal of the Oath of Supremacy; and he excepting against the endictment
because D, Horn was no Bishop; all the Judges resolved that his exception was
good, if indeed D. Horn was not Bishop, and they were all at a stand, till An.
8. Eliz cap. 1. the act of Edw. 6. was renewed and confirmed, with a particular
proviso, that no man should be impeached or molested by means of any
certificate by any Bishop or Archbishop made before this last Act. Whereby it
is clear, that they made some doubt of their own ordination, and that there is
nothing but uncertainty in the whole business of their Ordination, which
(forsooth) must depend upon six Prelates, the great Seal, Acts of Parliaments
being contrary one to another, and the like.

23 But though they want Personal Succession, yet at least they have
Succession of doctrine as they say, and pretend to prove, because they believe
as the Apostles believed. This is to beg the Question, and to take what they
may be sure, will never be granted. For if they want Personal Succession, and
slight Ecclesiastical Tradition, how will they persuade any man, that they
agree with the doctrine of the Apostles? We have heard Tertullian saying: I
will prescribe Sup. c. 5.
against all Heretics) that there is no means to prove what the Apostles
preached, but by the same Churches which they founded. And S. Irenaeus tells us
that, We may L. 3. c. 5.
behold the Tradition of the Apostles in every Church, if men be desirous to
hear the truth, and we can number them who were made Bishops by the Apostles in
Churches, and their Successors even to us. And the same Father in another place
says: We ought to obey L. 4. c. 43.
those Priests who are in the Church, who have Succession from the Apostles,
and who together with Succession in their Bishoprics have received the certain
gift of truth. S. Austine says: I am kept in the Church Contr. epist. Fundam.
c. 4.
by the succession of Priests from the very Sea of Peter the Apostle, to whom
our Savior after his Resurrection committed his sheep to be fed, even to the
present Bishop. Origin to this purpose gives us a good and wholesome Rule
(happy, if himself had followed the same) in these excellent words: Since
there be many who think Praef. ad lib* Periarchon.
they believe the things which are of Christ, and some are of different opinion
from those who went before them; let the preaching of the Church be kept, which
is delivered by the Apostles by order of Succession, and remains in the Church
to this very day; that only is to be believed for truth, which in nothing
disagrees from the Tradition of the Church. In vain then do these men brag of
the doctrine of the Apostles, unles first they can demonstrate that they
enjoyed a continued succession of Bishops from the Apostles, and can show us a
Church which, according to S. Austine, is deduced by undoubted SVCCESSION from
the Sea Cont. Faust* cap. 2.
of the Apostles, even to the present Bishops.

23 But yet nevertheless, suppose it were granted, that they agreed with the
doctrine of the Apostles; this were not sufficient to prove a Succession in
Doctrine. For Succession, besides agreement or similitude, does also require a
never-interrupted conveying of such doctrine, from the time of the Apostles,
till the days of those persons, who challenge such a Succession. And so S.
Augustine says: We are to believe that* Gospel which from the time of the
Apostles, the Lib. 28. cont. Eaust, cap. 2.
Church has brought down to our days by a never-interrupted course of times,
and by undoubted succession of connection. Now, that the Reformation begun by
Luther, was interrupted for diverse ages before him, is manifest out of History,
and by his endeavoring a Reformation, which must presuppose abuses. He cannot
therefore pretend a continued Succession of that Doctrine which he fought to
revive, and reduce to the knowledge, and practice of men. And they ought not to
prove that they have Succession of doctrine, because they agree with the
doctrine of the Apostles; but contrarily we must infer, that they agree not
with the Apostles, because they cannot pretend a never-interrupted succession
of doctrine from the times of the Apostles, till Luther. And here it is not
amiss to note, that although the Waldenses, Wicliffe etc. had agreed with
Protestants in all points of doctrine; yet they could not brag of Succession
from them, because their doctrine has not been free from interruption, which
necessarily crosses Succession.

24 And as want of Succession of Persons and Doctrine, cannot stand with that
Universality of Time, which is inseparable from the Catholic Church; so
likewise the disagreeing Sect^ which are dispersed throughout diverse Countries,
and Nations, cannot help toward that Universality of Place, wherewith the true
Church must be endued: but rather such local multiplication, does more and
more lay open their division, and want of Succession in Doctrine. For the
excellent Observation of S. Augustine does punctually agree with all modern
Heretics; wherein this holy Father having cited these words out of the
Prophet Ezechiell, Cap. 24.
My flocks* are dispersed upon the whole face of the Earth; he adds this
remarkable sentence: Not all Heretics Lib. de P^storib. c. 8.
are spread over the face of the Earth, and yet there are Heretics spread
over the whole face of the Earth, some here, some there, yet they are wanting
in no place, they know not one another. One Sect for example in Africa, another
Heresy in the East, another in Egypt, another in Mesopotamia. In diverse places
they are diverse: one Mother, pride has begot them all, as our own Mother the
Catholic Church has brought forth all faithful people dispersed throughout
the whole world. No wonder then, if Pride breed Dissension, and Charity Union.
And in another place, applying to Heretics those words of the Canticles: If
thou know not Cant. ^.
thy self, go forth, and follow after the steps of the flocks, and feed thy
kids, he says: If thou know not thy self, go Ep. 48.
thou forth, I do not cast thee out; but go thou out, that it may be said of
thee: They went from us, but they were not of us. Go thou out in the steps of
the flocks; not in my steps, but in the steps of the flocks, nor of one flock,
but of diverse and wandering flocks; And feed thy Kids, not as Peter, to whom is
said, Feed my sheep: but seed thy Kids in the Tabernacles of the Pastors, not
in the Tabernacle of the Pastor, where there is one flock, and one Pastor. In
which words this holy Father does set down the Marks of Heresy, to wit, going
out from the Church, and Want of Unity among themselves, which proceed from not
acknowledging one supreme Visible Pastor and Head under Christ. And so it being
Proved that Protestants having neither succession of Persons, nor Doctrine, nor
Universality of Time, or Place, cannot avoid the just note of Heresy.

25 Hitherto we have brought arguments to prove, that Luther, and all
Protestants are guilty of Heresy against the Negative Precept of faith, which
obliges us under pain of damnation, not to embrace any one error, contrary to
any Truth sufficiently propounded, as testified or revealed by Almighty God.
Which were enough to make good, that among Persons who disagree many one point
of Faith, one part only can be saved: Yet we will now prove that Whosoever
erreth in any one point, does also break the Affirmative Precept of Faith,
whereby we are obliged positively, to believe some revealed truth with an
infallible, and supernatural Faith, which is necessary to salvation, even
necessitate finis, or me^ii, as Divines speak; that is, so necessary that not
any, after he is come to the use of Reason, was or can be saved without it,
according to the words of the Apostle: Without Faith Heb. 11. 6.
it is impossible to please God.

26 In the beginning of this Chapter I showed, that to Christian Catholic
faith are required Certainty, Obscurtty, Prudence; and Supernaturality; All
which Conditions we will prove to be wanting in the belief of Protestants,
even in those points which are true in themselu^s, and to which they yield
assent, as hapeneth in all those particulars, wherein they agree with us; from
whence it will follow, that they wanting true Divine Faith, want means
absolutely necessary to salvation.

27 And first, The faith of Protestants wants Certainty.
that their belief wants Certainty, I prove, because denying the Universal
infallibility of the Church, can have no certain grou^nd to know what Objects
are ^evealed, or testified by God. Holy Scripture is in it self most true and
infallible; but without the direction and declaration of the Church, we can
neither have certain means to know what Scripture is Canonical; nor what
Translations be faithful, nor what is the true meaning of Scripture: Every
Protestant, as I suppose, is persuaded that his own opinions, be true, and that
he has used such means as are wont to be prescribed for understanding the
Scripture, as Prayer, Conferring of diverse Texts, etc. and yet their
disagreements show tha^ some of them are deceaved: And therefore it is clear
that they have no one certain ground whereon to rely for understanding of
Scripture. And seeing they hold all the Articles of Faith, even concerning
fundamental points, upon the self same ground of Scripture, interpreted, not
by the Churches Authority, but according to some other Rules, which as
experience of their contradictions teach, do sometimes fail; it is clear that
the ground of their faith is infallible in no point at all. And albeit sometime
it chance to hit on the truth, yet it is likewise apt to lead them to error:
As all Arch-heretiques believing some truths, and withal diverse errors upon
the same ground and motive, have indeed no true divine infallible faith, b^t
only a fallible humane opinion, and persuasion. For if the ground upon which
they rely were certain, it could never produce any error.

28 Another cause of uncertainty in the faith of Protestants, must rise from
their distinction of points fundamental, and not fundamental. For since they
acknowledge, that every error in fundamental points destroys the substance
of faith and yet cannot determine what points be fundamental; it follows
that they must remain uncertain whether or no they be not in some fundamental
error, and so want the substance of faith, without which there can be no hope
of Salvation.

29 And that he who erreth against any one revealed truth (as certainly some
Protestants must do, because contradictory Propositions cannot both be true)
does loose all Divine faith; is a very true doctrine delivered by Catholic
Divines, with so general a consent, that the contrary is wont to be censured
as temerarious. The Angelical Doctor S. Thomas proposes this Question:
Whether 2. 2. 4. 5. ar. 3. in corp.
he who denies one Article of faith, may retain faith in other Articles? and
resolves that he cannot which he proves, (Argument^ sed contra) because, As
deadly sin is opposits to Charity; so to deny one Article of faith is opposite
to faith. But Charity does not remain with any one deadly sin; therefore faith
does not remain after the denial of any one Article of faith. Whereof he gives
this farther reason: Because ( says he) the nature of every habit does depend
upon the formal Motive and Object thereof, which Motive being taken away, the
nature of the habit cannot remain. But the formal Object of faith is the
supreme truth as it is manifested in Scriptures, and in the doctrine of the
Church, which proceeds from the same supreme verity. Whosoever therefore does
not rely upon the doctrine of the Church (which proceeds from the supreme
verity, manifested in Scripture) as upon an infallible Rule, he has not the
habit of faith, but belieues those things which belong to faith by some other
me anes then by faith: as if one should remember some Conclusion, and not know
the reason of that demonstration, it is clear that he has not certain
knowledge, but only Opinion. Now it is manifest, that he who relies on the
doctrine of the Church, as upon an infallible Rule, will yield his assent to
all, that the Church teaches. For if among those things, which she teaches,
he hold what he will, and does not hold what he will not, he does not rely
upon the doctrine of the Church, as upon an infallible Rule, but only upon his
own will. And so it is clear that an Heretic, who with pertinacity denies
one Article of faith, is not ready to follow the doctrine of the Church in all
things: And therefore it is manifest, that whosoever is an Heretic in any one
Article of faith, concerning other Articles, has not says, but a kind of
Opinion, or his own will. Thus far. S. Thomas. And afterward: A man does
believe Ad 2.
all the Articles of faith for one and the self same reason, to wit, for the
Prime Verity proposed to us in the Scripture, understood aright according to
the Doctrine of the Church: and therefore whosoever falls from this reason or
motive, is totally deprived of faith. From this true doctrine we are to infer,
that to retain, or want the substance of faith, does not consist in the matter,
or multitude of the Articles, but in the opposition against Gods divine
testimony, which is involved in every least error against faith. And since some
Protestants must needs err, and that they have no certain rule to know, why
rather one then another; it manifestly follows that none of them have any
Certainty for the substance of their faith in any one point. Moreover D.
Potter, being forced to confess that the Roman Church wants not the substance
of faith, it follows that she does not err in any one point against faith,
because as we have seen out of S. Thomas, every such error destroies the
substance of faith. Now if the Roman Church did not err in any one point of
faith, it is manifest that Protestants err in all those points wherein they
are contrary to her. And this may suffice to prove that the faith of
Protestants wants Infallibility.

30 And now for the second Condition of faith, I say: If Protestants have
Certainty, they want Obscurity, They want the second Condition of Faith:
Obscurity.
and so have not that faith which, as the Apostle says, is of things not
appearing, or not necessi^ating our Understanding to an assent. For the whole
edifice of the faith of Protestants, is settled on these two Principles: These
particular Books are Canonical Scripture: And the sense and meaning of these
Canonical Scriptures, is clear and evident, at least in all points necessary
to Salvation. Now, these Principles being once supposed, it clearly follows,
that what Protestants believe as necessary to salvation, is evidently known by
them to be true, by this argument: It is certain and evident, that whatsoever
is contained in the word of God, is true. But it is certain and evident, that
these Books in particular are the word of God: Therefore it is certain and
evident, that whatsoever is contained in these Books is true. Which Conclusion
I take for a Mayor in a second Argument, and say thus: It is certain and
evident that whatsoever is contained in these Books is true: but it is certain
and evident, that such particular Articles (for example, the Trinity,
Incarnation, Original sin, etc.) are contained in these Books: Therefore it is
certain and evident, that these particular Objects are true. Neither will it
avail you to say, that the said Principles are not evident by natural
discourse, but only to the eye of reason cleared by grace, as you speak. For
supernatural evidence, no less (yea rather more) draws and excludes
obscurity, then natural evidence does: neither can the party so enlightened be
said voluntarily to captivate his understanding to that light, but rather his
understanding is by a necessity made captive, and forced not to disbelieve,
what is presented by so clear a light: And therefore your imaginary faith is
not the true faith defined by the Apostle, but an invention of your own.

31 That the faith of Protestants wants the third Condition which was
Prudence, Their faith wants Prudence.
is deduced from all that hitherto has been said. What wisdom was it, to
forsake a Church confessedly very ancient, and besides which, there could be
demonstrated no other visible Church of Christ upon earth? A Church
acknowledged to want nothing necessary to Salvation; endued with Succession of
Bishops, with Visibility and Universality of Time and Place; A Church which if
it be not the true Church, her enemies cannot pretend to have any Church,
Ordination, Scriptures, Succession, etc. and are forced for their own sake, to
maintain her perpetual Existence, and Being! To leave, I say, such a Church,
and frame a Community, without either Unity, or means to procure it; a Church
which at Luthers first revolt had no larger extent then where his body was; A
Church without Universality of place or Time; A Church which can pretend no
Visibility, or Being, except only in that former Church which it opposes* A
Church void of Succession of Persons o^ Doctrine? What wisdom was it to
follow such men as Luther, in an opposition against the visible Church of
Christ, begun upon mere passion? What wisdom is it to receive from Us, a
Church, Ordination, Scriptures, Personal Succession, and not Succession of
Doctrine? Is not this to verify the name of Heresy, which signifies Election
or Choice? Whereby they cannot avoid that note of Imprudency, (or as S.
Augustine calls it) Foolishness, set down by him against the Manichees; and by
me recited before. I would not (says he) believe Cont. ep. Fund. c. 5.
the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Church did move me. Those therefore
whom I obeyed, saying, Believe the Gospel, why should I not obey the same me^
saying to me, Do not believe Manichaeus (Luther, Calvin, etc.) Choose what
thou please: If thou say, Believe the Catholics; they warn me not to
believe thee. Wherefore if I believe them, I cannot believe thee. If thou say,
Do not believe the Catholics; thou shall not do well, in forcing me to the
faith of Manichaeus, because by the Preaching of Catholics, I believed the
Gospel it self. If thou say; you did well to believe them (Catholics)
commending the Gospel, but you did not well to believe them, discommending
Manichaeus; do thou think me so very FOOLISH, that without any reason at all,
I should believe what thou will, and not believe, what thou will not? Nay this
holy Father is not content to call it Foolishness, but mere Ma^nesse, in these
words: Why should I not most diligently enquire Lib. de util. Cred. c. 14.
what Christ commanded of those before all others, by whose Authority I was
moved to believe, that Christ commanded any good thing? Can thou better
declare to me, what he said, whom I would not have thought to have been, or to
be, if the Belief thereof had been recommended by thee to me? The therefore I
believed by fame, strengthened with Celebrity, Consent, Antiquity. But every
one may see that you, so few, so turbulent, so new: can produce nothing which
deserves Authority. What MADNESS is this? Believe them (Catholics) that we
ought to believe Christ; but learn of us what Christ said. Why I beseech thee?
Surely if they (Catholics) were not at all, and could not teach me any
thing, I would more easily persuade my self, that I were not to believe
Christ, then I should learn any thing concerning him from other then those, by
whom I believed him. Lastly, I ask what wisdom it could be to leave all
visible Churches; and consequently the true Catholic Church of Christ, which
you confess cannot err in points necessary to salvation, and the Roman Church
which you grant does not err in fundamentalls, and follow private men who may
err even in points necessary to salvation? Especially if we add, that when
Luther rose, there was no visible true Catholic Church besides that of Rome,
and them who agreed with her; in which sense, she was, and is, the only true
Church of Christ; and not capable of any Error in faith. Nay, even Luther, who
first opposed the Roman Church, yet coming to dispute against other
Heretics, he is forced to give the Lie both to his own words and deeds, in
saying: We freely confess I^ epist. co^t. Anah. ad duos Parocho^. to. 2. Germ.
Wit. sol. 229. and 230.
that in the Papacy there are many good things, worthy the name of Christian,
which have come from them to us. Namely, we confess that in the Papacy there
is true Scripture, true Baptism; the true Sacrament of the Altar, the true
keys for remission of sins, the true office of Preaching, true Catechism, as
our Lords Prayer, Ten Commandments, Articles of faith etc. And afterward: I
avouch, that under the Papacy there is true Christianity, yea the Kernel and
Marrow of Christianity, and many pious and great Saints. And again he
affirms, that the Church of Rome has the true Spirit, Gospells, Faith,
Baptism, Sacraments, the Keys, the Office of Preaching, Prayer, Holy
Scripture, and whatsoever Christianity ought to have. And a little before: I
hear and see that they bring in Anabaptisme only to this end, that they may
spite the Pope, as men that will receive nothing from Antichrist; no otherwise
then the Sacramentaries do, who therefore believe only Bread and Wine to be in
the Sacrament, merely in hatred against the Bishop of Rome; and they think
that by this means they shall overcome the Papacy. Verily these men rely upon
a weak ground, for by this means they must deny the whole Scripture, and the
Office of Preaching. For we have all these things from the Pope; otherwise we
must go make a new Scripture. O Truth, more forcible (as S. Austine says) to
wring out Contra Donar. post collat. cap. 24.
Confession, then is any rack, or torment! And so we may truly say with
Moses: Inimici nostri sunt Iudices: Our very Enemies give Deuteronomy. c. 32. 31.
Their faith wants Supernaturality.
sentence for us.

32 Lastly, since your faith wants Certainty, and Prudence, it is easy to
infer that it wants the fourth Condition, Supernaturality. For being but an
Humane persuasion, or Opinion, it is not in nature, or Essence Supernatural.
And being imprudent, and rash, it cannot proceed from divine Motion and grace;
and therefore it is neither supernatural in it self, nor in the cause from
which it proceeds.

33 Since therefore we have proved, that whosoever erres against any one point
of faith, loses all divine faith, even concerning those other Articles
wherein he does not err; and that although he could still retain true faith
for some points, yet any one error in whatsoever other matter concerning
faith, is a grievous sin; it clearly follows, that when two or more hold
different doctrines concerning faith and Religion, there can be but one Part
saved. For declaring of which truth, if Catholics be charged with Want of
Charity, and Modesty, and be accused of rashness, ambition, and fury, as D.
Potter is very free in this kind; I desire every one to ponder the words of S.
Chrysostom, who teaches, that every least error overthrowes all faith, and
whosoever is guilty thereof, is in the Church, like one, who in the Common
wealth forgeth false come. Let them hear (says this holy Father)* what S.
Paul says: Namely, that they who brought in some small error Galat. 1. 7.
had overthrown the Gospel. For, to show how a small thing ill mingled does
corrupt the whole, he said, that the Gospel was subverted. For as he who clips
a little of the stamp from the Kings money, makes the whole piece of no value:
so whosoever takes away the least particle of sound faith, is wholly corrupted,
always going from that beginning to worse things. Where then are they, who
condemn us as contentious persons, because we cannot agree with Heretics,
and do often say, that there is no difference betwixt us and them, but that
our disagreement proceeds from Ambition to dominere? And thus having showed
that Protestants want true Faith, it remains that, according to my first
design, I examine whether they do not also want Charity, as it respects a
man's self.

THE ANSWER TO THE SIXTH CHAPTER.
That Protestants are not Heretics.
HE that will accuse any one man, Ad. 1
much more any great multitude of men of any great and horrible crime, should
in all reason and justice take care that the greatness of his evidence do
equal, if not exceed the quality of the crime. And such an accusation you
would here make show of, by pretending, first, to lay such grounds of it, as
are either already proved, or else yielded on all sides: and after to raise a
firm and stable structure of convincing arguments upon them. But both these I
find to be mere and vain pretenses, and having considered this Chapter also
without prejudice or passion, as I did the former, I am enforced by the light
of Truth, to pronounce your whole discourse, a painted and ruinous Building
upon a weak and sandy Foundation.

2 Ad. 2. 3. First for your grounds, a great part of the^, is falsely said to
be either proved or granted. It is true indeed that Man by his natural wit or
industry could never have attained to the knowledge of Gods will to give him a
supernatural and eternal happiness, nor of the means by which his pleasure
was to bestow this happiness upon him. And therefore your first ground is
good, That it was requisite his understanding should be enabled to apprehend
that end and means by a knowledge supernatural. I say this is good, if you
mean by knowledge, an apprehension or belief. But if you take the word
properly and exactly, it is both false, for faith is not knowledge, no more
then three is four, but eminently contained in it, so that he that knows,
believes, and something more, but he that believes many times do not know, nay
if he does barely and merely believe, he does never know: and besides it is
retracted by your self presently, where you require, That the object of faith
must be both naturally and supernaturally unknown. And again in the next page,
where you say, Faith differs from science in regard of the objects obscurity.
For that science and knowledge properly taken are Synonimous terms, and that a
knowledge of a thing absolutely unknown is a plain implicancy, I think are
things so plain, that you will not require any proof of them.

3 But then whereas you add, that if such a knowledge were no more then
probable, it could not be able sufficiently to over bear our will, and
encounter with humane probabilities, being backed with the strength of flesh
and blood, and therefore conclude, that it was farther necessary, that this
supernatural knowledge should be most certain and infallible: To this I
answer, that I do heartily acknowledge and believe the Articles of our faith
be in themselves Truths, as certain and infallible as the very common
Principles of Geometry and Metaphysics. But that there is required of us a
knowledge of them, and an adherence to them, as certain as that of sense or
science, that such a certainty is required of us under pain of damnation, so
that no man can hope to be in the state of Salvation, but he that finds in
himself such a degree of faith, such a strength of adherence: This I have
already demonstrated to be a great error, and of dangerous and pernicious
consequence. And because I am more and more confirmed in my persuasion that the
truth which I there delivered, is of great and singular use, I will here
confirm it with more reasons. And to satisfy you that this is no singularity
of my own, my Margent presents you with a M. Hooker in his answer to Travers
his supplication. -- I have taught that the assurance of things which we
believe by the word, is not so certain as of that we perceive by sense. And is
it as certain? Yes I taught, that the things which God does promise in his
word are surer unto us then any thing we touch, handle or see. But are we so
sure and certain of them? If we be, why does God so often prove his promises
unto us, as he does by arguments taken from our sensible experience? We must be
surer of the proof then the thing proved, otherwise it is no proof. How is it
that if ten men do all look upon the Moon, every one of them knows it as
certainly to be the Moon as another: but many believing one and the same
promises all have not one and the same fulness of persuasion? How falls it
out that men being assured of any thing by sense, can be no surer of it then
they are? whereas the strongest in faith that lives upon the earth, had
always need to labor, and strive, and pray, that his assurance concerning
heavenly and spiritual things may grow, increase, and be augmented.
Protestant Divine of great authority, and no way singular in his opinions, who
has long since preached and justified the same doctrine.

4 I say that every Text of Scripture which makes mention of any that were
weak, or of any that were strong in faith: of any that were of little, or any
that were of great faith: of any that abounded, or any that were rich in faith:
of increasing, growing, rooting, grounding, establishing, confirming in faith:
Every such Text, is a demonstrative refutation of this vain fancy: proving that
faith, even true and saving faith, is not a thing consisting in such an
indivisible point of perfection as you make it, but capable of augmentation and
diminution. Every Prayer you make to God to increase your faith (or if you
conceive such a prayer derogatory from the perfection of your faith,) The
Apostles praying to Christ to increase their faith, is a convincing argument of
the same conclusion. Moreover if this doctrine of yours were true, then seeing
not any the least doubting can consist with a most infallible certainty, it
will follow that every least doubting in any matter of faith, though resisted
and involuntary, is a damnable sin, absolutely destructive, so long as it
lasts, of all true and saving faith: which you are so far from granting, that
you make it no sin at all, but only an occasion of merit: and if you should
esteem it a sin, then must you acknowledge, contrary to your own
Principles, that there are Actual sins merely involuntary. The same is
furthermore invincibly confirmed by every deliberate sin that any Christian
commits; by any progress in Charity that he makes. For seeing, as S. John
assures us, our faith is the victory which overcomes the world, certainly if
the faith of all true Believers were perfect, (and if true faith be capable of
no imperfection, if all faith be a knowledge most certain and infallible, all
faith must be perfect, for the most imperfect that is, according to your
doctrine, if it be true, must be most certain, and sure the most perfect that
is, cannot be more then most certain,) then certainly their victory over the
World, and therefore over the flesh, and therefore over sin, must of
necessity be perfect, and so it should be impossible for any true believer to
commit any deliberate sin, and therefore he that commits any sin, must not
think himself a true believer. Besides seeing faith works by Charity, and
Charity is the effect of faith: certainly if the cause were perfect, the effect
would be perfect, and consequently as you make no degrees in faith, so there
would be none in charity, and so no man could possibly make any progress in
it, but all true believers should be equally in Charity, as in faith you make
them equal: and from thence it would follow unavoidably, that whosoever finds
in himself any true faith, must presently persuade himself that he is perfect
in Charity: and whosoever on the other side, discovers in his charity any
imperfection, must not believe that he has any true faith. These you see are
strange and portentous consequences, and yet the deduction of them from your
doctrine is clear and apparent; which shows this doctrine of yours, which you
would fain have true, that there might be some necessity of your Churches
infallibility, to be indeed plainly repugnant not only to Truth but even to all
Religion and Piety, and fit for nothing but to make men negligent of making any
progress in faith or Charity. And therefore I must entreat and adjure you
either to discover unto me (which I take God to witness I cannot perceive,)
some fallacy in my reasons against it, or never hereafter to open your mouth in
defense of it.

5 As for that one single reason which you produce to confirm it, it will
appear upon examination to be resolved finally into a groundless Assertion of
your own, contrary to all Truth and experience, and that is, That no degree of
faith, less then a most certain and infallible knowledge, can be able
sufficiently to overbeare our will and encovnter with humane probabilities,
being backed with the strength of Flesh and Blood. For who sees not that many
millions in the world forgo many times their present ease and pleasure,
undergo great and toylsome labors, encounter great difficulties, adventure
upon great dangers, and all this not upon any certain expectation, but upon a
probable hope of some future gain and commodity, and that not infinite and
eternal, but finite and temporal? Who sees not that many men abstain from
many things they exceedingly desire, not upon any certain assurance, but a
probable fear of danger that may come after? What man ever was there so madly
in love with a present penny, but that he would willingly spend it upon any
little hope that by doing so he might gain an hundred thousand pound? And I
would fain know what gay probabilities you could devise to dissuade him from
this Resolution. And if you can devise none, what reason then, or sense is
there, but that a probable hope of infinite and eternal happiness, provided
for all those that obey Christ Jesus, and much more a firm faith, though not
so certain, in some sort, as sense or science, may be able to sway our will to
obedience, and encounter with all those temptations which Flesh and Blood can
suggest to avert us from it? Men may therefore talk their pleasure of an
absolute and most infallible certainty, but did they generally believe that
obedience to Christ were the only way to present and eternal felicity, but as
firmly and undoubtedly as that there is such a City as Constantinople, nay but
as much as Caesar's Commentaries, or the History of Salust, I believe the lives
of most men, both Papists and Protestants would be better then they are. Thus
therefore out of your own words I argue against you: He that requires to true
faith, an absolute and infallible certainty, for this only Reason because any
less degree could not be able to overbeare our will, etc. imports, that if a
less degree of faith were able to do this, then a less degree of faith may
be true and divine and saving Faith: But experience shows, and reason
confirms, that a firm faith, though not so certain as sense or science, may be
able to encounter and overcome our will and affections: And therefore it
follows from your own reason, that faith which is not a most certain and
infallible knowledge may be true and divine and saving faith.

6 All these Reasons I have employed to show that such a most certain and
infallible faith as here you talk of, is not so necessary, but that without
such a high degree of it, it is possible to please God. And therefore the
Doctrines delivered by you 25. are most presumptuous and uncharitable: viz:
That such a most certain and infallible faith is necessary to salvation,
necessitate Finis, or Medii, so necessary, that after a man is come to the use
of reason, no man ever was or can be saved without it. Wherein you boldly
intrude into the judgment seat of God, and damn men for breaking Laws, not
of God's, but your own making. But withal, you clearly contradict your self,
not only where you affirm, P. 1. C. 2. 14.
That your faith depends finally upon the Tradition of Age to Age, of Father to
Son, which cannot be a fit ground, but only for a Moral Assurance; P. 2. C.
5.. 32.
nor only, where you pretend, that not alone Hearing and Seeing, but also
Histories, Letters, Relations of many (which certainly are things not certain
and infallible,) are yet foundations good enough to support your faith; Which
Doctrine, if it were good and allowable, Protestants might then hope that their
Histories and Letters and Relations might also pass for means sufficient of a
sufficient Certainty, and that they should not be excluded from Salvation for
want of such a Certainty. But indeed the pressure of the present difficulty
compelled you to speak here, what I believe you will not justify, and with a
pretty tergiversation to show D. Potter your means of moral certainty; whereas
the Objection was that you had no means or possibility of infallible certainty,
for which you are plainly at as great a loss and as far to seek as any of your
Adversaries. And therefore it concerns you highly not to damn others for want
of it, least you involue your selves in the same condemnation; according to
those terrible words of S. Paul, Inexcusabilis es, etc. In this therefore you
plainly contradict your self. And lastly most plainly, in saying as you do
here, you contradict and retract your pretense of Charity to Protestants in the
beginning of your Book: For there you make profession, that you have no
assurance but that Protestants dying Protestants, may possibly dye with
contrition, and be saved: And here you are very peremptory, that they cannot
but want a means absolutely necessary to salvation, and wanting that cannot but
be damned.

7 The third Condition you require to faith, is, that our assent to divine
Truths should not only be unknown and unevident by any humane discourse, but
that absolutely also it should be obscure in it self, and ordinarily speaking,
be void even of supernatural evidence. Which words must have a very favorable
constructio^, or else they will not be sense. For who can make any thing of
these words taken properly, that faith must be an unknown unevident assent, or
an assent absolutely obscure? I had always thought that known and unknown,
obscure and evident had been affections, not of our Assent, but the Object of
it, not of our belief, but the thing believed. For well may we assent to a
thing unknown, obscure, or unevident; but that our assent it self should be
called therefore unknown or obscure, seems to me as great an impropriety, as if
I should say, your sight were green or blew, because you see something that is
so. In other places therefore I answer your words, but here I must answer your
meaning: which I conceive to be, That it is necessary to faith that the Objects
of it, the points which we believe should not be so evidently certain, as to
necessitate our understandings to an Assent, that so there might be some merit
in faith, as you love to speak (who will not receive no not from God himself,
but a pennyworth for a penny,) but as we, some obedience in it, which can
hardly have place where there is no possibility of disobedience, as there is
not where the understanding does all, and the will nothing. Now seeing the
Religion of Protestants, though it be much more credible then yours, yet is not
pretended to have the absolute evidence of sense or demonstration; therefore I
might let this doctrine pass without exception, for any prejudice that can
redound to us by it. But yet I must not forbear to tell you, that your
discourse proves indeed this condition requisite to the merit, but yet not to
the essence of faith: without it faith were not an act of obedience, but yet
faith may be faith without it; and this you must confess, unless you will
say either the Apostles believed not the whole Gospel which they preached, or
that they were not eyewitnesses of a great part of it: unless you will
question S. John for saying that which we have seen with our eyes, and which
our hands have handled, etc. declare we unto you: nay our Savior himself for
saying. Thomas because thou see thou be lievest, Blessed are they which have
not seen and yet have believed. Yet if you will say that in respect of the
things which they saw, the Apostles assent was not pure and proper and mere
faith, but somewhat more; an assent containing faith but superadding to it, I
will not contend with you, for it will be a contention about words. But then
again I must crave leave to tell you, that the requiring this condition, is in
my judgment a plain revocation of the former. For had you made the matter of
faith either naturally or supernaturally evident, it might have been a fitly
atte^pered and duly proportioned object for an absolute certainty natural or
supernatural: But requiring as you do, that faith should be an absolute
knowledge of a thing not absolutely known, an infallible certainty of a thing
which though it is in it self, yet is it not made appear to us to be
infallibly certain, to my understanding you speak impossibilities. And truly
for one of your Religion to do so, is but a good Decorum. For the matter and
object of your Faith being so full of contradictions, a contradictictious faith
may very well become a contradictious Religion. Your faith therefore, if you
please to have it so, let it be a free, necessitated, certain, uncertain,
evident, obscure, prudent and foolish, natural and supernatural unnatural
assent. But they which are unwilling to believe nonsense themselves, or to
persuade others to do so, it is but reason they should make the faith
wherewith they believe, an intelligible, compossible, consistent thing, and not
define it by repugnances. Now nothing is more repugnant, then that a man should
be required to give most certain credit unto that which cannot be made appear
most certainly credible: and if it appear to him to be so, then is it not
obscure that it is so. For if you speak of an acquired, rational, discursive
faith, certainly these Reasons which make the object seem credible, must be the
cause of it, and consequently the strength and firmity of my assent must rise
and fall together with the apparent credibility of the object. If you speak of
a supernatural infused faith, then you either suppose it infused by the former
means, and then that which was said before must be said again: for whatsoever
effect is wrought merely by means, must bear proportion to, and cannot exceed
the virtue of the means, by which it is wrought: As nothing by water can be
made more cold then water, nor by fire more hot then fire, nor by honey more
sweet then honey, nor by gall more bitter then gall: Or if you will suppose it
infused without means, then that power which infuseth into the understanding
assent which bears analogy to sight in the eye, must also infuse evidence,
that is, Visibilitie into the Object: and look what degree of assent is infused
into the understanding, at least the same degree of evidence must be infused
into the Object. And for you to require a strength of credit beyond the
appearance of the objects credibility, is all one as if you should require me
to go ten miles an hour upon a horse that will go but five: to discern a man
certainly through a mist or cloud that makes him not certainly discernable; To
hear a sound more clearly then it is audible; to understand a thing more fully
then it is intelligible: and he that does so, I may well expect that his next
injunction will be, that I must see something that is invisible, hear
something inaudible, understand something that is wholly unintelligible. For he
that demands ten of me, knowing I have but five, does in effect, as if he
demanded five, knowing that I have none: and by like reason, you requiring that
I should see things farther then they are visible, require I should see
something invisible, and in requiring that I believe something more firmly then
it is made to me evidently credible, you require in effect that I believe
something which appears to me incredible, and while it does so. I deny not but
that I am bound to believe the truth of many Texts of Scripture the sense
whereof is to me obscure, and the truth of many Articles of faith the manner
whereof is obscure, and to humane understandings incomprehensible; But then it
is to be observed, that not the sense of such Texts, not the manner of these
things is that which I am bound to believe, but the truth of them. But that I
should believe the truth of any thing, the truth whereof cannot be made
evident with an evidence proportionable to the degree of faith required of me,
this I say for any man to be bound to, is unjust and unreasonable, because to
do it is impossible.

8 Ad 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. and 12. Yet though I deny that it is required
of us to be certain in the highest degree, infallibly certain of the truth of
the things which we believe, for this were to know and not believe, neither is
it possible unless our evidence of it, be it natural or supernatural, were
of the highest degree; yet I deny not but, that we are to believe the Religion
of Christ, we are and may be infallibly certain. For first, this is most
certain, that we are in all things to do according to wisdom and reason
rather then against it. Secondly, this is as certain, That wisdom and Reason
require that we should believe these things which are by many degrees more
credible and probable then the contrary. Thirdly, this is as certain, that to
every man who considers impartially what great things may be said for the truth
of Christianity, and what poor things they are which may be said against it,
either for any other Religion or for none at all, it cannot but appear by many
degrees more credible, that Christian Religion, is true then the contrary. And
from all these premises, this conclusion evidently follows, that it is
infallibly certain, that we are firmly to believe the truth of Christian
Religion.

9 Your discourse therefore touching the fourth requisite to faith which is
Prudence, I admit so far as to grant. 1. That if we were required to believe
with certainty (I mean a Moral certainty,) things no way represented as
infallible and certain, (I mean morally,) an unreasonable obedience were
required of us. And so likewise were it, were we required to believe as
absolutely certain, that which is no way represented to us as absolutely
certain. 2. That whom God obliges to believe any thing, he will not fail to
furnish their understandings with such inducements, as are sufficient (if they
be not negligent or perverse) to persuade them to believe. 3. That there is an
abundance of Arguments exceedingly credible, inducing men to believe the Truth
of Christianity: I say so credible, that though they cannot make us evidently
see what we believe, yet they evidently convince that in true wisdom and
prudence, the Articles of it deserve credit, and ought to be accepted as things
revealed by God. 4. That without such reasons and inducements, our choice even
of the true faith, is not to be commended as prudent, but to be condemned of
rashness and levity.

10 But then for your making Prudence, not only a commendation of a believer,
and a justification of his faith, but also essential to it, and part of the
definition of it, in that questionless you were mistaken, and have done as if
being to say what a man is, you should define him, A Reasonable creature that
has skill in Astronomy. For as all Astronomers are men, but all men are not
Astronomers, and therefore Astronomy ought not to be put into the definition of
men, where nothing should have place, but what agrees to all men: So though all
that are truly wise (that is, wise for eternity,) will believe aright, yet many
may believe aright which are not wise. I could wish with all my heart as Moses
did, that all the Lords people could Prophesy: That all that believe the true
Religion were able (according to S. Peter's injunction) to give a reason of the
hope that is in them, a reason why they hope for eternal happiness by this
way rather then any other! neither do I think it any great difficulty that men
of ordinary capacities, if they would give their mind to it, might quickly be
enabled to do so. But should I affirm that all true Believers can do so, I
suppose it would be as much against experience and modesty, as it is against
Truth and Charity, to say as you do, that they which cannot do so, either are
not at all, or to no purpose true believers. And thus we see that the
foundations you build upon, are ruinous and deceitful, and so unfit to support
your Fabric that they destroy one another. I come now to show that your
Arguments to prove Protestants Heretics, are all of the same quality with
your former grounds: which I will do by opposing clear and satisfying Answers
in order to them.

11 Ad. 13. To the first then, delivered by you. 13. That Protestants must be
Heretics, because they opposed diverse Truths propounded for divine by the
Visible Church: I Answer, It is not Heresy to oppose any Truth propounded by
the Church, but only such a Truth as is an essential part of the Gospel of
Christ. 2. The Doctrines which Protestants opposed, were not Truths, but plain
and impious falsehoods: Neither thirdly, were they propounded as Truths by the
Visible Church, but only by a Part of it, and that a corrupted Part.

12 Ad. 14. The next Argument, in the next Particle tell us, That every error
against any doctrine revealed by God is damnable Heresy: Now either Protestants
or the Roman Church must err against the word of God: But the Roman Church we
grant (perforce) does not err damnably, neither can she, because she is the
Catholic Church, which we (you say) confess cannot err damnably: Therefore
Protestants must err against Gods word, and consequently are guilty of formal
Heresy. Whereunto I answer plainly, that there be in this argument almost as
many falsehoods as assertions. For neither is every error against any Doctrine
revealed by God a damnable Heresy, unless it be revealed publicly, and
plainly with a command that all should believe it. 2. D. Potter no where
grants, that the Errors of the Roman Church are not in themselves damnable,
though he hopes by accident they may not actually damn some men amongst you:
and this you your self confess in diverse places of your book, where you tell
us, that he allows no hope of Salvation to those amongst you, Chapter 5.. 41.
whom ignorance cannot excuse. 3. You beg the Question twice in taking for
granted, First that the Roman Church is the truly Catholic Church; which
without much favor can hardly pass for a part of it: And again, that the
Catholic Church cannot fall into any error of it self damnable: for it may
do so, and still be the Catholic Church, if it retain those Truths which may
be an antidote against the malignity of this error, to those that held it out
of a simple un-affected ignorance. Lastly, though the thing be true, yet I
might well require some proof of it from you, that either Protestants or the
Roman Church must err against Gods word. For if their contradiction be your
only reason, then also you or the Dominicans must be Heretics, because you
contradict one another as much as Protestants and Papists.

13 Ad. 15. The third Argument pretends that you have showed already, that the
Visible Church is Judge of Controversies, and therefore infalliable; from
whence you suppose that it follows, that to oppose her, is to oppose God. To
which I answer, that you have said only, and not showed that the Visible
Church is Judge of Controversies. And indeed how can she be Judge of them if
she cannot decide them? And how can she decide them, if it be a question
whether she be Judge of them? That which is questioned it self, cannot with
any sense be pretended to be fit to decide other questions; and much less this
question, whether it have Authority to judge and decide all questions? 2. If
she were Judge, it would not follow that she were infallible, for we have many
Judges in our Courts of Judicature, yet none infallible. Nay you cannot with
any modesty deny, that every man in the world ought to judge for himself, what
Religion is truest, and yet you will not say that every man is infallible. 3.
If the Church were supposed Infallible, yet it would not follow at all, much
less manifestly, that to oppose her declaration is to oppose God: unless you
suppose also that as she is infallible, so by her opposers, she is known or
believed to be so. Lastly, If all this were true (as it is all most false) yet
were it to little purpose, seeing you have omitted to prove that the Visible
Church is the Roman.

14 Ad. 16. In stead of a fourth Argument this is presented to us, That if
Luther were an Heretic, then they that agreed with him must be so. And that
Luther was a formal Heretic, you endeavor to prove by this most formal
Syllogism; To say the Visible Church is not Universal, is properly an Heresy:
But Luthers Reformation was not Universal; Therefore it cannot be excused from
formal Heresy. Whereunto I Answer, first to the first part, that it is no way
impossible that Luther, had he been the inventor and first broacher of a false
Doctrine, (as he was not) might have been a formal Heretic, and yet that
those who follow him may be only so materially and improperly, and indeed no
Heretics. Your own men out of S. Augustine distinguish between Haeretici and
Haereticorum sequaces: And you your self though you pronounce the leaders
among the Arrians formal Heretics, yet confess that Salvian was at least
doubtful whether these Arrians, who in simplicity followed their Teachers,
might not be excused by ignorance. And about this suspension of his you also
seem suspended, for you neither approve nor condemn it. Secondly, to the
second part I say, that had you not presumed upon our ignorance in Logic as
well as Metaphysics and School Divinity, you would never have obtruded upon
us this rope of sand for a formal Syllogism. It is even Cosen German to this,
To deny the Resurrection is properly an Heresy; But Luthers Reformation was
not Universal, Therefore it cannot be excused from formal Heresy! Or to
this, To say the Visible Church is not Universal is properly an Heresy: But
the preaching of the Gospel at the beginning was not Universal; therefore it
cannot be excused from formal Heresy. For as he whose Reformation is but
particular, may yet not deny the Resurrection, so may he also not deny the
Churches Universality. And as the Apostles who preached the Gospel in the
beginning, did believe the Church Universal, though their preaching at the
beginning was not so: So Luther also might and did believe the Church
Universal, though his Reformation were but particular. I say he did believe it
Universal, even in your own sense, that is, Universal de iure, though not
defacto. And as for Universality in fact, he believed the Church much more
Universal then his reformation: For he did conceive (as appears by your own
Allegations out of him) that not only the Part reformed was the true Church,
but also that they were Part of it who needed reformation. Neither did he ever
pretend to make a new Church but to reform the old one. Thirdly and lastly, to
the first proposition of this unsyllogisticall syllogism, I answer, That to
say the true Church is not always defacto universal, is so far from being an
Heresy, that it is a certain truth known to all those that know the world,
and what Religions possess far the greater part of it. Donatus therefore was
not to blame, for saying, that the Church might possibly be confined to Africa;
but for saying without ground, that then it was so. And S. Austine, as he was
in the right, in thinking that the Church was then extended farther then
Africa; so was he in the wrong if he thought that of necessity it always must
be so; but most palpably mistake^ in conceiving that it was then spread over
the whole earth, and known to all nations, which if passion did not trouble
you, and make you forget how lately almost half the world was discovered, and
in what estate it was then found, you would very easily see and confess.

15 Ad. 17. In the next Section you pretend that you have no desire to
prosecute the similitude of Protestants with the Donatists; and yet you do it
with as much spite and malice as could well be devised, but in vain: For
Lucilla might do ill in promoting the Sect of the Donatists, and yet the
Mother and the Daughter, whom you glance at, might do well in ministering
influence (as you phrase it) to Protestants in England. Unless you will
conclude because one woman did one thing ill, therefore no woman can do any
thing well: or because it was ill done to promote one Sect, therefore it must
be ill done, to maintain any.

16 The Donatists might do ill in calling the Chair of Rome the Chair of
Pestilence, and the Roman Church an Harlot; and yet the state of the Church
being altered, Protestants might do well to do so, and therefore though, S.
Austine might perhaps have reason to persecute the Donatists for detracting
from the Church, and calling her harlot, when she was not so; yet you may have
none to threaten D. Potter that you would persecute him (as the Application of
this place intimates you would,) if it were in your power: plainly showing that
you are a cursed cow though your horns be short, seeing the Roman Church is not
now what it was in S. Austines time. And hereof the conclusion of your own book
affords us a very pregnant testimony: where you tell us out of Saint Austine,
that one grand-impediment, which among many kept the seduced followers of the
faction of Donatus from the Churches Communion, was a vile calumny raised
against the Catholics, that they did set some strange thing upon their Altar.
To how many (says S. Austine) did the reports of ill tongues shut up the way
to enter, who said, that we put, I know not what upon the Altar? Our of
detestation of the calumny, and just indignation against it, he would not so
much as name the impiety wherewith they were charged, and therefore by a
Rhetorical figure calls it, I know not what. But compare with him Optatus,
writing of the same matter, and you shall plainly perceive that this ( I know
not what) pretended to be set upon the Altar, was indeed a picture, which the
Donatists (knowing how detestable a thing it was to all Christians at that
time, to set up any Pictures in a Church to worship them, as your new fashion
is) bruited abroad to be done in the Churches of the Catholic Church. But
what answer do S. Austine and Optatus make to this accusation? Do they
confess and maintain it? Do they say, as you would now, It is true we do
set Pictures upon our Altar, and that not only for ornament or memory, but for
worship also; but we do well to do so, and this ought not to trouble you, or
affright you from our Communion? What other answer your Church could now make
to such an objection, is very hard to imagine: And therefore were your Doctrine
the same with the Doctrine of the Fathers in this point, they must have
answered so likewise. But they to the contrary not only deny the crime, but
abhor and detest it. To little purpose therefore do you hunt after these
poor shadows of resemblances between us and the Donatists: unless you could
show an exact resemblance between the present Church of Rome and the Ancient:
which seeing by this, and many other particulars it is demonstrated to be
impossible; that Church which was then a Virgin may be now a Harlot, and that
which was detraction in the Donatists, may be in Protestants a just accusation.

17 As ill success have you in comparing D. Potter with Tyconius whom as S.
Austin finds fault with for continuing in the Donatists separation, having
forsaken the ground of it, the Doctrine of the Churches perishing: so you
condemn the Doctor, for continuing in their Communion, who hold (as you say)
the very same Heresy. But if this were indeed the Doctrine of the Donatists how
is it that you say presently after, that the Protestants who hold the Church of
Christ perished, were worse then Donatists, who said that the Church remained
at least in Africa? These things me thinks, hang not well together. But to let
this pass; The truth is, this difference, for which you would feign raise such
a horrible dissension between D. Potter and his Brethren, if it be well
considered is only in words and the manner of expression: They affirming only,
that the Church perished from its integrity, and fell into many corruptions
which he derlies not: And the Doctor denying only that it fell from its
essence, and became no Church at all, which they affirm not.

18 These therefore are but velitations, and you would seem to make but small
account of them. But the main point you say is, that since Luthers Reformed
Church was not in being for diverse Centuries before Luther, and yet was in the
Apostles time, they must of necessity affirm heretically with the Donatists,
that the true unspotted Church of Christ perished, and that she which remained
on earth, was (O Blasphemy!) anharlot. By which words it seems you are
resolute perpetually to confound True and Unspotted; and to put no difference
between a corrupted Church and none at all. But what is this, but to make no
difference between a diseased and a dead man? Nay what is it but to contradict
your selves, who cannot deny but that sins are as great stains and spots and
deformities in the sight of God, as errors; and confess your Church to be a
congregation of men, whereof every particular, not one excepted, (and
consequently the generality which is nothing but a collection of them) is
polluted and defiled with sin? You proceed.

19 But, say you, The same heresy follows out of D. Potter and other
Protestants, that the Church may err in points not fundamental; because we
have showed that every error against any revealed truth is Heresy and Damnable,
whether the matter be great or small: And how can the Church more truly be said
to perish, then when she is permitted to maintain damnable Heresy? Besides we
will hereafter prove that by every act of Heresy all divine faith is lost, and
to maintain a true Church without any faith, is to fansy a living man without
life. Ans. what you have said before, has been answered before, and what you
shall say hereafter, shall be confuted hereafter. But if it be such a certain
ground, that every error against any one revealed truth is a damnable Heresy,
Then I hope I shall have your leave to subsume, That the Dominicans in your
account must hold a damnable heresy, who hold an error against the immaculate
Conception: which you must needs esteem a revealed truth, or otherwise why are
you so urgent and importunate to have it defined? seeing your rule is, nothing
may be defined unless it be first revealed. But without your leave, I will
make bold to conclude, that if either that or the contrary assertion be a
revealed truth, you or they, choose you whether, must without contradiction
hold a damnable Heresy: if this ground be true that every contradiction of a
revealed Truth is such. And now I dare say, for fear of inconvenience you will
begin to temper the crudenesse of your former assertion, and tell us, that
neither of you are Heretics, because the Truth against which you err though
revealed, is not sufficiently propounded. And so say I, neither is your
Doctrine which Protestants contradict sufficiently propounded. For though it be
plain enough, that your Church proposes it, yet still methinkes, it is as
plain, that your Church's proposition is not sufficient; and I desire you
would not say but prove the contrary. Lastly, to your Question, How can the
Church more truly be said to perish, then when she is permitted to maintain a
damnable Heresy? I Answer, she may be more truly said to perish, when she is
not only permitted to do so, but defacto does maintain a damnable Heresy.
Again, she may be more truly said to perish, when she falls into an Heresy,
which is not only damnable in it self, and ex natura rei, as you speak, but
such an Heresy, the belief of whose contrary Truth is necessary, not only
necessitate praecepti but medii, and therefore the heresy so absolutely and
indispensably destructive of salvation, that no ignorance can excuse it, nor
any general repentance, without a dereliction of it, can beg a pardon for
it. Such an heresy if the Church should fall into, it might be more truly said
to perish, then if it fell only into some heresy of its own nature damnable.
For in that state all the members of it, without exception, all without mercy
must needs perish for ever: In this, although those that might see the truth
and would not, cannot upon any good ground hope for Salvation, yet without
question, it might send many souls to heaven, who would gladly have embraced
the truth, but that they wanted means to discover it. Thirdly and lastly, she
may yet more truly be said to perish when she Apostates from Christ
absolutely, or rejects even those Truths out of which her Heresies may be
reformed; as if she should directly deny Jesus to be the Christ, or the
Scripture to be the Word of God. Toward which state of Perdition it may well
be feared that the Church of Rome does somewhat incline, by her superinducing
upon the rest of her errors the Doctrine of her own infallibility, whereby her
errors are made incurable; and by her pretending that the Scripture is to be
interpreted according to her doctrine, and not her doctrine to be judged of by
Scripture, whereby she makes the Scripture uneffectuall for her Reformation.

20 Ad 18. I was very glad when I heard you say The Holy Scripture and ancient
Fathers do assign Separation from the visible Church as a mark of Heresy:
for I was in good hope, that no Christian would so belly the Scripture, as to
say so of it, unless he could have produced some one Text at least, wherein
this was plainly affirmed, or from whence it might be undoubtedly and
undeniably collected. For assure your self, good Sir, it is a very heinous
crime to say, thus says the Lord, when the Lord does not say so. I expected
therefore some Scripture should have been alleged, wherein it should have
been said, whosoever separates from the Roman Church is an Heretic: or the
Roman Church is infallible, or the Guide of faith: or at least, There shall be
always some visible Church infallible in matters of faith. Some such direction
as this I hoped for: And I pray consider whether I had not reason! The
Evangelists and Apostles who wrote the New Testament, we all suppose were good
men, and very desirous to direct us the surest and plainest way to heaven; we
suppose them likewise very sufficiently instructed by the Spirit of God in all
the necessary points of the Christian faith, and therefore certainly not
ignorant of this Vnum Necessarium, this most necessary point of all others,
without which as you pretend and teach, all faith is no Faith, that is, that
the Church of Rome was designed by God the Guide of Faith. We suppose the^
lastly wise men, especially being assisted by the spirit of wisdom, and such
as knew that a doubtful and questionable Guide was for men's direction as good
as none at all. And after all these suppositions, which I presume no good
Christian will call into question, is it possible that any Christian heart can
believe, that not One amongst them all should ad rei memoriam write this
necessary doctrine plainly so much as once? Certainly in all reason they had
provided much better for the good of Christians if they had wrote this, though
they had writ nothing else. Me thinks the Evangelists undertaking to write the
Gospel of Christ, could not possibly have omitted, any One of them, this most
necessary point of faith, had they known it necessary, (S. Luke especially, who
plainly professes that his intent was to write all things necessary.) Me
thinks S. Paul writing to the Romans could not but have congratulated this
their Privilege to them! Me thinks instead of saying, Your faith is spoken of
all the world over (which you have no reason to be very proud of, for he says
the very same thing to the Thessalonians,) he could not have fayl'd to have
told them once at least in plain terms, that their faith was the Rule for all
the World for ever. But then sure he would have forborne to put them in fear of
an impossibility, as he does in his eleventh Chap. that they also, nay the
whole Church of the Gentiles, if they did not look to their standing, might
fall away to infidelity, as the Jews had done. Me thinks in all his other
Epistles, at least in some, at least in one of them, he could not have failed
to have given the world this direction, had he known it to be a true one, that
all men were to be guided by the Church of Rome, and none to separate from it
under pain of damnation. Me thinks writing so often of Heretics and
Antichrist, he should have given the world this (as you pretend) only sure
preservative from them. How was it possible that S. Peter writing two
Catholic Epistles, mentioning his own departure, writing to preserve
Christians in the faith, should in neither of them commend them to the guidance
of his pretended Successors, the Bishops of Route? How was it possible that S.
James, and S. Jude in their Catholic Epistles should not give this Catholic
direction? Me thinks S. John instead of saying, he that believes that Jesus is
the Christ, is born of God, (The force of which direction, your glosses do
quite enervate, and make unavailable to discern who are the sons of God,)
should have said, He that adheres to the doctrine of the Roman Church, and
lives according to it, he is a good Christian, and by this Mark ye shall know
him! What man not quite out of his wits, if he consider as he should, the
pretended necessity of this doctrine, that without the belief hereof no man
ordinarily can be saved, can possibly force himself to conceive that all these
good and holy men, so desirous of men's salvation, and so well assured of it (as
it is pretended,) should be so deeply and affectedly silent in it, and not One
say it plainly so much as once, but leave it to be collected from uncertain
Principles, by many more uncertain consequences? Certainly he that can judge so
uncharitably of them, it is no marvel if he censure other inferior servants
of Christ's Atheists, and Hypocrites, and what he pleases. Plain places
therefore I did and had reason to look for, when I heard you say, the holy
Scripture assigns Separation from the visible Church as a Mark of Heresy. But
instead hereof what have you brought us, but mere impertinencies? S. John says
of some who pretended to be Christians and were not so, and therefore when it
was for their advantage forsook their Profession, They went out from us, but
they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us. Of some, who before the decree of the Council to the
contrary, were persuaded and accordingly taught, that the convert Gentiles were
to keep the Law of Moses, it is said in the Acts, Some who went out from us.
And again S. Paul in the same book forewarnes the Ephesians that out of them
should arise men speaking perverse things. And from these places which it seems
are the plainest you have, you collect that separation from the Visible Church
is assigned by Scripture as a Mark of Heresy. Which is certainly a strange and
unheard of strain of Logic. Unless you will say that every Text wherein it is
said, that some body goes out from some body, affords an Argument for this
purpose! For the first place there is no certainty that it speaks of
Heretics; but, no Christians, of Antichrists, of such as denied Jesus to be
the Christ: See the place and you shall confess as much. The second place, it
is certain, you must not say it speaks of Heretics, for it speaks only of
some who believed and taught an Error, while it was yet a question and not
evident, and therefore according to your doctrine, no formal Heresy. The third
says indeed, that of the Professors of Christianity, some shall arise that
shall teach Heresy: But not one of them all that says or intimates, that
whosoever separates from the Visible Church; in what state soever, is certainly
an Heretic. Heretics I confess do always do so; But they that do so
are not always Heretics, for perhaps the state of the Church may make it
necessary for them to do so; as Rebels always disobey the command of their
King, yet they which disobey a Kings command (which perhaps may be unjust) are
not presently Rebels.

21 Your Allegations out of Vincentius, Prosper, and Cyprian are liable to
these exceptions. 1. That they are the sayings of men not assisted by the
Spirit of God, and whose Authority your selves will not submit to in all
things. 2. That the first and last are merely impertinent, neither of them
affirming or intimating, that separation from the present Visible Church is a
mark of Heresy: and the former speaking plainly of separation from
Universality, Consent and Antiquity, which if you will presume without proof
that we did and you did not, you beg the Question. For you know we pretend that
we separated only from that present Church which had separated from the
doctrine of the Ancient, and because she had done so, and so far forth as she
had done so and no farther. And lastly the latter part of Prospers words cannot
be generally true, according to your own grounds; For you say a man may be
divided from the Church upon mere Schism without any mixture of Heresy: And a
man may be justly excommunicated for many other sufficient causes besides
Heresy. Lastly, a man may be divided by an unjust excommunication, and be both
before and after a very good Catholic; and therefore you cannot maintain it
Universally true, That he who is divided from the Church is an Heretic, and
Antichrist.

22 In the 19. we have the Authority of eight Fathers urged to prove that the
separation from the Church of Rome as it is the Sea of S. Peter (I conceive you
mean as it is the Particular Church) is the mark of Heresy. Which kind of
argument I might well refuse to answer, unless you would first promise me,
that whenever I should produce as plain sentences, of as great a number of
Fathers, as ancient, for any doctrine whatsoever, that you will subscribe to
it, though it fall out to be contrary to the doctrine of the Roman Church. For
I conceive nothing in the world more unequal or unreasonable, then that you
should press us with such Authorities as these, and think you selves at
liberty from them; and that you should account them Fathers when they are for
you, and Children when they are against you. Yet I would not you should
interpret this as if I had not great assurance, that it is not possible for you
ever to gain this cause at the tribunal of the Fathers, nay not of the Fathers
whose sentences are here alleged. Let us consider them in order, and I doubt
not to make it appear that far the greater part of them, nay all of them that
are any way considerable fall short of your purpose.

23 S. Hierome (you say) writing to Pope Damasus, says, I am in the Communion
of the Chair of Peter: etc. But then I pray consider he says it to Pope
Damasus: and this will much weaken the Authority, with them who know how great
over-truths men usually write to one another in letters. Consider again, that
he says only, that he was then in Communion with the Chair of Peter, Not hat
he always would, or of necessity must be so: for his resolution to the
contrary is too evident out of that which he says elsewhere which shall be
produced hereafter. He says that the Church at that present was built upon
that Rock; but not that only, Nor that always. Nay his judgment as shall
appear is express to the contrary. And so likewise the rest of his
expressions (if we mean to reconcile Hierome with Hierome) must be conceived
as intended by him, of that Bishop and Sea of Rome, at that present time, and
in the present State, and in respect of that doctrine which he there entreats
of. For otherwise had he conceived it necessary for him and all men to conform
their judgments in matters of faith, to the judgment of the Bishop and Church
of Rome, how came it to pass that he chose rather to believe the Epistle to
the Hebrews Canonical, upon the Authority of the Eastern Church, then to
reject it from the Canon upon the Authority of the Roman? How comes it to pass
that he dissented from the Authority of that Church, touching the Canon of the
Old Testament? For if you say, that the Church then consented with S. Hierome,
I fear you will loose your Fort by maintaining your Outworks, and by avoiding
this, run into a greater danger of being forced to confess the present Roman
Church opposite herein to the Ancient. How was it possible, that he should ever
believe that Liberius Bishop of Rome either was or could have been wrought over
by the solicitation of Fortunatianus Bishop of Aquileia, and brought after two
years banishment to subscribe Heresy? Hierom de scrip. Eccle. tit.
Fortunatianus.
Which Act of Liberius though some fondly question, being so vain as to expect
we should rather believe them that lived but yesterday, thirteen hundred years
almost after the thing is said to be done, and speaking for themselves in their
own Cause, rather then the dis-interessed time-fellowes or immediate Successors
of Liberius himself: yet I hope they will not proceed to such a degree of
immodesty, as once to question whether S. Hierome thought so. And if this
cannot be denied, I demand then if he had lived in Liberius his time, could he
or would he have written so to Liberius as he does to Damasus? would he have
said to him, I am in the Communion of the Chair of Peter, I know that the
Church is built upon this Rock, Whosoever gathers not with thee scatters.
Would he then have said, the Roman faith and the Catholic were the same: or,
that the Roman faith received no delusions, no not from an Angel? I suppose he
could not have said so with any coherence to his own belief; and therefore
conceive it undeniable that what he said then to Damasus, he said it (though
perhaps he streyned too high) only of Damasus, and never conceived that his
words would have been extended to all his Predecessors and all his Successors.

24 The same Answer I make to the first place of S. Ambrose, viz. that no more
can be certainly concluded from it, but that the Catholic Bishops and the
Roman Church were then at unity; so that whosoever agreed with the latter could
not then but agree with the former. But that this Rule was perpetual, and that
no man could ever agree with the Catholic Bishops, but he must agree with the
Roman Church, this he says not, nor gives you any ground to conclude from him.
Athanasius when he was excommunicated by Liberius, agreed very ill with the
Roman Church, and yet you will not gainsay, but he agreed well enough with the
Catholic Bishops. The second, I am uncertain what the sense of it is, and
what truth is in it; but most certain that it makes nothing to your present
purpose. For it neither affirms nor imports, that separation from the Roman
Church is a certain mark of Heresy. For the Rights of Communion (whatsoever it
signifies,) might be said to flow from it, if that Church were by
Ecclesiastical Law, the head of all other Churches: But unless it were made
so by divine Authority, and that absolutely, Separation from it could not be a
mark of Heresy.

25 For S. Cyprian all the world knows that he It is confessed by Baronius
Anno. 238. N. 41. By Bellarm. l. 4. de R. Pont. c. 7. Tertia ratio.
resolutely opposed a Decree of the Roman Bishop, and all that adhered to him
in the point of Re. baptizing, which that Church at that time delivered as a
necessary Tradition. So necessary, that by the Bishop of Rome Firmilianus and
other Bishops of Cappadocia, Cilicia and Galatia, and generally all who
persisted in the contrary opinion, Confessed by Baronius An. 258. N. 14. and
15. By Card. Perron. Repl. l. 1. c. 25.
were therefore deprived of the Churches Communion, (which excommunication
could not but involve S. Cyprian, who defended the same opinion as resolutely
as Firmilianus, though Cardinal Perron magisterially and without all color of
proof affirm the contrary,) and Cyprian in particular so far cast off, as
for it to be pronounced by Stephen a false Christ. Again so necessary that the
Bishops which were sent by Cyprian from Africa to Rome, were not admitted to
the Communion of ordinary conference: But all men who were subject to the
Bishop of Romes Authority, were commanded by him not only to deny them the
Churches peace and Communion, but even lodging and entertainment: manifestly
declaring, that they reckoned them among those whom S. John forbids to receive
to house, or to say God speed to them. All these terrors notwithstanding S.
Cyprian holds still his former opinion, and though out of respect to the
Churches peace Vide Con. Cartho apud sur. To. 1.
he judged no man, nor cut off any man from the right of Communion, for
thinking otherwise then he held, yet he conceived Stephen and his adherents,
Bell. l. 2. de Con. c. 5. Aug. ep. 48. and lib. 1. de Bapt. c. 13,
to hold a pernicious error. And S. Austin, (though disputing with the
Donatists he uses some Tergiversatio^ in the point,) yet confesses elsewhere,
that it is not found that Cyprian did ever change his opinion. And so far was
he from conceiving any necessity of doing so, in submitting to the judgment of
the Bishop and Church of Rome, that he plainly professes that no other Bishop,
but our Lord Jesus only, had power to judge (with authority) of his judgment,
and as plainly intimates that Stephen, for usurping such a power, and making
himself a judge over Bishops, was little better then a Tyrant: and as heavily
almost he censures him, and peremptorily opposes him as obstinate in error, in
that very place where he delivers that famous saying, How can he have God for
his Father, who has not the Church for his Mother? little doubting it seems
but a man might have the Church for his Mother, who stood in opposition to the
Church of Rome, and far from thinking what you fondly obtrude upon him, that
to be united to the Roman Church, and to the Church was all one, and that
separation from S. Peter's Chair was a mark, I mean a certain mark, either of
Schism or Heresy. If after all this, you will catch at a phrase or a
complement of S. Cyprians, and with that hope to persuade Protestants, who know
this story as well as their own name, that S. Cyprian did believe that
falsehood could not have access to the Roman Church, and that opposition to it
was the brand of an Heretic: may we not well expect, that you will the next
time you write vouch Luther and Calvin also for Abettors of this Fancy, and
make us poor men believe not only (as you say) that we have no Metaphysics,
Bell. l. 2. de Con. c 5. 1. Canisius in Initio Catech.
but that we have no sense? And when you have done so, it will be no great
difficulty for you, to assure us that we read no such thing in Bellarmine, as
that Cyprian was always accounted in the number of Catholics; nor in
Canisius, that he was a most excellent Doctor and a most glorious Martyr; Sept.
die 14.
nor in your Calendar, that he is a Saint and a Martyr; but that all these are
deceptions of our sight, and that you ever esteemed him a very Schismatique and
an Heretic, as having on him the Mark of the Beast, opposition to the chair
of Peter, Nay that he (what ever he pretended) knew and believed himself to be
so; in as much as he knew (as you pretend,) and esteemed this opposition to be
the Mark of Heresy, and knew himself to stand and stand out in such an
opposition.

26 But we need not seek so far for matter to refute the vanity of this
pretense. Let the reader but peruse this very Epistle out of which this
sentence is alleged, and he shall need no farther satisfaction against it. For
he shall find, first, that you have helped the dice a little with a false, or
at least with a very bold and streined Translation: for S. Cyprian says not to
whom falsehood cannot have access, by which many of your favorable Readers I
doubt understood, that Cyprian had exempted that Church from a possibility of
error, but to whom perfidiousnesse cannot have access, meaning by
perfidiousnesse in the abstract, according to a common figure of speech, those
perfidious Schismatiques whom he there complains of: and of these by a
Rhetorical insinuation, he says that with such good Christians as the Romans
were, it was not possible they should find favorable entertainment. Not that
he conceived it any way impossible they should do so, for the very writing
this Epistle, and many passages in it, plainly show the contrary: But because
he was confident, or at least would seem to be confident, they never would,
and so by his good opinion and confidence in the Romans, lay an obligation upon
them, to do as he presumed they would do; as also in the end of his Epistle,
he says even of the people of the Church of Rome, that being defended by the
providence of their Bishop, nay by their own Vigilance sufficiently guarded,
they could not be taken nor deceived with the poisons of Heretics. Not that
indeed he thought either this or the former any way impossible: For to what
purpose, but for prevention hereof, did he write this long and accurate and
vehement Epistle to Cornelius? which sure had been most vainly done, to prevent
that which he knew or believed impossible! Or how can this consist with his
taking notice in the beginning of it, that Cornelius was somewhat moved and
wrought upon by the attempts of his Adversaries, with his reprehending him for
being so, and with his vehement exhorting him to courage and constancy, or with
his request to him, in the conclusion of his Epistle, that it should be read
publicly to the whole Clergy and Laity of Rome, to the intent, that if any
contagion of their poisoned speech and pestiferous semination, had crept in
amongst them, it might be wholly taken away from the ears and the hearts of
the Brethren, and that the entire and sincere charity of good men might be
purged from all dross of heretical detraction: Or lastly with his vehement
persuasions to them to decline for the time to come, and resolutely avoid their
word and conference, because their speech crept as a canker, as the Apostle
says; because evil communication would corrupt good natures, because wicked
men carry perdition in their mouths, and hide fire in their lips? All which
had been but vain and ridiculous pagentry, had he verily believed the Romans
such inaccessible Forts, such immovable Rocks, as the former sentences would
seem to import, if we will expound them rigidly and strictly, according to the
exigence of the words, and not allow him who was a professed Master of the
Art, to have used here a little Rhetorique, and to say, That could not be,
whereof he had no absolute certainty but that it might be, but only had, or
would seem to have a great confidence that it never would be, ut fides habita
fidem obligaret, that he professing to be confident of the Romans, might lay an
obligation upon them to do as he promised himself they would do. For as for
joining the Principal Church and the Chair of Peter, how that will serve for
your present purpose, of proving separation from the Roman Church a mark of
Heresy, I suppose it is hard to understand! Nor indeed how it will advantage
you in any other design against us, who do not altogether deny, but that the
Church of Rome might be called the Chair of Peter, in regard he is said to
have preached the Gospel there, and the principal Church, because the City
was the Principal and Imperial City: which Prerogative of the City, if we
believe the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon was the ground and occasion,
why the Fathers of former time (I pray observe,) conferred upon this Church,
this Prerogative above other Churches.

27 And as far am I from understanding, how you can collect from the other
sentence, that to communicate with the Church and Pope of Rome, and to
communicate with the Catholic Church, is always (for that is your Assumpt)
one and the same thing. S. Cyprian speaks not of the Church of Rome at all, but
of the Bishop only, who when he does communicate with the Catholic Church, as
Cornelius at that time did, then whosoever communicates with him, cannot but
communicate with the Catholic Church: and then by accident one may truly say,
such a one communicates with you, that is, with the Catholic Church, and that
to communicate with him is to communicate with the Catholic Church. As if
Titius and Sompronius be together, he that is in company with Titius, cannot
but be at that time in company with Sempronius. As if a General be marching to
some place with an Army, he that then is with the General must at that time be
with the Army: And a man may say without absurdity, such a time I was with the
General, that is, with the Army, and that to be with the General is to be
with the Army. Or as if a man's hand be joined to his body, the finger which is
joined to the hand is joined to the body, and a man may say truly of it, this
finger is joined to the hand, that is, to the body, and to be joined to the
hand is to be joined to the Body; because all these things are by accident
true. And yet I hope you would not deny, but the finger might possibly be
joined to the hand, and yet not to the Body, the hand being cut off from the
Body; and a man might another time, be with his General and not with his Army,
he being absent from the Army. And therefore by like Reason your collection is
sophistical, being in effect but this, to communicate with such a Bishop of
Rome, who did communicate with the Catholic Church, was to Communicate with
the Catholic Church, therefore absolutely and always it must be true, that
to communicate with him, is by consequent to communicate with the Catholic
Church, and to be divided from his Communion, is to be an Heretic.

28 In urging the place of Irenaeus you have showed much more ingenuity then
many of your Fellows. For whereas they usually begin at, Declaring the
Tradition of the etc. and conceal what goes before, you have set it down,
though not so completely as you should have done, yet sufficiently to show,
that what Authority in the matter he attributed to the Roman Church in
particular, the same for the kind (though perhaps not in the same degree) he
attributed to all other Apostolic Churches. Either therefore you must say
that he conceived the Testimony of other Apostolic Churches divine and
infallible, (which certainly he did not, neither do you pretend he did, and if
he had, the confessed Errors and Heresies which after they fell into, would
demonstrate plainly that he had erred,) or else that he conceived the testimony
of the Roman Church only humane and credible, though perhaps more credible then
any one Church beside, (as one man's Testimony is more credible then another;)
but certainly much more Credible, which was enough for his purpose, then that
secret Tradition, to which those Heretics pretended, against whom he wrote,
overbearing them with an argument of their own kind, far stronger then their
own. Now if Irenaeus thought the Testimony of the Roman Church in this point
only humane and fallible, then surely he could never think, either adhering to
it a certain mark of a Catholic, or separation from it a certain mark of a
Heretic.

29 Again, whereas your great Achilles Cardinal Perron in French, as also his
noble Translatresse misled by him, in English, knowing that men's resorting to
Rome would do his cause little service, has made bold with the Latin tongue,
as he does very often with the Greek, and rendered Ad hanc Ecclesiam necesse est
omnem convenire Ecclesiam, To this Church it is necessary that every Church
should agree, you have Translated it, as it should be, to this Church it is
necessary that all Churches resort: wherein you have showed more sincerity, and
have had more regard to make the Author speak sense. For if he had said, By
showing the Tradition of the Roman Church we confound all Heretics, For to
this Church, all Churches must agree, what had this been, but to give for a
reason, that which was more questionable then the thing in question: as being
neither evident in it self, and plainly denied by his adversaries, and not at
all proved nor offered to be proved here or elsewhere by Irenaeus. To speak
thus therefore had been weak and ridiculous. But on the other side, if we
conceive him to say thus, You Heretics decline a trial of your Doctrine by
Scripture, as being corrupted and imperfect, and not fit to determine
Controversies, without recourse to Tradition, and instead hereof, you fly for
refuge to a secret Tradition, which you pretend that you received from your
Ancestors, and they from the Apostles: certainly your calumnies against
Scripture are most unjust and unreasonable, but yet moreover, assure your
selves, that if you will be tried by Tradition, even by that also you will be
overthrown. For our Tradition is far more famous, more constant, and in all
respects more credible, then that which you pretend to. It were easy for me, to
muster up against you the uninterrupted successions of all the Churches founded
by the Apostles, all conspiring in their Testimonies against you: But because
it were too long to number up the Successions of all Churches, I will content
my self with the Tradition of the most ancient and most glorious Church of
Rome, which alone is sufficient for the confutation and confusion of your
Doctrine, as being in credit and authority, as far beyond the Tradition you
build upon, as the light of the Sun, is beyond the light of the Gloworme. For
to this Church, by reason it is placed in the Imperial City, whither all men's
affairs do necessarily draw them, or by reason of the powerful Principality
it has over all the adjacent Churches, there is, and always has been a
necessity of a perpetual recourse of all the faithful round about: who if
there had been any alteration in the Church of Rome, could not in all
probability but have observed it. But they to the contrary, have always
observed in this Church the very Tradition which came from the Apostles and no
other. I say if we conceive his meaning thus, his words will be intelligible
and rational: which if in stead of resort we put in agree will be quite lost.
Herein therefore we have been beholding to your honesty, which makes me think
you did not wittingly falsify, but only twice in this sentence mistake Vndique
for Vbique and Translate it, every where, and of what place soever, in stead of
round about. For that it was necessary for all the faithful of what place
soever to resort to Rome is not true. That the Apostolic Tradition has
always been conserved there from those who are every where, is not Sense. Now
instead of conservata read observata, as in all probability it should be, and
translate undique truly round about, and then the sense will be both plain and
good; for then it must be rendered thus, For to this Church, by reason of a more
powerful principality, there is a necessity that all the Churches, that is,
all the faithful round about, should resort, in which the Apostolic
Tradition has been always observed by those who were round about. If any man
say I have been too bold a Critic in substituting observata instead of
conseruata, I desire him to know, that the conjecture is not mine, and
therefore as I expect no praise for it, so I hope I shall be far from
censure. But I would entreat him to consider, whether it be not likely that the
same greek word signifying observo and conservo, the Translater of Irenaeus who
could hardly speak Latin, might not easily mistake, and translate, (...)
conservata est, instead of observata est; Or whether it be not likely, that
those men which ancienly wrote Books, and understood them nor, might not easily
commit such an error; Or whether the sense of the place can be salved any other
way; if it can in Gods name let it, if not, I hope he is not to be condemned,
who with such a little alteration has made that sense which he found non sense.

30 But whether you will have it Observata or Conservata, the new sumpsimus or
the old mumpsimus, possibly it may be something to Irenaus but to us or our
cause it is no way material. For if the rest be rightly translated, neither
will Conservata afford you any argument against us, nor Observata help us to
any evasion. For though at the first hearing the glorious attributes here
given, (and that justly) to the Church of Rome, the confounding Heretics with
her tradition, and saying it is necessary for all Churches to resort to her,
may sound like Arguments for you: yet he that is attentive I hope will easily
discover, that it might be good and rational in Irenaeus having to do with
Heretics, who, somewhat like those who would be the only Catholics,
declining a trial by Scripture as not containing the Truth of Christ
perfectly, and not fit to decide Controversies without recourse to Tradition: I
say he will easily perceive that it might be rational in Iraeneus to urge them
with any Tradition of more credit then their own, especially a Tradition
consonant to Scripture, and even contained in it; and yet that it may be
irrational in you to urge us, who do not decline Scripture but appeal to it
as a perfect rule of faith, with a Tradition which we pretend is many ways
repugnant to Scripture, and repugnant to a Tradition far more general then it
self, which gives Testimony to Scripture, and lastly repugnant to it self as
giving attestation both to Scripture and to Doctrines plainly contrary to
Scripture. Secondly that the Authority of the Roman Church was then a far
greater Argument of the Truth of her Tradition when it was United with all
other Apostolic Churches, then now when it is divided from them, according to
that of Tertullian, Had the Churches erred they would have varied, but that
which is the same in all, cannot be error but Tradition; and therefore though
Irenaeus his Argument may be very probable, yet yours may be worth nothing.
Thirdly, that foureteen hundred years may have made a great deal of
alteration in the Roman Church: as Rivers, though near the fountain they may
retain their native and unmixt syncerity, yet in long progress cannot but
take in much mixture that came not from the fountain. And therefore the Roman
Tradition though then pure, may now be corrupt and impure: and so this Argument
(being one of those things which are the worse for wearing) might in Irenaeus
his time be strong and vigorous, and after declining and decaying may long
since have fallen to nothing. Especially considering that Irenaeus plays the
Historian only and not the Prophet, and says only, that the Apostolic
Tradition had been always there as in other Apostolic Churches conserved or
observed, choose you whether, but that it should be always so, he says not,
neither had he any warrant. He knew well enough that there was foretold a great
falling away of the Churches of Christ to Antichrist: that the Roman Church in
particular was forewarned that she also, Romans 11.
nay the whole Church of the Gentiles, might fall if they look not to their
standing: and therefore to secure her that she should stand for ever, he had no
reason, nor Authority. Fourthly, that it appears manifestly out of this book
of Irenaeus quoted by you, that the doctrine of the Chiliasts was in his
judgment Apostolic Tradition, as also it was esteemed (for ought appears to
the contrary) by all the Doctors, and Saints, and Martyrs of or about his time,
for all that speak of it, or whose judgments in the point are any way recorded,
are for it: and Iustine Martyr professes that all good and Orthodoxe
Christians of his time believed it, In Dial. cunt. Tryphon.
and those that did not, he reckons amongst Heretics. Now I demand, was this
Tradition one of those that was conserved, and observed in the Church of Rome,
or was it not? If not, had Irenaeus known so much, he must have retracted this
commendation of that Church. If it was, then the Tradition of the present
Church of Rome contradicts the Ancient, and accounts it Heretical, and then
sure it can be no certain note of Heresy to depart from them, who have
departed from themselves, and prove themselves subject unto Error by holding
contradictions. Fifthly and lastly, that out of the Story of the Church it is as
manifest as the light at noone, that though Irenaeus did esteem the Roman
Tradition, a great Argument of the doctrine which he there delivers and defends
against the Heretics of his time viz: that there was one God, yet he was very
far from thinking that Church was, and ever should be a safe keeper, and an
infallible witness of Tradition in general: Inasmuch as in his own life, his
action proclaimed the contrary. For when Victor Bishop of Rome obtruded the
Roman Tradition touching the time of Easter upon the Asian Bishops under the
pain of Excommunication, and damnation, Irenaeus, and all the other Western
Bishops, though agreeing with him in his observation yet sharply reprehended
him for excommunicating the Asian Bishops for their disagreeing, plainly
showing, that they esteemed that not a necessary doctrine and a sufficient
ground of excommunication, which the Bishop of Rome and his adherents did so
account of: For otherwise how could they have reprehended him for
excommunicating them, had they conceived the cause of his excommunication just
and sufficient? And besides evidently declaring that they esteemed not
separation from the Roman Church a certain mark of Heresy, seeing they
esteemed not them Heretics though separated and cut off from the Roman Church.

Cardinal Perron to avoid the stroke of this conuincing argument, raises a
cloud of eloquent words, Lib. 3 cap. 2. Or this reply to King James. C. 2.. 32.
which because you borrow them of him in your Second part, I will here insert,
and with short censures dispell, and let his Idolaters see that Truth is not
afraid of Giants: His words are these.

The first instance then that Calvin alleges against the Popes censures, is
taken from Eusebius (a) an Arrian author, and from Ruffinus (b) enemy to the
Roman Church his translator; who writ, (c) that S. IRENEVS reprehended Pope
Victor for having excommunicated the Churches of Asia for the question of the
day of Pasche, which they observed according to a particular tradition that S.
JOHN had introduced (d) for a time in their Provinces, because of the
neighborhood of the Jews, and to bury the Synagogue with honor, and not
according to the universal tradition of the Apostles. Calv. ubi sup^a.
Irenaeus (says Calvin) reprehended Pope Victor bitterly, because for a light
cause he had moved a great and perilous contention in the Church. There is
this in the text that Calvin produces, He reprehended him, that he had not
done well, to cut off from the body of unity, Ruffin. in verse. hist. Eccl. Eus.
l. 5. c. 24.
so many and so great Churches. But against whom makes this, but (e) against
those that object it? for who sees not, that S. IRENEVS, does not there
reprehend the Pope for the (f) want of power, but for the ill use of his power;
and does not reproach to the Pope, that he could not excommunicate the Asians,
but admonishes him, that for (g) so small a cause he should not have cut off
so many Provinces from the body of the Church? Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24.
Iraeneus (says Eusebius) did fitly exhort Pope Victor, Kuffin. b. c. 24.
that he should not cut off all the Churches of God which held this ancient
tradition. And Ruffinus translating and envenoming Eusebius says. Iren. l. 3.
c. 3. 1. Book* (...) 25
He questioned Victor, that he had not done well in cutting off from the body
of unity so many and so great Churches of God* And in truth, how could S.
IRENEUS have reprehended the Pope for want of power; he that cries: To the
Roman Church, because of a more powerful principality; (that is to say) as
above appears, (h) because of a principality more powerful then the
temporal: or (as we have expounded other where) because of a more powerful
Original: (i) it is necessary that every Church should agree? And (k) therefore
also S. IRENEVS alleges not to Pope Victor the example of him, and of the
other Bishops of the Gauls assembled in a council holden expressly for this
effect who had not excommunicated the Asians, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. l. 22*
nor the example of Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, and of the Bishops of
Palestina assembled in an other Council, holden expressly for the same
effect, who had not excommunicated them, nor the example of Palmas, and of the
other Bishops of Pontus assembled in the same manner, and for the same cause in
the Region of Pontus, who had not excommunicated them, Iren. apud Eusebius. hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 26.
but only alleadges to him the example of the Popes his predecessors: The
Prelates (says he) who have presided before Soter in the Church where thou
presidest, Anisius, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus, and Sixtus, have not observed
this custom, etc. and nevertheless none of those that observed it, have been
excommunicated. And yet, O admirable providence of God, the (l) success of the
after ages showed, that even in the use of his power, the Popes proceeding was
just. For after the death of Victor, the Councels of Nicea, Conc. Antioch. c. 1.
of Constantinople, and of Ephesus, excommunicated again those that held the
same custom with the provinces, Conc. Constable. c. 7.
that the Pope had excommunicated, and placed them in the Catalogue of
heretics, Conc. Ephesians. p. 2. act. ^.
under the titles of heretics Quarto decumans!

But to this instance Calvin's Sect do annex two new observations; the first,
that the Pope having threatened the Bishops of Asia to excommunicate them,
Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus and Metropolitan of Asia, despised the Popes
threats, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 24. Hieron. in script. Eccl. in Polyer.
as it appears by the answer of the same Polycrates to Pope Victor, which is
inserted in the writings of Eusebius, and of S. IEROM, and which S. IEROM
seems to approve, when he says, he reports it to show the spirit and
authority of the man. And the second, that when the Pope pronounced anciently
his excommunications, he did no other thing but separate himself from the
communion of those that he excommunicated, and did not thereby separate them
from the universal communion of the Church. To the first then we say, that so
far is this Epistle of Polycrates from abating and deminishing the Popes
authority, that contrary wise it greatly magnifies and exalts it. For although
Polycrates blinded with the love of the custom of his nation, which he
believed to be grounded upon the word of God, who had assigned the fourteenth
of the Month of March for the observation of the Pasche, and upon the example
of S. JOHN'S tradition maintains it obstinately; Nevertheless, this that he
answers, speaking in his own name, Exodus 12.
and in the name of the Council of the Bishops of Asia, Hieronym, ubi supra.
to whom he presided; I fear not those that threaten us, for my elders have
said, it is better to obey God then man. Does it not show, that had it not
been, that he believed the Popes threat, was against the express word of God,
there had been cause to fear it, and he had been obliged to obey him; for (m)
who knows not, that this answer; it is better to obey God then men, is not to
be made but to those, whom we were obliged to obey, if their commandments were
not contrary to the commandments of God; And that he adds, that he had called
the Bishops of Asia, to a National Council, being (n) summoned to it by the
Pope; does it not insinuate, that the other Councels whereof Eusebius speaks,
that were holden about this matter, Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 23.
through all the provinces of the Earth, and particularly that of Palestina,
which if you believe the act that Beda said came to his hands, Beda in frag. de
Aequinoctio. ve^nali.
Theophilus Archbishop of Cesarea had called by the auctority of Victor, were
holden at the instance of the Pope, and consequently that the Pope was the
first mover of the universal Church? And that the Councels of Nicea, of
Constantinople of Ephesus embraced the censure of Victor, and excommunicated
those that observed the custom of Polycrates: does it not prove, that it was
not the Pope but (o) Polycrates that was deceived, in believing that the Popes
commandment, was against Gods commandment? And that S. IEROM himself
celebrates the Paschall Homelies of Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, which
followed the order of Nicea concerning the Pasche; Does it not justify, that
when S. IEROM says; that he reports the Epistle of Polycrates, to show the
spirit, and authority of the man he intends by authority, not authority of
right, but of fact* that is to say, the credit that Polycrates had amongst the
Asians and other Quarto decimans?

These are the Cardinal words, The most material and considerable passages
whereof to save the trouble of repetition, I have noted with letters of
reference: whereunto my answers noted respectively with the same letters follow
now in order.

(a) If Eusebius were an Arrian author, It is nothing to the purpose; what he
writes there is no Arrianisme, nor any thing toward it. Never any error was
imputed to the Arrians for denying the Authority or the infallibility of the
Bishop or Church of Rome. Besides what Eusebius says, he says out of
Irenaeus: Neither does or can the Cardinal deny the story to be true and
therefore he goes about by indirect Arts to foil it and cast a blurre upon it.
Lastly, whenever Eusebius says any thing, which the Cardinal thinks for
the advantage of his side, he cites him, and then he is no Arrian: or at least
he would not take that for an answer to the arguments he draws out of him.

(b) That Ruffinus was enemy to the Roman Church, is said, but not proved,
neither can it be.

(c) Eusebius says the same also of caeteri omnes Episcopi, all the other
Bishops: that they advised Victor to keep those things, that belonged to peace
and unity, and that they sharply reprehended Victor, for having done otherwise.

(d) This is said, but no offer made of any proof of it: The Cardinal thinks
we must take every thing upon his word. They to whom the Tradition was
delivered, Polyerates and the Asian Bishops, knew no such matter, nay professed
the contrary. And who is more likely to know the Truth, they which lived within
two ages of the fountain of it, or the Cardinal who lived sixteen ages after
it?

(e) How can it make against those that object it: seeing it is evident from
Irenaeus his Reprehension, that he thought Victor and the Roman Church, no
infallible nor sufficient Judge, of what was necessary to be believed and done,
what not: what was Universal Tradition, what not: what was a sufficient ground
of Excommunication and what not: and consequently, that there was no such
necessity as is pretended, that all other Churches, should in matters of faith,
conform themselves to the Church of Rome?

(f) This is to suppose that Excommunication, is an Act, or Argument, or sign
of Power and Authority in the party excommunicating, over the party
excommunicated, whereas it is undeniably evident out of the Church Story, that
it was often used by Equals upon Equals, and by Inferiors upon Superiors, if
the equals or inferiors, thought their equals or superiors did any thing
which deserved it.

(g) And what is this but to confess, that they thought that a small cause of
excommunication and unsufficient, which Victor and his adherents thought great
and sufficient? And consequently, that Victor and his Part declared that to be
a matter of faith and of necessity, which they thought not so; and where was
then their conformity?

(h) True, you have so expounded it, but not proved nor offered any proof of
your exception. This also we must take upon your Authority. Irenaeus speaks not
one word of any other power, to which he compares or before which he preferres
the power of the Roman Church. And it is evident out of the Council of
Chalcedon, Can. 2^.
that all the Principality which it had, was given it (not by God, but) by the
Church, in regard it was seated in the Imperial City. Whereupon when
afterward Constantinople was the Imperial City, they decreed that that Chuch
should have equal Privileges and dignity and pre-eminence with the Church of
Rome. All the Fathers agreed in this decree, saving only the Legates of the
Bishop of Rome: showing plainly that they never thought of any Supremacy given
the Bishops of Rome by God, or grounded upon Scripture, but only by the Church,
and therefore alterable at the Churches pleasure.

(i) This is falsely translated. Convenire ad Romanam Ecclesiam, every body
knows signifies no more but to resort or come to the Roman Church: which then
there was a necessity that men should do, because that the affairs of the
Empire were transacted in that place. But yet Irenaeus says not so of every
Church simply, which had not been true, but only of the adjacent Churches, for
so he expounds himself in saying, To this Church it is necessary that every
Church, that is, all the faithful round about should resort. With much more
reason therefore we return the Argument thus, Had Irenaeus thought that all
Churches must of necessity agree with the Roman, how could he and all other
Bishops have then pronounced, that to be no matter of Faith, no sufficient
ground of Excommunication, which Victor and his adherents thought to be so? And
how then could they have reprehended Victor so much, for the ill use of his
power, as Cardinal Perron confesses they did, seeing if that was true which is
pretended, in this also as well as other things, it was necessary for them to
agree with the Church of Rome?

Some there are that say, but more wittily then truly, that all Cardinal
Bellarmines works, are so consonant to themselves, as if he had written them in
two hours. Had Cardinal Perron wrote his book in two hours, sure he would
not have done that here in the middle of the Book, which he condemns in the
beginning of it. For here he urges a consequence, drawn from the mistaken
words of Irenaeus against his lively and actual practice: which proceeding,
there he justly condemns of evident injustice. His words are In his Letter to
Casaubon toward the end.
, For who knows not that it is too great an injustice to allege consequences
from passages, and even those ill interpreted and misunderstood, and in whose
illation there is always some Paralogisme hid against the express words, and
the lively and actual practice of the same Fathers from whom they are
collected: and that may be good, to take the Fathers for Adversaries, and to
accuse them for want of sense or memory: but not to take them for Judges, and
to submit themselves to the observation of what they have believed and
practiced.

(k) This is nothing to the purpose: he might choose these examples, not as of
greater force and authority in themselves, but as fitter to be employed against
Victor, as domestique examples, are fitter and more effectual then foreign:
and for his omitting to press him with his own example and others, to what
purpose had it been to use them, seeing their Letters sent to Victor from all
parts, wherein they reprehend his presumption, showed him sufficiently, that
their example was against him. But besides, he that reads Irenaeus his Letter
shall see, that in the matter of the Lent Fast, and the great variety about the
celebration of it, which he paralels with this of Easter, he presses Victor
with the example of himself and others, not Bishops of Rome; both they (says
he speaking of other Bishops) notwithstanding this difference, retained peace
among themselves, and we also among our selves retain it; inferring from his
example, that Victor also ought to do so.

(l) If the Popes proceeding was just, then the Churches of Asia were indeed,
and in the sight of God excommunicate, and out of the state of Salvation: which
Irenaeus and all the other ancient Bishops never thought. And if they were so,
why do you account them Saints and Martyrs? But the truth is, that these
Counsels did no way show the Popes proceedings just, but rather the contrary.
For though they settled an uniformity in this matter, yet they settled it as a
matter formerly indifferent, and not as a matter of faith or necessity, as it
is evident out of In ep. ad. Episcopos in Africa^ Where he clearly shows that
this question was not a question of faith by saying, The C^uncello^ Nice was
celebrated, by occasion of the Arrian heresy and the difference about Easter.
In so much (...) they in (...) and M^sopotamia, did ^^ffer herein from us, and
kept this feast on the same day with the I^wes: But thanks be to God* an
agreement was made, as concerning the Faith, so (...) concerning this holy
(...).
Athanasius; and consequently they rather declare Victors proceeding unjust,
who excommunicated so many Churches, for differing from him in an indifferent
matter.

(m) It seems then Polycrates might be a Saint and a Martyr, and yet think the
commands of the Roman Church enjoined upon pain of damnation, contrary to the
commandments of God. Besides S. Peter himself, the head of the Church, the
Vicar of Christ (as you pretend) made this very answer to the High Priest, yet
I hope you will not say, he was his inferior and obliged to obey him. Lastly,
who sees not, that when the Pope commandes us any thing unjust, as to
communicate Lay men in one kind, to use the Latin service, we may very fitly
say to him, it is better to obey God then men, and yet never think of any
authority he has over us?

(n) Between requesting and summoning, methinkes there should be some
difference, and Polycrates says no more, but that he was requested by the
Church of Rome to call them, and did so. Here then (as very often) the
Cardinal is feign to help the dice with a false translation, and his pretense
being false, every one must see, that that which he pretends to be insinuated
by it, is clearly inconsequent.

(o) Polycrates was deceived, if he believed it to be against Gods
commandment, and the Pope deceived as much, in thinking it to be Gods
commandment, for it was neither the one nor the other, but an indifferent
matter, wherein God had not interposed his Authority. Neither did the Council
of Nice embrace the censure of Victor, by acknowledging his Excommunication to
be just and well grounded, for which the Cardinal neither does pretend, nor
can produce any proof, any way comparable to the fore-alleaged words of
Athanasius testifying the contrary; though peradventure, having settled the
observation, and reduced it to an uniformity, they might excommunicate those
who afterward should trouble the Churches peace for an indifferent matter. And
thus much for Irenaeus.

31 I come now to S. Austine, and to the first place out of him, where he
seems to say, that the Succession in the Sea of Peter, was the Rock which our
Savior meant when he said, upon this Rock, etc. I answer, first we have no
reason to be confident of the truth hereof, because S. Austine himself was
not, but retracts it as uncertain, and leaves to the Reader whether he will
think that, or another more probable. Retr. l. 1. c. 26. Secondly, what he
says of the Succession in the Roman Church in this place, he says it else
where, of all the Successions in all other Apostolic Churches. Thirdly, that
as in this place he urges the Donatists with separation from the Roman Church,
as an argument of their Error: So elsewhere he presses them with their
Separation from other Apostolic Churches, nay more from these then from that,
because in Rome the Donatists had a Bishop, though not a perpetual Succession
of them, but in other Apostolic Churches they wanted both. These scattered
men (says he of the Donatists Epist. 165.) read in the holy books the
Churches to which the Apostles wrote, and have no Bishop in them: But what is
more perverse and mad, then to the Lectors reading these Epistles to say, Peace
with you, and to separate from the peace of these Churches, to which these
Epistles were written? So Optatus having done you (as it might seem) great
service, in upbraiding the Donatists as Schismatiques, because they had not
Communion with the Church of Rome, overthrowes and undoes it all again, and as
it were with a sponge wipes out all that he had said for you, by adding after,
that they were Schismatiques, because They had not the fellowship of Communion
with the seven Churches of Asia, to which S. John writes: whereof he pronounces
confidently, (though I know not upon what ground) (...) septem Ecclesias
quicquid for is est, alienum est. Now I pray tell me, do you esteem the
Authority of these Fathers a sufficient assurance, that separation from these
other Apostolic Churches, was a certain mark of Heresy, or not? If so, then
your Church has been for many Ages heretical. If not, how is their authority,
a greater argument for the Roman, then for the other Churches? If you say, they
conceived separation from these Churches a note of Schism, only when they were
united to the Roman: so also they might conceive of the Roman, only when it was
united to them. If you say, they urged this only as a probable, and not as a
certain Argument, so also they might do that. In a word, whatsoever answer you
can devise to show, that these Fathers made not separation from these other
Churches a mark of Heresy, apply that to your own Argument, and it will be
satisfied.

32 The other place is evidently impertinent to the present question, nor is
there in it any thing but this, That Caecilian might contemn the multitude of
his adversaries, because those that were united with him were more, and of more
account then those that were against him. Had he preferred the Roman Church
alone, before Caecilians enemies, this had been little, but something; but when
other Countries from which the Gospel came first into Africa, are joined in
this Patent, with the Church of Rome, how she can build any singular privilege
upon it I am yet to learn! Neither do I see what can be concluded from it,
but that in the Roman Church was the Principality of an You do ill to
translate it, the Principality of the Sea Apostolic, as if there were but
one: whereas S. Austine presently after speaks of Apostolical Churches, in the
plural number; and makes the Bishops of the, joint Commisioners for the
judging of Ecclesi^sticall causes.
Apostolic Sea, which no man doubts: or that the Roman Church was not the
Mother Church, because the Gospel came first into Africa, not from her, but
from other Churches.

33 Thus you see his words make very little, or indeed nothing for you* But now
his Action, which according to Cardinal Perrons rule, is much more to be
regarded then his words, as not being so obnoxious to misinterpretatio^, I mean
his famous opposition of three Bishops of Rome in succession, touching the
great question of Appeals, wherein he and the rest of the African Bishops
proceeded so far in the first or second Milevitan Council, as to The words
of the Decree (which also Bellarmine l, 1. de Matrim c. 17. assures us to have
bin ^erm'd by S. Austine) are these. Si qui (Africani,) ab Epis^^pis
provocandum putaverint, non nisi ad African^ provocent Concilia, vel ad
Primates provinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina autem, qui putaverit appellandum,
a nullo intra Africa^ in Communionem suscipiatur. This Decree is by Gratian
most impudently corrupted. For whereas the Fathers of that Council intended it
particularly against the Church of Rome, he tells us they forbad Appeals to All
excepting only the Church of Rome.
decree any African Excommunicate, that should appeal to any man out of
Africa, and therein continued resolute unto death: I say this famous Action of
his, makes clearly and evidently and infinitely against you. For had Boniface,
and the rest of the African Bishops, a great part whereof were Saints and
Martyrs, believed as an Article of faith, that Union and Conformity with the
doctrine of the Roman Church, in all things which she held necessary, was a
certain note of a good Catholic, and by Gods command necessary to Salvation,
how was it possible they should have opposed it in this? Unless you will say
they were all so foolish as to believe at once direct contradictions, viz. that
conformity to the Roman Church was necessary in all points, and not necessary
in this: or else so horribly impious, as believing this doctrine of the Roman
Church true, and her power to receive Appeals derived from divine Authority,
notwithstanding to oppose and condemn it, and to Anathematize all those
Africans, of what condition soever, that should appeal unto it. I say of what
condition soever: For it is evident, that they concluded in their
determination, Bishops as well as the inferior Clergy and Laity: And Cardinal
Perrons pretense of the contrary, is a shameless falsehood, (...)
repugnant to the plain words of the Remonstrance of the African Bishops to
Celestine Bishop of Rome.

34 Your allegation of Tertullian is a manifest conviction of your want of
syncerity: For you produce with great ostentation what he says of the Church
of Rome, but you and your fellows always conceal and dissemble, that
immediately before these words he attributes as much for point of direction to
any other Apostolic Church, and that as he sends them to Rome who lived near
Italy, so those near Achaia he sends to Corinth, those about Macedonia to
Philippi, and Thessalonica, those of Asia to Ephesus. His words are, Go to now
thou that wilt better employ thy curiosity in the business of thy salvation,
run over the Apostolical Churches, wherein the Chaires of the Apostles are yet
sat upon in their places, wherein their Authentic Epistles are recited,
sounding out the voice, and representing the face of of every one! Is Achaia
near thee? there thou have Corinth: If thou art not far from Macedonia, thou
have Philippi, thou have Thessalonica: If thou can go into Asia, there thou
have Ephesus: If thou be adjacent to Italy, thou have Rome, whose Authority is
near at hand to us (in Africa;) A happy Church, into which the Apostles powered
forth all their Doctrine together with their blood, etc. Now I pray Sir tell
me, if you can for blushing, why this place might not have been urged by a
Corinthian, or Philippian, or Thessalonian, or an Ephesian, to show that in the
judgment of Tertullian, separation from any of their Churches is a certain mark
of Heresy, as justly and rationally as you allege it to vindicate this
privilege to the Roman Church only? Certainly if you will stand to Tertullians
judgment, you must either grant the authority of the Roman Church (though at
that time a good Topicall Argument, and perhaps a better then any the
Heretics had, especially in conjunction with other Apostolic Churches:) yet
I say you must grant it perforce but a fallible Guide as well as that of
Ephesus, and Thessalonica, and Philippi, and Corinth: or you must maintain the
Authority of every one of these infallible, as well as the Roman. For though he
make a Panegyric of the Roman Church in particular, and of the rest only in
general, yet as I have said, for point of direction he makes them all equal;
and therefore makes them (choose you whether) either all fallible, or all
infallible: Now you will and must acknowledge that he never intended to
attribute infallibility to the Churches of Ephesus, or Corinth, or if he did,
that (as experience shows) he erred in doing so; and what can hinder, but then
we may say also that he never intended to attribute infallibility to the Roman
Church, or if he did that he erred in doing so?

35 From the saying of S. Basil, certainly nothing can be gathered, but only
that the Bishop of Rome may discern between that which is counterfeit, and
that which is lawful and pure, and without any diminution may preach the faith
of our Ancestors. Which certainly he might do, if ambition and covetousness
did not hinder him, or else I should never condemn him for doing otherwise.
But is there no difference between may and must? Believe he may do so, and
he cannot but do so? Or does it follow, because he may do so, therefore he
always shall or will do so? In my opinion rather the contrary should follow!
For he that says you may do thus, implies according to the ordinary sense of
words, that if he will he may do otherwise. You certainly may if you please
leave abusing the world with such Sophistry as this; but whether you will or
no, of that I have no assurance.

36 Your next Witness I would willingly have examined, but it seems you are
unwilling he should be found, otherwise you would have give^ us your direction
where we might have him. Of that Maximianus who succeeded Nestorius, I can find
no such thing in the Councels: Neither can I believe that any Patriarch of
Constantinople twelve hundred years ago was so base a parasite of the Sea of
Rome.

37 Your last Witness John of Constantinople, I confess speaks home and
advances the Roman sea, even to heaven: But I fear it is, that his own may
go up with it, which he there professes to be all one sea with the sea of
Rome; and therefore his Testimony, as speaking in his own case is not much to
be regarded. But besides, I have little reason to be confident that this Epistle
is not a forgery, for certainly Binius has obtruded upon us many a hundred
such. This though written by a Grecian is not extant in Greek but in Latin
only. Lastly, it comes out of a suspicious place, an old book of the Vatican
Library: which Library the world knows to have been the Mint of very many
impostures.

38 Ad. 20. 21. 22. 23. The sum of your discourse in the 4. next Sections, if
it be pertinent to the Question in agitation, must be this: Want of succession
of Bishops and Pastors holding always the same doctrine, and of the forms of
ordaining Bishops and Priests which are in use in the Roman Church, is a
certain mark of Heresy: But Protestants want all these things: Therefore they
are Heretics. To which I Answer, That nothing but want of truth and holding
error, can make or prove any man or Church heretical. For if he be a true
Aristotelian, or Platonist, or Pyrrhonia^, or Epicurean, who holds the doctrine
of Aristotle, or Plato, or Pirrho, or Epicurus, although he cannot assign any
that held it before him for many Ages together, why should I not be made a true
and orthodox Christian, by believing all the doctrine of Christ, though I
cannot derive my descent from a perpetual Succession that believed it before
me? By this reason you should say as well, that no man can be a good Bishop or
Pastor, or King or Magistrate, or Father that succeeds a bad one. For if I may
conform my will and actions to the Commandments of God, why may I not embrace
his doctrine with my understanding, although my predecessor do not so? You
have above in this Chapter defined Faith a free Infallible, obscure,
supernatural assent to divine Truths, because they are revealed by God and
sufficiently propounded: This definition is very fantastical; but for the
present I will let it pass, and desire you to give me some piece or shadow of
reason, why I may not do all this without a perpetual Succession of Bishops
and Pastors that have done so before me? You may judge as uncharitably, and
speak as maliciously of me, as your blind zeal to your Superstition shall
direct you, but certainly I know, (and with all your Sophistry you cannot make
me doubt of what I know,) that I do believe the Gospel of Christ (as it is
delivered in the undoubted books of Canonical Scripture,) as verily as that it
is now day, that I see the light, that I am now writing: and I believe it upon
this Motive, because I conceive it sufficiently, abundantly, superabundantly
proved to be divine Revelation. And yet in this, I do not depend upon any
Succession of men that have always believed it without any mixture of Error;
nay I am fully persuaded, there has been no such Succession, and yet do not
find my self any way weakened in my faith by the want of it; but so fully
assured of the truth of it, that not only, though your devils at Lowden do
tricks against it, but though an Angel from heaven should gainsay it or any
part of it, I persuade my self that I should not be moved. This I say, and this
I am sure is true: and if you will be so hyperscepticall as to persuade me,
that I am not sure that I do believe all this, I desire you to tell me, how
are you sure that you believe the Church of Rome? For if a man may persuade
himself he does believe what he does not believe, then may you think you
believe the Church of Rome, and yet not believe it. But if no man can err
concerning what he believes, then you must give me leave to assure my self
that I do believe, and consequently that any man may believe the foresaid
truths upon the foresaid motives, without any dependence upon any Succession
that has believed it always. And as from your definition of faith, so from
your definition of Heresy, this fancy may be refuted. For questionless no man
can be an Heretic but he that holds an Heresy, and an Heresy you say is a
Voluntary Error; therefore no man can be necessitated to be an Heretic
whether he will or no, by want of such a thing that is not in his power to
have: But that there should have been a perpetual Succession of Believers in
all points Orthodox, is not a thing which is in your power, therefore our being
or not being Heretics depends not on it. Besides, what is more certain, then
that he may make a straight line who has a Rule to make it by, though never
man in the world had made any before: and why then may not he that believes the
Scripture to be the word of God, and the Rule of faith, regulate his faith by
it, and consequently believe aright without much regarding what other men
either will do or have done? It is true indeed there is a necessity that if
God will have his words believed, he by his Providence must take order, that
either by succession of men, or by some other means natural or supernatural,
it be preserved and delivered, and sufficiently notified to be his word; but
that this should be done by a Succession of men that holds no error against
it, certainly there is no more necessity, then that it should be done by a
Succession of men that commit no sin against it. For if men may preserve the
Records of a Law, and yet transgress it, certainly they may also preserve
directions for their faith, and yet not follow them. I doubt not but Lawyers at
the Bar do find by frequent experience, that many men preserve and produce
evidences, which being examined of times make against themselves. This they do
ignorantly, it being in their power to suppress, or perhaps to alter them. And
why then should any man conceive it strange, that an erroneous and corrupted
Church should preserve and deliver the Scriptures uncorrupted, when indeed for
many reasons which I have formerly alleged, it was impossible for them to
corrupt them? Seeing therefore this is all the necessity that is pretended of a
perpetual Succession of men orthodoxe in all points, certainly there is no
necessity at all of any such, neither can the want of it prove any man or any
Church Heretical.

39 When therefore you have produced some proof of this, which was your Major
in your former Syllogism, That want of Succession is a certain mark of Heresy,
you shall then receive a full answer to your Minor. We shall then consider
whether your indelible Character be any reality, or whether it be a creature of
your own making, a fancy of your own imagination? And if it be a thing, and not
only a word, whether our Bishops and Priests have it not as well as yours; and
whether some men's persuasion that there is no such thing, can hinder them from
having it, or prove that they have it not if there be any such thing! (Any more
then a man's persuasion that he has not taken Physic or Poison, will mark him
not to have taken it if he has, or hinder the operation of it?) And whether
Tertullian in the place quoted by you, speak of a Priest made a Layman, by
just deposition or degradation, and not by a voluntary desertion of his Order?
And whether in the same place he set not some make upon Heretics that will
agree to your Church? Whether all the Authority of our Bishops in England
before the Reformation, was conferred on them by the Pope? And if it were,
whether it were the Pope's right, or an usurpation? If it were his right,
whether by Divine Law or Ecclesiastical? And if by Ecclesiastical only,
whether he might possibly so abuse his power, as to deserve to loose it?
Whether de facto he had done so? Whether supposing he had deserved to loose it,
those that deprived him of it had power to take it from him? Or if not, whether
they had power to suspend him from the use of it, until good caution were put
in, and good assurance given, that if he had it again, he would not abuse it as
he had formerly done? Whether in case they had done unlawfully that took his
power from him, it may not (things being now settled, and the present government
established) be as unlawful to go about to restore it? Whether it be not a
Fallacy to conclude, because we believe the Pope has no power in England, now
when the King and State and Church has deprived him upon just grounds of it,
therefore we cannot believe that he had any before his deprivation? Whether
without Schism, a man may not withdraw obedience from an usurped Authority
commanding unlawful things? Whether the Roman Church might not give authority
to Bishops and Priests to oppose her errors, as well as a King gives Authority
to a Judge to judge against him, if his cause be bad; as well as Traian gave
his sword to his Prefect, with this commission, that if he governed well, he
should use it for him, if ill against him. Whether the Roman Church gave not
Authority to her Bishops and Priests to preach against her corruptions in
manners? And if so, why not against her errors in doctrine, if she had any?
Whether she gave them not authority to preach the whole Gospel of Christ, and
consequently against her doctrine, if it should contradict any part of the
Gospel of Christ? Whether it be not acknowledged lawful in the Church of
Rome, for any Lay man or woman that has ability to persuade others by word or
by writing from error, and unto truth? And why this liberty may not be
practiced against their Religion, if it be false, as well as for it if it be
true? Whether any man need any other commission or vocation then that of a
Christian, to do a work of charity? And whether it be not one of the greatest
works of Charity (if it be done after a peaceable manner, and without an
unnecessary disturbance of order,) to persuade men out of a false, unto a true
way of eternal happiness? Especially the Apostle having assured us, that he,
(whosoever he is) who converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save
a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins? Whether the first
Reformed Bishops died all at once, so that there were not enough to ordain
Others in the places that were vacant? Whether the Bishops of England may not
consecrate a Metropolitan of England, as well as the Cardinals do the Pope?
Whether the King or Queen of England, or they that have the government in their
hands, in the minority of the Prince, may not lawfully commend one to them to
be consecrated, against whom there is no Canonical exception? Whether the
Doctrine, that the King is supreme head of the Church of England, (as the Kings
of Judah, and the first Christian Emperors were of the Jewish and Christian
Church,) be any new found doctrine? Whether it may not be true, that Bishops
being made Bishops, have their authority immediately from Christ, though this or
that man be not made Bishop without the Kings authority; as well as you say,
the Pope being Pope, has authority immediately from Christ, and yet this or that
man cannot be made Pope without the authority of the Cardinals? Whether you
do well to suppose, that Christian Kings have no more authority in ordering
the affairs of the Church, then the great Turk, or the Pagan Emperors? Whether
the King may not give authority to a Bishop to exercise his function in some
part of his Kingdom, and yet not be capable of doing it himself: as well as a
Bishop may give authority to a Physician, to practice Physic in his Diocese,
which the Bishop cannot do himself? Whether if Ner^ the Emperor would have
commanded S. Peter or S. Paul to preach the Gospel of Christ, and to exercise
the office of a Bishop of Rome, whether they would have questioned his
Authority to do so? Whether there were any Law of God or man, that prohibited
K. JAMES to give Commission to Bishops, nay to lay his injunction upon them, to
do any thing that is lawful? Whether a casual irregularity may not be
lawfully dispensed with? Whether the Popes irregularities if he should chance
to incur any, be indispensable? And if not who is he or who are they, whom
the Pope is so subject unto, that they may dispense with him? Whether that be
certain which you take for granted; That your Ordination imprints a character
and ours does not? Whether the power of consecrating and ordaining by
imposition of hands, may not reside in the Bishops, and be derived unto them,
not from the King but God; and yet the King have authority to command them to
apply this power to such a fit person, whom he shall commend unto them: As well
as if some Architects only had the faculty of architecture, and had it
immediately by infusion from God himself, yet, if they were the Kings subjects,
he wants not authority to command them to build him a Palace for his use, or a
fortress for his service: Or as the King of France pretends not to have power
to make Priests himself, yet I hope, you will not deny him power to command
any of his subjects that has this power, to ordain any fit person Priest, whom
he shall desire to be ordained? Whether it do not follow, that whenever the
King commands an house to be built, a message to be delivered, or a murderer
to be executed, that all these things are presently done without intervention
of the Architect, messenger, or executioner: As well as, that they are
ipsofacto ordained and consecrated, who by the Kings authority are commended to
the Bishops to be ordained and consecrated: Especially seeing the King will not
deny, but that these Bishops may refuse to do what he requires to be done,
lawfully if the person be unworthy, if worthy, unlawfully indeed, but yet de
facto they may refuse: and in case they should do so, whether justly or
unjustly; neither the King himself, nor any body else, would esteem the
person Bishop upon the Kings designation? Whether many Popes, though they were
not consecrated Bishops by any temporal Prince, yet might not, or did not
receive authority from the Emperor to exercise their Episcopal function in
this or that place? And whether the Emperors had not authority, upon their
desert, to deprive them of their jurisdiction, by imprisonment or banishment?
Whether Protestants do indeed pretend that their Reformation is universal?
Whether in saying, the Donatists, Sect was confined to Africa, you do not
forget your self, and contradict what you said above, in. 17. of this Chapter,
where you tell us, they had some of their Sect residing in Rome? Whether it be
certain, that none can admit of Bishops willingly, but those that hold them of
divine institution? Whether they may not be willing to have them, conceiving
that way of government the best, though not absolutely necessary? Whether all
those Protestants that conceive the distinction between Priests and Bishops,
not to be of divine institution, be Schismatic and Heretical for thinking
so? Whether your form of ordaining Bishops and Priests, be essential to the
constitution of a true Church? Whether the forms of the Church of England
differ essentially from your forms? Whether in saying, that the true Church
cannot subsist without undoubted true Bishops and Priests, you have not
overthrown the truth of your own Church: wherein I have proved it plainly
impossible, that any man should be so much as morally certain, either of his
own Priesthood or any other man's? Lastly, whether any one kind of these
external forms and orders, and government be so necessary to the being of a
Church, but that they may not be diverse in diverse places, and that a good and
peaceable Christian may and ought to submit himself to the Government of the
place where he lives whatsoever it be? All these Questions will be necessary to
be discussed for the clearing of the truth of the Minor proposition of your
former Syllogism, and your proofs of it: and I will promise to debate them
fairly with you, if first you will bring some better proof of the Mayor, That
want of Succession is a certain note of Heresy, which for the present remains
both unprov'd and unprobable.

40 Ad. 23. The Fathers, you say, assign Succession as one mark of the true
Church: I confess they did urge Tradition as an argument of the truth of their
doctrine and of the falsehood of the contrary; and thus far they agree with
you. But now see the difference: They urged it not against all Heretics that
ever should be, but against them who rejected a great part of the Scripture,
for no other reason but because it was repugnant to their doctrine, and
corrupted other parts with their additions and detractions, and perverted the
remainder with diverse absurd interpretations: So Tertullian not a leaf before
the words by you cited. Nay they urged it against them who when they were
confuted out of Scripture, fell to accuse the Scriptures themselves as if they
were not right, and came not from good authority, as if they were various one
from another, and as if truth could not be found out of them, by those who
know not Tradition, for that it was not delivered in writing, (they did mean
wholly,) but by word of mouth: And that thereupon Paul also said, we speak
wisdom amongst the perfect. So Irenaeus in the very next Chapter before that
which you allege. Against these men being thus necessitated to do so, they
did urge Tradition, but what or whose Tradition was it: Certainly no other but
the joint Tradition of all the Apostolic Churches, with one mouth and one
voice teaching the same doctrine. Or if for brevity sake they produce the
Tradition of any one Church, yet is it apparent, that, that one was then in
conjunction with all the rest; Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, testify as much
in the words cited, and S. Austin, in the place before alleged by me. This
Tradition they did urge against these men, and in a time, in comparison of
ours, almost contiguous to the Apostles: So near, that one of them, Irenaeus,
was Scholar to one who was Scholar to S. John the Apostle, Tertullian and
Origin were not an age removed from him: and the last of them all, little more
then an age from them. Yet after all this they urged it not as a demonstration,
but only as a very probable argument, far greater then any their Adversaries
could oppose against it. So Tertullian in the place above quoted. 5. How is it
likely that so many and so great Churches should err in one faith? (it should
be, should have erred into on faith.) And this was the condition of this
argument as the Fathers urged it. Now if you having to deal with us, who
question no Book of Scripture, which was not anciently questioned by some whom
you your selves esteem good Catholics; nay who refuse not to be tried by your
own Canons, your own Translations, who in interpreting Scriptures are content
to allow of all those rules which you propose, only except that we will not
allow you to be our Judges; if you will come fifteen hundred years after the
Apostles, a fair time for the purest Church to gather much dross and
corruption, and for the mystery of iniquity to bring its work to some
perfection, which in the Apostles time began to work, If (I say) you will come
thus long after and urge us with the single Tradition of one of these Churches,
being now Catholic to it self alone, and Heretical to all the rest: nay not
only with her ancient and original Traditions, but also with her post-nate and
introduced Definitions, and these as we pretend, repugnant to Scripture, and
ancient Tradition, and all this to decline an indifferent trial by Scripture,
under pretense (wherein also you agree with the calumny of the old Heretics)
that all necessary truth cannot be found in them without recourse to Tradition:
If, I say, notwithstanding all these differences, you will still be urging us
with this argument, as the very same and of the same force with that wherewith
the forementioned Fathers urged the old Heretics, certainly this must needs
proceed from a confidence you have, not only that we have no School Divinity,
nor Metaphysics, but no Logic or common sense, that we are but pictures of
men, and have the definition of rational creatures given us in vain.

41 But now suppose I should be liberal to you, and grant what you cannot
prove, that the Fathers make Succession a certain and perpetual ma^k of the
true Church; I beseech you what will come of it? What, that want of Succession
is a certain sign of an Heretical company? Truly if you say so, either you
want Logic, which is a certain sign of an ill disputer; or are not pleased to
use it, which is a worse. For speech is a certain sign of a living man, yet
want of speech is no sure argument that he is dead, for he may be dumb and yet
living still, and we may have other evident tokens that he is so, as eating,
drinking, breathing, moving: So, though the constant and universal delivery of
any doctrine by the Apostolic Churches ever since the Apostles, be a very
great argument of the truth of it, yet there is no certainty, but that truth,
even Divine truth, may through men's wickedness, be contracted from its
universality, and interrupted in its perpetuity, and so loose this argument,
and yet not want others to justify and support it self. For it may be one of
those principles which God has written in all men's hearts, or a conclusion
evidently arising from them: It may be either contained in Scripture in
express terms, or deducible from it by apparent consequence. If therefore you
intend to prove want of a perpetual Succession of Professors a certain note of
Heresy, you must not content your self to show, that having it is one sign of
truth; but you must show it to be the only sign of it and inseparable from it.
But this, if you be well advised, you will never undertake. First because it is
an impossible attempt: and then because if you do it you will mar all: for
by proving this an inseparable sign of Catholic doctrine, you will prove
your own, which apparently wants it in many points, not to be Catholic. For
whereas you say this Succession requires two things, agreement with the
Apostles doctrine, and an uninterrupted conveyance of it down to them that
challenge it: It will be proved against you that you fail in both points; and
that some things wherein you agree with the Apostles have not been held
always, as your condemning the doctrine of the Chiliasts, and holding the
Eucharist not necessary for Infants; and that in many other things you agree
not with them nor with the Church for many ages after. For example; In
mutilation of the Communion, in having your Service in such a language as the
Assistants generally understand nor, your offering to Saints, your picturing of
God, your worshipping of Pictures.

42 Ad. 24. As for Universality of place, the want whereof you object to
Protestants as a mark of Heresy: You have not set down clearly and
univocally what you mean by it, whether universality of fact or of right: and
if of fact, whether absolute or comparative: and if comparative, whether of the
Church in comparion of any other Religion, or only of Heretical Christians:
or if in comparison of these, whether in comparison of all other Sects
conjoined, or in comparison only of any One of them. Nor have you proved it by
any good argument in any sense to be a certain mark of Heresy: For those places
of S. Austine do not deserve the name. And truly in my judgment you have done
advisedly in proving it no better. For as for Universality of right, or a right
to Universality, all Religions claim it, but only the true has it, and which
has it cannot be determined, unless it first be determined which is the true.
An absolute Universality, and diffusion through all the world if you should
pretend to, all the world would laugh at you. If you should contend for
latitude with any one Religion, Mahumetisme would carry the victory from you.
If you should oppose your selves against all other Christians besides you, it
is certain you would be cast in this suit also. If lastly, being hard driven
you should please you selves with being more then any one Sect of Christians,
it would presently be replied, that it is u^certain whether now you are so, but
most certain that the time has been when you have not been so. Then when the
Hierom. Cont. Lucif^rianos.
whole world wondered that it was become Arrian: then when Athanasius opposed
the world, and the world Athanasius: then when In Theodoret. Hist. 16. c. l. 2.
your Liberius having the contemptible paucity of his adherents objected to him
as a note of error, answered for himself, There was a time when there were but
three opposed the decree of the King, and yet those three were in the right,
and the rest in the wrong: then when the Professors of error surpassed the
number of the Professors of truth in proportion, as the sands of the Sea do
the Stars of the Heaven. (As In ep. 48. (...) Vincentium.
S. Austine acknowledges:) then when Convnenitorij. lib. 1. c. 4.
Vincentius confesses, that the poison of the Arrians had contaminated, not
now some certain portion, but almost the whole World: then when the author of
Nazianzens life testifies, That In vita Naziauz
the Heresy of Arrius, had possessed in a manner the whole extent of the world;
and when Nazianzen found cause to cry out, In Orat. Arian. and (...).
Where are they who reproach us with our poverty, who define the Church by the
multitude, and despise the little flock? They have the People, but we the
faith. And lastly when Athanasius was so overborn with Sholes and floods of
Arria^s, that he was enforced to write a Treatise on purpose To. ^
against those, who judge of the truth only by plurality of adherents. So that
if you had proved want of Universality even thus restrained, to be an
infallible note of Heresy, there would have been no remedy but you must have
confessed, that the time was when you were Heretics. And besides, I see not
how you would have avoided this great inconvenience, of laying grounds and
storeing up arguments for Antichrist, against he comes, by which he may prove
his Company the true Church. For it is evident out of Scripture, and confessed
by you, that though his time be not long, his dominion shall be very large; and
that the true Church shall be then, the woman driven into the wilderness.

43 Ad. 25. and 26. The remainder of this Chapter if I would deal strictly
with you, I might let pass as impertinent to the question now disputed. For
whereas your argument promises that this whole Chapter shall be employed in
proving Luther and the Protestants guilty of Heresy, here you desert this
question, and strike out into another accusation of them, that their faith even
of the truth they hold, is not indeed true faith. But put case it were not,
does it follow, that the having of this faith makes them Heretics, or that
they are therefore Heretics because they have this faith? Aristotle believed
there were Intelligences which moved the Spheres; he believed this with an
humane persuasion, and not with a certain, obscure, prudent, supernatural
faith: and will you make Aristotle an Heretic, because he believed so? You
believe there was such a man as Julius Caesar, that there is such a City as
Constantinople, and your belief here of has not these qualifications which you
require: And will you be content that this shall pass for a sufficient proof
that you are an Heretic? Heresy you have defined above to be a voluntary
error: but he that believes truth, though his belief be not qualified according
to your mind, yet sure in believing truth he believes no error; and from hence
according to ordinary Logic methinkes it should follow, that such a man for
doing so, cannot be guilty of Heresy.

44 But you will say, though he be not guilty of Heresy for believing these
truths, yet if his faith be not saving, to what purpose will it be? Truly very
little to the purpose of Salvation, as little as it is to your proving
Protestants guilty of Heresy. But out of our wonted indulgence, let us pardon
this fault also, and do you the favor to hear what you can say, to beget this
faith in us, that indeed we have no faith, or at least not such a faith,
without which it is impossible to please God. Your discourse upon this point,
you have, I know not upon what policy, disjoynted, and given us the grounds of
it in the beginning of the Chapter, and the superstructure here in the end. Them
I have already examined, and for a great part of them, proved them vain and
deceitful. I have showed by many certain arguments, that though the subject
matter of our faith be in it self most certain, yet that absolute certainty of
adherence, is not required to the essence of faith, no nor to make it
acceptable with God, but that to both these effects it is sufficient, if it be
firm enough to produce Obedience and Charity. I have showed besides, that
Prudence is rather commendable in faith, then intrinsecall and essential to
it. So that whatsoever is here said, to prove the faith of Protestants no
faith, for want of certainty or for want of prudence, is already answered
before it is objected: for the foundation being destroyed the building cannot
stand. Yet for the fuller refutation of all pretenses, I will here make good,
that to prove our faith destitute of these qualifications, you have produced
but vain Sophismes, and for the most part, such arguments as return most
violently upon your selves. Thus then you say,

45 First that their belief wants certainty, I prove, because they denying
the universal Infallibility of the Church, can have no certain ground to know
what objects are revealed or testified by God. But if there be no other ground
of certainty but your Churches infallibility, upon what certain ground do you
know that your Church is infallible? Upon what certain ground do you know all
those things which must be known before you can know that your Church is
infallible? As that there is a God: that God has promised his assistance to
your Church in all her Decrees: that the Scripture wherein this promise is
extant is the word of God: that those texts of Scripture which you allege for
your infallibility are incorrupted: that that which you pretend is the true
sense of them? When you have produced certain grounds for all these things, I
doubt not but it will appear, that we also may have grounds certain enough to
believe our whole Religion, which is nothing else but the Bible, without
dependence on the Churches infallibility. Suppose you should meet with a man
that for the present, believes neither Church, nor Scripture, nor God, but is
ready and willing to believe them all, if you can show some sufficient grounds
to build his faith upon; will you tell such a man there are no certain grounds,
by which he may be converted; or there are? If you say the first, you make all
Religion an uncertain thing; If the second, then either you must ridiculously
persuade, that your Church is infallible, because it is infallible, or else
that there are other certain grounds besides your Churches infallibility.

46 But you proceed and tell us, that Holy Scripture is in it self most true
and infallible, but without the direction and declaration of the Church, we can
neither have certain means to know what Scripture is Canonical, nor what
Translations be faithful, nor what is the true meaning of Scripture. Answ. But
all these things must be known, before we can know the direction of your Church
to be infallible, for no other proof of it can be pretended, but only some
Texts of Canonical Scripture, truly interpreted: Therefore either you are
mistaken, in thinking there is no other means to know these things, but your
Churches infallible direction, or we are excluded from all means of knowing
her direction to be infallible.

47 But Protestants, though as you suppose, they are persuaded their own
oponions are true, and that they have used such means as are wont to be
prescribed for understanding the Scripture, as Prayer, conferring of Texts etc.
Yet by their disagreement show, that some of them are deceived. Now they hold
all the Articles of their faith, upon this only ground of Scripture,
interpreted by these rules, and therefore it is clear, that the ground of
their faith is infallible in no point at all. The first of these suppositions
must needs be true, but the second is apparently false: I mean, that every
Protestant is persuaded that he has used those means which are prescribed for
understanding of Scripture. But that which you collect from these suppositions
is clearly inconsequent: and by as good Logic you might conclude, that Logic
and Geometry stand upon no certain grounds, that the rules of the one, and the
principles of the other do sometimes fail, because the disagreement of
Logicians and Geometricians show, that some of them are deceived. Might not a
Jew conclude as well against all Christians, that they have no certain ground
whereon to rely in their understanding of Scripture, because their
disagreements show that some are deceived; because some deduce from it the
infallibility of a Church, and others no such matter? So likewise a Turk might
use the same argument against both Jews and Christians, and an Atheist against
all Religions, and a Sceptick against all reason. Might not the one say, Men's
disagreement in Religion, show that there is no certainty in any; and the
other, that experience of their contradictions teaches, that the rules of
reason do sometimes fail? Do not you see and feel how void of reason and
how full of impiety your sophistry is? And how transported with zeal against
Protestants, you urge arguments against them, which if they could not be
answered, would overthrow not only your own, but all Religion? But God be
thanked, the answer is easy and obvious! For let men but remember not to
impute the faults of men but only to men, and then it will easily appear, that
there may be sufficient certainty in reason, in Religion, in the rules of
interpreting Scripture, though men through their faults, take not care to make
use of them, and so run into diverse errors and dissentions.

48 But Protestants cannot determine what points be fundamental, and therefore
must remain uncertain, whether or no they be not in some fundamental error.
Ans. By like reason since you acknowledge, that every error in points defined
and declared by your Church destroies the substance of faith, and yet cannot
determine what points be defined, it follows that you must remain uncertain,
whether or no you be not in some fundamental error, and so want the substance
of faith, without which there can be no hope of Salvation. Now that you are
uncertain what points are defined, appears from your own words. c. 4.. 3. of
your second Part, where say you, No less impertinent is your discourse,
concerning the difficulty to know what is Heresy: For we grant that it is not
always easy to determine in particular occasions, whether this or that
Doctrine be such, because it may be doubtful, whether it be against any
Scripture, or divine Tradition, or Definition of the Church. Neither were it
difficult to extort from you this confession, by naming diverse Points, which
some of you say are defined, others the contrary. And others hang in suspense,
and know not what to determine. But this I have done elsewhere: as also I have
showed plainly enough, that though we cannot perhaps say in particular, thus
much, and no more is fundamental, yet believing all the Bible, we are certain
enough that we believe all that is fundamental. As he that in a receipt, takes
twenty ingredients whereoften only are necessary, though he know not which
those ten are, yet taking the whole twenty he is sure enough that he has taken
all that are necessary.

49 Ad. 29. But that he who erreth against any one revealed truth loses all
Divine Faith, is a very true doctrine delivered by Catholic Divines, (you
mean your own) with so general a consent, that the contrary is wont to be
censured as temerarious: Now certainly some Protestants must do so, because
they hold contradictions which cannot all be true; Therefore some of them at
least, have no divine faith. Ans. I pass by your weakness, in urging
Protestants with the authority of your Divines, which yet in you might very
deservedly be censured. For when D. Potter, to show the many actual
dissentions between the Romish Doctors, notwithstanding their braggs of
potentiall Unity, referres to Pappus, who has collected out of Bellar* their
contradictions, and set them down in his own words to the number of 237. and to
Flacius, de Sect is and controversiis Religionis Papisticae; you making the
very same use of M. Breerely against Protestants; yet jeere and scorn D.
Potter, as if he offered you for a proof, the bare authority of Pappus and
Flacius, and tell him, which is all the answer you vouchsafe him, It is pretty
that he brings Pappus and Flacius, flat Heretics, to prove your many
contradictions* As if he had proved this with the bare authority, the bare
judgment of these men, which sure he does not, but with the formal words of
Bellarmine faithfully collected by Pappus. And why then might not we say to
you, Is it not pretty that you bring Breerly as flat an Heretic as Pappus or
Flacius, to prove the contradictions of Protestants? Yet had he been so vain as
to press you with the mere authority of Protestant Divines in any point, me
thinks for your own sake, you should have pardoned him, who here and in many
other places, urge us with the judgment of your Divines as with weighty
arguments. Yet, if the authority of your Divines were even Canonical,
certainly nothing could be concluded from it in this matter, there being not
one of them, who delivers for true doctrine this position of yours, thus
nakedly set down, That any error against any one revealed truth destroies all
divine faith. For they all require, (not your self excepted) that this truth
must not only be revealed, but revealed publicly, and (all things considered)
sufficiently propounded to the erring Party, to be one of those, which God
under pain of damnation commands all men to believe. And therefore the
contradiction of Protestants (though this vain doctrine of your Divines were
supposed true, is but a weak argument) That any of them have no divine. Faith,
seeing you neither have, not ever can prove* (without begging the Question of
your Churches infallibility,) that the truths about which they differ, are of
this quality and condition. But though out of curtesy we may suppose this
doctrine true, yet we have no reason to grant it, nor to think it any thing but
a vain and groundless fancy: and that this very weak and inartificiall
argument, from the authority of your Divines, is the strongest pillar which it
has to support it. Two reasons you allege for it out of Thomas Aquinas, the
first whereof vainly supposes against reason and experience, that by the
commission of any deadly sin, the habit of Charity is quite extirpated. And
for the second, though you cry it up for an Achilles, and think like the
Gorgons head it will turn us all into stone, and in confidence of it, insult
upon D. Potter as if he durst not come near it, yet in very truth having
considered it well, I find it a serious, grave, prolixe, and profound nothing.
I could answer it in a word, by telling you, that it beggs without all proof
or color of proof, the main question between us, that the infallibility of
your Church is either the formal motive, or rule, or a necessary condition of
faith: which you know we flatly deny, and therefore all that is built upon it
has nothing but wind for a foundation. But to this answer I will add a large
confutation of this vain fancy, out of one of the most rational and profound
Doctors of your own Church, I mean Estius, who upon the third of the Sent. the
23. did* the 13.. writes thus, It is disputed (says he) whether in him who
believes some of the Articles of our faith, and disbelieves others, or perhaps
someone, there be faith properly so called in respect of that which he does
believe? In which question we must before all, carefully distinguish between
those, who retaining a general readiness to believe whatsoever the Church
believes, yet err by ignorance in some doctrine of faith, because it is not as
yet sufficiently declared to them that the Church does so believe; and those
who after sufficient manifestation of the Churches doctrine, do yet choose to
dissent from it, either by doubting of it, or affirming the contrary. For of
the former the answer is easy; but of these, that is, of Heretics retaining
some part of wholesome doctrine, the question is more difficult, and on both
sides by the Doctors probably disputed. For that there is in them true faith of
the Articles wherein they do not err, first experience seems to convince:
For many at this day denying, for example sake, Purgatory, or Invocation of
Saints, nevertheless firmly hold, as by divine revelation, that God is Three
and One* that the Son of God was incarnate and suffered, and other like
things. ^As anciently the Novatians, excepting their peculiar error, of denying
reconciliation to those that fell in persecution, held other things in common
with Catholics: So that they assisted them very much against the Arrians, as
Socrates relates in his Eccl. Hist. Moreover the same thing is proved by the
example of the Apostles, who in the time of Christ's passion being scandalized,
lost their faith in him: as also, Christ after his resurrection upbraids them
with their incredulity, and calls Thomas incredulous, for denying the
Resurrection, Ioh. 20. Whereupon S. Austine also in his preface upon the 96.
Ps. says, That after the Resurrection of Christ, the faith of those that fell
was restored again. And yet we must not say, that the Apostles then lost the
faith of the Trinity, of the Creation of the world, of Eternal life, and such
like other Articles. Besides, the Jews before Christ's coming, held the faith
of one God the Creator of Heaven and Earth: who although they lost the true
faith of the Messiah by not receiving Christ, yet we cannot say, that they lost
the faith of one God, but still retained this Article as firmly as they did
before.

Add hereunto, that neither Jews nor Heretics seem to lie, in saying they
believe either the books of the Prophets, or the four Gospels: It being
apparent enough, that they acknowledge in them Divine Authority, though they
hold not the true sense of them, to which purpose is that in the Acts. c. 20.
Believe thou the Prophets? I know that thou believe. Lastly it is manifest,
that many gifts of God, are found even in bad men, and such as are out of the
Church; therefore nothing hinders but that Jews and Heretics, though they
err in many things, yet in other things may be so divinely illuminated as to
believe aright. So S. Austin seems to teach in his book, De Vnico Baptismo:
contra Pe^ilianum c. 3. in these words: When a Jew comes to us to be made a
Christian, we destroy not in him Gods good things but his own ill. That he
believes one God is to be worshipped, that he hopes for eternal life, that he
doubts not of the Resurrection, we approve and commend him: we acknowledge,
that as he did believe these things, so he is still to believe them, and as he
did hold, so he is still to hold them. Thus he: subioyning more to the same
purpose in the next, and again in the 26. Chapter, and in his third book, De
Bapt. contr. Donat. cap. ult. and upon Psalm. 64. But now this reason seems to
persuade the contrary: Because the formal object of faith seems to be the
first verity, as it is manifested by the Churches Doctrine as the Divine and
infallible Rule, wherefore whosoever adheres not to this Rule, although he
assent to some matters of faith, yet he embraces them not with faith, but with
some other kind of assent: as if a man assent to a conclusion, not knowing the
reason by which it is demonstrated, he has not true knowledge, but an opinion
only of the same conclusion. Now that an Heretic adheres not to the r^le
aforesaid, it is manifest: Because if he did adhere to it, as divine and
infallible, he would receive all without exception, which the Church teaches,
and so would not be an Heretic. After this manner discourses S. Thom. 2. 2.
q. 5. art. 3. From whom yet Dur and dissents upon this distinction, thinking
there may be in an Heretic true faith, in respect of the Articles in which he
does not err. Others, as Scotus and Bonaventure, define not the matter
plainly, but seem to choose a middle way.

To the authority of S. Austine and these Schooleme^, this may be adjoined,
That it is usual with good Christians to say, that Heretics have not the
entire faith. Whereby it seems to be intimated, that some part of it they do
retain. Whereof this may be another reason: That if the truths which a Jew or
a Heretic holds, he should not hold them by faith, but after some other
manner, to wit, by his own proper will and judgment, it will follow, that all
that excellent knowledge of God and divine things, which is found in them, is
to be attributed not to the grace of God, but the strength of Free will, which
is against S. Austine, both elsewhere, and especially in the end of his book De
potentia.

As for the reason alleged to the contrary, We answer: It is impertinent to
faith, by what means we believe the prime Verity, that is, by what means God
uses to confer upon men the gift of Faith. For although now the ordinary
means be the Testimony and teaching of the Church, yet it is certain that by
other means, faith has been given heretofore, and is given still. For many of
the Ancients, as Adam, Abraham, Melchisedeck, Job, received faith by special
revelation; the Apostles by the Miracles and Preaching of Christ; others again
by the Preaching and miracles of the Apostles; and Lastly others, by other
means, when as yet they had heard nothing of the infallibility of the Church;
to little Children by Baptism, without any other help, faith is infused: And
therefore it is possible, that a man not adhering to the Churches doctrine as a
Rule infallible, yet may receive some things for the word of God, which do
indeed truly belong to the faith, either because they are now, or heretofore
have been confirmed by miracles: Or because he manifestly sees that the ancient
Church taught so, or upon some other inducement. And yet nevertheless we must
not say, that Heretics and Jews do hold the Faith, but only some part of
the Faith. For the Faith signifies an entire thing, and complete in all parts;
whereupon an Heretic is said to be simply an Infidel, to have lost the
Faith, and according to the Apostle 1. Tim. 1. to have made shipwreck of it,
although he holds some things, with the same strength of assent and readiness
of will, wherewith by others are held all those points which appertain to the
Faith. And thus far Estius. Whose discourse I presume may pass for a
sufficient refutation of your argument out of Aquinas. And therefore your
Corollaries drawn from it, That every error against faith, involves opposition
against Gods testimony, That Protestants have no Faith, no certainty, and that
you have all Faith, must together with it fall to the ground.

50 But if Protestants have certainty, they want obscurity, and so have not
that faith, which as the Apostle says is of things not appearing. This
argument you prosecute in the next Paragraph; But I can find nothing in it, to
convince or persuade me that Protestants cannot have as much certainty as is
required to faith, of an object not so evident as to beget science. If
obscurity will not consist with certainty in the highest degree, then you are
to blame for requiring to faith contradicting conditions. If certainty and
obscurity will stand together, what reason can be imagined that a Protestant
may not entertain them both as well as a Papist? Your bodies and souls, your
understandings and wills are, I think, of the same condition with ours: And why
then may not we be certain of an obscure thing as well as you? And as you made
this long discourse against Protestants, why may not we putting Church instead
of Scripture, send it back again to you? And say; If Papists have certainty,
they want obscurity, and so have not that faith, which as the Apostle says, is
of things not appearing, or not necessitating our understanding to an assent?
For the whole edifice of the faith of Papists is settled on these two
principles, These particular propositions are the propositions of the Church,
And the sense and meaning of them is clear and evident, at least in all points
necessary to salvation. Now these principles being one supposed, it clearly
follows, that what Papists believe as necessary to salvation is evidently
known by them to be true, by this argument; It is certain and evident, that
whatsoever is the word of God or Divine Revelation is true; But it is certain
and evident that these propositions of the Church in particular are the word of
God and Divine Revelations; therefore it is certain and evident, that all
propositions of the Church are true. Which Conclusion I take for a Major in a
second argument, and say thus; It is certain and evident that all propositions
of the Church are true; But it is certain and evident, that such particulars,
for example, The lawfulness of the half Communion, The lawfulness and
expedience of Latin Service, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Indulgences
etc. are the Propositions of the Church; therefore it is certain and evident
that these particular objects are true. Neither will it avail you to say, that
the said principles are not evident by natural discourse, but only by the eye
of reason cleared by grace: For supernatural evidence, no less (yea rather
more) drowns and excludes obscurity, then natural evidence does. Neither can
the Party so enlightened, be said voluntarily to captivate his understanding to
that light, but rather his understanding is by necessity made captive and
forced not to disbeleeve what is presented by so clear a light. And therefore
your imaginary faith is not the true faith defined by the Apostle, but an
invention of your own.

51 And having thus cried quittance with you, I must entreat you to devise (for
truly I cannot) some answer to this argument, which will not serve in
proportion to your own. For I hope you will not pretend that I have done you
injury, in settling your faith upon principles which you disclaim. And if you
allege this disparity, That you are more certain of your principles, then we
of ours, and yet you do not pretend that your principles are so evident, as we
do that ours are: what is this to say, but that you are more confident then
we, but confess you have less reason for it? For the evidence of the thing
assented to, be it more or less, is the reason and cause of the assent in the
understanding. But then besides, I am to tell you, that you are here, as every
where, extremely, if not affectedly mistaken in the Doctrine of Protestants;
who though they acknowledge, that the things which they believe are in
themselves as certain as any demonstrable or sensible verities, yet pretend not
that their certainty of adherence is most perfect and absolute, but such as may
be perfected and increased as long as they walk by faith and not by sight. And
consonant hereunto is their doctrine touching the evidence of the objects
whereunto they adhere. For you abuse the world and them, if you pretend that
they hold the first of your two principles, That these particular Books are the
word of God, (for so I think you mean) either to be in it self evidently
certain, or of it self and being divested of the motives of credibility,
evidently credible: For they are not so fond as to be ignorant, nor so vain as
to pretend, that all men do assent to it, which they would if it were
evidently certain, nor so ridiculous as to imagine, that if an Indian that
never heard of Christ or Scripture, should by chance find a Bible in his own
Language, and were able to read it, that upon the reading it he would
certainly without a miracle believe it to be the word of God: which he could
not choose if it were evidently credible. What then do they affirm of it?
Certainly no more then this, that whatsoever man that is not of a perverse
mind, shall weigh with serious and mature deliberation, those great moments of
reason which may incline him to believe the Divine authority of Scripture, and
compare them with the light objections that in prudence can be made against it,
he shall not choose but find sufficient nay abundant inducements to yield unto
it firm faith and sincere obedience. Let that learned man Hugo Grotius speak
for all the Rest, in his Book of the truth of Christian Religion; which Book
whosoever attentively peruses shall find that a man may have great reason to be
a Christian without dependence upon your Church for any part of it: and that
your Religion is no foundation, but rather a scandal and an objection against
Christianity. He then in the last Chapter of his second book has these
excellent words, If any be not satisfied with these arguments abovesaid, but
desires more forcible reasons for confirmation of the excellency of Christian
Religion, let such know that as there are variety of things which be true, so
are there diverse ways of proving or manifesting the truth. Thus is there one
way in Mathematics, another in Physics, a third in Ethics, and lastly
another kind when a matter of fact is in question: wherein verily we must rest
content with such testimonies as are free from all suspicion of untruth;
otherwise down goes all the frame and use of history, and a great part of the
art of Physic, together with all dutifulness that ought to be between parents
and children: for matters of practice can no way else be known but by such
testimonies. Now it is the pleasure of Almighty God that those things which he
would have us to believe (so that the very belief thereof may be imputed to us
for obedience) should not so evidently appear, as those things which are
apprehended by sense and plain demonstration, but only be so far forth
revealed as may beget faith, and a persuasion thereof, in the hearts and minds
of such as are not obstinate: That so the Gospel may be as a touchstone for
trial of men's judgments, whether they be sound or unsound. For seeing these
arguments, whereof we have spoken, have induced so many honest, godly, and wise
men to approve of this Religion, it is thereby plain enough that the fault of
other men's infidelity is not for want of sufficient testimony, but because they
would not have that to be had and embraced for truth which is contrary to their
wilful desires; it being a hard matter for them to relinquish their honors,
and set at naught other commodities; which thing they know they ought to do,
if they admit of Christ's doctrine and obey what he has commanded. And this is
the rather to be noted of them, for that many other historical narrations are
approved by them to be true, which notwithstanding are only manifest by
authority, and not by any such strong proofs, and persuasions, or tokens, as
do declare the history of Christ to be true: which are evident, partly by the
confession of those Jews that are yet alive; and partly in those companies and
congregations of Christians which are any where to be found; whereof doubtless
there was some cause.

Lastly seeing the long duration or continuance of Christian Religion, and the
large extent thereof can be ascribed to no humane power, therefore the same
must be attributed to miracles: or if any deny that it came to pass through a
miraculous manner; this very getting so great strength and power without a
miracle, may be thought to surpass any miracle.

52 And now you see I hope that Protestants neither do nor need to pretend to
any such evidence in the doctrine they believe, as cannot well consist both
with the essence and the obedience of faith. Let us come now to the last
nullity which you impute to the faith of Protestants, and that it is want of
Prudence. Touching which point, as I have already demonstrated, that wisdom is
not essential to faith, but that a man may truly believe truth, though upon
insufficient motives; So I doubt not but I shall make good, that if prudence
were necessary to faith, we have better title to it then you; and that if a
wiser then Solomon were here, he should have better reason to believe the
Religion of Protestants then Papists, the Bible rather then the Council of
Trent. But let us hear what you can say!

53 Ad. 31. You demand then first of all, What wisdom was it to forsake a
Church confessedly very ancient, and besides which there could be demonstrated
no other Visible Church of Christ upon earth? I answer: Against God and truth
there lies no presoription, and therefore certainly it might be great wisdom
to forsake ancient errors for more ancient Truths. One God is rather to be
followed then innumerable worlds of men: And therefore it might be great
wisdom either for the whole Visible Church, nay for all the men in the world,
having wandered from the way of Truth, to return unto it; or for a part of it,
nay for one man to do so, although all the world besides were madly resolute
to do the contrary. It might be great wisdom to forsake the errors though of
the only Visible Church, much more the Roman, which in conceiving her self the
whole Uisible Church, does somewhat like the Frog in the Fable, which thought
the ditch he lived in to be all the world.

54 You demand again, What wisdom was it to forsake a Church acknowledged to
want nothing necessary to Salvation, endued with Succession of Bishops, etc,
usque ad Election or Choice? I answer: Yet might it be great wisdom to forsake
a Church not acknowledged to want nothing necessary to Salvation, but accused
and convicted of many damnable errors: certainly damnable to them who were
convicted of them, had they still persisted in them after their conviction;
though perhaps pardonable (which is all that is acknowledged) to such as
ignorantly continued in them. A Church vainly arrogating without possibility of
proof a perpetual Succession of Bishops, holding always the same doctrine;
and with a ridiculous impudence pretending perpetual possession of all the
world: whereas the world knows, that a little before Luthers arising, your
Church was confined to a part of a part of it. Lastly a Church vainly glorying
in the dependence of other Churches upon her, which yet she supports no more
then those crouching Anticks which seem in great buildings to labor under the
weight they bear, do indeed support the Fabric. For a corrupted and false
Church may give authority to preach the truth, and consequently against her own
falsehoods and corruptions. Besides, a false Church may preserve the Scripture
true, (as now the Old Testament is preserved by the Jews,) either not being
arrived to that height of impiety as to attempt the corruption of it, or not
able to effect it, or not perceiving, or not regarding the opposition of it to
her corruptions. And so we might receive from you lawful Ordination and true
Scriptures, though you were a false Church; and receiving the Scriptures from
you (though not from you alone,) I hope you cannot hinder us, neither need we
ask your leave, to believe and obey them. And this, though you be a false
Church, is enough to make us a true one. As for a Succession of men that held
with us in all points of Doctrine, it is a thing we need not, and you have as
little as we. So that if we acknowledge that your Church before Luther was a
true Church, it is not for any ends, for any dependence that we have upon you;
but because we conceive that in a charitable construction, you may pass for a
true Church. Such a Church (and no better) as you do sometimes acknowledge
Protestants to be, that is, a Company of men, wherein some ignorant souls may
be saved. So that in this ballancing of Religion against Religion, and Church
against Church, it seems you have nothing of weight and moment to put into
your scale; nothing but smoke and wind, vain shadows and fantastical
pretenses. Yet if Protestants on the other side, had nothing to put in their
Scale but those negative commendations which you are pleased to afford them;
nothing but, no unity, nor means to procure it; no farther extent when Luther
arose then Luthers body; no Universality of time or place; no visibility or
being, except only in your Church; no Succession of persons or doctrine; no
leader but Luther, in a quarrel begun upon no ground but passion; no Church,
no Ordination, no Scriptures but such as they received from you; if all this
were true, and this were all that could be pleaded for Protestants, possibly
with an allowance of three grains of partiality your Scale might seem to
turn. But then if it may appear that part of these objections are falsely made
against them, the rest vainly; that whatsoever of truth is in these
imputations, is impertinent to this trial, and whatsoever is pertinent is
untrue; and besides, that plenty of good matter may be alleged for Protestants
which is here dissembled: Then I hope, our cause may be good notwithstanding
these pretenses.

55 I say then, that want of Universality of time and place, The invisibility
or not existence of the professors of Protestant Doctrine before Luther,
Luthers being alone when he first opposed your Church, Our having our Church,
Ordination, Scriptures, personal and yet not doctrinall Succession from you,
are vain and impertinent allegations, against the truth of our Doctrine and
Church. That the entire truth of Christ without any mixture of error should be
professed or believed in all places at any time, or in any place at all times,
is not a thing evident in reason, neither have we any Revelation for it. And
therefore in relying so confidently on it, you build your house upon the sand.
And what obligation we had either to be so peevish, as to take nothing of
yours, or so foolish as to take all, I do not understand. For whereas you say
that this is to be choosers and therefore Heretics, I tell you that though
all Heretics are choosers, yet all choosers are not Heretics, otherwise
they also, which choose your Religion must be Heretics. As for our wanting
Unity and Means of proving it, Luthers opposing your Church upon mere
passion, our following private men rather then the Catholic Church; the first
and last are mere untruths, for we want not Unity, nor Means to procure it in
things necessary. Plain places of Scripture, and such as need no interpreter
are our means to obtain it. Neither do we follow any private men, but only
the Scripture, the word of God as our rule, and reason, which is also the gift
of God given to direct us in all our actions, in the use of this rule. And then
for Luthers opposing your Church upon mere passion, it is a thing I will not
deny because I know not his heart, and for the same reason you should not have
affirmed it. Sure I am, whether he opposed your Church upon reason or no, he
had reason enough to oppose it. And therefore if he did it upon passion, we
will follow him only in his action and not in his passion, in his opposion, not
in the manner of it; and then I presume you will have no reason to condemn us,
unless you will say that a good action cannot be done with reason, because
some body before us has done it upon passion. You see then how imprudent you
have been in the choice of your arguments, to prove Protestants unwise in the
choice of their Religion.

56 It remains now, that I should show that many reasons of moment may be
alleged for the justification of Protestants, which are dissembled by you, and
not put into the balance. Know then Sir that when I say, The Religion of
Protestants, is in prudence to be preferred before yours: as on the one side I
do not understand by your Religion, the doctrine of Bellarmine or Baronius, or
any other private man amongst you, nor the Doctrine of the Sorbon, or of the
Jesuits, or of the Dominicans, or of any other particular Company among you,
but that wherein you all agree, or profess to agree, the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent: so accordingly on the other side, by the Religion of
Protestants, I do not understand the Doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or
Melancthon; nor the Confession of Augusta, or Geneva, nor the Catechism of
Heidelberg, nor the Articles of the Church of England, no nor the Harmony of
Protestant Confessions; but that wherein they all agree, and which they all
subscribe with a greater Harmony, as a perfect rule of their Faith and Actions,
that is, The BIBLE. The BIBLE, I say, The BIBLE only is the Religion of
Protestants! Whatsoever else they believe besides it, and the plain,
irrefragable, indubitable consequences of it, well may they hold it as a matter
of Opinion, but as matter of Faith and Religion, neither can they with
coherence to their own grounds believe it themselves, nor require the belief
of it of others, without most high and most Schismatic presumption. I for my
part after a long (and as I verily believe and hope,) impartial search of the
true way to eternal happiness, do profess plainly that I cannot find any
rest for the sole of my foot, but upon this Rock only. I see plainly and with
mine own eyes, that there are Popes against Popes, Counsels against Counsels,
some Fathers against others, the same Fathers against themselves, a Consent of
Fathers of one age against a Consent of Fathers of another age, the Church of
one age against the Church of another age. Traditive interpretations of
Scripture are pretended, but there are few or none to be found: No Tradition
but only of Scripture, can derive it self from the fountain, but may be
plainly proved, either to have been brought in, in such an age after Christ; or
that in such an age it was not in. In a word, there is no sufficient certainty
but of Scripture only, for any considering man to build upon. This therefore,
and this only I have reason to believe: This I will profess, according to this
I will live, and for this, if there be occasion, I will not only willingly, but
even gladly loose my life, though I should be sorry that Christians should take
it from me. Propose me any thing out of this book, and require whether I
believe it or no, and seem it never so incomprehensible to humane reason, I
will subscribe it with hand and heart, as knowing no demonstration can be
stronger then this, God has said so, therefore it is true. In other things I
will take no man's liberty of judgment from him; neither shall any man take
mine from me. I will think no man the worse man, nor the worse Christian: I
will love no man the less, for differing in opinion from me. And what measure
I meat to others I expect from them again. I am fully assured that God does
not, and therefore that men ought not to require any more of any man then this,
To believe the Scripture to be Gods word, to endeavor to find the true sense
of it, and to live according to it.

57 This is the Religion which I have chosen after a long deliberation, and I
am verily persuaded that I have chosen wisely, much more wisely the^ if I had
guided my self according to your Churches authority. For the Scripture being
all true, I am secured by believing nothing else, that I shall believe no
falsehood as matter of Faith. And if I mistake the sense of Scripture, and so
fall into error, yet am I secure from any danger thereby, if but your grounds
be true: because endeavoring to find the true sense of Scripture, I cannot
but hold my error without pertinacy, and be ready to forsake it when a more
true and a more probable sense shall appear unto me. And then all necessary
truth being as I have proved, plainly set down in Scripture, I am certain by
believing Scripture, to believe all necessary Truth: And he that does so, if
his life be answerable to his faith, how is it possible he should fail of
Salvation?

58 Besides, whatsoever may be pretended to gain to your Church the credit of a
Guide, all that and much more may be said for the Scripture. Has your Church
been ancient? The Scripture is more ancient. Is your Church a means to keep
men at unity? So is the Scripture to keep those that believe it and will obey
it, in unity of belief, in matters necessary or very profitable, and in unity
of Charity in points unnecessary. Is your Church universal for time or place?
Certainly the Scripture is more universal. For all the Christians in the world
(those I mean that in truth deserve this name,) do now, and always have
believed the Scripture to be the word of God: whereas only you say that you
only are the Church of God, and all Christians besides you deny it.

59 Thirdly, following the Scripture, I follow that whereby you prove your
Churches infallibility, (whereof were it not for Scripture what pretense could
you have, or what notion could we have?) and by so doing tacitly confess,
that your selves are surer of the truth of the Scripture then of your Churches
authority. For we must be surer of the proof then of the thing proved,
otherwise it is no proof.

60 Fourthly, following the Scripture, I follow that which must be true if your
Church be true: for your Church gives attestation to it. Whereas if I follow
your Church, I must follow that which, though Scripture be true, may be false;
nay which if Scripture be true must be false, because the Scripture testifies
against it.

61 Fifthly, to follow the Scripture I have Gods express warrant and command,
and no color of any prohibition: But to believe your Church infallible, I have
no command at all, much less an express command. Nay I have reason to fear
that I am prohibited to do so in these words: call no man Master on earth:
They fell by infidelity, Thou stand by faith, Be not high minded but fear:
The spirit of truth The world cannot receive.

62 Following your Church I must hold many things not only above reason but
against it, if any thing be against it: whereas following the Scripture I shall
believe many mysteries but no impossibilities; many things above reason, but
nothing against it; many things which had they not been revealed, reason could
never have discovered, but nothing which by true reason may be confuted: many
things which reason cannot comprehend how they can be, but nothing which reason
can comprehend that it cannot be. Nay I shall believe nothing which reason will
not convince that I ought to believe it: For reason will convince any man,
unless he be of a perverse mind, that the Scripture is the word of God: And
then no reason can be greater then this, God says so therefore it is true.

63 Following your Church I must hold many things which to any man's judgment
that will give himself the liberty of judgment, will seem much more plainly
contradicted by Scripture, then the infallibility of your Church appears to be
confirmed by it; and consequently must be so foolish as to believe your Church
exempted from error upon less evidence, rather then subject to the common
condition of mankind upon greater evidence. Now if I take the Scripture only
for my Guide, I shall not need to do any thing so unreasonable.

64 If I will follow your Church I must believe impossibilities, and that with
an absolute certainty, upon motives which are confessed to be but only
Prudentiall and probable: That is, with a weak foundation I must firmly support
a heavy, a monstrous heavy building: Now following the Scripture I shall have
no necessity to undergo any such difficulties.

65 Following your Church I must be servant of Christ and a Subject of the
King, but only- Ad placitum Papae. I must be prepared in mind to renounce my
allegiance to the King, when the Pope shall declare him an Heretic and
command me not to obey him: And I must be prepared in mind to esteem Virtue
Vice, and Vice Virtue if the Pope shall so determine. Indeed you say it is
impossible he should do the latter; but that you know is a great question,
neither is it fit my obedience to God and the King should depend upon a
questionable foundation. And howsoever, you must grant that if by an impossible
supposition the Popes commands should be contrary to the law of Christ, that
they of your Religion must resolve to obey rather the commands of the Pope then
the law of Christ. Whereas if I follow the Scripture, I may, nay I must obey my
Sovereign in lawful things, though an Heretic, though a Tyrant, and though,
I do not say the Pope, but the Apostles themselves, nay an Angel from heaven
should teach any thing against the Gospel of Christ, I may, nay I must
denounce Anathem^ to him.

66 Following the Scripture I shall believe a Religion, which being contrary to
flesh and blood, without any assistance from worldly power, wit or policy; nay
against all the power and policy of the world prevailed and enlarged it self in
a very short time all the world over. Whereas it is too too apparent, that your
Church has got and still maintains her authority over men's consciences, by
counterfeiting false miracles, forging fall stories, by obtruding on the world
suppositious writings, by corrupting the monuments of former times, and
defacing out of them all which any way makes against you, by wars, by
persecutions, by Massacres, by Treasons, by Rebellions; in short, by all manner
of carnal means whether violent or fraudulent.

67 Following the Scripture I shall believe a Religion, the first Preachers and
Professors whereof, it is most certain they could have no worldly ends upon the
world, that they could not project to themselves by it any of the profits or
honors or pleasures of this world, but rather were to expect the contrary,
even all the miseries which the world could lay upon them. On the other side,
the Head of your Church, the pretended Successor of the Apostles, and Guide of
faith, it is even palpable, that he makes your Religion the instrument of his
ambition, and by it seeks to entitle himself directly or indirectly to the
Monarchy of the world. And besides, it is evident to any man that has but half
an eye, that most of those Doctrines which you add to the Scripture do make
one way or other, for the honor or temporal profit of the Teachers of them.

68 Following the Scripture only, I shall embrace a Religion of admirable
simplicity, consisting in a manner wholly in the worship of God in spirit and
truth. Whereas your Church and Doctrine is even loaded with an infinity of
weak, childish, ridiculous, unsavory superstitions and ceremonies, and full of
that righteousness for which Christ shall judge the world.

69 Following the Scripture, I shall believe that which Universal,
never-failing Tradition assures me, that it was by the admirable supernatural
work of God confirmed to be the word of God: whereas never, any miracle was
wrought, never so much as a lame horse cured in confirmation of your Churches
authority and infallibility. And if any strange things have been done, which
may seem to give attestation to some parts of your doctrine, yet this proves
nothing but the truth of the Scripture, which foretold that (Gods providence
permitting it, and the wickedness of the world deserving it) strange signs
and wonders should be wrought to confirm false doctrine, that they which love
not the truth, may be given over to strange delusions. Neither does it seem to
me any strange thing, that God should permit some true wonders to be done to
delude them who have forged so many to deceive the world.

70 If I follow the Scripture, I must not promise my self Salvation without
effectual dereliction and mortification of all vices, and the effectual
practice of all Christian virtues: But your Church opens an easier and a
broader way to Heaven, and though I continue all my life long in a course of
sin, and without the practice of any virtue, yet gives me assurance that I
may be let in to heaven at a posterne gate, even by any act of Attrition at the
hour of death, if it be joined with confession, or by an act of Contrition
without confession.

71 Admirable are the Precepts of piety and humility, of innocence and
patience, of liberality, frugality, temperance, sobriety, justice, meekness,
fortitude, constancy and gravity, contempt of the world, love of God and the
love of man kind; In a word, of all virtues, and against all vice, which the
Scriptures impose upon us, to be obeyed under pain of damnation: The sum
whereof is in manner comprised in our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, recorded
in the 5. 6. and 7. of S. Matthew, which if they were generally obeyed, could
not but make the world generally happy, and the goodness of them alone were
sufficient to make any wise and good man believe that this Religion rather then
any other, came from God the Fountain of all goodness. And that they may be
generally obeyed, our Savior has ratified them all in the close of his
Sermon, with these universal Sanctions, Not every one that says Lord Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom, but he that does the will of my Father which is
in Heaven: and again, whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them
not, shall be likned unto a foolish man which built his house upon the sand,
and the ruin descended, and the stood came, and the winds blew, and it fell,
and great was the fall thereof. Now your Church, notwithstanding all this,
enervates and in a manner dissolves and abrogates many of these precepts,
teaching men that they are not laws for all Christians, but Counsels of
perfection and matters of Supererrogation: that a man shall do well if he do
observe them, but he shall not sin if he observe them not; That they are for
them who aim at high places in heaven, who aspire with the two sons of
Zebede, to the right hand or to the left hand of Christ: But if a man will be
content barely to go to heaven, and to be a door keeper in the house of God,
especially if he will be content to taste of Purgatory in the way, he may
obtain it at any easier purchase. Therefore the Religion of your Church is not
so holy nor so good as the doctrine of Christ delivered in Scripture, and
therefore not so likely to come from the Fountain of holiness and goodness.

72 Lastly, if I follow your Church for my Guide, I shall do all one, as if I
should follow a Company of blind men in a judgment of colors, or in the
choice of a way. For every unconsidering man is blind in that which he does not
consider. Now what is your Church but a Company of unconsidering men, who
comfort themselves because they are a great company together, but all of them,
either out of idleness refuse the trouble of a severe trial of their
Religion, (as if heaven were not worth it,) or out of superstition fear the
event of such a trial, that they may be scrupled and staggered and disquieted
by it; and therefore, for the most part do it not at all. Or if they do it,
they do it negligently and hypocritically, and perfunctorily, rather for the
satisfaction of others then themselves: but certainly without indifference,
without liberty of judgment, without a resolution to doubt of it, if upon
examination the grounds of it prove uncertain, or to leave it, if they prove
apparently false. My own experience assures me, that in this imputation I do
you no injury: but it is very apparent to all men from your ranking, doubting
of any part of your Doctrine, among mortal sins. For from hence it follows,
that seeing every man must resolve that he will never commit mortal sin,
that he must never examine the grounds of it at all, for fear he should be
moved to doubt: or if he do, he must resolve that no motives, be they never so
strong shall move him to doubt, but that with his will and resolution he will
uphold himself in a firm belief of your Religon, though his reason and his
understanding fail him. And seeing this is the condition of all those whom you
esteem good Catholics, who can deny, but you are a Company of men unwilling
and afraid to understand, least you should do good! That have eyes to see and
will not see, that have have not the love of truth (which is only to be known
by an indifferent trial,) and therefore deserve to be given over to strong
delusions; men that love darkness more then light: in a word, that you are the
blind leading the blind, and what prudence there can be, in following such
Guides, our Savior has taught us in saying, If the blind lead the blind, both
shall fall into the ditch.

73 There remains unspoken to in this Section, some places out of S. Austin,
and some sayings of Luther, wherein he confesses that in the Papacy are many
good things. But the former I have already considered, and returned the
argument grounded on them. As for Luthers speeches, I told you, not long since,
that we follow no private men, and regard not much what he says either against
the Church of Rome, or for it, but what he proves. He was a man of a vehement
Spirit, and very often what he took in hand, he did not do it but over do it.
He that will justify all his speeches, especially such as he wrote in heat of
opposition, I believe will have work enough. Yet in these sentences, though he
overreach in the particulars, yet what he says in general we confess true,
and confess with him that in the Papacy are many good things, which have come
from them to us, but withal we say there are many bad, neither do we think
our selves bound in prudence either to reject the good with the bad, or to
retain the bad with the good, but rather conceive it a high point of wisdom,
to separate between the precious and the vile, to sever the good from the bad,
and to put the good in vessels to be kept, and to cast the bad away; to try all
things, and to hold that which is good.

74 Ad. 32. Your next and last argument against the faith of Protestants is,
because wanting Certainty and Prudence, it must also want the fourth condition,
Supernaturality. For that being a humane persuasion, it is not in the essence
of it supernatural: and being imprudent and rash, it cannot proceed from
Divine motion, and so is not supernatural in respect of the cause from which
it proceeds. Ans. This little discourse stands wholly upon what went before,
and therefore must fall together with it. I have proved the Faith of
Protestants as certain, and as prudent as the faith of Papists; and therefore
if these be certain grounds of supernaturality, our faith may have it as well
as yours. I would here furthermore be informed how you can assure us that your
faith is not your persuasion or opinion (for you make them all one,) that your
Churches doctrine is true? Or if you grant it your persuasion, why is it not
the persuasion of men, and in respect of the subject of it, an humane
persuasion? I desire also to know, what sense there is in pretending that your
persuasion is, not in regard of the object only and cause of it, but in nature
or essence of it supernatural? Lastly, whereas you say, that being imprudent
it cannot come from divine motion: certainly by this reason all they that
believe your own Religion, and cannot give a wise and sufficient reason for it,
(as millions amongst you cannot) must be condemned to have no supernatural
faith: or if not, then without question nothing can hinder, but that the
imprudent faith of Protestants may proceed from divine motion, as well as the
imprudent faith of Papists.

75 And thus having weighed your whole discourse, and found it altogether
lighter then vanity, why should I not invert your conclusion; and say, Seeing
you have not proved that whosoever erres against any one point of Faith loses
all divine Faith: nor that any error whatsoever concerning that which by the
Parties litigant may be esteemed a matter of faith is a grievous sin, it
follows not at all, that when two men hold different doctrines concerning
Religion, that but one can be saved? Not that I deny, but that the sentence of
S. Chrysostom. with which you conclude this Chapt. may in a good sense be true:
for oftimes by the faith is meant only that Doctrine which is necessary to
salvation, and to say that salvation may be had without any the least thing
which is necessary to salvation, implies a repugnance and destroies it self.
Besides, not to believe all necessary points, and to believe none at all, is
for the purpose of salvation all one; and therefore he that does so, may justly
be said to destroy the Gospel of Christ, seeing he makes it uneffectuall to
the end for which it was intended, the Salvation of men's souls. But why you
should conceive that all differences about Religon, are concerning matters of
faith, in this high notion of the word, for that I conceive no reason.

CHAP. VII.
In regard of the Precept of Charity toward ones self, Protestants are in
state of Sin, as long as they remain separated from the Roman Church.
THAT, due Order is to be observed in the Theological Virtue of Charity,
whereby we are directed to prefer some Objects before others, is a truth
taught by all Divines, and declared in these words of holy Scripture: He has
ordered Cant. 2, 4.
Charity in me. The reason whereof is: because the infinite Goodness of God,
which is the formal Object, or Motive of Charity, and for which all other
things are loved, is differently participated by different Objects; and
therefore the love we bear to them for Gods sake, must accordingly be
unequal. In the virtue of Faith, the case is far otherwise; because all the
Objects, or points which we believe, do equally participate the divine
Testimony or Revelation, for which we believe alike all things propounded for
such. For it is as impossible for God, to speak an untruth in a small, as in a
great matter. And this is the ground for which we have so often affirmed, that
any least error against Faith, is injurious to God, and destructive of
Salvation.

2 This order in Charity may be considered; Toward God; Our own soul; The
soul of our Neighbor; Our own life, or Goods; and the life or goods of our
Neighbor. God is to be beloved above all things, both objective (as the
Divines speak) that is, we must wish or desire to God, a Good more great,
perfect, and noble then to any; or all other things: namely, all that indeed He
is, a Nature Infinite, Independent, Immense etc. and also appretiative, that
is, we must sooner loose what good soever, then leave, and abandon Him. In the
other Objects of Charity, of which I spoke, this order is to be kept. We may,
but are not bound, to prefer the life and goods of our Neigbour before our
own: we are bound to pre^erre the soul of our Neighbor before our own
temporal goods or life, if he happen to be in extreme spiritual necessity,
and that we by our assistance can succor him, according to the saying of S.
John: In this we have known 1. Joan. 3. v. 16.
the Charity of God, because he has yielded his life for us: and we ought to
yield our life for our Brethren. And S. Augustine likewise says: A Christian
will not doubt De mendac. cap. 6.
to loose his own temporal life, for the eternal life of his Neighbor.
Lastly we are to prefer the spiritual good of our own soul, before both the
spiritual and temporal good of our Neighbor, because as Charity does of its
own Nature, chiefly incline the person in whom it resides, to love God, and to
be united with him: so of it self it enclines him to procure those things
whereby the said Union with God is effected, rather to himself then to others.
And from hence it follows, that in things necessary to salvation, no man ought
in any case, or in any respect whatsoever, to prefer the spiritual good,
either of any particular person, or of the whole world before his own soul;
according to those words of our Blessed Savior: What does it; Mat. 6
avail a man, if he gain the whole world, and sustain the damage of his own
soul? And therefore (to come to our present purpose) it is directly against
the Order of Charity, or against Charity as it has a reference to our selves,
which Divines call Charitas propria, to adventure either the omitting of any
means necessary to salvation, or the committing of any thing repugnant to it,
for whatsoever respect, and consequently, if by living out of the Roman Church
we put our selves in hazard, either to want some thing necessarily required to
salvation, or else to perform some act against it, we commit a most grievous
sin against the virtue of Charity, as it respect our selves, and so cannot
hope for salvation without repentance.

3 Now, of things necessary to salvation, there are two sorts, according to the
doctrine of all Divines. Some things (say they) are necessary to salvation,
necessitate praecepti, necessary only because they are commanded; For, If thou will Math. 10. 17.
enter into life, keep the Commandments. In which kind of things, as probable
ignorance of the Law, or of the commandment does excuse the party from all
faulty breach thereof; so likewise does it not exclude salvation in case of
ignorance. Some other things are said to be necessary to salvation necessitate
medij, finis, or salutis; because they are Means appointed by God to attain
our End of eternal salvation, in so strict a manner, that it were presumption
to hope for Salvation without them. And as the former means are said to be
necessary, because they are commanded, so the latter are commonly said to be
commanded: because they are necessary, that is: Although there were no other
special precept concerning them; yet supposing they be once appointed as
means absolutely necessary to salvation, there cannot but arise an obligation
of procuring to have them, in virtue of that universal precept of Charity,
which obliges every man to procure the salvation of his own soul. In this
sort divine infallible Faith is necessary to salvation; as likewise repentance
of every deadly sin, and in the doctrine of Catholics, Baptism in re, that
is, in act, to Children, and for those who are come to the use of reason, in
voto, or hearty desire, when they cannot have it in act. And as Baptism is
necessary for remission of Original and Actual sin committed before it: so
the Sacrament of Confession, or Penance is necessary in re, or in voto, in
act, or desire, for the remission of mortal sins, committed after Baptism.
The Minister of which Sacrament of Penance being necessarily a true Priest,
true Ordination is necessary in the Church of God for remission of sins by
this sacrament, as also for other ends not belonging to our present purpose.
From hence it rises, that no ignorance or impossibility can supply the want of
those means which are absolutely necessary to salvation. As if, for example, a
sinner depart this world without repenting himself of all deadly sins,
although he dye suddenly, or unexpectedly fall out of his wits, and so commit
no new sin by omission of repentance; yet he shall be eternally punished for
his former sins committed, and never repented. If an Infant dye without
Baptism, he cannot be saved, not by reason of any actual sin committed by
him in omitting Baptism, but for Original sin, not forgiven by the means
which God has ordained to that purpose. Which doctrine, all, or must
Protestants will (for ought I know) grant to be trve, in the Children of
Infidels, yea not only Lutherans, but also some other Protestants, as M. Bilson
late of Winchester In his true difference etc. Part. 4. page 168. and 369.
and others hold it to be true, even in the Children of the faithful. And if
Protestants in general disagree fom Catholics in this point, it cannot be
denied but that our disagreement is in a point very fundamental. And the like
I say of the Sacrament of Penance, which they deny to be necessary to
salvation, either in act, or in desire; which error is likewise fundamental,
because it concerns (as I said) a thing necessary to salvation: And for the
same reason, if their Priesthood and Ordination be doubtful, as certainly it
is, they are in danger to want a means without which they cannot be saved.
Neither ought this rigor to seem strange, or unjust: For Almighty God having
of his own Goodness, without our merit, first ordained Man to a supernatural
end of eternal felicity; and then; after our fall in Adam vouchsafed to reduce
us to the attaining of that End, if his blessed Will be pleased to limit the
attaining of that End, to some means which in his infinite Wisdom he thinks
most fit; who can say, why do thou so? Or who can hope for that End, without
such means? Blessed be his divine Majesty, for vouchsafing to ordain us, base
creatures, to so sublime an End, by any means at all!

4 Out of the foresaid difference follows another, that (generally speaking)
in things necessary only, because they are commanded, it is sufficient for
avoiding sin, that we proceed prudently, and by the conduct of some probable
opinion, maturely weighed and approved by men of virtue, learning and wisdom,
Neither are we always obliged to follow the most strict, and severe, or secure
part, as long as the doctrine which we embrace, proceeds upon such reasons, as
may warrant it to be truly probable, and prudent, though the contrary part want
not also probable grounds. For in humane affairs, and discourse, evidence and
certainty cannot be always expected. But when we treat not precisely of
avoiding sin, but moreover of procuring some thing without which I cannot be
saved; I am obliged by the Law, and Order of Charity to procure as great
certainty as morrally I am able; and am not to follow every probable opinion or
dictamen, but tutiorem partem, the safer part, because if my probability prove
false, I shall not probably, but certainly come short of Salvation. Nay in such
case, I shall incur a new sin against the Virtue of Charity toward my
self, which obliges every one not to expose his soul to the hazard of
eternal perdition, when it is in his power, with the assistance of Gods grace,
to make the matter sure. From this very ground it is, that although some
Divines be of opinion, that it is not a sin to use some Ma^ter, or Form of
Sacraments, only probable, if we respect precisely the reverence or respect
which is due to Sacraments, as they belong to the Moral i^fused Virtue of
Religion; yet when they are such Sacraments, as the invalidity thereof may
endanger the salvation of souls, all do with one consent agree, that it is a
grievous offense to use a doubtful, or only probable Matter or Form, when it
is in our power to procure certainty. If therefore it may appear, that though
it were not certain that Protestancy unrepented destroys Salvation (as we
have proved to be very certain) yet at least that is probable, and with all,
that there is a way more safe; it will follow out of the grounds already said,
that they are obliged by the law of Charity to imb^ace that safe way.

5 Now, that Protestants have reason at least to doubt in what case they stand,
is deduced from what we have said, and proved about the universal
infallibility of the Church, and of her being Judge of Controversies, to whom
all Christians ought to submit their Judgment (as even some Protestants
g^ant,) and whom to oppose in any one of her definitions; is a grievous sin:
As also from what we have said of the Unity, Universality, and Visibility of
the Church, and of Succession of Persons, and Doctrine; Of the Conditions of
Divine Faith, Certainty, Obscurity, Prudence, and Supernaturality, which are
wanting in the faith of Protestants; Of the frivolous distinction of points
fundamental and not fundamental, (the confutation whereof proves that
Heretics disagreeing among themselves in any least point, cannot have the
same faith, nor be of the same Church:) Of Schism; of Heresy; of the Persons
who first revolted from Rome, and of their Motives; of the Nature of Faith,
which is destroyed by any least error, and it is Certain that some of the^
must be in error and want the substance of true faith; and since all pretend
the like certainty, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all,
but that they want true faith, which is a means most absolutely necessary to
Salvation. Moreover, as I said heretofore, since it is granted that every Error
in fundamental points is damnable, and that they cannot tell in particular,
what points be fundamental; it follows that none of them knows whether he,
or his Brethren do not err damnably, it being certain that amongst so many
disagreeing persons some must err. Upon the same ground of not being able to
assign what points be fundamental, I say, they cannot be sure whether the
difference among them be fundamental or no, and consequently whether they
agree in the substance of faith and hope of Salvation. I omit to add that you
want the Sacrament of Penance, instituted for remission of sins, or at least
you must confess that you hold it not necessary; and yet your own Brethren,
for example, the Century Writers do Cent. 3. cap. 6. Col. 1^7.
acknowledge that in times of Cyprian, and Tertullian, Private Confession even
of Thoughts was used; and that, it was then commanded, and thought necessary.
The like, I say, concerning your Ordination, which at least is very doubtful,
and consequently all that depends thereon.

6 On the other side, that the Roman Church is the the safer way to Heaven (not
to repeat what has been already said upon diverse occasions) I will again put
you in mind, that unless the Roman Church was the true Church there was no
visible true Church upon earth. A thing so manifest, that Protestants
themselves confess that more then one thousand years the Roman Church
possessed the whole world, as we have showed heretofore, out of their own Chap.
5. Hu^. 9.
words: from whence it follows, that unless Ours be the true Church, you
cannot pretend to any perpetual visible Church of your Own; but Ours does not
depend on yours, before which it was. And here I wish you to consider with
feate and trembling, how all Roman Catholics, not one excepted; that is,
those very men whom you must hold not to err damnably in their belief, unless
you will destroy your own Church, and salvation, do with unanimous consent
believe, and profess that Protestancy unrepented destroys Salvation; and then
tell me, as you will answer at the last day, Whether it be not more safe, to
live and die in that Church, which even your selves are forced to acknowledge
not to be cut off from hope of Salvation, (which are your own words) then
^^live in a Church, which the said confessedly true Church does firmly believe,
and constantly profess not to be capable of Salvation. And therefore I
conclude that by the most strict obligation of Charity toward your own soul,
you are bound to place it in safety, by returning to that Church, from which
your Progenitors Schismatically departed; least too late you find that saying
of the holy Ghost verified in your selves: He that loves Eccl. 3. 27.
the danger, shall perish therein.

7 Against this last argument of the greater security of the Roman Church drawn
from your own confession, you bring an Objection; which in the end will be
found to make for us, against your self. It is taken from the words of the
Don^tists, speaking to Catholics in this manner: Your selves confess Page
112.
our Baptism, Sacraments, and Faith (here you put an Explication or your own,
and say, for the most part, as if any small error in faith did not destroy all
Faith) to be good, and available. We deny yours to be so, and say there is no
Church, no salvation amongst you; Therefore it is safest for all to join with
us.

8 By your leave our Argument is not (as you say) for simple people alone, but
for all them who have care to save their souls. Neither is it grounded upon
your Charitable Judgment (as you Page 81.
speak) but upon an inevitable necessity for you, either to grant salvation to
our Church, or to entaile certain damnation upon your own: because yours can
have no being till Luther, unless ours be supposed to have been the true
Church of Christ. And since you term this Argument a charm, take heed you be
none of those, who according to the Prophet David, do not hear the voice of
him Ps. 57. 6.
who charmeth wisely. But to come to the purpose: Catholics never granted
that the Donatists had a true Church, or might be saved: And therefore you
having cited out of S. Augustine, the words of the Catholics, that the
Donatists had true Baptism, when you come to the contrary words of the
Donatists, you add, No Church, No Salvation; making the Argument to have
quinque terminos; without which Addition you did see it made nothing against
us: For, as I said, the Catholics never yielded, that among the Donatists
there was a true Church, or hope of salvation. And your self, a few leaves
after, acknowledge that the Donatists maintained an error, which was in the
Matter and Nature of it properly haereticall, against that Article of the
Creed, wherein we profess to believe the holy Page 126.
Catholic Church: and consequently, you cannot allow salvation to them, as
you do, and must do to us. And therefore the Donatists could not make the
like argument against Catholics, as Catholics make against you, who grant
us Salvation, which we deny to you. But at least (you will say) this Argument
for the Certainty of their Baptism, was like to Ours touching the Security and
Certainty of our salvation; and therefore that Catholics should have esteemed
the Baptism of the Donatists more certain then their own, and so have allowed
Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics, or sinners, as the
Donatists esteemed all Catholics to be. I answer, no. Because it being a
matter of faith, that Baptism administered by Heretics, observing due Matter,
form etc. is valide; to rebaptize any so baptized, had been both a sacriledg in
reiterating a Sacrament not reiterable, and a profession also of a damnable
Heresy, and therefore had not been more safe, but certainly damnable. But you
confess that in the doctrine or practice of the Roman Church, there is no
belief, or profession of any damnable error, which if there were, even your
Church should certainly be no Church. To believe therefore and profess as we
do, cannot exclude Salvation, as Rebaptization must have done. But if the
Donatists could have affirmed with truth, that in the opinion both of
Catholics and themselves, their Baptism was good, yea and good in such sort
as that unless theirs was good, that of the Catholics could not be such; but
theirs might be good, though that of the Catholics were not: and further that
it was no damnable error to believe, that Baptism administered by the
Catholics was not good, nor that it was any Sacriledg to reiterate the same
Baptism of Catholics: If, I say, they could have truly affirmed these
things, they had said somewhat, which at least had seemed to the purpose. But
these things they could not say with any color of truth, and therefore their
argument was fond, and impious. But we with truth say to Protestants: You
cannot but confess that our doctrine contains no damnable error; and that our
Church is so certainly a true Church, that unless ours be true you cannot
pretend any; Yea you grant, that you should be guilty of Schism, if you did
cut off our Church from the Body of Christ, and the hope of salvation: But we
neither do, nor can grant that yours is a true Church, or that within it there
is hope of salvation: Therefore it is safest for you to join with us, And now
against whom has your Objection greatest force?

9 But I wonder not a little, and so I think will ever body else, what the
reason may be, that you do not so much as go about to answer the argument of
the Donatists, which you say is all one with Ours, but refer us to S.
Augustine there to read it; as if every one carried with him a Library, or were
able to examine the places in S. Augustine: and yet you might be sure your
Reader would be greedy to see some solid answer to an argument so often urged
by us, and which indeed, unless you can confute it, ought alone to move every
one who has care of his soul, to take the safest way, by incorporating
himself in our Church. But we may easily imagine the true reason of your
silence: For the answer which S. Augustine gives to the Donatists, is directly
against your self, and the same which I have given. Namely, that Catholics Ad
lit. Petil. l. 2. cap. 10^.
approve the Baptism of Donatists, but abhor their heresy of Rebaptization.
And that as gold is good (which is the similitude used by Contra Cresc, lib. 1.
cap. 21.
S. Augustine) yet not to be sought in company of thieves; so though Baptism
be good, yet it must not be sought for in the Conventicle of Donatists. But you
free us from damnable heresy, and yield us salvation, which I hope is to be
embraced in whatsoever Company it is found; or rather that Company is to be
embraced before all other, in which all sides agree, that salvation may be
found. We therefore must infer, that it is safest for you to seek salvation
among us. You had good reason to conceal S. Augustins answer to the Donatists.

10 You frame another argument in our behalf, and make us speak thus: If
Protestants believe the Page 7^.
Religion of Catholics to be a safe way to Heaven, why do they not follow
it? which wise argument of your own, you answer at large, and confirm your
answer by this instance: The Jesuits and Dominicans hold different Opinions
touching Predetermination, and the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin:
Yet so, that the Jesuits hold the Dominicans way safe, that is, his error not
damnable, and the Dominicans hold the same of the Jesuits; Yet neither of them
with good Consequence can press the other to believe his opinion, because by
his own Confession it is no damnable error.

11 But what Catholic makes such a wise demand as you put into our mouths?
If our Religion be a safe way to heaven, that is, not damnable; why do you not
follow it? As if every thing that is good, must be of necessity embraced by
every body. But what think you of the Argument framed thus? Our Religion is
safe even by your Confession, therefore you ought to grant that all may embrace
it. And yet further, thus: Among different Religions and contrary ways to
heaven, one only can be safe: But ours, by your own Confession, is safe,
whereas we hold that in yours there is no hope of salvation: Therefore you may
and ought to embrace ours. This is our Argument. And if the Dominicans and
Jesuits did say one to another as we say to you; then one of them might with
good consequence press the other to believe his opinion. You have still the
hard for tune to be beaten with your own weapon.

12 It remains then, that both in regard of Faith, and Charity, Protestants
are obliged to unite themselves with the Church of Rome. And I may add also,
in regard of the Theological V^^tue of Hope, without which none can hope to be
saved, and which you want, either by ex^^sse of Confidence, or defect by
Despair, not unlike to your Faith, which I showed to be either ^^^cient in
Certainty, or excessive in Evide^ce; as likewise according to the rigid
Calvinists, it is either so strong, that once had, it can never be lost; or so
more then weak, and so much nothing; that it can never be gotten. For the trve
Theological Hope of Christians, is a Hope which keeps a mean between
Presumption, and Desperation; which moves us to work our salvation with fear,
and trembling; which conducts us to make sure our salvation by good works, as
holy Scripture advises. But contrarily, Protestants do either exclude Hope by
Despair, with the Doctrine that our Savior died not for all, and that such
want grace sufficient to salvation; or else by vain Presumption grounded upon
a fantastical persuasion, that they are Predestinate; which Faith must exclude
all fear, and trembling, Neither can they make their Calling certain by good
works, who do certainly believe that before any good works they are justified,
and justified even by Faith alone, and that by Faith whereby they certainly
believe that they are justified. Which points some Protestants do expressly
affirm to be the soul of the Church, the principal Origin of salvation, Of
all other points of Doctrine the chiefest and weightiest; as already I have
noted Chap. 3. n. 19. And if some Protestants do now relent from the rigor of
the aforesaid doctrine, we must affirm, that at least some of them want the
Theological Virtue of Hope; yea that none of them can have trve Hope, while
they hope to be saved in the Communion of those, who defend such doctrines, as
do directly overthrow all true Christian Hope. And for as much as concerns
Faith, we must also infer, that they want Unity therein (and consequently have
none at all) by their disagreement about the soul of the Church, the
principal Origin of salvation, of all other points of Doctrine the chiefest
and weightiest. And if you want trve Faith, you must by consequence want Hope,
or if you hold that this point is not to be so indivisible on either side, but
that it has latitude sufficient to embrace all parties, without prejudice to
their salvation; notwithstanding that your Brethren hold it to be the soul of
the Church etc. I must repeat what I have said heretofore, that, even by this
Example, it is clear, you cannot agree what points be fundamental. And so (to
whatsoever answer you fly) I press you in the same manner, and say, that have
no Certainty whether you agree in fundamental points, or Unity and substance
of Faith, which cannot stand with difference in fundamentalls. And so upon the
whole matter, I leave it to be considered, whether, Want of Charity can be
justly charged on us, because we affirm, that they cannot (without repentance)
be saved, who want of all other the most necessary means to salvation, which
are, the three Theological Virtues, FAITH, HOPE, and CHARITY.

13 And now I end this first part, having as I conceive, complied with my first
design, (in that measure, which Time, Commodity, scarcity of Books, and my own
small Abilities could afford) which was to show, that Amongst men of different
Religions, one side only can be saved. For since there must be some infallible
Means to decide all Controversies concerning Religion, and to propound truth
revealed by Almighty God; and this Means can be no other, but the Visible
Church of Christ, which at the time of Luthers appearance was only the Church
of Rome. and such as agreed with her: We must conclude, that whosoever opposes
himself to her definitions, or forsakes her Communion, does resist God
himself, whose Spouse she is, and whose divine truth she propounds; and
therefore becoms guilty of Schism, and Heresy, which since Luther, his
Associates, and Protestants have done, and still continue to do; it is not
Want of Charity, but abundance of evident cause that forces us to declare this
necessary Truth, PROTESTANCIE UNREPENTED DESTROIES SALVATION.

THE ANSWER TO THE SEVENTH CHAPTER.
That Protestants are not bound by the Charity which they owe to themselves, to
reunite themselves to the Roman Church.
THE first four Paragraphs of this Chapter are wholly spent in an un-necessary
introduction unto a truth, which I presume, never was, nor will be by any man
in his right wits, either denied or questioned; and that is, That every man in
wisdom and charity to himself, is to take the safest way to his eternal
Salvation.

2 The fifth and sixth are nothing in a manner, but references to discourses
already answered by me, and confuted in their proper places.

3 The seventh, eight, ninth, tenth, and eleventh; have no other foundation
but this false pretense, That we confess the Roman Church free from damnable
error.

4 In the twelfth there is something that has some probability to persuade some
Protestants to forsake some of their opinions, or others to leave their
communion; but to prove Protestants in state of sin while they remain
separate from the Roman Church, there is not one word or syllable: and besides,
whatsoever argument there is in it for any purpose, it may be as forcibly
returned upon Papists, as it is urged against Protestants; in as much as all
Papists, either hold the doctrine of Predetermination, and absolute Election,
or communicate with those that do hold it. Now from this doctrine, what is
more prone and obvious, then for every natural man (without Gods especial
preve^ting grace) to make this practical collection, Either I am elected or
not elected; If I be, no impiety possible can ever damn me: If not, no
possible industry can ever save me? Now whether this disiunctive persuasion be
not as likely (as any doctrine of any Protestants,) to extinguish Christian
hope, and filial fear, and to lead some men to despair, others to
presumption, all to a wretchlesse and impious life, I desire you ingenuously to
inform me! and if you deny it, assure your self you shall be contradicted and
confuted by men of your own Religion and your own Society, and taught at length
this charitable Doctrine, that though men's opinions may be charged with the
absurd consequences which naturally flow from them, yet the men themselves are
not; I mean, if they perceive not the consequence of these absurdities, nor
do not own and acknowledge, but disclaim and detest them. And this is all the
answer which I should make to this discourse, if I should deal rigidly and
strictly with you. Yet that you may not think your self contemned, nor have
occasion to pretend, that your arguments are evaded, I will entreat leave of my
Reader to bring to the test every particle of it, and to censure what deserves
a censure, and to answer what may any way seem to require an answer: and then
I doubt not, but what I have affirmed in general will appear in particular.

Ad. 1. To the First then I say. 1. It was needless to prove, that due Order
is to be observed in any thing; much more in Charity, which being one of the
best things, may be spoiled by being disordered! Yet if it stood in need of
proof, I fear this place of the Canticles, He has ordered Charity in me,
would be no enforcing demonstration of it. 2. The reason alleged by you why we
ought to love one object more then another, because one thing participates the
Divine Goodness more than another, is fantastical, and repugnant to what you
say presently after. For by this rule no man should love himself more then all
the world; unless he were first vainly persuaded that he does more
participate the Divine Goodness then all the world. But the true reason why
one thing ought to be loved more then another is, because one thing is better
then another, or because it is better to us, or because God commands us to do
so, or because God himself does so, and we are to conform our affections to
the will of God. 3. It is not true that all objects which we believe, do
equally participate the Divine Testimony or Revelation: For some are testified
more evidently, and some more obscurely; and therefore whatsoever you have
built upon this ground, must of necessity fall together with it. And thus much
for the first number.

6 Ad. 2. In the Second many passages deserve a censure. For 1. it is not true
that we are to wish or desire to God a nature infinite, independent, immense:
For it is impossible I should desire to any person that which he has already,
if I know that he has it; nor the perpetuity of it, if I know it impossible
but he must have it for perpetuity. And therefore, rejoicing only and not
welwishing is here the proper work of love. 2. Whereas you say, That in things
necessary to salvation, no man ought in any case or in any respect whatsoever,
to prefer the spiritual good of the whole world before his own soul: In
saying this you seem to me to condemn one of the greatest acts of Charity, of
one of the greatest Saints that ever was, I mean S. Paul, who for his brethren
desired to be an Anathema from Christ. And as for the Text alleged by you in
confirmation of your saying, what does it avail a man if he gain the whole
world, and sustain the damage of his own soul! it is nothing to the purpose:
For without all question it is not profitable for a man to do so; but the
question is, whether it be not lawful for a man to forgo and part with his
own particular profit, to procure the universal, spiritual, and eternal
benefit of others? 3. Whereas you say, it is directly against Charity to our
selves, to adventure the omitting of any means necessary to salvation, this is
true: But so is this also, that it is directly against the same Charity, to
adventure the omitting any thing, that may any way help or conduce to my
salvation, that may make the way to it more secure or less dangerous. And
therefore if the errors of the Roman Church do but hinder me in this way, or
any way endanger it, I am in Charity to my self bound to forsake them, though
they be not destructive of it. 4. Whereas you conclude, That if by living out
of the Roman Church we put our selves in hazard to want something necessary to
Salvation, we commit a grievous sin against the virtue of Charity as it
respects our selves: This consequence may be good in those which are thus
persuaded of the Roman Church, and yet live out of it. But the supposition is
certainly false. We may live and dye out of the Roman Church, without putting
our selves in any such hazard: Nay to live and dye in it is as dangerous as to
shoot a gulf, which though some good ignorant souls may do and escape, yet
it may well be feared that not one in a hundred but miscarries.

7 Ad. 3. I proceed now to the third Section; and herein first I observe this
acknowledgement of yours, That in things necessary only because commanded, a
probable ignorance of the commandment excuses the Party from all fault, and
does not exclude Salvation. From which Doctrine it seems to me to follow, that
seeing obedience to the Roman Church cannot be pretended to be necessary, but
only because it is commanded, therefore not only an invincible, but even a
probable ignorance of this pretended command, must excuse us from all faulty
breach of it, and cannot exclude Salvation. Now seeing this command is not
pretended to be expressly delivered, but only to be deduced from the word of
God, and that not by the most clear and evident consequences that may be; and
seeing an infinity of great objections lies against it, which seem strongly to
prove that there is no such command; with what Charity can you suppose, that
our ignorance of this command, is not at the least probable, if not, all things
considered, plainly invincible? Sure I am, for my part, that I have done my
true endeavor to find it true, and am still willing to do so; but the more I
seek, the farther I am from finding, and therefore if it be true, certainly my
not finding it is very excusable, and you have reason to be very charitable in
your censures of me. 2. Whereas you say, That besides these things necessary
because commanded, there are other things, which are commanded because
necessary: of which number you make Divine infallible faith, Baptism in Act
for Children, and in Desire for those who are come to the use of Reason, and
the Sacrament of Confession, for those who have committed mortal sin: In
these words you seem to me to deliver a strange Paradoxe viz. That Faith, and
Baptism, and Confession are not therefore necessary for us, because God
appointed them, but are therefore appointed by God because they were necessary
for us, antecedently to his appointment; which if it were true, I wonder what
it was beside God that made them necessary, and made it necessary for God to
command them! Besides, in making faith one of these necessary means, you seem
to exclude Infants from Salvation: For Faith comes by hearing, and they have
not heard. In requiring that this Faith should be divine and infallible, you
cast your Credentes into infinite perplexity, who cannot possibly by any sure
mark discern whether their Faith be Divine or humane, or if you have any
certain sign, whereby they may discern, whether they believe your Churches
infallibility with Divine or only with humane faith, I pray produce it, for
perhaps it may serve us to show, that our faith is divine as well as yours.
Moreover in affirming that Baptism in act is necessary for Infants, and for
men only in desire, You seem to me in the latter to destroy the foundation of
the former. For if a desire of Baptism will serve men instead of Baptism,
then those words of our Savior, Unless a man be borne again of water etc. are
not to be understood literally and rigidly of external Baptism; for a desire
of Baptism is not Baptism, and so your foundation of the Absolute necessity
of Baptism is destroyed. And if you may gloss the Text so far, as that men
may be saved by the desire, without Baptism it self, because they cannot have
it, why should you not gloss it a little farther, that there may be some hope
of the salvation of unbaptized infants: to whom it was more impossible to have
a desire of Baptism, then for the former to have the thing it self? Lastly,
for your Sacrament of Confession, we know none such, nor any such absolute
necessity of it. They that confess their sins and forsake them shall find
mercy, though they confess them to God only and not to men. They that confess
them both to God and men, if they do not effectually and in time forsake them,
shall not find mercy. 3. Whereas you say, that supposing these means once
appointed as absolutely necessary to salvation, there cannot but arise an
obligation of procuring to have them; you must suppose I hope, that we know
them to be so appointed, and that it is in our power to procure them: otherwise
though it may be our ill fortune to fail of the end, for want of the means,
certainly we cannot be obliged to procure them. For the rule of the law is also
the dictate of common reason and equity, That no man can be obliged to what is
impossible. We can be obliged to nothing but by virtue of some command: now it
is impossible that God should command in earnest anything which he knows to be
impossible. For to command in earnest, is to command with an intent to be
obeyed; which is not possible he should do, when he knows the thing commanded
to be impossible. Lastly, whosoever is obliged to do any thing, and does it
not, commits a fault; but Infants commit no fault in not procuring to have
Baptism; therefore no obligation lies upon them to procure it. 4. Whereas you
say, that if Protestants dissent from you in the point of the necessity of
Baptism for Infants, it cannot be denied but that our disagreement is in a
point fundamental; If you mean a point esteemed so by you, this indeed cannot
be denied: But if you mean a point that indeed is fundamental, this may
certainly be denied, for I deny it, and say, that it does not appear to me any
way necessary to Salvation to hold the truth, or not to hold an error, touching
the condition of these Infants. This is certain, and we must believe that God
will not deal unjustly with them, but how in particular he will deal with
them concerns not us, and therefore we need not much regard it. 5. Whereas you
say the like of your Sacrament of Penance, you only say so, but your proofs
are wanting. Lastly, whereas you say, This rigor ought not to seem strange or
unjust in God, but that we are rather to bless him for ordaining us to
Salvation by any means: I answer, that it is true, we are not to question the
known will of God, of injustice; yet whether that which you pretend to be Gods
will, be so indeed, or only your presumption, this I hope may be questioned
lawfully and without presumption; and if we have occasion we may safely put you
in mind of Ezekiel's commination, against all those who say, thus says the
Lord, when they have no certain warrant or authority from him to do so.

8 Ad. 4. In the fourth Paragraph you deliver this false and wicked Doctrine,
that for the procuring our own salvation we are allwaies bound under pain of
mortal sin to take the safest way, but for avoiding sin we are not bound
to do so, but may follow the opinion of any probable Doctors, though the
contrary may be certainly free from sin, and theirs be doubtful. Which
doctrine in the former part of it is appare^tly false: For though wisdom and
Charity to our selves would persuade us always to do so, yet many times, that
way which to our selves and our salvation is more full of hazard, is
notwithstanding not only lawful, but more charitable and more noble. For
example, to fly from a persecution and so to avoid the temptation of it, may be
the safer way for a man's own salvation; yet I presume no man ought to condemn
him of impiety, who should resolve not to use his liberty in this matter, but
for Gods greater glory, the greater honor of truth, and the greater
confirmation of his brethren in the faith, choose to stand out the storm and
endure the fiery trial, rather then avoid it; rather to put his own soul to
the hazard of a temptation, in hope of Gods assistance to go through with it,
then to baulke the opportunity of doing God and his brethren so great a
service. This part therefore of this Doctrine is manifestly untrue. The other
not only false but impious; for therein you plainly give us to understand, that
in your judgment, a resolution to avoid sin, to the uttermost of our power,
is no necessary means of Salvation, nay that a man may resolve not to do so,
without any danger of damnation. Therein you teach us, that we are to do more
for the love of our selves, and our own happiness then for the love of God;
and in so doing contradict our Savior, who expressly commands us, to love the
Lord our God withal our heart, withal our soul, and withal our strength;
and has taught us that the love of God consists in avoiding sin and keeping
his commandments. Therein you directly cross S. Paul's doctrine, who though he
were a very probable Doctor, and had delivered his judgment for the
lawfulness of eating meats offered to Idols; yet he assures us that he which
should make scruple of doing so, and forbear upon his scruple, should not
sin, but only be aweak brother; whereas he, who should do it with a
doubtful conscience, (though the action were by S. Paul warranted lawful,
yet) should sin and be condemned for so doing. You pretend indeed to be rigid
defenders and stout champions for the necessity of good works; but the truth
is, you speak lies in hypocrisy, and when the matter is well examined, will
appear to make your selves and your own functions necessary, but obedience to
God unnecessary: Which will appear to any man who considers what strict
necessity the Scripture imposes upon all men, of effectual mortification of
the habits of all vices, and effectual conversion to newness of life, and
universal obedience, Bellar. Contr. Barcl. c. 7. In 7. c. resutare con^tur
Bard^verba illa Romuli. Veteres illos Imperotores Constantium Valentem and
Caeteros non ideo toleravit Ecclesia quod legitime successissent, sed quod
illos sine populi detrimento coercere non po^erat. Et miratur hoc idem
scripsisse Bellarminum. l 5. de Pontif. c. 7. Sed ut magis miretur, sciat hoc
idem sensisse S. Th^m^m. 2. 2. (...). 12 art. 2. ad 1. ^^bi dicit Ecclesiam
tolerasse ut sideles obedirent Iuliano Apostatae, qui^i^ suinovitate nondum
habebant vires ^o^pescendi Principes terrenos.
and withal remembers that an act of Attrition, which you say with Priestly
absolution is sufficient to salvation, is not mortification, which being a work
of difficulty and time, cannot be performed in an instant. But for the present,
it appears sufficiently out of this impious assertion, which makes it
absolutely necessary for men, either in Act if it be possible, or if not, in
Desire, to be Baptized and Absolved by you, and that with Intention: and in the
mean time warrants them that for avoding of sin, they may safely follow the
uncertain guidance of a vain man, who you cannot deny may either be deceived
himself, or, out of malice deceive them, and neglect the certain direction of
God himself, and their own consciences. What wicked use is made of this
Doctrine, your own long experience can better inform you, then it is possible
for me to do: yet my own little conversation with you affords one memorable
example to this purpose. For upon this ground I knew a young Scholar in Doway,
licensed by a great Casuist to swear a thing as upon his certain knowledge,
whereof he had yet no knowledge but only a great presumption, because
(forsooth) it was the opinion of one Doctor that he might do so. And upon the
same ground, whenever you shall come to have a prevailing party in this
Kingdom, and power sufficient to restore your Religion, you may do it by
deposing or killing the King, by blowing up of Parliaments, and by rooting out
all others of a different faith from you. Nay this you may do, though in your
own opinion it be unlawful, because Bellarmine, a man with you of approved
virtue, learning and judgment, has declared his opinion for the lawfulness
of it, in saying, that want of power to maintain a rebellion, was the only
reason that the Primitive Christians did not rebel against the persecuting
Emperors. By the same rule, seeing the Priests and Scribes and Pharisees, men
of greatest repute among the Jews for virtue, learning and wisdom, held it a
lawful and a pious work to persecute Christ and his Apostles, Et posi^a,
Sanctus Gregorius decit, nullum adversus Iuliani persecutionem fuisse remediu^
praeter lachrimas, quoniam non habebat Ecclesia vires, quibus illius tyrannidi
resistere posset.
it was lawful for the people to follow their leaders: for herein, according
to your Doctrine, they proceeded prudently, and according to the conduct of
opinion, maturely weighed and approved by men as it seemed to them of virtue,
learning and wisdom; nay by such as sat in Moses chair, and of whom it was
said, whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: which universal
you pretend is to be understood universally, and without any restriction or
limitation. And as lawful was it for the Pagans to persecute the Primitive
Christians, because Truian and Pliny, men of great virtue and wisdom were of
this opinion. Lastly, that most impious and detestable Doctrine, (which by a
foul calumny you impute to me, who abhor and detest it,) that men may be
saved in any Religion, follows from this ground unavoidably. For certainly
Religion is one of those things which is necessary only because it is
commanded: for if none were commanded under pain of damnation, how could it be
damnable to be of any? Neither can it be damnable to be of a false Religion,
unless it be a sin to be so. For neither are men saved by good luck, but only
by obedience; neither are they damned for their ill fortune but for sin and
disobedience. Death is the wages of nothing but sin: and S. James sure intended
to deliver the adequate cause of sin and death in those words, Lust when it
has conceived brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth
death. Seeing therefore in such things, according to your doctrine, it is
sufficient for avoiding of sin, that we proceed prudently, and by the conduct
of some probable opinion, maturely weighed and approved by men of learning,
virtue and wisdom: and seeing neither Jews want their Gamaliels, nor Pagans
their Antoninus'es, nor any sect of Christians such professors and maintainers
of their several sects, as are esteemed by the people, which know no better
(and that very reasonably) men of virtue, learning, and wisdom, it follows
evidently that the embracing their religion proceeds upon such reason as may
warrant their action to be prudent, and this is sufficient for avoiding of
sin, and therefore certainly for avoiding damnation, for that in humane
affairs and discourse, evidence and certainty cannot be always expected. I
have stood the longer upon the refutation of this doctrine, not only because it
is impious, and because bad use is made of it, and worse may be, but only
because the contrary position, That men are bound for avoiding sin always to
take the safest way, is a fair and sure foundation, for a clear confutation of
the main conclusion, which in this Chapter you labor in vain to prove, and a
certain proof that in regard of the precept of charity toward ones self, and
of obedience to God, Papists (unless ignorance excuse them) are in state of
sin as long as they remain in subjection to the Roman Church.

9 For if the safer way for avoiding sin, be also the safer way for avoiding
damnation, then certainly whether the way of Protestants must be more secure,
and the Roman way more dangerous, take but into your consideration these
ensuing controversies: Whether it be lawful to worship Pictures? to picture
the Trinity? to invocate Saints and Angels? to deny Law-men the Cup in the
Sacrament? to adore the Sacrament? to prohibit certain Orders of men and
women to marry? to celebrate the public service of God in a language which
the assistants generally understand not? and you will not choose but confess
that in all these you are on the more dangerous side for the committing of sin,
and we on that which is more secure. For in all these things, if we say true,
you do that which is impious: on the other side if you were in the right, yet
we might be secure enough, for we should only not do something which you
confess not necessary to be done. We pretend, and are ready to justify out of
principles agreed upon between us, that in all these things, you violate the
manifest commandments of God; and allege such texts of Scripture against you,
as, if you would weigh them with any indifference, would put the matter out of
question, but certainly you cannot with any modesty deny, but that at least
they make it questionable. On the other side, you cannot with any face pretend,
and if you should, know not how to go about to prove, that there is any
necessity of doing any of these things; that it is unlawful not to worship
pictures, not to picture the Trinity, not to invocate Saints and Angels, not to
give all men the entire Sacrament, not to adore the Eucharist, not to prohibit
marriage, not to celebrate divine service in an unknown tongue: I say you
neither do nor can pretend that there is any law of God which enjoynes us, no
nor so much as an Evangelicall Counsel that advises us to do any of these
things. Now where no law is there can be no sin, for sin is the transgression
of the law; It remains therefore that our forbearing to do these things, must
be free from all danger and suspicion of sin; whereas your acting of them, must
be, if not certainly impious, without all contradiction questionable and
dangerous. I conclude therefore that which was to be concluded, that if the
safer way for avoiding sin, be also (as most certainly it is,) the safer way
for avoiding damnation, then certainly the way of Protestants must be more
safe, and the Roman way more dangerous. You will say, I know, that these things
being by your Church concluded lawful, we are obliged by God, though not to
do, yet to approve them; at least in your judgment we are so, and therefore
our condition is as questionable as yours. I answer. The Authority of your
Church is no common principle agreed upon between us, and therefore upon that
you are not to dispute against us. We might press you with our judgment as
well and as justly as you do us with yours. Besides, this very thing that your
Church has determined these things lawful, and commanded the approbation of
them, is that whereof she is accused by us, and we maintain you have done
wickedly, or at least very dangerously in so determining; because in these very
determinations, you have forsaken that way which was secure from sin, and
have chosen that which you cannot but know to be very questionable and
doubtful; and consequently have forsaken the safe way to heaven, and taken a
way which is full of danger. And therefore, although if your obedience to your
Church were questioned, you might fly for shelter to your Churches
determinations, yet when these very determinations are accused, me thinks they
should not be alleag'd in defense of themselves. But you will say, your Church
is infallible, and therefore her determinations not unlawful. Ans. They that
accuse your Church of error, you may be sure do question her infallibility:
show therefore where it is written, that your Church is infallible, and the
dispute will be ended. But till you do so, give me leave rather to conclude
thus, your Church in many of her determinations, chooses not that way which is
more secure from sin, and therefore not the safest way to salvation; then
vainly to imagine her infallible, and there upon to believe, though she teach
not the securest way to avoid sin, yet she teaches the certainst way to obtain
salvation.

10 In the close of this Number, you say as follows, If it may appear though
not certain, yet at least probable, that Protestancy unrepented destroies
salvation, and withal that there is a safer way, it will follow that they are
obliged by the law of Charity to that safe way. Ans. Make this appear and I
will never persuade any man to continue a Protestant, for if I should, I should
persuade him to continue a fool. But after all these prolix discourses, still
we see you are at, If it may appear: From whence without all Ifs and Ands that
appears sufficiently which I said in the beginning of the Chapter, that the
four first Paragraphs of this Chap. are wholly spent in an unnecessary
introduction, unto that which never by any man in his right wits was denied,
That men in wisdom and charity to themselves are to take the safest way to
eternal salvation.

11 Ad 5. In the fifth you begin to make some show of arguing, and tells us,
that Protestants have reason to doubt in what case they stand from what you
have said about the Churches universal infallibility, and of her being Judge
of Controversies, etc. Ans. From all that which you have said, they have reason
only to conclude that you have nothing to say. They have as much reason to
doubt, whether there can be any Motion, from what Zeno says in Aristotle's
Physics, as to doubt from what you have said, whether the Roman Church may
possibly err. For this I dare say, that not the weakest of Zeno's arguments
but is stronger then the strongest of yours, and that you would be more
perplexed in answering any one of them, then I have been in answering all yours.
You are pleased to repeat two or three of them in this Section, and in all
probability so wise a man as you are, if he would repeat any, would repeat the
best, and therefore if I desire the Reader by these to judge of the rest, I
shall desire but ordinary justice.

12 The first of them being put into form stands thus, Every least error in
faith destroies the nature of faith; It is certain that some Protestants do
err, and therefore they want the substance of Faith. The Major of which
Syllogism I have formerly confuted by unanswerable arguments out of one of
your own best Authors, who shows plainly that he has amongst you, as strange
as you make it, many other abettors. Besides, if it were true, it would
conclude that either you or the Dominicans have no faith, in as much as you
oppose one another as much as Arminians and Calvinists.

13 The second Argument stands thus, Since all Protestants pretend the like
certainty, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all: Which
argument if it were good, then what can hinder but this must also be so, Since
Protestants and Papists pretend the like certainty; it is clear that none of
them have any certainty at all! And this too: Since all Christians pretend the
like certainty it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all! And
thirdly this: Since men of all religions pretend a like certainty, it is clear
that none of them have any at all! And lastly this: Since oft-times they which
are abused with a specious Paralogisme, pretend the like certainty with them
which demonstrate, it is clear that none of them have any certainty at all!
Certainly Sir, Zeal and the Devil did strangely blind you, if you did not see
that these horrid impieties were the immediate consequences of your positions,
if you did see it, and yet would set them down, you deserve worse censure. Yet
such as these, are all the arguments wherewith you conceive your self to have
proved undoubtedly, that Protestants have reason at least to doubt in what case
they stand. Neither am I afraid to venture my life upon it, that your self
shall not choose so much as one out of all the pack, which I will not show
before indifferent Judges, either to be impertinent to the question,
inconsequent in the deduction, or grounded upon some false, or at least
uncertain foundation.

14 Your third and fourth argument may be thus put into one; Protestants
cannot tell what points in particular be fundamental; therefore they cannot
tell whether they or their brethren do not err fundamentally, and whether
their difference be not fundamental. Both which deductions I have formerly
showed to be most inconsequent; for knowing the Scripture to contain all
fundamentalls, (though many more points besides, which makes it difficult to
say precisely what is fundamental and what not,) knowing this I say and
believing it, what can hinder but that I may be well assured, that I believe
all fundamentalls, and that all who believe the Scripture syncerely as well as
I, do not differ from me in any thing fundamental?

15 In the close of this Section, you say, that you omit to add that we want
the Sacrament of Repentance instituted for the remission of sins, or at least
we must confess that we hold it not necessary: and yet our own brethren the
Century writers acknowledge that in the times of Cyprian and Tertullian,
private Confession even of thoughts was used, and that it was then commanded
and thought necessary; and then our Ordination, you say is very doubtful and
all that depends upon it. Ans. I also omit to answer, 1. That your brother
Rhenanus, acknowledges the contrary, and assures us that the Confession then
required and in use, was public, and before the Church, and that your
auricular Confession was not then in the world; for which his mouth is stopped
by your Index Expurgatorius. 2. That your brother Arcudius acknowledges, that
the Eucharist was in Cyprians time given to Infants, and esteemed necessary, or
at least profitable for them, and the giving it shows no less; and now I
would know whether you will acknowledge your Church bound to give it, and to
esteem so of it? 3. That it might be then commanded, and being commanded be
thought necessary, and yet be but a Church Constitution. Neither will I deny,
if the present Church, could, and would so order it, that the abuses of it
might be prevented, and conceiving it profitable, should enjoin the use of it,
but that being commanded it would be necessary. 4. Concerning our Ordinations,
besides that I have proved it impossible that they should be so doubtful as
yours, according to your own principles; I answer, that experience shows them
certainly sufficient to bring men to faith and repentance, and consequently to
salvation; and that if there were any secret defect of any thing necessary,
which we cannot help, God will certainly supply it.

16 Ad 6. In the sixth, you say, you will not repeat, but only put us again in
mind that unless the Roman Church were the true Church there was no visible
Church upon earth, a thing so manifest that Protestants themselves confess,
etc. Ans. Neither will I repeat, but only put you in mind that you have not
proved that there is any necessity that there should be any visible true.
Church; nor if there were, that there was no other besides the Roman. For as
for the confession of Protestants which here you insist upon, it is evident out
of their own words cited by your self, that by the whole world, they meant
only the greatest part of it, which is an usual figure of speech; and never
intended to deny that besides the Church then reigning and triumphing in this
world, there was another militant Church, other Christians visible enough
though persecuted and oppressed. Nor thirdly do you here make good so much as
with one fallacy, that if the Roman Church were then the visible Church, it
must needs be now the only or the safer way to heaven; and yet the connection of
this consequence was very necessary to be shown. For, for ought I know, it was
not impossible that it might then be the only Visible Church, and yet now a
very dangerous way to heaven, or perhaps none at all.

17 Afterward you vainly pretend that all Roman Catholics, not one excepted,
profess, that Protestancy unrepented destroies salvation. From which
generality we may except two at least to my knowledge, and those are, your
self, and Franciscus de Sancta Clara, who assures us that Ignorance and
Repentance may excuse a Protestant from damnation though dying in his error.
I^ Problem. 15. and 16.
And this is all the charity, which by your own confession also, the most
favorable Protestants allow to Papists; and therefore with strange repugnance
to your self you subjoyne, that these are the men whom we must hold not to
err damnably, unless we will destroy our own Church and salvation. Whereas,
as I have said before, though you were Turks, and Pagans, we might be good
Christians. Neither is it necessary for the perpetuating of a Church before
Luther, that your errors even then should not be damnable, but only not
actually damning to some ignorant souls among you. In vain therefore do you
make such tragedies as here you do! In vain you conjure us with fear and
trembling to consider these things! We have considered them again and again,
and looked upon them on both sides, and find neither terror nor truth in
them. Let children and fools be terrified with bug-beares, men of
understanding will not regard them.

18 Ad. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Your whole discourse in your five next Paragraphs, I
have in the beginning of this Chapter fully confuted, by saying, that it stands
altogether upon the false foundation of this affected mistake, that we do and
must confess the Roman Church free from damnable error; which will presently
be apparent, to any one who considers, that the seventh and tenth are nothing
but D. Potters words; and that in the other three, you obtrude upon us this
Crambe no fewer then seven times. May you be pleased to look back to your own
Book, and you shall find it so as I have said: and that at least in a hundred
other places you make your advantage of this false imputation: which when you
have observed, and withal considered that your self plainly intimate, that D.
Potters discourses which here you censure, would be good and concluding, if we
did not (as we do not) free you from damnable error, I hope you will
acknowledge that my vouchsafing these Sections the honor of any farther
answer, is a great supererrogation in point of civility. Nevertheless partly
that I may the more ingratiate my self with you, but especially, that I may
stop their mouths who will be apt to say, that every word of yours which I
should omit to speak to, is an unanswerable argument, I will hold my purpose of
answering them more punctually and particularly.

19 First then, to your little parenthesis, which you interline among D.
Potters words,. 7. That any small error in faith destroies all faith, (To omit
what has been said before,) I answer here what is proper for this place; that
S. Austine, whose authority is here stood upon, thought otherwise: He conceived
the Donatists to hold some error in faith and yet not to have no faith. His
words of them to this purpose are most pregnant and evident, you are with us
(says he to the Donatists. Ep. 48.) in Baptism, in the Creed, in the other
Sacraments: And again. Super gestis cum emerit: Thou have proved to me that
thou have faith; prove to me likewise that thou have charity. Parallel to which
words are these of Optatus, Lib. 5. prope initium.
Amongst us and you is one* Ecclesiastical conversation, common lessons; the
same faith, the same Sacraments. Where by the way we may observe, that in the
judgments of these Fathers, even the Donatists, though Heretics and
Schismatiques, gave true Ordination, the true Sacrament of Matrimony, true
Sacramental Absolution, Confirmation, the true Sacrament of the Eucharist,
true extreme Unction; or else (choose you whether) some of these were not then
esteemed Sacraments. But for Ordination, whether he held it a Sacrament or no,
certainly he held that it remained with them entire: for so he says in
express terms, in his book against Parmenianus his Epistle. Which Doctrine
if you can reconcile with the present Doctrine of the Roman Church, Lib. 2. c.
3.
Eris mihi magnus Apollo.

20 Whereas in the beginning of the 8. Sect. you deny that your argument drawn
from our confessing the Possibility of your Salvation, is for simple people
alone, but for all men: I answer, certainly whosoever is moved with it, must be
so simple as to think this a good and a concluding reason; Some ignorant men in
the Roman Church may be saved, by the confession of Protestants, (which is
indeed all that they confess,) therefore it is safe for me to be of the Roman
Church; and he that does think so, what reason is there why he should not think
this as good, Ignorant Protestans may be saved, by the confession of Papists,
(by name Mr K.) therefore it is safe for me to be of the Protestant Church?
Whereas you say, that this your argument is grounded upon an inevitable
necessity for us, either to grant Salvation to your Church, or to entail
certain damnation upon our own, because ours can have no being till Luther,
unless yours be supposed to have been the true Church. I answer, this cause is
no cause: For first, as Luther had no being before Luther, and yet he was when
he was, though he was not before; so there is no repugnance in the terms, but
that there might be a true Church after Luther, though there were none for some
ages before; as since Columbus his time, there have been Christians in America,
though before there were none for many ages. For neither do you show, neither
does it appear, that the generation of Churches is univocall, that nothing but
a Church can possibly beget a Church; nor that the present being of a true
Church, depends necessarily upon the perpetuity of a Church in all ages; any
more then the present being of Peripateticks or Stoics depends upon a
perpetual pedigree of them. For though I at no hand deny the Churches
perpetuity, yet I see nothing in your book to make me understand, that the
truth of the present depends upon it, nor any thing that can hinder, but that a
false Church, (Gods providence overwatching and overruling it,) may preserve
the means of confuting their own Heresies, and reducing men to truth, and so
raising a true Church, I mean the integrity and the authority of the word of
God with men. Thus the Jews preserve means to make men Christians, and
Papists preserve means to make men Protestants, and Protestants (which you say
are a false Church) do, as you pretend, preserve means to make men Papists;
that is, their own Bibles, out of which you pretend to be able to prove that
they are to be Papists. Secondly, you show not, nor does it appear that the
perpetuity of the Church depends on the truth of yours. For though you talk
vainly, as if you were the only men in the world before Luther, yet the world
knows that this but talk, and that there were other Christians besides you,
which might have perpetuated the Church though you had not been. Lastly, you
show not, neither does it appear, that your being acknowledged in some sense a
true Church, does necessarily import, that we must grant salvation to it,
unless by it you understand the ignorant members of it, which is a very
unusual Sinechdoche.

21 Whereas you say, that Catholics never granted that the Donatists had a
true Church or might be saved. I answ. S. Austin himself granted that those
among them, who sought the Truth, being ready when they found it to correct
their error were not Heretics, and therefore notwithstanding their error
might be saved. And this is all the Charity that Protestants allow to Papists.

22 Whereas you say, that D. Potter having cited out of S. Austine the words of
the Catholics, that the Donatists had true Baptism, when he comes to the
contrary words of the Donatist, adds, no Church, no Salvation! Ans. You wrong
D. Potter, who pretends not to cite S. Austines formal words but only his
sense, which in him is complete and full for that purpose whereto it is
alleged by D. Potter. His words are, Petilianus dixit, venite ad Ecclesiam
Populi and aufugite Traditores, Cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. (...)*
si perire non vultis: Petilian says, come to the Church ye people, and fly
from the Traditours if ye will not be damned, for that ye may know that they
being guilty, esteem very well of our Faith, Behold I Baptize these whom they
have infected; but they receive those whom we have baptized. Where it is plain,
that Petilian by his words makes the Donatists the Church, and excludes the
Catholics from salvation absolutely. And therefore no Church, no Salvation
was not D. Potters addition. And whereas you say, the Catholics never yielded
that among the Donatists there was a true Church and hope of Salvation, I say
it appears by what I have alleged out of S. Austine, that they yielded both
these were among the Donatists, as much as we yield them to be among the
Papists. As for D. Potters acknowledgement; that they maintained an error in
the matter and nature of it Heretical: This proves them but Material
Heretics, whom you do not exclude from possibility of Salvation. So that all
things considered, this argument must be much more forcible from the Donatists
against the Catholics, then from Papists against Protestants, in regard
Protestants grant Papists no more hope of salvation then Papists grant
Protestants: whereas the Donatists excluded absolutely all but their own Part
from hope of Salvation, so far as to account them no Christians that were not
of it: the Catholics mean while accounting them Brethren, and freeing those
among them, from the imputation of Heresy, who being in error quaerebant cauta
sollicitudine veritatem corrigi parati cum invenerint.

23 Whereas you say, That the Argument for the certainty of their Baptism
(because it was confessed good by Catholics, whereas the Baptism of
Catholics was not confessed by them to be good,) is not so good as yours,
touching the certainty of your Salvation grounded on the confession of
Protestants, because we confess there is no damnable error in the Doctrine or
practice of the Roman Church: I Ans. no: we confess no such matter, and though
you say so a hundred times, no repetition will make it true. We profess
plainly, that many damnable errors plainly repugnant to the precepts of Christ
both Ceremonial and Moral, more plainly then this of Rebaptization, and
therefore more damnable, are believed and professed by you. And therefore
seeing this is the only disparity you can devise, and this is vanished, it
remains that as good an answer as the Catholics made touching the certainty
of their Baptism, as good may we make, and with much more evidence of Reason,
touching the security and certainty of our Salvation.

24 By the way I desire to be informed, seeing you affirm that Rebaptizing
those whom Heretics had baptized was a sacrilege, and a profession of a
damnable Heresy, when it began to be so? If from the beginning it were so,
then was Cyprian a sacrilegious professor of a damnable heresy, and yet a Saint
and a martyr. If it were not so, then did your Church excommunicate Firmilian
and others, and separate from them without sufficient ground of Excommunication
or Separation, which is Schismatic. You see what difficulties you run into
on both sides; choose whether you will, but certainly both can hardly be
avoided.

25 Whereas again in this. you obtrude upon us, That we cannot but confess
that your doctrine contains no damnable error, and that yours is so certainly
a true Church, that unless yours be true we cannot pretend any: I answer,
there is in this neither truth nor modesty to outface us, that we cannot but
confess what indeed we connot but deny. For my part, if I were upon the rack,
I persuade my self I should not confess the one nor the other.

26 Whereas again presently you add, that D. Potter grants we should be guilty
of Schism, if we did cut off your Church from the body of Christ and the hope
of Salvation: I have showed above that he grants no such matter. He says
indeed, that our not doing so frees us from the imputation of Schism, and from
hence you sophistically infer, that he must grant, If we did so, we were
Schismatiques, and then make your Reader believe; that this is D. Potters
confession, it being indeed your own false collection. For as every one that is
not a Papist, is not a Jesuit, and yet not every one that is a Papist is a
Jesuit: As whosoever comes not into England, comes not to London, and yet many
may come to England, and not come to London: As whosoever is not a man, is not
a King, and yet many are men that are not Kings: So likewise it may be certain,
that whosoever does not so is free from Schism, and yet they that do so (if
there be sufficient cause,) may be not guilty of it.

27 Whereas you pretend to wonder that the Doctor did not answer the argument
of the Donatists, which he says is all one with yours, but referres you to S.
Austine there to read it, as if every one carried with him a Library, or were
able to examine the places in S. Austin: I answer, the parity of the Arguments
was that which the Doctor was to declare, whereto it was impertinent what the
answer was: But sufficient it was to show that the Donatists argument which you
would never grant good, was yet as good (...) yours, and therefore yours could
not be good. Now to this purpose as the concealing the answer was no way
advantageous, so to produce it was not necessary; and therefore he did you more
service then he was bound to, in referring you to S. Austin for an answer to
it. Whereas you say, he had reason to conceal it because it makes directly
against himself: I say it is so far from doing so, that it will serve in
proportion to the argument, as fitly as if it had been made for it: for as S.
Austine says, that Catholics approve the Doctrine of Donatists, but abhor
their Heresy of Re-baptization: so we say, that we approve those fundamental
and simply necessary Truths which you retain, by which some good souls among
you may be saved, but abhor your many Superstitions and Heresies. And as he
says, that as gold is good, yet ought not to be sought for among a company of
Thieves, and Baptism good but not to be sought for in the Conventicles of
Donatists: so say we, that the Truths you retain are good, and as we hope
sufficient to bring good ignorant souls among you to salvation, yet are not to
be sought for in the Conventicle of Papists, who hold with them a mixture of
many vanities, and many impieties. For, as for our freeing you from damnable
Heresy, and yielding you Salvation, (which stone here again you stumble at,)
neither he nor any other Protestant is guilty of it; and therefore you must
confess that this very answer will serve Protestants against this charm of
Papists, as well as S. Austine against the Donatists, and that indeed it was
not D. Potter but You, that, without a Sarcasme, had reason to conceal this
Answer.

28 The last piece of D. Potters book, which you are pleased to take notice of
in this first Part of yours, is an argument he makes in your behalf p. 79. of
his book, where he makes you speak thus, If Protestants believe the Religion of
Papists to be a safe way to heaven, why do they not follow it? This argument
you like not, because many things may be good and yet not necessary to be
embraced by every body, and therefore scoff at it, and call it an argument of
his own, a wise argument, a wise demand: and then ask of him, what he thinks
of it being framed thus, Our Religion is safe, even by your confession, and
therefore you ought to grant that all may embrace it. And yet farther thus,
Among different Religions one only can be safe: But yours by our own confession
is safe: where as you hold that in ours there is no hope of salvation,
therefore we ought to embrace yours. Ans. I have advised with him, and am to
tell you from him, that he thinks reasonable well of the arguments, but very
ill of him that makes them, as affirming so often without shame and conscience,
what he cannot but know to be plainly false: and his reason is because he is so
far from confessing, or giving you any ground to pretend he does confess,
that your Religion is safe for all that are of it, from whence only it will
follow that all may safely embrace it, that in this very place, from which you
take these words, he professes plainly, that it is extremely dangerous, if not
certainly damnable to all such as profess it, when either they do, or if
their hearts were upright and not perversely obstinat might believe the
contrary, and that for us wh^ are convinced in conscience that she (the Rom^^
Church) erres in many things, it lies upon us, even under pain of damnation to
forsake her in those errors. And though here you take upon you a show of great
rigor, and will seem to hold that in our way there is no hope of Salvation;
yet formerly you have been more liberal of your charity toward us, and will
needs vye and contend with D. Potter which of the two shall be more Charitable,
assuring us that you allow Protestants as much Charity as D. Potter spares you,
for whom he makes Ignorance the best hope of Salvation. Chap. 1.. 4.
And now I appeal to any indifferent reader, whether our disavowing to
confess you free from damnable error, were not (as I pretend) a full
confutation of all that you say in these five foregoing Paragraphs: And as for
you I wonder, what answer, what evasion, what shift you can devise to clear
your self from dishonesty, for imputing to him almost a hundred times, this
acknowledgment which he never makes, but very often, and that so plainly that
you take notice of it, professes the contrary!

29 The best defense that possibly can be made for you, I conceive, is this,
that you were led into this error, by mistaking a supposition of a confession,
for a confession; a Rhetorical concession of the Doctors, for a positive
assertion. He says indeed of your errors, Though of themselves they be not
damnable to them which believe as they profess, yet for us to profess what we
believe not, were without question damnable. But, to say, Though your errors be
not damnable, we may not profess them, is not to say, your errors are not
damnable, but only though they be not. As if you shoul say, though the Church
err in points not fundamental, yet you may not separate from it: Or, though
we do err in believing Christ really present, yet our error frees us from
Idolatry: Or, as if a Protestant should say, Though you do not commit Idolatry
in adoring the Host, yet being uncertain of the Priests Intention to
consecrate, at least you expose yourselfe to the danger of it: I presume you
would not think it fairly done, if any man should interpret either this last
speech as an acknowledgeme^t, that you do not commit Idol^try, or the former
as confessions, that you do err in points not fundamental, that you do err
in believing the real presence. And therefore you ought not so to have
mistaken D. Potters words, as if he had confessed the errors of your Church not
damnable, when he says no more but this, Though they be so, or, suppose, or
put the case they be so, yet being errors, we that know them may not profess
them to be divine truths. Yet this mistake might have been pardonable, had not
D. Potter in many places of his book, by declaring his judgment touching the
quality and malignity of your errors, taken away from you all occasion of
error. But now that he says plainly, That your Church has many ways played
the Harlot, and in that regard, deserved a Bill of divorce from Christ, and the
detestation of Christians p. 11. That for that Mass of Errors and abuses in
judgment and practice which is proper to her, and wherein she differs from us,
we judge a reconciliation impossible, and to us (who are convicted in
conscience of her corruptions) damnable. page 20. That Popery is the contagion
or plague of the Church. p. 60. That we cannot, we dare not communicate with
her in her public Liturgy, which is manifestly polluted with dross of
Superstition. p. 68. That they who in former ages dyed in the Church of Rome
died in many sinful errors. p. 78. That they that have understanding and means
to discover their errors and neglect to use them, he dares not flatter them
with so easy a censure, as to give them hope of salvation p. 79. That the way
of the Roman Religion is not safe, but very dangerous, if not certainly
damnable, to such as profess it, when they believe (or if their hearts were
upright and not perversely obstinate might believe) the contrary, p. 79. That
your Church is but (in some sense) a true Church, and your errors only to some
men not damnable, and that we who are convinced in conscience that she erres in
many things, are under pain of damnation to forsake her in those errors. Seeing
I say, he says all this so plainly and so frequently, certainly your charging
him falsely with this acknowledgement, and building a great part not only of
your discourse in this Chapter, but of your whole book upon it, possibly it may
be palliated with some excuse, but it can no way be defended with any just
apology. Especially seeing you your self more then once or twice, take notice
of these his severer censures of your Church, and the errors of it, and make
your advantage of them. In the first number of your first Chapter, you set down
three of the former places; and from thence infer, That as you affirm
Protestancy unrepented destroies Salvation, so D. Potter pronounces the like
heavy doom against Roman Catholics: and again. 4. of the same Chap. We allow
Protestants as much charity as D. Potter spare^ us, for whom he makes ignorance
the best hope of salvation. And c. 5. 41. you have these words: It is very
strange that you judge us extremely uncharitable in saying Protestants cannot
be saved, while your self avouch the same of all Learned Catholics, whom
Ignorance cannot excuse! Thus out of the same mouth you blow hot and cold; and
one while, when it is for your purpose, you profess D. Potter censures your
errors as heavily as you do ours; which is very true, for he gives hope of
Salvation to none among you, but to those whose ignorance was the cause of
their error, and no sin cause of their ignorance: and presently after, when
another project comes in your head, you make his words softer then oil toward
you; you pretend he does and must confess, That your Doctrine contains no
damnable error, that your Church is certainly a true Church, that your way to
heaven is a safe way, and all these acknowledgements you set down simple and
absolute, without any restriction or limitation; whereas in the Doctor they are
all so qualified, that no knowing Papist can promise himself any security or
comfort from them. We confess (says he) the Church of Rome to be (in some
sense) a true Church, and her errors (to some men) not damnable: we believe her
Religion safe, that is, by Gods great mercy not damnable, to some such as
believe what they profess: But we believe it not safe but very dangerous, if
not certainly damnable to such as profess it, when they believe (or if their
hearts were upright and not perversely obstinate might believe) the contrary.
Observe I pray these restraining terms which formerly you have dissembled, A
true Church in some sense, not damnable to some men, a safe way, that is by
Gods great mercy not damnable to some: And then seeing you have pretended these
confessions to be absolute, which are thus plainly limited, how can you avoid
the imputation of an egregious Sophister? You quarrel with the Doctor, in the
end of your Preface, for using in his Book such ambiguous terms as these, in
some sort, in some sense, in some degree: and desire him if he make any reply,
either to forbear them, or to tell you roundly in what sort, in what sense, in
what degree, he understands these and the like mincing phrases. But the truth
is he has not left them so ambiguous and undetermined as you pretend; but told
you plainly, in what sense, your Church may pass for a true Church, viz. In
regard we may hope that she retains those truths which are simply, absolutely,
and indispensably necessary to Salvation, which may suffice to bring those good
souls to heaven, who wanted means of discovering their errors; this is the
charitable construction in which you may pass for a Church: And to what men
your Religion may be safe, and your errors not damnable, viz. to such whom
Ignorance may excuse, and therefore he has more cause to complain of you, for
quoting his words without those qualifications, then you to find fault with
him for using of them.

30 That your Discourse in the 12.. presses you as forcibly as Protestants, I
have showed above: I add here, 1. Whereas you say that faith, according to
rigid Calvinists, is either so strong, that once had, it can never be lost, or
so more then weak, and so much nothing that it can never begotten: That, these
are words without sense. Never any Calvinist affirmed that faith was so weak,
and so much nothing that it can never be gotten: but it seems you wanted
matter to make up your Antithesis, and therefore were resolved to speak empty
words rather then loose your figure, Crimina rasis
Librat in antithetis, doct as posuisse Figuras
Laudatur.


2. That there is no Calvinist that will deny the Truth of this proposition,
Christ died for all, nor to subscribe to that sense of it, which your
Dominicans put upon it; neither can you with coherence to the received Doctrine
of your own Society, deny that they as well as the Calvinists, take away the
distinction of sufficient and effectual grace, and indeed hold none to be
sufficient, but only that which is effectual. 3. Whereas you say, They cannot
make their calling certain by good works, who do certainly believe that
before any good works they are justified, and justified by faith alone, and by
that faith whereby they certainly believe they are justified: I ans. There is
no Protestant but believes that Faith, Repentance, and universal Obedience,
are necessary to the obtaining of Gods favor and eternal happiness. This
being granted, the rest is but a speculative Controversy, a Question about
words which would quickly vanish, but that men affect not to understand one
another. As if a company of Physicians were in consultation, and should all
agree, that three medicines and no more were necessary for the recovery of the
Patients health, this were sufficient for his direction toward the recovery of
his health; though concerning the proper and specificall effects of these three
medicines, there should be amongst them as many differences as men: So likewise
being generally at accord that these three things, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
are necessary to salvation, so that whosoever wants any of them cannot obtain
it, and he which has them all cannot fail of it, it is not very evident that
they are sufficiently agreed for men's directions to eternal Salvation? And
seeing Charity is a full comprehension of all good works, they requiring
Charity as a necessary qualification in him that will be saved, what sense is
there in saying, they cannot make their calling certain by good works? They
know what salvation is as well as you, and have as much reason to desire it:
They believe it as heartily as you, that there is no good work but shall have
its proper reward, and that there is no possibility of obtaining the eternal
reward without good works: and why then may not this Doctrine be a sufficient
incitement and provocation unto good works?

31 You say, that they certainly believe that before any good works they are
justified: But this is a calumny. There is no Protestant but requires to
Justification, Remission of sins, and to Remission of sins they all require
Repentance, and Repentance I presume may not be denied the name of a good
work, being indeed, if it be rightly understood, and according to the sense of
the word in Scripture, an effectual conversion from all sin to all
holiness. But though it be taken for mere sorrow for sins past, and a bare
purpose of amendment, yet even this is a good work, and therefore Protestants
requiring this to Remission of sins, and Remission of sins to
justification, cannot with candor be pretended to believe, that they are
justified before any good work.

32 You say, They believe themselves justified by faith alone, and that by that
faith whereby they believe themselves justified: Some peradventure do so, but
withal they believe that that faith which is alone, and unaccompanied with
sincere and universal obedience, is to be esteemed not faith but presumption,
and is at no hand sufficient to justification: that though Charity be not
imputed unto justification, yet is it required as a necessary disposition in
the person to be justified, and that though in regard of the imperfection of
it, no man can be justified by it, yet that on the other side, no man can be
justified without it. So that upon the whole matter, a man may truly and safely
say, that the Doctrine of these Protestants, taken altogether, is not a
Doctrine of Liberty, not a Doctrine that turns hope into presumption, and
carnal security; though it may justly be feared, that many licentious persons,
taking it by halfes, have made this wicked use of it. For my part, I do
heartily wish, that by public Authority it were so ordered, that no man
should ever preach or print this Doctrine that Faith alone justifies, unless
he joins this together with it, that universal obedience is necessary to
salvation. And besides that those Chapters of S. Paul which entreat of
justification by faith, without the works of the Law, were never read in the
Church, but when the 13. Chap. of the 1. Epist. to the Corinth. concerning the
absolute necessity of Charity should be, to prevent misprision, read together
with them.

33 Whereas you say, that some Protestants do expressly affirm the former
point to be the soul of the Church, etc. and that therefore they must want the
Theological virtue of Hope, and that none can have true hope, while they hope
to be saved in their Communion. I Ans. They have great reason to believe the
Doctrine of Justification by faith only, a Point of great weight and
importance, if it be rightly understood: that is, they have reason to esteem
it a principal and necessary duty of a Christian, to place his hope of
justification and salvation, not in the perfection of his own righteousness
(which if it be imperfect will not justify,) but only in the mercies of God
through Christ's satisfaction: and yet notwithstanding this, nay the rather for
this, may preserve themselves in the right temper of good Christians, which is
a happy mixture and sweet composition of confidence and fear. If this Doctrine
be otherwise expounded then I have here expounded, I will not undertake the
justification of it, only I will say (that which I may do truly) that I never
knew any Protestant such a soli-fidian, but that he did believe these divine
truths; That he must make his calling certain by good works: That he must work
out his salvation with Fear and Trembling, and that while he does not so, he
can have no well-grounded hope of Salvation: I say I never met with any who did
not believe these divine Truths, and that with a more firm, and a more
unshaken assent, then he does that himself is predestinate, and that he is
justified by believing himself justified. I never met with any such, who if he
saw there were a necessity (...) do either, would not rather forgo his
belief of these Doctrines then the former: these which he sees disputed and
contradicted and opposed with a great multitude of very potent Arguments; then
those, which being the express words of Scripture, whosoever should call into
question, could not with any modesty pretend to the title of Christian. And
therefore there is no reason but we may believe, that their full assurance of
the former Doctrines does very well qualify their persuasion of the latter, and
that the former (as also the lives of many of them do sufficiently testify)
are more effectual to temper their hope, and to keep it at a stay of a filial
and modest assurance of Gods favor, built upon the conscience of his love and
fear, then the latter can be to swell and puff them up into vain confidence
and ungrounded presumption. This reason, joined with our experience of the
honest and religious conversation of many men of this opinion, is a sufficient
ground for Charity, to hope well of their hope: and to assure our selves that
it cannot be offensive, but rather most acceptable to God, if notwithstanding
this diversity of opinion, we embrace each other with the strict embraces of
love and communion. To you and your Church we leave it, to separate Christians
from the Church, and to proscribe them from heaven upon trivial and trifling
causes: As for our selves, we conceive a charitable judgment of our Brethren
and their errors, though untrue, much more pleasing to God then a true
judgment, if it be uncharitable; and and therefore shall always choose (if we
do err) to err on the milder and more merciful part, and rather to retain
those in our Communion which deserve to be ejected, then eject those that
deserve to be retained.

34 Lastly, whereas you say, that seeing Protestants differ about the point of
Justification, you must needs infer that they want Unity in faith, and
consequently all faith, and then that they cannot agree what points are
fundamental; I Answer, to the first of these inferences, that as well might
you infer it upon Victor Bishop of Rome and Poli^rates; upon Stephen Bishop
of Rome and S. Cyprian: in as much as it is indeniably evident, that what one
of those esteemed necessary to salvation the other esteemed not so. But points
of Doctrine (as all other things) are as they are, and not as they are
esteemed: neither can a necessary point be made unnecessary by being so
accounted, nor an unnecessary point be made necessary by being overvalued. But
as the ancient Philosophers, (whose different opinions about the soul of man
you may read in Aristotle de Anima, and Cicero's Tusculan Questions,)
notwithstanding their diverse opinions touching the nature of the soul, yet all
of them had souls, and souls of the same nature: Or as those Physicians who
dispute whether the brain or heart be the principal part of a man, yet all of
them have brains and have hearts, and herein agree sufficiently: So likewise,
though some Protestants esteem that Doctrine the soul of the Church, which
others do not so highly value, yet this hinders not but that which is indeed
the soul of the Church may be in both (...) of them; and though one account
that a necessary truth which (...) account neither necessary nor perhaps true,
yet this notwithstanding, in those truths which are truly and really necessary
they may all agree. For no Argument can be more sophistical then this; They
differ in some points which they esteem necessary; Therefore they differ in
some that indeed and in truth are so.

^35 Now as concerning the other inference, That they cannot agree what points
are fundamental: I have said and proved formerly that there is no such
necessity as you imagine or pretend, that men should certainly know what is, and
what is not fundamental. They that believe all things plainly delivered in
Scripture, believe all things fundamental, and are at sufficient Unity in
matters of faith, though they cannot precisely and exactly distinguish between
what is fundamental and what is profitable: nay though by error they mistake
some vain, or perhaps hurtful opinions for necessary and fundamental Truths.
c. 3.. 53. and ^libi.
Besides, I have showed above, that as Protestants do not agree (for you
overreach in saying they cannot) touching what points are fundamental; so
neither do you agree what points are defined and so to be accounted, and what
are not: nay, nor concerning the subject in which God has placed this
pretended Authority of defining: some of you settling it in the Pope himself,
though alone without a Council: Others in a Council, though divided from the
Pope: Others only in the conjunction of Council and Pope: Others not in this
neither, but in the acceptance of the present Church Universal: Lastly,
others not attributing it to this neither, but only to the perpetual
Succession of the Church of all ages: of which divided Company it is very
evident and undeniable, that every former may be and are obliged to hold many
things defined and therefore necessary, which the latter, according to their
own grounds, have no obligation to do, nay cannot do so upon any firm and
sure and infallible foundation.

THE CONCLUSION.
ANd thus, by Gods assistance and the advantage of a good cause, I am at length
through a passage rather tireing then difficult, arrived at the end of my
undertaken voyage; and have, as I suppose, made appear to all dis-interessed
and unprejudicate readers what in the beginning I undertook, that a vein of
Sophistry and Calumny runs clean through this first part of your book: wherein
though I never thought of the directions you have been pleased to give me in
your Pamphlet entitled a Direction to N. N. yet upon consideration of my
answer, I find that I have proceeded as if I had had it always before my
eyes, and steered my course by it as by a card and compass.

For first, I have not proceeded by a mere destructive way (as you call it,)
nor objected such difficulties against your Religion, as upon examination tend
to the overthrow of all Religion, but have showed that the truth of
Christianity is clearly independent upon the truth of Popery: and that on the
other side, the arguments you urge, and the courses you take for the
maintenance of your Religion, do manifestly tend (if they be closely and
consequently followed) to the destruction of all religion, and lead men by the
hand to Atheism and impiety; whereof I have given you ocular demonstrations in
diverse places of my book, but especially, in my answer to your direction to N.
N.

Neither can I discover any repugnance between any one part of my answer and
any other, though I have used many more judicious and more searching eyes then
mine own to make, if it were possible, such a discovery: and therefore am in
good hope that, though the music I have made be but dull and flat, and even
downright plain-song, yet your curious and critical ears shall discover no
discord in it; but on the other side, I have charged you frequently and very
justly, with manifest contradiction and retractation of your own assertions,
and not seldom of the main grounds you build upon, and the principal
conclusions which you endeavor to maintain: which I conceive my self to have
made apparent even to the ^ye, c. 2.. 5. c. 3.. 88. c. 4...14. and 24. c. 5..
93. c. 6.. 6. 7. 12. 17. c. 7.. 29. and in many other parts of my answer.

And though I did never pretend to defend D. Potter absolutely and in all
things, but only so far as he defends truth; (neither did D. Potter desire
me, nor any law of God or man oblige me to defend him any farther,) yet I do
not find that I have cause to differ from him in any matter of moment:
particularly, not concerning the infallibility of Gods Church, which I grant
with him to be infallible in fundamentalls, because if it should err in
fundamentalls, it were not the Church: Nor concerning the supernaturality of
Faith, which I know and believe as well as you to be the gift of God, and that
flesh and blood revealed it not unto us, but our Father which is in Heaven. But
now if it were demanded what defense you can make for deserting Chapter Mistaken in
the main question disputed between him and D. Potter, Whether Protestancy,
without a particular repentance and dereliction of it, destroy Salvation,
whereof I have convinced you? I believe your answer would be much like that
which Ulysses makes in the Me^amorphosis for his running away from his friend
Nestor, that is, none at all.

For Opposing the Articles of the Church of England, the Approbation, I
presume, cleeres my book from this imputation.

And whereas you give me a Caution, that my grounds destroy not the belief of
diverse Doctrines which all good Christians believe, yea and of all verities
that cannot be proved by natural reason: I profess syncerely that I do not
know nor believe, that any ground laid by me in my whole Book, is any way
inconsistent with any one such Doctrine, or with any verity revealed in the
word of God, though never so improbable or incomprehensible to Natural Reason:
and if I thought there were, I would deal with it, as those primitive converts
dealt with their curious Books in the Acts of the Apostles

For the Ep. of S. James, and those other Books which were anciently
controverted, and are now received by the Church of England as Canonical; I am
so far from relying upon any Principles which must (to my apprehension) bring
with them the denial of the authority of them, that I my self believe them
all to be Canonical.

For the overthrowing the Infallibility of all Scripture, my Book is so
innocent of it, that the Infallibility of Scripture is the chiefest of all my
grounds.

And lastly for Arguments tending to prove an impossibility of all Divine,
Supernatural, Infallible Faith and Religion, I assure my self that if you were
ten times more a spider then you are, you could suck no poison from them. My
heart, I am sure, is innocent of any such intention: and the searcher of all
hearts knows that I had no other end in writing this Book, but to confirm to
the uttermost of my ability the truth of the Divine and Infallible Religion of
our dearest Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, which I am ready to seal and
confirm not with my arguments only, but my blood!

Now these are directions which you have been pleased to give me, whether out
of a fear that I might otherwise deviate from them, or out of a desire to make
others think so: But howsoever, I have not, to my understanding, swarved from
them in any thing, which puts me in good hope that my Answer to this first Part
of your Book will give even to you your self indifferent good satisfaction.

I have also provided, though this were more then I undertook, a just and
punctual examination and refutation of your second Part: But (if you will give
your consent) am resolved to suppress it, and that for diverse sufficient and
reasonable considerations.

First, because the discussion of the Controversies entreated of in the first
Part (if we shall think fit to proceed in it, as I for my part shall, so long
as I have truth to reply,) will, I conceive, be sufficient employment for us,
though we cast off the burden of those many lesser dispu^es which remain
behind in the Second. And perhaps we may do God and his Church more service
by exactly discussing and fully clearing the truth in these few, then by
handling many after a slight and perfunctory manner.

Secondly, because the addition of the Second Part whether for your purpose or
mine is clearly unnecessary: there being no understanding man Papist or
Pro^estant, but will confess that (for as much as concerns the main Question
now in agitation, about the saveablenesse of Protestants) if the first Part of
your Book be answered, there needs no reply to the Second: as on the other
side I shall willingly grant, if I have not answered the First, I cannot answer
a great part of the Second.

Thirdly, because the addition of the Second not only is unnecessary, but in
effect by your self confessed to be so. For in your preamble to your Second
Part you tell us, That the substance of the present Controversy is handled in
the first: and therein also you pretend to have answered the chief grounds of
D. Potters book: So that in replying to your Second Part I shall do little else
but pursue shadows.

Fourthly, because your Second Part (setting aside Repetitions and References)
is in a manner made up of disputes about particular matters, which you are very
importunate to have forborne, as suspecting, at least pretending to suspect,
that they were brought in purposely by D. Potter to dazzle the Reader's eyes and
distract his mind, that he might not see the clearness of the reasons brought
in defense of the General Doctrine delivered in Charity Mistaken. All which
you are likely enough (if there be occasion) to say again to me; and
therefore I am resolved for once even to humor you so far as to keep my
discourse within those very lists and limits which your self have prescribed,
and to deal with you upon no other arguments, but only those wherein you
conceive your chief advantage and principal strength, and, as it were, your
Sampson's lock to lie: wherein if I gain the cause clearly from you (as I
verily hope by Gods help I shall do) it cannot but redound much to the honor
of the truth maintained by me, which by so weak a Champion can overcome such an
Achilles for error even in his strongest holds.

For these reasons, although I have made ready an answer to your Second Part,
and therein have made it sufficiently evident: That for shifting evasions from
D. Potters arguments; for impertinent cavills, and frivolous exceptions, and
injurious calumnies against him for misalleaging of Authors: For proceeding
upon false and ungrounded princiciples; for making inconsequent and
sophistical deductions, and, in a word, for all the virtues of an ill answer
your Second Part is no way second to the First. Yet notwithstanding all this
anvantage, I am resolved, if you will give me leave, either wholly to suppress
it, or at least to defer the publication of it, until I see what exceptions,
upon a twelve-months examination (for so long I am well assured you have had it
in your hands) you can take at this which is now published, that so if my
grounds be discovered false I may give over building on them: or (if it shall
be thought fit) build on more securely when it shall appear that nothing
material and of moment is or can be objected against them. This I say, upon a
supposition that your self will allow these reasons for satisfying and
sufficient, and not repent of the motion which your self has made, of reducing
the Controversy between us to this short Issue. But in case your mind be
altered, upon the least intimation you shall give me, that you do not desire
to have it out, your desire shall prevail with me above all other reasons, and
you shall not fail to receive it with all convenient speed.

Only that my Answer may be complete, and that I may have all my work together,
and not be troubled my self, nor enforced to trouble you with after-reckonings,
I would first entreat you to make good your Promise of not omitting to answer
all the particles of D. Potters book, which may any way import, and now at
least to take notice of some (as it seems to me) not unconsiderable passages
of it, which between your first and second Part, as it were between two
stools, have been suffered hitherto to fall to the ground, and not been
vouchsafed any answer at all.

For after this neglectfull fashion you have passed by in silence, First his
discourse, wherein he proves briefly but very effectually, that Protestants may
be saved, and that the Roman Church, especially the Jesuits are very
uncharitable. S. 1. p. 6. 7. 8. 9. Secondly the authorities whereby he
justifies, That the ancient Fathers, by the Roman understood always a
particular, and never the Catholic Church: to which purpose he alleges the
words of Ignatius, Ambrose, Innocentius, Celestine, Nicolaus* S. 1. p. 10,
Whereunto you say nothing, neither do you infringe his observation with any
one instance to the contrary.

Thirdly, the greatest and most substantial part of his answers to the
Arguments of Charity Mistaken, built upon Deuteronomy. 17. Numb. 16. Mat. 28. 20. Mat.
18. 17. and in particular many pregnant and convincing Texts of Scripture,
quoted in the margent of his book, p. 25. to prove that the Judges of the
Synagogue (whose Infallibility yet you make an Argument of yours, and therefore
must be more credible then yours) are vainly pretended to have been infallible:
but as they were obliged to judge according to the Law, so were obnoxious to
deviations from it. S. 2. p. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.

Fourthly his discourse wherein he shows the difference between the Prayers
for the Dead used by the Ancients, and those now in use in the Roman Church.

Fifthly, the Authority of three Ancient, and above twenty modern Doctors of
your own Church alleag'd by him, to show that in their opinion even Pagans, and
therefore much more erring Christians (if their lives were morally honest) by
Gods extraordinary mercy and Christ's merit may be saved. S. 2. p. 45.

Sixthly, a great part of his discourse whereby he declares that actual and
external communion with the Church is not of absolute necessity to Salvation:
nay that those might be saved whom the Church utterly refused to admit to her
Communion. S. 2. p. 46. 47. 48. 49.

Seaventhly, his discourse concerning the Churches latitude, which has in it a
clear determination of the maine Controversy against you: For therein he
proves plainly, that all appertain to the Church, who believe that Jesus is the
Christ the son of God and Savior of the world with submission to his
Doctrine in mind and will: which he irrefragably demonstrates by many evident
Texts of Scripture containing the substance of his Assertion even in terms. S.
4. p. 114. 115. 116. 117.

Eighthly, that wherein he shows by many pertinent examples, that gross error
and true Faith may be lodged together in the same mind: And that men are not
chargeable with the damnable consequences of their erroneous opinions. S. 4. p.
122.

Ninthly, a very great part of his Chapter touching the dissensions of the
Roman Church, which he shows (against the pretenses of Charity Mistaken) to
be no less then ours for the importance of the matter, and the pursuit of
them to be exceedingly uncharitable. S. 6. p. 188. 189. 190. 191. 193. 194.
195. 196. 197.

Tenthly, his clear refutation and just reprehension of the Doctrine of
implicit Faith as it is delivered by the Doctors of your Church: which he
proves very consonant to the Doctrine of Heretics and Infidels, but evidently
repugnant to the word of God. Ibid. p. 201. 202. 203. 204. 205.

Lastly, his discourse wherein he shows that it is unlawful for the Church
of after Ages to add any thing to the Faith of the Apostles: And many of his
Arguments whereby he proves that in the judgment of the Ancient Church the
Apostles Creed was esteemed a sufficient summary of the necessary Points of
simple belief, and a great number of great authorities, to justify the
Doctrine of the Church of England touching the Canon of Scripture, especially
the Old Testament. S. 7. p. 221, 223. 228. 229.

All these parts of Doctor Potter's book, for reasons best known to your self,
you have dealt with as the Priest and Levite in the Gospel did with the
wounded Samaritan, that is, only looked upon them and passed by: But now at
least when you are admonish't of it, that my Reply to your second part (if you
desire it,) may be perfect, I would entreat you to take them into your
consideration, and to make some show of saying something to them, least
otherwise the world should interpret your obstinate silence a plain confession
that you can say nothing.

FINIS.
GOod reader, through the Authors necessary absence for some weeks while this
Book was printing, and by reason of an uncorrected Copy sent to the Press,
some errors have escaped, notwithstanding the Printers sollicitous and
extraordinary care, and the Correctors most assiduous diligence: which I would
entreat thee to correct according to this following direction.

Page Lin. Err. Corr. 6. 1. To the first and second Add. 21. Vlt. To the
ninth, to the ninteenth. To the ninteenth, To the ninth, 64. 21. Principal
prudentiall. 67. 29. Canonized discanoniz'd. 73. In marg. posuit potuit. 108.
21. ou^ one. 134. 9. In for. 136. 9. some some thing. 146. 6. a truth truths.
150. 19. she there. 157. 13. vowed avowed. 158. Pe^^lt* best least. 168. 11,
causa pro non caus^ non causa pro causa 176. 3. Atheists Antith^sis. ib. 11.
dele with. 180. Antepen. government communion. 193. 19. that the. 198. 33.
continue the immortal, the 218. 44. profession p^^fection. 220. Post 53.
scribd Ad. 19. I^* 11. Fair Fa^ce. Ib. 33. instruct mistrust. 221. 38. which
is which is the Church. 225. 27. nay now* 293. 43. so far from far from so.
351. 11. exception exposition. 361. Vlt. Canons Canon. 372. 17. Foundation
Fundation of. 393. 32. dele whether 402 44. of themselves in the issue.


