A Christian meditacion or prayer to be said at all times whenever GOD shall
vyset us with any mortal plague or sicnesse.

Imprynted at London By Wylliam Awen 1.5.5.1.

A Christian meditacyon or prayer to meditacio^ or prayer to be said at all
times when soever God shall viset us with any mortal plage or sickness.
O Lord GOD almighty and Father most merciful, who though thou be daily
provoked to wrath and vengeance by the grievous offenses and sins of us thy
most disobedient children, yet nevertheless art so pacient and of such long
sufferaunce, that thou holdeste thy rod, till by our outrageous contemptes and
most wilful breakinges of the commandments thou art for our correccion
co^streigned to strike: remember good Lord thine accustomed goodness toward
thy people, whom of thine own fatherly thendernesse thou hadest ever more
lieffer to save the^ to spill, to emend the^, to destroy, to forgive then to
punyshe. What soever scourge or affliecions thou did in old time either
threaten or lay upon the stubberne and vnrepentau^ce people of Israel, yet
dyddest thou never shut up thy mercies from them when soever they would with
all their heart return unto the. Gene. 18.
When the cry of Zodome and Gomorre came unto thine ear for their most
grievous abominacio^s: yet such is thy readiness to show mercy, that at the
prayer of thy servant Abraham thou madeste promise to save the cities and not
to destroy them. First if fifty, secondely if fourtye five, than if fortye,
afterward if thirty, Joan. 3.
at last if twenty, yea finally if ten righteous persons could have been
found in them. Wha^ thy Prophet Jonas had proclaimed the destruction of Niniue
for their great and manifold sins: yet for their repentance sake, thou
did most gladly and readily call back thy sore sentence before pronounced
against them. 4. Re. 20
When thy Prophet Isay had at thy co^mau^demente declared to King Ezechias
that he should not escape death, yet for his herty prayers sake thou did
revoke that sentence again, and did add, fyfteen years unto his days.
And we also now O Lord acknowledge our manifold sins and most grievous
transgressio^s. We confess that we have most justly deserved this sodayn
plague and mortal disease and a great deal wurse. We grant that we have by
our wickedness, most worthily enke^dled thy wrath and indignacion against
us. But o Lord what is man that thou would match thy self to try in
battaill against him: What glory should it be, to ye o Lord, if thou
shouldeste destroy all fleash being but chaf and duste. Remember good Lord that
if thou will stand in trial with us, we have nothing to lay for our selfs,
nor can be hable to stand in judgment before the. We therefore appeal from
thy justice unto thy mercy, which for thy names sake and for thine own glory,
thou have in thine eternal word and truth promised unto all such as will
earnestly emend and convert unto the. Spar us therefore good Lord, and like as
thou have at this present sent unto us this sodayn plague both as a warning of
thy great indignacion for our most grievous sins, and also for a token that
except we will now emende, we cannot escape thy hands to be beaten with a
sharper rod: so grant O Lord that this may be unto us an wholesome medicyne
for our emendement of life, and that it may all together redounde unto thy
glory, so that whether we live or dye we may still be thy people, and thou
still our God and most tender loving Father. And forasmuch as every good gift
of true faith and repentance comes from the give us thy grate that we may by
this thy most tender and fatherly correccion, return from our did iniquities
which have now provoked thy wrath, and also that from hensforth we may serve
the in all holiness and pureness of life, whereby thy glory may increase, and
thy name may be magnified. Yea even among them that other wise are blasphemers
of thy most holy Gospel, and do impute unto the knowledge of thy most holy
word sent unto the world in these later times, all the plagues. Which have
been provoked by our stubbernesse and hardenesse of heart. But hear thou O
Lord the hertye prayers of the faithful litell flock trustyng in thy only
mercy: and grant this our petycyon for thy Son JESUS Christ's sake, to
whom with the, and thee Holy Ghooste be all praise, honor and glory for
ever and ever. So be it.


