A Mirror of Popish SVBTILTIES: Discovering sundry wretched and miserable
euasions and shifts which a secret cauilling Papist in the behalf of one Paul
Spence Priest, yet living and lately prisoner in the Castle of Worcester, has
gathered out of Sanders, Bellarmine, and others, for the avoiding and
discrediting of sundry allegations of scriptures and Fathers, against the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, concerning Sacraments, the sacrifice of the
Mass, Transubstantiation, Justification, etc.

Written by Rob. Abbot, Minister of the word of God in the City of Worcester.

The contents see in the next Page after the Preface to the Reader.

Perused and allowed.

TC VIRESSIT VULNERE VERITAS
printer's seal

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed, for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard. 1594.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, THE L. Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace,
Primate and Metrapolitane of all England: and to the right reverend Father in
God, the L. Bishop of Worcester, R. A. wishes all abundance of grace and
peace, with everlasting life.
Reverend Fathers, it may seem perhaps some presumption in me, to be thus bold
to use your LL. names for the countenancing of this Pamphlet, which neither for
the matter of it, nor for the occasion, may seem worthy of the notice or sight
of so grave and learned Fathers. Notwithstanding being drawn to the
publication hereof, partly by the importunity of adversaries, partly by the
desire and expectation of friends, I thought it very requisite both in respect
of the cause it self, and in respect of mine own private duty, to offer
these my simple labors to the protection of your LL. The matter hereof in the
beginning was only private betwixt my self and a Romish Priest, one Paul
Spence, detained as then in the Castle of Worcester, now, I know not upon what
occasion, living at his liberty abroad. But when by speech and report it was
drawn to occasion of public scandal, the adversary bragging in secret of a
victory, and others doubting what to think thereof, because they saw not to
the contrary, I judged it necessary after long debating and deliberating with
my self, to let all men see how little reason there was of any such insolent
triumph: supposing that it might be turned upon me for a matter of just
reproof and blame, if my concealing hereof should cause any disadvantage to
the truth, or any discredit of that Ministry and service which under your LL.
I execute in the place where I am. Now I must profess that my thus doing, is
only for the City of Worcester and others thereabout, for their satisfaction
in this cause, wherein I know many of them have desired to be satisfied. Your
LL. are both by special occasion affectioned to the place. I know my pains
shall be the better accepted with them, if it shall be vouchsafed your LL.
gracious and favorable acceptance. Moreover, the favor which I have received
of both your LL of the one, in commending me to the place where I am: of the
other, in yielding me special patronage and eountenance therein, has bound me
to yield unto you these my first fruits, though but as a handful of water, yet
a testimony of my dutiful and thankful mind. And if it shall find no other
cause to be liked of, yet in this I doubt not but it shall be approved that it
is a just defense of truth against the vain cauillations of error. The
special drift of my writing, is to approve concerning the matters that are
here in hand, our faithful and upright dealing in alleging the Fathers
against the doctrine of the church of Rome. Whose proctors for a time used the
name of the catholic church, as a fray-bug to terrify al me^ from speaking
against them. But when they were perforce urged to the scriptures, they cried
out that we expound the scriptures amiss, and otherwise then the ancient
Fathers did understand them. Being further pressed with the testimonies and
authorities of the ancient Fathers, they still notwithstanding exclaim that
we abuse them also, and allege them to other purpose then ever they intended.
A strange matter that the plain words both of the scriptures and of the
Fathers, being so expressly for us, yet their meaning and purpose, as these men
pretend, should be altogether against us. But whilst they endeavor to justify
this, either open exclamation, or privy whispering, it is strange to see how
strangely and madly they deal. Eccl. 19. 24.
There is, says the wise man, a subtlety that is fine, but it is unrighteous:
and there is that wresteth the open and manifest law. Verily there is nothing
so evident, nothing so manifest, but these men have a special faculty to
turn it out of the way that it would go, and by a distinction of this manner
and that manner, to set a meaning upon it which never came into the meaning of
him that wrote it. In which practice and occupation, it falls out with them
which Ireneus said of the heretics of his time: Iren lib. ^. cap. 1^.
There is none perfect amongst them, but such a one as does not ably cogge and
lie. Indeed lies cannot be defended but by lying, and false gloses must serve
to maintain false and erroneous assertions. Which is not a little to be seen in
this libell or pamphlet which I have here to refute, the Author whereof takes
upon him like a cunnyng Alcumist, to turn every thing into what he list, and
as if he supposed us to be men bewitched and transformed into beasts, sticks
not to make such constructions of the scriptures and Fathers sayings, as no man
that has but the common reason and understanding of a man, can but see to be
leaudly and unreasonably devised. Whereat I should the less marvel, if they
were only this man's devise: I would impute this folly to him only. But now he
has taken the most of them out of their learned Treatises forsooth, to which
he often refers me, as if they were the Oracle of all truth. So that the
spirit of this frenzy and madness goes through the heads of them all,
whereby it comes to pass that they take delight in those things which they
cannot but know to be absurd. That their masters know so much, it seems to
us apparent, for that they forbid their scholars and followers to be acquainted
with any of our writings wherein their absurdities and falsehoods are laid open:
and whereas we in answearing them, propose both theirs and ours indifferently to
all men to be judged of, they give their pupils some liberty to read their
books, but it is damnation for them to touch any of ours. Such scholars would
be suspicious of such masters, but that they are maruellously blinded with
prejudice and self will. Now as many other by other occasions, so I the least
of all by occasion offered to me, have taken upon me for this present matter,
to show I will not say how vainly and fondly, but wickedly and unshamefastly
they deal in perverting (they call it answering) the testimonies of the
ancient Fathers. What I have atteined unto herein, I leave it to be esteemed by
the wise and godly reader, whose will and convenient leisure does serve to be
exercised in such readings. Whatsoever it is, I commend it to the favor of
your good LL. Humbly craving that my willingness and care may be allowed of,
howsoever my ableness be not so fully answerable to the weightinesse of the
cause. The God of all grace multiply his graces and blessings upon your LL.
and so direct you by his holy spirit in all faithfulness and care for the
feedyng and guyding of his Church, that in the end you may receive that
incorruptible crown of glory, which Jesus Christ shall yield unto his
faithful servants when he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

Amen. From Worcest. Ianu. 7. 1593. Your LL. always to be commanded in Jesus
Christ. Rob. Abbot.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT may be deemed, good Christian Reader, that in publishing this Pamphlet I
neither bethought my self of my self nor of these times. As touching my self
I must acknowledge, that by reason of many defectes, I should have been
discouraged from giving any thing forth to the common view and censure of the
world. Especially these times being such and so abundant in learning and
knowledge, as that it may seem great pr^sumption in any man, to attempt the
diuulging of any writing wherein there is not either for wit or learning,
somewhat more then may be expected of every common and ordinary man. Moreover
these matters of controversy betwixt the Church of Rome and us, have been so
thoroughly sifted and debated to the full by diverse men of singular learning and
judgment in this age, that for such as I am, to say any thing after them, may
seem no other a matter then for Pan to pipe after Apollo his music, and for
an unlearned Attorney to plead a cause after the pleading and debating of most
learned counsel. But yet the necessary regard of procuring due estimation to
the truth against the adversaries secret disgracinges, has moved me to do
that in this behalf which otherwise I could not have thought convenient.
Neither have I judged the conscience of mine own slenderness and inhability a
sufficient reason to stay me here-from, the case standing as it does, because I
know that as in the bodily fight it is necessary for the winning of the field,
that not only the Captains and best experienced soldiers, do use their
strength, but also those that in experience and ableness are far inferior
unto them, so in this spiritual warfare and contending against the adversaries
of the Gospel of Christ, not only they that are of supreme excellency of
learning and gifts, but also they which are but as it were of the first order,
must as occasion serves use that ableness which God has given them to
justify the cause of the Gospel, and to clear it from those mistes of
falsehood and error, wherewith the adversaries labor to ouercast it, and to
hide it from being seen. And although these matters have been already very
sufficiently disputed of, yet because it fares with books as it does with
news, that whilst they are new and fresh they are regarded and sought after,
but after a while they are in a manner buried, so that if the adversary stir
again, though he bring nothing but that that was confuted before, yet he is
thought to be unanswered, except some special answer be returned to him,
therefore beside the commodity which arises by the diverse handling of the
same matters, serving much for the more easy conceiving and understanding
thereof, as t S. Austen notes, it is in this respect also very ^ August. de
bap cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap 1.
behouefull and necessary for the Church of God, that the same points be again
and again discussed, and truth from time against new adversaries a new
defended, though in respect of the matter it self, there needs not be any
thing further said, then that which by diverse has been said already. Therefore
it shall not seem unreasonable that I though not worthy, whose name should go
forth into this public notice, yet being occasioned thereto, should after the
labors of so many learned men, employ my small talent to the confuting of such
vain gloses and shifts as an adversary has used against my self to darken
the truth laid open and manifest before his eyes. But for thy better
understanding, gentle Reader, and more full satisfaction as touching the
necessity of this my doing, I will briefly declare the original and process
of the whole matter.

There was in the Castle of Worcester, a Priest named Paul Spence, not of the
Seminary, but begotten to his order as I suppose, in the ti^e of Queen Mary.
Upon motion sundry times made unto m^e, I went unto him to have some speech
with him concerning his profession. The particulars of our speech either then
or after, I will not report, least I should seem partial either for my self or
against him. The conclusion of my speech at that time, was to wish him that he
would at some convenient times resort to my study, that by the opportunity of
my books I might, as occasion served, show him those places and testimonies
which I should allege to him. He promised that he would* so that I would
procure him license. I procured it of my L. the Bishop lately deceased. I came
to him again, and after some speech I required the performance of his promise.
He showed himself too and fro in the matter, and in the end gave me plain
answer that he was resolved, and so he knew I was also, and therefore that it
was to no purpose for him so to do. I departed from him. The next news that I
heard, was a report given forth that I had been with him at the prison, and
that he had stopped my mouth that I had nothing to say to him. This is the
accustomed manner of these men, who are all so rank of learning, that the
veriest ass of them if he do but once braie, is able to astonish and confound
any adversary be he never so learned. I went to him again, and urged him as
before. He answered me in the same manner. A^ length he was persuaded by
another man and came to me. I reasoned with him of sundry matters. Being in
speech as touching Transubstantiation, I showed him a saying of Cyprian: Cypr.
lib. 2. ep. 3.
We find that it was wine which Christ called his blood. But Cyprian says
withal, That the cup was mixed which the Lord offered. He left the matter in
hand, and began to demand of me what I thought of the mixture of the cup, I
answered him nothing of mine own opinion, but told him that Chrysostom called
it Chrysostom. in Mat. ho. ^3.
A pernicious heresy. He required me and I showed him the place. But returning
to the former point, I showed him the words of Gelasius where he says, that in
the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ, Gelas. cont. ^uty. and ^estor.
There cease not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine. These two
latter places have been the occasion of all this writing. He sent to me within
two or three days after for my books, to peruse the places, that whereas he
could not presently answer any thing by spe^ch, he might do somewhat by
w^^ting. I received his answer, and replied to the same again by writing; yet
not intending, because it stood not with my business otherwise, to go any
further in this course, but only for some advertisement and instruction to him
which I saw he needed, and to give him occasion of further conference by
speech, as I moved him in the end. This happened near the beginning of Lent,
in the year 1590. Toward Whitsuntide next following, when I thought he had
been quiet and would have meddled no more, he sent me an answer again written
at large to my reply. But the answer in truth was none of his own doing, as
is manifest partly by his own confession, and by that he showed himself a
stranger in his own answers, when afterward in speech he was vpbraided with
some of them by my self: partly by the muttering report of his own fellows,
vaunting that though he were able to say little, yet some had the matter in hand
that were able to say enough. He himself indeed was not, nor is of ableness to
do it, as all men know that have any knowledge of him. He was never of any
University, and both professed and showed himself in speech utterly ignorant
of Logic, whereof his deputy Answ. pretends great skill. I omit some other
matters that I might mention for proof hereof. But thus I was unawares drawn
from P. Spence, to tontrouersie and disputation with some other secret friend
of his, who for his learning might take upon him to be a defender of the
Romish falsehood. I addressed my self to a confutation of this answer, and
thought to have sent the same to M. Spence in writing; but before I had fully
perfected it, which was in July or August following, he was by occasion of some
infirmity as was pretended, set free from his imprisonment upon suerties, and
so continues till this time, neither could I by such means as I used, bring
him forth to receive that which I had written. Hereupon have I been traduced
by the faction as a man conquered and overcome, as if I taught openly, that
which in dealing privately with an adversary I am not able to defend. For the
avoiding of this scandal, I was diverse times motioned to publish the whole
matter, but for some special reasons did forbear. It lay by me almost a
whole year, before I would resolve so to do. At the length, for the satisfying
of such as might be desirous to be satisfied in this behalf, and that
foolish men might have no further occasion of their vain imaginations and
speeches, I took it in hand as my great business otherwise would permit, to
peruse it again, and to add some things for answer to Bellarmine, as
touching some points for which the Answ. refers me to him, whose works I
had not at the first penning hereof, and so I have presumed, Christian Reader,
to offer it unto thy consideration. I have termed the whole discourse in
respect of the principal purpose and argument of it, A Mirror of Popish
subtilties, as wherein thou may in part behold the vanity and wretchedness
of those answers wherein these men account so great subtlety and acuteness
of wit and learning, as if the same being given, there were nothing more to be
said against them. In the publishing hereof, I have thought good to observe
this order. First I have set down the above named places of Chrysostom and
Gelasius. Secondly, M. Spence his Answer to those two places. Thirdly, my
reply to that answer. Fourthly, the latter answer to my reply, with a
confutation thereof, from point to point, and a defense of the allegations and
authorities used in the said reply. Read all, and then judge of the truth. I
protest, I have made conscience to write nothing but the truth: neither has
any vain curiosity led me to the publishing hereof, but only the regard of
justifying the truth, and that namely to those of the City and County of
Worcester, whom my labors do most nearly and properly concern. If thou
can reap any fruit or benefit by it, I shall be heartily glad thereof, and let
us both give glory unto God. If any see the truth herein, and yet will
maliciously kick against it, I pass by him with those words of the Apostle;
Apoc. 22 11.
He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. It is our part to propose the
truth: it is God only that can give men hearts to assent unto it, and Mat. 11.
1*
Wisdom shall be justified of her children. The God of all wisdom and
knowledge, enlighten us more and more to the understanding of his true
religion; subdue the pride and rebellion of our hearts, that we may unfeignedly
yield unto it, and give us constancy and perseverance to continue in the same
unto the end, that in our end we may attain to the endless fruition of his
kingdom and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen. Rob. Abbot.

The special matters that are discussed in this Treatise.
THat the mixture of water in the cup of the Lord is not necessary, neither
has any sufficient warrant. Defe. sect. 2. That the Liturgies which go under
the names of James, Basil, and Chrysostomes Masses, as now they are extant, are
not theirs whose names they bear. sect. 5. That Popish prayer for the dead
has no warrant from the ancientest church, sec. 7. That the sacrifice of the
Mass is contradicted by the scriptures and Fathers, that Bellarmin himself in
seeking to approve it, overthrows it; that the exceptions that are made
against our reasons and proofs, are vain and frivolous, sect 4. 9. 10. That
Theodoret and Gelasius, in disputing against the he esie of Eutyches, do very
peremptorily determine against Transubstantiation sect 11. 12. That Tertullian,
Cyprian, Chrysostom, Austen, do manifestly impugn the same error of
Transubstantiation, with a declaration of an obscure place alleged under*
Austens name, and a refutation of other exceptions that are made in the behalf
thereof. sect. 13. 14 15. 16. 17 18. 21. 22. That the expounding of the
descending of Christ into hell, of the torments and anguish of his soul,
contains, as touching the doctrine thereof, nothing but the truth witnessed
both by the scriptures and by the Fathers. sest. 15. That our sacraments are
rightly called seals, and in what respect they are preferred before the
sacraments of the old Testament, sect. 20. 30. That the real eating and
drinking of the flesh and blood of Christ is a leaude devise, and judged by the
Fathers to be wicked, profane, faithless, and heathenish, and that the words
of Christ, of eating and drinking, Job. 6. are not to be understood properly
but by a figure. sect. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 30. That the Doctors of the
Romish church by the defense of Transubstantiation have been driven to most
impious and damnable questions and assertions. sect. 29. That the place of the
Gospel Luc. 22. 20. which they so much cauil upon out of the Greek, makes
nothing at all for Transubstantiation, as by diverse other reasons, so by the
confession Bellarmine himself. sect 31. That the assumption of the virgin
Mary, is a mere fable sect. 33. That the Church has no authority after the
Apostles, to authorize any scriptures and that we seclude no other books from
the canon of the bible, then the old church did. sect. 34. How wickedly the
Papists deal in mangling and martyring the writings of the Fathers. sect. 35.
That our doctrine of justification before God by faith only, is the very
truth which both the scriptures and out of them, the Fathers have manifestly
taught: that it makes nothing against good works: that the place of S. James,
cap. 2. makes nothing against it. sect. 36.
May it please thee, gentle Reader, first of all to take notice of these two
places of Chrysostom and Gelasius, which have been the occasion of all this
controversy: for thy better satisfaction I have noted them both in English and
Latin, though otherwise to avoid both tediousness of writing and unnecessary
charges of printing, I have thought good to set down the places alleged only
translated into English.

The place of Chrysostom against the use of water in the cup of the Lords
table.
CVius rei gratia non aquam sed vinum post resurrectionem bibit? Chrysostom. in
Math. hom. 83.
Perniciosam quandam haeresin radicitus euellere voluit, eorum qui aqua in
mysterijs vtuntur. Ita vt ostenderet quia and quando hoc mysteriu^ tradidit,
vnum tradidit: etiam post resurrectionem in nuda mysterij mensae vino vsus est.
Exgenimine, ait, vitis, quae certe vinum, non aquam producit.

In English thus:

But why did Christ after his resurrection drink not Water but Wine? He would
pluck up by the roots a certain pernicious heresy; of them which use water
in the Sacrament. So that to show that when he delivered this Sacrament, he
delivered wine, even after his resurrection also he used wine at the bare table
of the Sacrament. Of the fruit of the vine, says he, which surely brings
forth wine and not water.

The place of Gelasius against Transubstantiation.
CErte sacramenta quae sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christi, diuina Gelasius
cont. Eutych. and Nestor.
res est; propter quod and per eadem diuinae efficimur consortes naturae, and
tamen esse non desiuit substantia vel natura panis and vini. Et certe imago and
similitudo corporis and sanguinis Christi in action mysteriorum celebrantur.
Satis ergo nobis euidenter ostenditur, hoc nohis in ipso Christo domino
sentiendum, quod in eius imagine profitemur, celebramus et sumimus, vt sicut in
haenc, scilicet in diuinam transeunt, sancto spiritu perficiente, substantiam,
permanent tamen in suae proprietate naturae: sic illud ipsum mysterium
principale, cuius nobis efficientiam virtutemque veraciter repraesentant, ex
quibus constat proprie permanentibus, vnum Christum, quia integrum verumque
permaenere demon strant.

In English thus:

Verily the Sacraments which we receive of the body and blood of Christ are a
divine thing, by reason whereof, we also by them are made partakers of the
divine nature, and yet there cease not to be the substance or nature of bread
and wine. And surely an image or esemblance of the body and blood of Christ,
is celebrated in the action of the mysteries. It is therefore evidently enough
showed unto us; that we must think the same in our Lord Jesus Christ, which we
profess, celebrate and receive in his image, that as these (namely the bread
and wine) do by the working of the holy Ghost pass over into a divine
substance, and yet continue in the propriety of their own nature; so they
show that that principal mystery, the efficiencie and virtue whereof these do
represent unto us, does abide one Christ; because whole and true; those natures
properly remaining, whereof he does consist.

M. Spence having had my books to peruse these places, sent me in writing this
answer to them.
SIr, I right heartily thank you for the willing mind you hau^ toward me.
Truly I should be very unkind if I knew m^ self vnaffectioned to so much
good will. I am in prison and poverty, otherwise I should be some way
answerable to your friendlinesse. In the mean season good will shall be ready
for good will. Touching the words of S. Chrysostom: He would pluck up by the
roots a certain pernicious heresy of them which use water in the Sacrament,
etc. Read the 32. Canon of the sixth Council holden at Constantinople, and
there you shall find upon what occasion this golden mouth did utter these
words, and not only that, but also mention of S. James, and S. Basils mass or
sacrifice left to the church in writing. The words of the Canon begin thus:
Because we know that in the country of the Armenians, wine only is offered at
the holy table, etc. The heresy therefore against which he wrote was of the
Untruth. For neither does Chrysostom intimate any thing against the Armenians
or such as use wine only: neither was it heresy in the^ that did so.
Armenians, and the Aquarians: the first whereof would use only wine, the
other only water in the holy mysteries. Against which use being so directly
against both the scriptures and custom of the primitive church, he wrote the
same which he says of pernicious heresy, as before, I cannot doubt of your
having the Councels or some of them.

Your other book containing the words of Gelasius, I will not yet answer,
being printed at Basil, where we suspect many good works to be corrupted and
abused. But if it prove so to be, yet the whole faith of Christ's church in that
point may not be reproved, against so many witnesses of scriptures and fathers
Neither scripture not Father avouches the contrary.
auouching the contrary. Nay what words should Christ have used if he had
meant to make his body and blood of the bread and wine as we say he did, other
then these: This is my body which shall be given, etc. And gain: for this is
my blood of the new Testament which shall be shead for many for remission of
sins. Mark well the speeches and they be most wonderful as most true. All
the world and writings therein The Gospel it self is sufficient to persuade
him that will be persuaded, ^nforming us of a true and natural body of
Christ, and not of a fantastical body in the fashion and quantity of a wafer
cake.
cannot justly and well persuade a Christian to believe the contrary in my
opinion: S. Matthew, Mark, Luke and Paul all writing, This is my body; whereas
writing otherwise of one thing, one says; If I in the finger of God cast out
devils, etc. Another, If I in the spirit of God, etc. So that in Untrue, as
appears by the conference of these places Mat. 5. 29. with Mar. 9. 3. Mar. 5.
39. with Luc. 6. 29. Mat. 20. 23. Mar. 10. 39. Mat. 21. 21. Mar. 11. 23. which
are not taken literally, and yet difler not in phrase of speech.
any matter where more then one speak of the same thing, every one has more of
the same thing to give more light then another. But in the matter of the
Sacrament no whit so, but in the very substantial point Untrue: for they
vary as touching the cup, and there is the same reason of the one part of the
Sacrament, as of the other. See the reply. Council. constanti. 6. can. 32
all deliver the self same effectual words.

Sir, once again thanks for your good Chrysostom, and so I beseech to recall
them that err into the way of truth and everlasting salvation.

A reply against the former answer to the places of Chrysostom and Gelasius.
THe willingness I have to do you good, M. Spence, I wish might take such
effect with you, as that God might be glorified by revealing unto you ye
knowledge of his truth. I doubt not but it shall be so, if you seek it as you
ought, and where you ought. Concerning the place of Chrysostom, of using water
in the Sacrament, I find it expounded as you answer me, in Council.
Constantinopol 6. ca. 32. of them that used water only and no wine. Albeit the
words seem to me plainly to enforce upon the Reader another understanding
neither find I any reason why the Bishops of Armenia being a thousand under one
Metropolitan, may not be thought as meet judges of Chrysostomes meaning, as
the Bishops of this Council; especially seeing it is not certain either what
time or by whom those Canons were made, and appear to be falsely fathered upon
the sixth general Council as Surius in his admonition Surius in admoni^. ad
Lector. de can. 6. synodi. council. to. 2.
concerning those Canons gives to understand. Yea and they are in diverse
points rejected by your selves, as is plain also by Surius both in the same
Preface, and by some notes added to some of the Canons. But I contend not of
that point, and as I condemn not in that respect the Churches which either
have used or do use that mixture, only without opinion of superstition and
necessity; so neither do I find reason why those Churches are to be condemned
that rather follow as most assured the simplicity of the institution of Jesus
Christ, where we find mention of the fruit of the vine, but nothing as
touching water. If you say as the Canon says, that this is to innouate those
things which have been delivered by tradition, Cypri. epist. ad Pompeium.
I must answer you with Cyprians words; Whence is this tradition? Whether
descending from the authority of the Lord and of the Gospel, or coming from
the Commandments and Epistles of the Apostles? for that those things which are
written must be done, God testifies, etc. If therefore either it be commanded
in the Gospel or contained in the Epistles and Acts of the Apostles, let this
tradition be kept as holy. Now, seeing there is no testimony of the holy
scripture to approve the necessity of water, I take your words ( directly
contrary to the scriptures) to be understood rather of those which use water
only contrary to the text, then wine only according to the express mention of
the text. Your gloss of the Canon De consecra. did. 2. cap. sicut in glossa.
law does tell that Doctors have said, that water is to be mingled in the cup
only for honesty or decency, and therefore not of necessity to the
Sacrament. And that amongst others Thomas Aquinas grants. Polydore Virgil
refers the fist institution thereof to Alexander Plati. in Alexander 1.
Durand. Rati. divine. lib. 4. rubri: de officio sacerdotis, etc. Thom. Aquin. pa
3. q. 7^. art. 3
the first, Bishop of Rome. P^atina seems to agree with him. So Durand says:
Water is mingled in the cup with the wine, by the institution of Pope Alexander
the first. And as touching Christ's using of water, Thomas Aquinas makes it
but a probability and no certain truth: It is probably believed that our Lord
instituted this Sacrament in wine mingled with water according to the manner of
that country. Your Council of Trent says no more: It is supposed that our
Lord did so. And in a conference betwixt Anselmus a Bishop of Saxome, and
Nech^tes Patriarch of Nicomedia, Anno domini Centur. Magdebur. cap. 12.
1138. Ne^hites obiecting that Christ our Savior did not use water in the
consecration, Anselmus answers by likelihood that he did so, because in
Palestina the manner is to mingle water with their wine. Now if it were done
according to the manner of that country, then it was done to abate the strength
of the wine and not for any such mystery as some have imagined. In many
Countries where their wines are very strong, temperate and sober men use to
qualify and delaie the heat thereof by mingling water, least it should cause
any distemperature to the body. And this the Greek Churches may seem to have
respected who consecrated with mere wine, as appears by N^chites his speech
in the conference aboue-named; as also by some editions of Chrysostomes
Liturgy, and afterward put in water when it was to be administered to the
receivers. The reason which they used for not adding water before, was this,
because Christ is not read to have added water; which accords with the words
of Chrysostom alleged by me. But as I said before, I stand not upon this
point. Only I pray you to consider an argument of Bertram in his book de
corpo. and sangui. domini. ad Carol imperat. taking Bertram. de corpo. and
sang. domini.
his ground from this mixture. Water, says he, in the Sacrament bears the
image of the people. Therefore if the wine sanctified by the service of the
Ministers, be bodily turned into the blood of Christ, then the water also which
is mingled withal, must needs be bodily or substantially turned into the blood
of the believing people. For where there is one sanctification there is
consequently one working or effect, and where there is the like reason, there
follows also the like mystery. But we see in the water there is nothing
turned bodily. Consequently therefore in the wine there is nothing bodily
showed. It is taken spiritually whatsoever is signified in the water as
touching the body of the people. It must needs therefore be taken spiritually
whatsoever is signified in the wine concerning the blood of Christ. Which words
amongst other, it has pleased those honest Censours of the King of Spains
appointment, to exempt from being Index Exp^ in censura Bertram^.
printed any more. A shift wherewith the church of Romes factours have made us
very well acquainted in the works of diverse Authors both old and new.

By the way as you touch this point, you seem to gleane for the defense of
your Mass, telling me that in the Canon aforesaid, there is mention made of S.
James and S. Basils Mass or Sacrifice left to the Church in writing. By which
speech you put me in mind of that melancholy Athenian, who standing at the sea
shore would imagine of every ship that he saw that it was his ship. For in like
sort whersoeuer you find in any of the ancient Fathers mention made of ye
mystical sacrifice, you fancy it straight ways to be meant of your
sacrilegious and abominable sacrifice of ye Mass: a cursed devise of Satan
thereby to withhold men from the soueraign and only sacrifice of the cross of
Christ. Therefore whereas ye Canon mentions only Sacrifice, you allege it to
me Mass or Sacrifice. But you should know that the Greek Fathers were not
privy to the name of your Mass, how soever it please some of you to make a
cogging argument to blind the unlearned by these titles, S. James his Mass,
S. Chrysostomes Mass, etc. used by the translators, but never meant by the
Authors. The Greek word (...) which they used, may rather import our
diuine-seruice then your profane Mass. And if it must needs signify Mass,
you may turn the magistrate into a Rom* 13. 6. The Minister of God. Romans 15.
27. Phil. 2. 25. to minister unto. Heb. 1 14. ministering spirits. Act. 13. 2.
as they were minist^ing to the Lord.
Masse-pri^st because he is called (...), and you may say that to relieve the
necessities of Saints is to say Mass, because the Apostle uses thereof the
word (...) and Angels shall be called Massing spirits, because they are called
(...). You remember since you would needs enforce the Apostles saying Mass by
the words (...). how well to ye purpose you may hereby understand. Your Mass
you call of the word Missa (you should indeed rather of the word Massa, as
being an heap of unprofitable ceremonies and wicked prophanations of the
Sacrament of Jesus Christ). But Missa imports not sacrifice as you pretend it
does. The old use of the word Missa, discloseth the great abuse of your Mass.
It noted the sending away of non-communicants; none being permitted to stay
while the Sacrament was ministered, but only such as did communicate. So does S.
Austen declare, speaking Au. de Temp. ser. 232.
as touching the Catechumeni, that is, such as were yet but nouices in religion
and under chatechising, and therefore as yet not permitted to be partakers of
the holy mysteries, nor to be present at the celebration thereof. Behold says
he, after the Sermon there is ( missa) a dimission or sending away of such as
are catechumeni: the faithful abide still; we shall come to the place of
prayer; etc. And in the fourth Council of Carthage, order is taken that the
Bishop shall forbid council. carthag. 4. can. 84.
none to enter into the Church and hear the word of God, whether he be
Gentile, heretic or Jew, vsque ad missam, until the dimission or sending
away of the catechumeni. There is no such dimission in your Mass, and of those
that stay, none are ordinarily partakers of the Sacrament, but only the
Priest. The people are spectatours only of his stage-like and trifling
iestures, and go as empty home as they came thither. But in process of time
custom drew this w^r^ to note the celebration of the Sacrament, which was
administered to such as remained after this dimission. Whence it is that the
pretended Liturgies of S. James, Basil, and Chrysostom, are by the translators
termed by the name of Mass. Whereas those Liturgies, I doubt not, if they
were written by those men whose names they bear, as some of them assuredly
were not, or if being written by them they remained as their Authors left them,
as by the variety of the editions of Chrysostomes Liturgy it is plain they do
not, would rather resemble our communion wherein both the Minister and the
people communicate together in both kinds, then your Mass wherein the people
are either idle lookers on, or when they are communicants, are by your
sacrilege communicants in one kind only, and secluded from the other;
contrary altogether to the practice of the primitive Church, or which is more,
to the express institution of our Savior Christ. And this is to be seen by
those steps of antiquity which as yet are found in those Liturgies: neither do
I see what great advantage you have by them to set any color upon your Popish
Mass, save only to blind the eyes of the simple and unlearned. And whereas
you alleged to me that there was in them prayer for the dead, there is good
cause to think that those prayers were at the first but commemorations and
thankesgiuings for the departed in the faith of Christ; for that in
Chrysostomes Liturgy we find, according to that which then I answered you,
thus: We offer unto thee, o Lord, this reasonable service for those chrysostom
^^gia.
which rest in the faith, our Ancestors, Fathers, the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Preachers, Euangeli^tes, Martyrs, especially for the most holy and
pure virgin Mary, etc. But it is contrary to the custom of your church and to
your doctrine, to pray for the virgin Mary, for Martyrs, etc. And you use to
that purpose the saying of S. Austen, He does injury to the Martyr, which
prays for a Martyr. Therefore August. de verb Apo. ser. 17.
these were only speeches of thanksgiving unto God for his loving mercy showed
to those through Jesus Christ, and make nothing at all for your prayer for the
dead. To this being the ancient custom o^ the Church, S. Austen alludeth when
he says: When the Aug. Euchi^. cap. 10.
sacrifices either of the altar or of any alms are offered for all that are
dead, they are for them that are very good thankesgiuings, etc. which custom
of thanksgiving generally we also use for all that are departed hence in the
faith of Jesus Christ. As for that which he adds: For them that are not very
evil, they are propitiations, etc. we take it to be a superstitious conceit
which after crept into y^ church, contraried by many in S. Austens time, as may
appear in his book of questions to Dulcitius, where proposing the question of
Dulcitius, whether oblations for the dead did avail them (whereby it appears
it was a matter controuersed in that time) he answers: To this many say that
if there might be any good done herein August de 8. quaest. D^lcitij q. 2.
after death, how much rather should the soul it self procure rest for it
self by it own confession of sins there made, then that an oblation should
be procured for the rest thereof by other man? A reason not without some weight
if it be well considered.

But in that place aforementioned of S. Austen, I would not you should be deceived
to think y^ he means the sacrifices of the altar, for the offering or
sacrificing of the body and blood of Christ, whereas indeed he means it of
the offerings (as we also call them) which every particular man offered at the
Sacrament, which were employed either to the service of the Sacrament, or to
the relief of the poor, or to other sacred and godly uses. Which manner of
offering Hierom in 1. Cor. 11.
S. Hierome declares upon those words of the Apostle: When ye come together,
etc. This he speaks, says he, because when they met in the church, they
offered their offerings severally, and after the communion, eating a supper in
common, they spent there in the church whatsoever remained unto them of the
sacrifices. To which purpose sundry other like places might be alleged. And
this is one reason amongst the rest, why sometimes we find mention of
sacrifice offered in the Sacrament.

But I know, M. Spence, what sacrifice it is that you mean: a sacrifice
properly so called of the very body and blood of Christ, propitiatory for the
sins of quick and dead, offered really and indeed every day by the hands of
a wretched and sinful priest, who must entreat God in behalf of the sacrifice
of Christ's body and blood, that he will look down mercifully upon it and
accept it, etc. The very naming of which things cannot but be loathsome to a
true Christian heart, which simply believes out of the word of God that Christ
having purged our sins by once offering himself upon his cross Heb. 1. 3.
and 9. 26. 28. Cap. ^. 27. Cap. 10. 1^.
is ascended into heaven, neither needs to be often offered because by that
once offering he has fully perfected the work of one atonement and
forgiveness of sins, and therefore that there is now no other sacrifice or
offering propitiatory for sin: I say not only no other thing offered, but no
other offering or sacrificing for remission of sin. Read uprightly, M. Spence,
and with feeling of conscience the 7. 9. and 10. to the Hebrews. The sayings
are clear as the sun-light, and in vain do your Rhemists struggle and strive
to darken the light of them. There is none almost that knows any thing as
touching religion, but can see how their commentary is controlled by the text.
Consider this argument out of the tenth chapter: where there is forgiveness of
sins there is no more offering for sin. By the sacrifice of Christ upon his
cross there is forgiveness of sins: for his blood was there shead for the
forgiveness of sins. Therefore after Christ's sacrifice upon his cross there
is no more offering for sin. The Apostle in that place rejecting the
sacrifices of the old law, as which could not sanctify as touching the Hebr.
10. 1. 2.
conscience those that came unto them (for if they could, they should not have
been often offered) substitateth in place thereof the true, entier, and only
sacrifice of Christ upon his cross. Who having a body 5. 7.
fitted him, comes according to the will of his father into the world to
sanctify us by the offering of his body once. And whereas, 10. 11.
says he, the priests of the old law do daily and oftentimes offer their
sacrifices (an argument that they took not away sin) this man having offered
one offering for sin, is gone into heaven not to offer up himself often,
says he, chap. 9. for then he should have often cap. 9. 25.
suffered since the foundation of the world, but waiting henceforth till his
foes be made his footestoole: inferring withal, that he needs cap. 10. 13.
14.
not to be often offered because by one offering or oblation of himself, he
has perfected and that for ever them that are sanctified. Now that he has
persected us, and therefore that there needs no other sacrifice or offering
for sin, he proves by the words of Jeremy, 15.
who defines the new Testament, the ground whereof is the bloodsheading of
Jesus Christ by the forgiveness of sins, concluding thereupon; Now where
remission of these is, there is no more 18.
offering for sin. Collect the Apostles reason thus: If after that once
offering there be no more offering for sin, then surely by that once offering
he perfected us. But after that once offering there is no more offering for
sin; therefore by that once offering he has perfected us. The assumption or
minor he proves thus: Where forgiveness of sins is, there is no more
offering for sin. But by that once offering there is forgiveness of sins;
therefore after that once offering there is no more offering for sin. Examine
this collection and see how it goes hand in hand with the Apostles words.
Which is so peremptory and resolute against the sacrilege of the mass* that
your Rhemists without any color or show of probability by the text, do force
upon the word oblation a strange meaning, as if the Apostle had said; There is
no Rhem. Annot. Hebr. 10. 18.
second baptism whereby we may have applied unto us the full pardon and
remission of our sins. What should I here say? I man Campian. rat. 1
justly retort upon them the words of Campian: What? is it so? ^ there such
perverseness, such presumption, and shamelessness in men Cicer. epist. 12. lib.
5. Lucceio.
But they practice that which the Heathen Orator says: He which has once
passed the bounds of modesty and shamefastness, mu^ needs show himself
lustily impudent and shameless. What hat^ the Apostle to do with Baptism in
this text? Why did they no^ show how this sense hangs upon the words gone
before? Wh^ did they forgo the expositions of the Fathers? of Chrysostom: He
chrysostom. Oecumen. Theodor. etc* in Hebr. 10.
forgave sins when he gave the Testament, and he gave the Testament by
sacrifice. If therefore he forgave sins by one oblation or sacrifice, there
needs not now any second: of Oecumenius out of Photius: What need is there
of many oblations, seeing that one which Christ has yielded is sufficient to
take away sin? Theodoret: There is now no offering for sin. For it is
superfluous, forgiveness of sin being given already: of Theophylact: If
remission of sins be granted by one oblation, what need we now any second:
of Primasius: for Christ which is our sacrifice is not to be offered again for
sin. For this was once done and needs not to be done a second time: of
Ambrose: for one offering of the body of Christ makes perfect them that are
sanctified, as which gives full and perfect remission of sins, etc. Wherefore
it needs not that we should daily purge with daily sacrifices as they did in
the old law. Did they see none of these expositions? yes without doubt, they
saw them and shut their eyes against them. The Lord will require it in his due
time. But hereby we understand the meaning of their words in their Preface to
the Epistles, that if in ye scriptures there sound any thing to us contrary to
their doctrine, we must assure our selves that we fail of the right sense. So
that be the words never so plain, yet if they sound either to the ancient
Fathers or to us contrary to the Romish doctrine, we must think that neither
the ancient Fathers nor we attain to the right understanding of the words.
But we are not so mad upon the warrant of any Philosopher to say that snow is
black, so long as our eyes assure us that snow is white.

I know here what you are ready to object; namely, that the Fathers in
speaking of the Eucharist, use very commonly a mention of sacrifice, and call
the same by the name of sacrifice, and all this you refer to the sacrilege
of the Mass. But you should not conceive so of the Fathers, as to think that
they meant any thing contrary to so express and manifest scripture, so long
as they do so plainly tell you what they meant in using the name of sacrifice.
You should remember the corrections which Chrysostom and Ambrose do use when
Chrysostom. and Ambros. in Hebr. 10.
naming their offering of sacrifice they add, Or rather we work the
remembrance of a sacrifice. You should take notice of the exposition of
Theophylact; We offer him the same always, or rather we Theophy. ibid.
make a remembrance of the offering of him, as if he were offered or sacrificed
at this time: and of the words of Eusebius, After all having Eusebius. de
demonstrat. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 10. Theodor. in Hebr. 8.
wrought a wonderful and excellent sacrifice unto his father, he offered for
the salvation of us all and ordained that we should offer the remembrance
thereof unto God in steed of a sacrifice: and of Theodoret: Why do the priests
of the new Testament use a mystical Liturgy or sacrifice? It is clear to
them that are instructed in divine matters that we do not offer another
sacrifice, but do perform a remembrance of that one and saving sacrifice. For
this commandment the Lord himself gave; Do this, says he, in the
remembrance of me; that by beholding the figures, we might call to mind the
sufferings which he undertook in our behalf. And of S. Austen: The flesh
August. con. faust. Manich. lib. 20. ca. 2^.
and blood of this sacrifice was promised before the coming of Christ by
sacrifices of resemblance: in the passion of Christ it was given in very
truth: after the ascension of Christ it is celebrated by a Sacrament of
remembrance. Learn by this place to put difference betwixt in very truth, and
by a Sacrament of remembrance, and learn by all these places, that the
Eucharist is not a sacrifice properly so called, wherein Christ is really and
properly and in very truth sacrificed, but a Sacrament, a commomoration and
remembrance of a sacrifice. Add hereunto if you will the words of saint
Austen: Was not Christ once offered in himself, and yet in a mystery or
Sacrament August. ep. 23.
he is every day offered for the people? For if Sacraments had not a kind of
resemblance of those things whereof they are Sacraments, they should not be
Sacraments at all. Now by reason of this resemblance they do most commonly
take the names of the things themselves. Note in these words the difference
betwixt being offered in himself, and being offered in a Sacrament or
mystery, and learn that this speech of being offered or sacrificed, when it
respects the Sacrament, has his use and meaning not of the things
themselves, but of the resemblance of the things, and therefore is not indeed
to be offered in himself. And therefore your own gloss of the Canon law
expounds it: Christ is sacrificed, that is, the sacrificing of him is
represented, De consec. did. 2. cap. semel.
and there is a remembrance made of his passion* The sacrifice of the death and
passion of Jesus Christ is the whole matter and substance of this mystery: it
is there proposed: the remembrance thereof renewed as if it were now done; the
thing resembled by outward signs of breaking the bread and pouring the wine:
the hearts of men stirred up as if they saw Christ nailed to y^ cross: the
sacrifice of this passion is presented by the faith and prayers of the church
unto God, thereby to have forgiveness of sins: nothing here remembered but
Christ's sacrificing himself upon the cross. What marvel then though the
Fathers called this mystery a sacrifice, though never imagining your sacrifice
of the Mass? What marvel though they will us to behold in this Sacrament the
sacrifice of our price; the sacrifice of sacrifices, the unbloody service of
the sacrifice, the sacrifice of our mediator and such like: which speeches your
men foolishly and unlearnedly or rather impudently and unconscionably allege
for their supposed sacrifice of the Mass. They have expounded their own
meaning as you have heard, and pitifully do your Rhemists labor and strive to
wind themselves out of those expositions and cannot prevail. And as for the
same speeches of the Fathers as touching sacrifice, we would not doubt ^^
speak in this case as they did, but that your heretical doctrine has caused
Gods people to conceive of sacrifice otherwise then the Fathers intended.
Albeit upon like occasions we are not far from that vehemency of words which
we find to have been used by them, nay we are no whit behind them.

But think with your self, M. Spence is not the death and passion of Christ
the only sacrifice for the fo^giuenesse of sins? Shame be on his face that
will deny it. What sacrifice then is there in the Eucharist? Verily Cyprian
says; The passion of Christ is the sacrifice Cypr. lib 2. epist. 3. P^o^p. in
psalm. 129.
which we offer. And Prosper: What propitiation is there but sacrifice, and
what sacrifice but the killing of that lamb, which has taken away the sin
of the world: and your own counterfeit decretall of Alexander the first: The
passion of Christ is to be remembered Alexan. epist. 1. to. 1. council.
in these sacrifices, and the same to be offered to the Lord. But does Christ
really suffer and die in the Sacrament? Is he there sweating water and blood?
is he buffeted with fists, spit in the face, crowned with thorns, derided,
accused, condemned, nailed to the cross. Indeed the ancient fathers say as
touching the Sacrament, Chrysostom thus: While that death is performed and
dreadful sacrifice: Chrysostom in Acta him. 21. De con^e. di^t. 2. cap. Quid^^t
san^u^. Cyp de caena domini. Chr^^ost. in Encaen^j^. H^^ron ^^ psa. 95.
and Gregory: Christ d^eth again in this mystery; his flesh suffers for the
salvation of the people: and Cyprian, We stick to the cross, we suck the
blood and fasten our tongues within the wounds of our redeemer; and Chrysostom
again: Good Lord, the judge himself is led to the judgment seat, the creator
is set before the creature: he which cannot be seen of the angels is spitted
at by a servant, he tastes gall and v^neger, he is thrust in with a spear, he
is put into a grave, etc. In which manner of speaking S. Hierome says: Happy
is he in whose heart Christ is every day borne: and again: Christ is
crucified for us every day: and S. Austen: Then is Christ slain unto Aug.
ouaes^. Euan. li 2. q. 33.
every man when he believes him to have been slain. Do you think that these
things are really done in the Sacrament as the words sound? that Christ indeed
suffers, dies, is burted; that we cleave to his cross, etc? S. Austen
tells you: The offering of the De cons. did. 2. cap. Hoc est.
flesh which is performed by the hands of the priest is called the passion,
death, and crucifying of Christ not in the truth of the thing, but in a
signifying mystery. Seeing then the passion of Christ is the sacrifice which
we offer, and the passion of Christ is to be understood in the Sacrament, not
in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery: it follows that that
sacrifice is likewise ^o to be understood, not in the truth of the thing, but
in a signifying mysserie, and therefore that the sacrifice which you pretend,
is indeed sacrilege as I have termed it, and a manifest derogation from the
sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice upon his cross.

As touching the matter of Transubstantiation, I alleged unto G^las. cont. ^u
y^h. and N^st.
you the sentence of Ge^as^^^ Bishop of Rome: There cease not to be the
substance or nature of bread and wine. You answer me first, that you suspect
it to be corrupted by some of ours. There is no cause M. Spence, of that
suspision: but the shameless dealing of some leaud varlets of your side is
notorious that way, and infamous through all the Church of God. Your own
clerks cannot deny the truth of this allegation, as they do not of many other
sayings of the ancient Fathers, as plainly contrary to your positions as this
is. Albeit Index Expurg. in censura Bertrami.
they practice therein that which they profess in the Index Expurgatorius,
where they say: In the old Catholic Doctors we bear with many errors, and
we extenuate them, excuse them, and by some devised shift do oftentimes deny
them, and feign a convenient meaning of them when they are opposed unto us in
disputations, or in contention with our adversaries. Indeed without these
pretty shifts your men could find no matter whereof to compile their answers.
But being taken for truly alleged, you say, yet the whole faith of Christ's
Church in that point may not by his testimony be reproved against so many
witnesses of scriptures and Fathers to the contrary. Whereas you should
remember that Gelasius was Bishop of Rome, and that what he wrote, he wrote it
by way of judgment and determination against an heretic, and therefore by
your own defense could not err. And if it had been against the received faith
of the Catholic Church in those days, the heretics against whom he wrote,
would have returned it upon him to his great reproach. But he spoke as other
ancient Fathers had done before him, as Theodor. dial. 1.
Theodoret: He which called himself a vine, did honor the visible elements
and signs with the name of his body and blood, not changing their nature, but
adding grace unto nature. And again; The Dial. 2.
mystical signs after consecration do not go from their own nature, for they
continue in their former substance, figure and form, etc. chrysostom. ad
caesarium Monach. August. apud ^edam. in 1. cor 10.
Chrysostom thus: Before the bread be consecrated, we call it bread, but the
grace of God sanctifying it by the ministry of the priest, it is freed from
the name of bread, and is vouchsafed the name of the Lords body, although the
nature of bread remain in it. Austen thus: That which you see is bread and the
cup, which your eyes also do tell you. De consect. did. 2 cap. ^oc est.
But as touching that which your faith requires for in ^ructio^, bread is the
body of Christ, and the cup is his blood. And again: This is it which we say,
which by all means we labor to approve, that the sacrifice of the Church
consists of two things; the visible form of the elements, and the invisible
flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: of the Sacrament and the matter of
the Sacrament, that is, the body of Christ. And that you may not take that
visible form of the elements for your empty forms and accidents without
substance, which and many other things your Censours aboue-named say, The
latter age of the Church subtly and truly added by the holy Index Expurgat.
in censura Bertrami.
Ghost, confessing thereby that these Popish sub^ilties were not known at all
to the ancient Fathers, take withal that which he adds: Even as the person
of Christ consists of God and man, for that Christ is true God, and true man:
because every thing contains the nature and truth of those things, whereof it
is made. By which rule you may understand also the saying of Irenee: The
Eucharist Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
consists of two things, an earthly and a heavenly; namely so as that it
contains the nature and truth of them both. By these places and many other
like it is evident, that albeit in this Sacrament there is yielded unto the
faith of the receiver the body and blood of Christ, and the whole power and
virtue thereof to everlasting life, yet there cease not to be the substance,
nature and truth of bread and wine. Which is the purport of Gelasiu^ his words;
By the Sacraments which we receive of the body and blood of Christ, we are
made partakers of the divine nature, and yet there cease not to be the
subsance or nature of bread and wine. The force of which words, and of the
words of Theodoret you shall perceive the better, if you know how they are
directed against Eutyches the heretic. The heretic in Theodorets Dialogues
by a comparison drawn from Dial. ^.
the sacrament, would show how the body of Christ after his assumption into
heaven was swallowed up, as it were, of his divinity, and so Christ ceased to
be truly man. As, said he, the bread and wine before the blessing are one
thing, but after the blessing become another, and are changed: so the body or
humanity of Christ whereby he was truly man before, is after-his ascension and
glorification changed into the substance of God. But Theodoret answers him;
Thou art taken in the nets which thou thy self have wouen. For as the bread
and wine, albeit in virtue and power they implie the body and blood of Christ,
yet retain still the substance and truth of nature which they had before; so
the body of Christ albeit it be glorified and advanced to high and excellent
dignity, yet remains still the same in substance and property of nature as
it was before. Which saint Austen expresses thus, speaking of the body of
Christ: To August. ep. 57.
which indeed he has given immortality, but has not taken away the nature
thereof. If Eu^yches were now alive, he would surely be a Papist. Your new and
gross heresy of Transubstantiation had been a good neast for him to shroude
himself in. For he might and would have said, that as the bread and wine in
the sacrament after consecration do leave their former substance, and are
changed into another, so the body of Christ, although it were first a true and
natural body, yet after his ascension and glorification was changed into
another nature and substance of the Godhead. A meet cover cyp. de caena domini.
for such a cup. You may remember that I showed you how Cyprian does exemplify
the matter of the sacrament, by the divinity and humanity of Christ, that as
Jesus Christ though truly God, yet was not let thereby to be truly man; so
the sacrament though it implie sacramentally not only the virtue and power, but
also the truth of the body and blood of Christ, yet is not thereby hindered
from having in it the substance and nature of bread and wine. And as Christ was
changed in nature, not by leaving his former nature of Godhead, but by taking
to him the nature of man, so bread and wine were changed in nature not by
leaving their former nature and substance, but by having united unto them by
the working of the holy Ghost in such manner as I have said, the substance and
effect of the body and blood of Jesus Christ.

But you cannot see how the words of Christ, This is my body, etc. can be
understood otherwise but of your Transubstantiation. There is, M. Spence, a
veil of prejudice lying before your heart, which blinds your eyes that you
cannot see it. Otherwise you might know by the very speeches of the ancient
Fathers to whom you refer your self, that Christ called bread and wine his
body and blood: and that after the same manner of sacramental speaking which I
noted unto you before out of saint Austen: Sacraments because August. ep. 23.
of the resemblance, do most commonly take the names of the things themselves
which they do resemble. Whereof he says for example in the same place. The
Sacrament of Christ's body is after a certain manner the body of Christ. But
Cyprian tells you: Our Cypr. ll. 1. ep. 6.
Lord called the bread made by the uniting of many corns his body, and the
wine pressed out of many clusters and grapes he called his blood. And
Chrysostom says of bread in the sacrament; The bread chrysostom. ad caesar.
Theod. dia. 1.
is vouchsafed the name of our Lords body. And Theodoret as before; Christ
honored the visible signs with the name of his body and blood. And S. Austen:
The bread is the body of Christ. And Theodoret again: Aug. ap^d B^dam in 1.
cor. 10.
Our Savior changed the names, and gave unto his body the name of the sign,
and to the sign the name of his body. And Cyprian again: Our Lord gave at
the table with his own hands bread Theod dial. 1. Cypr. de vnct. Chrismatis.
and wine, and: bread and wine are his flesh and blood. The signs and the
things signified are counted by one name. And if you would know the cause why
Christ did use this exchange of names, Theodoret tells you straightwaies
after: He would have those that are partakers of the divine mysteries not to
regard the nature of those things which are seen, but because of the changing
of the names to believe the change which is wrought by grace: namely, that our
minds may be fixed not upon the signs, but upon the things signified thereby;
as he that has any thing assured unto him by hand and seal, respects not
the paper or the writing or the seal, but the things that are confirmed and
assured unto him hereby. By these you may understand that it was bread which
Christ called his body, and as Cypr. lib. 2. ep^st. 3. Aug. cont. Ad^m. c2.
12. Tertul cont. Marcionem. lib. 4.
Cyprian says, That it was wine which he called his blood. And let S. Austen
tell you the same: Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave
the sign of his body. So Tertullian; The bread which Christ took and
distributed to his disciples he made his body, saying, this is my body, that
is to say, a figure of my body. Whereby you may conceive that bread and wine
are not really changed into the body and blood, as you teach, but remaining
in substance the same they were, are in use and property the signs and
figures of the body and blood of Christ. And as Gelasius adds to the words
before alleged; The image and resemblance of the Lords body and blood is
celebrated in the exercise of the Sacraments. Yet they are not naked and bare
signs, as you are wont hereupon to cavil, but substantial and effectual
signs or seals rather, assuring our faith of the things signified thereby,
and delivering as it were into our hands and possession the whole fruit and
benefit of the death and passion of Jesus Christ. But you will urge perhaps
that Tertullian says; Christ made the bread his body: which words your men
are wont to allege out of the former part of the sentence, guilefully
concealing the end of the same. Tertullian declares his own meaning, that he
understands a figure of the body. But you may further Ioh. 1. 1^.
remember that the Gospel says; The word was made flesh, and yet it ceased
not to be the word: so the bread is made the body of Christ, and yet it
cease not to be the bread. S. Austen says: August. apud Bedam in 1. cor. 10.
Christ has commended unto us in this Sacrament his body and blood, which also
he made us to be; and by his mercy we are that which we do receive: yet we are
not transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ. Understand therefore
that the bread is made the body of Christ after a certain manner, and not in
the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery.

As touching the bodily and Popish eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and
blood grounded on this point of transubstantiation, Christ our Savior said to
the Jews as S. Austen expounds his words, August. in Psalm 98.
Ye shall not eat this body which you see, nor drink that blood which they
shall shead that shall crucify me. I have commended unto you a Sacrament.
Being spiritually understood, it shall give you life. Otherwise as Origin
says: There is in the new Testament a letter Orig. in Leuit. hom. 7.
which kills him that does not spiritually understand it. For if thou follow
according to the letter that that is written, Except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man and drink his blood, that letter kills* For says S. Austen, it
seems to command a horrible fact and heinous Aug. de doctr. christ. lib. 3.
c. 16.
matter. Therefore it is a figure, willing us to communicate of the passion of
Christ, and profitably to lay up in our memory that his flesh was crucified
and wounded for us. Be hold and consider well what these men teach you, that
the speeches which are used as touching eating and drinking the flesh and blood
of Christ are figurative speeches; that they are not literally to be
understood; that we do not bodily eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood. And
this is the plain truth and simplicity of the Fathers teaching, the evidence
whereof cannot be avoided but by those shifts which I mentioned before: We
extenuate them, we excuse them; by some devised lie we often deny them, or feign
of them some convenient meaning.

But you urge the circumstance of the text. Which shall be given: which shall be
shead, etc. Mark well the speeches, say you. An argument peeuishly alleged by
Friar Campian, and nothing at all to the Camp. Rat. ^.
purpose. For when we say that bread and wine are the Sacraments of the body
and blood of Christ, do we not mean, of the body which was given, and the
blood that was shead for us? Do we teach the receiving of the body and blood
of Christ by faith any otherwise then being broken and shead for the
forgiveness of our sins? When S. Aushen says, The sign of the body, and
Tertullian, a figure of the body, expounding the words, This is my body, do
they not understand, Which is given, etc. This reason you may very well spare
hereafter.

The speeches, you say, are wonderful, as most true. Yet the speeches, M.
Spence, are not so wonderful as the things themselves, that our wretched and
sinful bodies should by these Sacraments through the working of the holy
Ghost be really and indeed united and joined unto the body of Jesus Christ
being in heaven, so as to be his members, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones, and receive thereof such virtue and power as that though they be buried
in the earth and consumed to dust and ashes, yet they should be raised up
again and made partakers of immortality and glory: that God should hereby
effectually communicate and impart unto us the inestimable riches of his grace,
and the whole fruit and benefit of whatsoever Christ has done or suffered in
his body for mankind, forgiveness of sins, justification, sanctification,
the blessing and fauou^ of God and everlasting life. You may know M. Spence
what your own Oration says: Some not without probability expound the truth
of the flesh and blood of Christ to be the efficiencie thereof, De consecr.
did 2. cap. species.
that is, the forgiveness of sins. We add somewhat to this probability,
when we teach in the Sacrament a true and effectual uniting of us to the body
of Christ, whereby he dwells in us and we in him, he is one with us and we
with him, whereby as he has taken upon him what is ours, sin and death: so
he yields unto us what is his, righteousness and everlasting life. Which
union with Christ is wrought in all those, and in those only which do with true
and lively faith receive these holy mysteries: where as that Capernaitish
eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood which your doctrine yields, is
common to all graceless and profane persons; that I say nothing of those
monstrous, blasphemous, and horrible conceits which some of your captains have
fallen into by defense thereof.

But yet further you allege the vniformenesse of the words of Christ in the
Evangelists Mat. Mar. Luc. And in S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11. all saying: This is my
body, whereas the scripture where it means not a thing literally does vary in
the uttering of it. Which you speak upon the warrant of some Allen, or
Parsons, or Seminary reader telling you so and you have believed it. But they
have deceived you, both in the on and and in the other. For in the like matter
you shall find in Moses law by an uniform and constant speech, that the
sacrifices of the law are called expiations, propitiations and attonements for
sin, which were not so indeed, but they were so called sacramentally, because
they were types and figures, seals and assurances of the true atonement which
should be wrought by ye bloodsheading of our Lord Jesus. Again, if you had
looked in S. Luke and Luc 22. 20. 1. cor. 11. 25.
S. Paul, you should have found the words, This is my blood, expressed by such
manner of speech as tends directly to the overthrow of your
transubstantiation. For there it is said; This cup is the new Testament in my
blood, etc where I hope you will not say, that the cup is transubstantiated
into the Testament, but that the words must be figuratively understood. Then
you must say, that the cup, that is, the outward and visible element of wine
delivered in the cup, is the seal of the new Testament and covenant of grace,
which is dedicated and established by the bloodsheading of Jesus Christ: by
which seal we have assurance offered unto us to be partakers through Christ of
those benefits which God has promised unto the faithful in the same
Testament; the sum whereof is set down by the Prophet Ier, 31. 32, etc. Now
if any man should take it thus: Ier. 31. 32.
This cup, that is, this my blood in the cup is the new Testament in my blood,
your self would say, he spoke foolishly and absurdly.

Thus therefore your collections from the text are no collections. Some of your
own side, no mean men, have confessed indeed that transubstantiation cannot
be enforced by the words of the text. In truth it cannot. God open your eyes
that you may see his truth and subdue the affections of your heart, yt you may
yield unto it. By that little speech which I have had with you, I perceive you
are too too far in love with that whore of Rome. She flattereth you, and
makes show of goodly names, and pretends great devotion, as the harlot in
the Proverbs: I have peace offeringes; to day have I paid my Prou. 7. 14.
vows: and you believe whatsoever she says unto you. I showed you the
express testimonies of the Fathers, gainsaying her as touching the books of
Canonical scriptures: but you think she may approve them for Canonical which
were not so with the Fathers. I declared the impudency of the Rhemish glosers,
in auouching the story of the assumption of the virgin Mary, controlled by
their own computation of years. But because the Roomish harlot has approved
this fable, and the Rhemists do but sooth her in that which she has affirmed,
you will, rather then y^eld, say that the supposed reporter of this story
being a Counselor of Athens, and this being done in Judea, was there for that
purpose three or four years before he was converted to Christianity. I
showed you the sophis^ry of the same honest men in perverting the place before
alleged out of the tenth to the Hebru^s: but because they have set it down in
favor of the Romish Mass, you will not go from it, though it be without
show of reason and contrary to common sense. To show the plain evidence of
scripture as touching our doctrine of justification, I cited those words, That
a man is justified by faith without Romans 3. 2^. Iam. 2. 21. 24.
the works of the law. You cross it with S. James his words, That Abraham was
iu^^ified by works, and not by faith only. I answer directly out of S. Paul:
If Abraham were justified by works, he had Rom 4. 2.
to rejoice, but not with God: by which place Oecumenius accords Oecumen. in
Romans 4.
the former two, and by which conference it appears, that whosoever is
justified by faith before God, does also approve his true faith by works of
righteousness before men, but yet that no man's righteousness of works is
such, as whereby he may stand holy and blameless and without fault in the sight
of God, but that all are in this respect to cry out; Enter not into judgment
with thy servant; for in thy sight no man living shall be justified. Whereupon S.
Austen says: August. in P^al. 142.
says: Let the Apostles say; forgive us our trespasses, etc. And when it shall
be said unto them, Why say you so? what are your trespasses; Let them answer:
because no man living shall be justified in thy sight: but you believe because
your love has told you so, that men are by the righteousness and merits of
works to be justified in the sight of God.

Take heed, M. Spence, deceive not your self. There is but one heaven and one
faith that brings thither. God only has revealed that faith. Seek it there
where he has revealed it. Your ground is now only upon men: yet neither will
Popery stand upon that ground, if you tie not your self to your new builders.
Bishop Jewel amongst others, has detected the vanity of their building in
many points. But you say that one Steuens beyond the sea, declared his bad
dealing in his writing to that purpose. But were you so simple to credit what
Steuens said? Do you not know that many when they come to your Seminaries will
have some what to say, whereby to commend themselves and to discredit us, and
therefore when they want truth, must needs coin lies? One alleged to me when
I was in Oxford, how Jewel had falsified a place out of Thomas Aquinas. He
spoke it by hearsay as you do. I went into a Library of very ancient
cop^es, and found it word for word as it was cited. It was marvel that M.
Harding could not find that kind of dealing. It would have given him good
matter for a far more substantial answer. But I might as well upon report
tell you that Harding perplexed in mind near his death, wished that his soul
might have place with Bishop Jewels soul. I have heard that Heart the Jesuit
being demanded thereof in the Tower, could not make any great denial of it.
But the truth lies not in these matters. As for Bishops Jewels writings, I
will lend you the book if it please you. It were marvel that no syllable or
sentence should be mistaken in that multitude of allegations, the sight whereof
troubled M. Hardings mind, as I conceive by the Preface of his fond detection;
but for the substance of the cause, and justifying the points defended, I will
undertake to make good unto you the allegations, for so many of the ancient
Fathers as I have, and some of the principal you know I have, and can quickly
get more. And what I have here written, I will be ready to approve unto you,
and to make plain whatsoever is here for want of convenient leisure briefly,
and therefore perhaps obscurely collected. The God of peace guide us in the way
of peace, and grant us to know his truth, and to persevere in the knowledge
thereof unto the end.

A DEFENSE OF THE AVTHORITIES ALLEGED IN THE Reply against the answer of P.
Spence.
P. Spence. Section first.
IN respect you wish me good and well, (M. Abbot) I thank you for it, knowing
it cannot proceed of an ill ground, but at least of good nature, which I do
accept, with desire of no less good to you, then you to me, but I hope rather
much more, Although there be choice, and odds in our several judgments, what
is truly and indeed good, which the one wishes to the other. For as from God
(who is essentially good) all goodness proceeds whatsoever: so what
faithful servant of God soever he be, that in God wishes or wills my good
any way, that may be called good indeed, to him I think my self more
beholding, then for treasures of kingdoms of this world, if he had them to
be^^ow upon me. If such good could be found in you, (as touching this cause
between us) I would most thankfully accept it, with no less estimation of
your zeal and your person, then pure affection to your charity and care, etc.

R. Abbot. 1.
SVch is the frowardness of man's nature, that as S. Austen well notes, we are
most commonly Aug de not and great. cont. Pelag. cap. 2^.
more ready to seek what we may answer to those things that are objected
against our error, then to consider how wholesome and good they are, that
thereby we may be freed from error. Which as it is generally true wheresoever
the selfewill and pride of nature is not subdued and ouerruled by good
conscience and the fear of God, so it is more particularly approved in you, M.
Spence, by your untowardly answer to that which I wrote unto you, which it
seems you would needs return unto me not as being persuaded that you could
answer that that was alleged unto you, but August. contra Gandentium. lib 3.
only for this cause, least if you had holden your peace, you should have been
said to be convicted, as Austen told Gandentius the heretic upon the like
occasion. For to write somewhat or to say somewhat, is not always to answer;
and you, though you have taken pains to write much, yet in your whole pamphlet
have answered nothing. Which I call your pamphlet, not because I take either
the collections of the matter or the form of enditing to be yours, but because
it came to me in your name and under your hand. When I perused it, I
straightwaies perceived that it was none of yours, but that you had gotten the
help of a secret friend, who might more presume of his learning and reading,
as indeed he does, being as it seems far in love with himself, thinking
nothing to be learned but that that he likes of, sitting upon the circle of
his own brains, and calling the scriptures and Doctors before him, and
charming them that whatsoever they speak or howsoever plainly, yet they shall
mean no otherwise then he will have them to mean. And strange it is to see
what mad and unreasonable meanings he fathereth upon them, whilst he seeks
to shift off their clear and evident testimonies. Which I persuade my self
do for the most part bear that sway in his conscience that he cannot
extinguish the light thereof, nor satisfy himself that he has truly answered
unto them. Whosoever he is, I wish both him and you to remember that which S.
Austen says to Petilian the Donatist. August. cont. lite. Petil. lib. 3. cap.
30.
There is nothing more wretched or unhappy, then for a man not to yield to the
truth wherewith he is so shut in, that he cannot find any way out.

Now if this matter had by your good dealing rested in private betwixt you and
me, M. Spence, as my intention was it should, I would not have brought either
your name or mine own into this open light and censure of men. But sithence I
perceived both by your self and also otherwise, that you had communicated the
matter to your fellows, who are wont to brag greatly both in corners and
abroad, if any thing of theirs remain unanswered; truly howsoever you would be
willing that I should sit down as a conquered adversary, and so yield you some
what whereof to triumph in secret amongst your disciples and followers, and to
be a means to subvert the faith of others, I have against this mischief
thought it necessary to publish this whole matter, that though it be no good
to you, yet it may be good to them whom you seek to hurt, and as Bernard
says; Bernard. in Canti Ser. 6^.
though the heretic arise not from his filth, yet the Church may be confirmed
in the faith. To come to your words you thank me for wishing you good: I would
you had accepted of the good that I wished you, and then I would have accepted
of your thanks. But you differ from me in judgment what is good. If I judge
of good one way, and you another way, who shall be judge betwixt us. Not your
part, for I say they are partial for you. Not our part, for you say they are
partial for me. I must answer you with Optatus his words against the
Donatists: Optat. cont. Parmen. Donat. lib. 5.
No judgment of this matter can be found in the earth, we must require a judge
from heaven. But why knock we at heaven when we have here the testament of
Christ in the Gospel? S. Paul says: 2. Tim. 3. 15.
The scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus. If your judgment did entierly depend upon the
scriptures, you and I should not differ in judgment. But whilst you set one
foot in the scriptures, and another foot beside the scriptures, and Hilar. de
Trinit. lib. 1.
take not your understanding from the sayings of the scriptures, as Hilary
says you should, but labor to draw the scriptures to those fond opinions which
you have presumed without the scriptures, I marvel not that you go lame and
halting in your judgment, and I cannot yield to judge with you, because you
judge without God. Tertullian of old said, but I would not have you think he
spoke it of the Papists: Tertul. de resurr. carni^.
Take from heretics their Heathenish conceits that they may decide their
questions only by the scriptures, and they cannot stand. As for your regard of
truth how great it is, appears by your froward and wilful answers,
wherewith you shut your eyes against the clear sun-light, rather seeking
shifts to cast a mist before it, then framing your self to walk in the
comfortable light thereof. But to let that pass, I will now leave you to be a
looker on in this matter, and will henceforth apply my self to him that has
taken upon him to be the Answerer for you.

P. Spence. Sect. 2.
IF ye find S. Chrysostomes place so expounded as I have set down, then is it
but I allege it to no other purpose then the words themselves do manifestly
yield. See the answer
wrangling to allege it to the end you do, contrary to Chrysostomes mind:
that is to urge words contrary to the authors known meaning* not caring for
truth but to cavil. If your thousand Bishops of Armen^a because of the I
opposed number against number, neither to be followed for their multitude but
for their reason and proof
number, do in this point (which without them you favor otherwise) bear such
a swaie with you, why shall not the number of Bishops in other matters do the
like, if partiality of judgment would permit you? would you have a reason why
your thousand of Armenian Bishops (yea if they were ten thousand) were not
herein meet judges: the^ wo^e ye well, they did wrangle, as you do, upon
Christ's words against their own consciences, wres^ing words and sillables to
serve their sorry turn. Why so? Because the Armenians forsook both the Latin
and Greek Church, Anno dom. 5 27. for that they condemned Eutyches, and
Dioscorus, in the Calcedon Council, for denying the two natures of Christ: and
superstitiouslie they But how or where does it appear that they began to hold
this point upon that occasion?
held this point of wine alone, fearing least the water mixed therewith, should
signify Christ's two natures, as in the Greek and Latin Church it does. So
that if your thousand Armenian Bishops move you so, you must be an Eutychian,
and for that cause must you forbear water in the wine: and then tell me why
your thousand Armenians must not move you to hold with them, that ^o child is
christened with water alone, but with water and oil as they hereticallie held,
besides many other VVherof the Church of Rome has very great store.
toyish and most childish vanities. I stand not upon the validitio of the
Trullane Canons of the sixth Council, but it is enough, that besides their
testimony, not de iure but de facto, of the Churches mingling water with wine,
the some is otherwise by infinite testimonies proved to be used. You condemn
not you say, the Churches that use water and wine for that point, but for their
superstitious standing in it, and shall not we condemn more justly the
superstitious contradicting humor of those that make a religion, and a
superstition to use it with wine, containing so ancient and so universal and
so well witnessed a custom? You dare not flatly deny it, but you would have
it seem only probable, that Christ put water to the wine at his supper. But S.
Cyprian in his Epistle ad Caecilium so long ago(...) (...)th it sure that
Christ used both. Let that Epistle for all these points be the stickeler
between us: who says: Cyprians words are thus: In the sacrifice which is
christ none but christ is to be followed. Therefore we are not to follow the
church of Rome* beyond or beside that which Christ did.
In the sacrifice which is Christ, Christ is to be followed, even to this very
purpose using those words. Against which point to allege S. Cyprian ad
Pompeium, is to allege S. Cyprian against S. Cypria^. But let S. Cyprian say
thus much for us to you. If it be commanded in the Gospel, or be contained in
the Epistles or Acts of the Apostles to use only wine, let this tradition then
be observed. To make short, wine is ex institut^one, to put thereto water is Ex
praecepto Ecclesiae, which upon your warrant, (being so long and so universally
used) I dare not break. There arose about S. Cyprians time, certain fond
innouators very foolish fellows, who for temperance forsooth, used no wine,
but all water only in the sacrifice of the Church. These in the Catalogue of
Heretics written by S. Augustine, Ad quod vult deum, and in the like
Catalogue of Heretics written by Philastrius Brixiamus Episcopus, are called
Aquarij, Who (says he) in the heavenly Sacraments offer only water, and not
that which the Catholic and Apostolic Church is accustomed to do. The
argument and drift of the aforementioned Epistle, of Saint Cyprian, ad Caecilium
lib. 2. Epist. 3. is briefly set down, In the sacrifice of the Church neither
water without wine, nor wine without water ought to be offered. The whole
Epistle is for that matter notable, and no doubt, Saint Chrysostom meant of
those Aquarij. Saint Cyprian calls it our Lords tradition, and a thing
ord^ined of God: he says our Lord both did it, and also taught it. The learned
Fathers of the sixth Council, called it an order, delivered to the Church by
God, and say it was the tradition of the Apostles. Clemens constitu. Apost.
lib. 8. cap, 17 says likewise mingling of the cup with wine and water, and
consecrating it, etc. S. James in his Liturgy says: Likewise after he had
supped taking the cup and mingling it with wine and water, etc. S. Basil in
his Liturgy says: Likewise also taking the cup, of the juice of the wine,
mixing, giving thanks, etc. S. Chrysostom in his Liturgy, in putting wine
into the Chalice, said: And one of the soldiers opened his side and forthwith
issued blood (and mingling it with water he says.) And water and he that saw
it, has borne witness, and his witness is true. Ioh. 19. S. Proclus a near
successor of his, De traditione diuinae Liturgiae says. By these prayers they
expected the coming of the holy Ghost, that by his divine presence he should
make the bread and the wine mixed with water, which were proposed for
sacrifice, the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ. Theodoret, Dialog.
1. says, Theodoret says not, he made it, but he called it his blood.
That Christ made that which was mixed in the cup his blood. Eusebius Emiss. in
ser. 5. de Paschat, says: that Christ himself by his example taught that we
should consecrate the cup with wine mixed with water. Concilium Carthagin. 3.
cap. 24. In which Austen was present, says thus: That in the Sacrament of the
body and blood of the Lord, nothing else should be offered but that which the
Lord delivered, that is, bread, and wine mixed with water. Ambrosius lib de
Sacramento cap. 4. and lib. 5. cap. 10. affirms that wine and water must be
put in the cup. Irenaeus lib. 5. cap. When, says he, the mixed cup and the
bread broken receives the word of God, it is made the Eucharist of the body
and blood of the Lord. August. tract. 120. in Iohannem* Isidore lib. 2. offic.
cap. 18. Beda in Comment. Marci cap. 14. upon those words, This is the cup of
my blood. Anselmus in 26. Mat. Alexander near to the Apostle says: let bread
only and wine mingled with water be offered in the sacrifice of Masses. There
ought not to be offered in the cup of our Lord, either wine only, or water
only, but both together mingled, because both is read to have followed out of
the side of our Lord in his passion. Io. 19. de Consent. distinct. 2. cap. in
Sacramentorum. Justinius Apostol. 2. Damascen. lib. 4. cap. 14. Grego* Niss^n
for. Catechetico as is alleged by Euthimius in Panoplia lib. 2. titulo 21.
Chrysostom homil. 84. in Ioannem, and hom. 24. in 1. Corinthians. Theoph^^ct* in
I^annem cap. 9. See Bellarminus lib. 4. de Sacramento Eucharistiae, cap. 1. 11.
beside many other testimonies of all ages, in both Greek and Latin Church.

R. Abbot. 2.
AS touching this first point of mixture of water with wine in the Sacrament, I
showed before that our Churches have accounted it as a mere indifferent thing
where it is used with that simplicity wherewith it was first begun. The manner
of Countries where their wines are very strong, is to delaie them with water.
Christians would not neglect that commendable show of sobriety in their
mystical banquet, whereof Heathen men had regard at their ordinary tables.
Therefore according to the manner of their countries they mingled water with
their wine, taking wine to be the institution of Christ, but whether mere wine
or delaied wine, they knew it made no difference. Albeit some there were that
in regard of this sobriety and temperancie went too far, leaving Christ's
institution of wine, and using only water in the Sacrament, as Cypr. lib. 2.
epist. 3.
Cyprian intimates of some of his predecessors. To this mixture was added at
length some signification, either in Cyprians time or perhaps before. As for
that of Epist. 1. Council. tomo. ^.
Alexander the first to that purpose, that Epistle of his, and the rest of them
are sufficiently known to be counterfeit and bastard stuff. But thus this
usage and custom ran his course, till at length it sell with the rest into
the maine Ocean of Popish corruptions and superstitions, where the fathers
errors were turned into pestilent heresies, and those things that arose of the
simplicity of men for August. epist. 119. ad exhortationem vitae melioris.
profitable admonition and exhortation only as they intended them, were made
matters of true devotion and of the worship of God. Our Churches therefore
seeing this mixture abused in the church of Rome, and accounted as a necessary
mystery of Christian religion without any warrant of the word of God, thought
convenient utterly to relinquish the same, though otherwise occasion requiring
it, they have esteemed it an indifferent thing. And herein they have followed
the example of our Lord and master Jesus Christ, who knew well enough that
the washing of hands and cups was an indifferent thing, and yet when he saw
Mat. 15. 2. etc.
the Scribes and Pharisees to put affiance of holiness and purity in those
washings, so that they accounted them unclean which omitted the same, he did
himself neglect and by his example, as it seems, moved his disciples to
neglect that tradition of their Elders, telling them that in vain they did
worship God, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men.

In leaving the mixture of water, we are not contraried by the Mat 26. 2^.
institution of Christ set down in the Gospel. I alleged before Anselm. sax*
on. Centur. Magdebur. 12. cap. 9.
that the Greek Church consecrated with wine only, and their reason because
we read not that Christ added water. I showed how Chrysostom as one edition
of his Chrysostom. Liturg. per Leonem Tusc(...)
Liturgy intends, added water after the consecration, as being no part of
the institution of the Sacrament. I noted that Anselm. vt supra.
Anselmus and Tho. Aquin. page 3. qu 74. art. 6.
Thomas Aquinas notwithstanding the assertions of diverse ancient writers could
make at the most but a probability of Christ's using water in this Sacrament.
And why probable? because the manner of that Country is so to drink their wine.
Whereof it may rightly be gathered, y^ though Christ did use water as we do not
find that he did, yet he did it but after the manner of that Country in
drinking wine, and not for any mystery of the Sacrament. I alleged moreover
that Polyd. Virg^l. de invent. rerum. li. 5. ca. 10.
Polydore Virgil, and Platina in Alexan 1.
Platina and Dura^d. Ratio. diui. lib. 4. cap. de officio sacerdotis, etc.
Durand, refer this tradition to Alexander the first, and so for their parts
have acquitted us from crossing the institution of Christ. Also that De consecra
did. 2 ca^. sicut in glossa.
Doctors have taught that water is used in the cup de honestate tantum; namely
by way of temperancie and sobriety only, and therefore not of any necessity
to the Sacrament. Why would this man take upon him to answer, and yet slily
pass over all these things with silence, so directly pertaining to the point
in question? But to pardon his silence, and to take that which he does say; he
breaks out at the first dash and tells me that if I find the words of
Chrysostom expounded as was answered before out of the Trullan Canons, then I
did but wrangle in alleging them to another purpose contrary to the known
meaning of the Author. But I wrangle not herein. Whatsoever exposition it
pleased those Fathers to make of Chrysostomes words three hundred years after
Chrysostomes death, the words themselves are most plain to that purpose that
I first noted them. He demands this question: Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 83.
Why did Christ after his resurrection drink Not Water but Wine? Where
manifestly he names the drinking of wine and denies water. To this he
answers: He would pluck up by the roots the pernicious heresy of them
which use Water in the Sacrament. For to show that when he delivered this
Sacrament, he delivered wine, therefore did he use wine also after his
resurrection at the bare table of the Sacrament. Of the fruit of the vine,
says he, which surely brings forth Wine and not Water. It is hard to
suppose that Chrysostom would say, that Christ did drink not water but wine, to
reprove the heresy of them which use water in the Sacrament, and yet himself
have intention of both wine and water to be used in the Sacrament. I cannot see
it to stand with any reason. If the answer can, let him follow his own
fancy. As for the thing it self we doubt not, but the Churches of God have
used their liberty in the practice thereof, for that upon occasion of the
heresy of them that used only water, they in some places took away this
ceremony, as by the aforesaid place of Chrysostom, and the practice of the
Armenians may be gathered: in other places at least altered the manner of it,
that whereas it was wont to be added before consecration, thenceforth it should
be added after, that it might be known that water was no entire part or matter
of the Sacrament, but used for other purpose indifferently, as has been before
said. The ground whereof Chrysostom as we see makes to be this, that Christ
mentions only the fruit of the vine, which, says he, brings forth wine
and not water. Now this adding of water after consecration, as it appears by
the testimony of Ex Ansel. vt supra.
Nechites Patriarch of Nicomedia, who affirms y^ in their rites they swarued
not from the ancient tradition of their Fathers, and by one copy of the
Chrysostom. Liturg. vt supra.
Liturgy that goes under Chrysostomes name; so it is further manifest by the
testimony of Theod. Balsam. Annota. in council. Constant. ^. can. ^2.
Theodorus Balsamon Patriarch of Antioch, in his annotations upon that Canon of
the sixth Council, whereof I now speak, where he shows the same use, and
adds further, which the aforesaid Liturgy also gives to understand, that
the water which they put in was hot water. The reason whereof he affirms to
have been this; to signify that water and blood came out of the side of
Christ, not cold and dead, but warm, quick, and lively, as implying virtue
and power to quicken and make us alive spiritually, to which mystery the words
of the Canon aforesaid seem to have relation in making mention of Chrysostomes
Liturgy. If water had been taken to be any necessary matter of the Sacrament,
surely these men would not have omitted to have mingled it before consecration,
that so the Sacrament might be whole and perfect. But hereby it is manifest
that it was not so taken, ^ therefore by the judgment of the ancient Churches,
we offend not as maiming the Sacrament of Christ in using wine only without
mixture of water.

The exception which the Answ. uses against the Bishops of Armenia, is false
and feined. For whatsoever he can pretend of some Armenians that did revolt,
yet it is apparent that the Bishops of Armenia did approve the condemnation of
Eutyches and Dioscorus, by their council. chalced. in episto. illusttium
personarum pro eod. concilio.
Epistles written to Leo the Emperor in approbation of the Chalcedon Council
wherein they were condemned, and with reproof of that heresy for which they
were condemned. And that it may not be thought y^ they did it only for that
time, they are found again in the council constant. 6. act. 17. and 18 in
subscript.
sixth Council to subscribe against and condemn the heresy of Eutyches: even
in that Council which the Answ. alleges for the defense of his cause. And
therefore it is hereby manifest that they used not wine only with any such
intention as he shiftingly pretends. Nay it is further manifest by this, for
that the Iberians the near neighbors of the Armenians, and inhabiting that
part which was called Armenia interior, as Sozomen. hist. eccl. li. 2. cap. 6.
Sozomen reports, did use no water at all in the Sacrament, being
notwithstanding sound in all points of faith and religion. Thus does Theodore
Balsamon testify of them: Theodor. Balsam. in council. constan^i* 6. can. 32.
The Iberians do put no water into the sacred cup, albeit they be otherwise
very sound in the faith. Moreover the heresy of Eutyches contained no such
matter. He denied two-natures in Christ, but the Answ. cannot show that in
regard of his heresy he denied the mixture of water, or that this mixture was
in those times taken for a mystery of two natures in Christ, or that the
Fathers used any argument from thence for the proof of two natures. That long
afterward it was drawn to that signification, I wot well, as it appears by
Theod. Balsam. vt supra.
Balsamon, Nicepho. hist. lib. 18. cap. 5^.
Nicephorus and Theophy. in Ioh. 19.
Theophylact; but that construction being long after, serves not to prejudice
them who lived long before there was any such mystery intended by that
mixture. The Council intimates no such thing intended by it, and who will
believe that those Fathers would note a defect in ceremony, and so lightly
pass over without any mention at all, the error of doctrine whence that
defect should begin: Chrysostom in the time of his banishment lived amongst
the Sozomen. hist. eccl. li. 8. cap. 27.
Armenians, and was greatly beloved and honored of them. I doubt not but his
practice amongst them was according to the words which they alleged from him,
and that their manner both had ^ene before, and afterward continued the same
that the Iberians was; to consecrate the cup of the Sacrament without any
water; howsoever in times long after succeeding by means of a new
signification fancied of the mixture of water, it was forborne of some upon a
wrong and heretical meaning. As for numbers and multitudes of men, how far I
esteem them, the Ans. shall then perceive, when occasion is given by any
matter to make him answer. Though I ^rged multitude against multitude for the
exposition of the words of a man, yet I make not the assertion of any multitude
a certain argument of the truth of God. He that does, what would he have said
when the Hieron. aduersus Luceferianos.
whole world groned under the burden of Arianisme; which contented Vincentius
Lyrinens. adu. haereses.
not it self with some few parts or portions of the Church, as other heresies
for the most part, but as a pestilent infection spread it self through the
whole, so that Constantius y^ Emperor by reason of the ^ewnesse of them that
held with Athanasius in defense of the truth, took occasion to Theod. hist.
eccl. li. 2. ca. 16.
object unto Liberius Bishop of Rome, that he was the only man in the world
that took part with that wicked man, as he wickedly termed him. To whom
Liberius answered very ^itly: The word of faith is no whit diminished by my
standing alone in defense of it; though afterward Hieron. in ^atalo. eccles.
script. in fortunatiano.
he became fainthearted, and subscribed that heresy, which he had before
worthily resisted. The ground of faith is the certain and undoubted word of
God, not received from the thoughts and opinions of men, but from the Oracle of
the holy scriptures. He that speaks from hence, though he speak alone is to
be believed: but without this warrant in matters of faith, thousands of
thousands are not to be regarded.

He notes the Armenians of many toyish and childish vanities. But the vanities
of the Armenians were neither so many nor so toyish and ridiculous as are the
Jewish and Heathenish ceremonies of Popery, and therefore Papists may not
reprove them in that respect. Let Durandus his Rationale diuinorum, nay let the
apish and vice-like fooleries of the Mass it self bear witness hereof.

Whereas he says that the mixture of water and wine in the Greek and Latin
Church, be tokeneth the two natures of Christ, it seems that the matter has
not been well agreed upon, for that Theophyl. ^^ Ioh. 19.
Theophylact makes the wine to betoken the humanity, and the water the
divinity of Christ. Durand contrariwise Du^and Ratio. diui. lib. 4. cap. 30.
de oblatione. etc.
affirms, that the water betokens the humanity, and the wine the
divinity. But the more ancient Fathers knew not this uncertain mystery at
all, and therefore neither do we care to be acquainted with it.

Now having urged very egerly the aforesaid Canon, and fearing belike that
that might be turned to his prejudice, he tells me at length, that he will not
stand upon the validity of those Trullan Canons. And no marvel. For he
knows that by whomsoever they were made, they diversely Can. 13. 36. 52. 55.
cross the dealings of the Church of Rome, and pluck up by the roots the
best flower in that garden, the pretended supremacy of the Pope. Yea, says
he, but they beside infinite other testimonies, prove the Churches use as
touching the point in question. An unnecessary proof of that which no man
denies. But let him conclude hereof, that it is certain that Christ instituted
the Sacrament with water, or that it is a necessary part of the Sacrament, and
his own fellows will check him for his rashness, Thom. Aqui. par. 3. quae.
74. art 6. and 7.
who neither dare a^ouch that Christ used water, and simply confess that
there is no necessity of water to make the Sacrament. And this latter Tom. 2
cont. 3. lib. 4. cap. ^1.
Bellarmine the Jesuit confesses to be the judgment of the Catholic Church,
and dares not deny but that it is the cup of the Lord though water be wanting;
whereof it follows, that neither was water instituted by our Savior Christ,
(for then it should be holden as a thing simply necessary) neither do we in
le^^ing out water, ^aile of any thing that of necessity belongs to the
Sacrament. Which being true, and no certain proof alleged y^ Christ used any
water, we list not to follow any uncertainties for truths. We take y^ which we
are sure Christ ordained. They who have not contented themselves herewith, into
what variety are they run? Some put in water before consecration, some
after: some hot water, some cold: some will have the mixture of them a memorial
of water and blood issuing out of Christ's side at his passion: some a token of
the natures of Christ; and of them some will have the water to signify the
manhood, and the wine the Godhead; others the wine to signify the manhood, and
the water the Godhead: some again will have the wine to signify Christ, and
the water to signify the people, as appears by those things that have been
alleged before. Thus there is no certainty or settled resolution, when men
will make mysteries without the warrant of the word of God. Which things
considered, it has not been any superstitious contradicting humor, but sober
and advised judgment that has moved us to refuse this howsoever long and
generally received custom.

But the Answ. coming at length to set down his conceit of the point in
question, is in a mammering and cannot frame his wits to resolve any thing
thereof. For charging me first that I dare not deny flatly, but would have it
seem only propable that Christ added water with the wine, whereas I alleged
therein but the opinion and words of his own Doctors, he calls for S.
Cyprian to be stickler between us in this point, affirming it to be the
institution of Christ, and straightwaies as having forgotten himself, he
confesses that the wine only is of the institution of Christ, and the water of
the ordinance of the Church, and then again as uncertain where ^o rest
himself, he runs to Cyprian and others, craving their help and warrant to
prove that it was appointed by our Savior Christ. But truth is one, and
^litteth not in this sort from one ground to another. Concerning the Epistle of
cypria. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
Cyprian to Cecilius which is that whereunto he refers himself, he tells
me Sect. 16.
afterward that every word thereof is a sword to cut my throat, and
maruelleth that I would for shame allege it. But this is but a Popish brag
serving to set a good show upon a bad cause, and when truth fails, to outface
the matter with Thrasonical words. A man of mean discretion with indifferency
of judgment, will easily conceive that that Epistle makes far more deeply
against the Church of Romes doings, then against any thing that we do. It
contrarieth us in a small matter of ceremony, which we take to be no great
matter whether it be used or not used as has been said, but it conuinceth the
Roomish harlot of capital and deadly wickedness, and damnable Apostasy from
ye Gospel of Jesus Christ. For first, he requires water in ye Sacrament
together with wine, the one importing the people, the other Christ; to signify
that the people are united and joined unto Christ in being partakers of the
Lords cup. And so Thom. Aquin. par. 3. quae. 74. art. 7.
Thomas Aquinas resolves, that water is no otherwise of the necessity of the
Sacrament, but to signify the peoples being partakers thereof. What wisdom
is it then in the Answ. and his fellows to urge Cyprian for their defense of
the mixture of water, and yet utterly to bar the people from being partakers
of the Lords cup, which Cyprian intends by the same mixture. Mat. 23. 24*
They strain out a Gnat and swallow a Camel, contending with us for an
uncertain and unnecessary ceremony, and themselves frowardly departing from
that, which, I say not Cyprian in his Epistle, but Jesus Christ in his Gospel
has manifestly and expressly commanded unto them.

Secondly, Cyprian gives in the same Epistle diverse lessons which we desire to
have them bound unto: In the sacrifice which is Christ, none but Christ is t^
be followed. And again: If only Christ be to be harkened unto, we are not to
regard what any man has done before us, but what Christ did first who is
before all. For we must not follow the custom of men, but the truth of God.
And again: It is not lawful to infringe those things that pertain to the
Sacrament of our redemption, or by humane tradition to change them to any
thing else then is appointed of God. And again: We ought to do nothing but
that which Christ did; And again; That which it is certain the Lord did, let
us do. By all which speeches we are tied to the institution of Jesus Christ,
and bound to do nothing in the form of this mystery but that which we are
assured he did first. To which what the church of Rome can honestly answer I
cannot tell, in that she has by her detractions from Christ's institution
committed sacrilege, and by her additions made a mockery of his Sacrament,
setting the priest at the altar as a Squirrell at his bells to keep note and
time in his duckings and turnings, and kissings and crossings, and listing up
and lotting down, and holding forefinger and thumb together, and joining
together both the hands, and putting to the right eye and then to the left, and
a number such doltish and absurd toys. But for our selves we learn of Cyprian
by those rules, that unless we can warrant our selves, as we cannot, that
Christ instituted the Sacrament with water, we may not admit it a^ any part or
matter of the Sacrament. And to this purpose the words that I alleged before
out of the Epistle ad Pompeium are very fit. Being urged with tradition, he
thus answers: cypria. epist. ad Pompeium.
Whence is this tradition? Descends it from the authority of the Lord, or of
the Gospel* or comes it from the precepts and Epistles of the Apostles? For
God testifies that those things which are written must be done. etc. If
therefore either it be commanded in the Gospel, or be contained in the Acts
and Epistles of the Apostle, let this tradition be observed as holy; importing
that if it cannot be approved from thence, it is not to be observed. But the
Answ. full wisely and clerk like, turns the words of Cyprian to speak for him
against us. If, says he, it be commanded in the Gospel to use only wine, let
this tradition be observed. By which reason he gives to the Armenians, whom he
condemned before, as good a proof for using water and oil in Baptism, as to
himself for wine and water in the Lords supper. For they might have said for
the one, as he does for the other, that it is now here commanded to use only
water, and therefore that their adding of ^yle was not to be condemned. But S.
Cyprians words, if he would use his reason to conceive them, would teach him to
reason thus: We read in the Gospel of water for Baptism; of oil we read
nothing: therefore water only and not oil is to be observed. So likewise we
read of wine for the Lords supper, of water we read nothing: therefore wine
only and not water is to be enjoined. For the condition of the words of God is
this: Pro. 30. 6.
Put nothing to his words least he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar. Now
if Cyprian having laid this good foundation built any thing amiss thereon, as
in the matter of rebaptizing it is manifest that he did, whilst he took that
to be the sense of y^ scripture which indeed is not, that impeacheth not any
whit the certainty of that rule, which he knew well enough was always to
stand good for the trial and determination of the truth. And therefore in
these cases to allege Cyprian against Cyprian, is I hope no more heinous a
matter then to appeal from Philip overcome with sleep, to the same Philip
thoroughly a waked out of sleep. The drift and purpose of that Epistle to
Cecilius, is to prove the necessity of wine in the Sacrament, against the
heresy of those that used only water without wine. He refers them herein
to the institution of Christ set down in the Gospel, from which he tells
them they ought not to depart, and therefore that they ought to use wine in the
Lords cup, as it is mentioned in the Gospel that Christ did. And to this
purpose are all those speeches which he uses of our Lords tradition, of his
doing and teaching. Which manifestly appears as by the very scope of the
whole Epistle, so by that place namely where alleging the words of Christ, I
will drink no more of this fruit of the vine, etc. He infers thus; Whereby
we find that the cup was mixed which the Lord offered, etc. Yet we find not
in this place any mixture of the cup, we find only the fruit of the vine, and
this is the mark at which he aims in all that he urges of Christ's
institution. Of water he speaks jointly, I confess, and supposing, I doubt
not, but it was used by Christ. But he supposes it only: he proves it not,
and his suppose is no sufficient warrant. Nay although he by the way admit and
require the mixture of water in the Lords cup, yet seeing he there refers
us to the ^oote and original of Christ's institution in the Gospel, and we find
not there that Christ either ordained or used any such mixture, we hold our
selves sufficiently warranted even by Cyprian himself to do that we do, in
using wine only without any water.

But what means the Answ. to urge Cyprian at all to prove that Christ
mingled water, when he himself dare not upon Cyprians word, affirm so much.
For thus he makes short the matter as he says: Wine is of the institution of
Christ, water is of the precept of the church. If he can justify no more, as
indeed he cannot, it is but folly and trifling to allege any man's words that
say any more. And therefore all his other testimonies are superfluous. They
which say that Christ used water, say more then he or the most of his dare say.
They which testify the use thereof in the primitive Church, prove a thing not
denied or condemned where occasion requires it for such reason and in such
manner as has been before showed. Albeit they are partly forgeries, as those
out of Alexander, out of Clemens and James his Liturgy, of which shall be
spoken after: partly uncertain and doubtful, as those out of Chrysostomes and
Basils Liturgies: partly such as the Answ. himself will not stand upon the
validity thereof, as that out of the sixth Council; partly manifest and
wilful falsifications, as those out of Chrysostom in Ioh. hom. 84. and 1.
Cor. hom. 24. the former only showing that by water and blood issuing out of
Christ's side, were imported both the Sacraments of the Church: the other, that
out of Christ's side flowed fountains of water and blood that should be
healthful to the whole world. And what is that to the matter now in hand?

He refers me over for further proof of this matter to Bellarmine. But
Bellarmine says nothing that needs further answer then I have already
given. Only let me tell him that I take Bellarmine for a Jesuit, that is to
say, a man of a hard and uncircumcised forehead, desperately bent for the
upholding of the Pope, to make shipwreck of his own conscience. Whose
impudency appears herein, that for the better coloring of his mixture of
water, Bellarm. tom. 2. cont. 3. lib. 4. cap. 10.
he says, that it appears no more by the Gospel that Christ instituted the
Sacrament with wine, then with ale, or beer, or water only. And therefore he
denies those words, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, etc.
Ibid. lib. 1. cap. 11.
to be understood of the cup of the Sacrament, contrary to the general
consent of the ancient Fathers, Clemens. Alex. in paeda. lib 2. cap. 2.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Cypr. lib. 2. epist. 3.
Cyprian, Chrysostom. in Man. hom. 83.
Chrysostom, August. de consensu. Euang. li. 3. ca. 1.
Austen, Hilar. in Mat. cano. 30.
Hilary, Theophyl. in Mat. 26.
Theophylact, and others. Yet to cloak the matter the better, he would fain
make a jar betwixt the Fathers, and says that Hierome and Theophylact
expound it, not of the cup of the Lords table, but of the cup of the
passover; whereas in the places by him cited, there is not a word tending to
that purpose. It is plain by the two Evangelists Matthew and Mark, that our
Savior spoke of the cup of the new Testament. The difference that seems to be
betwixt them and S. Luke, was reconciled long ago by S. Austen, as follows
after to be declared. But hereby we may conjecture the honesty and truth of
the Jesuit in other matters.

P. Spence. Sect. 3.
COncerning Bertrame, there was in Carolus Magnus sons days, such a one
suspected for one point, especially in the Sacrament contra identitatem
corporis, or de duplici corpore Christi: but this book under his name, is much
worse. Great learned men are out of doubt that it is a counterfeit book, wrong
fathered, and misbegotten, not Bertrams, but of Oecolampadius coining. So
Caluins Catechism in Greek in the Preface is made an ancient book, newly
found again. So is a book foysted in Roffensis name, written by Bucer de
certitudine salutis and diuina misericordia, besides many other such forged
counterfeits. See Bibliothecam Sixti Senensis. Besides this counterfeit
Bertrams reason is of no force: for two caus^s. First how knows he, (for
ought he can show out of the And how appears it ^y the new Testament that
there should be any water v^ed at all?
new Testament) that the water with the wine is not changed in substance? Or
what necessity is there for ought he knows or shows in this his
reasonlesse reason, that because the wine is changed, therefore the water to,
for all his quia admixta est, and for all his necesse est? But by the way he A
need esse and idle proof
proves, (if he were not partus Supposititius) the mixing of water so long ago
as Ludouicus Charles son.

R. Abbot. 3.
AS touching Bertram, whereas the Answ. says that he was suspected concerning
the Sacrament, he does leaudly and unconscionably slander him, neither can he
justify it by any show of the story of that time. It is not probable that the
Emperor would have sought for his resolution, unless he had been taken for a
learned man and of sound judgment. But he is dealt with herein as one Ioannes
Scotus was, a familiar friend of his, who wrote a book concerning the
Sacrament to the same effect that Bertram did. He was accounted no heretic in
his time, but two hundredth years after, when Berengarius pleaded the
authority of the same book, it was condemned as heretical in a Council
holden at Vercellae, as Lanfranc. de sacram. (...)char.
Lanfrancus testifies who was present, and an actour in the same matter. So
Be^tram who was Catholic while he lived, is now after so many hundredth years
brought in suspi^ion to be an heretic. But the Answ. own fellows, the
Authors of the Index Expurgat* in ce^sura Bertra.
Index Expurgatorius do clear Bertram from this suspicion, acknowledging him
by these words, that he was A Catholic priest, a Monk of the Abbie of
Corbeie, beloved and reverenced of Carolus Caluus the Emperor; and this very
same Bertram do they confess to be the Author of that book which the
Answerer would feign make us believe to be a counterfeit. They freely confess
they must tolerate some errors in him, as well as they do very many in the
ancient Doctors. They say they would not wholly suppress the book, least we
should have cause to say that they make away such antiquity as serves for us.
They confess that it helps the history of the time wherein Bertram lived.
The book it self indeed does show it self so evidently to be of antiquity,
that no man of any judgment or conscience can gainsay it. Yet, says the Answ.
learned men are of opinion that this was not Bertrams book. Who are those
learned men? Forsooth Bristow in his reply to D. Fulk. cap. 10. de 19.
Bristow, and Sander and some few other of the same mark, whose word is enough
to prove any thing to be counterfeit. But their authority is ouerwaied by the
testimony and confession of those other of their own company, to whom these
must give place for commendation of learning. It is no marvel that the Answ.
and those other his honest companions would have the book seem counterfeit,
being written almost eight hundredth years agone so directly and of purpose
against Transubstantiation. The reason alleged out of him, carries with it
that force that the Spanish censures in the Index aforesaid* thought it not
safe to let it continue, but have discharged it from the press. The Answerer
full wisely passes it over, with How knows he, and what necessity is there,
without affirming any thing himself, or so much as looking at the ground of
that reason which is alleged. I would have him peruse it once again. As for
his speeches of those books of Calvin and Bucer falsely entitled, I take them
to be of the same sort, as that the Thames stood still when Friar Campian was
executed for his treason. Though any such thing were, it is not for a Papist to
speak of it, seeing that they themselves in counterfeiting and falsifying of
books have passed all the impudency of former times.

P. Spence. Sect. 4.
YOur Athenian mad man, was indeed a peevish fellow, and me think they are
not of the wisest that ween, we have no other defense for the Mass but the
word Liturgia. Where read you this for an argument? The Greeks call it
Liturgia, ergo it is the Mass. Though Erasmus in the Acts of the Apostles
translateth (...) as they were sacrificing, yet of his translation, or of the
word Untruth, for it is a common argument. The Answ. is ashamed of his fellows
doings. So M. Jewel uses Doctor Harding.
no man frames an argument for the name Missa, except he were like your mad
Athenian. It is no new devise to father upon us such arguments as we never
thought of, to triumph upon the easy solution thereof.

R. Abbot. 4.
HEre the Answ. is ashamed of the absurdity of his own fellows. For he
knows well enough that their mouths run over with these terms Basils Mass,
Chrysostomes Mass, etc. And that wheresoever they find the Latin word Missa,
in any ancient writer they triumph thereof, as having a proof for their
idolatrous Mass. You know, M. Spence, that these are very current arguments
with your self, and those titles turn round upon your tongue, neither need
you to be ashamed thereof, seeing D. Allen has taught you to esteem them so,
who takes himself for a better Clerk then you are. You know also when you
took those words Act. 13. 2.
(...), as they were ministering, to be a very good proof for your Mass, when
you demanded of me to that purpose what the Greek words were. But all these
things the Answ. is now ashamed of. He tells me that they do not say, the
Greek is (...), therefore it is the Mass. No but (...) is by some according
to the phrase of their time translated Mass, and that name of Mass thus
translated, some of his companions and namely you, M. Spence, deceitfully
allege to the simple and ignorant, as a strong proof for the Popish Mass.
And this is that cogging and cosoning argument that I speak of, wherewith you
your self are deceived as a very silly and ignorant man. He tells me
further, that though Erasmus translate sacrificantibus illis, that is, as they
were sacrificing. Act. 13. (whereas the truth of the text is, as they were
ministering to the Lord) yet of his translation or of the word, no man frames
an argument for the name Missa. No, but yet for the Mass it self the Rhem.
A^nota. Act. 13. 2.
Rhemists take an argument from thence, and unshamefastly and contrary to their
knowledge and conscience say that the word signifies, and they might have
translated saying Mass. Whereof follow those absurdities that before I
mentioned, that the Romans 13. ^.
Magistrate is a Mass priest; Heb. 1. 14.
that Angels are massing spirits; that Romans 15 27. 2. Cor. 9. 12.
to give to the poor is to say Mass, because the Apostle uses the same
Greek word of all these which they say does signify to say Mass. But the
Jesuit helps this lame reason of theirs by putting to it another lame leg.
He confesses that the Greek word Bellarm. tom. 2 con. ^ de M^ssa. lib. 1.
cap. 13.
(...) imports the execution of any public function or ministry
whatsoever. But yet in this place he says it must needs be understood of
sacrificing, because it is not simply said, As they were ministering, but as
they were ministering to the Lord For it may not be understood, he says, of
preaching the word or ministering the Sacraments, because the preaching of the
word and ministering the Sacraments, is not to the Lord but to men. He plaieth
herein the part of a crafty Lawier, who taking a bad cause in hand will seek
by shifting and faysting to prevail, because he fails of good and sound
argument. For first he argues from an imperfect and insufficient division, in
that he mentions only preaching the word and ministering the Sacraments, and
omitteth public prayer, where he saw he had no color to deny that the
Minister in the exercise of public prayer does minister unto the Lord, and
therefore that this place is not necessarily to be understood of sacrifice,
because it may be expounded of prayer. And so does the Syriacke interpreter
take it, translating thus: As they had prayed unto the Lord. Secondly in that
he says that it cannot be understood of the ministry of the word or
Sacraments, because preaching and ministering of the Sacraments is to men and
not to the Lord, he abuses his reader and his own conscience. For he knows
well enough that although the Minister preach not to the Lord, nor minister the
Sacraments to the Lord, but to men, yet in doing these duties unto men, he
ministers unto the Lord. For whose Minister and Officer he is in these things,
to him does he minister. He is in these things the Minister of the Lord.
Therefore in these things he must be said to minister unto the Lord. And so the
Jesuit could not be ignorant, but that Chrysostom. and Oecume in Act. 13.
Chrysostom and Oecumenius out of him do expound it writing upon the same
place; What is, as they were ministering? It is to say, as they were preaching.
Yea and Erasmus himself though he translated, as they were sacrificing, as the
Jesuit urges, yet notwithstanding in his paraphrase and annotations gives to
understand that he means thereby nothing else but prophesying and teaching
the doctrine of the Gospel, accordingly as it is said in the text of them that
ministered to the Lord, that they were Prophets and Doctors. To which purpose
the Apostle S. Paul uses both the word which he here translateth and the
word of sacrificing also. Rom 15. 16. Grace is given to me of God, (...), that
I should be the minister of Jesus Christ, (...), sacrificing the Gospel of
God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable. etc. Where
Theophy. and Oecume. in epist. ad Romans c. 25.
Theophylact uses this exposition; My office of sacrificing is to preach the
Gospel. And Oecumenius this; In bringing men to the faith, he sacrifices the
Gospel of God. By all which it appears, that neither from the words of the
text, as they were ministering unto the Lord, nor yet from Erasmus his
translation if it were admitted, can follow any sufficient proof for the
warranting of the Popish Mass. But the Jesuit knew that it was a sufficient
answer to his argument, to say, that in preaching and ministering the
Sacraments to men, they might rightly be said to minister unto the Lord,
because they did it to the honor of the Lord, and in the service of the Lord.
Therefore he thought good beforehand to add an exception against this answer,
and that he does full well and learnedly. If, forsooth, S. Luke had meant so, he
would not have added any thing of their fasting, because that should have been
comprehended under the name of ministering. For says he, he which fasteth does
in that sort minister to the Lord, according to that To. 14. He which eats,
eats to the Lord, and he which eats not, eats not to the Lord. I will not
here say, where was the Jesuits conscience; but where were his wits? or where
was the care of not discrediting himself with his own fellows? The word
(...) he grants to import the exercise of some public function or
ministry. Now who was ever so absurd to imagine a public function,
ministry or office of fasting? or that a man in fasting should be said to
execute an office or ministry? He brings the Apostles words, but to what
purpose? Does the Apostle say, He that eats, or he that eats not to the
Lord, does therein minister unto the Lord? Surely if in eating or not eating to
the honor of the Lord, a man shall be said to minister unto the Lord, then
in every action that he may do, he shall execute a function or ministry to
the Lord, because the Apostle says 1. Cor. 10. 31.
Whether ye eat or drink or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. If
this be absurd, then his exception is absurd likewise, as indeed it is. To
conclude this matter, the disciples there assembled, used after their
accustomed manner prayer, preaching of the word, and ministering of the
Sacraments. All these must be understood in their ministration. These may be
understood without any sacrifice of the Mass. Therefore it is foolishly and
absurdly done of any Papist to allege this as a proof of their sacrilegious
M^sse. Now let the Answ. say whether I father any other arguments upon them,
then they them selves have begotten. Such brats and untowardly birthes they
have a great number, and M. Jewels usage toward M. Harding in this behalf,
was no other but even a right laying before him the vanity and looseness of
his allegations and reasons, so pi^uish and childish sometimes, that they
rather deserved scorn then any answer at all.

P. Spence. Sect. 5.
THat the Liturgies of S. James, S. Basil and Chrysostom were mad^ by them,
whose names they bear, has been proved by good writers, and by the common
consent of long continued custom of the Greek Church; so Proclus the ancient
Bishop for that matter in the place aforenamed. It would ask a long, though an
easy proof. But what your side has said to the contrary, never yet proved
the contrary, and is all too light to bear down so well known and so
commonly received a truth.

R. Abbot. 5.
AS touching the Liturgies of S. James, Basil; and Chrysostom, if they be
defended by the Church of Rome to be theirs, the greater shame is it for the
Church of Rome not to follow the example of those man, under the authority and
countenance of whose names, they seek so much to shroude themselves. For as I
said before, so say I now again, that in those Liturgies and general y^^^ all
records of the primitive Churches service, there is a description of our
communion, wherein both the Minister and the people communicate together in
both kinds, not of the Roomish Mass, wherein the people are either idle
lookers on, or when they are communicants, communicate only in one kind, and
are secluded from the other. Now of the communion of the whole congregation by
these records specified, the Answ. says nothing at all, as being abashed
perhaps in that respect at the manifest Apostasy of the Church of Rome, from
the universal and continual practice of the ancient Church. But for defense
of their half and maimed receiving, he refers me to their Treatises of that
matter. Where I could as willingly have heard him say, Ask my fellow if I be a
thief. Why did he not rather refer himself to the institution of Christ,
set down in the Gospel, commended by S. Paul to the whole Church of Corinth,
generally and without exception observed in the primitive Church, but that he
chooses rather to assuage his thirst by drinking of the miery and filthy
puddles of the Church of Rome, then of the pure and clear fountain of the
word of God. But all this notwithstanding how may we be assured or persuaded
that the aforesaid Liturgies are theirs whose names they bear? For beside that
Liturgy which commonly goes under the name of saint Iame^ the Apostle, there
is also Clem. Apo^t. Constit. lib 8. cap. 15. etc.
another set down in the first volume of the Councels under his name. And
whether of these Liturgies will they require us to accept of? Or seeing they
will have not only that several Liturgy, but also the Constitutions under
Clemens name to be both authentical and good, what pretense have they to say
that S. James left two Liturgies in the Church? To say the truth they are both
bastards. The common, Liturgy of S. James prays for such as live Iacobi
Liturgia Latin.
in Monasteries, and I trow the Answ. cannot prove that there were any
Monasteries for Christians in the Apostles times. But here Hard. Reioind. pa.
46.
M. Harding excepteth that the Greek in that place is (...), that is to say,
in exercise, which by his exposition imports mon^stical and solitary life.
And although they had not Monasteries of wealthy provision such as ours in
England were, yet he avouches that they had places, celles or houses where
they lived solitarily in the exercise of virtue, not having to do with the
world. But he abuses his reader therein, neither could he justify any such
monastical life to have been used in (...) James his time. For whereas he
alleges Philo out of Eu^eb. hist. eccles lib. 2. cap. 17.
Eusebius to prove it, he might have found, if he had looked upon Philo. de
vita contemplat.
Philo himself, that be wrote his book not of Christian Monks but of Jewish
Essees. Whereof he makes two sorts, the one living in action, the other
incontemplation; as Joseph. de bello Judah. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Josephus also seems to note that they were not of one sort, when he
mentions that some of them were married, and other some professed single
life. Philo having written his book* Quod (...) probus f(...)er of the one
sort that lived in action, begins his other book, whereof* Eusebius
conceiu^d his opinion, t^us: Now that we have spoken of the Essees that live in
action, it follows that we also speak of them that live in contemplation.
Here it is apparent that they of whom Philo writes were called Essees, as
Andrad. Oxthod. Expli. li^. 2.
Andradius and others confess. But the name of Essees has not been found to
be attributed to any of Christian profession, until Eusebius by error
mistook that book of Philo, and gave occasion of the same error to Hierome,
Epiphanius, Sozomen and others. Yet Hierome although Hierony. in Catalo.
Marcus. and Philo.
one where he understands that book of Christians, ^oth in one* of Epist. ad
Eustoch. de custod. virginit.
his Epistles manifestly refer it to the same sect of Jewish Monks of which
Josephus writes. But if this will not stop the Answerers mouth, let him take
that which M. Harding confesses and is true, that Philo wrote in the time of
the Apostles, and then let him ^aigh herewith these words of Philo, concerning
those of whom he writes: Habent pris. little commentarios qui huius sectae
authors. etc.
They have, says he, the Commentaries of their ancestors, who being the
Authors of this sect, left many monuments of such allegories, etc. Ancestors
then and men of elder times then Philo and the Apostles, were Authors of y^
sect of which Philo writes. But I hope there were no Christian Monks before ye
time of y^ Apostles. Therefore this book cannot be understood of Christian
Monks, but of a sect whose beginning was before the Apostles times, such as
were the Essees of the Jews. And hereby appears the falsehood of Bellarm.
tom. 1. cont. 5. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Bellarmine, who says, that Philo gives to understand that he wrote of a sect
which began in his time, whereby he would have it seem likely that he wrote of
some of Christian profession; whereas Philo expressly affirms the contrary as
appears in the words alleged. To let pass that which Philo writes of their
observing the seventh day, which was the Jewish Sabbath, and that with
intention of special mystery, otherwise then may be supposed of m^n e^tierly
devoted to Christian religion, me thinks it is a thing not to be imagined that
the same Philo taking upon him to set down exactly the discipline and
profession of these men, should not so much as in one word intimate that they
were Christians, if they had ^ene so indeed. Strange it is also that there
should appear no monument of this monastical life in the Acts of the Apostles
or in any of their Epistles, neither by way of story, nor of precept, nor of
greeting them that used it, if it had been in those first times of the
Christian Church, as also that no other certain record of times immediately
suc^eeding, should deliver any such to our knowledge. Now whereas Andradius
very presumptuously and without any reason given, Andrad. Oxthod Expli. lib 2.
affirms that those things which Philo writes cannot agree to any other but
Christians, surely he which shall read that which Josephus. An^iq. Judah. lib.
18 cap. 2. and de bello* Iudai. lib. 2. ca. 7.
Josephus Plini. lib. 5. cap. ^7.
Pliny and So^^ de reb. o^b. me^ orab.
Solinus have written of those Jewish Essees, shall find that there is nothing
mentioned by Philo but what may well agree to them also. Seeing therefore it
cannot be proved that there was any such monastical life professed by
Christians in the Apostles times, it follows that we must needs take that
Liturgy which prays for some as then professing it to be a mere forgery.

The other Liturgy under the name of saint James is rejected by the like
reason. For therein prayer is made for Clem. constit. ^post. lib. ^. cap 18.
Pro sub(...)conis, lect(...)s, Cantoribus.
Subdeacons, Lesson-readers and singing men, whereas it is certain that there
were no such officers of the Church in saint James his time. But as touching
this Liturgy set down by the counterfeit Clement, it is to be noted that it is
said to have been endited by saint James in a solemn meeting of the Apostles
where they were assembled of purpose to resolve Ibid cap. 2.
of all ecclesiastical order. In the end whereof this general approbation is
added: Ibid cap. 23.
These things do we Apostles ordeine to you Bishops, Priests and Deacons
concerning the mystical service. Now if this were in this solemn manner
agreed upon, shall we think that the same saint James would of his private
authority without cause publsh another Liturgy to the Church? And would not
the Church universally according to the sanction and designement of the
Apostles have practiced that form of service; which it cannot be proved to
have done? Or if either of those Liturgies had been of authority from such an
Author, would Basil, Chrysostom, and others have given forth other forms of
Church-seruice, and not have cleaued to the received and enjoined Apostolic
form? It were well that these doubts were sufficiently cleared. But the
testimony of Gregory Bishop of Rome is enough to crack the credit of these
Liturgies, who assures us Gregor. Mag. in Regist* li. 7. cap. 63.
that it was the manner of the Apostles to consecrate the sacrifice with saying
only the Lords prayer. This gives us sufficiently to understand that those
pretended Liturgies under the name of saint James the Apostle, where much is
said beside the Lords prayer, either were not at all, or at least were not
deemed authentical at that time, and therefore are of the same stamp, with an
(...) number of ^ther forgeries and counterfeit writings, which have been put
fo^th in the name of the Apostles and other famous me^. Of that Liturgy also
which the sixth Council mentions under the name of S. James, Theodorus
Balsamon testifies, y^ in his time so long ago it was Theodor. Balsa. in
council. Constant. 6. can. 32.
not found nor known, but quite worn out amongst them. Whereby we have just
cause to think that these that now are, are other counterfeits, set forth
since that time. Basils Liturgy Chemnie. in exam. Trident. council. de canone
missae.
by the old translation is one, by the new translation another, and yet it is
said also that the Syrians have a third differing from both the former. This is
just cause to make a man suspicious of them all.

Of Chrysostomes Liturgy how often have they been told, that although it be
likely enough that he left some form of service in his Church, yet that there
is now no certainty what it was, the differen^e of copies being such as it is;
one published by Leo Tuscus, another by Erasmus, another by Pelargus, and yet
Pelargus affirms, that he has seen another copy at* Rome differing from
all these. In one of these Chrysostom himself is prayed unto, and these
together with y^ other Liturgies are alleged for invocation of saints. But
Epiphani. haeresi. 7 5. contra Aeri^nos.
Epiphanius testifies, that the Church in his time did pray for Saints,
Martyrs, Apostles, etc. To pray for them and to pray to them stand not
together. Epiphanius his testimony is true. Therefore these Liturgies are
certainly false. Again Chrysostom himself is prayed for, yea Pope Nicholas
and the Emperor Alexius are prayed for also, who neither of them were borne
some hundreds of years after S. Chrysostomes time. If they will say that these
names were put in, as the manner is, to put in the names of Princes and Bishops
to be prayed for while they live, then how comes it to pass that those names
continue there still unto this day, and that the names of those that succeeded
were not put in place of them? It appears undoubtedly that there was patching
and adding not only of names, but of prayers and ceremonies also, according to
the ^ustome of times and places, and the will of those hucksters that had these
things in handling. Now seeing that although Proclus and others do mention such
Liturgies of Basil and Chrysostom, yet by means of such alterations,
patcheries and forgeries, it cannot be certain unto us what Basil and
Chrysostom left in their Liturgies: what folly is it in the Answ. and his
fellows, to face us out with the names of Basil and Chrysostom in such sort
as they do. That many steps of antiquity are yet remainyng in them, it is not
denied; but those are directly contrary to the practice of the Roomish faction
in these days, and therefore yield not any allowance to their proceedings. And
whereas there are diverse particles translated from those ancient Liturgies
into their Mass, by occasion whereof they vaunt themselves as followers of
antiquity, surely they deal no otherwise herein then Irenae. lib. ^. cap. 1.
Irenaeus reproteth the Valentinian heretics to have dealt with the holy
scriptures. Who gathered here and there words and names out of the scriptures
with the which they painted their horrible and accursed heresies, y^ men might
believe that the scripture spoke of those things, which they wickedly taught
against the scripture. As if a man should take a precious and ^ostly image of a
prince, facioned by a cunnyng workman, and breakyng it in pieces, should of
the pieces of it make an il-fauoured image of a Fox, and say that the same is
the goodly image which such a cunnyng workman made to resemble such a Prince.
For so have they taken diverse pieces of the ancient Liturgies and turned them
to other use and meaning then ever was dreamed of by their Authors, and as
Irenee speaks, From that which is according to nature, to that which is
against nature, and yet forsooth tell us that their Liturgy has example and
warrant from all those that were used in former times. The prayers which then
were made to God for the accepting of the peoples gifts and offerings for the
celebration of the Sacrament, these men absurdly apply to the body and blood of
Christ, and appoint the Priest to entreat God that he will look down
mercifully thereupon and accept them. The old Liturgies used an open
commemoration of the death, passion, and resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that the people might be put in mind thereof, according to his
commandment: The Popish priest utters the words, but is enjoined to utter
them in silence, so that the people never have the hearing of them. The old
Liturgies craved of God grace and heavenly benediction, in behalf of the
people who together were partakers of the communion: the Mass keeps the
words, but excludes the people from the communion. The like dealing I noted
before concerning the mixture of water; and the like foll^weth in the next
place concerning the name of the Mass. By these (...) such speeches and doings
borrowe ^or (...) rather from the old Church-seruice, they go about to da^le
the eyes of ^en that they may not s^e their fraud and falsehood. But an ape
will be an ape still though he be ^clothed in purple, and the Mass though it
firmeth thus to be decked with ^^oures of antiquity, shall remain nothing
else but ^^ish this and abominable idol. It is but apish (...)tation truly*
to keep the words of the Fathers, and so absurdly to vary from the (...)tise
and meaning of the Fathers.

P. Spence. Sect. 6.
Whether (...) come of the Hebrew word, so grave and learned writers (...)
That some as grave and learned as themselves of their own side, are ashamed to
say the same.
that it were best for you first to disaproue their proofs* if you can, for it
is so substantially done by them, that I should but repeat their reasons here,
and so actum agere. Who would ween any pith in this your cavil? the dimissing
of the Catech^mine, E(...)min^ and P^^nitentes, was called Missa, ^^go this
whole celebration was not called Miss^ Belike the name of mass is a mungrell
coming of Hebrew and Latin both.
of the Hebrew word M^sah, as though one truth cannot stand with another. Great
learne^ men are of the mind that the old Fathers, especially Who cannot be
found once to have named Missarum solennia.
S. ^^gustine; and S. Ambrose use Missarum solemnia, in the plural number, to
declare that both the parts thereof, that before the Catechumens dimission, and
the rest following bear all that name* both which cannot stand with your
dimission. Touching receiving in both kinds which by the way you talk of,
because you frame no argument about it, my answer shall be to send you to our
Treatises of that matter, and Bellarmine l^b. 4. de Sacramento, from the tenth
Chapter, etc.

R. Abbot. 6.
THe deriuing of Mass from the Hebrew word Masah, that the very original of
the word might seem to import sacrifice, ^s an il-fauoured whelpe, lately
tumbled out of the Jesuits kennell: The word has been in use these thousand
years, never in the Greek but in the Latin Church. The most probable reason
thereof given from time to time by Latin writers, has been of the dimissing
and sending away of such as did not communi(...) (...) Gregor. de exposi. ord.
Roma. li. 2. ex Cassandro in Liturg.
(...)gorie Bishop of Rome; by Isidor. Origi. lib. 6.
Isid^re who (...) much in the ^ea^ching of Etymologies, by Cassian. de canon.
orat. and psalm. modo. li 2 cap. 7.
Casseinus, Durand. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Durand, Beatus Rhena. annot. ^^ Tertul. cont. Marc. lib. ^.
Beatus Rhenanus, Polyd. Virgil. de invent. rerum. li. ^. ca. 12.
Polydore Virgil and others, and shall we believe an vpstart Jesuit whom the
Pope licked to his fashion but yesterday, that it is derived from an Hebrew
word? Bellarm. to. 2 de Missa. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Bellarmine himself is ashamed of this deriuation. It is but even as if some
idleheaded fellow should imagine some proportion of letters or likeness of
sillables betwixt any Latin and Hebrew words, and should fondly here upon face
it out, that the one is derived from the other. If the Answ. would have had his
Mass from an Hebrew word, he should have taken it rather from the word Massah,
as being a temptation and provocation of the Lords wrath: or from Dani. 11. 38.
Mauzim the name of that idol which the abomination of desolation shall
worship in steed of the true God, and honor with gold, and silver, and precious
stones, etc. As Daniel speaks and fitteth just to the Popish Mass. Now if
Missa, Mass had his original from that custom of dimission, as by the
testimonies of the abouenamed it is most likely, and as was proved before by
the most ancient use of the word, then though in d^course of time, custom
brought the word to signify the celebration of the Sacrament, as in my former
answer I noted that it did, yet that alters not, I trow, the deriuation of
the word, nor forces it to seek another theme. And if the Answ. will not
believe me in this point, yet let him believe Gregory Bishop of Rome, who
applying it to the very celebration of the Sacrament, yet gives still the same
reason of the name. Gregor. apud Cassandrum. in Liturg.
Missa, the Mass, is therefore so called, for that they which ought not to be
present at the holy Sacraments, are willed to depart: which is the same, as
(mitti) to be sent away. Therefore unless by the voice of the Deacon those
that do not communicate, be willed according to the manner of our ancestors
to depart, the service which by the usual name is called Mass, is not rightly
performed. Let Durand also witness the same, though differing somewhat from
Gregory: Durand. Rat diui. lib. 4. cap. 1.
The Mass of the faithful is so called of dimissing or sending away, because
that being ended, every one of the faithful is dimissed or sent away to his
own home. Now here I must put the Answ. in mind that I alleged in my former
writing that the custom of dimissing or sending away such as communicate not,
and of the communicating of all that are present, is utterly worn out in the
Church of Rome, so that they have herein greatly swarued from antiquity, and
have kept the word M^ss^ or Mass without the meaning of the word. To which
point be answers nothing; but yet let him ^steeme with himself, what censure
Gregory in his words aboue-named for this cause gives of his Popish Mass,
namely that it is not rightly and well celebrated. Now then though his great
learned men tell him that Missarum s^l^nnia with Ambrose and Austen do signify
both parts of the Mass, that before the dimission and that after (a wise
saying of his, who knows well y^ in his Mass there is no dimissio^ at all)
yet that ^indereth not but that the Etymology of the word Missa, is the same
still as I have showed out of Gregory and Durand. Albeit I must tell him that
as great learned men as they of whom he speaks, are out of doubt that neither
Ambrose nor Austen ever ^^med Missirum sol^^ia.

P. Spence. Sect. 7.
FOr praying for the dead, and that the dead rec^^ue benefit thereby, and gain
as Chrysostom term that, nothing makes it so plain, as that Aerius by the
testimony of Epithanius, Augustine and Philastrius, was accounted not an
heretic but an Arch-hereticke, even as well for that point, as for two or
three other pretty Puritan opinions now greatly urged: And of whom was he so
accounted? even of the Not of the whole church for that point. For many of the
church held the same, and yet were not accounted heretics. See the answer.
whole Church, as by the testimony of the forenamed it is evident, who made
their Catologue only of open, notorious, and known condemned Heretics. And
because you shall not be blinded in Chrysostom, as though his prayer for the
dead were only thanksgiving, let Chrysostom interpret Chrysostom, who
speaking of this very sacrifice (called by him (...) the sacrifice not only
Liturgia) and of the most reverend and dreadful part thereof, I mean the
Consecration in his book of his Dialogue, di Sacerdotio says, that the priest
prays to God that he will be merciful to the sins of all, not only living
but also dead. And I wonder with what face you allege S. Augustine, who
distinctly But that which he tells, he learned rather out of the school of
Plato, then out of the school of God. He elsewhere speaks far otherwise, as
shall appear.
tells you of some very good, some very bad, some neither very good, no^
very bad, but of a middle sort, and because he would not leave you any thing
to help your self in this ease, he tells you how the Church uses, and in
what several sort for all three. Where as though S. Augustine were no body,
you would help Dul^itius reason* as well as you could, but that very reason
confounds you. For if the prayer of the Church had not been to crave Gods
mercy for the dead, but only to give thanks for them, what needed either that
question to be made by Dulcitius of that which was not, or that answer to be
made by S. Augustine when he might have denied that use? but the question of
the one, and the answer of the other, proves the Churches But it proves not
the lawfulness of the churches practice.
practice. What need I to answer herein? our books are infinite, to whom I
refer you.

R. Abbot. 7.
AS touching prayer for the dead, we take that for a sufficient cause to refuse
it, which Epiph. haer. 75.
Ephiph^nius confesses; that it is not taught by the holy scripture, but
observed by tradition received from the Fathers without scripture. What men
have said or thought good in this behalf we take not for Canonical, but
examine it by the Canonical scriptures, according to that rule which the
Fathers themselves have prescribed. The scripture tells us that Apoc. 14. 13.
they which die in the Lord are blessed and rest from their labors, and
therefore they need not the help of our prayers. If they die not in the Lord,
then no prayers can stand them in steed. So that prayer for the dead is a
matter of no effect, and consequently a vain usage of the name of God. That
which the Fathers say according to this truth of Gods word, we willingly
embrace: as that of Hierom: Cansa. 13. q. 2. cap. In praesenti.
In this present world we know that we may be helped either by the prayers or
counsels each of other. But when we shall come before the tribunal seat of
Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noe, can make request for any man, but
every one must bear his own burden. And that of Aust^n: August. in Ioh.
trac. 49.
The rest, which is given straightwaies after death, every man then receives
when he dies, if he be worthy thereof. Which worthiness Berna^d. in dedic.
eccle. se^. 5.
Bernard declares to be dignatione dinina, non dignitate nostrae: by Gods
vouchsafing to accept us as worthy, not by our worthiness in our selves. For
as Chrysostom says: Chrysostom. in ep. ad colos. hom. 2.
No man shows such conversation of life, as that he may be worthy of the
kingdom of heaven, but it is wholly the gift of God himself. To which effect
Hierome also says: Hierony. in Esai. lib. 6. c. 14.
When the day of death or of judgment shall come, all hands shall fail,
because there shall no work be found worthy of the justice of God, neither
shall any man living be found righteous in his sight. Now he that is not by
Gods acceptance in Christ Jesus holden worthy when he dies; he never shall
be by S. Austens judgment. For, says he, August. epist. 80.
Such as every one dies in this day, such a one shall he be judged at that
day. Now then if every one that is thought worthy of this rest, do receive it
immediately after death, and he that is not thought worthy thereof at his
death, shall never be, it follows that every one that receives the same
rest, receives it immediately after death, and therefore needs not to be
furthered unto it by the prayers or devotions of the living. If contrary to
this they have taught other-where a place of pain; where faithful men are
detained from that rest, they (...)here i^ (...) as men, ^ we (...) not but
they have found wisdom in Jesus Christ to iouer their error. But the Papists
have dealt with them here is as Genesis 9. 22.
Ch^m d^^lt with his father Noe, who in steed of h^ding, did rather publish and
make known ye nakedness and shame of his father. For so have they not sought
to hide, but to blaze abroad the imperfections and ouersightes of the ancient
Fathers, as Vincent. Ly^^n. cont. haereses.
Vincent(...) Lyrinensis tells the Donatists that they did, when in the very
like sort, (...) the Papists, they cloaked their error with the name of
Cyprian, and sundry other Bishops of former times. We may say now of the
ancient Fathers and the Papists; as the same, Vincentius said of Cyprian and
the Donatists: Ibid.
(...) change of things: The autho^rs of the same opinions are judged
Catholi^ke, but the followers thereof, are heretics: the masters are
pardoned, but the scholars or learners are condemned: the writers of the
books (wherein these opinions are) shall without doubt be the children of the
kingdom; but hell shall be the place for the mainteine^s and abettours thereof.
We doubt not indeed but that the ancient Fathers we ^^ Catholic and godly
Bishops and Pastors, notwithstanding that as men they erred sometimes in their
judgments. But we know the Papists to be wicked Apostates and Heretics, who
wilfully and stubburnly maintain the same errors against the plain truth
laid evidently before them out of the word of God.

That Aerius was condemned for an heretic we know: but we know withal that
there were greater matters of heresy to condemn him for, then denial of
prayer or offering for the dead; not only for two or three pretty Puritan
points as the Answ. speaks, but also for certain points of Popery concerning
marriage and eating of flesh, as Philaster records. So that the Answ. in
condemning Aerius for such a known and notorious heretic, must pluck
himself also by the nose. Basil. de spir. sanc. ca. 2. 3. 4.
Basil, Epiphan. haer. 75.
Epiphanius, and others note him also to have been a partaker of the heresy of
Arius, and to have sought further matter for defense thereof. There was
therefore sufficient cause for A(...)sme and Popery to condemn Aerius without
any touching of him for gainsaying prayer for the dead. S. Austen notes this
indeed in the August. de haeres cap. 53.
report of his heresy; but yet gives no such censure of those many in his
time, who avouched in effect the same that Aerius did, that the oblations of
the living were not available for the dead, whose words to that purpose I
reported out of Austen to Dulcitius, in my former reply. And as for the prayer
for the dead, which Epiphan. haere. 75.
Epiphanius defends against Aerius, it was no such as Papists now teach, not
only for that it was used as a testimony of their belief, that the dead were
not utterly perished, but lived with the Lord, whereas Papists defend it only
in behalf of them that are in Purgatory: but also that it was used Ibid.
for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, etc. to put difference betwixt Christ
and all other men, by the honor which is done to him, whilst he only is
acknowledged to be perfectly just, and is worshipped, and prayed unto, and al
others acknowledged to be such y^ they were to be prayed for. Whereas the church
of Rome now prays not for Saints, but prays unto them, and so yields unto
them that honor which the ancient Church reserved as a special prerogative to
Christ alone. Now as touching this manner of praying for Apostles, Prophets,
Martyrs, etc. which I mentioned. the Answ. says nothing at all. Only to no
purpose he brings a speech of Chrysostom to prove that there was in his time
prayer for the forgiveness of the sins of the dead. But do those words
serve for exposition of that which I alleged out of Chrysostomes Liturgy? If
they do, then he must say that that reasonable service was offered for the
sins of the blessed virgin. If not, then were they idly brought in. For I
alleged that speech as taken from the ancient use of the Church long before
Chrysostoms time; which because it imports only thanksgiving, therefore
gives sufficient cause: to think that in the beginning they used only
commemoration and thanksgiving for the faithful dead in Christ; howsoever by
little and little through the subtlety of Montanus his heresy, there was added
to (...)ither in Chrysostoms time or before, such prayers as he speaks of and
offering^ for the be(...) site of the dead. That Chrysostom has somewhat
tending heretal, i^ ^as not denied r Mat. 19. 8.
but it is sufficient for our defense that I from the beginning it was not so.
And yet that praying for the forgiveness of the si^^ of the dead, if there be
nothing more said by Chrysostom, makes nothing for Popish prayer for the
dead. For this rests only upon Purgatory torments, and is not intended for
any other purpose but for deliverance from thence: whereas it plainly appears
by the supposed Dionysius, that the auncienter Church prayed in that sort for
them, of whom notwithstanding they were assured Dionys. Areo. ^ccles. hierarch.
cap. vltimo.
that they were come to rest, that they were blessed and happy; that they were
not changed to worse but to better state then they had here, that they were
now compartners with the Saints which had been before from the beginning of
the world: and therefore in so praying, thought of nothing loss then Purgatory
pains. The saying of S. Austen which the Answ. urge this thus: August. Ench^r.
ca. 110.
The sacrifices of the altar or of whatsoever alms when they are offered for
all the dead that have been baptized are thankesgiuings for such as are very
good: for such as are no^ very bad, they are propitiations or attonements: for
those that are very bad, they are, though no benefit to the dead, yet some
kind of comfort to the living. The first part of which words confirms that
which I said before of the ancient custom, not of praying but of
thanksgiving for he faithful departed in Christ. In the other two he yielded
too much to those superstitions which tradition and later custom had brought
in without the word of God, whilst being busied in matters of greater weight
and importance, he omitted thoroughly to examine and try his opinion in this
point, with the true and even w^ights of the same word. Whereas the Answ.
tells me that by this means we make no body of S. Austen, I answer him
concerning Austen as Austen himself answered the Donatists concerning Cyprian:
August. cont. cresco. lib. 2. ca. 31. 32.
We do no injury to him when we distinguish any writings of his from the
authority of the holy scriptures. Whatsoever therein agrees to the authority
of the scriptures, we receive it with his commendation; but what agrees not
thereto, by his leave we refuse it, and as the s(...)e Austen answered also to
the Pelagians concerning Ambrose: Idem de great. christi cont. pel and Cele. li.
1. c. 23
He was a learned and godly man but not to be compared to the authority of the
Canonical scriptures. Shall we be said to make no (...) of David, because we
refuse to follow him in committing adultery and murders? or of Peter because
we will not deny Christ or cause the Gentiles to play the Jews? or of John
because we will not fall down and worship an Angel? or of Cyprian because we
will not yield to his error of rebaptising? August cont. Cresco. lib. 1. cap.
32 and li. 2. cap 32. and de vnico bapt. cont. Petil. ca 13 and cont. Gandent.
li. 2. cap. 23.
surely as we account our selves incomparably inferior to these renowned and
famous servants of God, and yet refuse to follow them in that which they
thought and did amiss: so we attribute exceeding much to Austen, we admire his
learning, we honor his labors, we esteem of his judgment, and yet with that
liberty whereunto the Lord has called us, we deny to follow him in this
whereof we cannot have our consciences assured by the undoubted warrant of the
word of God. And as lawful we hold it for our selves so to do in this point,
as for ye Papists to reject his August. de bono viduitatis. ca. ^. ^0. 11
sound judgment of the unlawfulness of dissoluing. and breaking such
marriages as are contracted after vow and protestation of single life. But as
touching the matter in hand of propitiation and atonement for sin, we hold
fast that which S. John teaches us and g^e no farther: 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
We have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the just, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. We believe no other merit of the forgiveness
thereof, but only his passion and death: in the participation whereof whosoever
dies, we assure rur selves he is immediately received into Paradise with Jesus
Christ, even as was Luc. 23. 43. Cypr. de caena domini ad finem.
the thief who upon the Cross began to believe in Jesus Christ. And to this
purpose I oppose against that three-membred division of Austen, another of his
consisting only of two parts ^ugust. in Io^. ^ract. 49.
All souls when they go out of this world have their diverse places of
receipt. The good have joy: the evil have torment. But when the resurrection
shall come, both the joy of the good shall be greater, and the torments of the
evil shall be more grievous: when as they shall be tormented in their bodies
also. Then all souls are either good or evil. Their portions if they be good,
joy: if they be evil, torment when they go out of this world, not the torment
of Purgatory, which is but for a time; but the torment of hell because it
continues till the resurrection, and then shall be increased by the receiving
of their bodies to be partakers of the same torment. What place leaves Austen
here for Purgatory, or for any middle sort of men? Surely none at all, and
therefore consequently excludes all effect of prayer or offering for the dead.

But I s^eke, the Answ. says, to help Dulcitiu^ his reason and yet conf(...)d
my self, because both by the question and by the answer it appears that to
pray or to offer for the dead was the churches practice at that time. A great
confusion, and worthily wrought. The Answ. must first know that it was his
oversight to call it Dulcitius his reason which was alleged; for S. Austen
reports it as a reason given by many in his time. Then let him understand
also that I knew it to be the churches practice, but question was then moved
whether that which the church did were available to the dead. Dulcitius upon
that occasion was doubtful herein. He sends to S. Austen to be resolved. S.
Austen tells him that August. de 8. quaest. Dulcit. q. 2.
many indeed said hereof, that if any good might be to the dead in obteining
ease, much rather should the soul by it own confession of sin find ease,
then by oblations procured by other men. Whereby it is plain that though it
were the churches practice, yet that this practice of the church was disauowed
and disliked by many in S. Au^^ens (...)e, and therefore not universally
entertained in the church. The Answerer kn^w well enough that thus much was
said to him before, but because he was ouer-pressed by the reason of those
many, used then against the custom of oblations and prayers for the dead, he
slippeth by and takes hold of this, that hereby the practice of the church in
this point is manifest. True, say I, in part, not generally, because it was
gainsaied and disputed against by many of the church even in those times. Now
he says nothing, neither of the men nor of their reason. And verily Austen
himself neither reproves the men, nor disproueth their reason, nor by any
reason approves that which he himself affirmed on the other side; but taking
this custom as he found it* he labors rather to show whom we may suppose
to have benefit after death by such prayers and offerings, if there be any
effect thereof, then to prove that there is so.

P. Spence. Sect. 8.
A Sorry shift you have to elude all that our side can bring out of the Fathers
for the sacrifice. Doct. Allen says that the name of sacrifices in the plural
number as is this, fitteth not to the sacrifice of the Mass.
The sacrifices of the altar, are forsooth by your cavil not offered by the
priest, but by every particular man as his oblations either for the Sacrament
(say you) or for the relief of the poor, the worst shift of a thousand.
Theodoret upon the 8. to the Hebrews, asks why (if Christ offered a perfect
sacrifice and made all other sacrifices unnecessary) the priests of the new
Testament offer the mystical sacrifice? If the peoples charitable offerings
were the meaning of the sacrifices of the altar, what need either Theodoret or
so many much more ancient Fathers that ask the self same question upon the
like objection, so much liked of your side, namely Chrysostom upon the same
Chapter, to move any such question or doubt? For when Christ abolished all the
old sacrifices of the law, you cannot imagine that these Fathers so learned
and so wise, would ever spend labor, or time to move this A deal of idle
talk. I denied not but that the Fathers do use the name of sacrifice
concern^ng the Lo^d^s Supper. For I gave the reason thereof at large.
idle doubt, whether he abolished all charitable offerings of the people,
either for the Sacrament or for the help of the poor. Besides the question is
moved of the sacrifice of the new Testament offered, not by the people, but by
the priests. That the people made such oblatio^s, we grant, but that thereby it
is proved that there was no other oblation or sacrifice offered by the priest,
we deny, and think it to be as unreasonable as if your mad Athenia^ would prove
that God made no Moon, because he made a Sun. One truth never shouldereth
out another. The same Theodoret to answer his own question goes further, and
thus solueth it. It is clear says he to those that are learned in divinity,
that we the priests of the new Testament (of whom the objection was made, not
of the people) do offer not another sacrifice, but do celebrate a memory of
that one healthful sacrifice, for this our Lord did command, Do ye this for a
remembrance of me.

R. Abbot. 8.
Whereas in the place of Austen before rehearsed, I construed the sacrifices
of the altar to be meant of the offerings of the people at the Communion, the
Answerer fondly collecteth thereof, that we use this for a sorry shift to elude
and put off all the testimonies of the Fathers concerning sacrifice. I may
justly call it a fond collection. That ye name of Sacrifice is used of those
offerings, I showed him by Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11.
S. Hierom. But that in other places both S. Austen and others do apply the
name of Sacrifice to the mystical offering of the body and blood of Christ,
he knew well enough that I made no doubt, inasmuch as it was a great part of my
speech following, to declare what they meant in so saying. Wherefore all that he
speaks of this point arises of his own pee^ish and idle fancy, and
therefore I trouble not my self therewith.

P. Spence. Sect. 9.
TO your great objection of S. Paul leaving a great heap of Which because he
could not answer, he thought good to pass over as waste words.
waste words (to say the best of them) I answer: the sacrifice of the law
took not away sins, but made only certain legal expiations, and therefore
the chief good that they wrought in the soul was ex Adiuncto of a thing added
to them, by the goodness of the receivers of them, which was their godly
faith, and expectation of remission of sins to be wrought by the Messiah, by
which faith they received justification such as their Their estate ^n the old
law had not the same light of revelation: but the grace of justification and
regeneration was the same to them as it is to us. See the answer to sect. 20
estate in the old law was capable of. But Christ by his sacrifice which was
done by his death (for his death only could confirm his new Testament) took
away sins, and therefore needed not to be reiterated. Good sir why The Answ.
dream. For no man charged him with any such assertion.
dream you that we think or profess to sley and crucify Christ in our Masses?
His death was once, and that once sufficient for ever, and he dies no more,
and then where is your objection? But our sacrifice which is the offering of
Christ to his father, is only to commemorate his said death once past, thereby
to If the Mass be but to procure the propitiation earned on the Cross, why is
it defended to be a continual sacrifice of propitiation. Absurd contradiction.
procure the said propitiation earned for us on the Cross by thanking him, and
praising him, for the said sacrifice of the Cross, and to procure by the said
Commemoration, the pardon gotten by the great sacrifice of his death. A goodly
cover for a cup of poison. See the answer.
Remission of sins does come by Baptism, by repentance, or penance and by
prayer. Do we therefore exclude Christ's death? No; but these work by the
virtue of that, and only by the virtue thereof are available and need no other
death of him to make them profitable and active for us. And therefore all your
testimonies go no further, but that there needs not now any Why does the
church of Rome then daily offer for sin?
new oblation for sin, but Christ's death already past, because it is still
and ever will remain and continue most sufficient to take away sins, and
never will need any reiteration, but is and will be still, able, strong, and
available to give force, virtue, and strength, to all our Sacraments,
sacrifices and prayers to procure Gods mercy unto us for the merit thereof, and
by the influence only thereof. And what have we ever affirmed more? And what
ge^ you by this? for all your testimonies by you alleged of Theodoret,
Oecumenius, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, Primasius, we grant as serving
our turn, proving in our sacrifice a memory and a commemoration, but of what?
of his death, and what more? of the same commanded to be offered in a
sacrifice to God, for so much your own testimonies do say. But do they They
d^ deny it* in that they make the sacrifice whereof they s^ake no more but a
memorial o^ his death.
deny that in this sacrifice we offer his body? they do not; They say a
memory, we say of his death; they call it a figure, we say of his sufferings.
You would have it a memory of himself as though he were absent, we say it is a
memory, a comemoration, a representation of his own only sacrifice, that is of
his death. Here is the point between us, here lies the narrow issue. In this
narrow difference of What sacricrifice is there says Prosper, but the ^^lling
of the Lamb of God? Therefore as touching sacrifice Christ himself is not to
be considered ^ut only as dying, See the answer.
himself, and of his death, you would snare and hamper us, as though the
verity of his body cannot stand with the remembering, representing and
signifying of his death. And therefore our own gloss (as you term it) tells
you it is a representation and memorial, but of what? of his oblation and
passion. That is it all our writers have told you so often and so learnedly: but
you will not hear, you dissemble it because the state of the question lies
therein which you starte away from. We say his body is offered in Sacrifice in
the which a memory is made of his death, by the which is applied to us
remission of sins purchased by his death only.

R. Abbot. 9.
NOw at length we are come to the capital points of the sacrifice of the Mass
and of transubstantiation, two foul monsters of the Church of Rome. In the
defense whereof the Answ. has showed himself a bird of the same nest with
them, who very honestly and ingenuously confessed of themselves thus. Index
expurgat in censura Bertram.
In the old Catholic Doctors we suffer very many errors, and we extenuate
them, excuse them, and by some devised shifte we oftentimes deny them, or feign
of them some convenient meaning, whenever they are opposed in disputations or
in contention and controversy with our adversaries. I might not here omit to
put him in mind again of this their pretty manner of answering our
allegations, disclosed and uttered by their own confession, sufficient to make
any man distrustful of their answers, howsoever good colors they set upon
them. But as touching the present matter he tells me that he passes over a
great heap of my waste words: and in deed I do not marvel that he does
so. For in those waste words I noted a cursed blasphemy contained in their
Mass, which I spak of before, namely that a greasy headed and filthy hearted
priest is brought in, praying unto God that he will look down with a merciful
countenance upon his son Jesus Christ, as though by the prayer of a sinful
and wicked man Christ must be accepted with the Father. Secondly those wast
words laid open the shame of the divines of Rhemes, as touching their gloss
upon the place Heb. 10. Heb. 10. 18.
There is now no more offering for sin. An everlasting testimony of their
lewd and ungodly mind, desperately bent to the perverting of all truth. The
Answ. as convicted in his conscience of their gross dealing herein, slippeth
by all, and uses not a word to defend them or to excuse them, but betaketh
himself to another idle and vain shifte. Where being a man that groundeth
himself much upon the infinite treatises of his learned side, he might have
thought with himself; surely these are learned men; they have sifted the
matter to the uttermost: If any other exposition then that which they have
given would better stand, they would rather have used it. But without doubt
they saw that nothing will serve the turn. Therefore it is bootelesse for me
to seek any other answer. Thus I say should have thought and so for the
credit of his Rhemists have joined with them to dubbe that which they so grossly
had avouched. Now he has left them naked to the shame of the world, and by his
silence confesses that their impudency is greater then he can tell any way
how to excuse: But let us see how well and wisely he does shift off all. The
question is whether there be any prepitiatorie offering or sacrifice for sin
after the sacrifice of Christ upon his Cross: the Papists say they have so in
their Mass. I prove out of the tenth to the Hebrews that there is no such.
Heb. 10. 18. (...).
For where forgiveness of sins is, * there is no more any offering or sacrifice
for sin. But in the new Testament once confirmed by y^ death of Christ there
is forgiveness of sins. Therefore in the new Testament once confirmed by the
death of Christ, there is no more any offering for sin, and therefore there is
no true sacrifice in the Mass. Nay, say the Rhemistes the text means that
there is no second Baptism to apply unto us a general pardon or full
forgiveness of sins, contrary to the evidence of the text* to the light of
their own consciences, to the manifest expositions of the ancient Fathers.
Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Photius, Theodoret, Theophylact, Primasius, Ambrose,
as before I alleged; who all according to the drift of the text expound it
against any further offering or sacrifice for sin after that once offering
upon the Cross. Yea and it must necessarily be so understood, because the
Apostle hereby concludes against the many and often offered sacrifices of the
Jews. Which conclusion makes nothing against their offerings or sacrifices,
unless we understand offering properly. For what were it against their
sacrificing that the Apostle should say; there is no second baptism to apply
unto us full forgiveness of sins? Now seeing this absurd and unreasonable
gloss of the Rhemists will not serve turn, neither could the Answ. for shame
write it, though they were not ashamed to print it, what other answer may we
look for at his hands? Good sir, says he, why dream you that we think or
profess to ^ley and crucify Christ in our Masses? His death was once, and
that once sufficient for ever, and he dies no more, and then where is your
objection? To whom I say again; Good sir, my objection has not any syllable
to charge you with affirming of Christ's dying any more, but proves that after
the once dying of Christ, there is no more sacrifice for sin, and therefore
that your Mass does lie in taking upon it to be a true propitiatory
sacrifice, and then where is your answer? Why did not your courage serve to
make a direct answer to that that was opposed; and if you could not answer,
why did not conscience prevail with you to make you yield to the truth? I
prove that there is now no more offering for sin, and he returns me a
sleeuelesse tale that they say not that Christ dies any more, and so runs
on to declare unto me what manner of sacrifice it is which they offer, which by
the reason alleged by me is ineuitably proved to be none at all. If Christ's
body be really offered for sin every day in the Mass, then there is yet
(...), an offering for sin. But the Apostle says, that there is not now an
offering for sin* Therefore Christ is not now any longer offered for sin.
And therefore although the body of Christ be yet really remaining in heaven
R^m. ^. ^.
being raised from the dead to die no more, and the same body be sometimes
termed in our speech the sacrifice for sin, yet is it not so called as having
now the condition of a sacrifice for sin, or as if it were now to be offered
any more, but only in respect that it was sacrificed once, and by the virtue of
that once sacrificing Heb ^. 2*
appears in the sight of God for us. In a word, it is no otherwise so called,
but as Christ in the Revelation is called the knobe, not to be killed but Apoc.
5. 6. 9. 12.
that was killed, and as the same body of Christ shall be called the sacrifice
for sin after the end of the world, when as the Saints of God shall
thankfully record the sacrificing thereof thus: Apoc. 5. 9.
Thou wast killed and have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every
nation, etc. The end and use of offering for sin is to take away sin, to
obtein remission of sins, to sanctify those that come unto it. Now when this
end of offering for sin is achieved, there is no further use of an offering
for sin. So that if the sacrifices of the old law Heb. 10. 1. 2.
had sanctified the comers thereunto, they should after once offering have
ceased to be offered as the Apostle tells us: importing thereby that that
sacrifice which does sanctify the comers thereunto, as does cap. 10. 10.
the body of Christ once offered, needs not to be offered any more but that
once. And hereupon it is that he infers, that seeing remission of sins is
obtained by the offering of Christ's body once, therefore thenceforth there is
no more offering for sin, neither of Christ's body nor of any other thing,
because there is no end or use thereof, even as when Chrysostom. in Heb. 10. ho.
17. Ambros. in Hebr. 10.
a man has gotten a medicine to heal his hurt, it is needless for him to
seek any other, either of the same substance or of any other. And therefore
hereby he resolves against all, whether Heathenish or Jewish or Popish
sacrificing for sin, as being to no end or purpose, because the end of
offering for sin, which is, remission of sins, is atteined already by the
death and bloodsheading of Jesus Christ. And unless we will understand
offering for sin, simply and universally without exception, and without that
determining of it to any one sort of offering which the Answ. uses in tying it
unto Christ's suffering and dying, we betraie this whole disputation into the
hands of the Jews and Heathens, as making nothing against their sacrificing
for sin, because it only proves that Christ dies no more, not that there is
no more offering for sin. But the Apostle would deny not only Christ's dying
any more, but also all manner of Jewish and Heathenish offering for sin.
Therefore the words must be absolutely and universally understood of offering
for sin after the once dying of our Lord Jesus.

Yet further let me tell him that if he will affirm the often offering of
Christ, he must say also that Christ often suffers and is slain. For
throughout the whole scripture he cannot allege one place where the offering
or sacrificing of Christ is otherwise understood then of his death and passion.
And this is plainly euicted out of the 9. to the Hebrews, where the Apostle
says, that Christ He. 9. 25. 26.
is entered into heaven to appear now in the sight of God for us, not to offer
himself often; for then, says he, he should have often suffered since the
foundation of the world. Which reason of the Apostle has no force at all if
there be any other offering of Christ but only by suffering and death. Which
also is manifest out of the law of Moses, where there was no offering or
sacrifice of propitiation, but by slaughter and bloodshead, and where there was
no sheading of blood, there was no forgiveness, as the Heb. 9. 22.
Apostle witnesses. Now seeing there is no sacrifice of propitiation in the
new Testament which was not prefigured in the law, which the Apostle says
Heb. 10. 1.
had the shadow of the good things that were to come, and the law prefigured
none but sacrifice by bloodshead and death, it follows that in the new
Testament there is no sacrifice propitiatory but only by death. And therefore
if Christ be often offered, he dies often. But he dies no more, says the
Answ. Therefore, say I, h^ i^ (...) no more. This reason stands ^o
(...)ptorie and sure (...) ^eall sacrifice in the Mass, (...) those grounds
which the Answerers masters have been forced to yield unto, that either he
must needs grant that there is a real death and destruction of the body of
Christ in the Mass, or else that there is not any real offering or
sacrificing of the same. For sacrifice, says Bellar. to 2. de Missa. lib. 1.
ca. 2. 15. 27.
Bellarmine, requires a changing and consuming, a killing and destroying of
the thing sacrificed; and a true and real sacrifice imports a true and real
death or destruction of the thing that is offered in sacrifice. If therefore
there be in the Mass a true and real sacrifice of the body of Christ, there
must needs be a true and real destroying of the same body. If this will not
be granted, then the other must be denied, and so the Popish sacrifice must
fall to the ground. The Jesuit having set down these things in such manner
cap. 27. vt supra.
as that he has convicted the Mass Priest to be a murderer and destroyer of
the body of Christ and passing slily over the matter with his omissis, sets
down afterward his suppose for the resolving of this doubt and avoiding of
this heinous crime: but so as that it seems he was even at his wits end to
devise a shift to salve the matter. He will have consecration to belong to the
essence of the sacrifice, and it self to be sacrificing. But consecration, I
trow, imports not a destroying of the body of Christ. Nay let him remember
the old saying, Sacerdos est creator creatoris sui: The priest is the maker of
his maker. And how but by consecration? Then it should seem he does not mar
but make the body of Christ by consecration, and therefore does no sacrifice
therein. Yea but, says he, by consecration the body of Christ is ordained to
be truly and really destroyed. Not sacrificed then by consecration but ordained
to be sacrificed. For the act of sacrificing is the act of destroying the thing
sacrificed. For, as the ibid.
Jesuit says, if the priest in the old law had received a sheep for sacrifice
and proceeded so far as to strike the stroke for killing the sheep, yet if
by any accident the stroke had been hindered, it had been no sacrifice. And
therefore Abraham as he says again, though he bound his son and laid him
on the altar, and so ordained him to be slain, yet for that he did not really
kill his son, did not really sacrifice him but only in will. And therefore
though consecration be performed, yet there is no sacrifice hitherto but only
in purpose and will, because there is no change or destroying of the thing to
be sacrificed. But yet further, how is the body of Christ ordained by
consecration to be destroyed? forsooth because it thereby receives y^ condition
of meat, and therefore is ordained to be eaten, and consequently to be altered
and destroyed as we know it comes to pass in meat. But where did he read
that eating was an act of sacrificing? Surely he himself cap. 2. vt supra.
reckoning all the forms and manners of the destroying of things sacrificed in
the old law, where many things sacrificed were appointed to be eaten by Aaron
and his sons, yet could not find that eating was any part of sacrificing,
but defines the destroying to have been either by killing as of living
things, or by burning as of solid things without life; or by effusion and
pouring out as of liquid or moist things. Then by his own confession it was
not eating that did make the sacrifice. And so much he cap. 27.
confesses here as touching the peoples eating. But why should not the peoples
eating as well accomplish the sacrifice as the priests, seeing the body of
Christ is as well destroyed by their eating as by his? Let it be answered with
Nemoscit. Again what sacrifice shall we say was performed by Christ, seeing we
do not read in the Gospel that he himself did eat, but only gave to his
disciples to eat? And if that must be supposed which he defends, that the
sacrifice was really and substantially Christ himself, how may we be persuaded
that he did eat himself, as he must needs do if he did then sacrifice
himself, because, he being then the priest, it must be his eating y^ must make
up the sacrifice? Moreover what if it so fall out that neither the people nor
the priest eat thereof, is there a sacrifice or not? To say that there is, is
contrary to his own definition of sacrifice, which cannot be without
destroying, and destroying here must be eating. To say, there is not,
overthrows his other position that sacrifice is done in consecration, as
where he says toward the end of ye chapter that Apostoli co^secrando
sacrificabant. Immolatio consecratione perficitur.
the Apostles in consecrating did sacrifice, and out of Gregory that sacrifice
is performed by consecration. And yet again I marvel how it may be said, that
the body of Christ is truly and really destroyed in the priests eating thereof.
Does it verily go into his body as meat there to be altered and digested and
changed in substance? No, says Bellarmine, the body of Christ feels no hurt
in it self, neither does it loose his natural being, but only esse
sacramentale, his sacramental being. But sacramental being is esse modi, not
esse rei; a being touching the manner of the thing, not touching the thing it
self. Now if there be a destroying only of the manner of the thing, not of the
thing it self, then it cannot be said that there is any sacrifice done of the
thing it self, because sacrifice imports the destroying not of any manner or
circumstance, but of the thing it self that is sacrificed. Otherwise Isaac
having been bound and laid upon the altar in manner of a sacrifice, though he
were not indeed slain, yet shall be said to have been properly sacrificed,
because being unbound and taken from thence he has lost that manner of being
wherein he was upon the altar. It were absurd to affirm this. Therefore it is
absurd also to affirm the other. In a word, a true and real destroying of a
thing, imports more then a mere difference in circumstance and respect.
Seeing then that sacrifice imports a true and real destroying of the thing
sacrificed, and that there cannot be any true and real destroying of the body
of Christ in the Mass, except we will say he is there verily slain, it
follows that unless we will say that Christ is verily slain, there cannot
be avouched any true and real sacrifice of the Mass. That the Answ. will not
grant in any wise. Therefore consequently he must forgo his sacrifice. The mad
Jesuit could not tell what to say to this point, and yet was resolved to say
somewhat. He saw it faulty which his fellows had set down, and yet neither
was he able to resolve the matter so but that he is overthrown by his own
grounds. And therefore he speaks warely with Arbitror, I suppose, as fearing
least he himself should be taken tardy. I marvel that he being at Rome, so
near the Pope the Oracle of the Church who pronounces without error from his
consistory chair, could not obtain of him the certain and undoubted truth of
this matter, but must thus feed men with his own vain ghesses and supposals.
The truth is, neither the Pope himself nor both his Seminaries of Rhemes and
Rome do know what to determine of this point, and should not we be wise men to
believe them as touching a sacrifice, of which they themselves are not agreed
how it is done or wherein it does consist?

But the nullity of this fained and counterfeit sacrifice I further showed
before by answering the objection concerning the Fathers often speech of
sacrifice. For I declared that they themselves plainly expound themselves not
to mean any true and real sacrifice properly so called, but only a mystery,
a sacrament, a resemblance, a remembrance of a sacrifice, as their own words
alleged do testify. To this he says that those testimonies do prove that
there is a commemoration indeed of Christ's death and sufferings, but not that
they do not in their sacrifice really and indeed offer his body. Then he
tells me full wisely what difference there is beetwixt us and them; that we
say; there is a memory of Christ himself as being absent; and they say; there
is a memory of his one only sacrifice, that is, of his death. Herein he says
lies the narrow issue to put a difference betwixt Christ's death and Christ
himself, importing hereby that there is a remembrance of Christ's death in the
Mass, and besides that a true and real offering of Christ himself. This he
tells me is the state of the question, which we always start from and will
not see. Where I may say of him as S. Austen said of the Heretic: August.
co^r. aduer. legis and prophe. lib. 1. cap. 23.
Quam eleganter sibi videtur iste verba discutere atque discernere, nesciens
quid loquatur. How trimly does this man seem to himself to sifte and
discern words and speeches, and knows not what he says. For first where
he says that their sacrifice is only to commemorate the death of Christ once
past, he crosses his own assertion. For if they only commemorate the death
of Christ, then they do not really offer him. If they do really offer him,
they do not only commemorate his death. Secondly he says that there needs
not now any new oblation or sacrifice for sin after Christ's death already
past, because his death is still sufficient and available to take away sin,
and yet he adds, that the same death of Christ gives force and virtue to
their sacrifice, which they say is a sacrifice propitiatory to take away sin.
If there need no other sacrifice for sin after Christ's death, how does
his death give force and virtue to their sacrifice for sin? Belike he would
have us to understand, that their sacrifice is but a mere fancy and no
sacrifice in deed. Surely it is folly Vigil. cont. Eutych. lib. 4.
as Vigilius says. For a man to go about to refute that which withal he is
proved not to deny. Thirdly where he says, that we would have the Sacrament a
remembrance of Christ himself whereas they intend it of his death, he shows
himself to be too much delighted with idle talk. For if he have but common
sense he may understand by that that I said unto him, that we use the Sacrament
entirely as a remembrance of Christ's death, and so defend it against their
counterfaite and imagined real sacrifice. Fourthly he says again, we are
commanded beside the memory of Christ's death to offer the same death in a
sacrifice to God, and yet after he says, it is only to be recorded, figured
and represented. But to pass over these overthwart and cross fancies of
brai^sicke and unstable heads which confound themselves in their own speeches,
and taking upon them to be 1. Tim. 1. 7.
the only Doctors of the Law, yet understand not what they speak nor whereof
they affirm: Let us come to the state of the question which he sets down,
namely whether beside the memory of Christ's death and passion, there be in the
Mass a true and real offering or sacrificing of the body and blood of Christ.
In which point we have dalied maruailously all this while, and have been
greatly too blame for going so wide from the question proposed. For the
question has been whether the body and blood of Christ be verily and in deed
offered or sacrificed in the Mass, or not: and we have still very directly
proved, that the body and blood of Christ is not verily and indeed offered or
sacrificed in the Mass; that there is not any sacrifice done for sin in the
Mass truly and properly so called: that the Mass is an abominable
sacrilege, and wicked profaning of the Sacrament of Christ. For first if they
will defend a sacrifice, they must defend it by the institution of Christ. But
let it be resolved what a sacrifice is, and what is there in the institution
of Christ that gives so much as any shadow of a sacrifice? Bellar. tom. 2. de
Missa. lib. 1. cap. 2.
To a true sacrifice, says Bellarmine and that truly, is required that that
which is offered to God in sacrifice, be verily destroyed, that is, be so
changed as that it cease to be (not only in use but in substance) that that it
was before. But what is there in the action of Christ answerable to this
condition of a sacrifice? Is there any man so mad as to say that the body of
Christ was there verily destroyed? or is there any show of any such matter? it
is more then senseless to imagine it? Now it has been showed before what a
srurre the Jesuit keeps to uphold the sacrifice of the Mass together with
this definition, and yet all in vain. Moreover where may we have it assured
unto us that Christ did sacrifice himself twice? The Scripture precisely
tells us* that he offered himself but once, which was by his death. Heb. 7.
27.
He needed not daily to offer up sacrifice, for that did he once when he
offered up himself. Cap. 9. 12.
By his own blood entered he in once into the holy place. Cap. 9. 26.
In the end of the world he has appeared once to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself. Cap. 9. 27.
As it is appointed to men to die once: so Christ was once offered to take away
the sins of many. cap. 10. 10.
We are sanctified by the offering of Christ's body once. cap. 10. 12.
This man having offered one sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at the right
hand of God. This is all which the Scripture testifies of the offering of
Christ. Now if Christ did offer himself but once, and that once was by death
upon his Cross, then it follows that he did not offer himself at the
institution of the Sacrament, and therefore commended not unto us any sacrifice
to be done therein. If they will say that he was but once offered in that
manner, namely with bloodshed, but vnbloudly he offered himself beside and so
is offered still, they deal presumptuously against the holy Ghost, and use
that sauciness with the word of God, which no man may be bold to do with the
laws of men. For if it hold in the laws of men that Regula iuris. Non est
distinguendum, vbi non distinguit lex.
no man may distinguish where the law it self does not warrant his
distinction, much more ought it to hold in the laws and words of God. Now
seeing the holy Ghost by a general word comprehending all manner of offering
has determined the offering of Christ's body only to once, who is he that
dare give check unto his word, and say: It is a lie: for he was offered twice,
once blouddily on the Cross, another time vnblouddily in the Sacrament, and so
remains to be offered daily and infinite times in a day unto the end of the
world. Especially seeing the Apostle urges this again and again for a great
and maine difference betwixt the sacrifices of the old Testament, and the
sacrifice of the new, that the Priests there offered often, but Heb. 7. 27.
Oecume. ibid Heb. 10. 11. 12.
Christ offered one only sacrifice and that but once; even in this respect
opposing this once offering not only to the general sacrifice that was made
cap. 9. 7.
once a year, but also to the particular sacrifices that were offered cap. 7.
27. and 10. 11.
every day, giving to understand that neither generally nor particularly,
neither in one manner nor other, the body of Christ was to be offered any more
but only once. He shows the greatness of this sacrifice, says Ambros. in
Heb. 7.
S. Ambrose, which being thus offered suffices for ever. For this sacrifice
was not daily to be offered, etc. but this man is of such power or worth that
being once offered in the sacrifice of his flesh, it should not be needful
for any of the faithful to offer for him any more. It sufficed, Chrysostom. in
Heb. 7. ho^. 13.
says Chrysostom, though it were but one, and but once offered. Now this
difference of the sacrifices of the two Testaments is utterly taken away, if by
any distinction of the manner of offering we will avouch y^ the sacrifice of the
new Testament is often offered as were the sacrifices of the old. Where I
cannot omit to note the drunken speech of the Rhemists as touching this point,
set down for safeguard of their sacrifice, who Rhem. An^ not. Heb. 10. 11
repeat often, as they say, that the Apostles reason and speeches of many
Priests and often sacrificing concern the sacrifices of the law only, unto
which he opposes Christ's sacrifice and Priesthood, and speaks no word of
or against the sacrifice of the new Testament, which is the sacrifice of
Christ's own Priesthood, and is daily done vnbloudily by the Priests, meaning
hereby their sacrifice of the Mass. I term it justly a drunken speech: For
seeing they are forced by the evidence of the text to grant that the Apostle in
that respect opposes the sacrifice and priesthood of Christ against the old
sacrifices and priestood of the law, which opposition cannot stand but only
thus, that there were many priests, here but one: there often offering, here
but once: what do they but talk like drunken men they know not what, when
notwithstanding in the very same respect they confound the Priesthood and
sacrifice of Christ with the Priesthood and sacrifices of the law, so that as
there were many priests, so here are many priests; as there was often offering,
so is here also. He affirms indeed there many Priests, here but one; there
often offering, here but once; and therefore leaves no place for any bastard
distinction of any manner whereby the body of Christ may be said to be often
offered. Furthermore against this devised manner we are instructed by that
which is written. Heb. 9. 22.
Without shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins. For hereof we
gather that if the Mass be a propitiation of sin, then there must be
shedding of blood in the Mass. If there be shedding of blood in the Mass, it
is not an vnblouddy sacrifice, and therefore the assertion of an vnblouddy
sacrifice in the Mass for the propitiation of sin is evidently contrary to
the word of God. Now the blood of Christ was shed for sin but only once, and
that once upon the Cross. Therefore Christ did offer himself for sin but
only once and that upon the Cross, and therefore nether did nor does offer
himself in the Sacrament. Again when we read that Heb. 9. 27. 28
as it is appointed unto men to die once, so Christ was once offered to take
away sins: we are given to understand that as well it may be said that men
to who^ it is appointed to die once may afterward in another manner die
oftentimes, as that Christ who is said in the like sort to be offered for
sin but only once, should yet in another manner be offered for sin times
without number, so long as the world stands. It is folly and madness to say
the one; it is madness and blasphemy to affirm the other. And so much the
more for that it is plainly testified unto us, that therefore he needs not
to be often offered because Heb. 10. 14.
by one oblation he has for ever made perfect them that are sanctified. Which
making perfect is declared in the words following to be intended of the
forgiveness of sins. Now if Christ need daily to be offered for the
forgiveness of sins either generally or particularly or howsoever, then he did
not by one oblation or offering of himself make us perfect in that behalf. If
he did perfectly work remission of sins by one offering of himself, then he
needs not thenceforth to be offered for sin, and he that affirms the
offering of him, does frustrate his death and deny the perfection of his former
offering. And therefore the Apostle infers as has been said before, ver.
18.
Where remission of sins is, there is no more offering for sin: As if he
should say: All sacrifice for sin is vain after remission of sins once
obtained, which is the end of sacrifice for sin. Remission of sins is
perfectly wrought and obtained by the once offering of Christ upon the Cross;
therefore after the once offering of Christ upon the Cross, all offering or
sacrifice for sin is vain, and therefore it is none at all. As for that
which the Answ. excepteth, that remission of sins does come by Baptism,
repentance, prayer, etc. And yet we do not thereby exclude Christ's death;
intending thereby as it seems that it follows not that Christ's death is
excluded, though remission of sins be affirmed to be wrought by the sacrifice
of the Mass it is a frivolous and vain shifte. For what comparison is there
betwixt the sacrifice which it self is defended to be a propitiation for
sin, and repentance, faith, prayer, baptism, which do not themselves work
forgiveness of sins, but only serve us to receive forgiveness of sins,
wrought only by the death and bloudshedding of Jesus Christ? As hunger
provoke a man to desire meat, so repentance stirs him to seek
forgiveness of sins. As a man craves meat to relieve his hunger, so prayer
craves the forgiveness of sins. As in a vessel meat is set before a man
and offered unto him, so God in the word and Sacraments though in other sort,
sets before us and offers unto us the effect of the blood of Christ to the
forgiveness of sins. As the hand and mouth receive the meat to the
satisfying of hunger and comfort of the body, so faith receives the benefit
of Christ's blood to the forgiveness of sins. But as neither the desire of
meat, nor the craving for meat, nor the vessel wherein meat is offered, nor
the hand and mouth that receives the meat have themselves any virtue to feed
the body, but the force thereof belongs only to the meat; so neither
repentance, nor prayer, nor the sacraments, nor faith, have any virtue
themselves of the remission of sins, but only are either occasions of
seeking, or means of offering and receiving the death and passion of Christ,
to which only and entirely in it self is to be attributed the forgiveness of
our sins. Neither is it any other but a fantastical toy which the Answ.
imagines that these by an influence, as he speaks, of the passion of Christ
have in themselves the efficiency of the forgiveness of sins; in like manner
(if at least he will give me leave to express his mind by a comparison) as
the air, being warmed by the fire, warmeth the body whereunto it is applied. A
mere devise of Satan that men whilst they seek for forgiveness of sins
where it is not, may fail of it where it is, and whilst they follow after a
shadow by these devises of influence from the blood of Christ, may miss of the
substance in Jesus Christ himself. The Scripture has not taught us that
either our repentance, or prayers, or faith, or sacraments, are propitiations
for our sins, and therefore it is but a fond shifte to gather from hence any
maintenance for the propitiatory sacrifice of the Moss. I resolve therefore as
before that seeing Christ Jesus by one offering has perfected us as touching
the propitiation and atonement for our sins, there is not now remaining any
manner of offering whatsoever for propitiation of sin.

But to go somewhat further in this matter seeing they will needs have us to
believe a real offering of the body of Christ, what Priest will they appoint
us to offer the same* Forsooth under pretense that this is Council. Trident.
sessi. 6. cap. 1.
a clean offering and such as cannot be defiled by the unworthiness of him
that offers, they will have us to believe that every varlet Priest coming
blowing from the Alehouse or sweating from the stews has Christ at his beck
to bring him from Heaven every morning as often as he list to offer him up for
the forgiveness of whose sins it pleases him. But we will not believe this,
because the Scripture names unto us in this behalf but one only Priest,
which is Heb. 3. 1.
the high Priest of our profession, one which is Cap. 7. 26.
holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, made higher then the
heavens. And seeing it makes this difference betwixt the Priesthood of the law
and the Priesthood of Christ Cap. 7 26.
that the law makes men high Priests that have infirmity, but the word of the
oath makes the son who is consecrated for ever, opposing Christ the son of
God, the Priest of the new Testament to men of infirmity that were Priests by
the law, either this difference is idle and without ground, and men of
infirmity are Priests as well in the Priesthood of Christ as in the priesthood
of the law, or else al men that have infirmity, and therefore all Popish
Priests, are utterly excluded from the priesthood of Christ. Therefore as the
council of Ephesus said, so say we: Council. Ephesians. Epist. ad Nestor.
We assign not the name and office of priesthood to any other man but to
Christ. For he is made the mediator betwixt God and man, and the reconciler to
peace, offering himself a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God for us.
Whereas they say for the better countenancing of this their sacrilege, that
Rhem. Annot. Heb. 7. 23. marg.
Christ concurreth with the Priests in this action of offering up himself, they
spurn at the text of ye Scripture which tells us that Heb. 7. 27.*
Christ needs not daily to offer up sacrifice, and that he Cap. 9. 25.
is gone into Heaven to appear in the sight of God for us, not that he should
offer himself often. Nay when it says. Cap. 1. 31.
Having by himself purged our sins he sits at the right hand of the
majesty in the highest places, and again; cap. 10. 12.
This man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at
the right hand of God, expecting thenceforth till his foes be made his
footestoole: it opposes Christ's offering himself for sin to his sitting at
the right hand of God, making the one a matter of humiliation, the other of
exaltation; the one of infirmity, the other of glory. And therefore as
humiliation and infirmity stands not with exaltation and glory, so the
offering of Christ for sin stands not with his sitting at the right hand of
God the Father. This Chrysostom and Theophylact and out of them Oecumenius
have rightly observed. Oecumen. He. 7. ex chrysostom. in Heb. ^. hom. 13.
Theophyl. ibid.
When thou hear him called the high Priest, do not think that he does
still sacrifice himself for sin. For when he had done so once, he ascended
to his fathers Throne. For it belongs to the Minister and Priest to stand,
but this sitting signifies that he brought sacrifice once even his own body,
and afterward sat down to be ministered unto of the heavenly powers. So
Theodoret also: Theodor. in Hebr. 8.
What office of Priesthood does he execute who offered himself once, and does
not offer sacrifice any more? And how can it be that he should both sit and
yet execute the office of a Priest, to offer sacrifice. As it seemed strange to
them that Christ should offer himself still in sacrifice, and yet withal sit
at the right hand of God, so no less strange seems it unto us, and therefore
we cannot believe the one, because the Apostle has taught us against that to
believe the other. I will add only one place more of Saint Ambrose as
touching this point of the offering of Christ, whereby we may sufficiently
understand the meaning of the ancient Writers in the use of the same words.
Amb. Officlib. 1. cap. 48.
Now Christ is offered, says he, but as man, as receiving or suffering his
passion, and he offers himself as a Priest, that he may forgive our sins.
Here in an image or resemblance: there in truth, where as an Advocate, he
pleads for us with the Father. Where he says indeed that Christ is
offered, and offers himself; but yet as suffering his passion, which he does
not suffer really and therefore is not really offered in sacrifice, but only
in a mystery. Therefore he says he is here offered not verily and in truth,
as if his very body were here to be offered but in an image or rese^blance by
these signs which betoken his body and blood. For as Oecumenius says out of
Gregory, Oecumen. in Heb. 10.
The image contains not the truth, though it be a manifest imitation of the
truth. And therefore if the offering of Christ here on the earth be in an
image, then it is not in the very truth. As for the truth of his body and
blood, he tells us that it is not in earth but in Heaven, where he offers
himself, not by real sacrifice but by presenting continually unto his father
in our behalf that body wherein he was once sacrificed, and thereby as by a
continual sacrifice making intercession to God for us: which he opposes by
pleading for us as an Advocate with the Father. And therefore does Oecumenius
expound Oecumen. in Heb. 8.
that sacrificing of himself in Heaven to be nothing else but his making
intercession for us. For Heb. 9. 24.
his appearing in the sight of God for us, and sitting with the Father clothed
with our flesh, is as Theophylact notes, Theophy. in Heb. 7.
a kind of intercession to God in our behalf, as if the flesh it self did
entreat God. Therefore our offering of Christ stands only in this that by
those mysteries of his body and blood which he has ordained for commemoration
of his death, and by our faith and prayers we do as it were present unto God
the Father, his son Jesus Christ sitting at the right hand of God in that
body wherein he was crucified for us, craving for his sake as thus crucified
for us y^ forgiveness of all our sin. So Christ's offering of himself is
nothing else but his continual presence in the sight of God for us, in that
body which he gave to death for our sins, by which even as effectually as by
vocal words he is said Heb. 12. 24.
to speak good things for us, and to entreat God that he will be merciful
unto us. And this undoubtedly is the vtermost that the fathers meant in all
those speeches of offering and sacrifice wherewith the Papists would abuse us.
To be short, the evidence of Scripture is against all sacrifice for sin. They
bring no evidence of Scripture for it. Some places indeed they allege, but
in no other manner then the old Heretics were wont to allege the scriptures
for defense of their heresies. There is nothing to be seen in the places
themselves to that purpose for which they are alleged, but we must rest only
upon those constructions and collections which it pleases them to make
thereof. Against the evidence of scripture they except with a blind
distinction that has no ground from the holy Scripture, and that which is
there generally denied, they restrain without any warrant to a particular
manner. Christ is not to be offered after his once offering as the scripture
teaches. True, say they, not in that manner as he was once offered, but in
another manner he may. We require it out of the scripture. Otherwise we may have
all assertions of faith and religion impiously deluded. For with as great
reason when we say there is but one God, it may be answered that in that manner
as he is God there is but one, but in another manner there are many: when we
say there is but one redeemer, it may be answered that in that manner as he is
redeemer, there is but one, but in another manner, there be many: nay when it is
said, that Christ died but once, as it is said he was offered but once, why may
it not as well be said, that in that manner as he died once, he dies no more,
but in another manner he dies often, as that he is offered no more indeed in
that manner as he was offered before, but in another manner he is offered often.
Therefore this licentious and presumed distinction is joined with impiety
against God, and serves to give a mock to all the words of God, and for this
cause is to be detested of us, beside that it is, as has been before showed,
manifestly contradicted by the word of God. Much more might here be added, to
show the villainy and abomination of the sacrifice of the Mass. But it shall
suffice for my purpose to have added this to that that I had said before; where
notwithstanding this matter was manifestly enough declared to satisfy the
Answ. had he been as careful to know the truth, as he is wilful to continue
in his error. For do not the places which I alleged before out of the
Fathers, exclude all real offering and sacrificing of Christ? I will once
again set them down particularly as thorns in the Answ. eyes, who being in
his own conscience overcome with them, answers nothing distinctly, but
seeks to go away in a mist of general words, and because he can say nothing
to the purpose, thinks it enough to say that none of these testimonies makes
against their sacrificing of Christ. A pretty kind of answering and very
agreeable to that that I alleged before out of the Index. But first Chrysostom.
^ Ambros in Heb. ^0.
Chrysostom and Ambrose purposely speaking of the sacrifice of the church, say
thus: We offer not another sacrifice but always the same, or rather we work
the remembrance of a sacrifice. It is absurd to use correction of speech where
the truth of y^ thing is fully answerable already to the proper signification
of the words. For correction of speech is a reuersing of that which is already
set down, as being hardly or not so fully or fitly spoken, and therefore
puts in steed thereof that which is more fit and convenient to be spoken.
And if these men had thought that in proper speech it is true that Christ is
indeed offered or sacrificed, to what purpose should they, having mentioned the
offering of him, adioyne thus; Or rather we work the remembrance of a
sacrifice, as to mollify that which was before hardly and improperly spoken.
Surely it had behooved the Answ. for his honesties sake to show some reason why
these men not talking of the death of Christ, but expressly of the sacrifice
which it is said the church did offer, and having mentioned the offering of
sacrifice, and the offering of Christ should so recall their words, and in
effect say; Nay, we offer not a sacrifice indeed, but rather perform the
remembrance of a sacrifice. But what can be more plain then that of
Theophylact? Theophyl. in Heb. 10.
We offer him the same always, or rather we make a remembrance of the offering
of him, as if he were now offered or sacrificed. Which words as if he were now
offered, make it as clear as the sun-light, that Christ is not now really and
indeed offered in sacrifice. For what reasonable man would ever say, as if he
were now offered, if he were persuaded that Christ is now indeed and verily
offered. To this purpose the words of Eusebius also are very pregnant: Eusebius.
de demonstr Euan. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Christ, says he, offered a sacrifice to his father, and ordained that we
should offer a remembrance thereof unto God in steed of a sacrifice. Then
Christ ordained not another sacrifice to be offered as Eusebius should have
said if he had been a Papist, but in steed of a sacrifice, in steed, I say, of
a sacrifice he ordained unto us to make a remembrance of his sacrifice.
Certainly these men if they had believed any such sacrifice as the Papists now
take upon them to practice, could not have omitted some plain declaration
thereof, being in ye places whence I alleged these words so directly and fully
occasioned thereto. The same I say much more of Theodoret, who so expressly
proposes the question of offering sacrifice. Theodor. in Heb. ^.
For if, says he, the priesthood which is by the law be ended, and the priest
after the order of Melchisedec have offered a sacrifice, and have made that
other sacrifices be not necessary, why do the priests of the new Testament
work a mystical Liturgy or sacrifice? Where if he would have answered as a
Papist, he must have said that they did indeed offer a very true sacrifice,
properly so called of the very body and blood of Christ, and that this
derogateth not from the sacrifice of Christ upon his Cross, but serves to
apply the same unto us, and that all the speeches of the Apostle against
sacrificing do touch only the sacrifices of the Jews. But he as unacquainted
with these Popish devises answers simply and plainly: It is clear to them
that are instructed in divine matters, that we do not offer another sacrifice,
but do perform a remembrance of that one and healthful sacrifice. For this
commandment the Lord himself gave us, saying, Do this in remembrance of me,
that by beholding the figures we might call to mind the sufferings that he
undertook for us, etc. By which words he plainly shows us, that after that
one and healthful sacrifice which Christ offered for us, which he expresses
by the sufferings of Christ, the priests of the new Testament do not now offer
another sacrifice but perform only a remembrance of that former sacrifice, by
those mysteries which Christ has left to be celebrated in remembrance thereof.
Let S. Austen yet make this more plain, saying that August. cont. faust^m
Manich. li. 2^. cap. 21.
the flesh and blood of Christ's sacrifice was in his passion given in very
truth: after his ascension is celebrated by a Sacrament of remembrance. He
makes these diverse each from other, to be given in very truth, and to be
celebrated by a Sacrament of remembrance, applying ye one to his passion, the
other to the Sacrament. Now if to be given in very truth belong to the
Sacrament also, then S. Austen speaks vainly and idly, and makes a
distinction without any difference. But now opposing one to the other, in very
truth and by a Sacrament of remembrance, he shows that in the Sacrament of
remembrance Christ is not really and truly sacrificed. The Answ. thought good
to say nothing to that which I urged concerning this opposition. The other
place of August. ep. 23.
Austen to Bonifacius, I opened also somewhat unto him, and fully beforehand
prevented him of his refuge in putting difference betwixt Christ's death and
Christ himself: and yet forsooth all this makes nothing against him. The best
kind of bad answering when there is no good answer to serve the turn. But S.
Austen in that place notes the offering of Christ Semel in seipso singulis
diebu in sacramento.
in himself to have been once, and that the offering which is said to be every
day is in a Sacrament or mystery, and not in himself. And to show the cause
why he is said in a Sacrament or mystery to be offered every day, whereas in
himself he was but once offered, he says, that because Sacraments have the
resemblance of those things whereof they are Sacraments, therefore they
commonly take unto them the names of the same things. Even as good Friday is
said to be the day of Christ's passion, and Sunday to be the day of Christ's
resurrection, not because Christ suffers every good Friday or rises again
every Sunday, but because these days resemble and in course of time are
answerable to those days wherein Christ suffered and rose again. So therefore
Christ is said to be offered every day, not because there is any real
sacrificing of him every day, but because his once offering of himself is
daily in the Sacrament figured and remembered. And this I showed before out of
the gloss of the Canon law: De cons^^ra. did. 2. cap. se mel. in glosla.
Christ is offered, that is, the offering or sacrificing of Christ is
represented, and a memory made of his passion. Which words the Answ. falsely
and deceitfully extenuateth, as if they served no further but only to note a
representation of Christ's death and passion which he yields unto. Whereas the
words serve to expound what Austen and Prosper meant when they said that
Christ is offered or sacrificed in a Sacrament, and by the same exposition
diminish the credit of the Roomish sacrifice. For if these words, The offering
or sacrificing of Christ is represented and there is a memory made of his
passion, be the true meaning of these words, Christ is offered or sacrificed,
as the gloss sets down, what can be more evident to him that has eyes to
see, then that Austen and Prosper and the other Fathers when they mention
sacrifice as touching the Lords Supper, do not thereby mean that Christ is
indeed and verily offered, but only that his sacrifice is represented. The
collection that I made before and even now noted again out of that place of S.
Austen, stands firm and sure to this purpose. Namely that there is
difference with Austen betwixt being offered in himself, and being offered in a
Sacrament or mystery, and that the name of offering or sacrificing when it is
referred to the Sacrament is used not ex rebus ipsis, for the truth of the
thing it self, but for the resemblance of the thing, and therefore imports
not the offering of Christ in himself. But this the Answ. would not see or
take notice of, because he should have had nothing to write of this matter,
being thereby excluded already from all that he has now said* For his shift is
^o put difference betwixt Christ's death and Christ himself, and to say that
Christ although he die no more, yet is verily sacrificed in himself: and my
collection was before direct to the contrary that Christ is not now sacrificed
in himself. So that he shows himself a stout disputer to let the premises
go, and deny the conclusion. Now the neck of his sacrifice being thus broken
in that it is proved that after the death of Christ there is no more offering
for sin, that Christ is not now offered in himself, but only the sacrificing
of his body on the cross, celebrated by a Sacrament of remembrance which yet
is called by the name of sacrifice, because sacraments are usually called by
the names of those things whereof they are Sacraments, and we therein call to
mind and show Christ's death and offering of himself as if he were then
presently offered, yet he, setting a good face upon the matter when nothing
else will help him, tells me that these things touch him no more then the man
in the Moon, and bids me to learn the state of the question better, not to
roue at random but to aim at the mark, and to put up in my purse all those
testimonies that I did allege, etc. An easy and soone-made answer or rather
an unshamefast and wretched shift. But the young Crab must go as the old Crab
does teach him, and he must give such answers as other his forefathers have
bin wont to do.

P. Spence. Sect. 10.
Wherefore all the premises considered, whersoeuer all or any of your
alleged places do sound a remembrance, memorial, and representation of a
sacrifice, and such like words, take this for a full answer, that they are
memories, and remembrances, representations, and if you will figures too of the
sacrifice of Christ. But what sacrifice? the sacrifice of his death, the
sacrifice of the Cross, which we do but represent, for die any more he now
cannot. And because we do not say that in our Mass Christ is crucified and
dies: you do us wrong so to burden us, which in no Catholics writing you
can show: and therefore in pressing these authories against us, you touch us no
more then the man in the Moon; but you wrankle two ways, both in interpreting
Sacrificium, here in these places to be Eucharistia, where it is meant of the
offering the same in a sacrifice, and not of it as it is absolutely a Sacrament
only: ^s though the Sacrament were but a remembrance; figure, or
representation. And also secondly herein you wrangle, for that you would bear
us in hand, the said authorities to mean, the thing represented, figured or
recorded to be Christ's body, where they only call our sacrifice a remembrance,
figure, and representation of Christ's passion and death upon the Cross, only
once done and now never more to be done or rei^erated, but only to be recorded,
fygured and represented. Learn better hereafter the state of your question,
and roue not at random but aim at the mark: and remember you fight not
herein with us, but you skirmish with your adversaries in the^ire* with
arguments fained, forged, and imagined of your selves.

Put A pattern how to answer any thing easily and without any study.
up therefore in your purse all your places of Chrysostom, Ambrose, The^phylact,
Augustine, Cyprian, Aug. ad Bona^acium, the Gloss de consecrati^^e, Cypria^
again and Prosper, Alexander the Pope, and again Chrysostom and H^erome and
Gregory, etc. For they say nothing for you* but what we confess, except you
think us so mad, to think that we use to crucify, and sley Christ in our
Churches sacrifice* an imagination fit for your merry gentleman the Athenian.
We must also tell you, that you ouerreach in writing, that the death and
passion of Christ is the whole (as much to say as the only) matter and
substance (so you term it) of this mystery. Christ's real body is the
matter, substance, and thing offered in our sacrifice really, but his passion
is with all offered but as in a Commemoration. So that our sacrifice has Nay
it has many things more then over Christ or any of his Apostles taught ^wo
things.
two things, Christ's body really, and his passion in a mystery only* and a
memory Dolosus versa^ur in generalibus, I wish you to speak more distinctly.
We grant with you his passion, but that only represented; we have also his
body and blood and that verily present, verily offered. Else all that you can
infer of the aforesaid authorities, we also confess so far as gladly as you
do: Saving that whereas you sa^e, that it is no ma^^ell though the Fathers
called this mystery a sacrifice* For they meant it was so called, but was not
so indeed, that we yield not unto. For we say the Fathers called it a
sacrifice, because they meant as they spoke and no where deny it, and we could
show if there were any weight in your reasons to press us so far, where the
Fathers give reasons why it is a sacrifice, because A Roomish devise which
there is never knew.
the bloody sacrifice of the Cross* and death are offered and sacrificed man
unbloody sacrifice; Ch^^st himself being verily offered, his death only
recorded with thanksgiving: and by this unbloody sacrifice of Christ's very
body, the virtue of that bloody sacrifice is daily applied to the faithful.
And therefore where you ask whether Christ indeed does Either he really
suffere^h and d^eth in the Mass, or else he is not really offered. The Fathers
speak of both alike, as I showed.
really suffer in the Churches sacrifice, or sweat water and blood, or be
condemned or nailed to the Cross, they are idle fantastical questions. But
to answer you, we do not think so. Be of good cheer man: we do not think
so, we never thought said or Doct. Allen has written that Christ i^ verily
slain in the Mass
wrote so. Yet we think (and till you come nearer the mark we will still so
think) that vnbloodily, but really we sacrifice and offer the same Christ's
very true body and blood, to the whole Trinity for all people, that once did
suffer, and never but once all the aforenamed torments. But that which you
infer for a conclusion, is most vain and false, which is this. The passion is
that we offer, the passion is offered, not in the truth of the thing, but in a
signifying mystery. Ergo the Churches sacrifice is not verily a sacrifice, but
in a mystery, for besides the form being negative in the third figure is
against art, the Mayor as I said before is false, if you mean the passion
only. For I told you we have in our sacrifice his passion in a memory, his
body really. If you mean not passion only, then the conclusion and the
premises hang together by very loose points. Briefly Christ's passion is
offered in a mystery only: his body in sacrifice verily. The first your
authorities prove, and we confess: the latter part, no Father ever denied, no
not the most eldest and ancient primative Church, and it is so true, that
Calvin sticked not to condemn all the Fathers, since the Apostles of Iudaisme
in that very point, for An impudent and unshamefast untruth. See the answer.
establishing a very sacrifice of the Church, so impudent a thing he took it
to be, to cast a mist upon the Fathers words in that point, prove the latter
point, the first we confess.

R. Abbot. 10.
HEre we may see how the poor man makes hard shift to credit himself by
seeming to say somewhat, when indeed he says nothing at all. For first he
tells me that wheresoever I read of a remembrance, memorial, and
representation of sacrifice, I must tak^ it for a full answer, that thereby is
meant a remembrance and representation of Christ's death. Not for a full, but
for a foolish answer, say I. For to what other purpose can he imagine those
words alleage^ by us, but to avouch the remembrance of that one and only true
sacrifice of Christ's death against their defense of a continual and oftentimes
repeated sacrifice? And seeing the Fathers speaking of their offering of
Christ, do recall and correct those terms as improperly spoken, and put in
place thereof that they rather celebrate the remembrance of his sacrifice, as
if he were now sacrificed indeed, we conclude hereof, neither can the Answ.
a^oyd it, that they simply deny the true and real offering of the body of
Christ, as before is the wed. Secondly, he says that I wrangle in interpreting
Sacrifice here in th^se places to be the Eucharist, whereas it is meant of the
offering of the same in a sacrifice. But indeed he says he knows not what.
For immediately before he expounds Sacrifice in these places to be meant of
the death of Christ, and how comes it to pass now that it must be understood
of offering the Eucharist in a sacrifice? But if his pen slipped, and he put in
(these places) meaning it of others, where I say the Fathers call the Eucharist
a sacrifice, that which he says is but Petitio principij, and a begging of
that to be yielded for truth, which I have auowed and proved to be false, The
Eucharist I understand to be the celebration of the Sacrament with thankeful
remembrance of the death of Christ. This I say the Fathers do often call
sacrifice, because the matter thereof is the sacrifice of Christ's death, not
because Christ is therein verily sacrificed. Thirdly I wrangle forsooth again
in bearing him in hand that the authorities alleged do mean the thing
represented to be Christ's body, whereas they understand it to be Christ's
passion, and death upon the Cross. Where without doubt either the Answ. wits
or his honesty failed him very much. For he would have it seem that we intend
not by the places of the fathers a representing of Christ's passion and death,
but merely of his body, and yet he himself justifies the contrary straight
ways after. For within some few lines he alleges my words directed to
those places of the fathers, that the death and passion of Christ is the whole
matter and substance of this mystery. To which I added also diverse more words
to that purpose, concluding that nothing is here remembered, but Christ's
sacrificing himself upon ye Cross. For although we say that we represent the
body and blood of Christ whereof yet there was nothing spoken in this place,
yet as afterward I told him, we represent the body no otherwise but as
broken, and the blood no otherwise but as shed for us. Notwithstanding here,
though having not so much as a syllable whereto he may refer this speech, he
tells me that I wrangle in pretending the thing represented to be ye body of
Christ, whereas it is his death and passion; as if I excluded the representation
of Christ's death and passion, which by his own confession I make the whole
matter and purport of the Sacrament. But this draffe he thought good enough,
wherewith to feed his corner companions, and to persuade them that he had
dealt very acutely and wittely in answering that that had been said unto him.

He tells me again that I ouer-reach in saying that the death and passion of
Christ is the whole substance of this mystery. He should have said that I
come short, because I say not so much as he would have me to say. For, says
he, there are two things in our sacrifice; a mystical offering of the passion
of Christ, and a real offering of the body of Christ. But neither scripture nor
father ^uer commended to our practice any other sacrifice of Christ, but only
the mystical offering of his passion. Neither do any of the authorities of
the fathers so much tossed and tumbled by the Papists enforce any other, as I
alleged the last time, and the Answ. says nothing to disprooue it. Surely
wonder it is, if the matter were so clear as these men would persuade us, that
never any one of the fathers speaking so often of the sacrifice would once note
this point expressly and distinctly that they had both a mystical offering of
the passion of Christ and a real offering of his body besides: no not when the
maine drifte of their speech pressed them so to do, if they had believed any
such thing. But they knew it not at all, and therefore no marvel that they
said nothing of it. For where as the Answ. tells me that the Fathers give
reasons why it is a sacrifice indeed, namely because the bloody sacrifice of
the cross and death of Christ is offered and sacrificed in a^ unbloody
sacrifice of his body, he does lewdly belie the fathers in fathering upon them
this new and Popish phrase of speech, wherewith the fathers were utterly
unacquainted. For although they sometimes call the Lords Supper an vnblouddy
sacrifice, as they do also the other Oecumen. in Heb. 13.
service and prayers of the Church to put a difference betwixt the Jewish
carnal and the christian spiritual sacrifices, as also betwixt the sacrifice
of Christ upon his cross, and the sacrifice of the church clem. Apost. consti.
li. 6. ca. 23. Eusebius. de vita constant. lib. 4. cap. 45. Council. Constanti. 6.
ca. 32.
calling the one blouddy as being properly a sacrifice, the other vnblouddy as
being so but improperly and only in a mystery (as the place of Clemens,
whosoever he was, does plainly show, affirming it to be celebrated by signs
of the body and blood of Christ, not by the body it self, and that of Oecumen.
in Heb. 5.
Oecumenius out of Photius, that Christ first offered an vnblouddy sacrifice
and then afterward he offered his own body also, manifestly declaring that
the vnblouddy sucrifice was not indeed the offering of y^ body of Christ) yet
to offer the blouddy sacrifice of Christ's death in an vnblouddy sacrifice of
his body to apply unto us the virtue of his bloody sacrifice, is a misshapen
monster, lately begotten in the time of Antichristian desolation, and such as
the ancient fathers never dreamed of. And wisely did he deal to tell me that he
could show much, and yet to show nothing at all.

Now he tells me again here that, which for enlarging his answer, he has
so often idly and vainly repeated that they are not of opinion that Christ
suffers or is slain in their sacrifice, which he says is an imagination
fit for my merry gentleman the Athenian. But surely it will fall to Doctor
Allen to be that merry gentleman. For he in great sadness tells us
concerning Christ in their sacrifice; That he is Allen. de Eucharist. sacrif.
cap 1^. Vere mactatur.
verily slain and offered in sacrifice; and I hope the Answ. will take Doct.
Allen for a Catholic, though he say that never any Catholic did so write.
But let that pass as an unsavory dream of a drousie Cardinal; the Answ. will
not say so. Yet he may as well prove by the sayings of the Fathers, ^ that
Christ dies and is crucified again in this mystery, as that he is verily
sacrificed, seeing that, as I showed him, they no less plainly affirm the one
then they do the other: But the letter is not to be forced in the one. What
reason then so much to force it in the other? Nay because they teach us that
the passion and death of Christ is the sacrifice which we offer, and the
passion of Christ is here to be understood not in the truth of the thing, but
in a signifying mystery, as S. Austen speaks, it follows that the sacrifice
which we offer, as touching y^ present act must be understood a sacrifice not
in the truth of the thing but in a signifying mystery. But here the Answ.
would saine lift me up before I am down, telling me first that mine argument
is against art, because the form is negative in the third figure. But the man
without doubt has forgotten his Logic. For what proposition of all these is
negative, I marvel? Mary this forsooth: The passion of Christ is here to be
understood not in the truth of the thing but in a signifying mystery, and so
the conclusion. But if I should say to him that Campian and his fellows were
executed not for religion but for treason, would he not take it that I spoke
very affirmatively that they were executed only for treason. And why then
could he not conceive, that when I said; The passion of Christ is to be
understood (as touching the Sacrament) not in the truth of the thing, but in a
signifying mystery, I affirmed this, that the passion of Christ is to be
understood only in a signifying mystery, and the conclusion answerable
thereto. His Logic rule of the negative particle Post copulam, would have
taught him to understand both the propositions affirmatively, as I set them
down: and then the form shall not be negative in the third figure. But this
being made good, the Mayor or first proposition he says is false, if I mean
it as I must, that the passion of Christ is the whole sacrifice. For there is
as he says beside the memory of the passion of Christ, a real offering also
of the body of Christ. The Mayor is the saying of Cyprian; as I alleged:
Cypri. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
The passion of Christ is the sacrifice which we offer. Yea, but he says not
that it is the whole sacrifice, says the Answerer. He says not so indeed, but
yet his words import no less to any man's understanding that is not froward.
But if that be not hence assured, yet was it otherwise manifestly enough proved
by the words of Prosper, though the Answ. would not see it, because it should
have prevented him of his answer Prosper. in Psalm. 12^.
What propitiation is there, says Prosper, but sacrifice, and what sacrifice
but the killing or death of that lamb which has taken away the sins of the
world? Now if there be no sacrifice of propitiation but only the death of the
lamb^, that is, the passion of Christ, as Prosper teaches, then the passion of
Christ is the whole sacrifice that we offer. Let him add hereunto the words of
S. Austen; who tells us thus: August con. aduer. leg. and proph. l. 1. c. 18
For the singular and only true sacrifice the blood of Christ was shed for us.
The bloodshedding of Christ then is the only true sacrifice; therefore there is
no other true sacrifice of Christ himself. The bloodshedding of Christ is only
represented in the Sacrament by a signifying mystery, and not performed in the
truth of the thing. Therefore the whole sacrifice that we offer is a
representation only of a sacrifice by a signifying mystery, not any real
sacrificing in the truth of the thing. Let Justinius Martyr further justify
this matter* who avouches plainly Iushin. Martyr. dial. cum Tryph.
That prayers and thanksgiving are the only sacrifices that Christians have
received to make: that by their dry and moist nourishment (that is, the
Sacrament or elements of bread and wine) they may be admonished of those things
which God the son of God has suffered for them. The Sacrament then of dry
and moist nourishment, that is, the Lords supper, contemeth no other
sacrifices but prayers and thanksgiuings, neither have Christians received to
use therein any other sacrifice, as Justinius Martyr expressly defines. Then it
follows that Christians have not received that which Papists teach, to make
any real offering of the body of Christ, but only an Eucharistical offering of
ye passion of Christ, in calling to mind by the use of this holy Sacrament
what God the son of God has suffered for them. Basil also witnesses the
same, writing upon these words of the prophecy of Esaias: Basil. in Esaias. cap. 1.
What have I to do with the multitude of your offerings, etc. God, says he,
rejecting multitude of offerings, requires of us one; namely that every man
reconcile and offer himself to God, yielding himself by reasonable service a
living sacrifice, offering to God the sacrifice of praise. For the multitude of
the sacrifices of the law is taken away. One is approved in the end of the
world, once offered for the abolishing of sin. For the lamb of God has
taken away the sin of the world, offering himself a sacrifice of a sweet
savor, etc. Where let the Answ. note, that in steed of many sacrifices for
sin, there is in the end of the world but one, and that one but once offered
for the utter abolishing of sin; so that there remains now no* other
srcrifice for us to offer, but thanksgiving and the offering of our selves
unto God by our reasonable serving of him. Let me conclude with the words of S.
Ambrose: Ambros. in Heb. 10.
There is now no more offering for sin. For one oblation of the body of
Christ makes perfect them that are sanctified, as which works full
forgiveness of sins. Therefore we need not daily to purge with daily
sacrifices as in the old law. If we need not daily to purge with daily
sacrifice as they did in the old law, then surely the daily sacrifice of the
Mass is superfluous, and consequently no sacrifice at all. By these and sundry
other testimonies of the old Fathers, it is evident and clear enough to those
that will see, that they knew not nor were acquainted with this strange devise
of a continual real offering of the body of Christ. Yea but the Answerer
says further, that the matter is so true of the Fathers auouching this real
sacrifice, that Calvin sticked not to condemn all the Fathers since the
Apostles of Iudaisme in that very point for establishing a very sacrifice of
the church: so impudent a thing he took it to be to cast a mist upon the
Fathers words in that point. If the Answ. speak this of himself, let him
remember that which Solomon says: Pro. 19 5 and 12. 22.
A false witness shall not escape unpunished: and again: Lying lips are an
abomination to the Lord. If he speak it upon the warrant of any other, let
him remember this for a true saying hereafter: Pro. 14. 15. Eccle. 19 4*
He that is hasty to give credit, is a fool. Caluins own words do lay open
the notable and shameless boldness of the Answ. and his fellows in this
point: Institut. li. 4. ca. 18. sect. 10.
If any man, says he, oppose the sentences of the old Fathers gathered here
and there, and upon their authority contend that the sacrifice which is done
in the Lords Supper is otherwise to be understood then we expound it, let this
briefly serve for answer to him. If the matter be to approve the devise of
that sacrifice which the Papists have forged in the Mass, the ancient Fathers
give no maintenance or defense to such sacrilege. Indeed they use the name of
sacrifice, but withal they expound that they mean nothing else but a
memorial of that true and only sacrifice which Christ performed on the
Cross, who is our only priest, as they every where show, etc. Again ibid.
sect. 1^.
he professes that he sees that they retained a godly and right sound
judgment concerning this whole mystery* neither finds that they would any
little derogate from the only sacrifice of Christ. Now therefore what conscience
may I think there is in the Answerer, that doubts not to avouch so manifest
and notorious a slander? But he will allege for himself y^ Calvin though he
confess that the Fathers had a right and true judgment concerning the
Sacrament, yet says that ibid.
in actionis modo, in the manner of their celebration they approached nearer to
the Jewish manner of sacrificing, then Christ had ordained, or was convenient
for the state of the Gospel. But this, say I, cannot excuse the Answ. from
just desert of being branded in the forehead with the letter C, as a calumnious
and slanderous person. For he charge Calvin to have condemned the Fathers of
Iudaisme for establishing a real sacrifice of the church, whereas Calvin
absolutely de^ieth that there was in them any opinion of any real sacrifice,
and only says, that in ceremonies they came nearer to the Jewish manner of
sacrificing then was convenient. We know that the Papists come nearer to those
rites and ceremonies wherewith the Heathens and Painims have worshipped their
idol gods, then is convenient for Christians to do in the spiritual service of
the true God. And yet it follows not that they establish those profane
mysteries or opinions whereunto the same ceremonies were annexed. So might
Calvin truly say, that the Fathers in ceremonies came too near the Jews, and
yet be far, as indeed he was, from denying that they taught or established
any real sacrifice in the church. In a word, Calvin condemns not the Fathers
of Iudaisme, but Papists of perverseness and wickedness in abusing the
writings of the Fathers. For let me tell the Answ. once again, that his
masters of Rhemes though they have in diverse places of their Annotations
scratched together out of the Fathers all and more then all, that may give any
show to countenance their sacrifice, yet cannot bring any one place that goes
without the compass of that reason of the name of sacrifice, which in my
former speech I declared to stand without any true or real sacrifice now to be
performed. For setting that down which Cyprian says that Cypr. lib. 2. epist.
3.
the passion of Christ is the sacrifice which we offer, what terms of
sacrifice can they allege out of the Fathers which do not agree to the passion
of Christ? It is the killing of the lamb of God, the sacrifice of sacrifices,
the everlasting quickening sacrifice, the sacrifice of our Mediator, the
sacrifice of our price, the eternal redemption both of body and soul. Now
since the passion of Christ is not now really performed, the sacrifice to which
these speeches are applied, is not a sacrifice now really done, but only in a
mystery and by remembrance. Now although it be plain enough by that that has
been already said, that there is no such sacrifice indeed as the Answ. and his
company do affirm, yet supposing for the while that there is, let us see what
he will make of it, or to what use he will put it. The use of it, as he tells
me in the former section, is to apply unto us remission of sins, purchased by
the death of Christ only. By which words he spoyleth his Mass of the nature of
a propitiatory sacrifice. For the true propitiatory sacrifice even by the very
signification of the word, is that only which it self satisfies for sin,
and purchases by the virtue and force thereof, forgiveness of sins and
atonement with God. Now therefore if forgiveness of sins be purchased by the
death of Christ only, then it stands not with the Mass to be a
propitiatory sacrifice. His Rhemish companions tell him that the blood of
Christ before his death was at his last supper sacrificed The. Annot. Luc. 2^.
20.
for propitiation or for pardon of sin. So Bellarmine says, that Christ at
his supper offered a sacrifice Bellar. to* 2. de Miss^. lib. 2. cap. 2.
for the Apostles sins, and with a mouth of blasphemy avouches that the
Mass is such a sacrifice as does purge, abolish, forgive sins: that it does
abolish the sin of the world, does save from eternal destruction, does make
atonement with God for our sins: falsifying and misconstruing to this
purpose diverse testimonies of the ancient fathers. In like sort the council
of Trent determines it to be such a sacrifice as does Council. Trident. sess.
6. cap. 2.
verily work propitiation for sin, and appease God, because it is the same
with that upon the Cross, differing only in the manner of offering, and
therefore it can. 3.
curses those that deny it to be such. Whereby it appears that the Answerers
fellows do not think that remission of sins is purchased only by the death
of Christ. And therefore when they say as sometimes they do, that the death of
Christ is The. Annot. H^b. 7. 27.
the one full sufficient ransom for the redemption of all sins, or as he
says here, that remission of sins is purchased by the death of Christ only,
they do but play mock-holy day, and delude the ignorant reader with deceitful
and double meaning words. The death of Christ is a sufficient ransom, they
say: but we must understand it of a general ransom: and therefore so, as
that there is beside that a particular ransom or redemption in the Mass, of
the same effect and working particularly, as the death of Christ is generally.
And therefore they call their sacrifice of the Mass The. Ann^^ H^b. 10. 11.
a particular redemption, and in that sense, the everlasting redemption both of
body and soul. So this man when he says, that remission of sins is
purchased only by the death of Christ, must be understood belike to mean it
of the general purchase, not to deny a particular purchase thereof in the
Mass also. Or if he mean simply as he speaks, that there is not at all
either generally or particularly any purchase of the forgiveness of sins in
the Mass, then let him curse the church of Rome that has cursed him, and let
him return into the bosom of the church of Christ, to profess with us that
truth which the church of Rome has impiously condemned. But to come to that
matter of applying, which he says is the use of their sacrifice, we may note
therein the notable fraud and shifting of the devil, whereby he has practiced
and pr^uailed in the church of Rome to defeat the people of the benefit of
Christ's redemption. For whereas Christ had left unto his church two special
means to offer and apply unto us the fruit of his death, the lively preaching
of the word and the use of his holy Sacraments, the devil has so wrought that
Apoc. 7. 1.
the wind of the word of God should not blow upon the earth, that men should
not have so much as any private use of the book of God; that their very
church-seruice should be in a language which they did not understand. As for
the Sacraments he has miserably corrupted the one, and utterly i^ a manner
abandoned the people from the use of the other, and instead thereof, has
deluded them with a theatricall show and vain opinion of a sacrifice, whereby
to procure to themselves forgiveness of sins. Truly it had been more meet
that these men should have carefully used those means of application which
Christ appointed to his Church, then thus thrust upon men other means of
their own devising. But this devise of theirs is unreasonable also and without
sense. A sacrifice forsooth to apply a sacrifice; a propitiatio^ to apply a
propitiatio^: a redemption to apply a redemption; as if a man would fondly
require a medicine to apply a medicine, and a plaster to apply a plaster.
Verily seeing that as Cyprian says, Cypri. de Bapt. Christi. and manifest.
Trinit.
the sacrifice which Christ offered upon the cross stands so acceptable in
the good pleasure of God, and abides so in perpetual force and virtue, as
that that oblation is no less effectual in the sight of the father at this
day, then it was that day when as water and blood issued out of his wounded
side, and the stripes still abiding in his body do exact the payment of man's
salvation and the stipend due unto his obedience, it cannot but be utterly
absurd and senseless, to say that we must every day offer Christ anew in
sacrifice, to apply unto us the benefit of his former sacrifice. Moreover the
act of sacrificing imports not applying unto us but offering unto God: and it
is one thing to offer sacrifice unto God, another to apply the benefit of a
sacrifice unto man, even as it is one thing to make a plaster for a sore, and
another thing to lay the plaster to the sore. So that they themselves are
forced to grant, that y^ mere sacrificing is not the applying of the
sacrifice. Wherein then is the application? Marry forsooth Hard* Rei. oind. pa.
5. 6.
in the intention and prayer of the priest. For whomsoever he does think upon
in his Memento, and to whomsoever he intends the benefit of his sacrifice, to
him is applied the passion and death of Christ, and that for the very work
wrought, though there be neither good mind nor good motion in him for who^ it
is done. Now the priest most commonly is a serviceable man, and ready for his
pay to give his attendance. One comes to him for himself, another for his
friend, another for a soul in purgatory, another for his swine and cattle,
and he has Christ at commandment to offer him up in sacrifice for the good of
them all, and for so much or so much money, a man shall have so many or so many
Masses as he shall think meet to serve the turn, either for himself or for
his. For (for the better utterance of this bad ware) they will not have it
thought, nay Prouin^. Constit. Linwood. titulo de celebrat. Missarum.
God forbid that any Catholic should think that one Mass devoutly
celebrated, does profit a man as much as a thousand Masses said with like
devotion. For though Christ be of infinite virtue, yet he dispenses not
himself all at once. Otherwise it were enough for a man when he is dead to
have one only Mass, which in no case is tolerable to think. Now therefore it
is good for a man to have Mass upon Mass, and never leave massing, and for
his massing he must remember paying, and yet when he has all done, he is no
whit the near; for after he is dead, he must yet have more massing to help
his soul to heaven, and thereof he must bethink himself when he makes his
will. These horrible and cursed doings are contained in the Roomish sacrifice,
whereby they have made a mockery of the son of God, and trodden under their
feet as a vile and base thing the sacred blood of Christ whereby we were
redeemed. But seeing that the applying of Christ's death consists not in
sacrificing, with what reason do these men teach a sacrifice to apply the death
of Christ unto us? Why could they not as well without any new sacrifice make
the priests Memento and his intention a means to apply Christ's death unto
us, as give him power to sacrifice Christ again, and to apply that sacrifice
to whom he will, and by that to apply the other sacrifice of his death? And
what if the priest never so much as think upon Christ's death in his Mass, but
mumble it up without consideration thereof, how shall we think that he does
apply the death of Christ? Last of all, why may they not with as good reason
say, that Christ must be borne again to apply unto us the benefit of his
birth: that he must suffer, die and rise again, to apply unto us the virtue of
his passion, death, and resurrection, as that he must be sacrificed again to
apply unto us the benefit of his former sacrifice? The former are absurd, the
Answ. will say, but by no reason which shall not also prove the absurdity of
the latter. The truth of applying, as the very word shows, consists in
offering and giving of Christ unto us, and our receiving of him. This is set
forth in the Sacrament by words of application; Take ye; eat ye; and again:
Drink ye all of this, where the body of Christ crucified, and his blood shed
for the forgiveness of our sins, are by the outward elements as by seals
and pledges proposed unto us, and we willed to accept and receive the same.
Which we do by true and lively faith through the working of the holy Ghost, and
so are made partakers of the benefits of his death and passion to justification
and everlasting life. And this is the only means of application which the
scripture teaches, briefly set down by Saint Paul, Romans 3. Romans 3. 25.
Him has God set forth to be an atonement, not by continual offering him in
sacrifice, but by faith in his blood: by faith, I say, apprehending and laying
hold on him both in the hearing of the word and receiving of the Sacraments.
Herein is our receiving of Christ, as S. John shows, expounding Ioh 1. 12.
receiving by believing: so many as received him, that is, so many as believed
in his name. Now the papists ouerthwarting ye ordinance of Jesus Christ, make
little or no regard of Take ye, eat ye; being the two means of application,
appointed by Christ and practiced by the primitive Church, but tell us of a
continual sacrificing of Christ, which does by the intention of the priest for
the very work wrought obtain grace, and apply unto us forgiveness of sins.
But in this point beside their manifest departing from the ordinance of God,
they again commit high treason against God, in that they advance so many other
their abominable and hateful devises, to ride in the same chariot with the
sacrifice of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. For all the filth and rifraffe
of the church of Rome, whereby they wickedly teach men to seek forgiveness of
sins, is shadowed and colored with this conceit of applying unto us the
death of Christ. The sufferings of Saints and Martyrs are The. Annot. Col. 1.
24.
satisfactions for our sins, they say. But how? Marry forsooth, they take
this virtue and force from Christ's death, and as a particular medicine apply
unto us the general medicine of his passion. Their crossings, their The.
Annot. Mat. 10. 12. and 1. Tim. ^5. Sum of religion taken out of Bristow, and
the order of confession.
Bishops blessings, their holy water, their Popes indulgences and pardons,
their shaven crowns, their munkish orders, their whippings, their shrifts,
their pilgrimages, and offerings to idols, their mumbling on their beads,
their Agnus Deis, their kissing the pax, and the remnant of this absurd rabble
are very helpful to the forgiveness of sins, because as the Mass does, so
do all these apply unto us the death of Christ. Thus they have multiplied their
devises as the stars, and filled the world with their e^chauntments and
sorceries of other sacrifices, merits and satisfactions of their own, to give
effect and working to the sacrifice, merit, and satisfaction of Jesus Christ.
And these bastard and misbegotten trumperies, because they are of themselves so
apparently injurious to ye cross of Christ, that the devil thought they would
never go for sale-able ware when they should be examined and tried, except some
deceitful color were set upon them, he has therefore somewhat graced and
countenanced with these terms of applying the death of Christ, to mollify and
extenuate, so much as might be, the horrible blasphemy that is contained
therein. And yet the blind and ignorant people were not acquainted with this
shift, but persuaded themselves to find merit and forgiveness of sins in the
mere exercise of these spiritual fornications and whoredoms, whereto they
were bewitched of their blind leaders. They might with as good reason have
told them that to run a man's head against a wall, to wear a straight pair
of shoes upon his feet, to lie naked upon thorns, to eat wormwood and gall,
to wash his hands before meat are means and merits of the forgiveness of
sins. They will say these things are fond. Alas blind men that cannot see the
like folly and madness in those things which they themselves approve. But thus
they have iustled the blood of Christ out of place, and fulfilled that which S.
Peter prophesied of them: 2. Pet. 2. 1.
There shall be false teachers which privily shall bring in damnable heresies,
even denying the Lord that has bought them, etc. And through covetousness
with feined words shall they make merchandise of you, etc. Of such feined and
whorish counterfeit words the The. Annot. 2. cor. 2. 11. and 1. Tim. 4. ^. and
c^ll. 1. 24. and pa^sim.
writings of Papists are very full, not sauouring at all of the holy
scriptures, but arising merely of their own devise, to cloak and cover the
monstrous and filthy abominations of the Roomish harlot.

P. Spence. Sect. 11.
Where we say, (as you confess) that the testimony of one Gelasius, or what
other Doctor may not preiudicate the whole faith of them all generally, we say
so indeed; yea we go further and will yield you that Reijcimus singulos,
probamus omnes; all of them together, or the greatest part of them consenting,
are the The church of God is built upon the foundations of the Apostles and
Prophets. Ephesians. 2. that is, upon the old and new Testament. But here both old
and new Testament are iustled out of their place, and the Doctors are made the
mouth and eyes, and spirit of the church.
mouth and eyes, and spirit, of the Church (next Gods spirit:) a very goodly,
noble, and great part of the church, far the best and fairest part of the
church: but their several opinions are not the whole churches doctrine. That
question has so many branches, that in this short discourse, I cannot touch
all the particularities thereof, to our treatises therefore I refer you. Was
Gelasius Pope of Rome? how prove it you, if we deny it? we marvel why you
think so. If he had been Pope, were all his books dogmaticke, and definitive?
It skilleth not though he did not* For Bellarmine tells us that it is most
probable that the Pope cannot err in his private judgment. It must be an
Oracle therefore what soever he writes whether as Pope or as a private man.
did he (if he had been Pope) pronounce them pro tribunal^? Did he send them as
responsa, and decretall epistles? Did never Popes write books, and yet not in
all points taken for Oracles? Aeneas Siluius after he was Pope wrote much, so
did others. You are wide and go astraie far from the state of that question; I
say no more, but view our questions therein. Theodoret and Gelasius are
answered at large, whatsoever they thought they were far from your mind.
Theodoret at that time was so partial, as in the controversy between him and
Cyrill it appears, that he was feign to recant ere he could be reconciled.
And in these very Dialogues we can show you errors, yea foul of his. It is
not unlikely that he followed sometimes the counsel that himself in the same
Dialogues gives, that is, to make a crooked wand straight, to bend it as much
the other way. And now sir to come to Gelasius, who in every point accords
with Theodoret against the Eutychian heresy, first he writes thus: Sapientia
aedificauit sibi domum septiformis spiritus soliditate subnixam, etc. I will
English it, for the same cause. Thus it is: Wisdom that is Christ the
wisdom of the father, has builded for it self an house grounded or leaning
upon the soundness of the seventh fold spirit, which should minister the food
or nourishment of Christ's incarnation, whereby or by which food, we are made
partakers of the divine nature. Verily the Sacraments of the body and blood of
Christ which we receive, are a divine thing, for the which cause by the same
also, are we made partners of the divine nature, and yet the substance or
nature of bread, and wine cease not to be, ( or loses not his being
utterly, and is anihilated and becomes nothing) and certes in the action (or
celebration) of the mysteries, ( or Sacraments) an image or similitude ( or
resemblance) of Christ's body and blood is celebrated ( or practiced.) It is
therefore evident enough showed unto us, that we ought to think the same thing
to be in Christ our Lord himself, which we profess to be, which we
celebrate, and which we receive in his image: ( he means in the Sacrament)
that even as they, ( the Sacrament of bread and wine) by the working of the
holy Ghost do pass over, ( or be changed) into a divine substance, remaining
nevertheless in the property of their nature, right so do they show, that
that very principal mystery it self: ( by which he means Christ, God, and
man: now being in two natures, one person in heaven whom the heretic Eutyches
would have in heaven to have lost his manhood, and to be but God alone) whose
efficiencie (or perfect nature) and virtue they ( the said Sacraments) do truly
represent, the things whereof it properly consists ( it is the two natures of
the divinity and humanity in one person) still remaining, does remain and
continue one* Christ ( because he is whole and truly being, or consisting in
his whole and true natures of God and man in one person.) This testimony of
Gelasius might seem perhaps to make somewhat for a Lutheran, because it
seems to affirm in the B. Sacrament to be two substances, a divine
substance, and bread and wine: but the Caluinist lacks four of his five wits
to urge it, which makes flat against him, not only in the very words, but
most chiefly in the drift of the argument against Eutyches, which by the
consideration His circumstances serve only to blind the eyes of the reader.
The troubling of the river is for the advantage of the fisher.
of the circumstances following, shall most evidently appear: for that the
very words and force of the reason or argument, here made, do prove Christ's
body to be really present, which he denies. Eutyches the Abbot, who was
condemned in the Chalcedon Council, at which time Gelasius flourished, held
that our Savior Christ his deity or divine nature, after his ascension into
heaven, did As touching the substance not as touching the properties: even as
the Papists say of the bread and wine.
consume and anihilate or bring to nothing his humane nature: So that by his
heresy Christ now should be no more man but God alone. The truth of the B.
Sacrament, that therein Christ was really continued, was so commonly and
firmly believed and professed in the holy church, That because never any
Father taught it, the Answerer is driven to seek proof thereof from the
heretics
that there were diverse heretics that used, (or rather abused) the same for
an argument pretensedly to confirm their heresies. The Maniches to prove that
the ill god (such was their blasphemous heresy) had imprisoned certain
parcels or pieces of the good God in these worldly creatures and earthly
things, alleged Christ (whom they f Untruth. S. Austen does not grant it.
called the good God) to be really in the Sacrament, but S. Augustine granting
them Christ to be really therein says he, is there by consecration, not by
creation: or as it were imprisoned. So touching our case of Gelasius, the
Eutychian against whom he wrote, held Christ in heaven his humanity being
gone, to be only God in like manner as his divine nature only is in the
Sacrament, the bread and wine being anihilated and consumed unto nothing: A
leaud tale wholly devised of the Answ. himself. Eutyches never imagined any
such matter, as shall appear.
nothing therein remaining of the substantial properties or natures of bread
and wine, but only Christ's divine nature. So certain a verity it was then
current in the whole church, and to the very heretics that Christ is really
in the B. Sacrament. Whereupon by a similitude or resemblance taken from the
Sacrament, he would have nothing remaining in heaven of Christ's humanity: but
the same being vanished into nothing, his Deity only there to remain, as the
bread is consumed in the Sacrament. Against this similitude Gelasius replieth,
not denying Christ's body and divine nature to be really in the Sacrament,
which was and ever has been a general, current, and confessed truth: which
otherwise had served his turn much better to deny, and thereby had he more
readily and directly rejected and reproved the argument framed against him by
that similitude. But confessing that the Sacraments of bread and wine, do pass
over and be turned into a divine substance, thereby granting a real presence
of Christ God and man, and in effect transubstantiation: only he denies the
bread to be anihilated or become nothing, or as he terms it desinere esse, to
cease from having any being at all. Before Berengarius never any man held that
Untruth: for all the Fathers held the same, as shall appear by many of them in
that which follows.
Christ's body was not really in the Sacrament, nor that the whole substance of
bread and wine unchanged, were in the Sacrament either without any other
substance, as Zwinglius and Calvin hold, or joined together with Christ's body
by impanacion as Luther held: but that the bread and wine by a conversion were
made Christ's body and blood, which conversion in the church of God in the
greatest Council that ever was held, called the Laterane Council, where
occasion was offered of the full search of the matter by Berengarius heresy,
by the instinct Not of the holy Ghost but of the spirit of Satan to bring in
idol^try into the Temple of God.
of the holy Ghost, most agreeable to the greatest number, and the best
learned of the Fathers defined to be by transubstantiation, that is the whole
substances of bread and wine being turned into the whole substance of Christ's
body and blood, his Godhead being joined thereto per concomitantiam. Yet did
Innocentius, under whom that Council was holden, thus write; that though the
substance of the bread and wine were changed into Christ, yet there remained
not only the accidents or accidental properties, but also the natural
properties, namely as he there speaks panietas, breadinesse to drive away
hunger, and vineitas wininesse to drive away thirst, and the force or nature of
nourishing. So that this turning of the bread and wine into Christ's body, was
not anihilation or utter vanishing of the bread as Gelasius denies: not a
natural change as is wrought in natural conuersions, where the same matter
remaining under both forms, only the first form is changed into an other
form, I mean not forma accidentalis, but forma essentialis, by which things
they have their being and substance: neither change of the matter that is under
the essential form, the said essential form remaining: but in this
wonderful sacrifice, is a most divine, and miraculous change of both the
matter, and essential form of bread into the whole substance of Christ's
body. And that was so established least by joining either the matter or the
essential form of bread with Christ's body, they should grant A weighty
consideration verily, and fit for the learning of such grave Fathers
impersonation, that is any substance saving Christ to be personally united
with Christ. It was not a matter clearly Christ and his Apostles never clearly
defined that there was any transubstantiation.
defined before the said Council, what kind of conversion it was, neither
heresy not to iumpe in just terms with transubstantiation before that time,
so that the real presence were not denied as after Berengarius did, nor the
substance of bread wholly were affirmed to remain, as never any Father said.
Only Gelasius to make a resemblance between the Sacrament, which he calls
an image of Christ's being in heaven, and Christ's two natures in one person in
heaven, which he terms in this comparing of them together, the principal
mystery, he says two things, first that the Sacrament is a divine thing, by
which we are made partners of the divine nature. And that it is so, because the
Sacrament by the working of the holy Ghost does pass over into a divine
substance. What He must say more or else it will not serve for
transubstantiation. See the answer.
more could he have said for the real presence or transubstantiation? The
second thing which to answer and stop the quarrelling heretic, he adds,
is, that the substance of bread and wine do not cease to be, that is to say,
does not utterly perish into nothing, but remains under the change, which
word Substance he mollifieth and interprets by adding or nature of bread, and
by and by after, he calls it the property of the nature of bread, where the
heretics for or, which is a word interpreting the former, have foysted in
substance and nature of bread. So that Gelasius meant not that the whole
substance of bread remains in the Sacrament, but that, not only the
accidental properties, but also the very essential properties (as
Innocentius before named also set down) of bread, and wine do remain, and
that was enough against the heretic. And It may be that Gelasius did deny
t^ansubstantiation, because the church as then knew it not.
it may be, that he being before the general definition of the church, did not
much trouble himself with the exact search thereof, thinking that the same
matter or else the same essential form, remained in that blessed conversion,
but not the whole substance, that is, the whole essential form and the whole
matter. And so many in these days held without heresy, as S. Thomas
contragentes declares, which now after the churches general definition were
damnable. Otherwise if we would urge the word Substantia in Gelasius, and not
admit Gelasius his qualification thereof and exposition of his vel natura and
proprietas nature, which every Catholic admits, this absurdity were too
beastly, and blasphemous for Gelasius so holy a Father and old fellow, that
Christ's body were united personally, or become one person with the bread: so
that Christ were one person of three natures, the Godhead, the manhood, and the
breadhood, which is most peevish blasphemy. And for Gelasius to admit To admit
the same to remain without the substance served fitly and fully for the
heresy of Eutyches. See the answer.
the nature or substantial properties to remain, as himself terms them,
was enough to stop the Eutychian heretics mouth, who denied any natural
property to remain at all in the Sacrament. And therefore thus much is to be
noted, that the force of the comparison between Christ's being in heaven, and in
the blessed Sacrament is not in this point, that in heaven he is in both
substance of manhood, and Godhead, even as in the Sacrament are two whole
substances, Christ's body and the whole substance of bread and wine. But the
similitude is herein, that as in the divine Sacrament, with the very true
body of Christ which Gelasius calls a divine substance, there are conjoined
essential, substantial, and natural properties of bread and wine: Even so in
heaven Christ in one person has united all the natural, and essential
properties of his two natures, the Godhead, and the manhood, unconfounded,
inviolable, whole and distinct: which is as much as out of the heretics
objection of the Sacrament, he needed to reply or urge against him at that
time, and upon that occasion. Thus much of Gelasius, whom you affirm for the
Bishop of Rome, but you cannot prove it, for this Gelasius was never Bishop of
Rome.

R. Abbot. 11.
THe whole being of the sacrifice of the mass rests upon this next point of
transsubstantiation: which being overthrown, the sacrifice consequently
falls to the ground. Now that is plainly overthrown by the testimonies of
Gelasius and Theodoret amongst others in my former answer alleged, who both
expressly affirm the substance of bread and wine after consecration. But to
unwind himself from the evidence of their words, it is strange to see what
miserable and wretched shifts the Answerer uses: and all in vain. He takes
exception against this Gelasius, that he was not Bishop of Rome. Then though he
were, yet all that he wrote was not of authority, because he did not pronounce
it from his consistory chair. etc. Thirdly whatsoever he thought, he was far
from our mind. Again Theodoret was not of sound judgment: he had foul
errors: and to make a crooked wand straight, he did bend it too much the other
way: that is, to confound Eutyches his heresy, he did plainly and flatly deny
popish transsubstantiation. But all these shifts the Answerer in his own
conscience knew to be vain and frivolous. Gelasius after that he was Bishop
of Rome wrote five books against Eutiches and Nestorius. The treatise whence I
took those words that I alleged, goes under his name as a part of one of
those books. Thus I find it reported, and no proof given to disprooue it. In
the end of this treatise, he exhorts them to whom he writes that as they did
with one mind hold the Apostolic sea, so they should constantly avouch that
rule of Catholic faith which he had declared out of the writings of the*
Fathers that were before him, making their holding with the Apostolic sea, a
reason why they should give heed to that which he had written. Which may give
a good conjecture that it was Galasius Bishop of Rome, and no other Gelasius
that was the author of this book. But it is sufficient though it were not
Gelasius Bishop of Rome, yet that the book is confessed to be authentical, so
that Bellarm. tom. 2. de sacram. (...) lib 2. cap. 2^.
Bellarmine himself takes it to have been written by Gelasius Bishop of
Caesaria before the council of Chalcedo^ which was in the year 455. Gregor. ^^
valent. de re^l^ praesent. ^^ transubst. (...) ^ cap. ^.
Gregory de Valentia in one place says that the author of that book was
Gelasius of Caesaria, as Bellarmine does; in Idem de ^dololat. lib. 2. cap. 5.
another, that it was Gennadius of Massilia. As for Theodoret he was found no
other but a Catholic Bishop in the said council of Council* Calced. Act. 8.
Calcedon, and so approved by general applause. It seems that Leo Ep^ 61.
et conci^. chalced. Act. 8
Leo Bishop of Rome took him for no other* by his letters written to him and
for him. That which the Answ. says of his recantatio^, is a lewd and
slanderous tale. Some stomach he took against Praefat. i^ ope^a Theodore^.
Cirill for his proceeding in the council of Ephesus, before he and his
company were come. Thereupon he wrote against Ciril, seeking to draw him into
suspicion of heresy without cause. This doing of his was greatly disliked of
many, and made him to be evil thought of. Yet matters were ordered be twixt
them, and they reconciled each to other. But that he made any recantation of his
opinions or was convicted in that behalf, it is unhonestly affirmed. These
shifts therefore not serving the turn, the Answ. sifteth the words alleged
against him, and to wrest them from their plain and evident meaning, he
sticks not to belie the Fathers; to father new opinions upon the old
heretics, to devise and affirm matters of his own head without any
testimony, or show of testimony of antiquity. He tells me that when it is
said, There cease not to be the substance, the meaning is; the accedents
remain. He will have the body of Christ to be made every day of bread, which we
believe to have been once only made of the substance of the Virgin Mary. He
makes as if the Fathers were as fond as he himself is; to say that there
remains the color of bread, the taste, the strength, the show of bread, but
yet there is no bread. He makes Gelasius to write he knew not what, because
forsooth he was before the general definition of the church, and made no exact
search of the matter. But why does he not bring proof of all these strange
fancies that here he has set down? Is it enough for him to say what he list?
May I not say as Austin said to the heretic: August. cont. epis. sund^. cap.
5.
Think thou I am so foolish to believe, or not to believe as thou woldst
have me without any reason given? He may be a Pythagoras perhaps to his own
pupills, but we do look for more then his bare words. But alas what do these
men mean thus to dally with God, and to wound their consciences by striving
against apparent and manifest truth? A Caluinist, the Answ. tells me lacks
four of his five wits, to allege that place of Gelasius, being, (as he
says,) both in words and in the drift of the argument against him. But I tell
him again that the odd fifth wit of a Caluinist, finds strength enough in
this place, to quell a Papist, and will be himself nothing endamaged thereby. As
touching his circumstances, which he sets down to explicate the same words
of Gelasius, they are for the most part, gross and shameless forgeries, which
serve indeed for nothing else, but to lead a man a dance round about, from
the sight of that which at the first sight is plain enough. It shall appear
that they are nothing else, by the consideration of the original, and process
of the matter disputed of by Gelasius.

Nestorius the heretic held a separation, and disioyning of the two natures
of Christ, the godhead and the manhood, and denied the personal uniting of
them into one Christ, and therefore condemned these speeches, that the Virgin
Mary is the mother of God, and that God suffered for our sins. Against him the
council of Ephesus resolved out of the word of God, that the godhead and the
manhood, are substantially united into one person; so that as the soul and
body make one man, so God and man are one Christ, as Athan. in S^mbolo.
Athanasius speaks. By reason of which union they defended it, to be truly
said that the Virgin Mary is the mother of God, because she is the mother of
him who is not only man, but also God. And so it is truly said that Luc. 1. 35.
Act. 20. 28. 1 cor. 2. 8. Leo. epis. 10.
God was borne, that God was wrapped inswadling clouts, that God was laid in
the manger, that God suffered and was buried, and purchased himself a church
with his precious blood. According to this truth Gelasius says: Gelas cont.
Eutichen.
The whole man christ is God: and Cirill says that the name of the godhead is
given unto christ as man. l ciril in ^oh. lib. 11 cap. 22. Vigil. contra
Eutich. lib. 4.
To which purpose some of the Council. constant. 6. act. 4. in epla. Agatho^is*
and act. 10. and 17. Thom. (...) par. ^. q. 16. art. 3. ex Damascen.
ancient writers say that the flesh or manhood of Christ is deified, not by
changing of the manhood into godhead, but by personal uniting of the one to
the other, whereby the things that are proper to the godhead are also dispensed
unto the manhood. Now Eutiches whilst he contended against the heresy of
Nestorius, and would justify the speeches aforesaid, went as far another way
into another heresy, and as Nestorius by distracting the natures, made two
persons, and Vigil. lib. 2. cont. Eutychen.
two Christ's, as Vigilius speaks* so he to make one person of Christ taught
a confusion of the natures, affirming that although Christ were truly incarnate
and took flesh indeed, yet that by the uniting of the flesh unto the
godhead, the flesh was swallowed up of the godhead, and ceased to be any longer
flesh, even as a drop of wine cast into the sea loses his own nature, and
becomes water. Leo. epis* 10. and 11.
Leo and Euagr. eccl. hist. lib 2. ca. 18
Euagrius report the words of Eutiches in the Chalcedo^ council thus; that he
confessed that Christ before the uniting of the manhood with the godhead was of
two natures, but after that uniting, there is, said he, but one nature in
Christ. And thus is his heresy set down in Definitio Cha cedo 1. council Act. 5.
the definition of the Chalcedon Council. Therefore though Christ was in the
shape and likeness of man upon the earth, yet he held that he was not indeed
man but only God; and that it was not the manhood but the Godhead that was
crucified. So Vigilius testifies: V^gil cont. ^at. lib. 2.
He affirmed, says he, that the Godhead suffered; which he would prove, as the
same Vigil. ^bid.
Vigilius and Gelas. cont. ^uty. and Nestor.
Gelasius also declare, out of 1. Cor. 2. If they had known, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. Behold, said he, not ye man Christ, but the
Lord of glory was crucified. Vigilius again says, that this heresy did
Vigil. lib. 1. con. Eutych.
refer to the contumely of the Godhead, all things that Christ either spoke or
did according to the dispensation of the flesh, whilst they contended that
there was in him but the one only nature of the Godhead: and Idem lib. 4.
elsewhere he sets down by their own words, that it was the Godhead that was
seen and felt and handled with hands, which they would prove by the words of S.
John, in the beginning of his first Epistle. And in this respect both Vigilius
and Gelasius say, that this opinion implied the heresies of Apollinaris, of the
Manichees and Marcionites, and others which held that Christ had only Putatiuum
corpus.
an imaginary and no true body. So Leo also urges them that by their opinion
Leo epist. 81
Christ did all things counterfeitly, and that not an humane body indeed, but
a fantastical show of a body appeared unto the eyes of them that beheld: and
therefore he calls them Phantasmaticos Christianos. Thus those things which
concern Christ properly as man, Eutyches could not conceive to be rightly
attributed unto Christ by the name of God, but by abolishing the nature of man.
Now there were also of Eutiches his faction, who being convicted of the
absurdity of this opinion, restrained the vanishing and consuming of the nature
of his manhood to the time of his ascension, of whom I shall speak afterward.
But in the mean time, let the Answ. here think whether I said rightly the
last time, that Eutyches if he were now alive, would surely be a Papist. The
absurd conceit of Transubstantiation serves fit for his purpose, and if it had
been in his time believed, he would have said: Do ye not see that after
consecration there remains the color, and show, and appearance of bread and
wine, but yet there is not the substance of them; for the substance is quite
abolished by consecration? Right so after the uniting of the two natures of
Christ, the substance of the humane nature is quite consumed, though there
appear the facion and shape and likeness, yea and the doings and sufferings
of a man. This he would have alleged for color of that shadow and fantasy
of Christ's humanity which he defended here upon the earth. But this stood not
with the doctrine of that time. Nay, whereas Eutyches could not understand that
those things which were done and performed properly in the manhood, are
rightly said to have been done and performed by God, by reason of the personal
uniting of the manhood unto the Godhead, but would for the justifying of this
speech abolish the manhood, and bring in the Godhead into the empty facion and
shape of a man (even as the Papists to make good the speeches that are used
oftentimes of ye Sacrament to express the singular effect thereof, do thrust
out the substance of bread and wine, and bring the very substance of Christ's
body and blood into the empty forms and shows of the same) Gelasius by a
comparison taken from the Sacrament according to the doctrine of his time,
shows him the vanity of his opinion. He sets down to that purpose these
two grounds, first that the Sacrament* is an image or resemblance of the body
and blood of Christ, and therefore secondly, that we must believe and profess
the same of Christ himself, that we do of his image. Which both tend to this
conclusion, that as the Sacrament is a divine and heavenly thing of excellent
grace and virtue, so that by it we are made partakers of the divine nature, and
yet there cease not to be the substance of bread and wine: so Christ as
touching his manhood is advanced to most high excellency and majesty, by the
uniting thereof unto the Godhead into one person, so that as man he is honored
and adored of all creatures, and all knees must bow unto him, and whatsoever
was done or suffered by Christ as man, is said to have been done and suffered
by God, and yet there cease not to be in him the very true substance and
nature of man. Gelas. cont. Euty chen and Nestor.
Surely, says he, the Sacraments which we receive of the hodie and blood of
Christ are a divine thing: by reason whereof we are by them made partakers of
the divine nature, and yet there cease not to be the substance or nature of
bread and wine. The words are plain, that in the Sacrament there remains the
substance of bread and wine. What should a man go about to cast a mist before
the Sun, or by shifting and paltering to obscure that which is as clear as
the shining light? Why do not the Answ. and his fellows say, that Gelasius
above a thousand years ago was a Caluinist, and erre^ in that point? But he
adds further: And surely in the exercise of the Sacraments, there is
celebrated an image and resemblance of the body and blood of Christ. Whereupon
he infers thus against Eutyches: It is therefore evidently enough showed
unto us that we must think the same in our Lord Jesus Christ which we profess
and celebrate, and receive in his image. And what do we profess in his image,
that is, in the Sacrament? Forsooth says the Papist, we must profess that the
substance of bread and wine is abolished, and only certain properties and
shows of bread and wine remain. Why then so must we think also of Christ
himself, that the substance of his manhood is extinguished, and that there
remain only certain accidents and shows thereof, in which he lived here as a
man, and was crucified as a man, but was not man indeed, which is the very
thing that Eutyches desired. But Gelasius tells us far otherwise, that as
these, namely, the bread and wine, by the working of the holy Ghost do pass
over into a divine substance, and yet continue in the propriety of their own
nature, so they show that that principal mystery, the force and virtue
whereof these do (...) represent unto us, does continue one Christ whole and
true, those natures properly remaining whereof he does consist. Let the Answ.
mark well that we must think the same i^ Christ, as we do in the Sacrament his
image. If consecration then take away the substance of bread and wine as
Papists teach, then personal uniting of the manhood unto God, takes away the
substance of the manhood as Eutyches affirmed. He knows, I say, he knows
that the comparison used by Gelasius enforces so much if it be applied to the
disproofe of Eutyches his heresy rightly and truly reported. Now as Gelasius
draws his comparison from the Sacrament to Christ, so does S. Austen as
Gratian alleges him from Christ to y^ Sacrament: De consecra. did. 2. cap.
Hoc est.
This is it which we say, says he, which by all means we labor to approve,
that the sacrifice of the church consists of two things, the visible form of
the elements, and the invisible flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: of
the Sacrament and the matter of the Sacrament, th^^ is, the body of Christ:
even as the person of Christ consists of God and man, for that Christ is
truly* God and truly m^^* For every thing contains the nature and truth of
those things whereof it is made. By which words it is most plain and eu^dent,
that as the person of Christ consists of the Godhead and manhood veri^^ and
^^^ly: so the Sacrament consisting of the visible element and the ^odi^ of
Christ, of an earthly thing and a heavenly thing, as Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
Ireneus speaks, contains the nature and truth of them both: and therefore
the nature and truth of bread and wine. And if the truth, then the substance as
Gelasius reasons concerning Christ: Gelas. con. Eurych.
If he be truly man, then there is in him the true substance of the nature of
man: because otherwise he cannot be truly man, but abiding substantially tr^e
in the propriety of his nature. So if there be the truth of the outward
elements in the Sacrament, then there is in them their true substance. For
otherwise there cannot be the truth of them, but as they abide substantially
true in the propriety of their nature. This collection together with the
places of Austen and Ireneus I set down before, sufficiently proving the
falsehood of Transubstantiation. But the Answ. thought good to pass it over
without any mention, because he could not find any answer at all to it, which
serves not for the maintenance of Eutyches his heresy; as do all those shifts
and collusions whereby he goes about to darken the evidence and clearenesse of
Gelasius his words. Let us see now what good stuff there is contained in them.
In his first and fourth circumstances, he bewraieth either his ignorance or
else his partiality and falsehood. For taking in hand by way of circumstance to
set down the heresy of Eutyches, where he should have done it wholly and
faithfully, he does it but in part and deceitfully, that it may not seem to
make so directly against his breadlesse bread. For he restrains it only to y^
time after Christ's ascension, as if Eutyches had thought that the humanity of
Christ was not consumed till after the time that he was ascended. Whereas
Gelasius in the very next words to the place before alleged, gives plainly to
understand that Eutyches meant the abolishing of the substance of the manhood
even while Christ was on the earth, though he retained the show and aprearance
of man, yea and continued passible also, by reason whereof, he said his Godhead
suffered and was crucified, which suffering was the very substantial property
of the humane nature. For Eutyches held not the annihilating of the properties
of the manhood, as the Answ. imagines, but the con^ounding of them with the
properties of the Godhead, so y^ the Godhead by those properties did and
suffered those things which belonged to the manhood. And this appears plainly
in the definition of the Chalcedon Council, where it is thus said: Council.
chalced. Act. 5. in definit.
They fondly imagine that there is but one nature of the Godhead and the flesh,
and so by a monstrous confusion of Christ, they signify that the divine nature
or Godhead is passible and subject to suffering. So that Eutyches held the same
of Christ on the earth, as the Papists do of the bread in the Sacrament, that
there was the show and appearance of man, and the properties of the manhood
remaining, but the substance was consumed: even as these do hold that there is
in the Sacrament a show of bread, and the properties of bread remaining, but
the substance of the bread is vanished. How then should Gelasius go about to
refute the heresy of Eutyches by the Sacrament, if his opinion as touching the
Sacrament had been the same that the Papists now is. Again whereas he says
that Eutyches held that the bread was utterly annihilated, nothing remaining
therein of the substantial properties or natures thereof, he deserves the just
reproach of a false and unshame fast person. For what a perverse and wilful
man is he to devise such a matter of his own brains, for proof or likelihood
whereof, there is not so much as any show to be found in any ancient writer.
Eutyches forsooth held that panietas and vi^eitas, the breaddinesse of the
bread, and the winynesse of the wine were gone, and Gelasius defended that the
breadinesse and winynesse do still remain, though there be neither bread nor
wine. So his good masters Index Expurgat. in censura Bertra.
the authors of the Index Expurgatorius to avoid the evidence of Bertrams
disputation, say, that he wrote against certain men which held that there was
not so much as the outward forms of bread and wine remaining in the sacrament,
but that that which was seen was the superficies or outside, or skin of the
body or flesh of Christ. O leaud and unconscionable men. Where were these men,
or what story ever made mention of any such? How dare they of their own heads
so boldly publish such vain tales? How does that harlot of Rome be witch and
enchaunt her lovers, that for her sake they care not what, how foolishly,
absurdly, falsely they speak, so that it may serve them for a shift to blind
the eyes of the unlearned? But the matter as touching Eutyches is plain by
Theodoret, that he yielded and confessed that Christ in the delivery of the
mysteries, called Theodor. dial. 1. To these things he answers: Ita
nominau^t. In co^^esso est. Hoc ver^ dixisti. ^ta dico.
bread his body, and wine his blood, that he honored these visible signs
with the name of his body and blood, not changing their nature, but adding
grace unto nature; that these were the signs not of his Deity, but of those
things whose names they did bear, that is of his body and blood, which he
acknowledged that Christ did truly take, but having taken them, changed them
into his divine nature. With what face then does the Answ. say, that the
heretic thought that the bread and wine were utterly annihilated, that
nothing of their nature remained, that the Sacrament was a matter only of
Christ's divine nature? It were answer enough unto him, to lay open this his
false and dishonest dealing; but yet I go forward.

In saying that Gelasius used these words by way of reply to Eutyches his
comparison (which he does to the end that having made of Eutyches his heresy
what he list, he may hew Gelasius his words to be an answer to that fancy of
his) he again deals amiss with Gelasius. For he of his own accord uses
them, to declare the point whereof he disputed; namely, that as the bread and
wine in the Sacrament become divine things, so as that by them we are made
partakers of the divine nature, and yet they loose not their former substance:
so though the manhood of Christ, by personal union with the Godhead be highly
advanced, so that it is truly said that the man Christ is God, yet he loses
not the substance and nature of the manhood. But supposing that the heretic
had urged Gelasius with that comparison, and had affirmed the presence of
Christ's divine nature only in the Sacrament, how I marvel does the Answ.
imagine that it had served for a direct answer, to have denied the real
presence? Should he have denied the real presence of the divine nature? That
none denies, because Vigi^. lib. 1. cont. ^uty. Plena sunt omnia filio, nec
est a^iquis locus di^initatis eius praesentia vacuus.
it is of the nature of the Godhead to be every where. Should he have denied
the real presence of the body of Christ, which is the very question? How had
that served his turn against the heretic, which neither urged him with real
presence of the body, nor thought that Christ had any body at all? What a wise
man is this to write thus, he knows not what, without rhyme or reason, without
head or tail. Surely for Gelasius to deny the real presence in this place,
had bin to talk, as the Answ. does, beside the purpose, foolishly and idly,
of matters whereof no occasion was giu^n to him.

In the second circumstance he sets down his Cuckowes note which he
rehearses again in y^ fourth, fifth, and sixth, to fasten it in the eyes and
memories of his secret readers, as being a special pillar to uphold his cause.
He tells me forsooth, y^ the real presence of y^ body of Christ was a truth
commonly known, current and generally confessed in ye primitive church, whereof
notwithstanding neither he nor all his follows for him are able to give any
certain and apparent proof out of any of the Fathers writings. But because
the Fathers fail him, he would prove it by the heretics, who as he says
did reason from it* as from a common received truth, to prove their heresies.
It is a sham^, we say, to belly the Devil, and why does ye Answ. belly ye
heretics, to make the^ y^ witnesses of his real presence? Indeed if it had
been a matter the^ received; it had served fit for the heresies of Marceon,
Manes, Apollinaris and such like, who taught that Christ had never any true
body indeed, but only a phantasy and show of a body. For they might and would
have said: do ye not confess that Christ's body i^ really in the sacrament,
yet nothing to be seen but the outward show of bread and wine. It is here, it
is there, it is in every priests hands, in every pi^, in every part of the
world at once in the quantity and likeness of a cake. What is this else but a
fancy of a body? Thus they would have reasoned, if it had been so believed;
especially when the ancient Fathers themselves, gave them occasion thereof by
proouing that Christ had a true body, because that the sacrament is used in
token of his body and blood, wherein he suffered and was put to death for us.
But they used not a word to this purpose because there was no such thing then
believed.

The manichees whom the Answ. names in the third circumstance, dreamed as S.
Austen Augst. con. faust. Manich. lib. 20. ca. 11.
declares that Christ was really in the Sun and Moon and upon the cross,
and hanging at every bough. etc. and all at once. S. Austen tells them that
Christ Secundum corporalem praesentiam.
according to his bodily presence, could not be at once in the Sun and Moon,
and upon the cross, and thereby crosses the real presence of the Papists,
whereby they hold christ corporally to be in heaven and in earth, in this man's
hands, and that man's hands and infinite places, and all at once: contrary to
the nature of a true body, whereto S. Austen in those words alludeth. Now
whereas the Answ. says, that S. Austen being urged by the Manichee, with the
real presence did grant the same, he lewdly abuses S. Austen. For the
heretic ibid ca. 1.
obiecting that the church used the bread and wine in the sacrament, with the
same superstitious conceit which they maintained, namely that Christ was realy
bound in them: S. Austen Answers, Ibid. ca. 13.
that the church did not use the bread and wine for a sacrament of religion, by
reason of any such opinion, that Christ was really bound in them, or in the
ears of corn, or branches of the vine, because then all bread and all wine
should have been matter of mystery and religion with them; which was not so:
but it is made mystical bread and wine, by a certain consecration, namely,
whilst by the word of God, they are dedicated and hallowed to be sacraments and
mysteries of the body and blood of Christ. The which consecrating and halowing,
the same S. Austen elsewhere declares thus concerning Baptism: August. ^n
Ioha. tri. 8^.
The word comes to the element and it is mede a sacrament; and in an other
place concerning the Lords supper, thus: Idem de tr^nit. lib. 3. cap. 4.
We call that the body of Christ, which being taken of the fruits of the
earth, and consecrated by mystical prayer, we receive in memory of the passion
of our Lord. Now, what is all this to the real presence, which the Answerer
says S. Austen did grant? Not a word does S. Austen use to import it. Nay he
rather rejects it in that he says, that bread and wine are not used in
sacrament, as in respect of Christ really bound in them, but are made only
mystical by consecration; where he denies that real presence which they
fancied, and puts no other in place thereof, but only says that the bread is
made mystical bread by consecration. As for Transsubstantiation, he is
plainly enough against it also in the same place, in that he calls the
sacrament, the sacrament of bread and of the cup; whereby we understand that
the sacrament is bread, and in that he denies that the church had the same
religion concerning bread and wine, that the Manichees had, because it was not
religion but sacrilege with the Manichees to taste wine, importing hereby, that
it was wine, which the church took and tasted in the sacrament. But the
Papists real presence, iumpeth with the Manichees imprisoning of Christ; for
they make Christ so fast bound by consecration to the forms of bread and wine,
that though ratts or mise or swine eat the same, or though it lie in the mire,
yet it must not be thought but that the body of Christ is there still, even till
the forms be consumed, and to think otherwise, as Thomas Aquinas says
derogateth from the truth of the sacrament, as after shall be declared.

To his sixth circumstance I answer him that the Lateran council was the
assembly of Gog and Magog, to set the idol Mauzim in his place. That which
they resolved against Berengarius, they reselued against all the Fathers; who
never knew real presence, nor transsubstantiation.

As for Innodentius his breadinesse and wininesse, panietas and vineitas, in
the seventh circumstance, the Answ* would not have named it but that swine are
delighted with mire and filth.

The eight circumsta^ce also contains only new Popish subtilties and
deserves no answer. The putting in thereof and others as impertinent by way of
explication of Gelasius his words shows the falsehood of the Answ. thinking
nothing less then to deal plainly, and seeking by frivolous tales and idle
talk to lead the reader away from that which otherwise he cannot but see.

The ninth circumstance tells us honestly, that before the Laterane council,
it was no heresy not to iumpe with Transsubstantiation. And then belike a man
might have been a Caluinist in that point, as all the Fathers were, and yet
not to be accounted an heretic. At least he might have said that the
substa^ces of bread and wine did remain in part, but not wholly forsooth; as
perhaps says the Answ* some of the Fathers* and namely Gelasius thought: a
ridiculous and childish fancy. When we show them plainly out of the Fathers
that the substances of bread and wine remain in the sacrament, forsooth the
Fathers thought that the substances of bread and wine, remain in part but not
wholly. What conscience may we think these men make of their answers? Why does
he not bring somewhat out of the Fathers, to approve this fond sophistication
and unhandsome dream? But it must be enough for us, that the Answ. tells us
that so it is.

But it is worth the noting that he tells us, that it was not clearly
defined before the Lateran council, what manner o^ conversion is in the
sacrament. No was? Why, did not the Apostles clearly know it? or knowing it,
did they not deliver it to y^ church? Did he which Act. 20. 27.
kept nothing back, but declared all the council of God, keep back this? or
did he deliver it to the Ephesians and not deliver it to the Romans and other
churches? To say the Apostles did not clearly know it, is to make himself
wiser then the Apostles. To say they knew it but declared it not, is to make
them unfaithful in their charge. To say that the church received it clearly
delivered, and yet that it was never clearly defined, until the Lateran
council, is a contradiction, and impugneth that in the one part which is set
down in the other. To say the church, and namely the church of Rome received
it, and did afterward forgo it, is to make the church of Rome, a very bad
keeper of the doctrines of the Apostles, especially seeing the sacrament is a
matter of continual and daily use. But indeed we take that which he says for
true, that Transsubstantiation was never clearly defined, before the Lateran
council. But we tell him withal, that we are very deinty to admit that for a
doctrine of truth, which for a thousand years and more after Christ, was never
clearly known or defined in the church of God. And because it was no heresy
all that while, not to iumpe with Transsubstantiation, we are well assured that
it is no heresy to leap from it now.

Now to return to Gelasius, the Answ. finds an hole or two in his words
before alleged, whereby he would feign creep out. The words are thus: There
cease not to be the substance, or nature of bread and wine. He adds ( or
nature) says the Answ. to mollify and interpret the word substance, as
importing that the natural properties of bread and wine remain though the
substance be gone. A very natural answer. Belike the substance remains, or
there cease not to be the substance, is as much as to say: the substance is
quite gone and utterly ceased, and only the accidents remain. But Gelasius a
little before speaks in the very same sort concerning Christ, and shows the
meaning of his own words: We say, says he, that the propriety of each
substance or nature, abides continually in Christ, where most plainly by the
same phrase of speech he makes substance and nature to import one thing. And
if we will follow the Answ. exposition, we must say here in the behalf of
Eutyches that not the substances themselves, but the natural properties of
each substance abide still in Christ, because he says substance or nature.
Again a little before that, he says: There is no substance but it is called a
nature, because if the nature of any thing being, be removed or taken away, the
substance also must needs be taken away. By which it is plain, that Gelasius
names nature, no otherwise, but to signify the very substance, because every
substance is called a nature. Otherwise when he names as often he does;
propriety of nature, the Answerer must expound it to be mea^t propriety of
natural properties, which is more absurd then that his face can be bold to
face it out. It is certain therefore that Gelasius by nature means the very
essential being of the thing. And so the Answerer cannot but know that in that
whole disputation concerning two natures in Christ, Gelasius by two natures
understands two entire and perfect substances as all the re^t of y^ Fathers
do. Only in this place Gelasius forgot himself and fell a sleep, and by
nature* would understand natural properties and accidents, albeit his very
drift was to show by the abiding of the nature of bread and wine in the
sacrament, the abiding of the nature, that is, the true substantial being of
the manhood of Christ.

But yet says the Answ. Gelasius says that the bread and wine do pass over
into a divine substance. We grant the same. For as Gelasius has said before,
they are now divine things because they are sacraments of Christ's body and
blood, and by them we are made partakers of the divine nature. The visible
element of the sacrament is no longer to be taken as a common or mere earthly
substance, but being sanctified by the word of Christ, it is a divine and
heavenly thing. And therefore does de consecr. did. 2. ca. hoc est.
saint Austen call the bread of the sacrament heavenly bread, and Cyprian
calls it Cyprian. de orat. domin. and de caena domi.
the food of salvation and of immortality, and Theodoret calls it Theodor.
dial. 2.
the bread of life, and Bertram says of it: Bertram de corp. and sang. domini.
There is in it the spirit of Christ, even the power of the word of God, not
only feeding but also clensing the soul. In respect therefore of this excellent
grace and virtue, it is rightly said that the bread and wine are now become a
divine substance? But do they therefore loose their own proper nature and
substance? Then we must think the like of the manhood of Christ. For Gelasius
says that we must think the same in Christ which we profess in his image, the
sacrament. If we think not so of the manhood of Christ, then we must conceive
that bread and wine pass over into a divine substance, not by forgoing their
own substance and nature, but Theodor. dial. 1. Non naturam mutans, sed
naturae gra^ia^ ad^ciens
by adding grace and spiritual blessing unto nature as Theodoret rightly
teaches us. So does Dionisius, whosoever he was, say; that we Dyonis. de
eccles. Hierar. cap. 1. and 3. stapulens. edi
are made God, and do pass over into God, not because we change our substance
and be made substantially Gods, but because through our communion with Jesus
Christ we are by grace renewed to the likeness of God, and effectually united
unto him. So does Vigilius say, that Vigil. lib. 1. cont. Eutych.
the nature of the flesh passed over into the person of the word, but yet so as
that says he, it was not consumed of the word. So does Leo Bishop of Rome say:
Leo. epist 22
We receiving the virtue of the heavenly food do pass over into the flesh of
Christ, who is made our flesh. Which S. Cyprian also says, and notes the
manuer thereof: Cypri. ser. de caena. dom.
We are united unto Christ, not by a corporal, but by a spiritual passing
over into him. Cyrill speaks in like sort that we are Cyril. in Ioh. lib. 1^.
ca. 26.
made one with Christ who by his flesh passed over unto us. Yet neither Christ
by passing over unto us, nor we by passing over into him do loose the propriety
and truth of our former nature and substance. By which it is plain that the
passing over into a divine substance does not enforce any changing of the
substance and nature, but only of the condition and use of the substance. And
therefore Gelasius says plainly that notwithstanding this passing over into a
divine substance, yet the bread and wine continue still in the propriety of
their own nature, which is the same which he had said before: There cease
not to be the substance or nature of bread and wine. For whereas the Answ. would
have the continuing in the propriety of their own nature to be understood of
the remaining of certain properties of bread and wine without the substance,
it is too gross and palpable shifting. For in the whole disputation concerning
two natures in our Savior Christ, that phrase of speech is continually used
both by Gelasius, Leo, Vigilius and others to import the manhood of Christ not
only in properties and qualities, which Eutyches would have admitted, but also
in truth and substance inuiolably being and remaining, which he would not
grant. Every kind of thing has his own proper and distinct essence and
being, whereby it is severed from all other things, and from whence do issue
immediately certain properties and qualities which are not incident unto any
other. Now this own-nesse as I may call it, and distinctnesse of essence and
being, these Fathers express by propriety of nature, affirming that Christ
continues in the propriety of both natures, namely so, as that each nature
the Godhead and the ma^hood reteineth his own proper and distinct substance and
being. Now seeing that the abiding of the bread and wine in the propriety of
their nature, is used by Gelasius in the place alleged to declare that
continuance of the manhood of Christ, it follows necessarily that it must be
understood of the remaining not only of the properties but also of the
substance of bread and wine: unless we will over turn all that those Fathers
have disputed against Eutiches, and plead for him out of their own words that
though certain properties and shows of the manhood of Christ be remaining,
yet the substance thereof is abolished. But the Answ. as guilty in his own
conscience of the untruth and vnsufficie^cy of this answer flitteth from it
and says as I noted before, that it may be that Gelasius thought ye somewhat
of the substance did remain, and therefore was somewhat of our opinion at
least, whereas he had said before that whatsoever Gelasius thought, he was far
enough from our mind. And yet such is his giddy head that by and by again he
says that if substance be understood for substance indeed, then there should
follow this great absurdity that Christ should be personally united unto the
bread, and so should consist of three natures, the Godhead, the manhood, and
the breadhood, as it pleases his wisedom-hood full untowardly, and vnhansomely
to conceive. So that it may be by this dream of his, that Gelasius thought
that Christ consists of three natures, the Godhead, the manhood, and the
breadhood, because it may be that Gelasius understood substance for substance
indeed. He has well deserved for this his learned reason to be personally
united unto a cloakbag. This idle fancy of his arises hereof, that he
understands no other presence but real and bodily, nor other uniting but
only personal. But of presence, Christ himself speaks as touching himself:
Mat. 18. 20.
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the
midst of them: yet we know he is not bodily present unto all such. Nay as
touching bodily presence, S. Austen says according to the Gospel, August. in
Ioh. tract. 50.
He is ascended into heaven and is not here. But according to his divine
majesty, according to his providence, according to his unspeakable and
invisible grace, it is fulfilled which he said: I will be with you always unto
the end of the world. So says Vigilius: Vigil. cont. Euty. lib. 1.
Christ is with us, and he is not with us. According to the form of a servant,
he is absent from us; according to the form of God, he is present with us.
Such is the presence of Christ in the sacrament, even cypr. de caena domini.
the presence of his divine power, as Cyprian calls it, whereby it comes to
pass, that as the Sun abiding bodily in the sky, yet by effect and working is
here on the earth, cherishing and comforting all things according to their
kind, so the son of righteousness Jesus Christ, though according to his
bodily presence remaining only in heaven, yet by his heavenly grace and spirit
is effectually present unto us in his holy sacraments, communicating himself
fully and wholly unto us, and joining us most nearly unto himself. As for that
gross presence which Papists teach, besides that it is unnecessary, it
repugneth also to that truth of the manhood of Christ, abiding in the
propriety of his own nature, which Gelasius defended and makes for the
heresies of Marcion, Eutyches and others of whom I spoke before. Now as the
presence of Christ in the sacrament is not carnal and bodily, so no more is
the uniting of Christ unto the sacrament any bodily or carnal matter, but
spiritual and sacramental: whilst by the word of God and the working of the
holy Ghost, there is made that mutual relation and respect betwixt the sign
and the thing signified, and such a dependence of the one on the other, that
the sign spiritually implies the force and virtue of the thing signified, and
the holy Ghost together with the sign, dispenses through faith the fullness
of that grace and blessing which is contained in the body and blood of Jesus
Christ. In which sort we believe also that Christ without any real presence is
united to the sacrament of Baptism, whereby we put on Christ, and are made
members of his body, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: neither is
there any more reason to maintain any real presence in the one sacrament, then
there is in the other. Thus therefore the remaining of the substance of bread,
does not enforce any personal uniting of Christ unto the bread. No, nor yet
that supposed real presence of Christ's body with the bread. The Vbiquitaries
when they teach that Christ's body is really present in the sacrament, yet
think not that the same is personally united unto it, neither does it follow
of that opinion of theirs. The Answ. himself, though in his conceit he receive
into his body y^ real body of Christ, yet I, hope will not think the same
personally united unto him, no nor yet to those forms and natural properties
of bread and wine, whereunder he says, the body of Christ lies inuisibly
hidden. He says that perhaps Gelasius, and undoubtedly others thought that
some part of the substance of bread and wine remained together with the body of
Christ, yea and Ferus ^n Math. cap. ^^
Ferus himself though a Papist, yet seems to doubt whether the substance of
bread remain or not together with the body, and yet he will not gather I hope,
that they thought though the substance did remain, that the body of Christ was
personally united unto the same, so that Christ should cons^st of three
natures, the Godhead, the manhood, and the breadhood. But what should I trouble
my self with such senseless and mad toys, serving only to blot paper, and
co^teining in them neither learning nor wit. As for that which follows, it is
but a new show of the same baggage stuff that I have examined already, and
needs no further answer. Only let me tell him, that he wretchedly peruerteth
the comparison made by Gelasius, and makes it fitly and rightly answerable to
the heresy of Eutyches. For as he says, that in the sacrament there is the
very body of Christ, having conjoined unto it the natural properties of bread
and wine, the substance being vanished: so said Eutyches that in the person of
Christ there was the Godhead, retaining with it the properties of the manhood,
to be visible, passible, mortal, etc. but the substance and distinct nature of
the manhood was consumed. Again he wittingly and willingly falsifieth the state
of the question which Gelasius disputed, as though he reasoned to prove the
continuing of the properties of the manhood, not of the substance: whereas the
purpose of Gelasius is altogether concerning the substance and nature it self:
which to continue inuiolably, notwithstanding the assuming thereof unto the
godhead, he shows by comparison of the sacrament where the substance of bread
and wine remains, notwithstanding they are adnanced to that honor to be the
mysteries of the body and blood of Christ. These things are sufficiently
bebated before: I come to that that follows.

P. Spence. Sect. 12.
NOw let us confer the places of Theodoretus by you alleged, with his own
sayings by you concealed. Theodoretus disputing with an Eutychian, who would
Christ now to consist of the only nature of his Deity, and not any more of the
humane nature, which he took of the virgin, does reprove him by the example
of the Sacrament of Christ's Supper, in the which Sacrament two things are
found: one which is seen, and that is the sign of bread and wine: the other
is not seen but understood and believed, and that is the true body and
blood of Christ. That which is seen is said to remain in his former
substance, nature, figure, and kind. In his substance, The mystical signs
remain in their former substance; that is, they do not remain in their former
substance.
because the forms of bread and wine subsist by the power of God, and have
their being now by themselves as they had it before, in the nature of bread and
wine. The same forms remain in their former nature, because they nourish no
less, then the substance of bread it self would have done, if it had
remained. They remain in the former shape and kind, as being things that may be
seen and touched, as they might before. Theodoretus then having said thus
much for the one part of the Sacrament, comes also to show the other part
thereof. For his mind is to declare, that as there be two kinds of things in
one Eucharist, so the two natures of God and man are in one person of Christ.
Therefore the other nature (besides the forms of bread and wine) is the real
substance of Christ's body and blood, of which part, thus he speaks,
Intell^guntur autem (esse) quae facta sunt and creduntur, and adorantur v^pote
quae illa sunt, quae creduntur; the mystical signs are understood to be
those things which they were made, and they are believed, and they are adored,
as being those things which they are believed to be. Note that these mystica
symbola are understood to be that they were made, but what? are they
understood to be that They are truly understood to be that in mystetie and
si^nificatio^* which in substance and nature they are not.
which they are not? Nay sir, that were false understanding, which falsehood
cannot be in the mysteries of Christ, they are the^ that indeed which they are
understood to be. What is it? Theodoretus shows a little before, that they
were after consecration the body and blood of Christ. Therefore the mystical
signs are understood to be the body and blood, not because they be not so,
but because they are so: for that they were made his body and blood, and so
they are believed to be, and are adored, or kneeled, and bowed unto. But how?
percase as bearing the image and signs of the body and blood of Christ. No
sir; but as being Strange divinity that mystical (...) should be indeed the
body and blood of Christ. (...) mystical sig^^ had been of the virgin Mary.
Ioh. 1. Theophy in Ioh. 1.
indeed the body and blood of Christ. (...); as being those things which they
are understood, and believed to be. They are Adored, because they are the
body and blood of Christ, (...) as being; (and the word (as) means in that
place a truth of being, as if it were vere existentia quae cre^untur, being
indeed the things which they are believed to be. So speaks S. John, Vi^imus
gloriam eius, gloriam quasi vnigeniti a patre, we saw his glory, a glory, as
of the only begotten of the father, to wit we saw the glory of him being
indeed the only begotten of his father. Upon which place Theophylact says,
(...) etc. This particle (...) in English (as) is not a word that betokens a
similitude or likeness; but that confirms and betokens an undoubted
determination, as when we see a King coming forth with great glory, we say,
that he came forth as a King: that is to say, he came forth as being indeed a
King. So that by the judgment of Theophylact, that particle ((...)) which
Theodoret uses, does betoken an undoubted being and determinate truth of that
thing whereof we speak. The holy mysteries are adored, as being those things
indeed which they are believed to be* This place is such as cannot be
reasonably answered unto. For the reason of adoring or giving Theodoret
intends not to give godly honor to the mystical signs, for that were
idolatry, but only such reverent usage as is fit for holy things See the
answer.
godly honor to the Sacrament of the altar is, because it is indeed the body
of Christ, as it is believed to be. But it is believed to be the body of
Christ after consecration, therefore it is adored as being the true body of
Christ. For Theodoret, before having confessed, the mysteries after
consecration to be called the body and blood of Christ, when it was demanded
farther: Do thou believe that thou receiuest the body and blood of Christ?
he answers to that question (...) ita credo, I do believe so. Now therefore
he affirms those mystical signs to be indeed after consecration the body
and blood of Christ, which they are believed to be, and so believed that they
are received of us. Every word must be weighed because we have to do with our
adversaries, who must find shifts, or else their deceit will appear to all the
world. First therefore let it be marked, that after consecration the mysteries
are called the body and blood. Secondly, that the mysteries are They are
understood to be and at made, and believed to be mystical signs of the body
and blood, and so are reverently used, though in substance they be but bread
and wine. This is all that Theodoret means, as shall appear.
understood to be the body and blood of Christ. Thirdly that they are made
so. Fourthly they are believed to be so. Fifthly they are adored, for that they
are indeed those things which they are believed to be. And last of all they are
received. The first saying, second, and the last ye can bear withal: to wit,
that they are called the body and blood, and are understood to be the body
and blood: and that the body and blood are received. For you would have them
called so, and not be so: thereby making the namer of them a miscaller, as one
that calls them by a wrong name. Secondly you would have them understood to
be the body and blood, and yet not be so: thereby showing that you take
pleasure in untrue understanding: for no S. Paul would have the rock understood
to be Christ, which indeed was not christ, and yet he was a good man.
good man would have a thing understood to be that, which indeed it is not.
Again, you would the body and blood to be received. How trow you? In the
faith of the man, but We receive the truth of the body of Christ, not by the
mouth of our bodies, but by the faith of our souls. You have turned faith into
the mouth, and the truth of the body into the fantasy of a body.
not in the truth of the body; thereby declaring that you divide faith from
truth, as men that have a persuasion of things that indeed be not so. But to
calling, understanding, and receiving; Theodoret joins also, believing,
adoring, and being. And the belief which he speaks of, is not referred to
heaven: but unto the holy mysteries. They are believed, they are adored, as
being those things which they are believed to be. h A peevish and blind fancy.
Nothing is more usual then to call the sign by the name of the thing
signified, though indeed it be not the same.
The thing that is called or named Christ's body and blood, is indeed that
thing which it is called: Christ can h misname nothing at all: for if he should
call that which were before air, water, or earth, by the name of fire, stones,
and bread, air, earth, and water, would sooner cease to be, and fire, bread
and stones would come in their place, then God would call any creature by a
wrong name. He called bread his body, therefore bread is understood to be
made the body of Christ. You say the understanding of man takes his beginning
of senses, which S. Austen says, that which you s^^ i^ bread, as your eyes
also tell you. He says it is that which our eyes tell us it is
tell me it is bread. I say in the matter belonging to faith, my understanding
is informed by Gods word: which tells me, it is In signification and
mystery after the manner of Sacraments, but not in substance.
the body of Christ: and Theodoret says, it is believed to be, and it is
worshipped, for it is so. And he gives the same very word of (...).
Worshipping to the holy mysteries, the which in the same sentence he gives
to the immortal body of Christ, sitting at the right hand of his father. And
no wonder, for seeing it is one body, whether it be worshipped in heaven or
Vig^lius says, that the flesh of Christ now that it is in heaven, is not upon
the earth. Therefore seeing it is in heaven, it cannot be worshipped upon the
(...)
upon the Altar: one worship is always due to it. Thus it is witnessed by
Theodoret, that the holy mysteries of Christ are worshipped and adored: not as
the signs of his body and blood, but as being indeed his body and his blood.
Therefore worship is not given to them as to images, which represent a thing
absent, but as to mystical signs which really contain the truth represented
by them. Look Bellarmine lib. 2. de Sacrament. cap. 27. pro horum testimonijs.

R. Abbot. 12.
NOw come to be handled the words of Theodoret, whom the Answerer uses in the
same honest manner as he has done Gelasius; yet cannot stop his mouth but
that he still stands at defiance with Transubstantiation. Theodoret in his
Dialogues debateth the whole matter of Eutyches his heresy, not only as
Eutyches himself held it as before has been showed, but also as some would
seem afterward to correct it, by saying that though Christ retained the
substance of his manhood while he continued on the earth, yet after his
ascension it was turned into ye Godhead* as of which there was thenceforth no
longer use. Now having disputed the matter at large, and brought the heretic
to this latter shift, he takes an argument from the Sacrament, to prove the
remaining and being of Christ's body and blood. For signs or samptars are not
admitted, but of such things as have being. Seeing therefore we receive the
mystical signs in token of the body and blood of Christ, it is certain that
the body and blood of Christ have their own nature and being. Now the
heretic takes occasion of this mention of the sacrament to reason thus: a
Even as the signs of the Lords body and o Theodor. dial. 2.
blood before the priests invocation are other things, but after the invocation
are changed and made other then before: so the Lords body after his
assumption or taking up into heaven, is changed into the divine substance.
Whereby being changed and made other, he means not any real changing into
the very body and blood of Christ, for he denied that Christ had now any
substantial body, neither does he understand the loosing of their own former
substance, for he expressly yields the contrary, as was showed before in
handling the place of Gelasius, but only intends that they are other in use
and name, being now made signs of the body and blood of Christ, which he once
truly took, but afterward did fo^go. This is plain enough by the
circumstance of the place, and by that which he had confessed before in the
former Dialogue, that the bread and wine were signs not of the divine nature
of Christ, but of those things whose names they did bear, namely the body and
blood. But to the objection Theodoret answers thus: Thou art taken in the
net, which thy self have made. For the mystical signs do not depart from
their own nature after consecration. For they continue in their former
substance, and figure and form, and may be seen and touched as before. But
they are understood to be the same which they are made, and are believed so,
and adored as being the same that they are believed. Now therefore confer the
image with the principal, and thou shall see the likeness. For the figure
must be like unto the truth. Verily that body of Christ has also the same
form as before, the same figure, and circumscription, and to speak all at
once, the same substance of a body. But it is made immortal after his
resurrection, etc. Here it is plainly avouched, that the mystical signs
continue not only in figure and shape, but also in substance, the same that
they were before, and so as that in them we must take notice how Christ
continues the same in substance of his body after his ascension. For the
mystical signs are the figure and image of Christ's body, and the figure must
be correspondent to the truth. And therefore if we find not the true and
proper substance remaining in the mystical signs, neither can it be avouched
in the truth, that is in Christ's body. What construction now then shall we
have of these words? Mary this. The mystical signs remain in their former
substance, that is to say, the forms have a new subsistence by themselves, and
the accidents remain without the substance. Bread and wine after consecration
remain in their former substance; that is to say, there is the color of bread
and wine, the taste of bread and wine, the force and strength of bread and
wine, the quantity and quality of bread and wine, but there is no substance
of bread and wine. I wonder whether these men be persuaded of the truth of
these unreasonable and senseless expositions. If they be, it is fulfilled in
them which is written, 2. These. 2. 11
God shall send upon them strong delusio^ that they may believe lies, which
believed not the truth, etc. If not, then Esa. 5. 20.
Woe says the Prophet, to them that call good evil, and evil good, which put
light for darkness, and darkness for light. The thing is plain enough. The
mystical signs says Theodoret, remain in their former substance. What was
their former substance? The very true and proper being or substance of bread
and wine. They continue therefore in the true and proper being and substance of
bread and wine. But the Answerer goes from substance which Theodoret names,
to subsistence of his own forging; and yet even there confounds himself
without recovery. For what was their former subsistence? Mary, they subsisted
before in the natures of bread and wine, says the Answerer. And how now? They
subsist now by the power of God, says he, and have their being by themselves.
But that cannot be, for they must abide in their former subsistence, and that
was in the natures of bread and wine. Therefore there must still be bread and
wine wherein these forms and mystical signs must subsist. And yet further, if
these words of Theodoret do not import the remaining of the very substance of
bread and wine, the heretic is not at al caught, as Theodoret tells him
that he is. For he has to reply, and would have replied if Transubstantiation
had been then believed. As it is in the mystical signs which are the image,
so must it be in the truth, which is, the body of Christ. The mystical signs
loose their substance after consecration. Therefore the body of Christ loses
his substance after his ascension. But indeed the argument stands firm
against the heretic with Theodoret, as it did with Gelasius. As it is in the
mystical signs, so it must be in y^ body of Christ. The mystical signs
keep their substance after consecration. Therefore Christ's body remains the
same substance after his ascension. And thus the words go current both
against Eutyches his confusion and popish transsubstantiation. Now I cannot but
marvel how the Answerer making Theodoret to speak so nicely and precisely of
those Laterane subtilties, of forms subsisting by themselves, of natural
properties and figures and shapes remaining without any substance, does imagine
that Theodoret being so long before the Laterane definition, should be so
thoroughly acquainted with these matters, and so perfectly set them down, which
yet, as it is plainly confessed in the Index Expurgat. in censu. Bertra. quae
subtilissime and verissime posterior aetas addidit.
Index Expurgatorius, have been since added in latter times, and indeed were
never known to the ancient Fathers. Without doubt Theodoret was some Prophet,
and had some special revelation to this purpose, to know what should be agreed
upon in the Laterane Council; and marvel it is, that for this cause he was
not sainted in the Roman Calender. But a liar they say should bear a brain,
and the Answ. and his fellows should remember, that if these things were added
since in later times, as they themselves confess, then Theodoret had never any
intelligence of them as indeed he had not. To leave this and to go forward; he
now enters further into the words of Theodoret, and opens that which I
concealed, and weighs every word at large, and when all is done, Parturiunt
montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Theodoret, as he says, having set down one
part of the Sacrament which he calls y^ forms of bread and wine, comes to
set down the other to be the real body and blood of Christ, and that in
these words: The mystical signs are understood to be the same that they are
made, and are so believed, and adored as being the same that they are believed.
Now hereof he gathers, that they are understood to be the body and blood of
Christ, and it may not be a false understanding, therefore they are so indeed:
and so they are believed to be, and adored not as being signs of the body and
blood of Christ, but as being the same indeed. How pretily this man plaieth
with a shadow, and solaceth himself with a large description of his idle
fancy. Who told him, I marvel, that this was Theodorets meaning? Surely he
took it out of some of his learned Treatises* and believed it as an Oracle Ex
tripode. But let me demand of him, are the forms of bread and wine understood
to be, to be, I say, y^ body and blood of Christ, are they believed to be so;
are they adored as being not signs, but verily and indeed the body and blood
of Christ? What new stuff is this, that forms of bread and wine be indeed
Christ's body and blood, and must be adored with godly honor, as the Answ.
means adoration. Is Christ's body now become forms of bread; and must we
adore and worship forms of bread? That is idolatry even by the confession of
his own side. But he will except and tell me that, not the forms, but the
body contained under them is adored? Yea but he has told me already, and
Theodorets words as he expounds them import no other, that the forms are the
body of Christ and are adored as being so indeed. Clear it is, that Theodoret
refers that adoration, which he speaks of, to the mystical signs. So
that the Answ. must either make himself an idolater, and must turn the body
and blood of Christ into forms of bread and wine, or else he must seek a new
construction of Theodorets words. The meaning is plain. The mystical signs
before consecration are (not mystical signs but) merely bread and wine. By
consecration they are made symbola mystica corporis and sanguinis domini:
mystical signs of the body and blood of Christ. And notwithstanding that
after consecration they continue in their former substance, yet are they
understood and believed to be not only that which they are in substance, but
the same that they are made, that is, signs of the body and blood of Christ,
and are honored and reverenced as being translated from common use to be, as
they are made, mystical signs of Christ's body and blood. And this to be the
plain meaning of Theodoret, it appears by that which he adds immediately;
for having thus set down the mystical signs, though in substance bread and
wine as they were before, yet understood to be the signs of Christ's body and
blood, he adds: Confer then the image with the pattern or principal, and
thou shall see the likeness. For the figure must be agreeable or answerable to
the truth. Where we see that he calls the mystical signs which he has
spoken of, the image and figure, not for that which they are in substance, but
for that which they are understood to be made: and on the other side, the body
of Christ whereof they are the image and figure, he calls the pattern, the
principal, the truth; and infers hereof, that as these signs though they be
thus highly honored to be the images, the signs, the figures of the body and
blood of Christ, yet are in substance and nature the same still* so the body
of Christ though^t be now become immortal, and not subject to any corruption
or weakness, and be set at the right hand of God, and worshipped of all
creatures, yet is still a true body, retaining the same form, figure,
circumscriptio^, and substance that it had before. Thus Theodoret will in no
wise yield to be made a Patron, either of real presence, or of
Transubstantiation. His judgment is so clear in these points, that he shows
but a naughty and leaud mind, whosoever shall go about to father any of these
matters upon him. In the former Dialogue he says plainly; that Christ in the
delivery of the mysteries called bread his body; that he set upon the sign
the name of his body; that he honored the mystical signs with the name of
his body and blood, not changing their nature, but adding grace unto nature;
that the holy food is the sign and figure of the body and blood of Christ.
And in this dialogue again, that the mystical signs of the body and blood of
Christ are offered to God by the priests of God; that the mystical signs do
represent the true body: that they are the image and figure of Christ's body;
and makes a manifest difference betwixt the body it self and the mystical
sign which is called the body. By all which speeches he declares that the
mystical signs are truly bread and wine, yet by consecration made figures of
the body and blood of Christ, and called by the name of the body and blood of
Christ, as Sacraments are wont to be called by y^ name of the things whereof
they are Sacraments, to lift up our minds from the beholding of the visible
elements, to the consideration of the things signified by them, as Theodoret
in the first Dialogue shows. And therefore the Priest has not in his hands
the real body of Christ to offer up unto God, but only the mystical signs
which represent the body; so that both Transubstantiation, and real presence,
and real sacrifice, are all overthrown by Theodorets judgment. Now whereas
the Answ. urges that we receive the body and blood of Christ, Theodoret
indeed says, that he believes that he is made a partaker thereof in receiving
the Sacrament. We believe the same, and it is our singular comfort. But this
receiving of Christ is not really by the mouth into the body, but spiritually
by faith into the soul. We say with the ancient Fathers, that this food is not
the food of the belly but of the mind, not for the teeth to chew, but for the
conscience to be refreshed with. S. Austen checketh that conceit of bodily
eating; Aug in Ioh. ^^. 25.
Why preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? Believe and thou have eaten. ibid.
tr. 2^.
For to believe in Christ, this is, says he, to eat the bread of life. And
acknowledging no other real presence of Christ, whereby we may receive him and
eat him but only in heaven, he makes one to demand of him, ibid tr. 50.
How shall I take hold of him being absent? how shall I put up my hand to
heaven to take hold of him there? Whereto he answers: Send up thy faith and
thou have laid hold of him; plainly confessing that there is no bodily presence
of Christ here, but that by faith he is to be received sitting in heaven.

That which the Answ. further urges of adoration, is frivolous, unless he
could show it to be meant of divine or godly honor, that is, which is proper
unto God. Theodoret plainly refers it to the mystical signs; but to give
divine honor or adoration to mystical signs, or to forms of bread and wine,
is manifest idolatry. The word of adoration here used by Theodoret, is very
often used by the seven interpreters in the Greek, and by the vulgar Latin
interpreter also not only for divine adoration, but also for civil worship.
And this diverse signification Aug. Quaest. in Genesis lib. 1. cap. 61.
S. Austen notes upon that which is written concerning Abraham, that Gen 2^ 7.
he adored ye Princes of the Hittites, as the Latin translation speaks. It
is needless to use many proofs hereof, seeing the Answ. masters the The.
^^no. tat. Act. 1^. 25*
Rhemists confess that this word of adoration does not always note divine
worship; but is commonly used in the scriptures toward men. So the gloss of
the* Canon law makes a construction of adoration, by which we may, as it is
there said, De conse. did. 3. cap. ^^n^rab^les.
Adore any sacred or holy thing; or Thom. Aquin. 22. q 8. a^. ^.
any excellent creature as Thomas Aquinas says, which adoration they expound
by having reverence thereof. Therefore Theodoret referring adoration to the
mystical signs, must not straightwaies be taken to understand divine honor
and worship, but only imports a religious and holy regard and reverence to be
had thereof, as being not now common bread and wine, but divine and heavenly
mysteries, sanctified by the word and spirit of God to most excellent and
singular use. Which reverence S. Austen ascribes not only to the Lords Supper,
but also to the Aug. de doct* Chr lib. 3. ca 9.
Sacrament of Baptism, by the Latin word Venerari. So that the Answ. can
gather nothing out of Theodoret to serve his turn. Whereas he further says,
that Christ calls nothing by a wrong name, etc. he shows his folly and
peevish ignorance. Signs and Sacraments are usually called by the names of the
things whereof they are signs, though in substance they be not the same, and
therefore are wrong named in respect of the substance, but rightly and truly
named in respect of the signification, 1 Cor. 10 2.
The rock was Christ, says S. Paul. He says not, says Idem. quaest. sup.
Le^it. ^7.
S. Austen, The rock signified Christ, but speaks as if it were Christ,
which yet was not he in substance but in signification. Nothing is more usual
either in sacred or profane writings, then thus to speak without
transubstantiating one thing into another. Christ says, that he is the vine
and his father the husbandman; must Christ therefore needs be turned into a
vine, and the father into a husbandman? He says that we are his sheep, are we
therefore turned into sheep? This must needs follow, if it be true which the
Answ. fondly speaks of the misnaming of things. But this is taken out of his
blind devotions, and serves him as a reason whereby to seduce in corners silly
and ignorant souls; O, says he, ye may not think that Christ will misname
any thing, and therefore when he called bread his body, without doubt he
turned it into his body. Mean knowledge will teach any man that this is but
fond and childish trifling. And thus much of Theodoret. Now that which was
further added in my former discourse out of Austen and Irenaeus, for declaring
and justifying that which was spoken by Gelasius and Theodoret, the Answ. slily
passes over, as being too manifest for him to cavil at. But partly it has
already, and partly it will by and by meet with him again.

P. Spence. Sect. 13.
YOur secundum quendam modum out of Saint Augustine ad Bonifacium epist. 23.
affirms the Sacrament of Christ's body to be his body, but the manner is the
point: for he was S. Austen speaks not of a manner of real being, but of a
manner and form of speaking and signifying. See the Answer.
visible and passible on the earth, in heaven in Majesty, in the Sacrament
sacramentally, and inuisibly: but yet truly. As for the examples used in the
allegation of his passion, and resurrection, because they were once done and
passed, the memories of them cannot be the things themselves, but a memory
only. But his body ever remaining, the memory of it may be also the very thing
it self, and that S. Augustine in so many places affirms that you must not
so rack this place to overthrow the other, and to set him at bate with
himself. Join therefore with this testimony of S. Augustine, another place
of the same August. in Sententijs Prosperi, and by that learn to understand
his own meaning of his secundum quendam modum. The place is thus: It is his
flesh which in the Sacrament we receive covered in the form of bread, and it
is his blood which we drink under the figure and savor of wine. Namely, flesh
is a Sacrament of flesh, and blood a Sacrament of blood. By flesh and blood,
both invisible, spiritual, and to be understood, is signified the visible and
palpable body of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Here you see by answer not by us patched and clouted, but Untrue: for it
cannot be showed that these are his words: and yet they serve not the Answ.
turn as shall appear.
by himself set down he explicateth thus much, that in both sides is true
flesh, and true blood. But now to his secundum quendam modum, he tells you
that on the one side is flesh covered in the form of bread in the Sacrament,
and blood under the form and savor of wine: invisible, spiritual, and to be
understood: this for the manner of the one: but on the earth, and now in heaven
a a visible and palpable body. Yet remember that flesh is a Sacrament of flesh,
and blood of blood. More I might say, but infinite have said it: to them I send
you.

R. Abbot. 13.
FOr the exposition of Christ's words, This is my body, I showed the
testimonies of the ancient fathers, that Christ called the bread and wine his
body and blood, taking for the ground of my speech that which S. Austen says:
Aug. Epis^* 23.
that Sacraments have a resemblance of those things whereof they are
Sacraments, and that because of this resemblance they commonly take unto them
the names of the things themselves, whereof they are sacraments. Now to this
rule the Answerer says nothing at all, as neither he did before when I
mentioned it concerning sacrifice, whereas he should have taken it for his
greatest enemy, and therefore fought most strongly against it, because hereby
is discharged the greatest part of that which either he or his fellows can
object for their sacrifice, real presence and Transubstantiation. But I gather
hereby his wilful and malicious resolution against plain and evident truth.
The words which he answers next, follow immediately after the words already
mentioned. As therefore says S. Ibid.
Austen, the sacrament of the body of Christ, is after a certain manner the
body of Christ, and the sacrament of the blood of Christ, is after a sort his
blood: so the sacrament of faith, namely baptism, is faith. Whereby S. Austen
exemplifieth that which he had said before, that sacraments because of their
resemblance take the names of ye things whereof they are sacraments. For even
so the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, is after a sort, that is,
by resemblance the body and blood of Christ: not verily and indeed then, but
after a sort and by resemblance, and so by resemblance called the body and
the blood of Christ: for as the sacrament of the body, is the body, so the
sacrament of faith, is faith. The sacrament of faith, is not faith indeed, but
by questions and answers of faith, it betokens the faith of Christian men.
So therefore the sacrament of the body, is not indeed the body, but betokens
the body of Christ that was given for us, and so because of this resemblance is
called the body. And this is the manner or sort of which S. Austen speaks,
not a manner of real being, but a manner of speaking and sacramental
betokening. As for that which the Answ. says, to note that manner that the
sacrament is inuisibly but yet truly the body, and so a memory, that it is
the thing it self, S. Austen acknowledges no such matter, nay it is contrary
to the whole drift and purpose of S. Austens speech. And beside it is
unreasonable and absurd, that the same thing should be the sacrament, and the
thing it self, the sign and the thing signified: the memorial and the thing
remembered: neither hangs it together by any better reason, then as if a man
should be said to be his own father, or a husband to be a husband in respect
of himself, or a Prince to be a Prince unto himself, and so to be both Prince
and subject. Every child knows that the sacrament of Christ's body, is the
visible sign of Christ's body, as all sacraments are visible signs: and the
visible sign of Christ's body is not the body it self. Therefore the
sacrament of Christ's body is not the body it self: Yea, S. Austens saying as
is before alleged that the sacrifice of the Church consists of De conse.
did. 2. cap. Ho^ est.
two things: the sacrament which is the visible element, and the matter of the
sacrament which is the body of Christ, makes it plain enough y^ he took the
sacrament of Christ's body, and the body it self to be two things, and not
one, as the Answ. absurdly conceiueth. But yet he takes upon him to prove this
absurdity by S. Austen himself, and alleges certain words, by which he
would have me to understand this place which has been already spoken of. The
words are thus: De conse. did. 2. cap. Hoc est.
It is his flesh which we receive in the sacrament covered in the form of
bread, and his blood which we drink under the form and savor of wine. Namely
flesh is a sacrament of flesh, and blood is a sacrament of blood. By the flesh
and blood, both visible, spiritual, and intelligible, is signified the visible
and palpable body of our Lord Jesus Christ, full of the grace of all virtues,
etc. Now of these words the Answ. as some other of his fellows do, makes a
monstrous conclusion, as if Christ had two kinds of flesh at one and the same
time, one visible, another invisible: one in heaven, another in earth: Tho.
Aqui. Par. 3. qu. 76. art. 3.
one having the due proportion of a body, the other without all proportion, and
having no difference of head or feet, or any other parts: one the same as it
was borne of the virgin Mary: the other like to the fantasy of Marcion and
the Manichees, of the nature of a spirit, Ibid art. 4.
whole in the whole cake, and whole in every part of the cake, so that though
it be broken into a thousand pieces, yet every one of them has the whole body
of Christ. But we believe not any such fantastical body of Christ: we read
only of a true and substantial body, wherein he is like unto us, wherein he
sits at the right hand of God August. Ep* ad Darda. 57. and in Ioh. tr. 30.
in some one place of heaven, as S. Austen notes, and is there contained, by
reason of the manner of a true body, until he come to judge the quick and the
dead, at which time he shall come in the same form and substance of his body,
in which he went from hence, to which we believe he has given immortality,
but has not taken from it the nature of a body, y^ it should be any where in
that manner as y^ Answ. and his fellows. Marcion-like do teach. We say as
Vigilius also says: (...) con. (...)
the flesh of Christ when it was upon the earth, was not in heaven, and now
because it is in heaven, surely it is not on the earth. As for the words which
he alleges, I marvel how he can make them good to be S. Austens. In all S.
Austens works extant, they are not found. They are cited out of the sentences
of Prosper, and there they are not. Beda has many fragmentes of Austen, but
not a word of this. L(...) de sacra. Eucha.
Lanfrancus uses them as his own words without any quotation of Austen, and
that writing against Berengarius where he would surely have countenanced them
with the name of Austen if they had been his. The truth is for ought that I
can perceive, Lanfrancus is the author of them, and they are his ill-favored
answer to Berengarius his allegation of S. Austens words which we have now in
hand. Yet because Gratian by error has made S. Austen the reputed father of
them, mistaking be like Austen for Lanfrancus, as very oftentimes he is found
to put the names of Austen, and others to those things which they never spoke,
I will do the Answe. that courtesy to take them for S. Austens words, only so
that he will not make S. Austen in this point to be at bate with himself. First
therefore according to the doctrine of S. Austen and all others who have
defined what sacraments be, they are always Aug decate chi^rud. ca. 26.
visible signs, and therefore to be discerned with the sense. For, De d^ct.
C(...)l. 2. cap 1.
a sign says the same S. Austen, is a thing which beside the show that it
offers to the senses, causes by it somewhat else to come into the mind and
understanding. In sacraments therefore being signs, ^x ser. ad infan. Beda.
1. Cor. 10. Co^^. Maximi. Aria. lib. 3. cap. 22.
one thing is seen, another thing is understood by that which is seen; and
therefore again does he call the sacrament In Johan. tra. 80.
a visible word, because the visible creature being consecrated to the
sacramental use, does in the use thereof after a sort, set before our eyes
that which the word of God delivers to our ears, yea and does as it were
speak unto us also to admonish and put us in mind of the things thereby so
signified. Now S. Austen does very precisely put difference De consecr. di. 2.
cap. Hoc est.
betwixt the sacrament which is the visible sign, and the thing or matter of
the sacrament; In Ioh. tr. 26
so that in diversity of sacraments, yet the matter of the sacrament, that
is, the thing signified may be the same, and Ibid.
a man may be partaker of the sacrament or sign, and yet have no benefit at
all of the thing signified. Notwithstanding by reason of that relation which by
the word of God is wrought betwixt the sacramental sign, and the thing thereby
signified, Epist. 23. and in quaest. super Leuit. q. 75.
the sign or sacrament, as has been before said, does usually take unto it
the name of the thing signified; as De consecr. did. 2. cap. vtrum sub.
Gratian notes again under S. Austens name, that the name of the body of
Christ, is given not only to the very body, but also to the figure thereof,
which is outwardly perceived. But what shall we take this figure of the body to
be by S. Austens judgment? Marry, says he, Ex ser. ad infan. Beda. 2. Cor.
10.
that which you see, is bread, as your eyes also tell you: which words the
Answe. has left unanswered, as also the other De conse. did. 2. cap. Hoc est.
that the sacrament contains the nature and truth of the visible element.
But by those words S. Austen refers us to our eyes, and wills us to
believe our eyes that it is verily bread. Now then seeing that by his judgment
a sacrament is a visible sign, and the visible sign in the Lords supper is
bread, how may it stand with his doctrine that the flesh covered* in the form
of bread, is a sacrament of the flesh, and the blood under the form of wine,
is a sacrament of the blood, and that by the invisible flesh is signified the
visible body of Christ. Surely if we take flesh to signify truly and properly
flesh, this stands not with S. Austens grounds. For seeing flesh is not
visible in the sacrament, neither is there any appearance thereof to the sense:
nay it is called here invisible flesh, it cannot be said to be a sacrament,
that is, a visible thing. Therefore we must seek another meaning of the
words, flesh and blood, according to the other rule, whereby the outward
elements take unto them the names of the things represented by them. By flesh
and blood then we understand the visible elements which are called by these
names, and that not only for that they do signify the true flesh and blood
of Christ, but also as August. ser. ad in^an. a^ud Bed. 1. cor. 10.
touching the spiritual fruit, as S. Austen speaks: in Ambros. de sacram.
lib. 6. cap. 1.
grace and virtue, as says saint Ambros: Cypria de caena d(...). and de resu^.
chri.
concerning the invisible efficiencie and virtue, as Cyprian speaks, are the
same to the faith of the receiver; according to that which Gratian says,
concerning a prayer of the Church, craving to receive the truth of the flesh
and blood of Christ, that some not De cons^cr. did. 2 cap. species.
without probable reason did expound that truth of the flesh and blood of
Christ, to be the very efficiencie or working thereof, that is, the
forgiveness of sins. Now because the visible element which is thus called
flesh is no such thing in outward appearance, neither has any show of this
virtue: therefore it is said to be flesh covered in the form of bread,
invisible, spiritual, a matter of understanding. For sacraments contain
those things which they contain, not openly but covertly; not in appearance
of the things themselves, but under the signs of the visible elements, not
visibly and corporally and to be perceived with the eye, but inuisibly and
spiritually, and to be conceived with the understanding. Where I make not that
containing or covering or being under, a physical or local matter, but I
mean it; partly in respect of signification (in which manner saint Austen says
that August. de catechi. rud. cap. 4.
in the old Testament, the new was hidden, and that Ibid epis. 89.
the incarnation of Christ was covered or hidden in the time of the old
Testament; the reason of which manner of speech, he elsewhere makes to be this,
Ibid. de Bapti^mo. cont. Donat. lib. 1. cap. 15.
because it was hiddenly signified. So he says again that Christ did ^bid in
Ioh. tra. 2^.
cover grace in those words which he used in the sixth of John, of eating his
flesh and drinking his blood, meaning that he did obscurely signify the same.
To this purpose Bertram says, as touching the sacrament, that it Bert. de co^.
and sang. domi.
shows one thing without in figure, but within it does represent another,
through the understanding of faith:) partly in respect of the secret and
invisible working of the spirit of God, Cypria. de caena domini.
whose divine majesty, as Cyprian speaks, does never absent it self from
the holy mysteries, but does, though without appearing to the eye, hiddenly
work the effect of that which is signified. Thus we may say as touching
Baptism, that it is the blood of Christ covered or hidden in the visible
element of water that does cleanse us from our sins. In which manner, the
council of Nice says. council. Nice. In fine ex cut. her. Tonstallo. To. 1.
council.
Our Baptism must be considered, not with bodily eyes, but with the eyes of
the mind. Thou see water, but consider the power of God, covered or lying
hidden in the water. Think the water to be full of the sanctification of the
holy Ghost, and of divine fire. And thus does Chrysostom declare the nature of
all Christian mysteries, in which, says he, Chrysostom. in 1. cor. hom. 7.
we see not that which we believe, but we see one thing and believe another,
and therefore the believing man is otherwise affected in them, then the
infidel. For, says he, the infidel hearing of the water of Baptism,
thinks it to be merely water, but I do not simply see that which I see, but
I behold it in the cleansing of the soul through the holy Ghost. Hereupon he
compares these mysteries to books, which an unlearned man takes, and sees
the letters, but understands nothing thereof. But one that is learned finds
great matter laid up or covered, and hidden in them: so the infidel hearing of
our mysteries, seems not to hear them, but the expert Christian beholds
great virtue in the things that are hidden in them. Thus things which are
signified by our mysteries are said to be covered and hidden in the^, because
they are not perceived with the bodily eye, but only with ye eye of the
faithful and believing mind The meaning then of the words above named according
to the doctrine of S. Austen, must be thus: that in the sacrament of the flesh
and blood of Christ, it is not mere bread and wine that we receive, but it is
in understanding and spiritual grace and blessing the flesh and blood of
Christ, not appearing so to the sense, which discerns only bread and wine,
but yet, as in all other mysteries of Christian Religion, so in this faith
beholds heavenly grace covertly and hiddenly contained through the holy
Ghost, and by the visible elements perceives the inward force of the flesh
and blood of Jesus Christ. The reason whereof, is because the visible signs
which bear the name of the flesh, and blood of Christ, are Sacraments, and
therefore not only have the name, but contain the force and power of that
true flesh and blood of Christ where in he suffered for our sins. And so by
these visible things which thus inuisibly, spiritually, and only by way of
understanding and mystery, are the flesh and blood of Christ, is signified
that true body of Christ which is visible, palpaple, full of grace, virtue,
majesty, and glory. No other meaning can the Answ. make of these words by S.
Austen, unless he will contrary those generally received grounds which Saint
Austen sets down: and surely hard it is to find in Austen that Christ has
one body visible, palpable, full of grace, virtue, majesty, and glory,
another not so, as these words import, if they be understood as the Answerer
takes them. And if he will have the word Form, as I know his meaning is, to
import such empty forms as he makes, without substance, S. Austen will deny
him that, for that he makes it the general name of the outward sign in all
Sacraments, when he defines a Sacrament thus: De co(...). (...). did. ^. ca.
^^r.
It is a visible form of invisible grace. But now if I seem partial in
expounding these words, let the same Saint Austen as Gratian cites him, even
in the very next words justify this exposition. For thus he says: Ibid. cap.
Hoc est.
The heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ is in it manner called the
body of Christ, whereas it is indeed the Sacrament of his body, even of that
body which being visible and palpable was put upon the Cross, and the
offering of the same flesh which is performed by the hands of the priest, is
called the passion, death and crucifying of Christ, not in the truth of the
thing, but in a signifying mystery. Where S. Austen plainly calls the
heavenly bread of the Sacrament the flesh of Christ, yet not as being flesh
verily and indeed, for then it should truly and properly be called the body of
Christ. But now it is so called, but only in it manner, whereas it is indeed but
a Sacrament of his body, which manner he declares in the other point to be
not in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery. And if I be
partial here also, let the gloss expound it: Ibid in Glo^.
The heavenly bread, that is, the heavenly Sacrament which does truly represent
the flesh of Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperly. Whereupon it
is said, in it manner, and not in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying
mystery; that the meaning may be thus: It is called the body of Christ, that
is, the body of Christ is signified. If this will not serve, let him hear also
the master of the sentences, whom he may not dislike, unless he can say: Hic
magister non tenetur. He having set down the words which the Answ. urges,
says thus: Sent. lib. 4. did. 10.
Mark here diligently that S. Austen here uses a trope or figure, whereby the
signs do bear the name of the things signified by them. For here the visible
form of bread is called by the name of flesh, and the visible form of wine by
the name of blood. Now it is called the invisible and intelligible flesh of
Christ, because according to that form, flesh is not seen, but understood,
and so the blood. Therefore the invisible flesh is said to be a sacrament of
the visible flesh, because the form of bread according to which that flesh is
not seen, is a sacrament of the visible flesh; because by the invisible flesh,
that that is, by the form, according to which the flesh of Christ appeapeareth
not flesh, is signified the body of Christ, which is visible and may be felt
where it appears in his form. To this he adds out of the other words of
Austen, that the bread is called the body, being indeed the sacrament of the
body of Christ, not in the truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery,
and so makes S. Austen to expound that which before he says, he had obscurely
spoken. Thus the Answ. own doctors though otherwise friends to
transubstantiation, yet do justify my exposition of this place, and make it
manifest, that though the place be obscure at first sight, yet by the common
grounds of divinity it connot be construed so, as that transubstantiation may
necessarily be proved thereby. Therefore I say still with Austen that the
sacrament of the body of Christ, is only after a certain manner the body of
Christ, namely, not properly, not in the truth of the thing, as the Answerer
avouches: but only in a signifying mystery betokening the same.

P. Spence. Sect. 14.
FOr your place of Chrysostom. The bread is vouchsafed the name of the body,
etc. For as for the place of S. Cypr. lib. 2. Epis. 6. is such as deserves no
answer, Cypria^. says that Christ called the bread* made of many grains his
body, etc. It is very bread therefore which is called the body.
only telling you that the bread whereof the sacrament was made, was compact of
many grains, and the wine pressed forth of many grapes, which no baker nor
vintner will deny, which is smally to this purpose: the place I say of
Chrysostom. only flattereth you, with these words. The words which I alleged
are thus: The bread is vouch^afed the name (...) the ^ody o^ christ.
The nature of bread remains. Why sir? who denies that the natural
properties of color, shape, taste, and feeding remain? no Catholic I am
sure, so that you see your testimony out of him makes not against us, nor
avails you any more then the painted fire warmed the old woman. But the
places of Chrysostom proving the real presence are so infinite, that infinite
madness it were ( M. Abbot) and far surmounting your Athenians madness, to
hazard my soul upon such a testimony as says nothing against me.

R. Abbot. 14.
IN the places which I alleged of Cyprian, Chrysostom, and Theodoret the
Answ. heart without doubt failed him. For he saw it plainly euicted and
proved by them, and that so as that he knew there was nothing for him to
answer directly to the words that it is bread which in the sacrament is
called the body of Christ, and wine which is called his blood. Yet being vowed
and sworn to his own error, he will rather do or say any thing then yield
unto the truth. The places of Theodoret, he leaves out quite, who affirms
that Christ honored the visible signs with the name of his body and blood;
that he made exchange of names, and gave to his body the name of the sign,
and to ye sign the name of his body. To the places of Cyprian and Chrysostom,
he writes somewhat, but answers nothing. He takes that which was not urged,
and that which was to the point in question he slippeth by. Let him remember
what S. Austen says; Aug. quaest. ex yet. ^^st. q. 14.
He which concealeth the words of the matter in question, is either an
ignorant person or a wrangler, studying rather for cauillinges then for
doctrine.

The words of Cyprian are thus: Cypri lib. 1. Epist. 6.
Our Lord calls bread made by the uniting of many corns, his body; and wine
pressed out of many clusters and grapes, he calls his blood. To this he
says childishly and vainly, that it only proves that bread is made of many
corns, and wine of many grapes, showing plainly that he made no conscience of
his answer, but was desirous to credit himself by writing somewhat
howsoever. But let Cyprian be further asked: what is it that Christ calls his
body? He says, it is bread. What is it that Christ calls his blood? It is
wine. Christ calls the bread his body, and the wine his blood. Now if there
be neither bread nor wine in the sacrament, as the Answ. and his fellows
teach, then Christ cannot call the bread his body, nor the wine his blood. But
because Christ calls the bread his body, and the wine his blood: therefore
the meaning of these words, This is my body, This is my blood, is thus: This
bread is my body, This wine is my blood. And because in proper speech that
cannot be true (for so it De consecr. did. 2* ca. panis est.
is impossible, as the gloss of y^ canon law says, that bread should be the
body of Christ:) therefore it must be figuratively understood: This bread is
the sign and sacrament of my body, etc. To this the words alleged out of
Chrysostom are very pregnant: Chrysostom. ad Caesat. Monachum.
The breadis vouchsafed the name of the body of Christ. Why does the Answ.
smoother up these words, and talk impertinently of that which in this place
was not mentioned at all. I talked not here of the nature remaining: I tell him
out of Chrysostom, that after consecration it is bread which bears the name
of the body of Christ, and let his own conscience tell him whether that be any
thing against him or not, when as he and his company say, there is no bread
remaining after consecration. Chrysostom says: The bread is vouchsafed the
name of the body of Christ. The Papist says: There is no bread, but the very
body of Christ it self. As for his construction of the nature of bread
remaining, that is, the color, shape, taste, and feeding, without any
substance of bread: it makes Chrysostom to speak fondly as himself uses to
do, namely thus: The bread is vouchsafed the name of Christ's body, although
there be no bread. His infinite testimonies out of Chrysostom, to prove the
real presence are just never a one. He decei^^eth himself for want of the
knowledge of that rule, which Chrysostom himself gives him upon these words
of Christ, chrysostom. in Ioh. hom. 46.
The flesh profits nothing. He means it not, says he, of the flesh it
self; God forbid. But of those which carnally and fleshly understand those
things which are spoken. And what is it to understand carnally? Marry, simply
as things are spoken, and not to bethink any thing else. For these things must
not be judged of as they seem, but all mysteries are to be considered with the
inward eyes, that is to say, spiritually. The forging of this lesson makes the
Answ. to play the Athenian mad man, so that wheresoever he hears of the body
of Christ in the sacrament, he dreameth of his real and carnal presence;
wheresoever he reads of eating the flesh, and drinking the blood of Christ,
he imagines his carnal and Capernaitish feeding. But let him understand
Chrysostom by Chrysostomes own rule, and he shall find nothing in him to
stand him in any steed for these gross conceits.

P. Spence. Sect. 15.
YOur place of S. Cyprian, Our Lord gave at his supper bread and wine, etc. De
vnctio. Chrismat. Besides many other places of S. Cyprian proouing the real
presence: mark this place vnmaymed, and tell me what you think of it, and how
you I like it very well: for he says plainly that Christ at his last supper
gave to his disciples with his own hands bread and wine.
like it. But yet you make me marvel what you make in this Sermon prowling for
a testimony, where the Sermon it self is wholly against you: have you in your
church the use We neither have it nor care to have it, because christ has not
taught.
of Chrisme so much in this sermon commended* have you retained D^gma tuum
^^rdet, cum te tua cu^pa remordet.
any shadow of the public and general reconciliation of sinners spoken of
him in this Sermon, done by the Church with music and common Iubilations, and
reioycings of the whole multitude in their reconciliation; as here S. Cyprian,
if you will admit him for the author of these Sermons, wonderful gallantly
sets out. And withal do ye like of this thing ( M. Abbot) that he says
that it was done in that time by public order of the Church, when Christ as
he utters it, brought out the prisoners from hell. Or as he says a little
before, when as descending to hell he turned the old captivity, and led it
captive? Or do you like of this point, that he left this example to his Church
by tradition, yet continuing that there should be in the Church absolution of
sinners? Think you Christ descended into hell? I doubt you do not, except in
that most pitiful damnable sort (to speak no worse of it) which It is horror
to the Papist, which is the special comfort of a true christian man.
with horror I must remember, that he should suffer hell torments himself
upon the Cross. What meant you then to put us in mind of this book so much
condemning your practices, and so notoriously testifying the ancient custom of
hallowing of the oil upon this time of Christ's passion, to serve for all the
year after? And yet the fathers forsooth are yours against us. I oppose
nothing but wish to be quiet, else you might hear whether they speak for us.
Thus then to the place: he had showed before that the Sacraments, (one of the
which he makes unction by express word,) do work our joining to Christ:
and for that conjunctions sake he infers: Our Lord then at the table where
he eat his last supper with his Apostles, gave with his own hands bread and
wine, but upon the cross he yielded his body to be wounded by the hands of
the soul^iours. But why? or how? to give the^ bare bread? no: But that sincere
truth, and true sincerity, being more secretly imprinted in the Apostles,
should declare unto the nations: What? that the Sacraments were bare Not so,
but that being in t^en own nature, but only common creatures: ^read and wine,
yet by grace and by the word of God they are to our faith not only in name,
but in power the flesh and blood of christ, the pledges of the grace of God,
the assura^ces of our immortality, the seals of our redemption, and as it
were vessels wherein God sets before us all his promises of blessings that we
may receive and enjoy the same.
bread and wine? a deep high point forsooth in such secret figurative sort to
be showed: No ( M. Abbot) they should show the nations How wine and bread are
the flesh and blood, and in what sort the causes agree to the effects, and
diverse names or kinds are reduced or brought to one essence. Do you hear
essence? they be brought to one essence, or one substance: (help that sore if
you can with all your cunning:) and the signs and the things signified, are
reckoned by the same names. And he has told you why they should be called by
one name, because (as he said before with the same breath) they were brought to
one essence. In the next period he terms the Sacrament Not because of the
substance of i^, but because of the mystery and signification.
the tree of life. Read what our side does tell you upon this and infinite such
places in their books: which my simpleness is not worthy to bear or touch:
and yet you oppose me and will mine answers as though the credit of the cause
hanged wholly upon my small skill and learning: or as though I must not
believe the Catholic religion except I were a doctor in the same.

R. Abbot. 15.
THe Answerer being weeried as it seems with the evidence of the testimonies
cited against him, and therefore desirous to take breath a while, makes an
idle vagary in answering this place of c^prian. de vnct. chri^matis.
Cyprian, and urges me with other matters contained and commended in that
sermon, which he says are not used or received in our Church, as Chrisme,
absolution, the descending of Christ into hell. But I marvel whether he were
well advised or not, when he wrote these things, or whether he understood
what Cyprian said. To answer to them in order: First he demands: Have you
in your Church the use of Chrisme so much in this sermon commended? He brings
no reason whereby to prove any necessity of Chrisme, and therefore it may be
sufficient to answer him with the like demand: Have you in your Church of
Room the custom of washing each others feet upon maundy thursday so much
commended in this sermon, and which you are here told that Christ H^^ sole^^i
d(...)tione omni tempore a^endum instituit.
instituted to be always done with solemn devotion, in the use whereof Saint
Ambros. de sacram. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Ambrose also thought that his church of Millaine did more rightly, then the
old church of Room in not using it: He will say ye they have lawfully refused
this. We say that we have as lawfully refused the other. These were arbitrary
and indifferent ceremonies, taken up by the will of men, and by the will of
men* and by the liberty of men to be refused again. Sta^ulen. in D^oni.
A^cop. Eccle. Hiera^.
Stapulensis upon Dyonisius notes many ceremonies observed in the ancient
Churches, that are now omitted in the Church of Room. Though the Church of
Rome were as sound as ever she was, that we might say as Ambrose said; that
Ambros de sacra. li^. 3. cap 1.
we desire in all thing, to follow the Church of Room, yet we would say as he
adds; We are men too, that have judgment and understanding, as well as they
of Rome, and have as great liberty in using or not using ceremonies as they
have. Secondly, he asks me; Have you retained any shadow of the public and
general reconciliation of sinners spoken of in this sermon, etc. Let him turn
the words, and suppose me demanding of him the same question concerning the
Church of Room. Verily she has it not: she has no show nor shadow of it:
neither the manner, nor the matter of it. The Answ. in vpbraiding our Church
with y^ want hereof, does much more lay open the shame and reproach of his own
friends. The Church of Room is she that has broken the bonds of all
discipline, and made a mockery of all religion: in steed of absoluing men, she
has bound them faster: in steed of reconcilement to God, she has thrust them
further off from God. Whatsoever defect or want our Church has in this be
half, it is but asker of that wound, wherewith the Church of Room had wounded
us, and as a weakness remaining after a grievous and deadly sickness from
whence we have not as yet been able perfectly to recover our selves. But
thanks be unto God that we have before us the substance of true absolution and
reconciliation in the word of the gospel, which the Church of Room withholdeth
from her Children. We preach to the repentant absolution and atonement with
God by the blood of Jesus Christ; whereby they find comfort, and release from
the bonds of their sins, and give glory unto God. Whereas the Church of
Room giving men ashes in steed of bread, and setting before them the
superstitious devises of men in steed of the sovereign blood of Christ: and
mocking them with the supposed absoluing words of a grumbling Popish Priest in
steed of the comfort of the gospel of Christ, leaves them either senseless,
and not feeling their own estate, or restless and unquiet whilst in the
absolutions of sinful men they find no assured trust of being absolved and
pardoned with God.

Concerning the descending of Christ into hell, I doubt not but he speaks
what he thinks, but understands not what he speaks, nor what he ought to
think. The judgment of learned and godly men, both old and new are very
diverse, as touching the meaning of this point. I preiudicate not the judgment
of any man that has not in it a prejudice against y^ word of God. For my part
I embrace it as an article of the Creed, and I take it that I am to conceive
every article of the Creed, as importing somewhat that entirely and properly
concerns my self, either as touching my creation or salvation. And therefore
I simply reject as a mere fancy, the opinion of the Papists, that Christ
descended to Linebus patrum, to fetch the fathers from thence. But if for any
respect properly touching our salvation, it may be justified that Christ in
soul descended to the very place of hell, as the very letter of the article
does import, I willingly subscribe the same. In the mean time that which the
Answ. cauilleth at, which some learned men have delivered for the meaning of
Christ's descending into hell, as touching the doctrine, whether belonging to
this article, or to the other of his suffering, I embrace and hold because I
know it contains the certain and undoubted truth of the word of God, and
particularly touches the redemption of mine own soul. We believe by the word
of God, that Jesus Christ the son of God, is our redeemer not only in his
body, but also in his soul; that in both he has paid a price for us, Irene.
adu. har. lib. 5.
giving, as Ireneus speaks, his soul for our souls, and his flesh for our
flesh: not only his flesh or body for our bodies, but his soul also for our
souls. The scripture justifies so much: He shall give Esa. 33. 10.
his soul an offering for sin. The story of the passion of Christ
justifies the same, where before any thing ailed him as touching any bodily
pain, he is described unto us Mat. 26. 37.
to be sorrrowful and grievously troubled: Mar. 14. 33.
to be afraid and in great heaviness: Luc. 22. 44.
to be in an agony, yea such an agony, and so beyond measure afflicting him,
that the sweat was like drops of blood, trickling from him down to the
ground: that the father thought it expedient to send v. 43.
an angel from heaven to comfort him: that he was driven to cry ^ut; Math.
26. 3^. 3^.
My soul is heavy even unto the death: father if it be possible, let this cup
pass from me. To refer these speeches and affections to any bod^^y
sufferings were fond and childish, since as yet he suffered nothing in body, but
as he himself expressly teaches, they are to be construed immediately of the
passion and sufferinges of his soul. Therefore Hierome says: Hieron. i^ E^a ^^.
That which we should have suffered for our sins, he suffered in our
behalf, etc. Whereby it is manifest that as his body being scourged and rent,
did bear the signs of that injury in stripes and blewnesse of wounds, so
his soul also did verily suffer grief for us, least that partly a truth, and
partly a lie should be believed in Christ. Whereby he testifies that Christ
suffered for us, both in body and soul, and even that that we should have
suffered for our sins; and that if he coming in the nature of man to suffer
for us, had suffered only in body, it should be in part a lie which we
believe of his suffering for us, because as touching his soul it should not be
true. S. Ambrose hereof says thus: Ambr^s. ^n Luc. ca. 22. l^^. 1^. and de
fide ad Grati. lib. 2. cap. 3.
He labored in his passion with deep affection, that because he destroyed our
sins in his flesh, he might also by the anguish of his soul abolish the
anguish of our souls. Which as it appears by those speeches already
mentioned at the first entrance of his passion, so it is further most
effectually showed, by his crying with a loud voice upon the cross: My Math.
27. 4^
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. A mystery, the depth whereof, the
very Angels themselves are not able thoroughly to search, that the son of God
should be humbled so far for our sakes, as to be for the time in our forlorn
and desperate state under the burden of the wrath of God, to feel his fathers
indignation Esa. ^3. 8 10.
smiting him, and breaking him, as the Prophet speaks, and as it were leading
out his armies against him: he in the mean time holding fast still upon God to
be his God, who would bring him back from these gates of death, when he had
finished the work that was given him to do, but yet feeling nothing for the
present, whereby he might appear to be his God. But what can I say more of
this speech of Christ then Ferus has said, a man by profession of the church
of Room: yet in many things not so gross as Romanists commonly are. Writing
upon these words of Christ, he says thus: Ferus in Matt 27.
Here God the father deals with Christ, not as a father, but as a tyrant,
although he be in the mean time of most loving affection toward him. This
Christ's being forsaken is the dread of our conscience for our sins, feeling
the judgment of God, and his eternal wrath: and is so affected, as if it were
for ever forsaken and rejected from the face of God. Christ of his mercy put
himself into our cause, and undertook the punishment that we had deserved.
Therefore on the one side we see the people reuiling him, the Pharisees
blaspheming him, etc. On the other side we see God as an adversary forsaking
him; so that he cries out, why have thou forsaken me. Christ to deliver
sinners, set himself in place of all sinners, not playing the thief, or
adulterer. etc: but transferring unto himself the stipend and wages, the
punishment and desert of sinners, as cold, heat, hunger, thirst, fear,
trembling, the horror of death, the horror of hell, despair, death, hell it
self, that by fear he might overcome fear, by horror, despair, death, hell,
might overcome horror, despair, death, hell, and in a word by Satan might
overcome Satan. Thus by the testimony of one of their own Prophets, it is
justified that Christ Jesus suffered not only a bodily death, but also in his
soul the weight of his fathers indignation, and the very horror of hell it
self, when he cried out and complained in that manner as has been declared.
And this is that which the scripture means when it says that Gal. 3. 13.
Christ was made a curse for us to deliver us from the curse. For as to be made
sin for us, imports that he did bear the punishment of our sins, so to
be made a curse for us, imports that he did bear the burden of our curse,
that is to say, the full measure of the wrath of God, that otherwise should
have lighted upon us. The fathers thought no less, when they construed the 88.
Psalm, or the 87. as they reckon it to be the description of the passion of
Christ. Where we read thus: Psalm. 88. 7. 1. 16.
Thine indignation is set against me, or lies hard upon me, and thou have
vexed me with all thy storms. Lord why abhorrest thou my soul? Thy wrathful
displeasure goes over me, and the fear of thee has undone me. So is that
Psalm. applied by Athan. de interpret. Psalm. Arnob. and Hieron. in psalm. 87.
Athanasius, Arnobius, and Hierome. Austen also calls the same August. in
Psalm. 87.
a song of the passion of Christ, though turning the words alleged to another
intention then they do manifestly intimate unto us. Athanasius referring
himself to those words; Thy fury or indignation is set against me, says,
Athanas. de inter. Psalm.
Christ died not for that he was guilty of sinnne himself, but he suffered for
us, and in himself did bear the wrath that was conceived against us for
sin: even as he says elsewhere: Idem in Euangel de pas. and cruce domi*
that he took the bitterness of that wrath which arose by the transgression of
the law, and swallowed it up and so made it void. So Hieron. in Psalm. 87.
Hierome brings in our Savior, speaking out of these former words of the
Psalm in this sort: Thou have brought upon me that wrath and storm of thy
fury and indignation, which thou would have powered out upon the nations,
because I have taken upon me their sins: Yea Hilarie though Hilar. de Trinit.
lib* 10.
elsewhere in heat of contention with an heretic he seem utterly to deny
all passion and suffering of Christ, whose very opinion in effect, I take it
to be which Ambros. in Luc. cap. 22. lib. 10.
S. Ambros reprooueth, writing upon Luke; yet in his more advised speech of
Sermon upon one of the Psalms, he gives a notable testimony to this truth:
Christ Hilar. in Psa. 68.
became subject to the death of the Cross, the waters coming in even unto his
soul, when the violence of all sufferings beak forth, even to the death of
the soul. By and by after he shows his mind more plainly: He descended even
to the depth, not of the flesh only, but of death it self: and all the terror of
that tempest which raged against us, lighted upon him. Thus therefore it is
evident, both by the authority of the scriptures, and by the consent of the
ancient fathers that Christ suffered for us not only in body, but also in
soul, and that his suffering in soul was the enduring of ye uttermost of that
tempest of the wrath of God, which should have fallen upon us for sin. Which
indeed should have oppressed us infinitely and without end, because the
infinite majesty of God, whom we had offended, required an infinite
satisfaction for the offense, and the same could not be yielded by us, but by
infinite and endless bearing of his wrath. But it neither would nor might hold
Christ in that sort, because the infiniteness of the time was recompensed by
ye infiniteness of the person, who was not only man but God also. Now whereas
it is urged that one drop of the blood of Christ, was sufficient to redeem the
world, I answer that it is folly hereof to conclude, that he suffered not in
his soul for us, and with as good reason they may conclude, that he was not
crowned with thorns, spitted upon, mocked and reviled, etc. Yea ye he died not
at all, nor shed any more but one drop of blood. We are not to stand upon the
fancies of men what they will think enough to redeem us, but we must learn
in the word of God, what the Lord has done for us, that we may accordingly
admire his mercy and goodness, and sing thanks and praises unto him. Now that
thus Christ descended into hell, I know: that otherwise he descended into hell,
though I stand not to deny it, yet I dare not affirm it: Neither is it any
pitiful and damnable and horrible matter to avouch this, but it is a truth to
be professed, and comfortable to be believed, and the Answe. in so condemning
it, does but as S. Peter says ^. Pet. 2. 12.
speak evil of those things which he knows not. Now by this descending of
Christ into hell, he has set us free, who were otherwise prisoners of hell and
bondslaues to the devil, and so according to the words of Cyprian, he has
turned our captivity, wherewith we were taken of old, by the transgression of
our father Adam, and has dispatched from us the torments of hell, whereunto
we were enthralled. Now to what purpose did the Answe. allege these words of
Cyprian, or what advantage does he dream he has in them: He would find his
Limbus patrum here, but it will not be. For Cyprian speaks expressly of
deliverance from hell torments, whereof there are none in Limbo patrum, as his
masters Rhem. An not. Luc. 16. 26
of Rhemes do instruct him. Now having used this peevish and impertinent talk
of things making nothing at all for his purpose, yet as a man in a dream, he
breaks out into this fond presumption, that the fathers are all theirs, and
that I should hear but that he is not disposed to oppose. I have not to do
with master Spence, I perceive but with a man well seen in all the fathers.
But the fathers are his, as they were his that said, Ego Dioscorus the
heretic. Council. Chalcedo. Act. 1.
cum patribus eijcior. The fathers and I are cast out both together. And that
appears in the words of Cyprian now to be handled. Cyprian. de vnct. chris.
Our Lord, says he, at the table where he kept his last supper with his
Apostles, gave with his own hands bread and wine, but upon the cross he
yielded his body to the Soldiers hands to be wounded, that sincere truth and
true synceritie being secretly imprinted in his Apostles, might declare to the
nations how bread and wine are his flesh and blood; and how causes agree to the
effects, and diverse names or kinds are reduced to one essence or substance,
and the things signifying, and the things signified are counted by the same
names. Where it is plainly avouched that Christ at his last supper gave bread
and wine. What needs any more? Yea but did Christ give bare bread and wine,
says the Answ. absurdly and frowardly? No say I, for this bread and wine is
the flesh and blood of Christ, as I before alleged out of Cyprian, according
to the which S. Paul says, 1. cor. 10. 16.
The bread which we break is the communion of the body of Christ. The cup of
blessing is the communion of the blood of Christ. Therefore S. Austen calls
this bread, August. de consecr. did. 2. cap. Hoc est.
heavenly bread, and Theodoret Theodoret. dial. 2.
the bread of life, and the same Cyprian says that Cypria. de resurrect chri.
that which is seen, namely the visible element of bread, is accounted both in
name and virtue the body of Christ, namely because it contains sacramentally
the whole virtue and benefit of the passion and death of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as before I showed. But let him remember that Cyprian says it is bread
and wine, which is the flesh and blood of Christ, whereas by his defense there
is in the Sacrament, neither bread nor wine. But Cyprian says, that diverse
names and kinds are reduced to one substance. Do you hear substance, says
the Answ. Help that sore if you can with all your cunning: surely small cunning
will serve to heal a sore, where neither flesh nor skin is broken or bruised.
This is in truth a very ignorant and blind opposition. The visible elements
that are in substance bread and wine, are in mystery and signification, the
body and blood of Christ, and are so called as Cyprian before sets down^.
When therefore bread being one substance, is called not only according to his
substance, bread: but also by way of Sacrament and mystery the body of
Christ, when the wine being one substance, is called not only as it is, Wine,
but also as it signifies, the blood of Christ, diverse names or kinds are
reduced to one substance. And this Cyprian declares when he adds; The signs
and the things signified are called by the same names. The body of Christ it
self, and the sign hereof which is bread, are both called the body. The
blood of Christ, and the sign hereof which is wine, are both called his blood.
The body and blood it self are so called indeed, and truth; but the signs in
their manner, not in the truth of the thing* but in a signifying mystery: yet
so one substance is called by diverse names, as the words before do specify.
Now the place of Cyprian being as clear as the sunne-light against
transubstantiation, as every eye may perceive, yet the Answ. sends me to
their learned treatises to see what is there said of this and other places. And
what shall I find there but such wretched and miserable cauils and shifts, as
he himself has borrowed from them. And here, master Spence, as in your name
he excuses himself of his simpleness, and that he is no doctor: which
accords not with his* vaunt before, that he could show me this and that out
of the fathers. And I marvel that he should make excuse thus of his learning
to a minister of our church, so mean as I am, seeing it is so peeuishly
bragged amongst you commonly, that there is little learning to be found amongst
the best of us. Wheresoever he be, I wish that his conscience and truth
toward God, were but even as much as his learning is.

P. Spence. Sect. 16.
THe same Cyprian you say, lib. 2. Epistola. 3. which is the famous Epistle, ad
Caecilium, so much condemning you in so many points about the sacrifice of the
Church, and of mixing of water, which he said assuredly Christ did: but I
marvel you would for shame ever avouch it, or point me to it, (for A Popish
b^agge. See the answer to sect. 2.
every line of it is a knife to cut your throat.) You say that here S.
Cyprian says that it was wine which Christ called his blood: Much to your
purpose (master Abbot.) Who doubts yet but that he took wine and not ale,
beer, sydar, metheglin, or such like matter? S. Cyprians meaning is most
plain against the Aquarios, that it was Did Christ call wine his blood, and
yet d^d he mean that it was not wine.
wine (mingled with water, as in this Epistle he proves notably) and not bare
water as those Aquarij would have it, that he called his blood, that is to say,
he took wine, and not bare water to make the Sacrament of: and what is this to
your purpose? such testimonies are the fathers scrappes, parings, and crummes,
and not their sound testimonies.

R. Abbot. 16.
THe famous Epistle of Cyprian to Cecilius says plainly; We Cypr. lib. 2.
Epist. 3.
find that it* was wine which Christ called his blood, as he says twice beside
in the same Epistle, that by wine is represented the blood of Christ. Yea says
the Answ. he means that it was wine at the first which he took to make the
Sacrament, but in being made the Sacrament, it was no longer wine, as if
Cyprian had said thus: Christ took wine, and made it no wine, and though it
were now no wine, yet he called wine his blood. Cyprians words are evident,
that Christ called wine his blood, and that by wine is represented his blood,
which cannot be till it be made a sacrament. Therefore in the Sacrament there
is wine which represents, and is called the blood of Christ: Such
testimonies, he says, are the scrappes, and parings, and crummes of the
fathers. But let him remember that a crumme is enough to choke a man, and so
does this testimony choke him, so that he staggereth and stammereth out an
answer; whereof he himself can make no reason, if he were enquired of it by
word of mouth. His other idle talk is answered Sect. 2.
before.

Pet. Spence. Sect. 17.
SAint Augustine, ad Adimantum makes so flatly against you: that I wonder why
you allege it. Our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body. (Why should he
doubt to say it was so, when he knew it was so)? when he gave the sign of his
body. But what sign? a bare sign? no sir: but such a sign as contained in
it the thing signified really, how prove you it* Even thus. He writes
against the Manichees that condemned all the old testament, as being the evil
Gods testament, (such was their vile blasphemy:) among other places they
condemned this place of Leuiticus 17. Sanguis pecoris erit eius a^ima. This
place says S. Augustine is spoken figuratively, not that it is the very soul
or life of the beast, but that in it lies the soul or life of the beast:
neither is the blood a bare signification of the beasts soul, but such a sign
as contains in it the very soul of the beast, and therefore of the same
speech he has Quaestio. 57. in Leuiticum, made particular discourse, where he
has these words. We are to seek out such speeches as by that which
contains do signify that which is contained, ^^ because the life is holden
in the body by the blood, (for if the blood be shed, the life or soul
departs) therefore by the blood is most f^^ly signified the soul, and the
blood takes the name thereof: even as the place wherein the Church assembled,
is called the Church. You I see the Answerer play with his own fancy
altogether stran^e from S. Austen^ meaning as shall be showed.
see he makes in this place the blood of the beast a sign of the beasts
soul, but such a sign as contained the soul in it. Now in the other place,
ad Adimantum by you objected, S. Augustine forgot not this point of this place
touched, but in excusing that place of Leuiticus, and interpreting it, he
exemplifieth it by the words of Christ, which they admitted all the sort of
them, as being the words of the good God, of the new testament (as they termed
him) saying: I may interpret that precept to be set down by way of sign. For
our Lord doubted not to say, etc. So that this place is brought by S.
Augustine, to show that in the B. Sacrament there is a sign, containing the
thing, and therefore called by the name of the thing: so in that of Leuiticus,
Moses called the blood, the soul of the beast, because it is such a sign, as
contains the soul of the beast really in it. This exposition is
irrefragable, because it is Which S. Austen himself never dreamed of.
S. August* own exposition, who could best expound his own meaning. And against
the Manichees he could not bring any other meaning possibly of This is my body,
but that. For they confessed Christ to be really in the Sacrament in his body,
because the evil God had tied him, or (as they foolishly uttered it) certain
pieces of him, as well in the Sacramental bread, as in other bread, ears of
corn, sticks, herbs, meats, and all other creatures: and that the elect
Manichees by eating those things, and after belching them out again, and
otherwise avoiding them, did let out at liberty the good God Christ's body.
And therefore after these expositions, agreeable to their heresy, this place
did fitly (as S. Augustine brings it in) expound that of Leuiticus. As Christ
in saying, This is my body: must mean as you Manichees expound it, This is a
sign of my body, in which sign the parts of my body are bound, even so the
blood of the beast is the life, is as much as the blood of the beast is a sign
of his life, in which sign his life is contained. Thus did S. Augustine
excellently, quoad homines, answer the Manichees with their own opinion. And
therefore to conclude S Augustine in calling it, signum does infer most
necessary that his body is present, because it is a sign, in which the body
is contained.

R. Abbot. 17.
TO show further that our Savior Christ said of very bread, This is my body,
and therefore that the Sacrament is not really and substantially, but only in
sign and mystery the body of Christ, I alleged the words of S. Austen; Our
August. cont. Adimantum. cap. 12.
Lord doubted not to say, This a is my body, when he gave the sign of his
body. The words are plain, that Christ in a certain understanding and
meaning called that by the name of his body, which is indeed but a sign of
his body. Now with this place of Austen the Answ. deals as Leu. deca. 1.
lib. 1.
Cacus the thief dealt with Hercules his Oxen, when he drew them backward by
the tails into his cave. So does this man violently pull and draw the words
of Austen backward into his den of real presence, and streineth them whether
they will or not to serve his turn in that behalf. But the lowing of the Oxen
to their fellows descried the theft of Cacus, and the words following in S.
Austen himself do prove that the Answ. does but play the thief. M. Harding
was content to say that S. Austen in heat of disputation spoke that which
might be greatest advantage against the heretic, not most agreeable to the
truth, or to his own meaning: but little did he think that the place should
serve to prove any thing for his part. But the Answ. has learned a trick to
make the words speak for real presence, which never was in S. Austens mind.
Forsooth having in hand against the Manichees to expound the words of Moses
law, The blood is the soul or life: he tells them that the meaning thereof
is, that the blood is a sign of life, in which sign, the soul or life is
really contained, and to show this we are told that he brings the words of
Christ, This is my body, which he spoke of the sign of his body: but yet such
a sign as does really contain the body, and therefore we must think that the
body of Christ is really present, and contained in the Sacrament or sign of
his body. Now this though it be a manifest untruth, yet the Answ. thought
would carry some show of truth, but yet because he would not have us abused
by this show, to think that S. Austen did here indeed avouch any real
presence, or transubstantiation, he tells us plainly in the end, that S.
Austen spak^ according to the Manichees exposition of Christ's words, and
answered them by their opinion, not by his own. So that if S. Austen do say
any thing of real presence, he notes the Manichees opinion, but affirms it
not himself, and therefore gives us to understand that the Papists herein
take part with the Manichees rather then with him. His answer in truth is
false and absurd, and yet I would not that the reader should think it was
devised by him, for he has learned it of Bellar. tom. 2. de sacram. Euchar.
lib. 2. cap. 24.
Bellermine their great Rabbine, and from him has patched two answers into
one. But the matter stands thus. The Manichees condemned the old testament
as false and contrary to the new testament. For in the new testament it is
said, Math 10. 28.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to hurt the soul, etc.
Now in the old said they, it is written, the blood is the soul, and that is
false: for the blood may be hurt and spilt as we know, but the soul cannot be
hurt, as we read in the gospel. Again, the new testament says that flesh 1.
cor. 15. 50.
and blood cannot enter into the kingdom of God. It is false therefore which
the old testament says that the blood is the soul, for then the soul should
not enter into the kingdom of God. Therefore they blasphe mous^y avouched that
the old testament was false and not to be believed. To this cauillation of
theirs, S. Austen answers that these words of the old testament, The blood
is the soul or life, were spoken of the life of beasts, not of the soul of
man. Of beasts it is said that the life of all flesh is the blood thereof, not
that man's soul is his blood. And therefore they reasoned absurdly from that
which was spoken of beasts to that that was said of the soul of man. Further
he answers thus; I may also interpret that commandment (of not eating blood,
because the blood is the soul or life) to be set down by way of sign. For
our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his
body: signifying hereby that as Christ said in the new testament, This is my
body, when as he gave not his body indeed, but only a sign of his body; so
Moses said in y^ old testament, The blood is the life or soul, not because it
is so indeed, but only because it was appointed for the sign of life: which
is most evident against Transubstantiation and real presence. Nay, not so,
says the Answ. for the blood is such a sign as does really contain the life,
and so the sign of Christ's body must really contain the body; that the one
sign may be answerable to the other. But let me ask him: does the blood
really contein the life when the thing is dead? or did either Moses or Austen
intend to make the blood a sign of life, as the same blood is in the body, and
the thing alive and whole? Was the Answ. well in his wits to send abroad such
untowardly imaginations? or rather was not Bellermine a wretched, and lewd man
to go about with such fictions to dazzle the eyes of his readers? The precept is
concerning those things that are taken and killed for meat, that the blood
thereof should not be kept and used for meat, because the blood is the life,
says God, that is, says S. Austen* it does betoken life, although the thing
be now dead, so that whether h^te or cold, whether alive or dead, it was not
lawful for the Jews to eat any blood at all. But if that speech had been
used as in respect that the blood does now really contain the life, they might
have said when the thing was dead, that now they might ^ate the blood; for now
the blood is not the life, because the life is gone, and is not really
contained in it. God would have the blood, as touching the eating of it, to
betoken life, and by this ceremonial commandment of abstinence from blood,
he would give to understand how he hates and detesteth savageness and
cru^^ty: how he would have life to be regarded and favored as of other his
creatures according to their kind whereof Solomon speaks thus, Prou. 12. 10.
The righteous man regards the life of his beast, so especially of man whom
he created according to his own image, concerning whom he speaks in the
first giving of this commandment, as it were to show the meaning and intent
thereof: I Genesis 9. 5. 6.
will require your blood, wherein your lives are. Who so sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God created he him. Now in
that other place which the Answ. cites out of the questions upon Leuiticus, S.
Austen gives reason why the life was signified by the blood rather then by any
thing else: namely, because Aug. quaest. sup. Leuit. q. 57
the life is contained or holden in the body by the blood; so that the blood
being shed, the life departs, therefore the life was most fitly signified by
the blood, and the blood did take the name of life. Which words do not
signify that blood was a sign of life only as now really contained in it, as
the Answ. fondly imagines, but that blood even of the things killed and dead
was appointed to betoken and signify life, because the life of those things
that are alive, is holden in y^ body, especially by the blood. Neither is he
helped any whit by that which he alleges: We must seek for speeches
signifying by that which contains that which is contained, as because the
life or soul is holden in the body by the blood: therefore the blood may take
the name of life, as the place wherein the Church assemble themselves, is called
also the Church. For we know that the place of the assembling of y^ Church is
called the Church though there be now no body contained in it, only because
it is appointed to that use, and so the blood was called the life, and
appointed to be a sign of the life or soul, though the life were now dead and
gone, because in things that live, the blood is a most special instrument of
life, whereby it is contained and holden in the body. But to put the matter out
of doubt, and to show the Answ. his folly. S. Austen in y^ end of the Chapter
whence I alleged the words in question says thus: So Aug. cont. Adimant. ca.
12*
is the blood the life as the rock was Christ, as the Apostle says, They
drank of the spiritual rock which followed them, and the rock was Christ.
It is not said, The rock was Christ because the rock did really contain
Christ. No more then was it said, The blood is the life, because it did really
contain the life, but because it was ordained to be a sign of life, though it
self were altogether dead and cold. And this does S. Austen again expressly
note in another place, saying, It August. cont. aduersa leg. and proph. lib. 2.
cap. 6.
is said. The blood of al flesh is the life or* soul thereof, in like manner as
it is said, The rock was Christ, not because it was so indeed, but because
Christ was signified hereby. The law would by the blood signify the life or
soul, a thing invisible by a thing visible, etc. because the blood is visibly
as the soul is inuisibly the chiefest and most principal of all things
whereof we consist Here is then a matter of signification only, not of any
real containing unless the Answ. will be so fond as to say that the rock did
really contain Christ. But now of this manner of speaking, The blood is the
life or soul, when it is indeed but a sign thereof, S. Austen gives a like
example in the words of our Savior Christ, who, says he, doubted not to say,
This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body: directly to this meaning
that as Christ said, This is my body, when he gave it into his Disciples
hands, not his body indeed, but only the sign and sacrament of his body,
and as the Apostle says, the rock was Christ, when it was not Christ indeed,
but only a sign of Christ, so Moses said, The blood is the life, not because
it self was the life indeed, but was only appointed to be a sign of life.
And if the sacrament were indeed and really the body of Christ, what occasion
should there be why Christ should doubt to say, this is my body: But either S.
Austen speaks vainly, or else his words import that there might be occasion of
doubting to say so. And why, but because it was not so indeed? Yet, says he,
because it was the mystery and sign of his body, though not his body in
substance and indeed, therefore he doubted not, according to the manner of the
scriptures in like case, to say, This is my body: and so did Moses speak of
the blood. Thus most manifestly and plainly I have showed that the Answ.
irrefragable exposition, is nothing else but dishonest and unconscionable
shifting.

P. Spence. Sect. 18.
But Tertullian kills the Cow: for he says: a figure of the body. What if I
prove to you, that you be as fowly deceived or would deceive in Tertullian as
in the last place of S. Augustine? This has Tertullian in lib. 4. contra
Marcionem, The bread which he took and distributed to his disciples, he made
his body. Lo Tertullian says Christ made the bread his body, so say we, and
not you, how made it he his body? by speaking over it the words of
consecration: in saying, this is my body, that is, a figure of my body. Did
Christ say to them, This is the figure of my body? But if he had, yet by
speaking those words, he had made it his body, after Tertullians mind. But
the very truth and all the point of the case herein, is in this, that
Tertullians words may have two expositions: one which you like of, This is my
body, Two expositions of Tertullian.
that is, the figure of my body: the other which is our sense, and the very
intended meaning of Tertullian is this, This is my body, This, that is to say,
the figure of my body is my body. To prove this unto you, remember it is out
of his fourth book against Marcion, which Marcion held the ill God of the old
testament, to be a deadly enemy to the good God of the new testament. Marcion
wrote a book called Antithesis or Antilogiae of contradictions, and repugnances
between the two testamentes. Against that book spends Tertullian the
greatest part of his fourth book, showing how Christ the God of the new
testament fulfilled, and consecrated the old figures of the old testament as a
friend, and not as an enemy thereof: and to that end thus he says: conferring
places together, Christ in the day time taught in the temple of Jerusalem: he
had foretold by O see: In my temple they s^ught me, and there I will dispute
with them. Again, he went apart into the mount Elaeon, that is, to the mount
of Olives. Because Zachary wrote, and his feet shall stand in the mount
Elaeon. Again, they came together early in the morning, agreeable to Esaias, who
says: He has given me an ear to hear betimes in the morning. If this be
says Tertullian to dissolve the prophesies, what is to fulfill them. Again,
he chose the passover for his passion. For Moses said before: It shall be the
passover of the Lord. Yea says Tertullian, He showed his affection or desire:
I have earnestly desired to eat this passover with you, etc. O destroier of
the law, which desired also to keep the passover. Again, he might have been
betrayed of a stranger, saving that the Psalm had before prophesied, He which
eats bread with me, will lif^ up his foot against me. Yet further, he might
have been betrayed without reward, save that that should have been for another
Christ, not for him which fulfilled the prophesies. For it was written, They
have sold the just. Yea the very price that he was sold for, Hieremie
foretold. They took the thirty silver pieces, the price of him that was
valued, and gave them for a potters field. Thus far in this one place among
infinite other in the whole book, Tertullian shows Christ the God of the new
testament to have fulfilled the figures of the old, as being the one only God
of both Testaments. And then by and by he infers as another example these
words. Therefore professing that he did greatly desire to eat the passover
as his own (for it was unfit that God should desire any thing of another)
whereby he shows Christ to be the only God of both testaments. He made the
bread which he took and distributed to his Disciples his body* in saying,
This is my body, that is, the figure of my body. What figure I beseech you?
meant he not the figure used He did not mean any figure used by Melchisedech,
neither does any way allude to it.
by Melchisedech, of bread and wine? meant he not a figure of the old
Testament, taken, used, and fulfilled by Christ in the new? is not that his
drift? Must Tertullian become an ass to serve your turn, and forget his own
drift and purpose here, and contrary what he has so plainly spoken of the
Sacrament in other his books? This is It is not foolish vaunting and bragging
that must weigh this matter, but reason and truth, see the answer at large.
to steal scrappes out of the fathers, and not to care for their drift and
purposes, but only to patch up matter for a show and to the sale. The figures
be of the old testament, in the new testament Christ fulfilleth them. It
follows: But it had been no figure except there were a true body. Surely an
empty thing as is a fantasy can take no figure. The Marcionites, said Christ
had a fantastical body: that says Tertullian, could not have a figure. No
can? Do not the fantastical bodies of spirits exhibit to the eyes a
certain figure or shape? it is too well known to the very Negromancers, and
the Apostles feared the like of Christ. But he means if Christ had no body at
all, but a fantastical body, Melchisedech in the old testament, had used no
figure of that in bread and wine. For of Untruth: for he talks not of it,
and though he had, yet does it not stand the Answ. in any steed as shall
appear.
it he talks, so that that is a figure of my body, must needs be interpreted
thus: This: that is, this figure of the old testament of bread and wine, used
by Melchisedech, which I now fulfill, est corpus meum, is now become my body
by my fulfilling in this my new testament in verity, a figure of the old
testament in a mystery. It follows: Or if therefore he made the bread his
body because he wanted a true body, then he should have given the bread for
us. This illation of Tertullian can have no wit nor sense, if he meant not
Christ to be really in his very true body in the Sacrament. It made for the
vanity of Marcion, that bread should be crucified. If Christ had given his
Apostles bread only, and not his very flesh, then by Tertullians mind, he
must have given a bready body, or a body of bread to be also crucified: so sure
he was that the thing he gave his Disciples, was the same that was also
afterward crucified, What say you to this master Abbot* Marcion said that
Christ had in steed of a heart, a kind of fruit called a Pepon. Why says
Tertullian did he not call a Pepon his body, as well as the bread, or rather
after Marcions opinion? his reason is, because Marcion understood not that
bread was an old figure of the body of Christ. Lo your id est figura, is by
Tertullian as much as id est, vetus figura, an old figure. Then by your mind
Christ fulfilled not the old figure in verity, although Tertullian says never
so plainly he made the bread his body: But gave them the old figure: therefore
to end this testimony of Tertullian, I answer you, that the premises
considered, you must needs grant that the same ( id est) is not referred to
corpus meum, but to hoc. That which in the old testament was a figure of my
body, is now, being made so by my speaking dicendo and omnipotentia verbi, by
the almighty power of the word, as S. Cyprian de caena domini utters, my
body. Note these points whereby it so appears by Tertullian to be meant.
First the scope of his fourth book, to prove the figures of the old law, and
the fulfilling of the new. Secondly Tertullian has figura non fuisset, nisi
veritatis esset corpus: If he had meant a figure then in the new testament, he
had not said fuisset sed esset figura. Thirdly when he says Christ called
bread his body, and not a Pepon (as Marcions folly would have him to have
spoken) he tells that Marcion understood not that bread was an ancient
figure of his body, so that Tertullian means not the bread to be a new
figure of his body, instituted by Christ in his Supper of the new testament,
but an ancient figure of the old testament, used by Melchisedech. Fourthly, a
little after this place he says, that Christ the reuealer of aniquities did
sufficiently d^clare what he would have the bread to have signified, calling
bread his body: Whereby Tertullians mind i^, that the name of bread had bin
used to import the body of Ch(...) ^^ prefigur^ ^^at bread indeed should be
appointed to signify the ^^me body. This he say^h, Ch(...) full(...) (...) he
took bread ind(...) and called it hi^ body.
his mind is that Christ would have the bread in the old testament, to have
signified his body to come, not now instituting a new figure in bread. Fifthly,
he says a little after, thou may acknowledge the old figure of blood in the
wine. Lo the wine in the old testament was an ancient figure of his blood. What
can plainlier utter or express his meaning? Lastly, it follows: Now says
he, (it is at his maundy) he consecrated his blood in wine, who then (that is
speaking certain words of Jacob the Patriarche even by the said Jacob) figured
wine by blood. he attributes A Figure to the name of wine consecration to wine
it self.
a figure to wine, consecration to his blood in wine: a figure to the old law,
consecration to the new, a figure to the old law, fulfilling thereof to the
new: what mean you then master Abbot to charge us with guilefull concealing,
clipping, and paring of Tertullian, who deliver him unto you so roundly, and so
wholly? we play not with you as master Jewel did, who brought out of Opus
imperfectum sermo. 11. in Chrisostomes name, in almost an hundredth places of
his book (as putting great trust in the same) these words against the
Sacrament, and against Chrysostom, for that very point in a notable Sermon of
his made for that purpose:) In the vessels of the church is not contained the
true body and blood of Christ, but a figure of his body and blood. Whereas the
An answer altogether vain and senseless, as the very words show.
author means it of the vessels, taken out of the temple of Jerusalem by
Nabuchodonosor, which point he guilefully suppressed. For the authors words
are these: For if it be a sin, and dangerous to transfer holy vessels to
private uses, as Balthazar teaches us, who drinking in the holy cups was
therefore deposed from his kingdom, and bereaved of his life, if then it be
thus dangerous to transfer these holy vessels to private uses, in which is
not the true body of Christ, but a mystery of his body is contained, etc. You
may see how Balthazar was stolen out of the text, to make those old Churches
vessels, to be the vessels of our Christian temples. Upon those words of
Tertullian how crossely you infer your conclusion upon your own supposed
sense of id est figura: it may I hope appear unto you, upon the consideration
of that which I have discoursed, concerning his testimony, except you could
wage Tertullian to say that he made no comparison between a figure of the old
testament, and the verity of the new, answering the same: and that he would
for your sake to help you to an argument, pull back his own confession,
affirming himself to have spoken de veteri Figura, of the old Figure, or
except you say his meaning was that Christ made his Supper, to be an ancient
figure of the old testament.

R. Abbot. 18.
HEre the Answerer begins with his jest. Tertullian says he, kills the
Cow. I answer him; if Transubstantiation be a Cow, Tertullian kills the
Cow. He stronglye gainsaieth it and will not abide it. Thus he speaks
Tertul. cont. Marcion. li. 4.
The bread which Christ took and distributed to his disciples he made his
body, in saying, This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body. But
it had not been a figure unless there were a true body. For an empty thing
as is a fantasy, could receive no figure. Marcion the heretic against whom
he wrote, held that Christ had not a true and real body, but only a fantasy
and appearance and show of a body. Tertullian proves by the Sacrament, that
Christ had a very true body. For the scripture is not wont to set down tokens
and figures of things, which have not the truth of the things answerable unto
them. Therefore seeing Christ in the Gospel gave bread as a token and figure
of his body, saying, This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body,
it is certain that Christ has a true body correspondent to this figure. Thus
do chrysostom in Mat. hom. 83. Theod. d^al. 2. Iren adu* haeres. lib. 5.
Chrysostom and other of the Fathers reason from the Sacrament to prove the
verity and truth of the passion and of the body of Jesus Christ. To this
place of Tertullian M. Harding confessing that Tertullian made these words,
This is a figure of my body, the exposition of those words, This is my body,
says that his interpretation is not according to the right sense of Christ's
words, and that in his contention he did not so much regard the exact use of
his words, as how he might win his purpose of his adversary, and so makes
Tertullian to write he cared not what. Campian being urged with the same words
in the Tower, shifted the matter off, that those words, That is to say, a
figure of my body, were the exception of the heretic and not Tertullians own
words. The Ans. has found in some other of his learned Treatises, namely
Bellar. to. 2. de sacram. Euchar. l^b. 2. cap 7.
in Bellarmine another devise for ye saluing of this matter. Whereby we may see
how these men are carried up and down with giddiness and frenzy, and being
pressed with evidence of truth, cannot find any answer whereupon to rest
themselves, and therefore as ashamed each of others doings, bestow their wits
from day to day to devise new collusions and shifts to save themselves. The
Answ. resting upon the credit of father Robert, thinks that there is great
wit and reason in that which he has written: so that Tertullian must be an
Ass if he meant otherwise then he expounds him: but indeed gets himself
hereby a privilege to wear the ears to whomsoever it befall to be the Ass.
For his exposition beside that it is foolish and absurd, makes also expressly
against himself, and admits that which I desire, and which he himself must
needs confess to be the undoing of Transubstantiation. He makes two
expositions of Tertullians words: the one ours and that thus; This is my body,
that is to say, this is a figure of my body: and this being indeed the current
and direct passage of Tertullians words, he disliketh and condemns. The other
is theirs, and as he would make us believe the very intended meaning of the
words, namely thus, This is my body: This, that is to say, the figure of my
body is my body. Whereby he briefly resolves out of Tertullian a marvelous
doubt whereof his Fathers were never able to determine any thing; namely,
whereto the word This is to be applied. For if it be said, This bread which is
the very truth, then they saw that Transubstantiation cannot stand. Therefore
have they profaned the sacred words of Christ with their cursed
sophistications, and have most wretchedly tossed them too and fro to make a
meaning of them that might serve for their purpose, and yet have found none.
But the Answ. sets down the meaning thus: This figure of my body is my
body. So that the word This, must be referred to the figure of the body. And
what figure? The old figure even the same says he that Melchisedech used. And
what was that old figure? Marry it was bread. Then we have the exposition of
Christ's words as we would have it; This is my body, that is to say, This
bread is my body. And this is manifest to be Tertullians mind, by that he
says twice in this place, that Christ called bread his body; and in his book
against the Jews says in like sort that he called bread his body; and in his
first book against Marcion, says again that Christ represented his body by
bread. Now if Christ in the Sacrament call bread his body, and by bread do
represent his body, then it follows that in the Sacrament it is bread which
is called the body of Christ, and is so called, because the body of Christ is
represented thereby. Therefore the meaning of Christ's words must needs be thus;
This bread is the figure of my body. This were sufficient for the opening of
Tertullians mind in this point, but yet I will follow the Answ. to sift the
matter somewhat further. I acknowledge first with him, that Tertullians purpose
in that place is to show that Christ fulfilled in the new Testament those
things that were foretold and foreshewed in the old. But as it was never
prefigured in the old Testament that there should be a transubstantiation of
the bread and wine, so no more does Tertullian go about by any old figure to
approve the same. And if he had named Melchisedech, or alluded unto him any way
as we are by this man borne in hand, yet could it not have been to any other
purpose but this, that Melchisedech by bringing forth bread and wine in figure
of the Sacrament, did signify that Christ should appoint and institute bread
and wine to be the tokens and signs of his body and blood; and that Christ in
the Gospel did fulfill ye same. So says S. Hierom: Hieron. in Mat. 26.
Christ takes bread and goes to the true Sacrament of the passover that as
Melchisedech the priest of the high God in prefiguring of him, offering bread
and wine had done, so he himself also might represent the truth of his body
and blood. Therefore though it be granted that Tertullian speaks of
Melchisedech, yet serves it my purpose and not his; that Christ instituted
bread and wine, to represent thereby the truth of his body and blood, as
Melchisedech had prefigured he should do. But the truth is, Tertullian speaks
not of Melchisedech: he does not so much as intimate any thing of him; and the
Answ. for that he read the place could not but know that there was nothing
meant as touching Melchisedech, and therefore in vpbraiding us with stealing of
scrappes out of the Fathers, because we use this place, he gives me occasion
to charge him with voluntary and wilful falsifying of their words. But I leave
that to his own conscience, whether he did purposely seek by this bad means
to add the more likelihood unto a false tale. Tertullian says nothing here to
intimate that ye very creatures of bread and wine were used in the old
Testament as figures of the body and blood of Christ, but only expounds some
places where the names of bread and wine are so used, as that thereby should be
signified the same body and blood of Christ. To this purpose he alleges the
words of Jeremy as the vulgar Latin text reads them, Ier. 11. 19.
Let us cast the wood upon his bread, that is, says he, the cross upon his
body, as noting that by the name of bread the Prophet signified the body of
Christ. Therefore he adds, Christ the reuealer of antiquities, calling bread
his body, did sufficiently declare what his will was that bread should then
signify. Whereby he gives to understand that as the Prophet did use the name
of bread to signify the body of Christ, so Christ himself to justify that
speech of the Prophet, did institute bread it self to be the sign and
Sacrament of his body, and accordingly called it his body. Another like
speech he recites concerning wine out of the words of Jacob the Patriarch,
Genesis 49. 11.
He shall wash his garment in wine, and his clothing in the blood of the
grape. Where by the garment and clothing, he understands the body and flesh
of Christ, by wine the blood of Christ, as if Jacob should foretell in those
words that the body of Christ should be embrued with ye shedding of his blood.
Hereupon he infers; He that then figured wine in blood, has now consecrated
his blood in wine; noting hereby not that blood indeed was used for a figure of
wine, but that the name of the blood of the grape served to signify wine, as
prefiguring that wine it sel^^ should be appointed to be the sign of ye blood
of Christ. Now this was fulfilled by Christ when he consecrated his blood in
wine, that is to say, made the Sacrament of his blood in wine, or appointed
wine in truth to be the Sacrament of his blood, for signification whereof, the
name of wine had been before used. The old figure the refore of which
Tertullian speaks, saying; that we may acknowledge an old figure in wine,
was in the use of the names of bread and wine, not of bread and wine indeed:
and that which by this old figure and manner of speaking was intimated in the
old Testament, Christ performed and fulfilled in the new, when he consecrated
and sanctified his creatures of bread and wine to be Sacraments and figures of
his body and blood, and by name accordingly called them his body and blood.
Which manner of speaking he had not approved but frustrated, if in making the
Sacrament he had destroyed the substance of bread and wine: for then he could
not have called bread his body and wine his blood, as Tertullian says he did.
Now therefore that which the Answ. says, that Figures are of the old
Testament, and Christ fulfilleth them in the new, makes nothing against us,
nay setting aside the error of the Answ. it makes wholly for us. For he vainly
fancieth Tertullian, to say that the very elements of bread and wine were used
in the old Testament for figures of the body and blood of Christ, and
therefore that the same should not be again appointed to that use in the new
Testament, whereas Tertullian says no more but only that the names or words of
bread and wine were sometimes taken to signify the same. Now then let him
remember that Turtullian avouches the fulfilling of this figure in this, that
Christ called bread his body and wine his blood, and let him say with us
according to Tertullians mind, that in the Sacrament it is bread and wine
which is called the body and blood of Christ; and that the meaning of Christ's
words is, This bread is my body, that is to say, A Figure of my body. Now
hereby Tertullian proves, that Christ has a true substantial body. For
says he, It had been no Figure except there were a true body. For an empty
thing as is a fantasy, might not have been capable of a Figure. But here the
Answ. would make us believe, that unless Tertullian mean this of a Figure in
the old Testament, his saying is not true. And this he proves by Nigromancy:
for says he, the fantastical bodies of spirits do exhibit to the eyes a
certain Figure or shape, as the very Nigromancers do know. But what motion I
marvel came into the man's mind to divert his speech from mystical and
sacramental figures instituted by Jesus Christ whereof Tertullian speaks, to
figures and facions, and shapes of devils and spirits. He was a blind man if he
saw not his own error and folly, but leaud and wretched if he saw it, and
yet against his own conscience would thus dally with Gods truth. And why could
he not conceive that Tertullians words if they had concerned any such figures,
should have bin false in respect of the old Testament as well as of the new,
because devils and spirits had their figures and shapes as well then as now. Was
it strange unto him that there are sacramental figures in ye new Testament,
to which the words of Tertullian might be fitly applied. Surely S. Austen
says, that August. in Psalm. 3.
Christ admitted Judas to that banquet, wherein he commended to his Disciples
the Figure of his body and blood. So says the old Father Ephrem, that Ephrem.
de natura dei no^ scrutanda. cap. 4.
Christ blessed and brake the bread in figure of his body, and blessed and
gave the cup in Figure of his precious blood. Nay the Answ. himself has
confessed Sect. 10.
before that the Fathers call the sacrifice which they speak of, a figure of
the death and passion of Christ. Of such a figure Tertullian speaks and
reasons thus, that there should never have bin appointed in the Gospel a
figure to represent the body of Christ, except there had been a true body to
be represented thereby. As for that cavil of his which he has borrowed from
Bellarmine, that if Tertullian had not spoken of a figure in the old Testament,
he should not have said, fuisset, but esset, it is too too foolish and absurd,
and if he were in the Grammar school, he should deserve to be laid over the
form, to make him know that the verb fuisset is rightly used by Tertullian,
with relation to Christ's first instituting of bread to be the figure of his
body. Let him consider better, whether this stand not with good construction
to say; Christ took bread and said thereof, This is my body, that is to say, a
figure of my body. But it had not been, or it should not have been a figure
except there were a true body. But yet he goes farther: Tertullian says
thus: If Christ did therefore make bread his body because he wanted a true
body, then he should have given the bread for us. It made for the vanity of
Marcion, that bread should be crucified. These words says he, have neither wit
nor sense, except it be supposed that Christ's body is really in the Sacrament,
nay otherwise it must be bread that was crucified for us. But except his wit
and his sense did fail him, he might find somewhat else in Tertullians words.
For still he calls ye sacrament bread, and puts difference betwixt the
bread that is called y^ body and ye true body it self, and so reasons against
Marcion, y^ if Christ had not a true body indeed which he represented by bread,
and in respect thereof called the same bread his body, then the bread itself
must be his body, and consequently it was bread which was given and crucified
for us. But Marcion himself would not say that bread was crucified for us:
Therefore he must needs confess that Christ had a true body figured by the
bread. And thus Tertullians reason against Marcion sets down bread in the
Sacrament as a figure of Christ's body, and razeth the foundation of Popish
Transubstantiation. And this is yet again plain by these words, to which he
asks me what I say, that Christ called not a Pepon his body as he should have
done by Marcions opinion, who held that Christ had in steed of a heart, a
kind of fruit called a Pepon: but he called bread his body because of the
old Figure, namely because the Prophet using the name of bread to import the
body of Christ, did thereby prefigure that bread indeed should be appointed to
be the figure and sign of the same body. So that Christ did not renew an old
figure by consecrating or sanctifying the bread to be a figure of his body,
but fulfilled that in the truth and substance of bread, which Tertullian says
was foreshewed by the name of bread. Thus much of Tertullians roundly and
wholly delivered words, where the Answ. has showed as great folly, in
enlarging them, as some other of his fellows have showed falsehood in clipping
and paring them. But to fill up the measure of this folly, he takes upon him
by the way to censure Master Jewel about a place alleged out of the
imperfect work upon Math. Sermon. 11. Which he does in that peevish and vain
sort, as that he shows himself to be led wholly with malice without any
judgment or discretion. First he misliketh that he did allege it in
Chrisostomes name. But why so? Is it not as lawful for master Jewel or for
the Church of England to do so, as it is for the Church of Room and her
followers? Sixth. S^n^n^. b^^l^ot. san^^ 4 in l^^n. C^rys^st.
The Church of Rome reads diverse homilies in their divine service from thence
under the name of Chrysostom. Many sentences and propositions are brought
thence under his name in the ordinary gloses, in the chains of the
explanations of the Gospels, in the decrees of the Bistops of Room, in the
Summaries of Divinity set forth by Divines of great name, as Sixtus Senensis
himself a Papist gives us to understand. Why then should master Jewel be
blamed for alleging that work under Chrysostomes name, when the Church of
Room by her example warranted him so to do. But yet he will further make us
believe that the words do not prove that for which they are alleged. The
words are these: If Chrysostom in open. imperf. hom. 11.
it be a dangerous matter to transfer holy vessels to private uses, as
Baltasar teaches us, who drinking in the sacred cups was deprived of his
kingdom and his life, if then I say it be so dangerous, to transfer to
private uses these sanctified vessels in which is not the true body of Christ
but a mystery of his body is contained. etc. Out of which words master
Jewel proves y^ in the sacred vessels there is not the true body of Christ,
as the Papists dream, but only a mystery of his body. The place is so
plain as nothing can be more plain. Now therefore what says the Answ. to it?
Forsooth the author meant these words of the vessels of the temple of
Jerusalem, which Nabuchodonosor took from thence, and not of the vessels of
our Christian Churches. But what vessels I marvel were those in the temple of
Jerusalem which contained the mystery of Christ's body? where did he ever
read or hear of any such? Or if he can unshamefastly face out such a matter,
how can he imagine that Chrysostom or the author whosoever would admonish his
auditors, that it was dangerous for them to abuse the vessels of the temple
of Jerusalem, which they neither had nor could have to abuse? Again, he says
not those holy vessels as pointing to the vessels of the temple, but expressly
these holy vessels, understanding them which he had then to use. Again he
says not, wherein was not, but wherein is not the true body of Christ, nor
wherein was contained, but wherein is contained the mystery of his body. All
which being referred to the present time, do plainly enough show that he spoke
of the vessels that then were present: and therefore his words are a very
direct and substantial proof, that in the vessels of Christian temples there
is not the true body of Christ, but only a mystery of his body. Yea but there
is mention of Baltazar there. And what then? Surely Baltasar is there brought
in to teach us, as the author speaks. Now what does the example of Baltasar
teach us? not to abuse the vessels of the temple of Jerusalem? A senseless
conceit. He teaches us not to abuse the vessels of our temples and Churches,
least offending as he did, we be punished as he was. For there is always the
same reason of the use or abuse of holy things; and particular examples are
always alleged for confirmation and proof of general doctrines. Surely the
Answ. was suddenly awaked out of his dream when he conceived this, and set his
hands to write before he was well advised what he should write.

P. Spence. Sect. 19.
AS I have dilated at large the meaning of Gelasius, so I cannot but wonder at
your repeating of him in this place, so contr^^ie to his meaning even by your
own confession. You would before have Gelasius drift to be this, that as in
heaven Christ is in his two natures several, the godhead, and the manhood: so
in the Sacrament with his body remains the bread, thereby to have* hoth in
heaven, and here two several natures. Yet now forsooth Gelasius must forget
what he has to prove, and must say for you that the Sacrament is nothing but a
sign: and then how serves it for an argument against Eutyches, if it be but
bare brad in one nature only: whereas if you look upon the whole testimony
of Gelasius, as I set it down largely to you, you shall see, yea with half an
eye that the meaning of these words. ( An image and similitude of the body and
blood of the Lord is performed in the celebration of the mysteries) is no other
but this, that his being in the Sacrament, both in a divine substance, as
himself told you, and also joined with the natural properties of bread, is a
figure and resemblance of his two natures remaining in heaven vnconfused. Thus
you care not how foolishly you make the author to speak, so he afford you
words and sillables to make a show. Look upon Gelasius and bethink your
self. I have answered him at large: Look ^
in the end and there you shall find it, because it was written before yours
came to my hand* I was loath to write it again in his orderly place, for that
writing is somewhat painful to my weak head and years. Wherefore I crave you
to bear with me in that matter.

R. Abbot. 19.
THe words of Gelasius are these: An Gelas. cont. Euty. and Nestor.
image or resemblance of the body and blood of Christ, is celebrated in the
action of the mysteries or sacraments. Hereby Gelasius gives to understand
that the sacrament is not the very body of Christ, but the image and
resemblance of his body. It is more plain by that which he adds: We must
therefore think the same of Christ himself, which we profess in his image,
that is to say, in the Sacrament. Mark how he distinguishes Christ himself,
and the image of Christ. The Sacrament therefore which is the image of Christ,
is not Christ himself. Thus the words themselves do manifestly give that for
which I alleged them. But the Answ. tells me that I allege Gelasius here
contrary to his own meaning, even by mine own confession. How may that be?
Forsooth I would before have Gelasius his drift to be that as Christ is in
heaven in two natures: so here upon the earth in the sacrament is bread with
the body, and so both in heaven and here would have two several natures: but
now in this place I would have the Sacrament to be nothing but a sign, and
bare bread in one nature only. But he knows that he speaks untruth both
in the one and in the other. Of the former he himself has acquitted me before,
saying; Sect. 9.
you would have the Sacrament a memory of Christ as though he were absent.
Then belike I would not have the body of Christ really present here upon the
earth in the Sacrament. Of the other I acquitted my self in that very place
which he takes upon him to answer. For I added immediately upon the alleging
of those words, thus. Yet are not the Sacraments naked and bare signs as you
are wont hereupon to cavil, but substantial and effectual signs or seals
rather, assuring our faith of the things sealed thereby, and delivering as it
were into our hands and possession, the whole fruit and benefit of the death
and passion of Jesus Christ. To answer him to both in a word, thus I say: that
as the water of Baptism does sacramentally imply the blood of Christ, though
the blood of Christ be in heaven: so likewise the bread and wine in the Lords
Supper, do sacramentally imply the body and blood of Christ, though the same
body and blood be in heaven and not upon the earth. And therefore neither did
I before say nor do now, that the Sacrament consists of two natures, really
being upon earth, but of bread and wine being on earth, and the body and blood
of Christ being in heaven: the one received by the hand of the body; the other
only by the hand of the soul, which only reaches unto heaven. Again, as
water in Baptism is not therefore bare water, because the blood of Christ is
not there really present; so no more is the bread of the Lords table bare
bread, although there be no real presence of the body, but it does most
effectually offer and yield unto the believing soul the assurance of the
grace of God, and of the forgiveness of sins. That which he further adds
as touching the drift and purpose of Gelasius how lewdly it peruerteth his
words and makes them to serve fully for the heresy of Eutyches against which
Gelasius writes, I have declared before, and so well have I bethought my self
hereof, as that I doubt I may in that behalf, charge the Answ. conscience
with voluntary and wilful falsehood and desperate fighting against God.

Pet. Spence. Sect. 20.
YOur term of Seals applied to the Sacraments is done to an ill purpose, to
make the Sacraments no better then the Jews Sacraments were. To handle that
matter would require a greater discourse, which willingly I let pass: But yet
I must tell you that the said opinion is very derogatorie to the Untruth: for
the passion of christ has had his effect from the beginning of the world.
effect of Christ's passion, of the which the Sacraments of Christ's Church
take a far more effectual virtue, then the Jews Sacraments did. Read our
treatises of that matter, for I list not to run into that disputation.

R. Abbot. 20.
HE disliketh that I call the Sacraments Seals. Yet here his own conscience
could tell him that we make not the Sacrament bare bread and wine, as he and
his fellows maliciously cavil. Though wax of it self b^ but wax, yet when
^^ (...) with the Princes signe^, it is treason to offer despite unto it. So
whatsoever the bread and wine be of themselves, yet when they are by the word
of God, as it were stamped and printed to be Sacraments and seals, it is the
peril of the soul to abuse them, or to come irreverently unto them. But why
is not the term of s^ales to be approved in our sacraments? Surely S. Austen
calls them visible August. lib. de catech^z. ^ud. ca. 26. and hom. 50. de v.
Tit. poen^t.
Seals, and why then is it amiss in us? Forsooth because it makes our
sacraments no better then the sacraments of the Jews. Indeed our Sacraments
are in number sewer, for observation more easy, in use more clean, in
signification more plain, and through the manifest revelation of the Gospel
more meet to excite and stir up our faith, and in these respects they are
better then the sacraments of the Jews: but as touching inward and spiritual
grace, they are both the same: neither is there in that respect any reason to
affirm our sacraments to be better then theirs. For they* did 1 Cor. 10. ^.
eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, that we
do, The same, I say, that we do,: For they drank of the spiritual rock
which followed them, and the rock was Christ. Christ therefore was their
spiritual meat and drink as well as ours: and Jesus Heb 13. 8.
Christ yesterday and to day is the same, and for ever. The same therefore to
them as he is to us, only in difference of time, To come, in respect of them,
and already come, in respect of us. This the apostle further shows when he
says that they 1. Cor. 10. 2.
were baptized. Which must be understood either of the outward sign, or of the
inward grace of Baptism. But not of the outward sign: therefore of the inward
grace. Therefore their Sacraments offered the same inward grace that ours do.
This S. Austen also plainly testifies, when he says, that Aug. in Ioh. tr. 26.
their Sacraments, though in outward signs diverse: yet in the things
signified; and as he speaks straightwaies after, in spiritual virtue were
equal unto ours, and again, that Ibid. tr. 45.
if a man respect the visible sign, they did drink an other thing, but as
touching signification and understanding they drank the same spiritual
drink, that we do, which in both those places he proves by the same words
of S. Paul which I have alleged, and that by way of expounding the same
words. Which is to the shame of the divines of Rhemes, who so peruersly and
contrary to the very light of the text, labor to draw them to another
meaning. Now therefore whereas the Answ. says that this derogateth from the
effect of Christ's passion, and that our sacraments have thence greater virtue
then the Jews sacraments had, it is but a presumptuous, a foolish, and
improbable assertion, without any likelihoode of truth, that may be gathered
by the word of God. We believe the virtue of Christ's passion to have been no
less to their salvation, then it is to ours, because we believe that Jesus
Christ Apoc. 13. 8.
is the lamb slain from the beginning of the world, not only in type and
figure, but in power and grace also. The August. lib. de natu and gra. cap. 44.
same faith saved them, says S. Austen that saves us, even the faith of Jesus
Christ the mediator betwixt God and man, the faith of his blood, the faith of
his cross, the faith of his death and resurrection. We believe therefore that
their sacraments, having all relation to Christ's passion as ours have, did
yield no less benefit to them in Jesus Christ then ours do to us. Here he
refers me again to his learned treatises, wherewith he is so besotted
himself that he takes every word in them to be an oracle, albeit they be
indeed as full of follies, triflings, and impudent falshoodes as his own
pamphlet is. I am well enough acquainted with them already. But to call
Sacraments seals, I learn of S. Paul. Romans 4. The name notably sets
forth the use of them. Seals serve for assurance of promises or couenantes to
them to whom they are made. Such are sacraments to assure our faith of the
promises of God. The delivery of seals gives interest and right of the
things sealed, to them to whom they are delivered. The sacraments of Jesus
Christ do give as it were into our hands and possession through faith, the
whole prerogative of the benefit of Christ's death and passion, which is
preached unto us in the word of the Gospel. Therefore does Bernardus Ser. in
caena domi.
Bernard fitly compare our sacraments to a ring, by which a man is invested and
entered to the possession of his inheritance, and whereof he may say, The ring
avails nothing, but it is the inheritance that I sought for. And even so may
we say that it is not the sacrament for it self, but the things sealed and
delivered by the sacrament that we desire.

P. Spence. Sect. 21. and 22.
THe place of S. John, The word was made flesh, What proves it touching the
Sacrament? what kind of argument is this? In this saying, The word was made
flesh: the sense is, the word assumpted flesh unto it, not changing his former
nature, and it is not to be taken as the words do sound, Ergo this text, This
is my body, is not to be taken as the words import. A very Cum insana dicis
and rides, phrenetico c^ similis. August. cont. Iulia. Pelag. lib* 4.
vpstantiall argument. But do you remember that syllogizari non est ex
particulari? It is like as if I should argue thus, I am a vine, is a figurative
speech, Ergo I am the light of the world, is also a figurative speech. But I
pray you Sir is this saying, The word was made flesh, like to This is my body?
does bread still remaining assumpt unto it into one person, or into one
suppositum, Christ's body? Luther said so, be you now of that mind? This is to
speak you wot not, nor care not what, so you say somewhat* S. Augustine as Bede cites him, says: Christ has commended unto us in this sacrament his
body and blood. Says he so? me thinks he says very well for us, as we
could wish him. We thank you for such texts heartily. But he says further,
which also he has made us, and by his grace we are the same that we receive.
What infer you hereof? and forsooth (say you) we are not transubstantiated
into the Sacrament. A most witty, pithie, and subtle piece of Logic, nihil
supra: logic was good cheap when this stood for good logic. A long
discourse it would ask to answer you fully, and a very goodly meditation is
herein offered to our souls. We are become one with Christ, not by being
transubstantiated into him, but by being joined by the Sacrament unto him, as
members to our head, as many pieces of wood make one door, ship, house, or
such like, not one turned into an other, but joined together that they make one
thing: and so we become by this Sacrament his mystical body, as his members
joined together into one. Remember for this point how divinely Hilarious and
Cyrillus have written, and leave your profane dealing in so weighty a cause,
especially so besides all reason, and common sense.

R. Abbot. 21. 22.
IN these two sections the Answ. plaieth Hickescorners part, and by the way
proves himself a mighty wise man. I see that to be true in him which a
worthy man said: Iren lib. 1. cap. 9.
Audax and impudens res est anima quae inani aere calescit: A rude and an
impudent thing is the mind of that man that is tickled with vain presumption
and fancy. Though he show himself here both an ignorant Blind-asinus, and a
perverse and wilful wrangler, yet he takes upon him as if no man had either
Logic or wit, but only he, and solaceth himself with his terms of
vpstantiall argument, and good cheap logic, and most witty, pithie, and
subtle piece of Logic. By his naming of Luther in this place he puts me
in mind to answer him with a saying of Luther: Hoc scio pro certo quod si cum
stercore certo, Vinco vel vincor semper ego maculor. But to the matter. The b
Timothean August. de (...)e. ad (...) in ^ine.
heretics, as S. Austen reports, affirmed that the godhead of Christ was
really changed into the manhood. This they would prove by the words of the
Gospel. The word was made flesh, which they expounded thus. The divine nature
is turned or transubstantiated into the nature of man. In like sort the Answ.
and some other cogging merchants of his part single out the words of
Tertullian: Christ made the bread his body, and will needs have us to believe
thereby that the bread is really turned and transubstantiated into the body of
Christ. They both argue alike upon the word made. For answer hereof I showed
how Tertullian expounds his own meaning by these words, that is to say, a
figure of his body. Further I said, that that phrase or manner of speech Christ
made the bread his body, does not enforce any Transubstantiation. Which I
showed by comparing therewith the very like speech or phrase before alleged
out of the Gospel, Ioh. 1. 14.
The word was made flesh. For as it was absurdly gathered by the Timotheans,
that because the word was made flesh, therefore it ceased to be the word; so as
fondly is it gathered by the Papists of Tertullians words, that because the
bread is made the body of Christ, therefore it cease to be bread. The one
enforces not for the Timothean any transubstantiation of the word, therefore
neither does the other for the Papist, any transubstantiation of the bread. The
speeches are like: The word was made flesh: the bread is made the body of
Christ. Now has he not sent me a worthy answer to this? The words of S. John
says he, what prove they touching the Sacrament? What argument is this? The
word was made flesh, the sense is, the word assumpted flesh unto it. And it is
not to be taken as the words do sound, therefore this text, This is my body,
is not to be taken as the words import. A very mighty vpstantiall argument.
Nay a very pithie and sound answer, and worthy to be registered in Vaticano. I
make a comparison betwixt the words of S. John, and the words of Tertullian;
and he answers me of a comparison betwixt the words of John and the words of
Christ. How many mile to London? A poke full of plummes. Yet as a child
plaieth with a counter in steed of a piece of gold, so he delights himself
in a rascal shift, as if he had made a very substantial answer. But see yet
further the extreme folly and ignorance of this man. It is says he, as if you
should reason thus: I am the vine is a figurative speech, therefore I am the
light of the world, is a figurative speech. And what? is it not by a figure
that Christ is called the light of the world. Surely Christ is the light, in
respect of the darkness of the world. Seeing therefore darkness is understood
figuratively in the world, a man would think that that which is called light
as opposite to this darkness, should be so called by a figure. Light is
properly a sensible quality, and darkness the p(...)tion thereof: and both
have relation to the bodily eye. They are by a Metaphore applied to the soul,
and so is Christ called light: even as he is elsewhere called* Mal 4. 2.
The sun of righteousness, not properly I trow, but by a figure, unless the
Answ. be of the Manichees mind, who as Theodoret says, would sometimes say,
that Theodo. haer^t. fa^ul. lib. ^.
Christ was the very sun. Now therefore seeing that Christ is no otherwise
called the light of the world, then he is called a vine, a young boy in the
University will easily find a Topicke place in Aristotle, to prove that this
argument holds very well, Christ is called a vine by a figure, therefore he
is also called the light of the world by a figure. Further he says: But I pray
you sir is this saying, The world was made flesh, like to This is my body? I
answer him, Truly sir, no. But yet these are like, The word was made flesh,
and the bread is made the body of Christ, and as transubstantiation of the
word cannot be proved by the one, so transubstantiation of the bread cannot be
proved by the other* Whereas he demands whether bread still remaining, do
assumpt unto it Christ's body into one person, his question is idle. I have
answered before, that the union of Christ with the Sacrament is not personal
or real as he understands real; but relative and sacramental, as in
Baptism also it is. But as the word remains being personally united to the
flesh, so the bread remains being sacramentally united unto Christ. That
which he says of Luther is false. Luther did not teach that the body of
Christ was joined into one person with the bread. But now I wish him to
bethink himself who it is that cares not what he say, so that he say
somewhat.

Now for further declaration of the words of Tertullian, I alleged a saying of
S. Austen: Christ has commended unto us in this Sacrament his body and blood;
which also he has made us, and by his mercy we are the same that we receive.
Whereas the Answ. says, that the first part of this sentence serves very well
for him, it is but like the dotage of the melancholy Athenian. We say with S.
Austen, that Christ has commended unto us in this Sacrament his body and
blood, yet not being on earth to be received by the mouth, but August. in Ioh.
tr. ^0.
Sitting in heaven to be received by faith. But as Tertullian said; Christ made
the bread his body, so here Austen says: Christ has made us his body and
blood. The manner of speech is here also alike; and therefore I inferred hereof,
that Tertullians words do no more prove y^ the bread is transubstantiated into
the body of Christ, then S. Austens do prove, that there is a
transubstantiation of us into the body of Christ. That which I excepted as
touching those words; Yet we are not transubstantiated into the body of
Christ, the Answ. falsifieth and peruerteth thus; yet we are not
transubstantiated into the Sacrament. This is the faithfulness that he uses.
But what answer makes he? Forsooth it would ask a long discourse to answer
me: and therefore he has thought good not to answer me at all. For as for
that which he says, it serves directly for me. We are become one with Christ;
says he: let him speak as S. Austen speaks; we are made the body of
Christ, not by being transubstantiated into him, but by being joined unto him.
So say we, that the bread is made the body of Christ, not by being
transubstantiated into his body, but by having tied unto it by the word of God
the promise of that grace and blessing that is yielded unto us by and in the
body and blood of Jesus Christ. Or else let him show what commission he and
his fellows have to tell us that the word Made, must import transubstantiation
in the place of Tertullian, and in S. Austen must import none. If they have no
such, then let them give us leave to say, that as we are made the body of
Christ, not by changing our substance, but by being united and joined unto
him: so the bread of the sacrament is made the body of Christ, not by the
changing of the nature of it, as Theodoret says, but Theodor. di^l 1.
by adding grace unto nature; not by changing ye substance, but by altering the
condition and use thereof: not by loosing his former being, but by having ye
body of Christ united unto it, in such sort as I have before declared, through
the almighty power of the word of God, and the unspeakable working of the holy
Ghost. So that as S. Ambrose says, Ambr^^ sacra. lib. 4 cap. 4.
The bread and wine are the same that they were, and yet are changed to other
also. They are the same in substance that they were before; but as touching the
use, the virtue, power, and effect thereof, they are changed into other. As
for the meditation that is offered unto us by the words of S. Austen, it is too
divine and heavenly for the Answerers gross and fleshly conceit, who can
imagine no other receiving of Christ, but by the mouth, nor eating of his
flesh, but into the belly. We become the mystical body of Christ by Baptism,
as S. Paul teaches, Ephesians. 5. 26. There we become flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bone. There also as S. Austen notes, August. ser. ad infan. ^^da* 1.
Cor. 10.
We are made partakers of the body and blood of Christ, so that though one die
before he come to the Sacrament of the bread and the cup, yet is he not
deprived of the participation and benefit of that Sacrament, seeing he has
found that already which this Sacrament signifies. Into this holy communion
and fellowship with Christ, we grow more and more through faith in the exercise
of the word and of the other sacrament, he abiding in us and we in him, he
ministering unto us, and we receiving of him through the holy Ghost, the suck
and juice of his heavenly grace, even as branches from the Vine, whereby as his
members we are quickened to everlasting life. Hereof Cyril and Hilary have
written indeed very divinely, but they must have readers that are as divinely
and spiritually minded, not such as the Answ. is, who turns all to his own
carnal and Capernaitish imagination. He should gather from these, that such as
is our uniting and joining unto Christ, such is our eating of his flesh and
drinking his blood. Our uniting unto Christ is mystical and spiritual, not
carnal and bodily. Therefore such also must our eating and drinking be. As for
that gross and bodily eating, Cyrill makes a strange and absurd matter of
it, when Cyril. aduer. Theodoret. anathe. ^^.
he says to Theodoret: Do thou pronounce our Sacrament to be the eating of
a man, and profanely urge the minds of them that believe, to gross
imaginations, and assaie to handle by humane conceits, those things which are
to be received by only pure and sincere faith? By which words he plainly
shows, that the opinion of the Papists of the eating and drinking with the
mouth the very humane flesh and blood of Christ is a gross and profane
imagination, and therefore little help may the Answ. hope for to his purpose, by
any thing that Cyrill says.

P. Spence. Sect. 23.
But S. Augustine says, Ye shall not eat this body which ye see, and drink
that blood which they shall shead, which shall crucify me; that is, S. Austen
speak^^h simpl^ of eating and d^inking ^ith the mouth, and denies the same: of
c^tting in gobbets he says nothing.
not to cut it in gobbets, as the Capharnits imagined, and as flesh to be
bought in the shambles, nor in this visible shape as it were Anthropophagi. You
must M. Abbot not snatch pieces of S. Augustine, to make up a patched testimony
to serve your own turn. For so you may make your Doctor say what you will
have him. But you must consider the circumstances of the place, and thereafter
judge of the meaning: as here he talks of the Capharnites butcherly
Anthropophagicall imagination, and therefore he tells how we must eat
Christ's body. I have commended unto you a Sacrament: being spiritually
understood, it shall give you life, etc. As who should say, As who should say,
ye s^all not eat him in pieces but ye shall e^te him ^hole A mi^^rable an^were.
you shall not eat him cut in pieces, but entire in a Sacrament, in a most
divine sacramental manner, and in a spiritual high mystery: but yet most
verily. For you imagine Spiritually imports that it is a thing done by the
spirit, not by the body, and therefore that we eat Christ by the faith of the
heart, not by the chewing of the teeth.
spiritually to be applied to the substance, whereas it is to be referred to the
manner. We receive his very flesh not fleshly, but spiritually. We eat his
very body, but not corporally or after a bodily manner, as we eat common
meats.

R. Abbot. 23.
FOr disproofe of that carnal eating and drinking, and consequently of
Transsubstantiation, I alleged Saint Austens exposition of Christ's words in
the sixth Chapter of saint John, concerning the eating of his flesh and
drinking his blood. Saint Austen writing in Psalm. 98. falls into treaty of
the offense that many took at Christ's words, and shows the reason thereof,
that they August in Psalm. 98.
took them foolishly, they understood them carnally, and thought that he would
cut them pieces of his flesh. But if they had not been hard hearted, they would
have thought: It is not without some cause that he says this. Surely there is
some secret mystery in it. His disciples he instructed, says he, and said
unto them: It is the spirit that quickens, etc which he expounds thus:
Understand spiritually that which I have said: Ye shall not eat this body
which ye see, nor drink that blood which they shall shead which shall crucify
me. I have commended unto you a Sacrament. Being spiritually understood, it
shall give you life. This place does plainly deny that eating and drinking of
the very flesh and blood of Christ, which the Capernaits dreamed of, and
tells us that we do not eat Christ's very flesh; nor drink his very blood,
namely with the mouth and body: but that for our eating and drinking we have a
sacrament commended unto us, which being though visibly celebrated, yet
spiritually understood, does make us partakers of the flesh and blood of Christ
to everlasting life. What answer makes the man to this? Forsooth, saint
Austen means that we cut not Christ's flesh in gobbets, nor as it is to be
bought in the shambles, nor we eat him not in a visible shape, etc. So then
belike saint Austen meant, that we eat not Christ's body peecemeale, but we
swallow him whole: and so the difference betwixt the Capernaites and us, must
be only this, that they would eat him in pieces, and we eat him whole. And
this only difference does the Answ. afterward make betwixt 1. Sect. ^ 9*
the Capernites and them, that they eat him in a sacrament, whole, inviolable,
like the paschal lamb, without breaking or brusing him: whereas the
Capernaites imagined that they should eat him in pieces, as flesh in the
shambles. Which mad fancy of eating Christ whole, Bellarmine goes about to
approve by another fancy as mad as it. For Bel^arm. tom 2. con^. 3. lib. 3.
cap. 22.
being urged that it is a horrible and unnatural thing, and therefore not
standing with piety to eat the very flesh of man, he answers that the
horror hereof is only in respect of the hurting and mangling of it. For
otherwise a man would willingly eat, or as he more mildly terms it, would
receive into him his friend whom he tenderly and dearly loves, if he might
take him in whole and without hurting him. Undoubtedly Bellarmine is a kind man
to his friend, that can find in his heart to eat him if he might eat him
whole, and without doing him any harm. But to leave him in his madness, we
see here how feign the Answ. would shift himself from being a brother to the
Capernaites, and it will not be. The Gospel simply notes the error of the
Capernaites to have consisted in this, that they thought they should with their
very mouths eat and drink the very flesh and blood of Christ. The same is
the gross conceit of the Papists: and the Gospel condemns both alike. The
fond distinction of the manner makes no difference in that behalf. As for
saint Austen, he declares his meaning plainly in his sermon to the people. He
knows none of these manners and peevish differences, but speaking of eating
and drinking with the mouth, he gives them to understand that it is but the
sacrament which they eat and drink, not the flesh and blood it self. Ye
shall not eat the body, ye shall not drink the blood. I have commended to you
a Sacrament. In another place entreating of the very same matter, he notes
that Christ signified to his hearers, that he would go up into heaven whole,
that they might understand that he spoke not of that eating his very body. Aug.
in Ioh. tra. 27.
They thought that he would give them his very body, but he told them that he
would go up into heaven, even whole. Thus that we may not think that either
peecemeale or whole we eat the very body, he gives us to understand that he
is ascended to heaven entire and whole. To which purpose Athanasius also says:
How Athan: sermon. in illud Chri. Qui dixerit verbum contra filium.
should it be that all the world should eat of his flesh which would suffice
but a few men? But therefore our Lord, when he spoke unto his Apostles of the
eating of his flesh, made mention of his ascension unto heaven, that he might
withdraw them from corporal and fleshly understanding. And so the Answerer
eating of Christ whole, is indeed but a fiction and absurd shift. Yet let him
remember what saint Austen says again in another place concerning the eating
of Christ in the sacrament. Thus he says: When Aug. ser. de ver. Euan. Beda.
1. cor. 10
we eat Christ, we make not pieces of him. Yet surely in the Sacrament we do
so, and the faithful know how they eat the flesh of Christ. Every one takes
his piece. When the grace is called pieces. Christ is eaten peecemeale, and yet
continues whole. He is eaten peecemeale in the Sacrament, and abides entire
and whole in heaven. Where he hears saint Austen directly contrary to his
assertion, saying that the flesh of Christ in the sacrament is eaten
peecemeale, signifying that it is not indeed the real and very flesh of
Christ, and yielding us for proof thereof this argument: That flesh of Christ
which is eaten with the mouth in the sacrament, is eaten peecemeale. The true
and real flesh of Christ is not eaten peecemeale. Therefore that flesh of
Christ which is eaten with the mouth in the sacrament is not the true and real
flesh of Christ, and consequently it is so only sacramentally and in a
mystery. A sound answer to this argument without shifting would do very well.
Whereas he says again, that they eat Christ in the sacrament without
breaking him, let him hearken what Chrysostom says: This Chrysostom. in 1. cor.
10. hom. 24.
breaking we may see in the Eucharist, but not upon the cross, nay rather the
contrary there, for not a bone of him shall be broken, says God. But that
which he suffered not upon the cross, he suffers in the Sacrifice, and
permits himself to be broken for thee. Behold how Chrysostom says that
Christ who was not broken upon the cross, is broken in the sacrament, and
suffers that now, which he did not suffer then to be done: whereof we may
gather thus, that seeing the sacrament is broken, and the true and real body
of Christ cannot be broken, therefore the sacrament is not the true and real
body of Christ, but myst^cally and sacramentally, and so in the breaking of the
sacrament, the body is mystically and sacramentally broken. Whereas saint
Austen says that we must spiritually understand that which Christ says of
eating his flesh and drinking his blood: the Answ. tells me that spiritually
must be referred to the manner of the flesh, because we eat it not like flesh,
or cut in pieces, or as we eat common meats. But if we follow this
construction of h^s, it cannot be avoided, but that the wicked and ungodly also
do spiritually eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood. If spiritual
eating and drinking of the flesh and blood of Christ consist in this that we
eat him ^ot (...) flesh, hewed or chopped in pieces, the wicked by the doctrine
of the Church of Room do eat him so as well as the godly, because they are
in that respect alike partakers of the sacrament. But S. Austen teaches
expressly out of the Ioh. 6. 5^
words of Christ, that August. in Ioh. tract. 26.
they only which abide in Christ, and Christ in them, do spiritually eat the
flesh of Christ and drink his blood. Therefore the Answ. exposition as it is a
lewd and a cursed gloss: so it is expressly contrary to the doctrine of saint
Austen. Such answers become him very well. But what is meant by understanding
spiritually, I showed by the words of Origin, which he deceitfully passes by,
and leaves them without answer. There Orig. in Leuit. hom. ^.
is, says he, in the new testament a letter, which kills him that does not
listen to it spiritually. For if thou follow according to the letter that which
is written, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood,
that letter kills. Where he teaches us that to understand spiritually, is to
understand, not according to the letter, not as the words sound, not simply as
things are uttered, as k Chrysostom Chrysostom in (...) 46.
speaks, but to gather another meaning imported by the words. For example he
alleges, that those words of eating the flesh of Christ and drinking his
blood, must not be understood according to the letter, and as the words
import, but another spiritual construction must be made of them. Which S.
Austen very effectually and to the purpose shows in the next place that
follows now to be handled.

Pet. Spence. Sect. 24.
YEa but S. August. lib. 30. de doctr. Christiana strikes us dead. He seems,
says he, to command a heinous matter. Therefore it is a figure commanding,
etc. This is your great Achilles so much magnified of your side. But I beseech
you sir, did saint Augustine bring in this speech upon the place, This is my
body: onels upon the place of saint John, Except ye eat the flesh of the son
of man. etc. You know it was upon the latter place. For when Christ told them
they should eat his flesh, they might imagine, as indeed they did, that they
should A butcherly answer, and fit for the shambles. S. Austen taught not the
Capernaites, but us to understand eating and drinking not properly, but by a
figure.
eat it in gobbets cut, slashed and hewed, and chopped as flesh to the pot or
the broach, yea monstrous and like the Cannibals, man-hunting and man-eating
beastly manner: Here therefore they must needs by saint Augustines rule flee
to some other more milder sense, and to a more humane meaning, which was that
he would exhibit himself to them in a sacrament in a mystical, sweet,
spiritual manner. But what then? ergo not verily? Nego argumentum. Did saint
Augustine say so any where? no verily. But at his supper when he raught his
Apostles the forms of bread and wine, and told them (not beguiling them nor
lying to them) that it was his body and blood that he gave them to eat and
drink, where was now that flagitium and facinus? What fear was here of any
such Capharnaticall bloody imagination? Nay here he let them see, how he
before meant to give them his body when at Caphernaum he said. Nisi
manducaueritis, etc. And therefore hear the manner of exhibiting his body very
truly, though in a sacrament to be verily eaten, but not mangled our worried,
and torn in pieces, gives neither fear or need or occasion to S. Augustines
rule: prove that S. August. meant it in this place that at his supper he gave
only a figure, or else you prove nothing.

R. Abbot. 24.
Here S. Austens drist is to show what speeches of the holy scripture are to
be understood properly, and what figuratively, and to another meaning then the
words sound. Of the latter sort, he sets down this rule: Aug(...) 6
If it be a speech that seems to command any heinous or wicked thing, or to
forbid the doing of good, it is a figurative speech. Whereof he had given this
rule before: ^.
We must take heed that we take not a figurative speech according to the
letter. For to this belongs that of the Apostle: The letter kills: for when
a man takes a thing spoken by figure, as if it were properly spoken, he does
carnally understand it. Hereof he gives for example those words; Except ye
eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, etc. Of this he
says: It seems to command a heinous and wicked thing. Therefore it is a
figure, that is to say, a figurative speech, and therefore must not be
understood as the words do import. The meaning of this figure, he declares,
It wills us to communicate with the passion of Christ, and sweetly and
profitably to lay up in our memory that his flesh was crucified and wounded
for us. Then by S. Austens judgment, the meaning of this figurative speech of
eating and drinking ye flesh and blood of Christ is, to apply unto our selves
the benefit of his passion, and comfortably to record that his flesh was
wounded, and his blood shed for the forgiveness of our sins. Whereby it is
evident that he never dreamed of that monstrous and loathsome eating and
drinking, which the church of Room teaches, flesh, blood, and bone as he was
born of the virgin Mary, as some of them Canniball, and Capernait-like have
uttered. This place the Answ says is our great Achilles, much magnified of our
side. The greater this Achilles is, the more strongly it behooued him to have
fought against it. But he says nothing to it, but that that is ridiculous and
childish. First he comes in with a bald and impertinent question; Did S
Austen bring in this speech upon the place, This is my body? He did not so,
and what then? Surely this is but to talk idly, and not to care what he
says, so be say some what. He brings it in for that purpose for which I
alleged it, to expound the words of Christ in the sixth of John, of eating and
drinking the flesh and blood of Christ, and tells us that it is a figurative
speech, and therefore must not be understood according to the proper
signification of eating and drinking. What says this good man to it? Forsooth
the Capernaites when they heard Christ speak of this matter, might imagine, as
indeed they did, says he, that they should eat it in gobbets, cut, slashed and
hewed, etc. Therefore they must needs by S. Austens rule flee to a milder sense,
and to a more humane meaning. Then belike S. Austen taught the Capernaites how
they should have understood the words of Christ, but he teaches not us. For
we are far from imagining the eating of Christ's flesh in gobbets, slashed,
hewed, chopped in pieces, as the Answ. speaks with his butcherly and barbarous
terms. Alas children see the folly of these answers. S. Austen in that place
gives us a rule of understanding the scriptures. He gives this place for an
example of his rule. He teaches us that to eat and drink the flesh and blood
of Christ imports a horrible and heinous thing, if we understand eating and
drinking properly. He talks not of slashing or hewing, but of eating and
drinking, and therefore tells us that we must understand eating and drinking
not properly, but by a figure. He tells us what the meaning of it is, as I
have showed before. Not a word to intimate any such Popish construction: nay he
condemns it as a heinous and wicked imagination. The matter is clear. Every
eye may discern it. As for that which he asks whether Christ do not give
himself verily unto us, we say he does, and that wholly with all that is his;
yet not to be eaten with the mouth as being here on earth, but to be received
by faith sitting in heaven, as I said before out of S. Austen. And this is
enough for us to prove, and in proouing whereof we confound that Supr. sect. 22.
gross imagination, as Cyrill calls it of eating the flesh of Christ, with
the mouth into the belly. For that Christ at his supper gives only a figure
and nothing else: we need not prove it, because it is not our assertion, but
the Answ. cavil and a Popish slander. As for the meaning of Christ's words,
This is my body, it is showed before. Christ did not lie to his Disciples, nor
beguile the^ in so saying. His Disciples were no Capernaites, they were no
Papists. They knew that Christ instituted and delivered a sacrament. They knew
that sacraments are called by the names of those things which they signify,
whereof they had example in the name of the passover, which they celebrated at
the same time, calling it the Passover, which was indeed but a remembronce
and sign thereof. Therefore they understood the meaning of Christ to be as the
ancient Fathers expound it: This is a Figure, a sign, a Sacrament of my body.
They saw the true body of Christ before their eyes. They knew that Christ had
not a body at one and the same instant visible and invisible, with form and
without form, sitting at the table, and yet enclosed in a little fragment or
crust of bread. These leaud and untowardly fancies were not yet bredde. They
delivered no such unto us, and therefore we believe no such. Let me thus
conclude out of these two places, this of Austen and that before of Origin: He
that understands a figurative speech according to the letter, does
misunderstand it. But he that understands the eating and drinking of Christ's
flesh and blood concerning the very eating of his flesh and drinking his blood
with the mouth, understands a figurative speech according to the letter.
Therefore he that so understands the eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and
blood, does misunderstand it. But the church of Rome does so understand it.
Therefore the Church of Rome does understand it amiss.

P. Spence. Sect. 25.
TO conclude, we eat and drink in the blessed Sacrament Christ's flesh and
blood really, truly, and indeed, but not bodily (for so much I will grant you)
taking bodily, for after a gross bodily manner but sacramentally, figuratively
and in a divine mystery: in a figure, not a figure of Rhetoric or of
Grammar, but in a divine figure, but yet very truly.

R. Abbot. 25.
HEre is now the Answ. conclusion set down without any premises upon his bare
word, namely that in the Sacrament they verily and truly eat and drink the
flesh and blood of Christ. But against this presumed conclusion of his, I
oppose the ancient prayer of the Church, mentioned by De corp. and san. do.
Bertram, De sacr. Euch.
Lanfrancus, and De conse. did. 2. ca. ^pecies.
Gratian,: Let thy Sacraments, o Lord, work in us that which they contain,
that what we now celebrate in sign or resemblance, we may in the truth of the
things receive the same. They prayed to receive the truth of the things. Of
what things? Namely of those, the sign or resemblance whereof they celebrated
in the Sacrament, that is, of the body and blood of Christ. Then the Sacrament
it self is not the truth of the body and blood, but only the sign, the image
and resemblance thereof. For with what reason should they pray to receive the
truth of that, which verily and truly they did receive already? But their
prayer was, that whereas they did now receive but the image and sign of the
body and blood of Christ, they might in the kingdom of heaven enjoy the thing
it self; the very body and very blood of Christ. And hereof Bertr. de corp.
and san. dom.
Bertram in his book very soundly concludes, that the body of Christ is not
verily and really in the Sacrament, whose whole collection to that purpose
being very strong, the Index Expu^^n co^r. Bertr.
Spanish censurers in their Index above named, have treacherously appointed to
be left unprinted, as before I showed of another place. Lanfrancus to avoid the
evidence of this ancient prayer, so plainly contradicting the real presence,
betaketh himself to an absurd shift, whose words to that purpose being,
Gratian has taken and put into the decrees in the chapter last before cited.
That Truth, he says, is to be understood of the manifestation and open
revealing of the body of Christ: and affirms that the name of truth is
diverse times used in scripture to that meaning, but yet alleges not any one
place to prove it so. Further he adds, that the word species does sometime
import the very Truth it self, and so in that maier he will have it
understood. Then the meaning of the prayer must be thus; that they might
receive in truth, that which they did now receive in truth: or that they might
receive in truth, that is visibly and manifestly, that which they now received
in truth, but inuisibly and under another shape. But the Church, as it is
always convenient, used their prayer plainly and without these
sophistications. If they had meant so, they had words enough to express their
meaning, neither needed they to use such doubtful words, to seem to say one
thing and yet to mean another. They plainly oppose species and veritas: the
sign and the truth one against the other. They would not put veritas in an
improper signification, as opposite to species, and understand it in proper
signification included in the word species. This were a very strange and
unwonted kind of speaking. And therefore referring the sign or resemblance to
the time present, and the truth to the time to come, they plainly show that
there is not now in the Sacrament the very truth, but only the resemblance of
the body of Christ, and therefore that we do not in the sacrament really and
verily with our mouths eat the body of Christ. And this is most plainly
affirmed by Hierome as Gratian cites him in the decrees: ^e conse. di. 2 cap.
de hac.
Surely, says he, Of this sacrifice which is wonderfully made in remembrance
of Christ, a man may eat: but of that which Christ offered upon the altar of
the cross as touching it self, no man may eat. The host or sacrifice which
Christ offered upon the Cross was his very body and blood. The sacrament
thereof, he says we do receive and eat, but as touching it self, no man may
eat thereof. Therefore no man may eat the very body and drink the very blood
of Christ, but these speeches must be figuratively understood, as has been
noted out of Austen. And whereas the Answ. says for declaration of S. Austens
meaning that we eat the flesh of Christ in a figure, not in a figure of
Rhetoric or Grammar, but in a divine figure, he may have that justly returned
to him which S. Austen said of a forefather of his: Aug. cont. aduer. leg. and
proph. lib. 2. cap. 9.
Imperita peritia de figurarum qualitate tractat: He would seem skillful, but
talks very unskillfully of the quality of Figures. For if he were required a
meaning of this his divine figure, no doubt it would prove to be a very
disfigured and misshapen thing. He had a fancy in his head, wherein he thought
he had gone beyond al his fellows, and he was glad y^ he had gotten occasion
here to utter it. But the Figure of which S. Austen speaks is figurata
locutio, a figurative speech, a Rhetoric figure called a metaphore, which is
not to be understood August. de doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 5. and 16.
proprie or ad literam, properly, of according to the letter, and as the words
do barely signify, as before has been said, because by the said figure the
word is translated from his own proper signification, to express another
thing, which in some respect is fitly and conveniently resembled thereby. As
for example because by believing we do as it were lay hold upon Christ, apply
him unto our selves, make him ours, assure our selves of his body crucified;
and his blood shed for the forgiveness of our sins to the relief and
comfort of our distressed and afflicted souls, even as in eating we take meat
and receive it into our stomachs and incorporate it into our selves, to the
cherishing and strengthening of our weak and feeble bodies; therefore the word
of eating which properly belongs to the body, is used to express the effect
of believing in Christ which appertains only to the soul. And thus does S.
Austen mean that there is a figure in these words of eating and drinking the
flesh and blood of Christ, as appears both in the place above mentioned as
touching this figure, and by his exposition of the same words upon the sixth of
John.

P. Spence. Sect. 26.
GOdly men have noted upon these words Tradetur and effundetur, shall be given,
shall be shed, that Christ used them by an Energie to signify that the blessed
Sacrament, that he gave to his Apostles, was not his fantastical, or
imaginatiue body: but that very body of his that was to be crucified,
tormented, and slain on the cross. I confess those words not strong enough
to compel a repining adversary, but yet very well able sweetly to allure A
seely fool that without trial will believe whatsoever the church of Room
does lewdly persuade him.
an obedient child of the Catholic Church to believe her in this point,
having so many other infinite reasons joined thereunto. But remember I oppose
not, neither will I, neither may I by the laws, but only much against my will I
am drawn by you to answer your objections according to my small talent.
Otherwise you should hear whether the fathers be ours or not, or what we
might say to this effect.

R. Abbot. 26.
OF the words of Christ, This is my body which shall be given, This is my blood
which shall be shed. The Answerer confesses that that additie^, which shall be
given, which shall be shed, is not an argument strong enough against a repining
adversary, but yet able to allure an obedient child of the Church. It is used
in corners indeed to seduce and be guile the ignorant; but alas simple souls
that suffer themselves to be deceived with those arguments, which their
seducers confess to be no substantial proofs. I hold you one of those simple
ones, M. Spence, who alleged it to me for a very good reason. If Campion
took it not to be so, then was it great want of discretion in him Camp. Rat. 2
to allege it as an argument to university men, who he might know would
soon take notice of his folly in that be half. And here I may not omit to
note the perverse dealing of the Answ. godly men forsooth in this matter, who
when they are in hand with Transubstantiation will prove it by the words of
Christ thus, that he said: this is my body which shall be given, This is my
blood which shall be shed, as the vulgar Latin reads. Lo, say they, Christ
names the very body and blood that was after to be given and shed upon the
cross; therefore the sacrament is the very body of Christ. Thus M. Spence and
his godly fellows reason. But when they are in hand with sacrifice, they will
have it thus: My body which Hard. Answ. art. 17. Di. 4. Rhem. Annot. Luc. 22.
19.
is given; my blood which is shed, in the present tense according to the
greek, and will prove hereby that Christ did even at that present offer a
sacrifice of his body and blood, that he gave his body and shed his blood,
because he says not, shall be given, but is given, nor shall be shed, but is shed.
Thus they toss the words of Christ as it were a tennise ball from one wall to
another, and suffer them not to rest in any certain meaning, but turn them
and wind them as their fickle and unstable fancies give them occasion. The
meaning of the words is one and certain, that the sacrament is a figure and
sign of the body and blood of Christ given and shed for the forgiveness of
our sins. His infinite other reasons and authorities of the Fathers which he
baunteth he could allege, are all of the same stamp as these are. They are
but words of course that he uses to that purpose, serving to fright his
obedient children: but the children of God have good experience, that it is but
foolish and idle talk.

P. Spence. Sect. 27.
I Confess all that you say next following of the wonderful speeches, and
also of the effects of the blessed sacrament by our conjunction with Christ
wrought thereby, and also of our resurrection, justification, and
sanctification, saving that you imagine with Calvin, (which before him no man
imagined) that we receive these effects, and graces by a conduct of faith,
that sucketh a very real virtue, flowing out of his very flesh in heaven:
which to do needs Untrue, for God has appointed both the one and the other
to be means whereby our faith should more and more lay hold upon Christ, and
feed upon him to eternal life.
no Sacrament at all, but only to preach unto us, and so Calvin says himself,
that if our faith were quick enough, we might without the sacramental signs
receive the Sacrament at all times, and minutes of the day. An imagination very
metaphysicall, bred in his own brain, and hatched up only by himself, tending
to the contempt and overthrow of the Sacrament. But we say that we receive all
the said graces and effects most divine by our spiritual receiving of him in
faith, hope and charity, joined with the entrance of his blessed body into
ours, and so by that divine touching thereof, we are so united to him, as man
and woman by the conjunction of their bodies; become one body or one flesh
according to S. Paul: For we being many are one bread and one body, all which
are partakers of one bread and one cup. 1. Cor. 10. This same, one bread and
one cup, whereof we participate, is Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament
received, which by entering into our bodies, and touching us; makes us all one
In that manner do we eat Christ, as he makes us one amongst our selves, and
one with him. This is not done by bodily touching: therefore neither do we eat
him by bodily feeding.
amongst our selves, and one with him, this being a Sacrament of unity. And it
is to be understood of Christ, not of very bread, which cannot be one in so
many places of the christian world, but It is one bread in mystery throughout
all the world, even as it is one cup.
diverse breads. We do therefore participate of one bread in the blessed
Sacrament, which is Christ.

R. Abbot. 27.
HE confesses those excellent and heavenly effects of the Sacrament which I
set down, saving that I follow Caluins metaphysical imagination, as he terms
it, that we receive the same effects in the sacrament by faith. Caluins
judgment in that point is indeed more metaphysicall then that a mere natural
should understand it. He knew well enough that Christians come not to their
sacraments as swine to a trough, as if they were to receive the graces of God
with their bodily mouths, and therefore that it must be the hand of the soul,
Augu. in Ioh. tra. 50.
which is faith that must receive the same, both in the word and in the
sacrament: He found by comparing the speeches of Ioh. 6. 47. 54
Christ in the sixth of John, that by believing in Christ we eat and drink
the flesh and blood of Christ, and consequently receive all the virtues and
graces that arise from thence to us. He found that S. Austen did so expound it:
To August. in Ioh. tra. 26.
believe in Christ, says he, that is to eat the bread of life. He that
believes in him eats him. He knew that the fathers of the old testament
received the same graces that we do, and that they received them by faith, and
that we have cor. 4. 13.
the same spirit of faith as they had, and therefore by faith are made
partakers of the same graces as they were. He knew that God had appointed both
the word and Sacraments to be means both to begin and also to continue,
uphold, and increase our faith, that by this faith in the exercise of the same
word and sacraments we might more and more grow into society and unity with
Christ until we attain to the fullness of our perfection. Now whereas the
Answ. obiecteth that if our eating and drinking of the flesh and blood of
Christ be only by faith, then we may eat and drink the same at any time
without any sacrament, I would have him know that we take not the same eating
and drinking to be any momentany action, but the continual exercise of a
lively faith. For although the mind perhaps by reason of the present occasion
be most effectually bestowed to this exercise, either in the use of the word,
or especially of the sacrament, and of the sacrament so much the more by how
much visible and apparent signs and tokens are more forcible to move us then
only words, yet we know that neither the word nor the sacraments have only a
present effect, but serve to settle and continue Christ in our consciences in
such sort that he may be a continual meat for our souls to feed upon: that by
the assured belief of his body given, and his blood shed for the forgiveness
of our sins, our hearts may be cheered continually, and comforted against all the occasions of doubt and distrustfulnesse: which from day to day, and from
hour to hour arise to disquiet our minds. And as Abraham our father though
he had faithfully embraced the promise of God, and the covenant, of his grace,
yet needed the sacrament of circumcision for a seal of the same covenant,
thereby to be vpholden in the continual assurance thereof; so we though we
have once by the word of the Gospel and participation of his sacraments,
received Christ to be the food and sustenance of our souls, yet that we loose
not Christ again, and the comfort of his grace, our faith needs to be
continually exercised and strengthened by the offering and yielding of Christ
unto us in his word and sacraments, which else through the want of these means
would fail, decay and dye in us, even as we see the body to perish for want of
his daily food. Which I note for the avoiding of that cauil which perhaps the
Answ. would move against that that has been said: that if we may eat the
flesh and blood of Christ without any sacrament, then we need not any sacrament
for the doing thereof. For although we do by faith eat and drink the same
when there is no sacrament: yet it follows not thereof that the sacrament is
needless, because the Sacrament is one of those special and most effectual
means whereby God offers and gives Christ unto us, with all his benefits
to be ours, that our faith may lay hold upon him and receive him to make him
the continual food and sustenance of our souls. And if the aforesaid eating
and drinking import not such an action as may be at al times and without the
sacrament, what shall we say of those that are hindered from ever being
partakers of the Sacrament, as the thief that was crucified with Christ, but
that they are consequently secluded from euelasting life. For Christ says:
Ioh. 6. 53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, ye shall
not have everlasting life. If then the eating and drinking of the flesh and
blood of Christ cannot be without the sacrament, it follows that he which
receives not the sacrament fails of eternal life. But to say so, is
erroneous and damnable doctrine. Therefore the eating and drinking of the flesh
and blood of Christ, signifies such a thing as may be done at all times and
without the sacrament.

But now that the Answ. has so rejected that manner of receiving the grace of
Christ in the sacrament which Calvin taught, let us see how he will have the
same to be received. He says we have it by our spiritual receiving of Christ
in faith, hope, and charity. But this hangs not well together with that
which he says afterward of the sacraments, yielding their effect by the very
work wrought, and therefore without any of these. Let that be reserved to his
due place. But here we have him confessing that faith is one means of the
receiving of Gods grace in the sacrament. Marry yet he excepteth that it must
be joined with the entrance of Christ's body into our bodies, and so by that
divine touching thereof, we are so united unto him, as man and woman by the
conjunction of their bodies become one body and one flesh. What a gross and
swinish imagination is this, that by corporal entrance of Christ's body into
ours, we must be made one with Christ, as man and woman by corporal
conjunction become one flesh? Saint Paul teaches us to loath this fancy, when
he says: 1. cor. 6. 16. 17.
Know ye not that he which coupleth himself with an harlot, is one body.
For two, says he, shall be one flesh. But he that is joined unto the Lord, is
one spirit. Where by an opposition of the body and the spirit, of the
corporal joining of man and woman, and the spiritual uniting of Christ and
us, he gives plainly to understand that the conjunction betwixt Christ and
us, is not wrought by any bodily commixtion of substances as is the conjunction
of man and woman, but by the spiritual apprehension of the believing soul,
receiving through the holy Ghost the fruit and effect of the body of Christ
being in heaven. And this S. Cyprian notably declares when he says: g The
conjunction betwixt Christ and us neither mingleth our Cypri. de caena domini.
persons, nor unites our substances, but coupleth our affections and
conioyneth our wills, and so the Church being made Christ's body does obey
the head, and the higher light being shed upon the lower, and reaching with the
fullness of his brightness from end to end, does abide whole with it self,
and yields it self whole to all, and the oneness of that warmth does so
assist the body, that it departs not from the head. By which words he
shows, that our conjunction with Christ is altogether spiritual, and that we
are made the body of Christ not by any corporal or bodily touching or
bringing our substances together, but by the spiritual working of his
effectual power, set forth by a comparison of the sun, working in these
inferior bodies, and yet abiding in heaven, as before also I declared. And as
concerning the touching of Christ, S. Ambrose says: Ambros. in Luc. 24 lib. 10.
We touch not Christ by bodily handling, but by faith, etc. Therefore, says
he, Neither on the earth, neither in the earth, nor after the flesh, ought we
to seek thee, O Christ, if we will find thee. To the same effect, also S.
Austen speaks by occasion of Christ's words to Mary Magdalin: Ioh. 20 17.
Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended to my father. August. in Ioh. tract.
26. and epist. 59.
She might not touch him standing on the earth, says he, and how should she
touch him being ascended to the father? Yet thus, even thus he will be touched.
Thus is he touched of them of whom he is well touched, being ascended to the
father, abiding with the father, equal to the father. And this touching he
there expounds, believing as Ambrose does. Our touching of Christ then is our
believing in him, not being here in the earth, or on the earth, but being
ascended to the father and abiding with the father. And as the sick woman in
the Gospel though with her hand touching but Mat. 9. 20. 22.
only the hemme of Christ's garment, yet whilst Aug. ibid. vt supra.
by faith she touched Christ himself, received virtue from him to make her
whole: So we although with our bodily hands we touch but only the Sacrament
which is but as it were the hemme of his garment, yet whilst by faith we touch
himself, sitting at the right hand of God in heaven, we receive of him virtue
and grace to everlasting life. Which virtues and effects seeing we receive in
Baptism also, as has been before showed, it is manifest, that it is not by
any such corporal touching as the Answ. most absurdly has expressed. Here he
cauilleth further concerning saint Paul's words: We are all partakers of one
bread, and one cup. By bread, he says, must needs be understood the body of
Christ, for if we understand it of bread indeed, all are not partakers of one
bread, but many breads. But his understanding deceives him. The Sacrament, as
he confesses, is a Sacrament of unity. Christ would commend unto us this
unity Aust. in Ioh. tra. 26. Cypr. li. 1. epist. 6.
by being partakers of those things, which of many are made one, as bread of
many grains, and wine of many grapes. To this the name of one bread has
relation, admonishing us being many, to become one. But I hope the body of
Christ shall not be said to be made of many corns or grapes. This bread
therefore is not the very body of Christ. But we are all partakers of one
bread, because the bread of the Sacrament though in substance of loaves it be
many breads, yet in use and mystery or signification is all one. And so though
the cup be diverse according to the diversity of places, yet in the same manner
we are also said to be partakers of one cup.

Pet. Spence. Sect. 28.
AS for Gratian, I am sorry to see how fowly you abuse him, did he doubt of the
verity of transubstantiation, or of Christ's presence? All the whole part de
consecratione, does proclaim the contrary. But the thing which some not
vnproblably do expound in this place, the truth of the flesh and blood to be
the efficiency thereof: that is, the forgiveness of sins; was not any words
of Christ touching the Sacrament, but the words of a prayer which he a little
before mentioned, which he means by saying in this place: which was quae nunc
specie gerimus, rerum veritate capiamus, which had two senses (as Gratia^
tells you) the one was, that we may once receive in a manifest vision* as it
is indeed the body of Christ, the which under the forms of bread and wine is
celebrated. The other sense of that prayer was, with some men thus: that we may
receive the effect of those mysteries, that is to say remission of sins in
verity, whereof now in a Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine we
celebrate the mystery. For you know this is a Sacrament of remission of
sins, which some, (says Gratian,) understood by the truth of the things in
the said prayer. Is this to deny the real presence? but your mind is so wholly
set upon that point, that (like your merry, I dare not say mad Athenian) all
things sound against Christ's presence, and all the belles ring against
Transubstantiation in your ears.

R. Abbot. 28.
THe prayer of the ancient Church which I mentioned before, Sect. 25. beside
the exposition of Lanfrancus there set down, is reported by Gratian to have
been otherwise expounded by some other. The Church prayed at the receiving of
the Sacrament, y^ they might De cons^^. did 2. cap. species.
receive the truth of the flesh and blood of Christ. Some says Gratian, not
without probability, expound the truth of the flesh and blood of Christ in
this place, to be the effect thereof, that is, the forgiveness of sins.
Whereby it is evident, that those some did understand the receiving of the
truth of Christ's flesh and blood to be, not that corporal eating and drinking
which the church of Rome mainteineth, but the participation of the effects of
his passion, that is, forgiveness of sins, according to that which was
before declared out of S. Austen. Now to note that in receiving the effect and
fruit of the flesh and blood of Christ, we are said to be partakers of the
same flesh and blood, I alleged this exposition in my former Treatise, which
does plainly testify the same. But the Ans. as a melancholy man, imagining
himself to be made of glass, and fearing every wall, least he should be
cracked in pieces, thinks his real presence to be here disputed against, and
tells me that I do fowly abuse Gratian, in making him an adversary of
Transubstantiation and real presence, and moreover that those words do not
serve for exposition of the words of Christ. What Gratian thought, I stand not
upon: it may be he was as absurd in his conceits as the Answe. is. I speak of
them whose exposition he alleges, who as touching their church prayer, tell
us that a man in receiving the effects of Christ's flesh and blood, is said to
receive the truth of his flesh and blood, and this is all for which I alleged
it. Albeit it seems to me indeed now a strong proof against real presence.
For if they had thought that they had received the very truth of the flesh and
blood of Christ, according to the substance in the sacrament, they would have
used other words to e^presse the effects thereof, and not pray again to
receive the truth, that is, the effects. But it skilleth not whether it be a
proof to this purpose or not. There be belle^ enough to ring against
Transubstantiation and real presence, though the clapper of this should be
pulled out. It is fit enough to show that for which I brought it, and therefore
all this answer of his is but a fond cavil.

P. Spence. Sect. 29.
YOu charge our doctrine with Caphemitish eating and drinking of Christ's body:
and of those monstrous, blasphemous, and horrible conceits, which some of our
captains have fallen into. As for those conceits, I cannot conceive what they
might be on gods name* and therefore will conceive no answer to them, till I
understand your conceits, but refer th^se conceits to your own conceit. But
you Untruth, for the Capernaits thought they should eat with their mouths the
flesh of Christ, and so do the Papists.
roaue wide from the mark, in calling us Capharnites, for we are far enough
from thinking to eat Christ's body peecemeale, as flesh in the sha^bles* We
eat him in a Sacrament whole, inviolable, like the paschal Lamb, without
breaking a bone of him* ye^ not hurting of him, nor brusing of him, nor tearing
of him with our teeth as the ^ap^er^its dreamed of. Remember what S. Thomas
Aquinas a Papist in the office of the Sacrament says, and all the church
sings A sumente non concisus, non confractus, nec diuisus, integer accipitur.
Which sequences Luther was very far in love withal, and a late Papist of
Oxonf^rd sing not long s^thence in a most sweet tune of that same matter:
Sumeris, and sumptus rursu^^ sine fine resumi, Ne^ tamen absumi diminuiu^
potes. Beware, bear not false witness against your neighbors.

R. Abbot. 29.
I Charge them with the gross error of the Capernaits in their doctrine of
eating Christ's body and blood. But he answers me that I roaue wide from the
mark in calling them Capernaits. And why I pray? Marry sir, the Capernaits
thought they should eat Christ's body by pieces, but they say they eat him
whole. Surely but that the judgment of God is great upon them, it were wonder
that such vnha^so^ imaginations should prenaile with reasonable men. I have
spoken hereof Sect. 23.
before. As for his sequences and verses, they may have their convenient
understanding without that absurd co^struction of eating and drinking which he
makes. I told him of monstrous, blasphemous, and horrible conceits that some
captains of his part have r^nne into by defense of that eating. He answers
me very pleasantly, that he understands not those conceits, but refers
those conceits to mine own conceit. But M. Spence you could have told him
what they were, because you had been before urged therewith, but could not
stumble out any answer to them. Let me tell him what they are. I refer him
first to the gloss of the Canon law, where he shall find this conceit, that De
conse, did. 2. cap. Qui been.
It is no great inconvenience to say, that a Mouse receives the body of
Christ, seeing that most wicked men do also receive it. The master of the
sentences knows not what to conceive hereof Lib. 4. did. 13*
What does the mouse take, or what does he eat? God knows, says he. As for
him, he cannot tell. Yet he holds that Ibid.
It may be foundly said, that the body of Christ is not eaten of brute
beasts. But he is noted for that in the margin* Here the Master is not
holden, and the In erroribus condemn. Paris.
Parisians set it down for one of his errors not commonly received: that he
says, that the bruit croature does not receive the very body of Christ. Let
him look the conceit of Pat. 4. qu. 45.
Alexander de Hales. If a dog or a swine should swallow the whole consecrated
host, I see no reason why the body of Christ should not withal pass into the
belly of the dog or swine* He commends Thomas Aquinas by the name of a
Papist, and his catholic church, has set him in his place, next the
Canonical scriptures. Let him look the conceits of this Papist: Thom. Aqui.
sum. par. 3. qu. 79. art. 3. in res. ad. 3.
Albeit, says he, A mouse or a dog do eat the consecrated host, yet the
substance of the body of Christ cease not to be under the form, (of the
brea^) so long as the same form does remain, etc. A^ also if it should be cast
into the mire. And again; some have said that straitwaies as soon as the
Sacrament is touched of the mouse or dog, there cease to be the body of
Christ: but this, says he, derogateth from the truth of the Sacrament. And
again: Ibi. in corp. arti.
The body of Christ does so long conti^^e under the sacrament all forms
received by sinful men, as the substance of bread would remain if it were
there: which cease not to be by and by, but remains until it be digested
by natural heat. These are those horrible and blasphemous ^onceits which the
Answ. could not con^eiue out of my former words. These are y^ fruits of their
Transubstantiation and real presence, that the very body of Christ is
received into the bellies of d^gs and swine and mice, that it may be in the
dirt and in the bellies of ungodly men, until the forms ^e consumed and
digested, beside other filthy matters, Antonin. sum. p. 3. tit. 13. cap. 6. q.
3. de defectib. Missae.
of vomiting up the body of Christ, and eating it again being vomited, and
drawing it out of the entrals of the mouse or other beast that has eaten it,
etc. which are most leathsome to any Christian ears to hear of, (...) yet
very venturously disputed of and resolved upon by Antonin^s, no meaner a man
then Archbishop of Florence, and as I think Saincted by the Pope for his great
pains. Never any Capernaite more gross, never Manichee more blasphemous, then
these villainous imaginations which these cai^ifes have published to ye world,
and their real presence standing, they cannot resolve how to shift of these
things, but stagger as Harding did with, it may be this, and it may be that,
and it may be they know not what. Therefore let the Ansvv. now think with
himself, with what reason he bid me beware of bearing false witness against
my neighbor. Let him remember that thieves and malefactors do usually call
true evidence false witness, but yet their honesty and truth is no whit the
more. S. Hierom says, that Hierony. in Esa. 66. li. 18.
they which are lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, and are not holy
both in body and spirit, do neither eat the flesh of Christ nor drink his
blood, whereof he himself speaks in the sixth of John, He that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life. Where out of the words of
Christ himself, he secludeth not only bruit beasts, but also ungodly and
unholy men from eating and drinking the flesh and blood of Christ. Yet it may
so be that not only unholy and profane men, but also brute beasts may eat of
the Romish host or Sacrament. Therefore the Romish Sacrament is not the very
flesh and blood of Christ, as the Romish faction would bear us in hand that it
is.

P. Spence. Sect. 30.
THe conformity of the words of the Evangelists, and of S. Paul is so great a
matter, as that of it self it offers good and great cause of noting it,
without the warning of any Allen, Parsons, or any other never so learned. And
your similitude of the sacrifices of the old law so agreeably uttered, (and
yet by your leave but by one Moses alone, and not by three sundry Evangelists,
and one Apostle, as it is in this case) fitteth not to this. For Moses endewed
with the spirit of God, could not in any words imagine to attribute A mere
fancy. Their Sacraments yielded the same fruit to them that ours do to us.
See sect. 20.
such a working force, ex opere operato to the legal expiations (which wrought
ex adiuncto fidei, and not of themselves) as is to be given to the Sacraments
of Christ, howsoever your side abase them as low as the very Jewish
Sacraments. I am glad that the plain consent of the Evangelists, and Saint
Paul does so little like you in this point.

R. Abbot. 30.
THere is urged for the proof of Transubstantiation the consent of the
Evangelists, and S. Paul saying all alike, This is my body; whereas if they
meant not to be understood literally, the one would have expounded the other.
But the conformity of these three Evangelists, and S. Paul is no stronger an
argument, as I have told him, to prove Transubstantiation, then the
continual calling of the old sacrifices of Moses law by the name of expiations
and attonementes, was to prove that they were verily and indeed expiations and
attonementes for sin, which yet were but types and figures thereof, as the
Sacrament is a figure and sign of the body and blood of Christ. The exception
of the Answ. that that was spoken but by one Moses, and this by three
Evangelists and one Apostle is vain. The holy Ghost spoke in both places by
whomsoever, and if the Answ. argument be good, must needs have altered that
speech in Moses law. But that the goodness of it is distrusted by his own
fellows also: it follows after to be showed. That which he adds in this
place of the working force in both sacraments, the old and the new, is
impertinent. I spoke not of the working force of either, but of the like phrase
of speech concerning both. But yet whereas he says that the Sacraments of the
new testament have force by the very work wrought, I must tell him that he
speaks without scripture, without father, a thing absurd in itself, and
contrary also to that which he has said before. If we obtain the effects of
the Sacrament by receiving Christ in faith, hope and charity together with the
entrance of his body into ours, as he said before, then the sacrament gives
not that grace by the very work wrought, as he says here. If it give grace
by the very work wrought, as he says here, then it is not to be ascribed to
faith, hope and charity as he says there. The council of Trent has told us
that a man Council. Tride^t. sess. 6. ca. 9
may not assure himself that he has received the grace of God. But if the
sacraments yield gra^^ by the very work wrought, a man may assure himself
that he has received grace, because he may assure himself that he is
baptized. And what reason is there why infants, naturals and frantic persons
should be excluded from receiving the Lords supper, if the Sacrament have his
force of the very work done. But S. Austen plainly refuteth this conceit as
touching our sacraments: August in Ioh. tra. 80.
Whence has the water such force, says he, to touch the body, and cleanse the
heart: but that the word works it, and that not because it is spoken, but
because it is believed. Therefore he calls it according to the Apostle, Romans
10. 8. 9
The word of faith, because if thou confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
believe in thine heart that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.
To this purpose he alleges that God is said Act. 15. 9.
to cleanse the heart by faith* and that of S. Peter, that 1. Pet. 3. 21.
baptism saves us, not the washing away the filth of the flesh, (that is, not
for the very work wrought) but the answer of a good conscience toward God.
To this effect Tertullian says: Tertul de resurrect carnis.
The soul is sanctified, not by the washing of water, but by the answer of
faith. And S. Austen again: August. quae vet. and noui. test. q. 59.
He cannot attain the heavenly gift which thinks himself to be changed by
the water, and not by faith. Hereby it is plain that Baptism has his force
not of the very work done, but of true and unfeigned faith working in the
heart good conscience toward God. So as touching the other Sacrament, S.
Austen refers the virtue and effect thereof August. in Ioh. tr. 26. and de
ciuit. dei. li. 21. cap. 25.
to our eating inwardly and in the heart, and this eating inwardly he
expounds to be our believing in Christ, and resolves that he that by this
believing in Christ, abides not in Christ, and Christ in him, he does not
spiritually eat and drink the flesh and blood of Christ, though he receive
the sacrament thereof. Therefore neither does this Sacrament avail by the
work wrough^, but only by faith whereby we abide in Christ, and Christ in us.
A miserable doctrine it is whereby men are borne in hand that coming without
faith, void of knowledge, without repentance or any good motion, yet they may
receive the effect of the sacraments whereas the Scripture so plainly affirms
that Rom 14. 23.
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, and that Heb. 11. 6.
without faith it is impossible to please God; and therefore precisely charge
every man before he come to the Lords table 1. cor. 11. 28.
to examine himself 2 Cor. 13. 5.
in that behalf. But for disproofe of this assertion, it is reason enough that
there can be no reason nor probable show of reason given whereby to prove it.
Of the difference of the Jews sacraments and ours, I have spoken before. We
abase neither, but lift both very high. The consent of the Evangelists
avails with me to make me yield to that which can be soundly proved thereby,
not to every thing that froward and perverse men will peeuishly fancy thereof.

P. Spence. Sect. 31.
YOu tell me a matter out of S. Luke, 22. but in good sooth to what purpose I
cannot imagine. Who ever denied but it was Metonymia, when he said this cup is
the new testament or rather two tropes in one sentence. For the cup is taken
for Christ's blood in the cup, and to be the new testament is to be the seal,
establishment, promulgation and consecration of the new testament. Who ever
denied it? but because we say that the true body and blood of Christ is
contained in the sacramental forms, and that Christ saying, This is my body,
spoke plainly Be like when you list, there is a figure, and when you list,
there is none. You might understand the one by a Figure, as well as the other.
without a figure: therefore must we mean so grossly, that no where the
scripture speaking of this matter uses a figure? O^ would you conclude thus,
in these words? This cup is the new testament, there is a figure, ergo in
these words, This is my body? Logic will be good cheap if this may go for
current. But good sir let me be bold a little with you to put you in mind of
this place of S. Luke, that A popish and pee^ish brag. See the answer. Qui
calix.
so troubled Beza, that he wist not what to say to it, but he imagined that
either some sorry fellow had foysted it into the text, or else that S. Luke
spoke false greek so sure he was that the text was awry, it made so sore
against him. For setting it down by the participle as it is in greek thus it
sounds, hic calix nouum testamentum in sanguine meo pro vobis effusus. Which
must needs respect Calix for his substantive, and then the cup, that is, the
liquor in the cup, was shed for them and us all, which if it were wine, let
every good christian man judge. I hope he shed for our salvation a far more
precious liquor then wine. And doctor Fulke to salve this sore, tells us that
in many places of the greek text of other Scriptures there is incongruitie.
Very true, I confess but it is smally to the purpose. For where no sense will
help the syntaxis, there we must needs grant incongr^itie. But how There are
reasons enough to prove it. See the answer.
proved doctor Fulke that the sense wherein this place is congrue and
according to grammar, is not the true sense? Or why should he not allow it for
congrue being indeed congrue? Or why should Beza imagine, and he allow of a
sense, that is not congrue when the text was congrue enough? This point being
the state of the question, Doctor Fulke steals away from and medleth not
with it: because it was too plain for us and against his sacramentarie
doctrine. As likewise was that place of S. Luke, where drinking at his
Supper in wine to his Disciples, before he instituted the Sacrament, he told
them he would drink wine no more till in his kingdom, which was after
his resurrection, and yet a little after he What did Christ drink his own
blood? we can not believe it.
drank to them in the Sacrament, which if it had been wine, he had
contraried his former speech: an absurdity I think not to be admitted.

R. Abbot. 31.
FOr further answer as touching the conformity used in these words, This is
my body, I showed how S. Luke, and S. Paul vary from S. Matthew and S. Mark,
as touching the other part of the sacrament. For whereas these say: this is my
blood of the new testament, etc. The other say, This cup is the new testament
in my blood. etc. And these latter words I showed to ^e the overthrow of
transubstantiation. But the Answ. in good sooth tells me that he cannot see
to what purpose this is alleged. I pray you therefore, M. Spence, put him in
mind of his headless reason which he has used before. Christ, says he, will
call nothing by a wrong name. If he should call fire, water, earth by the names
of air, stones or bread, they would sooner become air, stones and bread, then
he would misname any thing. He did not lie to his Disciples: he did not ^eguile
them. Therefore when he said: This cup is the new Testament, without doubt the
cup was substantially turned into a Testament. Nay not so, says he: there is a
figure here. Yea? and may a thing be called by a wrong name by a figure? and is
there now a figure in these words? Why then is the man so straight laced that
he cannot yield a figure in the other words, especially seeing the ancient
Fathers so expressly expound them by way of figure, and neither he nor his, can
make any certain exposition of them but by a figure. But it follows not, he
says, that because there is a figure in the one speech, therefore there is so
also in y^ other. Yet, say I, if it follow not that because Christ taking the
cup said thereof, This cup is the new Testament, therefore the cup was turned
into the testament, then it follows not, that because Christ taking y^ bread
said thereof: This is my body, therefore the bread was turned into his body.
And this is so good Logic that diverse great masters of his side have
plainly confessed that the words of the Gospel notwithstanding the aforesaid
consent do not enforce Transubstantiation, as I told him before, and he
answers nothing to it. Yea Bellarmine himself who has taken upon him to be
the Atlas of Popery at this time, after that he has sweat and travailed to
prove it by the scripture, when he has all done, is content to confess so
much. For being urged that Scotus and Cameracensis do say, that there is no so
express place of scripture, that it can enforce to admit of
Transubstantiation, he answers: Bellar. tom. 2. contr. 3. li 3. cap. 23.
This indeed is not altogether unlikely. For although the scripture, which I
have alleged before, seem to us so clear that it is able to force a man that
is not overthwart, yet whether it be so or not, it may worthily be doubted;
for that most learned and sharp witted men, such as Scotus especially was, do
think the contrary. It is sufficient for our discharge, that the Jesuit
confesses that it may justly be doubted whether Transubstantiation may be
proved by the scripture or not, and that it is likely that indeed it cannot.
The matter then is come to this pass, that Transubstantiation must be believed
because of the authority of the Church of Rome, but otherwise that it cannot
be proved by the authority of the scripture. But we dare not trust the Church
of Rome so far as to receive any doctrine of her without the warrant of the
scripture. For we are of Chrysostomes mind: Chrisost. in Psalm 95.
If any thing says he, be spoken without scripture, the mind of the hearer
halteth or hangs in suspense. But when there comes out of the scripture the
testimony of the voice of God, it confirms both the mind of the hearer and
the words of the speaker. They must prove it unto us by the scripture, or else
we cannot be assured of it. But they cannot agree how to expound the words
of scripture for it, and the scripture it self is manifestly against it.
Christ says: This is my body. The word This, does demonstrate and point to
somewhat. And what may that be? One of them says one thing, and another says
another thing, and in fine, they cannot tell. So that we must suppose that
Christ said, This I know not what is my body. Bellarmine comes after all the
rest to resolve the matter, and he tells us that we must understand it thus:
Bellar. tom 2 cont 3 lib. 1. ca. 10. 11.
This that is contained under the forms is my body. But the question is the
same again, what is that contained under the forms? To say it is the body
before all the words of consecration be spoken, they themselves will not allow.
But except the body, it can be nothing else but bread. It is bread therefore
to which the word This is referred, and perforce must the words be thus taken,
This bread is my body: which again must needs have this meaning, This bread is
the sign and Sacrament of my body, and consequently overthrow
Transubstantiation. Moreover what Christ brake and bid his Disciples take and
eat, that they did take and eat. It was bread which he brake and bid them
take and eat: for the words of consecration were not yet spoken. Therefore it
was bread which they did take and eat. But that which they did eat, Christ
called his body. Therefore Christ called bread his body, and meant, This
bread is my body. So likewise as touching the other part of the Sacrament, we
say, that what Christ willed them to drink, that they did drink. But Christ
willed them to drink wine, saying, Drink ye all of this, and this was wine,
because there was yet no consecration. Therefore they did drink wine. That
which they did drink, Christ called his blood. The words therefore of Christ
must be thus meant, This wine is my blood. And so he expounds himself
immediately, when he calls it: This fruit of the vine, showing hereby to what
we must refer the word This, when he says, This is my blood, namely to the
fruit of the vine, that is to say, wine. To avoid these things thus plainly
gathered from the circumstances of the text, many blind shifts have been
devised; but one especially most worthy to be noted Tho. Aquin. page 3. q. 78.
art. 1.
that the Evangelists do not report these matters of the institution of the
Sacrament in that order as they were spoken and done by our Savior Christ.
Thus to serve their turn, the Evangelists must be controlled, and upon their
word we must believe that these things are not so orderly set down as the
matter required. I might add hereunto how the scripture usually calls the
Sacrament Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 10. 16. and 11. 26. 27. 28
bread, even after consecration in the breaking and distributing and eating
thereof; then which what should we require more to assure us that in substance
it is bread indeed? And of this speech they can give no certain reason
neither, but are carried up and down from fancy to another, as appears by
Lanfrancus, saying; Lanfran lib. de sacram. Euchar^.
It is called bread either because it was made of bread and retains some
qualities thereof, or because it feeds the soul, or because it is the body
of the son of God who is the bread of Angels, or in some other manner which
may be conceived of them that are better learned, but cannot of me. They care
not what they say it is, so that they grant it not to be that that it is in
truth. But thus do they deserve to be led up and down from error to error,
and folly to folly, as it were after a dancing fire, who refuse to be guided
and directed by the clear and shining light of the evident word of God. By
this that has been said, it may appear sufficiently how little hold the Answ.
has in the consent of the Euange lists, for the proof of his
Transubstantiation, even by the confession of his own fellows, to whose
wisdom and learning he does greatly trust.

But yet once again to prove it by the Gospel, we have another argument,
wherein the Answ. as a saucy fellow takes upon him to censure and control M.
Beza and M. Fulke, in a matter of Greek construction, as he did M. Calvin and
B. Jewel, in other matters before. But what may it be that he presumes so
much on. Forsooth the Greek in Luc. 22. is so plain against our doctrine and
for proof of Transubstantiation, that Beza was greatly troubled there with,
and was feign to say that either S. Luke spoke false Greek, or else that
somewhat was foisted into the text. This argument Gregory Martin and others,
have run out of breath already, and therefore it will not serve the
Answerers turn to carry him so far as he would feign go. That which he
mentions first of false Greek, is but his peevishness and malice. Beza
names it Solaecophanes, which is a figure noting an appearance of incongruitie
by departure from the usual and ordinary course of Grammar construction. The
same he notes may be excused in this place as being borrowed from an Hebrew
manner of speaking. And whereas Discou ca. 1. sect. 39.
Gregory Martin without regard of his own credit, avouched, that not one
example could be brought of the like constructto^ to be resolved as Beza
translateth this, M. Fulke shows him diverse the very same in all respects,
as Col. 1. 26. Apoc. 1. 4. 5. and 3. 12. and 8. 9. And therefore a man might
have said to him as Austen said to Julian the Pelagian heretic: August co^t.
Iul. Pelag^li. 5. cap. 2.
I am sorry that you should so abuse the ignorance of them which know not the
Greek tongue, that you would not fear the judgment and censure of them that
have knowledge of it

As touching the other point, Beza indeed upon some conjecture, supposes that
the words (...), which is shed for you, might happily be added from the margin
into the text, as in other places sundry have observed. But yet he freely and
ingenuously confesses, that he found them in all copies generally that he saw,
and therefore leaves them in the text entire and whole, and translateth them
as the words of the holy Ghost. No man denies the words: no man makes
question of them, but receives them for Canonical scripture. Therefore all
that the Answ. says in that respect is but vain cauilling. Let us consider
the words of the text which he says are so against us. (...). This cup is the
new Testament in my blood which is shead for you. Here says he the words,
which is shead for you, must by the order of construction be referred to the
cup, and so the cup, that is to say, that in the cup shall be said to be shed
for us, which must needs be understood of the blood of Christ: whereof it must
follow, that that which was in the cup was the blood of Christ. I answer him
that there is no necessity by the Greek construction to refer those words
to the cup, as is proved by the examples of the like construction before
alleged. And in this point G. Martine was so taken tardie by M. Fulke for his
bold asseueration, that I doubt it was one matter that killed his heart. The
Answ. by some secret intelligence belike has learned to urge the matter
otherwise, and leaves Martin to go alone. He denies not therefore but that
the like incongruities may be found, but demands reason why we should
translate it to a sense that admits incongruitie of speech, and refuse the
sense wherein the text is congrue enough. Reasons enough have been given, but
they are not yet confuted, and therefore it was folly to make any further
mention of this matter. First there is not found any one of the ancient
Fathers either Greek or Latin, that takes the words otherwise then as we
translate them. Secondly Basil. Ascet. defin. 21.
S. Basil expressly reads the Greek according as Beza translateth it: (...),
(...): In my blood, which (blood) is shed for you. Whereby it is apparent that
either ye text was so read at that time, as is likely, for that Basil in that
book sets down the very words of the scripture; or at the least that he
being a Bishop so famously learned and most ^loquent in the Greek tongue took
the construction and sense of those words to be no otherwise. Thirdly Erasmus
in his translation dedicated to Leo the tenth, Bishop of Rome, and approved by
him, at which time he was known to be no enemy to Transubstantiation, yet
translated those words as Beza does, being a man I trow as well seen in Greek
construction, as Gregory Martin was. Fourthly, what reasonable man will deem
that the Evangelist or Christ himself would thus speak, This blood, which is
shed for you, is the new Teshament in my blood: or thus: This blood is the
new Testament in my blood: which I alleged to the Answerer to be an absurd
tautologie, and he speaks nothing at all whereby to defend it. Moreover it
seems strange to me that the Evangelist setting down the proper name of
blood: to which shedding must be applied, and that betwixt the word cup, and
the mention of shedding, should notwithstanding intend the word shed to be
referred rather to the cup which is further of, and to say that the cup was
shed for us, then to the proper name of blood which is next unto it, and to
which it properly belongs. Again, the blood of Christ could not be in the
cup without being shed and separated from his body: and to this end did Christ
beside the Sacrament of his body institute severally and distinctly the
sacrament of his blood, thereby to betoken the shedding, the issuing forth, the
seuering of the same blood from his body in his passion for the forgiveness
of our sins; in respect whereof he says: This is my blood which is shed for
you. Now his blood was not shed or severed from his body, but in his passion:
For he shed not his blood twice. Therefore the words of shedding cannot be
referred to that in the cup. Seventhly, the blood of Christ, as the Bellar.
tom. 2 con^. ^. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Papists themselves confess, is not in the cup till the words of
consecration be all spoken. Therefore when Christ had said no more but This
cup, the blood was not yet there, but only wine: and therefore the words which
is shed for you cannot be referred to the cup: because it was not wine which
was shed for us. Further also, the Answ. says straightwaies after that Christ
began to his Disciples of that which was in the cup. But we cannot believe
that Christ did eat himself, or that he drank the very blood of his own
body. Therefore we believe not that that in the cup was the blood that was
shed for us, or that the Evangelist would intend to say: This cup which is
shed for you. Last of all, the Answ. fellows, of far greater worth then
himself confess, partly that there is not at all, partly that it may be
justly doubted whether there be or not any place of Scripture sufficient to
prove Transubstantiation, as I have before showed. Therefore they grant that
this place does not necessarily require any such construction, as whereby
Transubstantiation should be concluded. Whereby they give to understand that
they themselves do know that all that they say both of this place and others is
nothing else but cauilling without any certain ground or assurance of truth.
These reasons I take it are sufficient and strong enough against a naked and
bare collection from a point of doubtful construction. Which seeing they have
diverse of them been alleged by master Fulke and others directly against the
Answrers demand, and yet have not received any tolerable answer, it was but
a escape of his wit to say that master Fulke does steal away from the state of
the question, and medleth not with it.

His other cavil out of the words of S. Luke that Christ before the sacrament
said Luc. 22. 17.
he would drink no more of the fruit of the vine, till in his kindome, and
yet drank after in the Sacrament whereby he would prove the sacrament to be
no wine, was long ago prevented by S. Austen, who affirms that S. Luke
August de consen. Euangeli. lib. 3. ca. 1.
according to his manner sets down the former mention of the cup by way of
anticipation, putting that before which is to be referred to somewhat following
after, and therefore understands it of the cup of the new testament by and by
after instituted, and so reconcileth him to the other two Evangelists, Matthew
and Mark. But to help this argument: the Answ. is feign to vary from his
good masters of Rhemes. For he expounds the kingdom of God to be after the
resurrection, but they understand it Rhem Annot. Luc. 22. 17
of the celebration of the Sacrament of Christ's blood. Whereof it follows
that Christ in the Sacrament drank of the fruit of the vine, as both Matthew
and Mark set it down, and the ancient fathers do expound it. Let him go and
be agreed with his fellows before he urge this argument again.

P. Spence. Sect. 32.
IN the end you give me council how to behave my self in these controversies.
In all Christian charity I thank you, and love you for the same: for you
advise me no worse then your self follow and in good faith I accept of it as
proceeding from your great good will toward me, and therefore again and
again I thank you. And I will follow you in genere, that is to have care of
my poor soul, to feed it with the truth of Gods word, but expounded by his
Catholic Church, I must tell you plainly: and therefore in specie in the
particulars of the points of our belief, I will not follow you. You and I
endeavor both to come to one resting place at night but in our days journey
we go two sundry ways, I pray God send us merrily to meet in heaven, Amen.

R. Abbot. 32.
MY council M. Spence must stand for a witness against you at that day if you
go on forward still to walk in the counsel of the ungodly. In the mean time,
I again advise and counsel both you and your master to cease to rebel and
fight against God, or to say when he offers himself unto you, we will none
of thy ways. I council you indeed as you say to no other thing, but that
which I follow my self, and I most humbly thank almighty God, who has given
me his grace to follow the same, and has preserved me from that danger
wherein I have been often falling away from him. You will follow me you say in
general to have a care to feed your soul with the truth of Gods word. Do so
M. Spence, do so: that is the food of life; that is the river of the water of
life, the heavenly Manna: he that feeds there shall surely find life. August.
de pastor.
Feed there, says S. Austen, that ye may feed safely and securely. But you
mar and poison this good food with that which you add. You will feed your
soul you say with the word of God, but expounded by his Catholic Church: you
mean the Church of Room. Which is as much as if you should say, you will not
follow the word of God it self, but that which it pleases the Church of Room
to make of the word of God. Take heed of M. Spence. Assure your self that
though the Church of Room do maintain 2. Pet 2. ^.
damnable heresies and 1. Tim. 4. 1.
doctrines of devils contrary to Gods word, yet being wise, as she is,
according to this world, she will never expound the word of God against her
self if it be in her to make the meaning of it. When she expounds the
Scriptures to make her self the Catholic Church, and no such thing is to be
found in the words of the scripture, will you believe her in her own cause. It
shall then be verified of you which Solomon says: Prou. 1^. 15.
The fool will believe every thing. Take the simplicity of the word of God
it self, and be directed thereby. Prou. 8 9.
The ways of God are plain to him that will understand. God Hiere. in psalm.
8^.
has not written as Plato did, that few should understand, but for the
understanding of all, says S. Hierome. So that although there be depth enough
in the word of God, for the best learned to bestow his study and labor in,
yet as Chrysostom and Austen teach us: Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. August. ep. 3.
Whatsoever things are necessary, they are manifest: and Aug. de doct. Christ.
li. 2. c. 9.
in those things which are manifestly set down in the Scriptures, are
contained all things that pertain to faith and conversation of life. Lay
before you therefore those things which need not the exposition of the Church
of Room. When the scripture says: There is now no offering for sin, will you
take her exposition to say that there is? When the scripture says: no man
living shall be found just in the sight of God, shall she by her exposition make
you believe that it is not so? When the scripture says; Thou shall not bow
down to, or worship a carved or graven image* will you be persuaded by her
expositions that you may? I pass over the rest. Justly do they deserve to be
given over to error, and to be deluded with lies and lewd expositions, which
will not yield unto God when he speaks unto them so plainly as needs no
exposition. It were worth the while to set down here a Catalogue of Romish
expositions, but that the conscience of you all that way appears sufficiently
in this whole discourse. You pray that we both going sundry ways, may meet in
heaven. But master Spence it will not be in that way wherein you go. Either
you must say that there is no heaven, or else that your way is not the way to
heaven, because the God of heaven has gainsaid it. God open your eyes that you
may see the right way that so we may joyfully meet in heaven.

P. Spence. Sect. 33.
AS touching the escape of our Rhemistes in the account of our Ladies
assumption: The matter is very slight, not tending any way to our salvation:
I mean, to err in that computation: especially when they have The more
impudent they that having no certain authority to direct them, do so
resol^tely affirm that whereof they are not certain.
no certain authority therein to direct them. Some said she was martyred
according to the saying of Simeon, The sword shall go through thy soul. Some
said she suruiued Christ's ascension but three years, Eusebius in Chronico,
says she died at 59. or thereaboutes. The most common reckoning faith, she
departed at 63. years of her age. Epiphanius Untruth, leaud and unshamefast:
Dyonisius has no such thing.
who of so good authority, and of so great antiquity allows of that report
of Dyonisius, says she died at 70. years, or thereabout of her age (as far
as I remember) and then may Dionysius words well stand with that report. In
this so uncertain a matter what side would you have our Rhemists to take? they
showed what the common opinion was, not defining any thing, and therefore could
not be empeached for any oversight. They did not declare therein their own
judgments; but told you what was the common-opinion of her age, and of the
time of her passage out of this mortality. How then can you say they are
ouerreached by their own computation concerning Dionysius? do they say the
common opinion of her age only to be true? and reject the r^st? They do not,
but only set down both, but define of neither, what error then or oversight
at all? but imagine the worst: they forgot themselves in their account. A high
matter in a low house, it is neither f^lonie, nor treason, nor heresy, nor
venial sin. But you would, I smell you, have them reject Dionysius report.
Dionysius whom Erasinus, though without commission or reason he censure him
for another Dionysius yet he yields him to be very ancient: but saving him
all Untruth: they do not say that that Dionysius that was the author of that
narration o^ fable was the scholar of S. Paul.
the learned men that ever were of both Greek and Latin Church admit for S.
Paul's disciple the Apostle of France, without doubt or controversy. Or because
the writers agree not upon the time of our Ladies decease, do you doubt whether
she be departed or no? Or be you angry and envy her felicity to be
assumpted? I dare ^uouch it that she was higher in favor with God then eythe^
Enoch or Eltas. To be plain with you, I take it to be impiety to deny her
assumption, so constantly confessed of the whole Church, so solemnly
celebrated, so long and aunciently kept, by so many ancient fathers confessed,
and by none denied, and now of late only by your selves without any other
warrant, reason, or probability controlled.

R. Abbot. 33.
HE excuses the oversight of his Rhemistes about the tale of the Assumption of
the virgin Mary. But why does he here again omit to say any thing for their
exposition of ye words. Heb. 10. O impudent men that would commit such apparent
falsehood: for excuse whereof, a man as impudent as themselves can devise no
shift at all. I say as impudent as themselves, because he shows himself so
in the matter now in hand. The Assumption is proved by the reason that I
alleged to be a mere fable. The Remistes that report it, mention the longest
time that she is said to have lived, namely 63. years: and yet that will not
help the matter. But the Answ. says that Epiphanius, who of so good
authority and of so great antiquity allows of that report of Diosius, says
she dyed at 70 years of her age, as far, says he, as I remember. A naughty
man and of a lewd remembrance that can remember a thing that he never read.
Where does Epiphanius say so, or where does he allow or so much as name that
report of Dionysius? Where is the truth or conscience of this man? If any such
thing had been, his Remistes would have been glad of such ^ patron. But
Epiphanius took no notice thereof. Epiphan. haer 78. contr. Antidicomariantas.
Whether the holy virgin, says he, be dead and buried, her falling a sleep is
in honor, etc. Or whether she were put to death, her glory is among the
martyrs, etc: or whether she have remained, (for it is not impossible to God to
do all that he will) for her end is known to no man: it is not convenient to
honor saints more then is meet, but to honor their Lord. Where in plain
words he gives to understand, yt there was nothing in his time known or
received concerning this matter. Nay the Masse-booke it self checketh the
wilfulness of these men in the assertion hereof, where the lesson for the
assumption day going as it seems under the name of Hierome calls the story
of the departure hence of the B. virgin Lect. in festo Assumpt.
an apocryphal writing: and says, that nothing can be avouched thereof, but
that she dyed as that day: that it was doubted of whether she were assumpted
with her body or not, that it was not known whether she was raised again or
not, although some did go about to avouch so, and all this to the end that Paul
and Eustochium should not take things uncertain for certain. In the Sermons
de sanctis in S. Austens works there is a Sermon as it is thought of
Fulbertus, which affirms likewise that De sanct. ser. 35.
no catholic history did testify the assumption, that the apocryphal
writings thereof were not allowed to be read, that none of the latin writers
had spoken any thing plainly of her death, and concludes thus; It remains
therefore that man do not lyingly feign that to be manifest and known, which
God would have to remain hidden and unknown. What then shall we account the
Rhemistes, but liars that so boldly avouch this fable as certain without any
certain proof thereof. It is manifest hereby that no report of any Dionysius
was as touching this point received for Catholic history. But for proof
that that Dionysius of whom the Answ. speaks of is a counterfeit, I refer
him to those reasons Confer with Heart. chap. 8 diu. 2
that D. Rainoldes gives thereof, till the same reasons be fully answered.
That he is ancient, we deny not, but yet an ancient counterfeite. That all
the learned men that ever wrote have confessed this Dionysius to be S. Paul's
Disciple, it is unhonestly and unshamefastly spoken: neither can he justify it
by any one of great antiquity. So is that y^ he says of so many fathers
confessing, and none denying the assumption of the virgin Mary, as appears by
that that has been said. In refusing this story of the assumption we envy
not to the blessed virgin her felicity, but we condemn Papists of
wilfulness and folly in alleging uncertain fables for certain and approved
trueths.

P. Spence. Sect. 34.
AS touching Canonical Scripture, the Church does not give them their
goodness, truth, force, and virtue, but the holy Ghost only who wrote them,
being as sound, good, true, and perfect, if they lay hid under the ground and
never seen, as now being allowed of. But the Church plaieth herein like a
Lapidarie, who by his long The great skill of the Church of Room to discern
those books to be canonicail which the Apostles and primative Church could not
discern to be so.
skill discerns a true diamond from the counterfeit, but the virtue he gives
not to it, but that came of the first creation. And so the Church by the
illumination of the holy ghost is taught not to make scriptures, nor to give
truth to the books of the holy Ghost* but to discern which be the holy
Ghosts books, and which be not. I ask you whether the Apocalypse and S. James
Epistle besides other* books of Scripture be not (as Calvin and Beza, against
Luther confess them to be) Canonical Scripture. I am sure you will say they
be. Then whether were they If they had not been received at the first they
might not have been received afterward.
at the first received of the whole Church* for such or no? I ask you further
whether the Churches general acceptance of them, after due examination of
them by the help of the holy ghost, had made them any truer or better then
they were before? If not, why then did not the Church receive them generally at
the first? or why do you rather wrangle about it that all the world sees was
done in these books? The cause why you would not have the Church determine the
canonical Scriptures is because your private spirit being enemy to That is,
to the wilful fancies of a few Romish prelates.
the general spirit and sentence of the whole Church, you will rather seem to
prefer your own judgment then accept the work of the holy ghost.

R. Abbot. 34.
AS touching the books of scripture, Hierome testifies thus of those books
that we seclude from the canon: Hiero. in prolo. Galeato
They are not says he, in the canon, they must be put amongst the Apocryphal
writings. And again, Idem. praefat. in libros solomo.
The Church reads them, but yet receives them not amongst canonical
Scriptures. Ruffin. in expos. symb. apud. Cypri.
Ruffinus that lived at the same time expressly witnesses the same, and that as
he says, out of the monuments of the Fathers. So does Eusebius eccle. hist. lib.
4. c 25.
Eusebius out of Melito. So Athanas. in synopsi
Athanasius: So Epiphan. de mensu. and ponderi.
Epiphanius; So the Council. Laodi. ca. 59.
council of Laodicea. And must we now in the end of the world believe the
Roomish Lapidarie that these are Canonical books? Her obedient children may
be so foolish as to believe her warrant herein: but we know her hereby to be,
not a true Lapidarie, but a false and presumptuous harlot. The canonical
books that truly are such, have been received for such from the beginning. So
does S. Austen term them Augustine. cont. Cresco. lib. 2. cap. 31. and de bap.
con. Dona. lib. ca. 3.
canonem constitutum, and confirmatum: the canon appointed, set down and
confirmed. Whatsoever books were not then set down, delivered and received
for such, they cannot now be warranted to be such. If any man through
simplicity did afterward call in question any of those books, as some did
the Revelation, the Epistles to the Hebrews, and of S. James, the Church did
rightly correct their error in that behalf, not newly approouing them for
canonical which were not so taken before, but defending them to be canonical
as they had been before received. And therefore the world does not see that the
Church of Christ did that then which the Synagogue of Room presumes now, in
that contrary to the judgment of that Church she takes upon her to make them
canonical, which were not from the beginning delivered to the Church for such.
Neither do we in the canon of scriptures follow our own private spirit, but
the express testimony and consent of the ancient Church. As for his
hypocritical speeches of the help and work of the holy Ghost, they are but the
same that the Mo^tanistes, the Marcionites, the Valentinians and other old
heretics did use, who when they taught against the holy ghost, yet pretended
the instinct and inspiration of the holy Ghost.

P. Spence. Sect. 35.
INdex Expurgatorius alters no Doctors words but where it is certain that
heretics have corrupted or T(...) t^ say, where the church of R(...) see^^
any (...) contrary ^o her fa^^e doctrine. The Fathers speak like heretics,
when they say any thing contrary to her learning.
where all the world knows their private opinions were amiss and erroneous,
there it gives a note thereof truly. In later writers it notes what is
suspicious, and to be taken heed of: in forged books and heretics books and
heretical editions, and heretical prefaces, censures, and notes, or
heretical commentaries: it controlleth them, and great It is great charity in
the church of R^me to blot out as heretical, whatsoever is contrary to their
damnable heresie^.
charity so to do. All which is good, and therefore unjustly to be found fault
with, but of such whose backs being galled, do winse at that book set out
with great judgments to teach us to beware of heretics corruptions and traps.

R. Abbot. 35.
THis defense of the Index Expurgatorius is shameless. The authors of it knew
so much well enough, and therefore would have had it kept close; but the
providence of God has to their reproach brought it to light. It is not meet
that the judgments of learned men either old or new, should be subject to the
fancies of a few wilful persons that they may dislike in them, and put out what
pleases them. But welfare a child that though his mother play the thief and
the harlot never so much, yet will boldly stand in defense of her that she is
an honest woman. And indeed I marvel not that this dealing seems very
tolerable and lawful with these men, because I know that the corrupting and
deprauing and forging of books is a very special means and help for the
upholding and patronaging of the Roomish abominations. Falsehood cannot be
vpholden but by falsehood, and he that takes a bad cause in hand, must needs
use bad means to color and cloak his evil doing. Thus Francise. Iunius in
praefat. indic. Expurga.
Franciscus Iunius reports, that being at Lions in France, in the year of
our Lord 1559. and coming to the Correctour of Frelonius his print, with whom
he was familiarly acquainted, the same Correctour showed him a very fair print
of Ambrose his works. Which when Iunius commended, the Corrector told him,
that notwithstanding the fairness of it, yet if he were to buy* Ambrose, he
would rather buy it in any other copy the^ in that. The reason whereof he told
him; for that whereas they had printed the book faithfully according to an
ancient and undoubted copy, two Franciscan Friars came by authority and
cancelled many sheets thereof, some in part, some wholly, and caused them to
print other in their steed, not agreeing to the true books; to Frelonius his
great loss both of time and charges. The like dealing Ibid.
he notes of Turria^, that unshamefast Jesuit, in a Greek edition of the
Canons of the Apostles. In a print of Chrysostomes works by Stelsius at Paris,
they have* razed out a most notable and unanswerable place Oper. imperf. in
Mat. hom. 49.
testifying that in the time of Antichrist, there can be no warrant of true
Christianity, nor other refuge for Christians being desirous to know the truth
of faith, but only the scriptures of God, that they which would know, cannot
otherwise know which is the true Church of Christ but only by the scriptures;
that Christ knowing the confusion that should be in the last days, did will
that Christians desiring to have assurance of true faith, should flee to
nothing else but to the scriptures: because if they look unto other things,
they shall stumble and perish, not knowing which is the true Church, and hereby
they shall light into the abomination of desolatio^ which stands in the holy
places of the church. This whole place they have falsely and treacherously left
out. And why? because they take it to have bin put in by an Arian heretic, as
Bellarm. to. 1 cont. 1. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Bellarmine says. But what wretchedness is there in this pretense, when as
they have left in still those places which make for the Arians indeed, and have
only taken away this which was not for the Arians turn, but served to confound
themselves in a matter of controversy betwixt them and us. Thus See Doct.
Rainolds confer. with ^a^t. cha. ^. diui^. 2.
Manutius and Pamelius in their editions of Cyprian, the one at Rome, the other
at Anwerpe, have notoriously falsified a place in his Treatise de vnitate
ecclesiae. And whereas Cyprian expressly avouches by the universal consent of
all approved copies, that the rest of the Apostles were the same that Peter was
endued with equal fellowship both of honor and of power, they have foisted in
other words importing a supremacy given by Christ unto Peter, and so make him
in one sentence and with one breath to speak contrary to himself. Which
impudency and unpietie of theirs is so much the greater, for that against the
common consent and credit of so many copies both written and printed, they
would presume to alter the text of Cyprian upon the warrant of two or three
such copies as they themselves evidently saw and knew to be corrupted, and so
corrupted that they were feign even for shame to vary in some things from that
reading which they found in the^. Thus have the Spanish censurers used Bertram
also, as has been before showed, nipping him and paring him where they have
thought good, that he may not seem too strong against their fantastical
conceit of Transubstantiation. Now we may not wonder that they who have been
thus bold with the ancient Fathers, should presume a great deal further with
later writers. And therefore it needs not that I stand here to show how they
have maimed the writings and censures of Index. Expurgat. in castiga^. operum
August. Tertul. Hierony. and passim.
Beatus Rhenanus, Ludouicus Viues, Erasmus, and other famous learned men
whersoeuer they have with great aduisement and judgment, noted the corruptions
and abuses of the Roomish church either in matters of manners or of doctrine.
This is that godly and charitable dealing which the Answ. commends, and
thinks to be a very Christian and necessary course. But were he not too much
bewitched with the love of a harlot, he would not be so easily brought to
flatter her in such dishonest and hateful doings. Hereby it appears what
confidence and hold Papists have in the writings of the Fathers, and that the
Fathers if they were now alive in the church of Rome, and should speak as they
have written, should be condemned for heretics, and their books carried to
the fire to be burned with them.

P. Spence. Sect. 36.
YOu chop in the end to the matter of justification. A very large race to
course in. To be short we say, Faith justifies, but that faith which works
by love. We yield with S. Paul, Not to him that works, that is, not to him
that works with the respect of the law, or by his free will without the faith
of Christ and his grace, as the Jews and Gentiles, But to him that believes
in him that justifies the ungodly, etc. Here you see he talks of one that
not only believes God or that God is, but in God, which is to have faith,
hope, and charity. And that we require in justifying, Here we have, we say and
we say, but no pr^ofe for that which they say, and so they may say what they
list.
We say Faith without works is dead and yet being dead, it is a true faith
nevertheless. We say this faith so quickened and formed with charity does
justify, that is, makes of wicked just and withal we say, that good works
done by him that is justified, or else they could not be good, do justify,
that is, as S. James says, they make faith perfect. By Abraham's works his
faith was made perfect. And not only before men as you would have S. James to
mean; thereby to elude this clear testimony: for he tells you as for only
faith the devils believe and tremble, and he says faith to be a ioynt-worker
with works in our justification, which is not by faith only but by works: and
they do make a man more just, or increase our justice. They An absurd
contradiction: they deserve it, and yet it is ^^eely ^iuen them. ^f it be
^^eely, th^n it is not of desert.
deserve the reward though given them by Gods free mercy for Christ's passions
sake; yet now made their wages and hyer by Gods ordinance, and by the
proportion and relation betvveene grace Sap. 3. 15. Eccl. 16. 2. Romans 2. 6.
and glory We defy Pelagius that said we might merit the first grace, or
remission of sinner: yet we say with S. Augustine, that the kingdom of heaven
is both gratuite, or free, because it is of grace purchased by Christ's blood;
and yet vvithall says he, it is a thing deserved because it is due to works;
which works come of grace that was given freely by Christ. We desire no
better judge of the true sense of Gods word in this point, then S. Augustine
himself, to whom we appeal. We say with S. John, Behold the lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world. We say we must put off the old man,
and put on the new. We say we must be noua conspersio, and Azimi. We say we
must be Yet the Answers own conscience does tell him that he is not clean,
nor. white as snow.
clean and whiter then snow, and not have a curtain only drawn to cover our
sins only. We say that we have inherent justice, not imputed, which we
think to be but A leaude wretch that derideth that which the holy Ghost has
expressly set down.
an ape of justification. We say that justification stands of these integrall
parts. First An untowardly description of iustificat^on, wherein remission of
sins and reconcilement to God is put before fa^^h, besid^ d^uerse other
peevish follies that might therein be noted.
forgiveness of sins. 2. Reconcilement to God. 3. Renewing in faith, hope, and
charity. 4. Charity not imperfect and begun, but childelike and of another
more divine nature, and which wholly in kind differs from that which is but
begun. 5. The ascribing to the inheritance of heaven. And because you mention
here S. Augustine, understand you that he notes three sorts or degrees of
justification. The first to make of ungodly just. The second, He which is just,
let him yet be justified, and fear not to be justified unto death, that is, to
be made better and more just. The third, Not the hearers of the law but the
doers shall be justified; that is, to have the last final revvard, end, and
perfection of justice. Thus does S. Augustine speak of it. First, concerning
the two first degrees thus he says, contra Iulianum, li. 20. Justification is
given us in this life, by these In which three things there is nothing at all
to make for inherent justice in this life, but altogether and wholly against
it. For if there be justice, what place is there for forgiveness of sins, or
fighting against sin.
three things: first by the washing of regeneration, whereby all sins are
forgiven, After by fighting with vices from the guilt whereof we were
discharged and assoyled. Thirdly while our prayer is heard wherein we say,
Forgive vr our trespasses. Thus far S. Augustine in that place. So that here S.
Augustine himself tells you what he means by Forgive us our trespasses,
the continual venial slips which the very best and iustest many times in
the day fall into, and yet justice Untruth, for the trespassing of justice,
takes away the name of being just.
not taken away thereby, though their alacrity abated. Venial sins are
beside charity, but not He that is not with me, is against me, says Christ*
so must we say al^o as touching charity.
against charity. And remember that no man of his own state can assure
himself but that he may fear, and must cry out, Enter not into judgment,
etc. and why? The very shift of the Pelagian heretics. See the answer.
in respect of the purity of God no man never so good, no nor Angel, nor
heaven, is pure. Man even the best man of himself, must say, I am unprofitable
servant. Yet God calls the just not his servants but his friends. We must say
we be unprofitable servants, in very deed not profiting God a myte, who was as
happy and as glorious before he laid the foundation of the world as ever
sithence. Neither could Christ as touching his humanity, is made an
unprofitable servant.
Christ's blessed humanity, or all he did in the flesh profit God any way, who
before wanted not any perfection, nor could receive any more benefit or good
then before he had. Thus I say must a man (even the best man) humbly think of
himself. Yet S. Paul 2. Tim. 2. says, If any man cleanse himself from these,
he shall be a vessel sanctified to honor profitable for the Lord: and why
profitable? Prepared or ready to every good work. Reconcile therefore these
places rightly, and learn that Profitable, is not meant to be profitable to God
who receives no profit by all our uttermost endeavors: but it is as much as
serving to such a good use as God has created us too, to his glory and our
salvation, to honor him with our glorification. A justified cannot nor must
not boast of his state which he is ignorant of (but yet in good hope) and
therefore must abase himself before Gods Majesty We must abase himself to
the center of the earth, and yet think it may be that he is worthy enough to
lift up his head as high as heaven. A preposterous and doubtful humility.
to the very center of the earth. But we supposing another man to be justified,
may say that of him, which himself cannot say of himself. Now of the third
degree of Justification, which is the end and perfitting of our justice, S.
August. epist. 106. says, our hope shall be fully accomplished in the
resurrection of the dead, and when our hope shall be fulfilled, then shall our
justification be fulfilled and accomplished. So that you see by S. Augustine in
these places our justification has a beginning, an increase, and end.

R. Abbot. 36.
AS touching justification, he fendeth me a deal of paltrie stuff patched
out of the heresy of the Pelagians, and the vain presumptions of the
Schoolmen without any sound argument out of the word of God; neither makes
he any direct answer to that that was urged against him. The scripture is
plain, that Romans 3. 20. Gal. 2. 16
by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified in the sight of God; Rom
3. 28
that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law: that Gal. 3.
10.
whosoever are of the works of the law are under the curse, because it is
written; Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the book of the law to do them: and no man continues in all: Iam. 3. 2.
for in many things we offend all, says S. James. The Answ. shows not, he
cannot show that the inherent righteousness of any man in this life is such,
as that thereby he can be presented holy and blameless and without fault in
the sight of God, which is the thing required. The consciences and confessions
of all the godly are against it. S. Austen to whom the Answ. refers
himself, says: August. epist. 29.
The most perfect love or charity which cannot now be increased, is found in
no man so long as he lives here: and so long as it may be increased, surely
that that is less then ought to be, is of a default or vice. By reason of
which default or vice, there is not a man just upon the earth which does good
and sins not. By reason, of which default, no man living shall be found
righteous in the sight of God. And this is so true that f Pighius, otherwise a
heavy and deadly enemy to the Gospel, is forced to subscribe to our f Pighi.
contro. de iustificat.
doctrine in this point, and to confess that the righteousness whereby we
stand just before God, is not our inherent righteousness according to the law,
but the imputed righteousness of Jesus Christ; which he illustrateth by the
story of Genesis 27. 15. 27.
Jacob, who came in the apparel of his elder brother Esau, to receive the
blessing of Isaac his father. For so are we presented before God to receive the
blessing of eternal life, not in the ragged clothes of that righteousness
which is in our selves, which is full of imperfection and weakness, full of
blots and stains, and unable to abide the trial of the judgment of God, but
clothed with the full and perfect obedience and righteousness of Jesus
Christ, which by the dispensation of the wisdom and mercy of God, is reckoned
unto all that are Christ's for theirs, as effectually as if they themselves in
their own persons had performed the same. Neither ought this to seem strange
unto us, who know the like to have befallen in the person of Jesus Christ. For
he knew no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; yet 2. cor. 5. 21.
He was made sin for us, he 1. Pet. 2. 2^.
bare our sins, the Esa. 53. 6.
Lord laid upon him the iniquities of us all. Could our sins by imputation
take hold upon Christ to put him to death, and to inflict upon the curse
pronounced by the law, and shall not his righteousness by imputatio^ stand
available for us to yield unto us the blessing of everlasting life? Shall our
sins be stronger against him then his righteousness is for us? God forbid,
Nay, S. Austen truly says: August. Psalm 21.
He made our sins his sins, that he might make his righteousness our
righteousness. In humane things we see and know that the suerties payment is
imputed unto the debtor for his discharge, as if he himself had paid the
debt. Christ has taken upon him to be our suertie; he has made full payment of
our debt, both in bearing the punishment of sin, and performing the fullness
of all righteousness. What should let that his payment also should not be
imputed unto us, God offering this favor unto man, and man by grace accepting
the offer of God? Verily Christian religion has taught us thus to esteem that
whatsoever Christ did or suffered, he did all for us. For what need had he to
be made under the law, and so to work and to deserve for himself, who from
the beginning was the Lord of glory, to whom by right and inheritance did
belong the kingdom of life and peace? Therefore as his obedience in dying is
imputed unto us to justification from sin, so his obedience in working is
imputed unto us to justification unto eternal life. And therefore the
scripture as it calls him the 1. Ioh. 2. 2
propitiation for our sins, so it calls him likewise Iere. 23 6
the Lord our righteousness. To which purpose ye Apostle S. Paul says, that
1. cor. 1 30
he is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. Wisdom to cover our error, ignorance, and weakness of faith;
Righteousness, in whose obedience we stand here just and righteous before God,
and are accepted for his children, being as yet sinners and unrighteous in our
selves: sanctification to purge us from sin, and to restore in us the image
of God by little and little 2. cor. 3. 18
from glory to glory Psa. 84. 7
from strength to strength, in this life, till we ^e fully perfected at the
resurrection of the dead: Redemption, in whom only we have full and perfect
atonement and satisfaction for all our sins, by means whereof, there is
Romans 8. 1
no codemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. No less plainly says he
again to the same effect. 2. Cor. 5. 21
Him which knew no sin, God made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Whereof S. Austen says thus: August. Enchiri. ad
Laurent. cap. 41
He then was made sin, that we might be righteousness, not our own
righteousness, but the righteousness of God, neither in our selves but in
him, even as he in the similitude of sinful flesh wherein he was crucified
showed forth sin, not his own sin, but our sin, neither being in him,
but in us. Where first the Apostle and then out of the Apostle, S. Austen
gives to understand, that as Christ was punished as a sinner for those sins
which were not in him but in us, so we are accepted for righteous before God,
by that righteousness not which is in our selves but in him. Yet it is so in
him, as that it is imputed unto us as being performed for us and in our name,
and therefore by faith in Christ it is made ours, even as Christ himself is
wholly ours. By reason whereof it is called Romans 3. 21 22.
The righteousness of God through the faith of Jesus Christ, standing and
being without the law, and the refore by faith only. Therefore is faith said to
be reputed unto us for righteousness, as in those words of S. Paul, Romans ^. 5
Oecum. ibid.
To him that works not (that is as Oecumenius expounds it of Photius. To
him that has no confidence by works) but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is imputed or counted for righteousness. Not works then
but faith is counted for, righteousness to the believing man, and as the
Apostle Gal. 2. 16
elsewhere says, We have believed in Christ, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, because that by the works
of the law no flesh shall be justified. Either there is not at all any
justification of man before God, and so Christ shall have died in vain; or
this is his only justification which I have described, because as partly has
been showed, and shall be showed further, there is no righteousness extant in
man in this life, whereby he can stand just and blameless before the judgment
seat of God.

But that exclusion of works which I have mentioned out of the Apostle, the
Answ. restrains only to works done by freewill, and by the law without the
faith and grace of Christ. A vain exception, the falsehood whereof he that
sees not, is altogether blind, albeit it is the only starting hole, which
the Rhemists use to avoid the evidence of the text. The question of
justification by the law was moved concerning Rhemi. Annot. Act 1^. 13
the converted gentiles, as the Rhemistes confess, concerning the Act. 15. 1.
10.
brethren and Disciples, as the text calls them. Of them the beleeeuing
Pharisees required for justification and salvation to v. 1. ^.
be circumcised and to keep the law of Moses. The Apostle S. Paul handles it
concerning the Galathians, which had Gal 1. 6. 9. and 3. 2 4. 27.
received the Gospel, which were baptized into Christ, which had received the
spirit, which had suffered many things for the Gospel. Them having been for
some space professors of the faith of Christ the false Apostles had persuaded
to join with their believing, in Christ the keeping of the law thereby to be
justified. Concerning these men and the like converted to the faith of Christ,
baptized into Christ, being Disciples and brethren, the Apostle determines
this matter that Gal. 2. 16. Romans 3 21. 28.
they must be justified by faith, and not by the works of the law, yea without
the works of the law, and that not of the ceremonial law only, but of that
law also Romans 3. ^0
by which comes the knowledge of sin, which says Cap. 7. 7.
Thou shall not lust; which pronounces; Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in
this law; which says, Romans 1 5. Ga^. 3. 1^.
He that does these things shall live in them, that is to say of the moral
law as S. Aug^st. de spir. ^ ca. 8. and 14.
Austen also gathers by the same places. Therefore not only ceremonial
works, nor only works of nature and freewill, but all works whatsoever
either before baptism or after baptism, either before grace or in grace are
secluded from justification, and only faith in Christ is our righteousness
before God. Yea and that so, as that the Apostle against that distinction of
works done in the grace of Christ, says expressly: Gal. 5 4.
Ye are abolished from Christ, ye are fallen from grace, whosoever are
justified (that is, do seek justification) by the law. So that he which
being come to the grace of Christ shall thenceforth seek to be justified by
the works of the law done in the state of the same grace, voideth himself of
Christ, and falls away from the grace of God. And therefore Abraham himself
is set forth unto us as a pattern of justification by faith, wthout works, not
in his first justification as the Roomish language has taught men to speak,
but Genesis 12. ^. 5. 6. 7. 8. etc.
after that he had obeyed the voice of God to depart out of his own country,
had travailed many countries as God directed him, had built many altars unto
the name of the Lord, had called upon him and served him a long time, as
appears in Genesis from the twelfth chap. to the fifteenth. Even then was it
said: Genesis 15. 6.
Abraham believed the Lord, and he counted that to him for righteousness.
Whence the Apostle thus reasons: Romans 4. 2.
If Abraham were justified by works, he had to rejoice, but not with God.
For what says the Scripture. Abraham believed God, and that was counted to
him for righteousness. Wherein he infers that because the scripture
pronounces of Abraham after his long serving of God, and many good works
done, yet that not his works as Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Romans hom. 8.
Chrysostom rightly gathers: but only his faith was counted to him for
righteousness, therefore that howsoever he might with men by works, yet with
God he was not justified by works but only by faith. Abraham was the Romans 4.
11.
Father of the faithful, and therefore all that are justified, must be
justified according to that pattern which the word of God has set forth
concerning him, and therefore not by works, but by faith only.

Now that the true justifying faith is not separated from charity and good
works we willingly confess, because it Gal. 3. 14.
receives the promise of the spirit, the effect whereof is noted in the
declaration of the promise: Ezec. 36. 27.
I will put my spirit within you and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall keep my judgments and do them. Yet notwithstanding as the diverse
members of the body necessarily concurring for the perfecting of the whole,
have every one their several office: so these virtues of the soul, namely
faith and charity, though they always meet in the regenerate man, yet in
office and function are distinct each from other. The office of justifying
belongs only unto faith, even as the office of seeing belongs only to the
eye, the office of hearing only to the ear, etc. And therefore the defining
of believing in God by the having of faith, hope and charity, as the Answ.
sets down, is a very preposterous and unorderly definition, and no other
then as if a man taking in hand to tell what it is to see, should say it is to
have eyes, ears and nose. Belief in God is set forth by the Creed; charity
and works, by the ten Commandments: they may not be confounded one with the
other. Doubtless it were very strange to think that when a man says; I
believe in God the father, etc. he should mean thereby, I have faith, hope,
and charity; or that Christ when he said to the blind man in the Gospel:
John 9. 3 5.
Do thou believe in the son of God, did intend to ask him whether he had
faith, hope and charity. Cyprian tells us what it is to believe in God:
namely, Cypria. de dup. martyr.
to place the confidence of our whole felicity in God only, which though it
never be without the love of God, yet every man's understanding may give him
that the act of believing is one, the act of loving is another. Whereas he
says that faith without works though it be dead, yet it is a true faith, he
speaks indeed Roomishly, but that is ignorantly and absurdly. For that only
is the true faith, whereby a man is called truly faithful, so that the saints
of God in whom it is, are by a special and proper name termed Ephesians 1. 1.
the faithful, and col. 1. 2.
faithful brethren, which it self is called by the Apostle Tit. 1. 1.
the faith of the elect; by which he says Gal. 3. 26.
we are the children of God: which has this promise Ioh. 3. 3^.
that every one that believes in Christ, has eternal life: which has no
place in the carnal worldling, as our savior notes saying: Ioh. 5. 44.
How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes of God only: whereby a man not only believes that God
is, or that God is true in that which he says, but also aplieth unto himself
the promises of God, assuring himself of the benefit thereof to the
forgiveness of sins and eternal life by the mediation of Jesus Christ. S.
Bernard therefore says that a man Berna. ser. 1. in Annunc. Mar.
has but the beginning of faith until he come to this to believe that his
sins are forgiven him by Jesus Christ, and that this is that which the
Apostle says that a man is freely justified by faith. Ferus the preacher of
Mentz as he smelled diverse corruptions in the doctrine of the Church of Room,
so he noted the misconstruing of true faith for one. Ferus in Mat. 8.
It is not always faith, says he, which we call faith. For we call it faith
to assent unto those things which are proposed in the divine histories, and
which the Church teaches to be believed This the schoolmen call an unformed
faith, and S. James, a dead faith. But* what faith is that which is dead and
wants his form. Verily this is not faith but a vain opinion. Far
otherwise does the Scripture speak of faith. For according to the scripture
faith is no^ without confidence of Gods mercy promised in Jesus Christ. This
he shows by examples and places and concludes thus: To be short the faith
which the scripture commends is notliing else but to trust upon the free
mercy of God. This, says he, is the true faith: and in In Mat. 27.
another place: To believe is to trust that God for Christ sake will not impute
thy sins. Thus the light of truth caused Ferus to speak, and to control
that senseless fancy and imagination of faith which the schoolmen and
Jesuits have devised and defended to delude the true doctrine of Christian
faith.

His saying that faith is quickened and formed by charity should have been
proved; because I take not his saying to be a sufficient answer. The 1. Cor.
13. 13.
Apostle reckons that faith whereby a man is called faithful as a virtue
distinct from charity, and therefore not formed by charity but having a
proper act and being by it self. And so by it self it does justify, and
though in the justified man, there be not only faith, but charity and good
works do also necessarily follow, yet in justifying no work but faith only
takes place. Aug. de fide and oper. cap. 1^
Good works, says Austen, follow the justified man, they go not before while
he is yet to be justified. And therefore y^ which he adds that works done by
a justified man do justify, and as he says anon after, do make more just or
increase our justice, is merely absurd: For to speak of moral or inherent
justice of which he speaks, seeing that the just man is as the tree, and just
or good works are as the fruit, it is alike absurd to say that the good
works of a man do justify him or make him more just, as to say that the
fruits do make the tree good, or increase the goodness of the tree. Mat. 7.
17.
The good tree brings forth good fruit, says our savior Christ, and the
better the tree waxes, the better wax the fruits, but who ever heard that
the betternesse of the fruits did work the bettering of the tree? But such
unreasonable fanties are fit enough to possess the heads of unreasonable men.

Yea but faith is made perfect by works, as S. James says of Abraham, that by
his works his faith was made perfect. We grant the same and expound it by the
like phrase used by S. Paul: 2. cor. 12. 9.
The power of God is made perfect in weakness; not for that the weakness of
man adds any perfection to the power of God, but because in the weakness of
man, it is perfectly declared and approved to be indeed the power of God,
according to that which he says in another place; 2. cor. 4. 7.
We have this treasure in earthen vessels that the excellency of this power
might be of God, and not of our selves. So faith is made perfect by works,
that is, it is perfectly showed or declared to be true and perfect, as S. James
teaches us to expound it when he says: I will show thee my faith by my
works. Thus does Beda expound it manifestly: Beda in epist. Iaco. cap. 2.
His faith was made perfect by works, that is to say, it was proved by the
practice or execution of works that his faith was perfect in his heart.

Whereas it is urged out of the same place of S. James that Abraham was
justified by works, I have already answered by the exception that S. Paul
has set down: Romans 4. 2
If Abraham were justified by works, he had to rejoice, but not before God.
The Greek Scholiast out of the Greek fathers says thus upon those words:
Oecumen. in Romans 4.
What then? Had not Abraham works? Yes. But did they justify him? God forbid.
Indeed he had works, so that if he had been brought in judgment with the
men with whom he lived he should easily have been justified and preferred
before them, but to be justified by his works before God as worthy of the
kindness and bountifulnes of God toward him, he should never have attained,
etc. By what means then was he accounted worthy hereof? By faith only, etc.
Hereby, says he, the answer is manifest how S. Paul says that Abraham was
justified by faith, and S. James that he was justified by works. A man then,
we say, is justified by works, and must be justified by works, but not before
God. Thus says the Apostle manifestly, and thus has the ancient Church
subscribed the words of the Apostle. Now against these the Answ. tells me
upon his own bare word that we are justified by works in the sight of God: but
I cannot bear his word against the word of God. Further I must add that that
justification before men by works, is nothing else with S. James, but a proof
and declaration that a man is the same that he professes himself to be: a
true christian man, a true servant and friend of God. He speaks to this
effect: Thou say thou have faith, but I would have thee show it me. For I
believe it not except thou justify and prove it to me by thy works. And that
there is no other justification by works, let Thomas Aquinas himself teach us;
Thom. Aqui. i^ epist. ad Gala. cap. 3. lect. 4.
Works says he, are not the cause that any man is just with God: but they are
the practicing and manifesting of justice. For no man is justified by works
with God, but by the habit of Faith. And anon after obiecting to himself the
words of S. James, was not Abraham justified by works, he says that
justification is here understood as touching the exercise and declaration of
justice, and that thus a man is justified, that is, declared just by his
works. This justification we require in all the faithful, and affirm that
there is no man a true professor of true piety and religion, but he that
justifies himself so to be by the careful ordering of his life and
conversation.

Yet he obiecteth that as touching only faith, S. James says; The devils
believe and tremble. It is manifest hereby* say I, that S. James speaks not
of that faith which S. Paul means, when he says that a man is justified by
faith without works. For S. Paul speaks of such a faith as Act. 15. 9.
whereby the heart is purified, whereby R^. 10. 13. 14
God is inuocated and called upon, whereby Bernar. ser. 1 in Annu^c. Mar.
we believe that our sins are forgiven us by the blood of Jesus Christ, which
is not a faith incident to devils or ungodly men. But S. James speaks of such
a faith as is incident not only to evil men, but even to the devil himself.
This difference of the understanding of faith is observed by Oecumenius of whom
I spoke before, that Oecume^. in ep. ^ac. cap. 2.
S. James speaks of a bare assent according to which we know the devils
believed that Christ was the son of God, but that S. Paul by faith imports
some further consequence arising out of the affection of man joined with a
firm and steadfast consenting to that which he is said to believe. The one
speaking of justification before God, teaches us that we are justified by
faith only, according to the true meaning of faith which the scripture
intends. The other speaking of justification before men, teaches that a man
is not justified or showed to be a true christian man by a naked and bare
assenting unto some points of religion, which hypocrites call faith, but he
must by his fruits testify and show that he is a true follower of Jesus
Christ. For men do not account a man religious for a bare profession of faith,
but they esteem of a man's faith and profession as they see it appear in his
conversation and doings. And therefore as Abraham's faith wrought with works to
justify him to be the friend of God, so must our profession of faith also have
good works concurring with it to show us to be the true Disciples of Jesus
Christ. Otherwise as the bode without the soul is dead, So Faith without
works is dead also. Where he compares faith to the body, and works to the
soul: not as faith imports unfeigned trust and confidence toward God: but
as it is a profession of faith and religion before men, as he himself teaches
us in saying: What avails it that a man says he has Faith, etc. For if we
will consider faith and works as touching the eyes of God: then faith is the
soul, and works are the body: so that no works are lively and acceptable
unto God, seem they never so beautiful before men, except they be quickened
and made alive by a true and lively faith, so that as S. Austen. August. de
nupt. and ^ouen. li. 1. cap. 3. and cont (...) ^el. l. 4 c 3. and Retract.
(...) c. ^.
oftentimes affirms, and the Heb. ^1. ^.
Apostle to the Hebrews confirms, they deserve not those names of virtue and
justice, by which they are usually called, so long as they grow not from this
root. But if we will speak of faith and works as they are referred unto the
eyes of men, there faith is indeed the body and works are the life and soul,
so that no words or profession can make men believe that thou have in thee
faith or religion so long as sin and filthiness has sway and dominion in
thy life. Such a faith therefore, or rather a saying that thou have faith, as
S. James terms it, is dead; and so far are men from approouing it or thee
for it, as that they rather abhor and loath it as a rotten and stinking
carrion, and take occasion thereby to blaspheme and speak evil of that faith
and religion which thou take upon thee to profess. Thus I have the more at
large discoursed this place of S. James because the Answerer and his fellows
think they have greatest hold therein for their justification by works.

From justification he choppeth to merit, and there defieth Pelagius which
said that we might merit the first grace and forgiveness of sins. But let
him take Pelagius by the hand, and be friends with him again: for he knows
that it is the doctrine of his part that though not ex condigno, yet ex
congruo, a man may merit the first grace. As touching merit we are satisfied
by the words of Christ that we have none at all: Luc. 17. 10.
When ye have done all that is commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
servants, we have done that that was our duty to do. But the Answ.
expounds these words as not making against merit. We are called
unprofitable servants, not because we merit nothing, but because we do not
yield any profit unto God, who was as happy and glorious before the foundation
of the world as ever since. And here like a drunken man deprived of wit and
reason, and not knowing whither he goes, he brings Christ as man within the
number of unprofitable servants, because he does not profit God any way, nor
yield him any benefit or good. But that very example should have put him in
mind to seek another meaning of unprofitable servant. Christ's own words
would have taught it him, if he would have listened thereto: Does the master
thank his servant, because he did that that he commanded him? I trow not: So
likewise when you have done all that is commanded, say, we are unprofitable
servant, etc. Whereby Christ gives us to understand that though we did all
which is commanded us which no man does, yet that we cannot require so much as
thanks at the hands of God, because in doing all we do but our duty, and
that that we are bound unto: and in that respect are unprofitable servants.
And therefore if he give us thanks or any reward, or call us not servant but
friends, it is of his own kindness and goodness, not of any merit or desert
of ours, whereby he should stand bound unto us. Thus did Chrysostom, take it.
Chrysostom. in Epist. ad colos. hom. 2.
No man, says he, shows such conversation of life, as that he may be worthy
of the kingdom, but it is wholly the gift of God. Therefore he also says,
when ye have done all, say, we are unprofitable servants. So does Beda
expound it, Beda in Luc. 17.
We are unprofitable servants, because the sufferings of this time are not
worthy of the glory to come, as in another place: Which crowns thee in
mercy and compassion. He says not, in thy merits, because by whose mercy we
are prevented that we may humbly serve him, by his gift we are crowned to
reign with him on high. So is it understood by Mark the heremite: Marc.
Here^. lib. de his qui pu^ant se operibus iustificari.
Our Lord willing to show that we are debtors of the whole law, and that the
adoption of children is freely given us by his blood, says, when ye have done
all, say, we are unprofitable servants. Therefore the kingdom of heaven is
not the wages of works, but the grace of our master prepared for his
faithful servants. This is then our unprofitableness that we do not merit
or deserve any thing at Gods hands for any thing that we do, which I hope
agrees not to Christ, who though he yielded no benefit unto God, yet
deserved of God for us the kingdom of everlasting life. As for that which he
obiecteth out of 2. Tim. 2. 21.
2. Tim. 2. I take his exposition for true, but nothing contrary to that that I
have said. We serve for such good use as God has created us and appointed us
unto, and yet in doing all we do but our duty, and therefore what can we be
said to deserve thereby?

Whereas he affirms that the kingdom of heaven is gratuite and free, that
is, yielded by grace, and yet deserved also by works, he gainsaieth the Apostle
who tells him, Romans 11. 6.
If it be of grace, it is not of works, otherwise grace is no grace. For as S.
Austen says, Aug. cont. pelag and ce^est. lib. 2. cap. 24.
Grace cannot be called grace in any respect, unless it be free in every
respect: and Epist. 105.
it is not free, says he again, if it be not freely given, but rendered unto
works. Yet the Answ. shrowdeth himself under the name of S. Austen, and to
him he appealeth to prove that heaven is merited by works, but he did wisely
to allege no place of Austen to that purpose. S. Austens judgment is clear
every where that eternal life is the free grace and gift of God, because
although we have good works: yet our good works also come from that grace
whereby God of his own good will, and free promise in Jesus Christ has
intended to us glorification and everlasting life. August. in Psalm. 109.
God says he, has made himself a debtor unto us, not by receiving any thing
of us, but promising all things unto us, and therefore says he in another
place, In Psalm. 32. and 83.
We say not unto him, Lord, repay that which thou have received, but pay that
which thou have promised. And so S. Bernard according to the doctrine of Saint
Austen, calls the crown of heaven by S. Paul's word ^ernar de lib. arb^^.
and great.
a crown of justice, but not of man's justice, but of the justice of God. For
it is just with God to pay that which he owes, and he owes that which he
has promised. And this, says he, is the justice of 2. Tim. ^. 8.
which the Apostle presumes, even the promise of God. Whereby it appears
that S. Austen though he use the name of merit oftentimes, yet understands
it not as whereby we properly deserve, but which it pleases God of his grace
to accept as our merit, and by his promise vouchsafes to reward it, or rather
to yield unto us under the name of reward thereof, that which is indeed his
mere promise and gift. And this is most evident and vndemably proved by S.
Austens words in the place above cited: August in Psalm. 1^9.
God promised to us men communion with God, immortality to us being mortal,
justification to us sinners, glorification to us castawaies. Whatsoever he
promised, he promised to us being unworthy, that it might not be promised as a
reward to works, but being grace it might according to the name be freely
given; because, that a man lives justly, so far as man can live justly, it
is nothing of man's desert, but of the gift of God This one place sets forth
unto us sufficiently the judgment of S. Austen, as touching this whole point.
And to this accords y^ saying of Basil: Ba^in ps. 11* (...).
Eternal rest is laid up for the^ which lawfully fight the fight of this life
not to be rendered for the merit of works, but prepared by the grace of our
bountiful God for all those that trust in him. How far differs the spirit
that spoke in these men from that proud and blasphemous spirit that now
speaks in the Church of Room, out of whose mouth the Rhemistes tell us Rhem
Annot. H^^. ^. 10.
that good works be truly meritorious and the very cause of salvation, so
far that God should be unjust if he rendered not heaven for the same. Where
may the man be found, I maruelll, whose works are so far meritorious that God
must be unjust, if for the merit thereof he render not heaven unto him? But
this arrogant and more then Pelagian vaunt of merit, is in very express and
direct terms contradicted by S. Bernard: Bernard* de* lib arbit. and g^at.
If says he, we will properly speak of those which we call our merits, they
are the way to the kingdom, and not the cause of our obtaining the kingdom.
And in another place thus: Ibid in An(...) Mar^ae. Sermon. 1.
The merits of men are not such as that eternal life should be due unto us
for them by right, or as that God should do injury if he gave it not for the
same. For to say nothing that all our merits are the gifts of God, and so man
is rather a debtor unto God for them, then God unto man, what are all merits
to so great glory? and briefly, who is better then the Prophet David, who yet
was feign to say, O Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant. Let no man
then deceive himself, etc. The Rhemistes say that our merits are the very
cause of salvation: S. Bernard says they are not so. They say that God should
be unjust if he rendered not heaven for them; he says that God should do no
injury therein. They say, heaven is Rhem Annot. 2. Tim. 4 8
our own right deserved by works: he says it is not due unto us by right
for our works. In like sort do they overthwart those testimonies of
Chrysostom, Beda, Mark, Austen, Basil, which I have mentioned before, and
yet forsooth they teach nothing but that which the aun(...)t fathers have
universally received.

We must, says the Answ. be clean, and whiter then snow. But says the
scripture, Prou. (...)
Who can say, my heart is clean? I am clean from my sin? If none, as in
truth none can, then can none by that that is in himself be reckoned for just
in the sight of God. Hilary rightly and truly admonishes us as touching this
point H^l^r. ^pud. Aug^st (...)
that our bodies are the matter of all vices, by reason whereof being polluted
and filthy, we have nothing innocent in us, nothing clean. Even our best
works are blemished and stained with the blot of original corruption, the
remains whereof stick fast in us whilst we continue in this life: so that the
Apostle in the midst of his graces and good works is forced to cry out, Romans
7. 14
I am carnal and sold under sin. And therefore S. Bernard teaches us to
confess of our righteousness that it is Bern^^ de (...)
not pure or clean, except we will perhaps presume that we are better then
they who with no less truth then humility said, All our righteousnesses are
like unclean and defiled clothes. Our cleanness then is in Christ, not in our
selves, in his innocence we appear before God undefiled and whiter then snow.
Not but that God cleanses us inwardly also, but this clensing is yet but in
part, and therefore we have still need of a cover to hide the remains of our
uncleanness. Therefore howsoever the Answ. scorneth a curtain, as he speaks
to be drawn before him to cover his sins, yet S. Bernard embraces the
righteousness of Christ as a cloak or garment for that purpose. O Lord, says
he, Bernard ^^ Ca(...) (...)
I will make mention of thy righteousness only* for that is mine also. For
thou art of God made righteousness unto me. Should I be afraid least that one
righteousness be not enough for us two? It is not a short cloak or garment
which cannot cover two. Thy righteousness is for ever. It is large and
everlasting, and shall largely cover both thee and me. And in me surely it
covers a multitude of sins, but in thee O Lord what but the treasures of
piety, the riches of goodness. With this garment we desire to be clothed, and
to be found in Christ, as Phil. 3. 9.
S. Paul says, not having our own righteousness which is by the law, but the
righteousness which is by the faith of Christ, as knowing that otherwise we
can never endure to stand before the face of God.

But we say, says the Answ. that we have inherent justice. If he have so, let
him reap the benefit thereof: but if a sinful man have opened his mouth
against heaven, and said I am just, his own conscience shall scourge him for it
in due time. Contrariwise he derideth imputed justice as an ape of
justification, but let him remember that therein he has reviled the spirit of
God who in the fourth to the Romans, has by that word expressly set forth the
justification of man before God. Romans 4. 5. 6. 3. 23.
To him that believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed
for righteousness. David declares the blessedness of the man to whom the
Lord imputes righteousness without works. Abraham believed God, and that was
imputed to him for righteousness. And this is not written for him only that
it was imputed to him for righteousness; but for us also to whom it shall be
imputed, believing in him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, etc.
Where saying in the future tense, It shall be imputed to us, after that he had
been now a long time a worthy Apostle of Christ, he gives to understand that
that imputing of righteousness without works, as he has before termed it, was
not only in the beginning, but still to be his and our justification in the
sight of God, and so excludes that frivolous and shifting distinction of first
and second justification. But thus does the Apostle expressly avouch imputed
righteousness. And I marvel that the Answ. and his fellows think so
strangely of imputing the righteousness of Christ unto us, who yet defend the
like imputing of the righteousness and merits of other men. This they teach
and practice as The. Annot. 2. Cor. 8. 14.
concerning their own beggarly and sinful de^otions, their moonkish and
frierly observations, their works of supererogation, whereby they merit
further then is needful for themselves, and appoint this overplus to serve for
the help and benefit of other being dispensed, applied and imputed unto them
by a pardon from the Pope, or from such as to whom he gives commission in that
behalf. So the Friars here in England made men believe that Out of the copy
of a pardon granted by the armel^te Friars in London in the year, 1527.
they gave them participation of all the masses, prayers, fastinges,
watchinges, preachings, abstinences, indulgences, labors and al good works
that were done by the brethren of that order being here in England. Now with
what face do these men deny that to the righteousness of Christ, which thus
blasphemously they yield to the supposed righteousness of sinful men? But so
drunk are they with their own fancies that whatsoever the holy Scripture
says, it is but apishnesse if it be contrary to their conceit.

His description of justification is but his own and his fellows devise, the
bastard of the Jesuits and schoolmen. Let him bury it where it was borne. S.
Paul by the spirit and word of God purposely treats of justification to the
Romans and Galatians to teach us what it is, and wherein it consists. Him
we follow and out of him describe and set forth justification in that manner
as I have declared before. But to countenance his matter he names S. Austen
again in this place. The best is he does but name him. I must tell him that
either he never read S. Austen, or else understands him not. We confess
according to the word of God, and the doctrine of S. Austen taken from thence
that God justifying us, and receiving us into his favor by faith in Christ,
does give unto us his holy spirit to renew us to holiness and righteousness
of life* wherein we are to increase from day to day. But yet this newness is
not such in this life, as whereby we can stand just before the judgment seat
of God. Nay we have still to cry out; Romans 7. ^. 4
Unhappy man that I am who shall deliver me from the body of this death, and
again, Mat. 6. 12.
O Lord forgive us our trespasses, and again Psalm. 143. 2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, For in thy sight shall no man
living be found righteous. Thus has Christian wisdom taught us to confess,
but what meaning does Popish wisdom teach us to make of this Christian
confession. We say forgive us our trespasses, says the Answ. for venial slips
which hinder not justice. And this he falsely collecteth out of a place of S.
Austen, where there is no mention or word of any such thing. But I alleged to
him that S. Austen affirms that the very Apostles themselves were to say so
for this reason, August. in ^sal. 142.
because no man living shall be found just before God. The Answ. says, we say so
for venial slips which hinder not, but that a man is just: S. Austen says,
the Apostles themselves were to say so for this cause, because no man living
shall be found just before God. Why does he pass over this without answer,
and without proof affirm that which is hereby overthrown. As for venial
sins we know none as touching their own nature, because the scripture
absolutely says: Romans 6. 23.
The reward of sin is death, and Gal 3. 10.
Cu^sed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in
the law. Therefore he that offends in any thing whatsoever is accursed by the
law, and the end of the curse is Mat. 25. 41.
everlasting fire, as our Savior Christ admonishes.

Further he tells us, why we must say to God, Enter not into judgment with
thy servant: for in thy sight no man living shall be found just. Because, says
he, in respect of the purity of God no man nor angel nor heaven is pure. Now
I thought that it was but a word in jest, when he defied the Pelagians before.
In this very manner, and with this very answer did they seek to shift off
these words in the like case. S. Hierome reports it thus. Hieroni. in
epistola ad Ctesiphon.
This testimony the Pelagians delude by a new reason under the name or show of
piety. They say that in comparison of God no man is just or perfect. He
answers them, As though this were that which the scripture speaks of:
surely it says not, No man living shall be found righteous, but in thy sight no
man living shall be found righteous. When it says, in thy sight, it will have us
understand that even they which seem holy unto men, are not holy as touching
the notice and knowledge of God, and God looking upon and viewing all things,
whom the secrets of hearts cannot deceive, no man is just. Let him hear S.
Hierome telling him again that those words are not spoken as touching Idem.
dial. 1. cont. Pelagia.
righteousness in comparison of God, but as touching that righteousness which
concerns the frailty of man. S. Bernard gives this reason why we are to
cry, so, Bernard. in fest. sanct. ser. 1
because all our righteousness even our very righteousness is found
unrighteousness if it be straightly judged. Therefore for this cause are we to
pray in this sort because indeed we are not just if God consider of us, and
judge us according to that righteousness which is by works.

The justified man is ignorant of his state, says he, and therefore may not
boast thereof. But the justified man of whom the Scripture speaks, is not
ignorant of his state: for he R^m. 5. 1. 2.
has peace toward God through Jesus Christ our Lord, yea and that in such
sort as that he rejoices under the hope of the glory of God. Now a man
rejoices or Chrysostom. in ep. ad Romans hom. 9.
glories, says Chrysostom, of those things which he has already in hand.
But because the hope of things to come is as certain and sure as of things
already given us. Therefore says S. Paul we do alike glory thereof. But
this glorying he groundeth not upon his works, for there he finds no
assurance, but upon confidence of the mercy and goodness of God toward him
in Jesus Christ. Bernar. de Euangel. 7. pa. number. sermon. 3.
I consider the things, says S. Bernard, wherein all my hope consists, the
love of Gods adoption, the truth of his promise, and his ableness of
performance. Now let mine own foolish thought murmr as much as it will,
saying: Who art thou, and how great is that glory, and by what merits hopest
thou to obtain it? And I will boldly answer, I know whom I have believed, and
I am sure because he has adopted me in exceeding great love, because he is
true in his promise, and able for the performance thereof. These three says he,
do so confirm and strengthen my heart, that no want of merits, no
consideration of mine own vileness, no estimation of the heavenly bliss can
cast me down from the height of my hope, wherein I am firmly rooted. This is
the faith, this is the assurance of the justified man which the scripture
teaches, this gives him comfort in life and death, in outward troubles and
inward terrors, in which there is no comfort, if a man must be ignorant and
doubtful of his state.

The Answ. intimates further that the justified man uses those former
speeches by way of humbling himself before God. Bernar. de triplici custodia.
etc.
Indeed, says S. Bernard, by way of humility, but what? against truth? Nay,
Idem de verb. Esaiae. sermon 5.
with no less truth then humility as we heard him say before Aug. epis. 89
and in Psalm. 118. con. 2. and de not. and great. cap. 36.
not with counterfeit humility, but with words of truth, as saint Austen
says concerning Daniel, and Idem de peccat. merit. and remis. lib. 2. cap 10.
knowing in truth that it is so that there is no^ a man that is just in the
sight of God, as he also speaks out of Job.

His third justification we know not by that name. God in this life begins
his good work of sanctification in us, but it is yet but begun. Romans 8. 23.
We have received but the first fruits of the spirit, says S. Paul. Aug. de
^e^p. Sermon 49.
In comparison of that which we hope for at the resurrection, says S. Austen,
it is but dongue which we have in this life. So that our Idem de ciuit. dei.
lib. 19. cap 27.
righteousness in this life, as he says again, consists rather in
forgiveness of sins, then in perfection of virtues. But 2. Pet. 3. 13.
according to the promise of God we look for new heavens and a new earth
wherein dwells righteousness. Rom 8. 23.
We wait for the adoption and full redemption of out bodies, 1 Cor. 15. ^3
when this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, when sin and death shall be no more, and 1. cor. 13. 10.
that which is perfect being come that which is now in part shall be done away.
Now because this our sanctification and righteousness is yet but imperfect and
in part, therefore we resolve that the righteousness whereby we stand just
before God, is only the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and that by inherent
justice no man living shall be found just in his ^ight. The cause why God does
not perfect us in this life we take to be this which S. Austen gives August.
de spiri. and l^tera. cap 36.
that the mouth even of the righteous may be shut in their own praise, and not
be opened but to the praise of God: and as S. Bernard says, Bernard. in
cantie. Ser. 50.
that we may know at that day, that not for the works of righteousness which
we have done, but of his own mercy he has saved us.

The places which your simplicity, M. Spence, as I guess, added in the margin
to that which your author had said, need no great answer. The two former
are Apocryphal and prove nothing. Yet the one of them is nothing to the
purpose, VVised. 3. 15
the fruit of good works is glorious: the other is a false translation where
in steed of Eccle. 16. 12.
works, is put in merit of works. The third is of S. Paul, Romans 2. 6.
God will render unto every man according to his works* So we preach, so we
inform the people of God. The words of Christ agree to it, John ^. 29.
They that have done good, shall rise to the resurrection of life, but they
that have done evil shall rise to the resurrection of condemnation. The true
faithful man works according to his faith, and as he is by his new birth
made a good tree, so he brings forth new and good fruits. As he does good,
so shall he receive good, though his goodness be neither of that valor, that
thereby he can deserve that which he shall receive: nor so perfect as that
thereby he may stand just and without fault in the sight of God, as I have
before declared. But to reason from this place in this sort, God rendereth unto
the good man according to his good works, therefore a man is justified by his
works, is an untowardly kind of reasoning, and the like as if a man should
say: The loving father requiteth good unto his child according to his
obedience and good service: therefore by his obedience and good service he is
become his child. It is the birth that makes the child a child. Our
justification consists in this, that God accepts us for his children. This
he does in our new birth by Gal. 3. 26. John. 1. 12. 13
faith in Christ Jesus. Under the couerture of this justification and new birth
we stand still before God as his children, and Romans 8. 17.
if children of God, then heirs of God and ioint-heires with Jesus Christ unto
everlasting life. Though afterward by his gace, and as his children we do good,
and according to this good do receive good: yet it is absurd to say that by
these our good doings we are justified, that is to say: made the children of
God, and the heirs of life, which is a matter of birth and not of a working.

P. Spence the conclusion.
But what mean I to wade in this large sea? Good sir forbear ^e in this and
all other controversies hereafter, which now I know not how your courtesies and
good nature has drawn me on to run into. I protest unto you I am most
unwilling thereunto, knowing my want of learning, fearing thereby to scandalize
our most sound, good Catholic cause, and being loath to exasperate the
magistrate, or to transgress laws, or to endanger my self, which you cannot
help me out of if it be ill taken. And therefore I profess I have written to
you, and then to the fire, fit to be seen of none, and not ware to make any
muster with. I charge you therefore in the bowels of brotherly charity, and in
friendly sort, to hide this Pamphlet, and keep it from all men's eyes and
ears, as being written to your self alone, and wrested out of me by your
self, and as it were exacted: such a force has the love of you, and your
courtesies showed unto me, have such an interest in me. I will not meddle with
those odious comparisons of M. Iewe^l and D. Harding, and of his vvishing at
his death to be with M. Jewels soul: which I dare assure you by the report
of those that were at his death, was not so as it was told you. Such
fabulous reports are not too much to be leaned unto by the wise. As for M.
Steuens, I stand not upon the truth of his report, yet the man was honest and
then a favorer of your side, and a servant with the Archbish* of Canterbury,
Do. Parker who sent him with a Letter (as he reported) to M. Jewel, to
admonish him of certain slips in his book to be revoked. But with those
things as with his falsifyings of places of Fathers and vvriters in every
leaf, and almost in every line, charge him. I say nothing as having little to
do with the matter. And so vvishing to you as to my self, I most heartily
rest here your unfeigned vvel-vviller, and vvil daily pray for you. Only this I
request you that if any word in this our scholasticall conflict be misplaced
or breed occasion of offense, as seeming over bitter, I most humbly crave
pardon. For the force of arguing sometime breeds heat of words, where the
mind means well enough. I vvrote this trifle to your self and to Vulcane,
and to no body else. You see two Lavviers plead egerly and angerly, and as
it were chide at the bar, and yet dine together full merrily. Once again I
pray you suppress this Pamphlet, that neither others may be offended thereat,
nor let your Pulpit sound reproach of me about it, I beseech you. And thus I
commend you to the highest.

Your assured but unable to do you good, save with my prayer, the poor
prisoner Paul Spence.

The answer to the conclusion.
HE that evil does hates the light, Ioh. 3. 20.
says our Savior. Ioh. 3. 20. neither comes to the light, least his deeds
should be reproved. If you have spoken truth, why are you so loath to have it
known what you have spoken? If your cause be just, why should it fly the
light. You are afraid, you say, least through want of learning you should
scandalize your sound good Catholic cause. Your cause M. Spence is not sound
and Catholic. No, no, M. Spence, it is a leaud cause and leaudly defended.
Your answer does prove so much, not through your want of learning, as you
pretend* but through the badnesse of it in it self. Whatsoever excuse you
pretend of your want of learning, the truth is, that for the substance of your
answer, it is the best learning that Bellarmine and the best of your side can
yield unto you, and your excuse does but argue a conscience and fear in you,
that the best learning of your side is naught and easily overthrown. Albeit
your learning M. Spence is not to be spoken of in the matter. Your own fellows
have given it out, that though your learning be but small, yet some other have
had the matter in handling that were able to say somewhat to the purpose. You
remember that you your self confessed so much to me in effect, when you told
me that you sent abroad for the collections of it, and did not plainly deny but
that another man was the Author of the whole. Now therefore seeing you would
not conceal to your self that which I wrote privately to you, but would needs
send it abroad to have it answered by others, what reason have you to require
of me y^ which you have not done your self? Verily, if the matter had rested
only in private betwixt you and me, or if it had but only privately concerned
me, I would never have taken this course; no nor if you would have come forth
to receive mine answer in writing, when I used means to that purpose. But
since that by means of you and your fellows, it has gone abroad and has
touched the credit of the doctrine which I teach publicly, both God and the
world, and my calling and conscience have required of me, not to suffer my
concealing hereof in private, to lie as a stumbling block in the way of any,
to cause them either to fall away or to stand in doubt. My silence might be and
I doubt has been, a fit occasion for you and your fellows to work upon, for
the seducing of such ignorant persons in the Country as by occasion you have to
deal with, and therefore I do not marvel that you do so instantly desire it.
The scornful and disdainful speeches wherewith your Author delights
himself, are fit to blind the eyes of ye unlearned, as if he had gotten some
great victory. That is indeed the common manner of Popish writing. But let the
Christian Reader judge of all. I wish him whosoever he is, to consider further
of his doing. Let him remember the tribunal seat where he is to give reckoning
of it. Let him beware that his conscience do not say unto him, Thou have
studied to answer with shifts and lies. What odd fellow that Steuens was of
whom you speak, I know not. but I doubt not but he was an honest man at Rhemes
and Rome, if he would say any thing to touch the credit of B. Jewel, such as
were Staphylus and Bolsecke, and such other vile renegates. You must as well
give me leave to believe y^ report which I mentioned of Hardings death, as to
your self to believe a runagates and renegates tale of B. Jewel. This Steuens
you say, carried letters to B. Jewel from Archbishop Parker, to admonish him of
some stippes in his book. It may be so. But what were that to the substance of
the matter, if amongst infinite allegations he mistook himself in some few?
Yea but he is charged by your side with infinite falsifications almost in every
line. I doubt not but he is so charged. For if you should not say that he wrote
falsely, how should you make men believe that you spoake truth? The devil when
he will make men believe his lies, commends his lies for truth, and
condemns the truth by the name of falsehood and lies: so the church of Rome
seeking the overthrow of that truth which B. Jewel defended, must needs for the
saving of her own honesty avouch that B. Jewel d^^lt falsely in his writing.
The thief being convicted, will yet cry out that he is falsely accused. O what
wringing and straining does Harding use to fasten upon B. Jewel that discredit
of falsifying, and it still reboundeth to himself. What passions does he run
into sometimes, in charging M. Jewel, and all to save himself some little
credit by vain outcries and claimours. The books are extant, and men thanks
be to God, have eyes to see whether of them played the iugler, and whether the
true man. Out of doubt those falsifications are such pretty matters, as that one
which the Answ. mentions out of the imperfect work upon Matthew, whereof
see sect. 18. I wish the Reader to note it. Your Sent. 18.
terms of scholasticall conflict and force of arguing and heat of words, I
pass over as not concerning you, but him y^ has taken ye pains for you. If
he knew any thing misplaced, why did he not place it aright? If he saw any
thing that might breed to me occasion of offense, why would he write it? You
wrote to me, you say, and to no body else. If you had observed that rule with
me, as it was fit you should have done, I would have dealt accordingly: but now
you and your companions having dealt in the matter as you have, I might not
suppress your Pamphlet, occasion being offered me to publish it, without
betraying the cause of God. Once again I exhort both you and yours to be wise
for ye safety of your own souls. Fight not against God. It Act. 2^. 14.
is hard to kick against the pricks. Heb. 10. 31.
A fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God. If God say
unto you, know me, and you say, we Job. 21. 14.
will none of the knowledge of thy ways, woe unto you: better had it been for
you that you had never been borne. Shifts and colors, and lies, and excuses,
will not serve the turn, when you must come to answer before the throne of
God. God give you grace to remember it in time, that forgoing your own ways
of error and wilfulness, you may embrace the ways of God unto everlasting
life.

Amen.
FINIS.
Cyprian. Florent. lib. 4. epist. 9. Habes tu literas meus and ego tuas: in d^e
iudicij ante tribunal Christi vtrunque recitabitur.

You have my writings and I have yours: at the day of judgment both shall be
recited before the tribunal seat of Christ.




