AN HARMONY OF THE CONFESSIONS OF THE FAITH OF THE CHRISTIAN AND REFORMED
CHVRCHES, which purelie profess the holy doctrine of the Gospel in all the
chief Kingdoms, Nations, and Provinces of Europe: the Catologue and order
whereof the Pages following will declare.

There are added in the end very short notes: in which both the obscure
things are made plain, and those things which may in show seem to be
contrary each to other, are plainly and very modestly reconciled, and if
any points do as yet hang in doubt, they are sincerely pointed at.

All which things, in the name of the Churches of France and Belgia, are
submitted to the free and discrete judgment of all other Churches.

Newly translated out of Latin into English.

Also in the end is added the Confession of the Church of Scotland.

Allowed by public authority.

Imprinted by THOMAS THOMAS, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1586.

A PREFACE IN THE NAME OF THE CHVRCHES OF FRANCE AND BELGIA, WHICH Profess
the reformation of the Gospel. *
AMbrose in a certain place says notably, There ought to be no strife, but
conference, among the servants of Christ. For, seeing the dulnes of man's
understanding, especially in heavenly matters, is such, that we can not often
times perceive matters otherwise very plain, it can by no means be denied,
but that by mutual conference, and friendly, and brotherly debating of the
matter, we come to very great light. And that especially seems profitable
and needful, that some should be set on edge by others, that those things
which the Lord has particularly bestowed upon several members of the Church,
may redound to the common benefit of the wholl body, and that all sinister
affection set a part, Christ, who is the Fathers wisdom, and the only Master
and teacher of the Church may be heard: and as he is the Prince of peace may so
by his spirit join together our minds, that if it be possible, we may all
think^ one and the same thing in the Lord. But to strive* braule, and
fiercely, and frowardlie to contend, as fensers do, is so far from
becoming men that are taught of god, as that it is not seemly for modest or
civil persons. And if so be that in all, yea even in the very least affairs
of man's life, that rule of modesty is to be kept, what, I pray you, is to be
done, when we are in hand with God and Gods matters? Surely holy things are
holily and devoutly to be handled, in the fear of god and love of our
neighbor. Who, if he go out of the way* is by the Spirit of me^kenes to be
called back again: but if he take the right way, he is more and more to be
instructed therein, to the end it may appear, that we are not driven by any
motion of man, but that in all things our minds are ruled and governed by God.
Yet alas, such is the spot and stain of our times, that the evil custom of
writing whatsoever, and even of railing, has seized upon the wits and minds
not of mean men only, but even of those* whom i^ most of all behooued to do
the clean contrary. The roble of Jesuits, and such other like fellows, (whose
very reward is the earnest of bondage and cursed speaking) how shamelessly
and outragiouslie they are carried against us and the truth: and woh what
bitterness they cast out against us such things, as they have bin taught in the
school of shamelesnes, it ma^e be sufficiently perceived of any man.

For they, when they feel them selves pressed with most strong reasons, and
overcome with express places of scripture, they run to cauills and
slanders, as to the only refuge of their errors. They say we have revolted
from the Catholic Church* that we might follow the diverse imaginations of
men: they cr^e aloud that we are heretics, schis^atiques, and sectaries, and
they often times in mockage call us Confessionists: and moreover they la^e in our
dish, that we neither agree with our selves, nor with others, who detest the
bishop of Rome: but there are as many Religions among us, as there are
Confessions of Faith. And that they may seem to procure credit to themselves,
and to give a check to the Germane Churches especially, they bring forth both
certain other writings, and especially that Form of Agreement, of late
published in Germany, in which there are certain things to be seen far
differing from those ancient Confessions of Faith, which the Churches of the
Gospel have even since the beginning given out. But let them so think, that
the fault of heresy is not to be laid upon those, whose faith altogether
relieth on most sure grounds of scripture: that they are no schismatiques who
intierly cleave to Gods Church such an one as the Prophets and Apostles do
describe unto us: nor to be accounted sectaries, who embrace the truth of God,
which is one and always like it self. What do they mean, I pray you, by the
name of Confessionists so often repeated? For if every man be commanded to
make confession of his Faith so often as Gods glory, and the edifying of the
Church shall require; what a wonderful or strange thing ought it to seem, if
Cities, if Provinces, if wholl kingdoms have made profession of their faith,
when they were falsely charged by the Popish sort, that they had gone from the
doctrine of the true believing Church? but they will say, there ought to be
one confession of faith and no more: as though forsooth, a confession of faith
were to be valued rather by the words, then by the thing it self. What
therefore will they say to our ancetours, who when they had the Apostles
Creed, yet for all that set out the Nicene, Chalcedonian, and many more such
like Creedes? Those Creedes, say you, were general. Yea surely, but so
general* that a great part of the world in those elder times followed the
frantique heresies of the Arrians, whom the godly forefathers by setting forth
those Creedes desired to bring home into the Church again. The truth, says
Hilarie, was by the advice and opinions of Bishops many ways sought, and a
reason of that which was meant was rendered by several confessions of faith
set down in writing: And a little after. It ought to seem no marvel right
well-beloved breethren, that men's faiths began to be declared so thick: the
outrage of heretics lays this necessity upon us. Thus much said Hilarie.
What that Athanasius, Augustine, and many other ancients set forth their
Creedes also, that the purity of Christian faith might more and more shine
sorth. Therefore if Kingdoms, Cities, and and whole provinces have privately
made confession of their faith, this was the cause thereof, for that hitherto
the state of times has not suffered, that a general Council of all those,
who profess the reformed religion, might be holden. But if it once come to
pass (and the Lord grant that the Churches may at length enjoy so great a
benefit) then there may be one only confession of faith extant, conceived in
the same words, if the state of the Churches shall seem to require it. Let
them therefore leave of in mockage to term us Confessionistes, unless perhaps
they look for this answer at our hands, that it is a far more excellent
thing to bear a name of confessing the faith, then of denying the truth. For
even as more small streams may flow from one spring, so more confessions of
faith, may issue out from one and the same truth of faith.

Now to speak somewhat also of those, who while they will seem to embrace the
truth of the Gospel, and renounce popish errors, show themselves more unjust
toward us, then was meet they should, we are compelled to find want of
Christian charity inthem. This one thing in deed was remaining, that after so
many dangers, losses, banish ments, downefalles, woes without number, griefs
and torments, we should also be evil entreated by those, of whom some
comfort was rather to be looked for. But that ancient enemy of the Church is
far deceived (by whose subtilties this evil is also wrought for us) while he
hops that we ma^e by his crafts be overwhelmed. But bearing our selves bold
on that love, which the merciful God through Jesus Christ our Lord bears
unto us, and who has planted a love and fear of him in our minds, we leap
for joy in these very things, and boast with the Apostle, that it will never
be, (the same grace of God always preventing us) that tribulation, anguish,
hunger, nakedness, the sword, false accusation, or cursed speaking shall
withdraw us from the truth once known and undertaken. For we know that
saying of Chrysostom to be true, It is not evil, to suffer; but to do evil.
Neither are we any whit disgraced hereby, but they whom I know not what
distemperature whetteth against us having deserved nothing, and to repaie them
like for like, quitting railing with railing, far be it from us, whom God
vouchsafes this honor, that being fashioned like to the image of his Son we
might through good report and evil report walk on, vpholden with the stay
of a good conscience, yea we have resolved with our selves not only to abide
the open wrongs of our enemies, but even the disdain of our brethren,
although never so unjust.

And what we furthermore think of the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
confession of our faith, set forth many years ago, has made it known to
the wholl world: and we have God, and Angels, together with men, witnesses of
that sincere endeavor, by which we labored, and do as yet, to the vttermoste
of our power, labor to set up again and maintain the pure worshipe of God
among us out of Gods word.

And, even as we showed our selves to be ready at all times to render a reason
of the hope that is in us: so we thought it a matter worth the pains, to make
all men privy to that bond which one our part is very straight with the
holy and truly Catholic Church of God, with every Saint and sound member
thereof, that so far as we c^n, we might deliver, partly our selves, partly
the Churches joined with us from those most grievous crimes, by which some
men's speeches and books are laid to our charge. And when we be thought our
selves by what means it might best be done, this especially for the present
time seemed a meet way unto us, which would give offense to no man, and might
satisfy all that would yeald unto reason, namely to publish this Harmony of
confessions, whereby it might sufficiently be understood, how falselie we are
charged, as though we, that have rejected popish errors, agreed not at al among
our selves. For (to begin with those stout maintainers of the Romish tyranny,
who will yet seem to be defenders of the truth, this conference of confessions
will pluck every visard from their faces, when as itshal plainly appear,
that all the opinions in these confessions of faith were in other sondrie words
so laid down, that yet the same truth always abides, and there is none at al,
or very little difference in the things themselves. And how narrow must they
needs perceive the bounds of that their Catholic Church to be, when it
shall be openly known, that so many kingdoms, provinces, cities, peoples, and
nations professing the truth of the Gospel, do with common consent renounce
the abuses and orders of the Romish Church? As for those whom (without any
desert) it pleases to count us among the Arrians and Turks, they shall see
also how far through the benefit of God we be from such heinous and wicked
errors. And they also, who accuse us of sedition shall perceive how
reverently we think of the dignity of kings, and the Magistrates authority,
and they to conclude that not being content with those public confessions of
the Churches of Germany, may by laying against us that form of new agreement
seem worthelie more and more to sever them selves from us, and who have
already very pithilie been refuted by most learned writings, they also shall,
if true agreement be earnestly sought, be satisfied with this Harmony. For
(that we may freely say as it is in deed) that long rank of names sealed
and written at that book is such, that it seems rather to stand idlelie in
the field, then to fight manfully.

And if it had pleased us to follow this policy, we might have set down the
names not of seven or eight thousand mean men (most famous Princes and some
other excepted) of whom it may worthelie be doubted, whether there ever were
any such, or what they were, but also the names of far more Churches. And
this our diligence had been far more commendable, namele, being bestowed,
not in wringing out and begging from village to village some hundreds of names,
but in laying out the opinions of most gracious Kings, most renoumed
Princes, of noble nations, and peoples, of most mighty common wealths and
Cities: of which a great part has not bin used to dispute in corners, or to
trifle, but has known these many years how even unto blood to suffer many
and grievous things for Gods truth sake. But we know that the truth has not
it warrant from men, nor by men: it is simple, it will be simply published and
taught. Therefore we are purposed for this time not to deal by any long
disputation with any man, but bar^lie to open the meaning of the reformed
Churches, to knit all the Churches of Christ together with one bond of
brotherly love, to keep peace with all men, and so far as it ought to be
done, to judge well of all men: yea and to entreat those, who think somewhat
too hardly of us, that if we disagree from the confession of no Church that
does truly believe, they would themselves also begin to be of the same
mind with us, and quietly, and soberlie confer with their brethren, of
what things they shall think good, rather then themselves to slander and
give the adversaries occcasion to rail upon the Gospel. But if they will not
do it, let this public and everlasting monument witness to all that come
after, that we and all of our side are and shall be free not only from the
grievous reproaches, with which we are undeservedly laden, but also without
blame of all the hurly burlies and dissentions that have been hitherto and
that (which God forbid) are peradventure like tobe more grievous, unless it be
speedily prevented on both sides.

And seeing in this Harmony we speak not only with our own, but even with
the mouth of all those nations, whose confessions we have brought into one
form of one and the same doctrine; we hope it will come to pass that not so
much the several names of the French, Belgia, and other Confessions shall
hereafter be heard, as that one only universal, simple, plain, and absolute
Confession of all Churches (speaking as it were with one and the same tongue of
Chanaan) shall be seen* and that they who were thought to be far wide (as
has hitherto not altogether without desert by reason of over many men's private
writings been thought of us and the brethren of the Confession of Auspurge) if
so be that men keep within the bounds of the Confessions, and all cauilling
and sophistry be laid aside and as well faithful as favorable exposition be
admitted, shall be thought very neerelie to agree in all things. And this was
the cause why we desired to put the confession of Auspurge, together also with
that of Saxony, and Wirtemberge, in this Harmony, that it might be the more
easily known, that both we agree with them in all particular points of faith,
and that there are very few matters hanging in controversy between us. For
concerning that doubt about the Lords Supper, in the, thing and of the thing i^
self, there is no strife, we differ in certain adjuncts and circumstances of
the thing. In the thing it self, I say, we agree: although as the gifts of
God are diverse, so some do more plainly, some do not so plain lie, and perhaps
not so fitly, utter that which they think. For we all acknowledge that the
holy signs, have not a bare signification, but that by the ordinance of God
they assure our consciences that the things themselves are as truly and
certainly given of God to all that come, as the signs themselves are given by
Gods minister. But this question remains, whether as the sign, so also the
present thing it self be given to the body, or rather the present sign be
given to the body, but the present thing given only to the mind and faith*
Again, whether as both be given to al, so both be received of al, of some unto
life, and of other some unto death. In like sort, we all believe the true
Communication of the true body and the true blood of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The controversy stands in the manner of communicating, but who may therefore
of right think, that the holy unity of the Churches is to be plucked a
sunder? That they of our side were always desirous of peace and agreement, the
history of the conference at Marpurge, and such things as were afterward done
in the year 1536. do sufficiently witness.

Moreover, so often as there appeared any hope of agreement, it is clear, that
there was no other cause, but the importunity of some certain men, why new
and sudden braules being raised, the matter could not come or long continue in
that agreement which was hoped for. For that we may let pass very many other
things, although in the beginning it were openly known among all, that there
was no controversy between us (no not so much as the very Papists excepted)
in the opinion about worshipping the mystery of the holy Trinity; lo about
the latter end that unhappy monster of Vbiquitie came forth, which if it be
admitted, will quite overthrow the true doctrine of Christ's person, and his
natures. Hence then come the distractions of Churches, hence come so deadly
quarrellings. But seeing this wholl matter has been often handled by very
learned men, it is no time for us to deal any farther therein. For it is
sufficient for us to show in few words, that our men so far as was possible,
always provided for the peace of the Church.

Neither truly has any man cause after the example of certain moderators
(such as not long since have been) why he should persuade himself that we
would here of this hotch-potch of opinions make a certain medlie as it were of
contrary qualities. But we leave all things wholl, that every one may so
know his own words being compared with the sayings of others, that he shall
find nothing forged, nothing taken away, nothing put to, or wrested. And to
conclude, the form and drift of this wholl work, if it be more narrowly
vowed, shall not unworthily be judged a sound body of christian doctrine, framed
and allowed by the writings, and as it were by ^ common council of the godly
Churches well nigh of all Europe. For here all the chief points of our
Religion, being discussed and approved, are by the public authority of all
the chief nations in Christendom with one consent published and knit
together: yet we must confess, as we before touched, that through the manifold
and busy braulings of private persons, and glosses (as men commonly speak) the
matter was brought far from the grounds thereof to things clean besides the
purpose and impertinent. For first there began to be dealing only about the
supper: then it came to Christ's Ascension and sitting in heaven: and within a
while after to the personal union of both his natures, and what stay will
there be in the end? for many, (by all men's leave be it spoken) seem to be
delighted with this continual striving, that howsoever, and whatsoever it might
cost them, they might not be unknown. But it becomes the Disciples of
Christ to seek peace, and to despise glory. For as Bernard says, They that
despise peace, and seek after glory, they lose both peace and glory. A way
therefore with those speeches, I am of Paull, I am of Cephas, and let that one
saying be heard, I am Christ's, I am the Churches.

There is something that may be misliked, yet there are very many things that
may well be liked: the same ground work of faith abides, let therefore the same
love continue: and let us not think much to take them for brethren, whom God
vouchsafes to take for sons: neither let us despise those, for whom Christ
despised himself. That thing is assuredly true, and very much liked of us,
that nothing in holy doctrine is to be thought of small importance: but rather
that even in the least points thereof a certain faith and full assurance is
required, flat contrary to the wavering of the Academikes: yet we can not like
of too too much peeuishnes, through which some do straight way upon very small
occasion call their brethren heretics, schismatikes, ungodly, Mahumetanes: let
these speeches be thrown out against Atheists, Epicures, Libertines, Arians,
Anabaptists, and such like mischievous persons, which desire to have the Lords
field utterly destroyed: but let us every day grow in faith and love: and
let us teach the flocks committed to our charge, to fear God, to hate vices,
and follow after virtues, to deny the world and themselves: obeying the
commandment of our Lord and teacher Jesus Christ, who bids us not tobraule
but to love each other. Whose example in governing the Church if we will
follow, we shall raise up those that are afflicted, take up those that are
fallen, comfort the feeble, waken the drousy, and not negligentlie denounce
Gods wrath against sins, and shall draw out the sword of the same word which
is no blunt one against hypocrites, wolves, dogs, swine, goats, and to
conclude against all wicked ones which in our Churches mingle themselves with
the true sheep, and which cause the word of God to be evil spoken of. It were
a far better thing surely then that which some do, busying the sharpnes of
their wit in making of certain trifles, that forsooth the knowledge of such
subtilties, may shake out of our minds all conscience. It was justly said
that the strength of the gospel was weakened through the thornie subtelties of
schoolequestions: and we through our wayward disputations what else do we, then
cause that the authority thereof be not strengthened, but rather weakened, and
do even stagger among the wicked. We read it excellently written in Liuie, a
very grave writer, that not only grudges, ^ut also wars have an end, and
that oftentimes deadly foes become faithful confederates, yea and sometimes
Citizens: and that by the same speeches of the people of Rome, very bitter or
cruel enmities have been taken up between men of great account. And that which
these few words wrought with the heathen, shall not godliness toward God
obtain at the hands of Christians, of deuines, and of Pastors of Churches?
yea if the travel of reading and diligently examining and conferring of this
book shall not be irksome, if upright and sincere judgment, if not
preiudicate opinions, but the love of one truth shall bear swaie in all men's
hearts, it will shortly obtain it. That old contention about the celebrating
of Easter very hotly tossed to and fro for two hundred years, or there about,
between the Greeks and the Latins, was long since by us thought worthy of
laughter: but we must take good heed, lest in a matter not altogether unlike,
we seem to be wiser then both, if so be that we desire to have the Church
wholl, and not to leave it rent unto the posterity, and would have our selves
be counted not foolish among men, and not stub born in the sight of god. There
has scarce been any age, which has in such sort seen al Churches following
altogether one thing in all points, so as there has not always been some
difference, either in doctrine, or in ceremonies or in manners: and yet were
not Christian Churches through the world therefore cut a sunder, unless
peradventure then, when the Bishop of Rome brake of all agreement, and
tyrannically ^ioyned to other Churches, not what ought to be done, but what
himself would have observed: but the Apostle did not so. Barnabas in deed
departed from Paull, and Paull also withstood Peter, and surely for no trifle:
and yet the one became not more enemy or strange to the other, but the self
same spirit, which had coupled them from the beginning, never suffered them to
be disioyned from themselves. It is the fashion of Romists to command, to
enforce, to press, to through out cursings, and thunder excommunications upon
the heads of those that whisper never so little against them: but let us,
according to the doctrine of the holy Ghost, suffer, and gently admonish each
other: that is, keeping the groundwork of faith, let us build love upon it, and
let us jointly repair the walls of Sion lying in their ruins.

It remains, that through the same Lord Christ we beseech our reverent
brethren in the lord, whose confessions published we set forth, that they take
this our pains in good part: and fuffer us to lean, as it were to a certain
stay, to the common consent of the reformed Churches, against the accusations
and reproaches of the common adversaries of the truth. But it had been to be
wished, that we might at once have set out all the Confessions of all the
reformed Churches: but because we had them not all, therefore we set out them
only, that were come to our hands, to which the rest also, so far as we
suppose, may easily be drawn. And we also could have wished, that the thing
might have bin made common to all the reformed Churches. But when as the state
of our Churches seemed to force the matter, and that they could not abide any
longer delaie, the right well beloved brethren will pardon us, with whom by
reason of the time we could not impart both the Harmony it self, and the
observations* as also the intent of this wholl edition. Whereas moreover we
have put to more confessions of one and the same nation, as of Auspurge, and
Saxony, as also the former and latter of Heluetia, that was not done without
cause: for besides that one expounds another, we thought it good also hereby
to rid them from all suspicion of inconstancy and wavering in opinion, which
the adversaries are wont to catch at, by such repetitions o^ confessions.

Yet why we would not add some confession^ of the brethren of Bohemia often
repeated, we (...) straight way show a cause* and we hope that ou^ reason will
easily be liked of them. And we have set down every where two, yea and in
some places three editions of Auspurge, for this respect, lest in this
diversity we might seem to have picked out that, which rather favored
ourside, and to have utterly misliked the other. Wherein notwithstanding we
have not every where followed the order of times, in which every of them came
to light, but the c^ppie which we had in our hands printed at Wirtemberge 1572.
with a double edition. And w^ therefore thought it meet to pass over the
Apologies adjoined to the confessions (as of Auspurge, Bohemia, Sucueland, and
England) as well that the work might not grow to be exceeding big, as also
that we might not seem rather to increase disputations and controversies, then
to make an Harmony of doctrine. And as for our observations, our mind was to
meet with the cauills of sophisters, who we know well enough will take hold
on the least matters, that they may thereby set us on work. Wherefore lest
they should charge us to set out a discord rather then a concord of
confessions* we have added in the end very short observations, in which we lay
open those things which might seem somewhat obscurelie spoken, and do
favorably and freely, giving them an interpretation, expound those things,
which either have, or seem to have any show of repugnancie. And we beseech the
brethren to bear with us therein, as the most distressed, and desirous of the
peace and agreement of the Curches among those, who in these last times have
embraced the truth of the gospel. For God forbid, that we should desire to be
counted Censurers of others, who are ready rather to be taught of our brethren,
and to be strengthened in this face of truth, which is begun. We would therefore
have them so to think, that these observations are laid before them, that they
may judge of them, and may, if they shall think it any where needful,
better and more fitly declare their own opinion, and in the mean while
accept of our pains.

YE therefore most gracious Kings, Dukes, Earls, Marquesses, most famous
Barrons, and noble Lords, ye Cities, and Common wealths, ye most wise
Pastors, Doctors, and, to be short, all Christian people, professing the
truth of the Gospel, be present in souls and bodies, suffer not the poison
of discord to spread any farther: but kill this hurtful serpent, and receive
with a Christian mind as is meet, and as is offered unto you this most sure
token and earnest of the everlasting friendship of the French and Belgian
Churches with you, offered to you in the face of the whole world: that we being
by a friendly league coupled together in Christ may vanquish all Antichrists,
and may sing that hymn to the Lord our God, Behold how good and joyful a
thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity.

A CATALOGVE OF THE CONFESSIONS WHEREOF THIS HARMONY IS FRAMED, ACCORding to
the order of the times, wherein every of them were written and published.
I
THe confession of Auspurge was first presented in the Germane tongue at the
City Auspurge, in the year 1530. to Charles the fifth being Emperor, by
certain most renoumed Princes of Germany, and other states of the sacred
Empire, whom they call Protestants. Secondly the self same year it was set
out and published at Wirtemberge in latin, somewhat corrected in certain
Articles, with a preface, and the subscription of the authors names.

II.
THat confession of the four cities was presented both in the Germane, and
also in the Latin tongue, to the same most sacred Emperor Charles the fifth, in
the same assembly held at Auspurge, in the same year, by the Ambassadors of
the Cities of Strausbrough, Constance, M^mi^ga, Lindaw: both which we have in
certain Articles compared together, that the readers might have the one made
more ample by the other: and we have therefore in the titles called it the
confession of Sueueland, for that those four Cities, by whom it was
presented, are commonly counted neighbors to Sueueland.

III.
THat of Basil about the year 1532. was first written in the Germane tongue by
the ministers of the Church of Basil, and also by a common subscription allowed
of the Pastors of Strausbrough, then again in the year 1561. both recognized
and received by the self same ministers of Basil. Afterward also it was
published by the magistrate of Millaine in his own name in the Germane tongue
with a preface, as though it had been that Churches own confession. And at the
last it was turned into latin. Whichwe, as more ancient then the rest of
Heluetia, have thought good to be set down here also, and do else where in
like sort call it the confession of Millaine.

IIII.
THe former Confession of Heluetia was written at Basil about the year 1536.
in the behalf of all the Churches of Heluetia, and sent and presented to the
assembly of divines at Wirtemberge by Master Bucer and Master Capito: and in
the year following 1537. it was again propounded together with the
declaration thereof to the assembly at Smalcaldia by Bucer himself, and
allowed of that wholl assembly, namely, of al^ ^he divines (...) degrees of
Protestants, as Luther his ow^e latters to (...) Heluetians do testify. And
the d^^lara^ion in (...) as conferred in very many places (...) the more am^^^
copy written in the Germane (...)

V.
That of Saxony was written in latin in the year 1551. in the behalf of the
Saxon Churches, by Master Philip Melancthon, that it might be presented to the
council of ^rent: to which not only the Saxon and Meissen Churches, but also
very many other did suscribe, as if it had been to the confession of
Auspurge repeated.

VI.
THat of Wirtemberge was of the most renoumed prince and Lord, Lord Christopher
Duke of Wirtemberge and Tecca, Earl of Mountbelgard, by his ambassadors
presented to the assembly of the Tridentine council the 24. day of the
month of January in the year 1552.

VII.
THe French confession was in the year 1559. presented to Frauncis the second
King of France first at Amboise, in the behalf of all the godly of that
Kingdom: Secondly in the year 1561. at Poisie. It was presented again in
French, to Charles the ninth: and at length also published by the Pastors of
the French Churches, with a preface to all other Evangelical Pastors, in the
year 1566.

VIII.
THe English confession was inserted in the general apology written in the
year 1562. in the behalf of the English Church.

IX.
THe latter confession of Heluetia was written by the Pastors of Zurich, in the
year 1566. and approved and subscribed unto, not only of the Tigurines them
selves and their confederates of Bern, Scaphusia, Sangallia, Rhetia, Myllaine,
and Bienna: but also of all them of Geneua, and of Sauoi, of Polonie and
likewise by the Churches of Hungary, and Scotland.

X.
THe confession of Belgia was published in french in the name of all the
Churches of Belgia, in the year 1566. and in the year 1579. in a pub^^que
Synod held at Belgium, it was repeated, confirmed, and turned into the
Belgian tongue.

XI.
THat of Bohemia being the last of the four former, which were far more
ancient, (which for the largenes we thought good not to be inserted into this
harmony) being recited in the same order of Chapters and arguments, and
somewhat more plainly expressed, and in the year 1573. published in diverse
places, was also approved by common testimony of the university of
Wirtemberge, even as Master Luther, and Melancton had approved the former,
published in the year 1532. being altogether the same in doctrine with this,
as Luther his preface wit^esseth* and we have called it else where the
confession of the Waldenses, following the common title assigned thereunto by
those Churches: which we would have to be spoken without any prejudice to those
brethren.

AN ADMONITION TO THE GODLY AND GENTLE READER, TOUCHING THE ORDER and course of
this wholl Harmony. *
THis wholl Harmony of Confessions (genie Reader) is parted into 19. Sections,
which we have taken sometimes out of noe, sometimes out of fewer Confessions in
^umber, as each seemed every one in his ^wne pl^ce to handle one and the some
matter or chief point of doctrine. But in (...) ^ing the context of every
Confession, because we w^r^ ^o have regard of the order of things and doctrine,
rather then either of the time, or worthiness of the Churches and Authors that
wrote them, or other such like circumstance* the^fore it seemed good without
any envy or prejudice of other Confessions, either more ancient or more
famous, to give the first place to the latter Confession of Heluetia; ^oth
because the order thereof seemed more fitie, and ^he wholl handling of doctrine
more full and convenient and also because that Confession was publicly
approved and subscribed unto by very many Churches of d^uers Na^^on^.
Farther upon ^his do the re^t fitly follow, to wit, ^he former confession of
Heluetia* and then all other, without any ^ho^s^, indifferently, save that we
had rather join together the Confessions of Germany, then s^uer them ^ach
(...) according to ^h^ argument of every Section. (...) info^^ed to p^t that
Confession of the (...) as rece^u^d somewhat ^^te, in the la^^ pl^ce. (...) if
it shall not seem fit and convenient to (...) may easily be altered in the
second edition, as other Confessions also, if any such beside these shall be
wanting, may in their due place be adjoined.

To conclude, that the godly Reader may want nothing, and that no man may
suspect any thing to be taken away or added to any of those Confessions, we
have here set down the articles or chief points in the order wherein they were
first written. Which we desire every man favorably to interpret, and to
enjoy this our labor, rather seeking peace and agreement, then malitiouslie
hunting after occasions of dissensions.

PROPER CATALOGVES FOR EVERY CONFESSION, CONTAINED IN THIS HARMONY, AFTER
THAT ORDER WHEREIN They were first written.
THE ARTICLES OF THE FORMER CONFESsion of Heluetia.
SCripture 1 Interpretation 2 Fathers 3 Humane Traditions 4 The drift of the
Scripture 5 God 6 Man, and his strength 7 Original sin. 8 Free will. 9 The
eternal Counsel, touching the restoring of man. 10 Jesus Christ, and those
benefits which we reap by him. 11 The drift of the doctrine of the Gospel.
12 Faith, and the force thereof. 13 The Church. 14 Of the Ministers of the
word. 15 Ecclesiastical power. 16 The choosing of Ministers 17 The head and
Shepherd of the Church. 18 The duties of Ministers. 19 Of the force and
efficacy of the Sacraments. 20 Baptism. 21 The Eucharist. 22 Holy
assemblies. 23 Of Heretics and Schismatikes* 24 Of things indifferent. 25 Of
the Magistrate 26 Of Holy Wedlock. 27
THE CHIEF POINTS OF THE LATTER CONfession of Heluetia.
Of the holy Scripture, being the true word of God. 1 Of Interpreting the
holy Scripture, and of ^athers, Councels, and Traditions. 2 Of God, his unity
and the Trinity. 3 Of Idols, or Images of God, Christ, and Saints. 4 Of the
Adoration, worship, and In^ocation of God, through the only Mediator Jesus
Christ. 5 Of the Providence of God. 6 Of the creation of all things, of
Angels, the Devil, and man. 7 Of the fall of man, sin, and the cause of
sin. 8 Of free w^ll, and so of man's power and ability. 9 Of the
Predestination of God, and Election of the saints. 10 Of Jesus Christ being
true God, and man, and the only Savior of the world. 11 Of the law of God.
12 Of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, of the Promises, also, of the spirit, and
the letter. 13 Of Repentance, and the Conversion of man. 14 Of the true
justification of the faithful. 15 Of Faith, and good works, and of their
reward, and the merit of man. 16 Of the Catholic and holy Church of God, and
of the only head of the Church. 17 Of the Ministers of the Church their
institution, and duties. 18 Of the Sacraments of the Church of Christ. 19 Of
holy Baptism. 20 Of the holy Supper of the Lord. 21 Of holy and
Ecclesiastical assemblies. 22 Of the Prayers of the Church, of singing and
Canonical hours. 23 Of Holy days, fastes, and choice of meats. 24 Of
Comforting, or visiting the sick. 25 Of the burial of the faithful, and the
care that is to be had for the dead, and of Purgatory, and the appeering of
Spirits. 26 Of Rites, Ceremonies, and things Indifferent. 27 Of the goods of
the Church. 28 Of single life, Wedlock, and the ordering of a Family. 29 Of
the Magistrate. 30
THE ARTICLES OF THE CONFESSION OF Basil.
Of God. 1 Of man. 2 Of the care of God toward us. 3 Of Christ, being true God,
and true man. 4 Of the Church. 5 Of the Supper of our Lord. 6 Of the
Magistrate. 7 Of Faith, and works. 8 Of the last day. 9 Of things
commanded, and not commanded. 10 Against the error of the Anabaptists. 11
THE CHIEF POINTS OF THE CONFESSION OF Bohemia.
Of the holy Scripture, and of Ecc^siasticall writers. ^ Of Christian
Catechizing. 2 Of the unity of the divine essence, and of the three Persons. 3
Of the knowledge of himself. Also, Of sin, the causes and fruits hereof,
and of the promises of God. 4 Of repentance. 5 Of Christ the Lord, and of
Justification through faith in him. 6 Of good works, which be holy actions. 7
Of the holy Catholic Church, the order and discipline hereof, and moreover
of Antichrist. 8 Of the Ministers of the Church. 9 Of the word of God. 10 Of
the Sacraments in general. 11 Of holy Baptism. 12 Of the Supper of the Lord.
13 Of the keys of Christ. 14 Of things accessorie, that is, of rites, or
Ecclesiastical ceremonies. 15 Of the politic or Civil Magistrate. 16 Of
Saints, and their worship. 17 Of fasting, 18 Of single life, and Wedlock, or
the order of married folk. 19 Of the time of Grace. 20
THE ARTICLES OF THE FRENCH CONFEssion.
Of God, and his one only essence. 1 Of the knowledge of God. 2 Of the
Ca^onicall books of the holy Scripture. 3 Of distinguishing the Canonical
book^ from the Apocryphal. 4 Of the authority of the word of God. 5 Of the
Trinity of the Persons in one only essence of God. 6 Of the Creation of the
world. 7 Of the eternal Providence of God 8 Of the fall of man, and his free
will 9 Of Original sin. 10 Of the propagation of Original sin, and of the
effects thereof. 11 Of the free Election of God. 12 Of the reparing of man
from his fall through Christ. 13 Of two natures in Christ. 14 Of the
hypostaticall union of his two natures. 15 Of the death and resurrection of
Christ, and of the fruit thereof. 16 Of the merit, and fruit of the sacrifice
of Christ. 17 Of the remission of sins, and true Justification. 18 Of the
Intercession, or Mediation of Christ. 19 Of justifying Faith, and the gift, and
effects thereof. 20. 21. 22 Of the abolishing of Ceremonies, and true use of
the Moral law. 23 Of the intercession of Saints, Purgatory, and other
superstitious traditions of the Popish sort. 24 Of the Ministry of the
Gospel. 25 Of the unity of the Church, and the true notes thereof. 26. 27. 28
Of Ecclesiastical functions. 29 Of the power, and authority of the ministers.
30 Of their lawful calling, and election. 31 Of Ecclesiastical discipline. 32
Of Excommunication, and other Censures. 33 Of the Sacraments in general. 34 Of
Baptism. 35 Of the holy Supper of the Lord. 36 Of the efficacy, and true
communication of the thing signified by the signs. 37. 38 Of the Magistrate,
and politic laws 39. 40
THE ARTICLES OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
Of one God in three Persons. 1 Of Jesus Christ being the true Son of God,
and of the Incarnation, and other works of Redemption, and of his two natures
being vnseperablie united and unconfounded. 2 Of his last coming Of the holy
Ghost, and his works in us. 3 Of the Catholic Church, and the one only
King, head, and husband thereof. 4 Of the diverse degrees of the Church. 5 Of
the prima^ie of the Antichrist of Rome. 5 Of the lawful calling and Election of
ministers. 6 Of their power, and the use of the keys. 7 Of marriage and a
Single life. 8 Of the Canonical scriptures. 9 Of the Sacraments, and the
number thereof. 10 Of Baptism. 11 Of the holy Eucharist. 12 Of the ^^le of
Masses. 13 Of Purgatory. 14 Of Ceremonies, and Ecclesiastical rites. 15 Of
prayer in a vulgar tongue. 16 Of the only Intercessour, and Mediator
Christ. 17 Of the corruption of man through sin, of his justification through
Christ. 18 Of the one only sacrifice of Christ, whereby we are perfectly
reconciled to God. 19 Of good works. 20 Of the last resurrection of this
flesh. 21
THE ARTICLES OF THE CONFESSION OF Belgia.
Of the essence, or nature of God. 1 Of the double knowledge of God. 2 Of the
beginning, and author of the word of God. 3 Of the Canonical books of the
old and new Testament. 4 Of their authority. 5 Of the Apochryphall books. 6
Of the perfection of the Canonical Scripture above all the doctrines of all
men. 7 Of three persons in one only essence of God. 8 Of the testimonies of
both the testaments, whereby both the Trinity of the persons, and also their
properties m^^ be proved 9 Of the divine nature, and generation of Jesus
Christ the Son of god. 10 Of the divine nature of the holy ghost. 11 Of the
creation of the world, and Angels, and the distinguishing of them. 12 Of the
Providence of God, and of his just government, both general, and special. 13
Of the creation of man, his fall, corruption, and servile free will. 14 Of
Original sin. 15 Of free election, and just reprobation. 16 Of the repairing
of man through Christ. 17 Of the first coming of Christ, and his true
incarnation of the seed of David. 18 Of his two natures hypostatically united
in one only person. 19 Of the cause, or end of his death, and resurrection.
20 Of his only Priesthood, and expiatorie sacrifice. 21 Of faith, the only
instrument of our Justification. 22 Of true justification through Christ. 23 Of
regeneration and good works. 24 Of the abrogating of the law and shadows. 25
Of the only Mediator or intercessour Christ, against the intercession of
Saints. 26 Of the Catholic Church. 27 Of the unity and communion thereof. 28
Of true notes of the true Church. 29 Of the government, and Ecclesiastical
functions. 30 Of the Election of Ministers, Elders and Dea^ons, and of their
authority. 31 Of Ecclesiastical traditions. 32 Of the Sacraments, and their
number 33 Of Baptism. 34 Of the Supper of the Lord. 35 Of Magistrates, and
their office and power. 36 Of the last Judgment. 37
THE ARTICES OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
Of God, and the persons of the divinity. 1 Of Original sin. 2 Of the
incarnation of the Son of God. 3 Of Justification. 4 Of the Preaching of
Repentance, and general Remission. 5 Of the righteousness of good wookes. 6 Of
the Church. 7 Of the Sacraments which are administered by evil men. 8 Of
Baptism. 9 Of the Lords Supper. 10 Of Repentance. 11 Of Confession. 12 Of the
use of Sacraments. 13 Of Ecclesiastical order, or degrees. 14 Of Ecclesiastical
ri^^s. 15 Of civil ordinances. 16 Of the la^^ Judgment. 17 Of fr^^ will. 18 Of
the cause of sin. 19 Of good works. 20 Of ^nuocation. 21
ARTICLES CONCERNING THE ABUSES WHICH ARE changed in external rites
Of the Mass. 1 Of either kind of the Sacrament. 2 Of Confession. 3 Of the
difference of mea^es, and such like Popish traditions. 4 Of the marriage of the
Priests. 5 Of the vows of Monks. 6 Of Ecclesiastical power. 7
THE CHIEF POINTS OF THE CONFESSION of Saxony.
Of Doctrine. 1 Of Original sin. 2 Of the remission of sins, and of
I^*stification. 3 Of freewill. 4 Of new obedience, 5 What works are to be
done. 6 How good works may be done. 7 How new obedience does please God. 8 Of
rewards. 9 Of the difference of sins. 10 Of the Church. 11 Of the
Sacraments. 12 Of Baptism. 13 Of the Lords Supper. 14 Of the use of the wholl
Sacrament. 15 Of repentance. 16 Of Satisfaction. 17 Of Wedlock. 18 Of
Confirmation and anointing. 19 Of Traditions or Ecclesiastical rites 20 Of a
Monastical life. 21 Of the inuocating of godly men departed out of this life.
22 Of the civil Magistrate. 23
THE CHIEF POINTS OF THE CONFESSION OF Wirtemberge.
Of God, and three persons in one godhead. 1 Of the Son of God. 2 Of the
holy Ghost. 3 Of sin. 4 Of Justification. 5 Of the law. 6 Of good Works. 7
Of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 8 Of the Sacraments. 9 Of Baptism. 10 Of
Confirmation. 11 Of Repentance. 12 Of Contrition. 13 Of Confession. 14 Of
Satisfaction. 15 Of Prair. 16 Of Fasting. 17 * Of Alms. 18 Of the Eucharist,
that is, of the Sacrament of thanksgiving. 19 * Of the Mass. 20 Of holy
orders 21 Of Marriage. 22 * Of e^^reame Unction. 23 Of the inuocating of Saints.
24 Of the remembrance of the dead. 25 Of Purgatory. 26 * Of Monastical vows.
27 Of Canonical hours. 28 Of Fasting. 29 Of the consecrating of water, salt,
wine, and other such like things. 30 Of the holy Scripture. 31 * Of the Pope.
32 Of the Church. 33 Of Councels. 34 Of the Teachers of the Church. 35 Of
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies. 36
THE CONTENTS OF THE BOOK FOLLOWING, ACCORDING TO THE SECTIONS, WHICH are in
number 19. and of how many confessions each Section does consist.
THE 1. SECTION. page 1.
OF the holy Scripture* being the true word of God, and the interpretation
thereof. This Section consists of 10. confessions: to wit, Of the former and
latter confessions of Heluetia, of that of Basil or Myllane, of Bohemia or the
(...) the French, the English, that of Belgia, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and
Sueueland.

THE 2. SECTION. page 18.
OF God in essence one, in persons three, and of his true worship. This Section
(...) of 11. confessions, to wit* Of the former (...) confession of Heluetia,
that of Basil, of (...) or the Waldenses, the French, the English, that of
Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, (...).

THE 3. SECTION. page* 53.
OF the eternal providence of God, and the creation of the world. This Section
does consist properly of four Confessions only, to wit, Of the latter
confession of Heluetia, Basil, the French, and that of Belgia, which alone
have express titles of these chief points of doctrine. But these four, to
wit, the former confession of Heluetia, the English, that of Auspurge, and
Wirtemberge, do by the way make mention, both of the providence of God, and
also of the creation of the world* in the article of God, as is to be seen in
the 2. Section. And the others, to wit, those of Bohem. Saxony, and Sueueland,
have altogether omitted this part of doctrine.

THE 4. SECTION. page 59.
OF the fall of man, of sin, and of free will. This Section consists of 10.
Confessions: to wit, Of the former and latter confessions of Heluetia, of that
of Basil, Bohemia or the Waldenses, the French, English, that of Belg.
Auspurge, Saxony, and Wirtemb.

THE 5. SECTION. page 84.
OF eternal Predestination. This Section consists of four Confessions only,
to wit, Of the l^tter Confession of Heluetia, that of Basil the French, and
that of Belgia.

THE 6. SECTION. page 88.
OF the reparing or deliverance of man from his fall by Jesus Christ alone:
Also, of his Person, names office and the works of Redemption. This Section
consists of 12. confessions, to wit, Of the former and latter Confessions of
Heluetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Belgia,
Auspurge, Saxony* Wirtemberge, Sueueland.

THE 7. SECTION. page 1^0.
OF the law and the Gospel. This Section* consists of 7. confessions only,
to wit, Of the former and latter confessions of Heluetia, that of Bohemia, the
French, that of Belgia, Saxony, and Wirtemberge.

THE 8. SECTION. page 212.
OF Repentance, and the Conversion of man. Tihs Section consists of 6.
Confessions only, to wit, Of the latter confession of Heluetia, that of Bohem.
Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemb. and Sueueland.

THE 9. SECTION. page 242.
OF Justification by faith, and of good works, and their rewards. This Section
consists of 11. confessions to wit of the former and latter confessions of
Heluetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Belgia,
Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.

THE 10. SECTION. page 306.
OF the holy Catholic Church. This Section consists of 11. confessions, to
wit, of the former and latter confessions of Heluetia, that of Basil, Bohemia,
the French, the English, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and
Sueueland.

THE 11. SECTION page 337.
OF the Ministers of the Church, and of their calling* and office. This Section
consists of 9. confessions: to wit, Of the former and latter confessions of
Heluet. that of Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Belgia, Auspurge*
Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.

THE 12. SECTION. page 377.
OF true and false Sacraments, in general. This Section consists of 11.
confessions. Of the former confession of Heluetia, and the declaration thereof,
the latter confess. of Heluet. that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the
English, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.

THE 13. SECTION page 395.
OF the Sacrament of holy Baptism. This Section consists of 10.
confessions, to wit, Of the former confession of Heluetia, and the declaration
thereof, of the latter con^es. of Heluet. that of Bohemia, the French, the
English, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.

THE 14. SECTION page 411.
OF the holy Supper of the Lord. This Section consists of 11. confessions:
to wit, of the former confession of Heluetia, and the declaration thereof, of
the latter confess. of Heluet. that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the English,
that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.

THE 15. SECTION page 464.
OF Ecclesiastical Meetings. This Section consists of 8. confessions: to
wit, the former and latter confessions of Heluetia* that of Bohemia, the F
e^ch, the English, that of Saxony, Wirtemberg, and Sueueland.

THE 16. SECTION page 47^.
OF Holy days, fasts and the choice of meats, and of the visiting of the
sick* and the care that is to be had for the dead. This Sect. consists of 9.
Confess to wit, of the latter confession of Heluet. that of Basil, Bohemia,
the French, the English, that of Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.

THE 17. SECTION. page 516.
OF Ceremonies, and rites, which are indifferent in general. This Section
consists of 11. confessions* to wit, of the former and latter confessions of
Heluetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Belgia,
Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.

THE 18. SECTION. page 540.
OF Wedlock, single life, and Monastical Vows. This Section consists of 8.
confessions to wit, of the former and latter confessions of Heluetia, that of
Bohemia, the French, the English, that of Auspurge, and Sueueland.

THE 19. SECTION. page 578.
OF the Civil Magistrate. This Section consists of 10* confessions: to wit,
of the former and latter confessions of Heluetia, that of Basil, Bohemia, the
French, that of Belgia, Auspurge, Saxony, Wirtemberge, and Sueueland.

A GENERAL CONFESSION OF THE TRVE CHRISTIAN FAITH AND RELIGION, ACCORding to
Gods word and acts of our Parliaments, subscribed by the Kings Majesty and
his household, with sun dry others. To the glory of God, and good example of
all men. At Edinborough the 28. day of January. The year of our Lord. 1581.
And in the 14. year of his Majesty's Reign.
WE all, and every one of us under written protest, that after long and due
examination of our own consciences, in matters of true and false Religion, are
now thoroughly resolved in the truth by the word and spirit of God. And
therefore we believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with
our hands, and constantly affirm before God and the whole world, that this
only is the true Christian faith and religion, pleasing God, and bringing
salvation to man, which is now by the mercy of God revealed to the world by
the preaching of the blessed Euangell, and is received, believed, and defended
by many and sundry notable Churches and realms* but chiefly by the Church of
Scotland, the Kings Majesty, and three Estates of this Realm, as Gods eternal
truth, and only ground of our salvation, as more particularly is expressed
in the confession of our Faith, established and publikelie confirmed by sundry
acts of Parliaments, and now of a long time has been openly professed by
the Kings Majesty, and wholl body of this Realm, both in burgh and land. To
the which confession and form of Religion, we willingly agree in our
consciences in all points, as unto Gods undoubted truth and verity, grounded
only upon his written word. And therefore we abhor and detest all contrary
religion and doctrine, but chiefelie all kind of Papistrie in general, and
particular heads, even as they are now damned and confuted by the word of God
and Church of Scotland, but especially we detest andrefuse the usurped
authority of that Roman Antichrist upon the Scriptures of God, upon the
Church, the ci^^ll magistrate and conscience of men: all his tyranous Laws,
made upon indifferent things, against our Christian liberty: his erroneous
doctrine against the sufficien^^ of the written word, the perfection of the
law, the office of Christ, and his blessed Euangell: his corrupted doctrine
concerning original sin, our natural inab^l^ti^ and rebellion to Gods law:
our instification by faith only: our imperfect sanctification and obedience
to the law: the nature, number, and use of the holy Sacraments, his fine
bastard sacraments, with all his rites* ceremonies, and false doctrine added to
the administration of the true Sacraments, without the word of God: his cruel
judgment against Infants departing without the Sacrament, his absolute
necessitie^ Baptism, his blasphemous opinion of transsubst antiatio^ or real
presence of Christ's body in the elements, and receiving of the same by the
wicked, or bodies of men: his dispensations with solemn oaths, periuries, and
degrees of marriage forbidden in the word, his cruelty against the Innocent
divorced, his deuilish Mass, his blasphemous Priesthood, his profane
sacrifice for the sins of the dead and the quick: his Canonization of men,
calling upon Angels, or Saints departed, worshipping of Images, relics, and
crosses, dedicating of Churches, Altars, Days, Vows to creatures: his
Purgatory, prayers for the dead, praying or speaking in a strange language,
with his processions and blasphemous Letany, and multitude of Advocates, or
Mediators: his manifold orders, Auricular confession, his dispersed and
uncertain repentance, his general and doubt some faith, his satisfactions of
men for their sinnnes, his justification by works, Opus Operatum, works of
supererogation, merits, pardons, peregrinations and stations, his holy water,
Bapti^^ng of Belles, Coniuring of spirits, Crossing, Saying, Anointing,
coniuring, Hallowing of Gods good Creatures, with the superstitious opinion
joined therewith, his worldly Monarchy, and wicked hierarch^e, his three
solemned vows, with all his sha^eli^gs of sundry sorts: his erroneous
bloody decrees made at Trent, with all the subscribers and approouers of that
cruel and bloody band coniured against the Church of God. And finally ^e
detest all his vain allegories, rites, signs, and traditions brought in the
Church without, or against the word of God and doctrine of this true reformed
Church: to the which we toyne our selves willingly, in doctrine, faith,
religion, discipline, and use of the holy Sacraments, as lively members of
the same in Christ our head, promising and swearing by the great name of the
Lord our God, that we shall continue in the obedience of the doctrine and
discipline of this Church, and shall defend the same according to our vocation
and power, all the days of our lives, under the pains contained in the law,
and danger both of body and soul, in the date of Gods fearful judgment.
And seeing that many are stirred up by Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to
promise, s^^are, subs^r^^^, and for a time use the holy Sacraments in the
Church deceitfully against their own conscience, minding hereby, first under
the external cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subvert secretly Gods true
Religion within the Church, and afterward when time may serve, to become open
enemies and persequuters of the same, under vain hope of the Popes
dispensation devised against the word of God, to his greater confusion, and
their double condemnation in the day of the Lord Jesus; We therefore willing
to take away all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of such double dealing with God
and his Church, protest and call the s^archer of all hearts for witness, that
our minds and hearts do fully agree with this our confession, promise, oath,
and subscription. So that we are not moo^ed for any worldly respect, but are
persuaded only in our conscience, through the knowledge and love of Gods true
religion, printed in our hearts by the holy spirit, as we shall answer to him
in the day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. And because we
perceive, that the quietness and stabilitie of our religion and Church does
depend upon the safety and good behauio^r of the Kings majesty, as upon a
comfortable Instrumen^ of Gods mercy, granted to this country, for the
manteining of his Church, and ministration of Justice amongst us, we protest
and promise with our hearts, under the same oath, hand writ, and pains, that
we shall defend his person and authority with our goods, bodies, and lives, i^
the defense of Christ's Euangell, Liberty of our country, ministration of
justice, and punishment of iniquity, against all enemies within this realm or
without, as we desire our God to be a strong and merciful defender to us in
the day of our death, and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the
father and the holy spirit, b^ all honor and glory eternally.

Amen.
THE ESTATES OF SCOTLAND WITH THE INHABITANTS OF THE SAME, PROfessing Christ
Jesus and his ho lie gospel. To their natural country men, and to all other
Realms and nations, professing the same Christ Jesus with them, wish grace,
mercy, and peace, from God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, with the
spirit of righteous judgment of salvation.
LOng have we thirsted (dear brethren) to have notified unto the world the
sum of that doctrine which we profess, and for the which we have sustained
infamy and danger. But such has been the rage of Satan against us, and
against Christ Jesus his eternal verity lately borne amongst us: that to
this day no time has been granted unto us to clear our consciences, as
most gladly we would have done. For how we have been tossed at times
heretofore, the most part of Europe, as we suppose, does understand. But
seeing that of the infinite goodness of our God (who never suffers his
afflicted utterly to be confounded) above expectation we have obtained some
rest and liberty, we would not but set forth this brief and plain confession
of such doctrine as is proponed unto us, and as we believe and profess:
partly for satisfaction of our brethren, whose hearts we doubt not have been
(and yet are) wounded by the despitefull railing of such as yet have not
learned to speak well: and partly for stopping of the mouths of the impudent
blasphemers, who boldly damn that which they have neither heard nor yet
understood. Not that we judge that the cankred malice of such is able to be
cured by this our simple confession: No, we know the sweet savor of the
Gospel, is, and shall be death to the sons of perdition, but we have chief
respect to our weak and infirm brethren, to whom we would communicate the
bottom of our hearts, lest that they be troubled or carried away by
diversity of rumors, which Satan spreads abroad against us, to the defacing
of this our most godly enterprise: protesting that if any man shall note in
this our confession, any article or sentence repugning to Gods holy word,
and do admonish us of the same in writing, we by Gods grace do promise unto
him satisfaction from the mouth of God, that is, from his holy Scriptures, or
else reformation of that, which he shall prove to be amiss.

For God we take to record in our consciences, that from our hearts we abhor
all sects of heresy, and all teachers of erroneous doctrine, and that with
all humility we embrace the purity of Christ's Gospel, which is the only
food of our souls, and therefore so precious unto us, that we are determined
to suffer the extremity of worldly danger, rather then that we will suffer
our selves to be defrauded of the same: for hereof we are most certainly
persuaded, that whosoever denies Christ Jesus, or is ashamed of him in the
presence of men, shall be denied before the Father, and before his holy
angels. And therefore by the assistance of the almighty, the same our Lord
Jesus, we firmly purpose to abide to the end, in the confession of this our
faith, as by articles follows.

Of God.
Deuteronomy. 6. Isa. 44. Deuteronomy. 4.
WE confess and acknowledge one only God, to whom only we must cleave,
whom only we must serve, whom only we must worship, and in whom only
we must put our trust: who is eternal, infinite, unmeasurable,
incomprehensible, omnipotent, invisible, one Mat. 28. Genesis 1.
in substance, and yet distinct in three persons, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. By whom we confess and b^l^eue all things in heaven and earth,
as well visible, as invisible, to have been created, to be retained in their
being, and to be ruled and guided by his inscrutable providence, to such end,
as his eternal wisdom, goodness, and justice, Pro. 16.
has appointed them, to the manifestation of his glory.

Of the creation of man.
WE confess and knowledge this our God to have created man, to wit, our first
father Adam, to his Genesis 1. 2*
own image and similitude, to whom he gave wisdom, Lordship, justice, free
will, and clear knowledge of himself, so that in the wholl nature of man
there could be noted no imperfection. From which honor and perfection, man and
woman did both fall* the woman being deceived by the serpent, and man obeying
the voice of the woman, both Genesis 3.
conspiring against the Sovereign Majesty of God, who in express words had
before threatened death, if they presumed to eat of the forbidden tree.

Of Original sin.
BY which transgression, commonly called Original sin, was the Image of God
utterly defaced in man, Ephesians 3. Romans 5. Ioh. 3. Romans 5. 8.
and he and his posterity of nature became enemies to God, slaves to Satan, and
servants to sin. Insomuch that death everlasting has had, and shall have
power and dominion over all that have not been, are not, or shall not be
regenerate from above, which regeneration is wrought by the power of the holy
Ghost, working in the hearts of the elect of God, an assured faith in the
promise of God, revealed to us in his word, by which faith, we apprehend Christ
Jesus, with the graces and benefits promised in him.

Of the revelation of the promise.
FOr this we constantly believe, that God after the fearful and horrible
defection of man from his obedience, did seek Adam again, call upon him,
rebuke his sin, convict him of the same, and in the end, made unto him a
most joyful promise, to wit, that the seed of the woman Genesis 3. Genesis 12. 15.
Isa. 7. 8.
should break down the serpents head, that is, he should destroy the works
of the Devil: which promise as it was repeated, and made more clear from time
to time: so was it embraced with joy, and most constantly received of all
those faithful from Adam to Noe, from Noe to Abraham, from Abraham to David,
and so forth to the incarnation of Christ Jesus, all (we mean the faithful
Fathers under the law) did see the joyful days of Christ Jesus, and did
rejoice.

The continuance, increase, and preservation of the Church.
Ezec. 16. Genesis 12. 13. Exodus 1. 2. Ezod 20.
WE most constantly believe that God preserved, instructed, multiplied,
honored, decored, and from death called to life his Church in all ages, from
Adam til the coming of Christ in the flesh. For Abraham he called from his
Fathers country, him he instructed, his seed he multiplied, the same he
marvelously preserved, and more marvelously delivered from the bondage and
tyranny of Pharao, to them he gave his laws, constitutions, and ceremonies,
Ios^. 1. 25. ^. Reg. 17.
them he possessed in the land of Chanaan, to them after Judges and after Saul,
he gave David to be King, to whom he made promise, that of the fruit of his
loins should one sit for ever upon his regal seat. To this same people from
time to time he sent Prophets to reduce them to the right way of their God:
from the which oftentimes 2. Reg. 24 25 Deuteronomy. 28. Ier. 39. Esdr. 1. Agge. 1. ^
Zach. 3.
they declined by Idolatry. And albeit that for the stubborn contempt of
justice, he was compelled to give them into the hands of their enemies, as
before was threatened by the mouth of Moses, in so much that the holy City was
destroyed, the temple burnt with fire, and the wholl land left desolate the
space of 70. years, yet of mercy did he reduce them again to Jerusalem, where
the City and Temple were reedified, and they against all temptations and
assaults of Satan, did abide till the Messiah came according to the promise.

Of the incarnation of Christ Jesus.
Galat. 4. Luc. 1. 2.
WHen the fulness of time came, God sent his son his eternal wisdom, the
substance of his own glory, into this world, who took the nature of manhood
of the substance of a woman, to wit, of a Virgin, and that by operation of the
holy Ghost.

And so was borne the just seed of David, the angel of the great counsel of
god, the very Messiah promised, whom we acknowledge and confess Emmanuel,
very God, and very man, two perfect natures united and joined in one person.

By which our confession, we condemn that damnable and pestilent heresies of
Arrius, Marcion, Eutiches, Nestorius, and such others, as either did deny the
eternity of his Godhead, either the verity of his humane nature, either
confound them, either yet divide them.

Why it behooves the Mediator to be very God and very man.
WE acknowledge and confess, that this most wondrous conjunction betwixt the
Godhead and the manhood in Christ Jesus, did proceed from the eternal and
immutable decree of God, whence also, our salvation springs, and depends.

Election.
FOr that same eternal God and father, who of mere grace elected us in Christ
Jesus his son, before the foundation of the world was laid, appointed him to
be our Ephesians. 1. Heb. 2.
head, our brother, our Pastor and great Bishop of our souls. But because that
the enimitie betwixt the justice of God and our sins was such, that no flesh
by it self could, or might John. 20.
have atteined unto God: it behooved, that the son of God should descend unto
us, and take him self a body of our body, flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bones, and so become the perfect Mediator betwixt God and man, giving
power to so many as believe in him, to be the sons of God, as himself does
witness, I pass up to my Father, and unto John. 1. John. 20.
your God. By which most holy fraternity, whatsoever we have lost in Adam, is
restored to us again. And for this cause are we not afraid to call God our
father, not so much because he has created us (which we have common with the
reprobate) as for that that he has given to us his only son to be our
brother, and given unto us grace to acknowledge and embrace him for our
Mediator, as before is said. Isa. 53.
It behooued farther, the Messiah and Redeemer to be very God and very man,
because he was to bear the punishment due for our transgressions, and to
present him self in the presence of his Fathers judgment, as in our person,
to suffer for our transgression, and inobedience, by death to overcome him that
was author of death. But because the only godhead could not suffer death,
neither yet could the only manhood overcome the same, he joined both together
in one person, that the imbecillitie of the one should suffer, and be subject
to death (which we had deserved) and the infinite and invincible power of the
other, to wit, of the godhead, should triumph and purchase to us life,
liberty, and perpetual victory, and so we confesi^ and most undoubtedly
believe.

Christ's death, Passion, and B^ri^ll.
Heb. 10. Esa 53.
THat our Lord Jesus offered himself a voluntary sacrifice unto his Father
for us, that he suffered contradiction of sinners, that he was wounded and
plagued for our transgressions, that he being the clean innocent lamb Deuteronomy.
21. Gal. 3.
of God, was damned in the presence of an earthly judge, that we should be
absolved before the tribunal seat of our God, that he suffered, not only
the cruel death of the Cross (which was accursed by the sentence of God) but
also that he suffered for a season the wrath of his Father, which sinners had
deserved. But yet we auow that he remained Heb. 10. 1.
the only well-beloved and blessed son of the Father even in the midst of his
anguish and torment, which he suffered in body and soul, to make the full
satisfaction for the sins of the people. After the which we confess and auow,
that there remains no other sacrifice for sin, which if any affirm, we
nothing doubt to auow, that they are blasphemous against Christ's death, and
the everlasting purgation and satisfaction purchased to us by the same.

Resurrection.
Act. 2. 3. Romans 6.
WE undoubtedly believe, that insomuch as it was impossible that the dolours
of death should retain in bondage the author of life, that our Lord Jesus
crucified, dead and buried, who descended into hell, did rise again for our
justification, and destroying of him, who was the author of death, brought
life again to us that were subject to death and to the bondage of the same: we
know that his resurrection Math. 28. Mat 27. Ioh. 20. 21.
was confirmed by the testimony of his ver^e enemies, by the resurrection of
the dead, whose sepulchers did open and they did arise, and appeered to many,
within the City of Jerusalem. It was also confirmed by the testimony of his
Angels, and by the senses and judgments of his ^postles and others, who had
conversation and did eat and drink with him after his resurrection.

Ascension.
Act. 1. Mat. 28*
WE nothing doubt, but the self same body, which was borne of the virgin,
was crucified, dead, and buried, that it did rise again, and as^end into the
heavens, for the accomplishment of al things, where in our names, and for our
comfort, he has received all power in heaven and earth, where he sits at
the right hand of the Father, crowned in his kingdom, advocate, and only
Mediator for us. Which glory, honor, and prerogative, he alone amongst 1*
Joan. 2. 1. Tim. 2. Psa. 110.
the brethren shall possess, till that all his enemies be made his footestole.

As that we undoubtedly believe there shall be a final judgment: to the
execution whereof, we certainly believe that the same our Lord Jesus shall
visibly return, even as he was seen to ascend. And then we firmly believe,
that the time of refreshing and restitution of all things shall come, in
so much that those, that from the beginning have suffered violence, injury, and
wrong, for righteousness sake, shall inherit Apoc. 2^. Esa* 66.
that blessed immortality, promised from the beginning: but contrariwise, the
stubborn, inobedient, cruel oppressors, filthy persons, Idolaters, and all
sorts of unfaithful, shall be cast into the dungeon of utter darkness, where
their worm shall not die, neithet yet the fire shall be extinguished. The
remembrance of which day, and of the judgment to be executed in the same, is
not only to us a bridle, whereby our carnal lusts are refrained, but also
such inestimable comfort, that neither may the threating of worldly princes,
neither yet the fear of temporal death and present danger, move us to
renounce and forsake the blessed society, which we the members have, with our
head and only mediator Christ Jesus. Whom we confess and auow Esa. 1. Col.
1. Heb. 9. 10.
to be the Messiah promised, the only head of his Church, our just law giver,
our only high Priest, advocate, and Mediator. In which honors and office,
if man or Angel presume to intrude themselves, we utterly detest and abhor
them, as blasphemous to our sovereign and supreme gouernuor Christ Jesus.

Faith in the holy Ghost.
THis faith and the assurance of the same, proceeds Mat. 16. Ioh. 1^. 15. 19.
not from flesh and blood, that is to say, from no natural powers within us,
but is the inspiration of the holy Ghost: whom we confess, God, equal with
the Father and with the son, who sanctifies us, and brings us into all
verity by his own operation, without whom we should remain for ever enemies
to God, and ignorant of his son Christ Jesus. For of nature we are so dead,
so blind, and so perverse, that neither can we feel when we are pricked, see
the light when it shines, nor assent to the will of God when it is revealed,
unless the spirit of the Lord quicken that which is dead* remove the darkness
from our minds, and bow our stubborn hearts, to the obedience of his
blessed will. And so as we confess that God the Father created us, when we
were not: as his son our Lord Jesus redeemed us, when we were enemies to him:
so also do we confess, that the holy Ghost does sanctify and regenerate us,
without all respect of any merit proceeding from us: be it before, or be Romans
5.
it after our regeneration. To speak this one thing yet in more plain words,
as we willingly spoil our selves of al^ honor, and glory of our own
creation, and redemption, so do we also of our regeneration, and
sanctification: for of our selves we are not sufficient to think one good
thought, but he who has begone the work in us, is only he that ^. Cor* 3.
continues in us the same, to the praise and glory of his undeserved grace.

The cause of good works.
Ioh. 13. Ephesians. 2.
SO that the cause of good works we confess to be not our free will, but the
spirit of the Lord Jesus, who dwelling in our hearts by true faith, brings
forth such good works, as God has prepared for us to walk in. For this we
most boldly affirm, that it is blasphemy, to say, that Christ abides in
the hearts of such, as in whom there is no spirit of sanctification. And
therefore we fear no^ to affirm, that murderers, oppressers, cruel
persecuters, adulterers, whormongers, filthy persons, Idolaters, dronkerds, the
eues, and all workers of iniquity, have neither true faith, neither any
portion of the spirit of the Lord Jesus, so long as obstinatlie they continue
in their wickedness. For how soon that ever the spirit of the Lord Jesus (which
Gods elect children receive by true faith) takes possession in the heart of
every man, so soon does he regenerate and renew the same man, so that he
begins to hate that which before he loved, and begins to love that, which
before he hated. And from thence comes that continual ba^tel which is betwixt
the flesh and the spirit in Gods children: so that the Gal. 5.
flesh and natural man, according to the own corruption, lusts for things
pleasing, and delectable unto it self, grudgeth in adversity, is lifted up in
prosperity, and at every moment is prone and ready to offend the majesty
of Romans 3.
God. But the spirit of God which gives witnessing to our spirit, that we are
the sons of God, makes us to resist filthy pleasures, and to groan in Gods
presence for deliverance from this bondage of corruption. And finally, so
triumphs over sin, that it reigns not in mortal bodies. This battle
have not the carnal men, being destitute of Gods spirit, but do follow and
obeie sin with greedines, and without repentance, even as the Devil and
their corrupt lusts do prick them. But the Sons of god, as before is said,
do fight against sin, do sobbe and mourn, when they perceive themselves
tempted in iniquity: and if they fall they rise again with unfeigned
repentance, and these things they do, not by their own power, but by the power
of Ioh. 15.
the Lord Jesus, without whom they were able to do nothing.

What works are reputed good before God.
WE confess and acknowledge, that God has given to man his holy law, in
which not only are forbidden Ex^d. 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
all such works as displease and offend his godly majesty, but also are
commanded, all such as please him, and as he has promised to reward. And
these works be of two sorts. The one are done to the honor of God, the other
t^ the profit of our neighbors: and both have the revealed will of God, for
their assurance. To have one God, to worship and honor him, to call upon him
in all our troubles, to reverence his holy name, to hear his word, to believe
the same, to communicate with his holy Sacraments, are the works of the first
table. To honor father, mother, Princes, Rulers, and superior powers, to love
them, to support them, Ephesians. 6.
yea to obey their charges (not repugning to the commandment of God) to save
the lives of innocents, to repre^* tyranny, to defend the oppressed, to keep
our bodies clean^ and holy, to ^ue in sobernes and temperance, to deal
i^stlie with all men, both in word and deed: and finally to repres all
appetite of our neighbors hurt, are the good works Ezech. 22. ^e^. 22 Esa. 50.
^. Thessalonians 4. ^uc. 2.
of the second table, which are most pleasing and acceptable to God, as those
works that are commanded by himself The contrary whereof, is sin most
odious, which always displeases him and prouol^eth him to anger. As not to
ca^ upon him alone, when we have need, not to hear his wor^^ with reverence,
to contemn and despise it, to have, or^^ worship Idols, to maintain and
defend idolatry, lightly (...) esteem the r^u^r^nt name of God, to profane,
abuse, o^ contemn the Sacraments of Christ Jesus, to disobey or resist Rom 11.
Ezech. 22.
any that God h^th placed in authority, (whilst the^ pass not over the ^o
indes of their office) to murder, or^o consent thereto, to be are hatred, or
to suffer innocent bloo^ to be shed, if we may withstand it: and finally, the
transgression of any other commandment in the first or second table, we
confess or affirm to be sin, by the which Gods hate and displeasure is
kindled against the proud unthankful world. So that good works we affirm to
be those only, that are done in faith, and at Gods commandment* who (...)
his law has expressed what the things be that please him. And evil works we
affirm not only those, that expresselie are done against Gods commandment,
but those also that in matters of religion, and in worshipping of God have no
other assurance, but the invention and opinion Esa. 26. Mat. 15.
of man: which God from the beginning has ever rejected, as by the Prophet
Esaie, and by our Master Christ Jesus, we are taught in these words: In vain
do they worship me, teaching the doctrines and precepts of men.

The perfection of the law, and imperfection of man.
THe law of God we confess, and acknowledge most just, most equal, most
holy, and most perfect, commanding those things, which being wrought in
perfection, were able to give light, and able to bring man to eternal
felicity. Romans 7. Psalm. 19. Deuteronomy. 5. Romans 10. 1. Ioh. 1. Rom* 10. Gal. 3. Deuteronomy
26. Ephesians. 1. Romans 4.
But our nature is so corrupt, so weak, and so imperfect, that we are never able
to fulfill the works of the law in perfection. Yea, if we say we have no
sin, even after we are regenerated, we deceive our selves, and the verity of
God is not in us. And therefore it be houeth us to apprehend Christ Jesus with
his justice and satisfaction, who is the end and accomplishment of the law, by
whom we are set at this liberty, that the curse and malediction of God fall
not upon us, albeit we fulfill not the same in all points. For God the Father
beholding us, in the body of his son Christ Jesus, accepts our imperfit
obedience, as it were persit, and covers our works, which are defiled with
many spots, with the justice of his Son we do not mean, that we are so
set at liberty, that we owe no obedience to the law (for that before we have
plainly confessed) but this we affirm, that no man in earth (Christ Jesus
only excepted) has given, gives, or shall give in work that obedience to
the law, which the law requires. But when we have done al things, we must fall
down and vnfein^dly confess, that we are unprofitable Luc. 16.
servants. And therefore whosoever boaste themselves of the merits of their
own works, or put their trust in the works of supererogation, boast
themselves of that which is naught, and put their trust in damnable Idolatry.

Of the Church.
AS we believe in one God, Father, Son, and the Mat. 3. 8.
holy Ghost, so do we most constantly believe that from the beginning there
has been, and now is, and to the end of the world shall be, one Church, that
is to say, a company and multitude of men chosen of God, who rightly Ephesians.
1. Col 1. Ephesians. 5.
worship and embrace him by true faith in Christ Jesus, who is the only head
of the same Church, which also is the body and spouse of Christ Jesus, which
Church is Catholic, that is universal, because it contains the elect of all
ages, of all realms, nations, and tongues, be they of the Jews, or Apoc. 7.
be they of the Gentiles, who have communion and society with god the father
and with his Son Christ Jesus, through the sanctification of his holy
spirit, and therefore it is called the communion, not of profane persons, but
of Saints: who as Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, have the fruition of the
most inestimable benefits, to wit, of one God, one Ephesians. 2.
Lord Jesus, one faith, and of one Baptism, out of the which Church, there is
neither life nor eternal felicity. And therefore we utterly abhor the
blasphemy of those that affirm, that men which live according to equity and
justice, shall Ioh. 5. 6.
be saved, what religion so ever they have professed. For as without Christ
Jesus there is neither life nor salvation, so shall there none be participant
thereof, but such as the father has given unto his Son Christ Jesus, and
those in time, to come unto him, auow his doctrine, and believe in him (we
apprehend the children with the faithful parents) This Church is invisible
known only to God, who alone knows whom he has chosen, and comprehends
as well (as said is) the elect that be departed, commonly called the Church
triumphant, as those that yet live and fight against sin and Satan, and shall
live hereafter.

The immortality of the souls.
THe elect departed are in peace and rest from their labors: Apoc. 14. Apoc. 7.
not that they sleep and come to a certain oblivion, as some phantastikes do
affirm: but that they are delivered from all fear and torment, and all
temptation, to which we, and al Gods elect are subject in this life, and
therefore do bear the name of the Church militant, as contrariwise, the
reprobate and unfaithful departed, have anguish, torment, and pain, that can
not be expressed. So that neither are the one, nor the other in such sleep,
that they feel not their torment, as the parable of Christ Jesus in the 16.
Luc. 16.
of Luke, his words to the thief, and these words of the souls crying under
the Altar (O Lord thou art righteous and Apoc. 6.
i^st, how long shall thou not revenge our blood upon these that dwell in the
earth) do testify.

Of the notes by the which the true Church is discerned from the false, and who
shall be judge of the doctrine.
BEcause that Satan from the beginning has labored to deck his pestilent
sinagogue with the title of the Church of God, and has inflamed the hearts of
cruel Genesis 4. 21. 27.
murderers, to persecute, trouble and molest the true Church and members
thereof, as Caine did Abell, Ismaell Isaak, Esau Jacob, and the wholl
priesthood of the Jews Christ Jesus himself and his Apostles after him: It
is a thing most requisite, that the true Church be discerned from the filthy
sinagogues, by clear and perfect notes, lest we being deceived, receive and
embrace to our condemnation, the one for the Mat. 23. Ioh. 11. Act. 3.
other. The notes, signs, and assured tokens, whereby the immaculate spouse of
Christ Jesus, is known from the horrible harlot, the Church malignant, we
affirm are neither antiquity, title usurped, lineall descent, place
appointed, nor multitude of men, approouing an error: for Caine in age and
title was preferred to Abell and Seth, Jerusalem had prerogative above al
places of the earth, where also were the priests lineallie descended from
Aaron, and greater number followed the Scribes, Pharisees and Priests, then
unfeignedly believed and approved Christ Jesus and his doctrine: and yet, as
we suppose, no man of sound judgment will grant, that any of the forenamed
were the Church of God. The notes therefore of the true Church of God, we
believe, confess, and auow to be, first, the true preaching of the word of
God, in the which God has revealed himself unto us, Ioh. 1. 10.
as the writings of the Prophets and Apostles do declare. Romans 4.
Secondly the right administration of the Sacraments of Christ Jesus, which
must be annexed unto the word and promise of God, to seal and confirm the
same in our hearts* 1. Cor. 5.
Lastly, Ecclesiastical discipline vprightlie ministered, as Gods word
prescribes, whereby vice is repressed, and virtue nourished. Whersoeuer then
these former notes are seen, and of any time continue (be the number ne^^r so
few, above two or three) there without all doubt is the true Church of Christ,
who, according to his promise, is in the midst of them. Not in the universal,
of which we have before Act. 16. 18. 1. Cor* 2. Act. 20.
spoken, but particular, such as was in Corinthus, Gallacia, Ephesus, and other
places, in which the ministry was planted by Paull, and were of himself named
the Churches of God: and such Churches we the inhabitants of the Realm of
Scotland, professors of Christ Jesus, profess our selves, ^o have in our
Cities, towns, and places reformed. For the doctrine taught in our Churches is
contained in the written word of God, to wit, in the books of the old and
new Testaments, in those books we mean, which of the ancient have been
reputed Canonical. In the which we affirm that all things necessary to be
believed for the salvation of mankind, are sufficiently expressed* The
interpretation whereof, we confess, neither appertains to private nor
public person, neither yet to any church, for any pre-eminence, or
prerogative personal or local, which one has above another, but appertains
to the Spirit of God, by the which also the scripture was written. When
controuetsie the^ happens for the right understanding of any place or
sentence of scripture, or for the reformation of any abuse within the Church
of God, we ought no^ so much to look what men before us have said or done, as
unto that, which the holy ghost vniformlie speaks within the body of the
scriptures, and unto that which Christ Jesus himself did, and commanded to be
done. For this is one thing universally granted, that the spirit of god, which
1. Cor. 12.
is the spirit of unity, is in nothing contrary to himself. I^ then the
interpretation, determination, or sentence of any Doctor, Church, or Council,
repugne to the plain word of God, written in any other place of the
scripture, it is a thing most certain that there is not the true
understanding and meaning of the holy ghost: although that councels, Realms,
and nations have approved and received the same. For we dare not receive nor
admit^te any interpretation* which repugneth to any principal point of our
faith, or to any other plain text of scripture, or yet unto the rule of
charity.

The authority of the Scriptures.
1. Tim. 3.
AS we believe and confess the scriptures of God sufficiently to instruct,
and make the man of God perfect: so do we affirm and auowe the authority of
the same, to be of God, and neither to depend on men nor Angels. We affirm
therefore, that such as allege the scripture to have no other authority, but
that which it has received from the Church, are blasphemous against God, and
injurious to the true Church, which always hears John. 10.
and obeys the voice of her own spouse and Pastor, but takes not upon her
to be maistresse over the same.

Of the general Counsels, of their power, authority, and causes of their
conuention.
AS we do not rashly damn that, which godly men assembled together in
general Council lawfully gathered have proponed unto us: so without just
examination do we not receive whatsoever is obtruded unto men under the name
of a general council: for plain it is, as they were men, so have some of them
manifestly erred, and that in matters of great weight and importance. So far
then as the Council proves the determination and commandment that it
gives, by the plain word of God, so soon do we reverence and embrace the
same. But if men under the name of a Council pretend to forge unto us new
Articles of our faith, or to make constitutions repugning to the word of God,
then utterly we must refuse the same, as the doctrine of Devils, which draws
our souls from the voice of our only God, to follow the doctrine and
constitutions 1. Tim. (...)
of men. The cause then why that general Councels came together, was neither to
make any perpetual law, which God before had not made, neither yet to forge
new articles of our belief, neither to give the word of God authority: much
less, to make that to be his word, or yet the true interpretation of the same,
which was not before his holy will expressed in his word. But the cause of
councels (we mean of such as merit the name of Councels) was partly for
confutation of heresies, for giving public confession of their faith to the
posterity following, which both they did, by the authority of Gods written
word, and not by any opinion of prerogative, that they could not err, by
reason of their general assembly. And this we judge to have been the chief
cause of general Counsels The other was for good policy and order to be
constitute, observed in the Church, wherein (as in the house of God) it
becomes all things to be done decently, and in order. Not that we think
that one policy and one order in ceremonies can be appointed for all ages,
times, and places: for as ceremonies, such as men have devised, are but
temporal, so may and ought they to be changed, when they rather suffer
superstition, then that they edify the Church using the same.

Of the Sacraments.
AS the fathers under the law besides the verity of the sacrifices, had two
chief Sacraments, to wit, Circumcision, and the Passover, the despisers and
contemners whereof, were not reputed for Gods people: so we acknowledge and
confess, that we now in the time of the Gospel have two chief Sacraments
only, instituted by the Lord Jesus, and commanded to be used of all those,
that will be reputed members of his body, to wit, Baptism, and the Supper or
table of the Lord Jesus, called the communion of his body and his blood. And
these Sacraments as well of the old, as of the new Testament, now instituted
of god, not only to make a visible difference betwixt his people and those
that were without his league, but also to exercise the faith of his children,
and by participation of the same Sacraments to seal in their hearts the
assurance of his promise, and of that most blessed conjunction, union, and
society, which the elect have with their head Christ Jesus. And thus we
utterly damn the vanity of those, that affirm sacraments to be nothing
else but naked and bare signs. No, we assuredly believe, that by baptism we
are ingrafted in Christ Jesus, to be made partakers of his justice, by which
our sins are covered, and remitted. And also that in the Supper rightly used,
Christ Jesus is so joined with us, that he becomes the very nourishment and
food of our souls. Not that we imagine any trans^ubstantiation of the bread in
Christ's natural body, and of wine in his natural blood as the Papists have
perniciously taught* and damnablie believed: but this union and conjunction,
which we have with the body and blood of Christ Jesus in the right use of the
Sacrament, is wrought by operation of the holy Ghost, who by true faith
carries us above all things that are visible, carnal, and earthly, and makes
us to f^^de upon the body and blood of Christ Jesus, which was once broken
and shed for us, which now is in heaven, and appears in the presence of his
father for us: and notwithstanding the far distance of place, which is
betwixt his body now glorified in the heaven, and us now mortal in this
earth* yet we must assuredly believe, that the bread which we break is the
communion of Christ's body, and the cup which we bless, is the communion of his
blood, so that we confess and undoubtedly believe, that the faithful in the
right use of the Lords table, do so eat the body and drink the blood of
the Lord Jesus, that he remains in them, and they in him. Yea they are so
made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, that as the eternal Godheade
gives to the flesh of Christ Jesus (which of the own condition and nature was
mortal and corruptible) life and immortality, so does Christ Jesus his his
flesh and blood eaten and drunken by us, give unto us the same prerogatives.
Which albeit we confess are neither given unto us at this time only, neither
yet by the proper power and virtue of the Sacrament only, yet we affirm,
that the faithful, in the right use of the Lords table, have such conjunction
with Christ Jesus, as the natural man cannot apprehend: yea, and further we
affirm, that albeit the faithful oppressed by negligence, and manly
infirmity, do not profit so much as they would, in the very instant action
of the Supper, yet shall it after bring fruit forth, as lively seed sown in
good ground. For the holy spirit, which can never be divided from the right
institution of the Lord Jesus, will not frustrate the faithful of the fruit
of that mystical action: but all this we say comes of true faith which
apprehends Christ Jesus, who only makes his Sacraments effectual unto us.
And therefore whosoever slaundereth us, as that we affirm or believe
Sacraments to be only naked and bare signs, does injury unto us, and
speaks against the manifest truth. But this liberally and frankelie we
confess, that we make distinction betwixt Christ Jesus, in his eternal
substance, and betwixt the elements, in the sacramental signs. So that we
will neither worship the signs, in place of that which is signified by them,
neither yet do we despise, and interpret them as unprofitable, and vain, but
do use them with all reverence, examining our selves diligently before that
so we do. Because we are assured by the mouth of the Apostle, that such as
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup unworthily, are guilty of the
body and of the blood of Christ Jesus*

Of the right administration of the Sacraments.
THat sacraments be rightly ministered, we judge two things requisite: the
one, that they be ministered by lawful ministers, whom we affirm to be only
they, that are appointed to the preaching of the word, into whose mouths, God
has put some sermon of exhortation, they being men lawfully chosen there to
by some Church. The other that they be ministered in such elements, and in such
sort, as God has appointed: else we affirm that they cease to be right
sacraments of Christ Jesus. And therefore it is that we fl^^ the society with
the papisticall Church, in participation of their sacraments, first, because
their ministers are no ministers of Christ Jesus (yea, this is more horrible,
they suffer women, whom the holy Ghost will not suffer to teach in the
congregation, ^o baptize:) and secondly, because they have so adulterated both
the one sacrament, and the other, with their own inventions, that no part of
Christ's action abides in the original purity. For oil, salt, spattle, and
such like in baptism, are but men's inventions: adoration, veneration, bearing
through streets and towns, and keeping of bread in boxes or boists, are
profanation of Christ's sacraments, and no use of the same. For Christ Jesus
said, Take eat, etc. Do you this in rememberance of me. By which words and
charge, he sanctitied bread and wine to be the Sacrament of his holy body and
blood, to the end that the one should be eaten, and that all should drink of
the other, and not that they should be kept, to be worshipped and honored as
God, as the Papists have done heretofore: who also have committed sacrilege,
stealing from the people the one part of the sacrament, to wit, the blessed
cup. Moreover that the sacraments be rightly used, it is required, that the
end and cause for which sacraments were instituted, be understood, and
observed, as well of the Minister, as by the receivers. For if the opinion be
changed in the receiver, the right use cease, which is most evident, by the
reiection of the sacrifices: as also if the teacher plainly teach false
doctrine, which were odious and abominable before God (albeit they were his
own ordinance) because the wicked men use them to another end, then God has
ordained. The same we affirm of the Sacraments in the Papistical Church, in
which we affirm the wholl action of the Lord Jesus to be adultered, as well in
the external form, as in the end and opinion. What Christ Jesus did, and
commanded to be done, is evident, by the Evangelists and by Saint Paul: what
the Priest does at his ^ul^^r, we need not to rehearse. The end and cause of
Christ's institution, and why the self same should be used, is expressed in
these words: Do ye this in rememberance (...) me. As of^e as you shall eat
this bread, and drink of this ^uppe, you shall show forth, that is, extol,
preach, magnify, and praise the Lords death till he come. But to what end
and in what opinion the Priests say their mass, let the words of the same,
their own Doctors and writings (...) wit, that they, as mediators betwixt
Christ and his Church* do offer unto God the father, a sacrifice propitiatory
for the sins of the quick and the dead: which doctrine as blasphemous to
Christ Jesus, and making derogation to the (...) of his only sacrifice, once
offered for purgation of all those that shall be sanctified, we utterly
abhor, detest, and renounce.

To whom sacraments appertain.
WE confess and acknowledge, that baptism apperteineth as well to the infants
of the faithful, as unto them that be of age and discretion. And so we damn
the error of the Anabaptists, who deny baptism to apperteine to children,
before they have faith and understanding. But the supper of the Lord, we
confess to appertein to such only, as be of the household of says, and can
try and examine themselves, as well in their faith, as in their duty toward
their neighbors. Such as eat and drink at that holy table without faith, or
being at dissension with their breethren, do eat unworthily: and therefore it
is, that in our Church, our ministers take public and particular examination
of the knowledge and conversation of such, as are to be admitted to the table
of the Lord Jesus.

Of the civil maigistrates.
WE confess and acknowledge Empires, kingdoms* dominions, and cities, to be
distincted and ordained by God: the powers and authority in the same, be ^t of
Emperors in their empires, of Kings in their realms, Dukes and Princes in
their dominions, and of other magistrates in their cities, to be Gods holy
ordinance, ordained for manifestation ofhis own glory, and for the singular
profitte and commodity of mankind* so that whosoever goes about to take
away, or to confound the whole state of civil policies, now long established,
we affirm the same men, not only to be enemies to mankind, but also
wickedlie to fight against Gods expressed will. We farther confess and
acknowledge, that such persons as are placed in authority, are to be beloved,
honored, feared, and holden i^ most reverent estimation: because they are the
lieuete^an^es of God, in whose seats God himself does sit and ^^^ge, yea,
even the judges and Princes themselves, to whom by God is given the sword, to
the praise and defense of good men, and to revenge and punish all malefactors.
Moreover, to Kings, Princes, Rulers, and Magistrates, we affi me that
chiefelie and most principally, the conservation and purgation of the
Religion appertains, so that not only they are appointed for civil
policy, but also for manteinance of the true Religion, and for suppressing of
idolatry and superstition whatsoever. As in David, Iosaphat, Ezcehias, Josias,
and others highly commended for their zeal in that case, may be espied. And
therefore we confess and auow* that such as resist the supreme power, doing
that thing which appertains to his charge, do resist gods ordinance, and
therefore cannot be guiltles. And farther we affirm, that whosoever deny unto
them their aid, counsel, and comfort, whilst the Princes and rulers
vigilantlie travel in execution of their office, that the same men deny their
help, support, and counsel, to God, who by the presence of his lieftenant
does crave it of them.

The gifts freely given to the Church.
ALbeit that the word of God truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly
ministered, and discipline executed according to the word of God, be the
certain and infallible signs of the true Church, yet we mean not that every
particular person joined with such company, is an elect member of Christ Jesus.
For we acknowledge and confess that darnell, cockell, and chafe may be
sown, grow: and in great abundance lie in the midst of the wheat, that is,
the reprobate may be joined in the society of the elect, and may externallie
use with them the benefits of the word and sacraments. But such being but
temporal professors in mouth, and not in heart, do fall back and continue
not to the end. And therefore they have no fruit of Christ's death,
resurrection, nor ascension: but such as with heart unfeignedly believe, and
with mouth boldly confess the Lord Jesus, as before we have said, shall most
assuredly receive these gifts: First, in this life, the remission of sins,
and that by only faith in Christ's blood. In so much that albeit sin
remain and continually abide in these our mortal bodies, yet it is not
imputed unto us, but is remitted and covered with Christ's justice. Secondly,
in the general judgment, there shall be given to every man and woman,
resurrection of the flesh. For the sea shall give her dead: the earth those that
therein be enclosed, yea the eternal god shall stretch out his hand on the
dust, and the dead shall arise incorruptible, and that in the substance of the
same flesh that every m^n now bears, to receive according to their works,
glory, or punishment. For such as now delight in va^itie* cruelty, filthiness,
superstition, or idolatry, shallbe adjudged to the fire unquenchable: in
which they shall be tormented for ever, as well in their own bodies, as in
their ^o^les, which now they give to serve the devil inall abomination. But
such as continue in well doing to the end, b^ldlie professing the Lord Jesus,
we constantly beleene that they shall receive glory, honor, and immortality
to reign for ever in life everlasting, with Christ Jesus, to whose glorified
body all his elect shall be made like, when he shalll appear again in
judgment, and shall render up the kingdom to God his Father, who then shall be
and ever shall remain all in all things, God blessed for ever: to whom with
the Son, and with the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and ever. So
be it.

THE KINGS MAJESTY'S CHARGE TO ALL COMMISSIONERS AND MINISTERS within his
Realm.
SEeing that we and our household have subscribed and given this public
confession of our faith, to the good example of our Subjects: we command and
charge all Commissioners and Ministers, to crave the same confession of their
parishioners, and proceed against the refusers, according to our laws and
order of the Church, deliuerine their names and lawful process tothe
Ministers of our house, with all haste and diligence, under the pain of 40.
pound, to be taken from their stipend that we with the advice of our counsel
^aie take order with such proud contemners of God and ourlawes. Subscribed with
our hand At Hol^^udhous 1581.) the 2. day of March, the 14 year of our reign.

TO THE READER.
I am to desire the Godly and Christian Reader, for whose sake only this
work was taken in hand, as to accept friendly and brotherly of these
labors, and to bear with some light faults which might easily escape in the
translating; so to pardon me a great oversight, committed especially and
only in the observations, wherein is was very requisite to have used greater
diligence. This ou^rsight is of two s^r^es, one in certain obseru* set down in
the margent, but ye^ in latin: the other in such as should have bin placed in
the margent, and are clean left out. These things because they be of some
great weight and moment, I thought it good to admonish thee thereof, and to
desire thee before thou read the book, either to place every observation
in it proper page, or in reading ^o have recourse to this place, lest otherwise
thou may think hardly of some parts of doctrine, or other matter, set down
in this Book.

THE LATIN OBSERVATIONS are thus to be translated.
In the 12. page* against the 24 line, read the observation in the margent
thus: Look the 1. obseru. upon this Confession, both in this, and also in the
second Section.

Page 13. 1. Look the 1. obseruat. upon this Confession.

Page 19 2. Look the 1. obseru. upon this Confess.

Page 44. 21. Of the wasting of the gifts of the holy Ghost, look the 1.
obseru. upon this Confess Sect. 4.

Page 45. 25. Look the first obseru. upon the Confession of Saxony.

THE OBSERVATIONS WHICH are clean left out in the margent, are thus to be
placed in their several pages.
Page 7. against the 28. line read in the margent: Look the first observation
up in this Confess.

Page 20. 2. Look the second observation upon this Confess.

Page 23. 11. Look the first observation upon this Confess.

Page 26. 1. Look the first observation upon this Confess.

Page 27. 31. Look the second observation upon this Confess.

Page 27. 38. Look the third observation upon this Confess.

Page 37. 16. Look the first observation upon this Confess.

Page 43. 33. Look the first observation upon this Confess.

Page 44. 21. Look the second observation upon this Confess.

Page 94. 23. Look the first observation upon this Confess.

Page 103. 23. Look the first observation upon this Confess.

Page 223. 32. Look the first observation upon this Confess.

Page 223. 33. Look the second observation upon this Confess.

Page 232. 2. Look the second observation upon this Confess.

Page 223. 29. Look the third observation upon this Confess.

Page 336. 27. Look the fifth observation upon this Confess.

Page 523. 28. Look the first observation upon this Confess.

In the 105. page, put out in the margent, look the 2. obseru. etc.

Now unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be
honor and glory for ever and ever, Amen.
THE CHIEF POINTS OF CONFESSIONS BELONGING TO THIS FIRST SECTION OF the holy
Scripture.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF Heluetia touching the holy Scripture, being the true
word of God.
CHAP. 1.
WE believe and confess the Canonical scriptures of the holy Prophets and
Apostles of both Testaments, to be the very true word of God, and to have
sufficient authority of them selves, not of men. For God him self spoke to
the Fathers, Prophets, Apostles, and speaks yet unto us by the holy
scriptures. And in this holy scripture the universal Church of Christ has
all things fully expounded, whatsoever belong both to a saving faith, and also
to the framing of a life acceptable to God: in which respect it is expresselie
commanded of God, that nothing be either put to, or taken from the same. We
judge therefore that from these scriptures is to be taken true wisdom and
godliness, the reformation and government of Churches, also the instruction in
all duties of piety: and to be short, the confirmation of opinions and the
confutation of error* with all exhortations, according to that of the Apostle,
^ 2. Tim 3.
scripture inspired of God is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, and ^
Again, These things I write unto thee (says the Apostle ^ Timothy. 1. Chap.
3) that thou may know how it behooves (...) to be conversant in the house of
God, etc. Again, the self sa^* 2. These. 2.
Apostle to the Thessalonians, When, says he, ye received the word of us,
^^receiued no^ the word of men, but, as it was indee^* Mat. 10.
the word of God, etc. For the Lord himself has said in the gospel, It is
not ye that speak, but the spirit of my father speeketh Luc. 10.
in you: therefore he that hears you, hears me, and (...) John. 13.
that despises you, despises me. Wherefore when this wor^ of God is now
preached in the Church by preachers la^f^lli^ called, we believe that the very
word of God is pre^ched, and received of the faithful, and that neither
anie^ther word of God is to be feigned, or to be expected from heaven: and that
now the word it self which is preached is to be regarded, not the minister
that preaches: who although he be evil and a sinner, nevertheless the (...)
of God abides true and good. Neither do we think th^^ therefore the outward
preaching is to be thought as fr^i^lesse, because the instruction in true
religion depends (...) Ier. 12. 1. Cor. 3. Ioh. 6.
the inward illumination of the spirit, because it is written No man shall teach
his neighbor. For all men shall know me. And he that watreth, or he that
planteth, is nothing, but God who (...) the increase. For albeit no man can
come to Christ, unless he^ drawn by the heavenly Father, and be inwardly
lightened (...) the holy Ghost, yet we know undoubtedly, that it is (...) will
of God, that his word should be preached even ou^ wardlie. God could indeed
by his holy spirit, or by the ministry of an Angel, without the ministry
of Saint (...) have tought Cornelius in the Acts* but nevertheless (...)
refers him to Peter: of whom the Angel speaking sai^^ ^e shall tell thee
what thou must do. For he that illuminate^ in^a^dl^^, by giving men the holy
Ghost, the self same b^ Mar. 16. Act. 16.
way of commandment said unto his disciples, go ye i^^ the who^^ world, and
preach the gospel to every creature. And (...) Pa^^ preached the word
outwardly to Lydia a purple sell^ among the Philippians, but the Lord
inwardly opened the woman's heart. And the same Paul upon an elegant g^^dation
fitly placed in the 10. to the Romans, at last infers: therefore faith is
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. We know in the mean time that
God can illuminate whom, and when he will, even without the external
ministry, which is a thing appertaining to his power: but we speak of the
usual way of instructing men, delivered unto us of God both by commandment
and examples.

We therefore detest all the heresies of Artemon, the Manichees, Valentinians,
of Cerdon, and the Marcioni^^s, who denied that the scriptures proceeded from
the holy Ghost, or else received not, or polished and corrupted some of them.
And yet we do not deny that certain books of the old Testament were of the
ancient authors called Apochry^hall, and of others Ecclesiastical, to wit,
such as they would have to be read in the Churches, but not alleged to avouch
or confirm the authority of faith by them. As also Austine in his 18. Book
De ^iuit. Dei. C. 38. makes mention* that in the books of the Kings the
names and books of certain Prophets are reckoned: but he adds, that they
are not in the Canon; and that those books which we have, suffice unto
godliness.

OF INTERPRETING THE HOLY SCRIPTVRES, and of Fathers, Councels, and
Traditions. CHAP. 2.
2. Pet. 1.
THe Apostle Peter has said, that the holy scriptures are not of any private
interpretation, therefore we do not allow all expositions: whereupon we do
not acknowledge that which they call the meaning of the Church of home, for the
true and natural interpretation of the scriptures, which forsooth the
defenders of the Roman Church do strive to force all men simply to receive:
but we acknowledge that interpretation of Scriptures for authentical and
proper, which being taken from the scriptures themselves (that is, from the
phrase of that tongue in which they were written, they being also waied
according to the circumstances, and expounded according to the proportion of
places either like or unlike, or of more and plainer) accords with the rule of
faith and charity, and makes notably for Gods glory and man's salvation.
Wherefore we do not contemn^ the holy treatises of the Fathers, agreeing with
the scri^tures, from whom notwithstanding we do modestly d^ sent, as they
are deprehended to set down things meere^ strange, or altogether contrary
to the same. Neither do^ think that we do them any wrong in this matter,
seein^ that they all with one consent will not have their writing^ matched with
the canonical scriptures, but bid us allow^ them so far forth, as they
either agree with them, or disagree, and bid us take those things that agree,
and leave those that disagree: and according to this order we do account^ the
decrees or Canons of counsels. Wherefore we suffer not o^^ selves in
controversies about Religion or matters of faith^ be pressed with the bare
testimonies of fathers, or decrees o^ Counsels, much less with received
customs, or else with (...) of men being of one judgment, or with
prescription of long ti^^* Therefore in controversies of religion or matters of
faith we cannot adm^^ any other judge then God himself, pronouncing by the
holy scriptures, what is true, what is fal^^ what is to be followed, or what
to be avoided. So we do (...) rest but in the judgments of spiritual men,
drawn from the word of God. Certainly Jeremy and the other Prophets (...)
vehemen^lie condemn the assemblies of Priests, gathere^ against the law of
God: and diligently forewarned us, that ^ Ezec. 20. 18.
should not hear the fathers or tread in their path, who w^^ king in their own
inventions, swarued from the law of go^ We do likewise reject humane
traditions, which althou^ they be set out with goodly titles, as though they
were d^uine and Apostolical, by the lively voice of the Apostles* delivered to
the Church, as it were by the hands of Apostolical men, by mean of Bishops
succeeding in their roome^ yet being compared with the scriptures, disagre from
the^ and by that their disagreement bewraie them selves in (...) wise to be
Apostolical. For as the Apostles did not disagree among themselves in
doctrine, so the Apostles sch^lers did not set forth things contrary to the
Apostle^ Nay it were blasphemous to avouch, that the Apostles (...) 1. Cor. 4.
2. Cor. 1.
lively voice delivered things contrary to their writing^ Paull affirms
expresselie, that he taught the same thinge^* in all Churches. And again. We,
says he, write no other thi^^ unto you, then which ye read, or also
acknowledge. Also in another place he witnesses, that he and his disciples, to
wit Apostolical men, walked in the same way, and jointly by the same 2. Cor.
12.
spirit did al things. The Jews also in time past had their traditions of
Elders, but these traditions were severely confuted by the Lord, showing that
the keeping of them hinders Gods law, and that God is in vain worshipped
with Mat. 15. Mare. 7.
such.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION of Heluetia.
Artic. 1. Scriptura.
THe Canonical scripture, being the word of God, and delivered by the holy
Ghost, and published to the world by the Prophets and Apostles, being of all
other the most perfect and ancient philosophy, does alone perfectly contain
all piety and good ordering of life. The interpretation Artic. 2.
Interpretatio.
hereof is to be taken only from herself, that herself may be the interpreter
of her self, the rule of charity and faith being her guide. Which kind of
interpretation so far Artic. 3. Patras.
forth as the holy Fathers have followed, we do not only receive them as
interpreters of the scripture, but reverence them as the beloved instruments of
God. But as for the Artic. 4. Tradit. h^manae.
traditions of men, although never so glorious and received, how many soever of
them do withdraw or hinder us, as of things unprofitable and hurtful, so we
answer with that saying of the Lord, They worship me in vain, teaching the
doctrine of men. The drift of the Canonical scripture is this: that God
wishes well to mankind: and by Christ the Lord his son has declared this
good will, which is received by faith alone, and faith must be effectual
through love, that it may be showed forth by an innocent life.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Of things commanded and not commanded. Art. 10.
WE confess that as no man can command those things which Christ has not
commanded, so likewise no man can forbid those things which he has not
forbidden. And in the margent. For it is written, hear him. Also section the
3. in the same place. And much less can any man license those things, which
God has forbidden, etc. And in the marg. God said, I am Iehoua your god,
Leuit. 18. and by Moses, Deuteronomy. 10. for Iehoua your god is God of Gods, a great
god and terrible* Who therefore among his creatures can gra^^ those things,
which he has forbidden? In like sort Section 4. And again, no man can forbid
those things, which God has granted, etc. The other things which are
contained in this article, because they belong to other sections, they are
inserted, every one in their places.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA O^ THE WALDENSES. Of the holy scriptures.
CHAP. I.
FIrst of all the ministers of our Churches teach with one consent, concerning
the holy scripture of the ne^ and old Testament (which is commonly called the
Bible, and is lawfully received and allowed of the fathers, which are of best
and soundest judgment) that it is true, certain, and worthy to be believed,
whereunto no other humane writings whatsoever, or of what sort soever they be,
may be compared, but that, as man's writings, they must give place to the holy
scripture: First, because it is inspired an^ taught of the holy Ghost, and
uttered by the mouth of holy men, written by them, and confirmed by heavenly
and divine restimonies: which spirit also himself opens and discloseth the
meaning how it ought to be understood, and the truth of this scripture in the
Church, in what manner seems him best: especially by raising up and giving
faithful ministers, who are his chosen instruments. Of which spir^ 2. Sam. 22.
2. Pet. 1.
David speaks, when he says, The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his
word was in my tongue: and Peter, For prophecy (...) 2. Tim. 3. Romans 15. Joan.
5.
not molde time by the will of man, but holy men of God spakes they were
moved by the holy Ghost. and Paull* The wholl scripture given by inspiration
of God, is profitable, etc. besides the Lord himself says, Search the
scriptures. And again, Ye are deceived, Mat. 22. Luc. 24.
not knowing the scriptures, neither do ye understand the power of God. And,
He opened the minds of his Disciples, that they might understand the
scriptures.

Secondly because it is a true and sure testimony and a clear proof of Gods
favorable good will, which he has Heb. 11.
reueiled concerning himself, without which revelation of scripture, there is
no wholesome knowledge, nor faith, nor access to God. For in this such things
as are necessary to doctrine, to discipline and government of the holy
Church, for all and singular persons in the ordinary ministry of salvation
(whence also springs true faith) in this I say, are all such things fully,
absolutely, and so far forth, as (...) requisite, as in a most excellent
and most exquisite work of the holy Ghost, comprehended and included, then
which no Angel from heaven can bring any thing more certain, and if he should
bring any other thing, he ought not to be believed.

And this persuasion and belief concerning holy scripture, namely that it is
taught and inspired of God, is the beginning and ground of our Christian
profession, which takes beginning from the word outwardly preached, as from
an ordinary mean, orde^^ed of god for this purpose. Wherefore every one
ought very highly to es^e^^e of the divine writings of the holy Prophets and
Apostles, resolutelie to believe them, and religiously to yea^d unto them in
all things, diligently to read them, to gather wholesome doctrine our of them,
and according to them ought every man to frame and order himself, but
especially they, who after an holy manner are set over the Church of God. For
which causes in our Churches and meetings this holy scripture is rehearsed to
the hearers in the common and mother tongue which all understand, and
especially (according to the ancient custom of the Church) those portions of
the Gospells in scripture, which are wont to be read on solemn holy days out
of the Evangelists and Apostles writings, and are usually called Gospells and
Epistles: out of which profitable and whollsome doctrines, and exhortations,
and sermons are made to the people, as at all times occasion and need
requiteth. We likewise teach that the writings of holy Doctors, especially of
those that are ancient, are also to be esteemed for true and profitable*
whereof there may be some use to instruct the people, yet only in those
things wheerin they agree with the holy scripture, or are not contrary
thereunto, and so far forth as they give testimony to the excellency
thereof, to the information and example of the Apostolic Church, and swerve
not from the consent, judgment, and decrees, of the ancient Church (wherein
she has continued unspotted in the truth) after what sort they themselves
also have charged men to judge and think of their writings, and have given
warning that heed should be taken, lest that they being but men, too much
should be ascribed to them. Of which thing S. Augustine In pro. em. in 3. de
sanct. Trinit.
speaks in this manner. Be not thou a servant to my writings, as it were to
the Canonical scriptures, but in the Canonical scriptures such things as thou
did^t not believe, when thou have there found them, immediately believe. But in
my writings that which thou know not for a certain truth, unless thou
perceive it to be certain, hold it not resolutelie. And else where he says,
Give not as great credit to mine or Ambrose his words, as to the Canonical
scriptures. This is the right rule to discern writings by, which so greatly
liked the Papists that they have cited it in their decretal* distinct. 9. Chap.
Noli meis verbis, etc.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
THis one god has revealed himself to be such a one Artic. 2.
unto men, first in the creation, preservation and governing of his works:
secondly fa^re more plainly in his word, which word in the beginning he
revealed to the fathers by certain visions and oracles, and then caused it to
be written in these books which we call Holy scripture.

All this holy scripture is contained in the Canonical Artic. 3.
books of the old and new Testament. The Catalogue whereof is this. The five
books of Moses (namely Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Deuteronomine:
Iosue, Judges, Ruth, two books of Samuel, two books of the Kings, two books
of Chronicles, or Paralipomenon, one book of Esdras, Nehemiah, Ester, Job, the
Psalms, Salomons Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of songs, Esaie, Jeremy,
with the Lamentations, Ezechiell, Daniell, the 12. small Prophets (namely Ose,
Ioell, Amos, Abdiah, Jonah, Micheah, Nahum, Abacu^, Sophonie, Haggaie,
Zachary, Malachie) the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ according to Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John, the Acts of the Apostles, Paulls Epistles (namely one to the
Romans, two to the Corinthians, one to the Galathians, one to the Ephesians,
one to the Philippians, one to the Collossians, two to the Thessalonians, two
to Timothy, one to Titus, one to Philemon, the Epistle to the Hebrews. The
Epistle of James, two epistles of Peter, three epistles of John, one epistle of
I^de, John's Revelation. Artic. 4.


We acknowledge these books to be Canonical, that is, we account them as the
rule and square of our faith, and that not only for the common consent of the
Church, but also much more for the testimony and inward persuasion of the
holy ghost, by whose inspiration we are taught to discearne them from other
Ecclesiastical books* which howsoever they may be profitable, yet are they
not such, that any one article of faith may be builded upon them.

Ar^ic. 5.
We beleeeue that the word contained in these books, came from one god, of
whom alone, and not of men, the authority thereof depends. And seeing this
is the sum of al truth, containing whatsoever is required for the worship of
God and our salvation, we hold it not lawful for men, no not for the Angles
themselves, to add or detract any thing from that word, or to alter any whitte
a^ al in the same. And hereupon it follows, that it is not lawful to oppose
either antiquity, custom, multitude, man's wisdom* and judgment, edicts, or
any decrees, or Counsels, or visions, or miracles, unto this holy scripture,
but rather that al things ought to be examined, and tried by the rule and
square thereof. Wherefore we do for this cause also allow those three Creedes*
namely the Apostles, the Nicen, and Athanasius his Creed, because they be
agreeable to the written word of God.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
Artic. 10.
WE receive and embrace all the Canonical scriptures, both of the old and new
testament, giving thanks to our God, who has raised up unto us that light,
which we might ever have before our eyes: lest either by the subteltie of man,
or by the snares of the devil, we should be carried away to errors, and lies.
Also we profess that these be the heavenly voices, whereby God has opened
unto us his will: and that only in them man's heart can have settled rest:
that in them be abundantly, and fully comprehended al things, whatsoever be
needful for our help, as Origin, Augustine, Chrysostom, and Cyrillus, have
taught: That they be the very might and strength to attain to salvation: that
they be the fundations of the Prophets and Apostles, VVhereupon is built the
Church of God: that they be the very sure and infallible rule, whereby may be
tried, whether the Churh do swerve, or err, and whereunto all Ecclesiastical
doctrine ought to be called to account: and, that against these scripturs
neither law, nor ordinance, nor any custom, ought to be heard: no though
Paull him self, or an angel from heaven should come and teach the contrary.

Artic. 2. Sub ^inem.
OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
HE has revealed himself much more plainly in his holy word, so far forth
as it is expedient for his own Artic. 3.
glory, and the salvation of his in this life.

We confess that this word of God was not brought or delivered by any will of
man: but that holy men of God inspired by Gods spirit spoke it, as S. Peter
witnesses* but afterward God himself for that exceeding tender carefullnes
which he has of his, and of their salvation, gave in commission to his
servants the Apostles and Prophets, that they should put those his oracles in
writing: and he himself also wrote the two tables of the law with his own
finger: which is the cause why we call such writings sacred and divine
scripture.

And we comprehend the holy scripture in those two books Artic. 4.
of the old and new Testament, which are called the canonical books* about
which there was never any ado. And of them this is the number and also the
order, received of the Church of God. The five books of Moses, the book of
Joshua, of the Judges, of Ruth, two books of Samuel, two of the Kings, two of
the Chronicles, which are called Paralipomena, the first of Esdras: Nehemias,
Ester, lob: also Dauides Psalms, three books of Solomon, namely the
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the song of songs: the four great Prophets, Esaias,
Jeremy, Ezechiell, and Daniell: and furthermore also the 12* small Prophets:
moreover the Canonical books of the new testament are, the four Evangelists,
namely Saint Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, the Acts of the Apostles, the
14. Epistles of Saint Paull, and seven of the othet Apostles, the Revelation of
S. John the Apostle. These books alone do we receive as sacred and
canonical, Artic. 5.
whereupon our faith may rest, be confirmed and established: therefore without
any doubt we believe also those things, which are contained in them, and that
not so much because the Church receives and allows them for Canonical, as
for that the holy ghost bears witness to our consciences that they came from
god, and most of all for that they also testify and justify by them selves
this their own sacred authority, and sanctity, seeing that even the blind may
clearly behold, and as it were feel the ^ulfilling and accomplishment of all
things which were foretold in these writings.

Artic. 6.
We furthermore make a difference between the holy books, and those which
they call Apocriphall* for so much as the Apocriphall may be read in the
Church, and it is lawful also so fa^re to gather instructions out of them, as
they agree with the Canonical books, but their authority, and certainty is
not such, as that any doctrine touching faith or Christian Religion, may
safely be built upon their testimony: so far of is it, that they can
disanull or impair the authority of the other. Artic. 7.


We believe also that this holy scripture does most perfectly contain all
the will of God, and that in it all things are abundantly taught whatsoever
is necessary to be believed of man to attain salvation. Therefore seeing the
wholl manner of worshipping God, with God requires at the hands of the
faithful, is there most exquisitelie and at large set downe^, it is lawful
for no man, although he have the authority of an Apostle, no no^ for any
Angel sent from heaven, as Saint Paul speaks, to teach otherwise then we
have long since been taught in the holy scriptures. For seeing it is
forbidden that any one should add or detract any thing from the word of God,
thereby it is ^uident enough that this holy doctrine is perfect and absolute
in all points and parcells thereof: and therefore no other writings of men,
although never so holy, no custom, no multitude, no antiquity, nor
prescription of times, nor personal succession, nor any counsels, and to
conclude, no decrees or ordinances of men are to be marched or compared with
these divine scriptures and bare truth of God, for so much as Gods truth
excels al things. For all men of their own nature are liars, and lighter
then vanity it self: therefore we do utterly refuse whatsoever things agree
not with this most certain rule, as we have been taught by the Apostles,
when they say: Try the spirits whether they be of God. And, If any come
unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not to house, etc.

OVT OF THE SAXONS CONFESSION.
Of Doctrine.
Seeing it is most undoubtedly true, that God out of mankind does gather
together unto him*selfe a Church unto eternal life for and by his son,
thorugh preaching of that doctrine which is written in the books of the
Prophets and Apostles, we plainly auoutch before God and the wholl Church in
heaven and in earth, that we do with a true faith embrace all the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles, and that in that very natural meaning, which is
set down in the Creedes of the Apostles, of Nice, and of Athanasius. And these
self same Creedes, and the natural meaning of them we have always
constantly embraced without corruption, and will by Gods help always
embrace: and in this faith do we call upon the true God, who sending his son,
and giving clear testimonies, has Vide obseru. 1. adhanc confess. tum in hac
sect. tum in sect. secund^.
revealed himself in his Church: joining our prayer with all Saints in heaven
and in earth: and our declarations upon the Creedes are abroad, containing the
wholl body and ground of doctrine, which show that this our protestation is
most true. We do also very resolutelie condemn all brainsick fantasies, which
are against the Creedes: as are the monstrous opinions of heathen men, of the
Jews, of the Mahometistes, of Marcion, the Manichees, of Samosatenus,
Seruetus, Arrius, and those that deny the person of the holy Ghost, and other
opinions condemned by the true judgments of the Church.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE Of the holy scipture.
CHAP. 30.
Vide obseru. 1. in hanc Confess.
THe holy scripture we call those Canonical books of the old and new
testament, of whose authority there was never doubt made in the Church. This
scripture we believe and confess to be the oracle of the holy Ghost, so
confirmed by heavenly testimonies, that If an Angel from heaven preach any
other thing, let him be accursed. Wherefore we detest all doctrine, worship,
and religion contrary to this scripture. But whereas some men think, that all
doctrine necessary to be known of us to true and everlasting salvation is not
contained in this scripture, and that the right of expounding this scripture
lies so in the power of chief Bishops, that what they according to their own
will give out, is to be embraced for the meaning of the holy Ghost, it is more
easelie said then proved. The wholl 2. Tim. 3.
scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to
improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may
be perfect, being thoroughlie prepared to every good work. and John. 15. I
have called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my father, have I
made known to you* and those things which the Apostles received of Christ,
those have they by their preaching published in the wholl world, and by their
writings delivered them to posterity. It is a plain case therefore that all
things which are needful to be known to salvation, are contained in the
Prophets and Apostles writings. He has reueiled his own word in due season by
preaching, which is all Chrysostom. ad Titum, hom. 1.
committed to me: this is the preaching. For the Gospel con^einedth things,
both things present, and things to come, as honor, piety, and faith, yea and
all things he ha^h ioyn^l^e comprised in this one Jerome ad Tit. Cap. 1.
August. super Joan. C^. 11. Tract. 40.
word preaching. Again, Without authority of the scriptures, babbling has no
credit. For seeing the Lord Jesus did many things, al are not written, as the
same holy Evangelist himself witnesses, that the Lord Christ both said and
did many things which are not written. But those things were selected to be
written, which seemed to suffice for the salvation of those that believe. For
whereas they say that the right of expounding the scripture lies in the power
of chief Bishops, it is evident, that the gift of expounding the scripture
is not of man's wisdom, but of the holy ghost. To every man, says Paull, is
given the manifestation of the spirit to profit withal: for to one is given
by the spirit the word of wisdom, etc. But the holy ghost is altogether at
liberty, and is not tied to a certain sort of men, but gives Number. 11.
gifts to men according to his own good pleasure. Oh that all the people had
power to prophecy, and that the Lord would Iud. 4.
put his spirit upon them. Debora a woman the wife of Lapidoth is Amos. 7.
raised up to be a prophetess. Again, I am no Prophet, nor Proprophets son,
but I am a heardman, and a gatherer of wild figs. And yet Amos received the
holy ghost, and was made a-Prophet. 1. Cor. 12.
All these things works one and the same spirit distributing to every man as
he will. Many examples also do witness that chief Bishops have been often and
very foulie deceived. wheresore the gift of expounding the scripture is not so
tied to the Popes, that whosoever shall be Pope, must needs rightly expound the
scripture: but the true meaning of the scripture is to be sought in the
scripture it self, and among those, that being raised up by the spirit of God,
expound scripture by scripture.

OF COVNCELLS. CHAP. 34.
WE confess that Counsels ought to have their judgments in the Church
concerning the holy doctrine of Religion, and that the authority of lawful
counsels is great: but the authority of Gods word must needs be the
greatest. For although the Church have a sure promise of Christ's continual
presense, and be governed by the holy Ghost, yet not every assembly of men
may be taken for the true Church: and albert never so many see me often times
to come together in the name of Christ, yet few are chosen, and all have not
faith. And as it is wont to fall out in civil meetinges, so does it also in
meetings of the Church, that for the most part the greater side overcomes
the better. Hither to may be added, that the holy Ghost does not make men in
this life not subject to sin, but leaves in them many and sundry
infirmities. Examples also witne, that not only the Popes, but also Councels
have been deceived. Wherefore seeing that the doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets is confirmed of god, the sentence of no one man, nor of any assembly
of men, is to be received simply without trial, for the oracle of the holy
ghost: but it is to be laid to the rule of the Prophets and Apostles doctrine,
that that which agrees therewith may be acknowledged, and that which is
contrary thereunto may be confuted. If we or an Angel from heaven preach
unto you a gospel Gal. 1.
beside that, which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. 1. Ioh. 4.
And, believe ye not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God.
Again, Try all things, and keep that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Augustine against Maxim^us a Bishop of the Arrians in his 3. book. Chap. 14.
says. But now an I neither to cite the council of Nice, nor you the council
of Arimine, as it were to prejudice the matter, neither am I bound by the
authority of the one, nor you by the authority of the other: with authorities
of scripture, which are witnesses not proper to any one, but common to us
both, let matter with matter, Cause with cause, Reason with reason, etc. And
Panormitane in the Chapter significasti. Extr. de electio. In things concerning
faith, even the verdite of one private man were to be preferred before the
Popes, if he were leadwith better warrants of the old and new Testament then
the Pope. And Gerson in the first part about trial of doctrines. The first
truth shoud stand, that if there were a plain private man sufficiently
instructed in holy scripture, more credit were to be given in a case of
doctrine to his assertion, then to the Popes definitive sentence. For it is
plain, that the gospel is more to be believed then the Pope. If then a man so
learned teach any truth to be contained in the Gospel, where the Pope were
either ignorant, or willingly deceived, it is clear whose udgement were to be
preferred. And a little after. Such a learned man ought in that case, while a
general council were holden, at which he him self were present, to set him
self against it, if he should perceive the greater part of malice or
ignorance to incline to that which is contrary to the Gospel.

Of Ecclesiastical writers. CHAP. 34.
RIse up before an hoare head, says the scripture, and reueuerence the person
of an old man. We do therefore reverence the graie hears of our ancetours, who
even since the Gospel began to be revealed and published have in the world
taken upon them the t a^el of furthering the Church, not only by preaching, but
also by public writings that the posterity might from the Apostles, even unto
this time, have manifest and certain testimonies of the holy Doctrine. And we
so embrace their writings, as both the holy scripture allows us to use man's
authority, and as themselueswould have their writings acknowledged. Job. 12.
(You my friends say) that in the ancient is wisdom, and in the length of
days is understanding (but I say unto you) that with him to wit with the Lord
our God is wisdom and strength he has council and understanding. And 1. Corinthians. 4. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the rest judge. And,
Try all things, and keep that which is good. 1 Thessalonians. 5. It is not lawful
for us to bring in any thing of our own Turtl. Lib. de scrip. haeret.
head, no not so much as to take that which any man has brought in of his own
head. We have the Apostles of the Lord for authors, who chose nothing of their
own heads which they might bring in: but the discipline which they received of
Christ, they faithfully delivered to all nations. And Augustine says. Neither
ought we to esteem of the Epist. ad Fortunat. Did. 8.
writings of any men, although they be Catholic and commendable persons, as of
the Canonical scriptures, as though it were not lawful (yealding the^ that
reverence which is due unto such men) to disallow and refuse something in their
writings, if perchance we find that they have thought otherwise then the
truth is understood either of others, or ^a Proe. in Lib 3. de Trinit.
of our selves, thorough the gift of God. Such am I in other men's writings, as
I would have them construers of mine. Again, Be thou not tied to my writings
as it were to the Canonical scriptures: but in the Canonical scriptures, that
which thou did not believe, when thou have found it, believe it
incontinently: but in mine that which thou thoughtest to be undoubtedly true,
unless thou perceive it to be true indeed, hold it not resolutelie. And
again, I neither can nor ought Ad Vincent. Lib. 2.
to deny that as in those who have gone before, so also in so many slender
works of mine there are many things, which may with upright ^a epist. ad Ierom.
judgment and no ra^hnes be blamed. And again, I have learned to give this
reverence to these writers alone, which are now called Canonical. Again, But
I so read others, that be they never so holy, or never so learned, I do not
therefore think it true, because they have so thought, but because they could
persuade me by other authors, De vnico ^^^timo in E^^st. ad Vincent.
or by Canonical, or at least by probable reasons, which disagree not from the
truth And in another place, Who knows not that holy scripture, etc. And, Do
not brot^^^ against so many divine, etc. For these places are known even out
of the Popes own decrese.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Art. 1. ss. 1. Whence sermons are to be taken.
FIrst, a controversy being raised amongst the learned about certain articles
of Christian doctrine, when as the people with us were dangerously divided by
reason of contrary preachings, we charged our preachers, that they should
henceforth broach no thing to the people in any sermon, which either is not
taught in the scriptures of God, or has not sure ground thereout: as it was
openly decreed in the assembly holden at Norimberge in the 22. year after
the smaller account: which moreover is also the opinion of all the holy
fathers. For seeing S. Paull writes, That the scripture given by inspiration
of God is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct, that
the man of God may be absolute, being made perfect to every good work, we
could not determine any otherwise, but that it was meet, that we also being
in danger of schism should fly to that holy scripture, to which in times
past not only the holy fathers, Bishops, and Princes, but also the children
of God every where in such extremity have always resorted. For S. Luke
witnesses, not without singular commendation of the Thessalonians, that they
compared the Gospel they had heard of the Apostle with the scripture, and tried
it. Paul also warns his scholar Timothy, that he exercise himself very
diligently in the scriptures. and this holy scripture was had in so high
reputation of all holy Bishops and Doctors, that neither any Bishop desired
to have his ordinances obeyed, nor any Doctor his writings believed, except he
had thereout approved them. And surely seeing Saint Paull does plainly
testify, that by the holy scripture the man of God is made absolute and
perfect to every good work, no part of Christian truth and sound doctrine can
be wanting to him who with all his mihgt labors to follow and embrace the
scripture of God.

THE SECOND SECTION, OF GOD, IN ESSENCE ONE, IN persons three, and of his true
worship.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of God, his unity, and the Trinity. CHAP. 3.
WE believe and teach, that God is one in essence or nature, subsisting by
himself, all sufficient in himself, invisible, without a body, infinite,
eternal, the creator of all things both visible and invisible, the chiefest,
good, living, quickening and preserving all things, almighty, and exceeding
wise, Deuteronomy. 6. Exodus 20.
gentle or merciful, just and true. And we detest the multitude of Gods,
because it is expressie written. The Lord thy God is one God. I am the Lord
thy God, thou shall Isa. 54.
have no strange Gods before my face. I am the Lord, and there is none other,
beside me there is no God. Am not I the Lord, and there is none other beside
me alone? a just God, and a Savior, there is none beside me. I the Lord,
Iehoua, the merciful God, gracious, and long suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, etc. Exodus 34.

We nevertheless believe and teach, that the same infinite, one, and indivisible
God is in persons inseparably and without confusion distinguished into the
Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, so as the Father has begotten the Son
from everlasting, the Son is begotten by an unspeakable manner, and the
holy Ghost proceeds from them both, and that from everlasting, and is to be
worshipped with them both. So that there be not three Gods, but three persons,
consubstantiall, coeternall, and coequall, distinct, as touching their persons,
and in order one going before another, yet without any inequality. For as
touching their nature or essence they are so vide obser^^ ^. (...) confess.
joined together, that they are but one God, and the divine essence is common to
the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost. For the scripture has delivered
unto us a manifest distinction of persons, the Angel among other things
saying thus to the blessed Virgin: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
Luc. ^*
the power of the highest shall ouershadow thee, and that holy thing which
shall be borne, shall be called the son of God. Also in the baptism of Christ a
voice was heard from heaven, Math. 3. Ioh. ^.
saying, This is my beloved Son. The holy Ghost also appeared in the likeness
of a dove. And when the Lord himself commanded to baptize, he commanded To
baptize in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Math. 28.
Ghost. In like sort else where in the Gospel he said, The Father will send
the holy Ghost in my name. Again he says, Ioh. 14. 15.
When the comforter shall come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, the
spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he shall bear witness of me,
etc. To be short, we receive the Apostles Creed, because it delivers unto us
the true faith.

We therefore condemn the Jews and the Mahometistes, and all those that
blaspheme this Trinity, that is sacred, and only to be adored. We also
condemn all heresies and heretics, which teach that the son and the holy
Ghost are God only in name, also that there is in the Trinity some thing
created, and that serves and ministers unto an other: finally that there is
in it some thing unequal, greater or less, corporal, or corporally fashioned,
in manners or in will diverse, either confounded, or sole by it self: as if the
son and holy Ghost were the affections and proprieties of one God the
Father, as the Monarchistes, the Nouatians, Praxeas, the Patripassians,
Sabellius, Samosatenus, Aetius, Macedonius, Arrius, and such like have thought.

Of Idols or Images of God, of Christ, and of Saints. CHAP. 4.
ANd because god is an invisible spirit, and an incomprehensible essence, he
can not therefore by any art or image be expressed. For which cause we fear
not with the scripture to term the Images of God mere lies. We do
therefore reject not only the Idols of the Gentles, but also the images of
Christians. For although Christ took upon him man's nature, yet he did not
therefore take it, that he might set forth a pattern for caruers and painters.
He Math. 5.
denied that he came To destroy the law and the Prophets: But images are
forbidden in the law and the Prophets. He denied Deuteronomy. 4. Isa. 40. Ioh. 16. 2.
Cor. 5.
that his Bodelie presense should any whit profit the Church. He promised that
He would by his spirit be present with us for ever: who would then believe that
the shadow or picture of his body does any whit benifit the godly? and
seeing that he 1 Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6.
abides in us by his spirit, We are therefore the Temples of God. But what
agreement has the temple of God which images* And seeing that the blessed
spirits, and saints in heaven, Act. 3. and 14.
while they lived here, abhorred all worship done unto themselves, and spoke
against images, who can think it likely, that the saints in heaven, and the
Angel, are delighted with their own Images, whereunto men do bow their
knees, uncover their heads, and give such other like honor? But that men
might be instructed in Religion, and put in mind of heavenly things, and of
their own Mar. 16.
salvation, the Lord commanded To preach the Gospel, not to paint, and
instruct the laytie by pictures: he also instituted Sacraments, but he no where
appointed Images. Furthermore, in every place, which way soever we turn our
eyes, we may see the lively and true creatures of God, which if they be
marked, as is meet, they do much more effectually move the beholder, then
all the Images, or vain, immovable, rotten, and dead pictures of all men
whatsoever, of which the Prophet spoke truly, They Psalm. 115.
have eyes and see not, etc. Therefore we approve the judgment of Lactantius
an ancient writer, who says, Undoubtedly there is no religion, wheresoever
there is a picture. And we affirm that the blessed Bishop Epiphanius did well,
who finding on the church doors a veil, that had painted in it the picture as
it might be of Christ, or of some other Saint, he cut and took it away: For
that contrary to the authority of the scriptures he had seen the picture of
a man to hang in the Church of Christ: and therefore he charged that from
thence forth no such vailes, which were contrary to ou^ religion, should be
hanged up in the Church of Christ, but that rather such scruple should be taken
away, which was unworthy the Church of Christ, and all faithful people.
Moreover we approve this sentence of S. Augustine, Cap. 55. de vera relig. Let
not the worship of men's works be a religion unto us. For the workmen
them*selues that make such things are better, whom yet we ought not to worship.

Of the adoring, worshipping, and inuocating of God, through the only
Mediator Jesus Christ. CHAP. 5.
WE teach men to adore and worship the true God alone: this honor we impart to
none, according to the commandment of the Lord, thou shall adore the Lord
Math. 4.
thy God, and him alone shall thou worship, or, him only shall thou serve.
Surely all the Prophets inueighed earnestly against the people of Israel;
whenever they did adore and worship strange Gods, and not the one only
true God. But we teach that God is to be adored and worshipped, as himself
has taught us to worship him, to weere in spirit and true^h, not Ioh. 4.
with any superstition, but with sincerity, according to his word, lest at any
time he also say unto us, who has required these things at your hands? For
Paull also says, God is not worshipped Isa. 66. Iere. 7. Acts. 17.
with man's hands, as though he needed any thing, etc. We in all dangers, and
casualties of our life, call on him alone, and that by the mediation of the
only Mediator, and our intercessour Jesus Christ. For it is expressly
commanded us, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee,
Psalm. 50.
and thou shall glorify me. Moreover the Lord has made a most large promise,
saying, whatsoever ye shall ask of my father, Ioh. 16.
he shall give it you. And again, Come unto me all ye that Math. 11.
labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. And seeing it is
written, How shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed? and we
do believe in God alone, therefore we Romans 10.
call upon him only, and that thorough Christ. For there is one God (says the
Apostle) and one Mediator, between 1. Tim. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
God and men, Christ Jesus. Again, If any man sin, we have an advocate with
the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, etc. Therefore we do neither adore,
worship, nor pray unto the Saints in heaven, or to other Gods: neither do we
acknowledge them for our intercessours or Mediators, before the father in
heaven. For God and the Mediator Christ do suffice us, neither do we imparte
unto others the honor Isa. 42:
due to God alone and to his son, because he has plainly said, I will not
give my glory to another: and because Peter has Act. 4.
said, There is no other name given unto men, whereby they must be saved, but
the name of Christ. In which doubtless they that rest by faith, do nor seek
aniething without Christ.

Yet (...) all that we do neither despise the Saints, nor th^nke bas^lie of
them. For we acknowledge them to be the (...) members of Christ, the friends of
god, who have glor^ouslie overcome the flesh and the world. We therefore love
them as ^^^th^en, and honor them also, yet not with any wo^sh^, (...) an
honorable opinion of them, and to conclude, (...) their just praises. We also
do imitate them. For we desire w^^h most ea^nest affections and prayers to be
followers of their faith and virtues, to be* partakers also with them of
everlasting siluation, to dwell together with them everlastingly with God, and
to rejoice with them in Christ. And in this point we approve that saying of
Saint Augustine, in his book De vera relig. Let not the worship of men
departed be any religion unto us. For if they have lived holily, they are not
so to be esteemed, as that they seek such honors, but they will have us to
worship him, by whose ill^minatio^, they rejoice that we are fellow seruant^,
^s touching the reward. They are therefore to be honored for imitation, not to
be worshipped for religions sake* etc. And, we muchlesse believe that the
relics of Saints are to be adored or worshipped. Those ancient holy men
seemed sufficiently to have honored their dead, if they had honestly
committed their bodies to the earth, after that the soul was gone up into
heaven: and they thought that the most noble relics of their ancetours were,
their virtues, doctrine, and faith* which as they commended with the praise of
the dead, so they did endeavor to express the same so long as they lived upon
earth. Those ancient men did not swear b^t by the name of the only Iehoua, as
is it commanded in the law of God. Therefore as we are forbidden Deuteronomy. 10.
Exodus 23*
To swear by the names of strange Gods, so we do not swear by Saints,
although we be requested thereunto. We therefore in all these things do reject
that doctrine which gives too much unto the Saints in heaven.

Arti^. ^.
OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
WE thus think of God, that he is one in substance, three in persons, and
almighty. Who as he has by the word, that is, his son, made all things of
nothing, so by his spirit and providence, he does iustl^^, truly, and mos^e
wisely govern, preserve, and cherish all things. Artic. 1^*


Who as he is the only Mediator, intercessour, and sacrifice* also our high
priest, Lord, and King, so we acknowledge, and with the wholl heart believe,
that he alone is our atonement, redemption, satisfaction, expiation, wisdom,
protection, and deliverance, simply rejecting herein all means of life and
salvation, besides this Christ alone.

Artic. ^*
OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
WE believe in God the father, in God the son, in God the holy Ghost, the
holy divine Trinity: three persons, and one eternal, almighte God, in
essence and substance, and not three Gods. And in the marginall note is added.
This is proved by many places of the Artic. 10*
wholl scripture of the old and new testament. Therefore we mislike the worship
and invocation of dead men: the worshipping of Saints, and setting up of
Images, with such like things. And in the same place in the marginall note
upon the word Saints. Nevertheless we confess that they serve in Gods
presence, and that they reign with Christ everlastingly, because they
acknowledged Christ, and both in deed and word confessed him to be their
savior, redemption, and righteousness, without any addition of man's merit* For
this cause do we praise and commend them, as those who have obtained grace at
Gods hand, and are now made heites of the everlasting kingdom: Yet do we
ascribe all this to the glory of God and of Christ. Artic. 11.


We plainly protest that we condemn and renounce, al strange and erroneous
doctrines, which the spirits of errors bring forth, etc. And ss. 2. of the
self same article: We condemn that doctrine which says, that we may in no
case swear, although Gods glory and the love of our neighbor require it. And
in the marginall note upon the word swear. It is lawful to use an oath in
due time. For God has commanded this in the old testament, and Christ has
not forbidden it in the new: yea Christ and the Apostles did swear.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA O^ THE WALDENSES.
Of the unity of the divine essence, and of the three persons. CHAP. 3.
OVt of this fountain of holy scripture, and Christian instruction, according
to the true and sound understanding and meaning of the holy ghost, our men
teach by faith to acknowledge, and with the mouth to confess, that the holy
Trinity, to wit, god the father, the son, and the holy ghost, are three
distinct persons: but in essence one only, true, alone, eternal, almighty,
and incomprehensible Romans 11. Exodus 20.
God: of one equal indivisible divine essence, Of who^^, thorough whom, and in
whom are all things: who loves and rewards righteousness and virtue, but
hates and punishes all iniquity and sin. According to this faith men are
taught, to acknowledge the wonderful works of god, and those properties which
are peculiar to each person o^ the holy Trinity, and of the divine unity,
and to acknowledge the sovereign and infinite power, wisdom, and goodness of
the one only God: out of which also arises and proceeds the saving
knowledge as well of the essence, as of the will of god. One kind of works or
properties of the three persons of the godhead (by which they are discerned one
from the other) are the inward, eternal, and hypostaticall proprieties, which
always remain immutable, and are only apprehended by the eyes of faith, and
are these.

That the father, as the fountain and welspring of the godheade, from al
eternity begets the son, equal to himself, and that himself remains not
begotten, neither yet is he the person of the son, seeing he is a person
begitting not begotten. The son is begotten of the eternal father from all
eter^itie ^^ue god of god: and as he is a person, he is not the father, but the
son begotten of the essence o^ nature of the father, and consubstantiall with
him: which son in the fulness of time, which he had before appointed for this
purpose, himself alone (as he is the son) took unto him our nature of the
blessed Virgin Marie, and united it into one person with the godheade, whereof
we shall speak afterward. But the holy Ghost proceeds from the father and
the son, and so he is neither the father, nor the son, but a person
distinct from them, eternal* and the substantial love of the father and of the
son, surpassing all admiration: these three persons are one true God, as is a
foresaid.

The other kind of works in these persons, and in the unity of the godhead
is^ueth as it were into open sight out of the divine essence and the persons
thereof, in which being distinct they have manifested themselves: and these are
three. The first is the wonderful work of creation, which the Creedes do
attribute to the father. The second is the work of redemption, which is proper
to Christ. The third is the work of sanctification, which is ascribed to the
holy Ghost, for which cause he in the Apostles Creed is peculiarly called
holy. And yet all these are the proper works of one true God, and that of him
alone, and none other: to wit, the father, the son and the holy Ghost. This
true and absolute faith, and difficulte knowledge of God, as well concerning
^^s nature, as his will, is comprehended, and con^eyned in the aforenamed
Catholic and Apostolic Creed, and in the decree of the Nicene Council,
agreeing therewith, and in many other sound decrees, and also in Athanasius
his confession. All which we judge and profess to be true. But it has
everlasting and sure grounds on which it rel^^th, and most weighty reasons,
by which it is out of the holy scripture convinced to be true: as by that
manifestation wherein the whole Trinity showed it self, when Christ the Lord
was Math 3. Math. 28.
baptized in lordane* by the commandment of Christ, because in the name of the
persons of the same holy Trinity al people must be baptized and instructed in
the faith. Also Ioh. 14.
by Christ's words, when he says, the holy ghost the comforter whom the father
will send in my name, shall teach you all these things: and before these
words he says: I w^l pray the father, and he will give you an other
comforter, who shallbe with you for ever, even the spirit of truth. Besides we
teach, that this only true God, one in essence and in divine nature, and
three in persons, is above all to be honored with high worship, as chief Lord
and King, who rules and reigns always and for ever, and especially after
this sort, that we look unto him above al, and put all our confidence in him
alone, and offering unto him all subjection, obedience, fear, ^l faith, love,
and generally the service of the wholl inward and outward divine worship, do
indeed sacrifice and perform it, under pain of loosing everlasting salvation:
as Deuteronomy. 6. Deuteronomy. 6. Math. 22. M^r. 12. Luc. 10.
it is written Thou shall worship the lord thy god, and him only shall thou
serve: and again, thou shall love the lord thy god with all thy heart, with
all thy soul, with all thy mind, and to be short* with a^ thy might, as well
of the inward as outward powers, to whom be glory from this time forth for
evermore.

Amen.
Of holy men and their worship.
Chap. 17.
AS touching holy men, it is taught, first, that no man from the beginning of
the world unto this time, either was, is, or can be henceforth unto the end
sanctified by his works or holy actions: according to the saying of Moses,
the faithful servant of the Lord, when he cried out unto Exodus 34.
the Lord, O Lord in thy sight no man is innocent, that is, perfectly holy.
And in the book of Job it is written, what is man* Job. 15.
that he should be undefiled, and he that is borne of a woman, that ^e should
appear just? (to wit, before God.) Behold among his Saints, none is
immutable, and the heavens are not clean in his sight: how much more
abominable and unprofitable man, who drinks in iniquity as water? And the
holy scripture plainly witnesses throughout all the books thereof, that
all men ^ph. ^. ^^al. 14.
even from their buth are by nature sinners, and that there neither is, nor has
been any one, who of himself and by himself was righteous and holy, but all
have gone aside free Romans 3.
God, and are become unprofitable, and of no account at all. And whereas some
are made holy and acceptable unto God, that is purchased unto them without
any worthiness or merit of theirs, by him, who alone is holy. God himself, of
the mere grace, and unspeakable riches of his goodness has ordained, and
brought them to that state, that they be blessed, and called redeemed by
Christ, cleansed and consecrated by his blood, anointed of the holy Ghost,
made righteous and holy by faith in Christ, and adorned with commendable
virtues and good deeds or works, which beseem a Christian profession: Of
whom manic having finished their life and course in such works, have now
received and do enjoy by grace eternal felicity in heaven, where God
crowns those that be his. Some of them also God has endued with a certain
peculiar grace of his, and with divine gifts, unto the ministry, and to the
public and common good of the Church, such as were the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and other holy fathers, also Apostles, Evangelists, Bishops, and many Doctors
and Pastors: and also other famous men, and of rare excellency, and very well
furnished with the spirit, whose memory, monuments of their labors, and the
good things which they did, are extant and continue even until this day in
the holy scriptures and in the Church.

But especially it is both believed, and by open confession made known, as
touching the holy Virgin Marie, that she was a daughter of the blood royal,
of the house and family of David that dear servant and friend of God: and
that she was chosen and blessed of God the Father, consecrared by the holy
Ghost, visited, and sanctified above other of her sex: and also replenished
with wonderful grace and power of God to this end, that she might become the
true mother of our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God: of whom he vouchsased to
take our nature: and that she was at all times, before her birth, in the same,
and after it, a true, chaste, and pure Virgin: and that by her best beloved
son, the son also of the living God, through the price of his death, and
the effusion of his most holy blood, she was dearly redeemed and
sanctified, as also made one of the dear partakers of Christ by the holy
Ghost through faith, being adorned with excellent gifts, noble virtues, and
fruits of good works, renowned as happy before all others, and made most
assuredly a joint heir of everlasting life. And a little after. Furthermore,
it is taught in the church, that no man ought so to reverence holy men as we
are to worship God, much less their Images, or to reverence them with that
worship and affection of mind which only are due to god alone. And, to be
short, by no means to honor them with divine worship, or to give it* unto
them. For god sa^eth by the Prophet Esaie, I am (...) Esa. 42. 48.
Lord thy God, this is my name, I will not give mine honor to another nor my
glory to Images. Again a little after. But even as t^^ thing is gainesaid,
that the honor due to God should be g^uen to Saints, so it is by no means to
be suffered, that the honor of the Lamb Christ our Lord, and things belonging
to him, and due to him alone, and apperteining to the proper and true
Priesthood of his nature, should be transfe^red to them: that is, lest of
them, and those torments which they suffered, we should make redeemers or
merits in the life, or else advocates, intercessours, and Mediators in heaven,
or that we should invoke them, and not them onel^, but not so much as the
holy Angels, seeing they are n^* 1. Tim. 2. Heb. 9. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
God. For there is one only redeemer, who being once delivered to death,
sacrificed himself both in his body and (...) his blood: there is also one
only advocate, the most merciful Lord of us all.

And they are not only to be reputed and taken for sai^^ who are gone before
us, and are fallen a sleep in the Lord and dwell now in joys, but also they,
who (as there have ^lwaies been some upon earth) so do likewise live now on
the earth: such are all true and godly Christians, in what place o^ country
soever, here or there, and among what people soever they lead their life: who
by being baptized in the name of the Lord may be sanctified, and being endued
with true faith in the son of God, and set on fire, are mutuallie enflamed
with affection of divine charity and love: who also acknowledging the
justification of Christ, do use both it and absolution from their sins, and
the communion of the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and
diligently apply themselves to all holy exercises of piety beseeming a
Christian profession: as also the Apostles call such believers in Christ (which
as yet like strangers are conversant here on earth according to the state of
mortal men) Saints. As for example, Ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, 1. Pet. 2. 2. Cor. 13. Heb. 13.
an holy nation, a peculiar people. Again, all the Saints grees you. In like
manner, Salute all those that have the oversight of you and all the Saints, that
is, all faithful Christians.

For this cause it is taught that we ought, with entire love and favor of the
heart to embrace all Christians, before all other people, and when need is,
from the same affection of love to afforde unto them our service and to help
them* further, that we ought to mantaine the society of holy friendship with
those that love and follow the truth of Christ, with all good affection to
conceive well of them, to Romans 1^. Gal. 6. 1. Cor. 12.
have them in honor for Christ's sake, to give unto them due reverence from the
affection of Christian love, and to study in procuring all good by our duty
and service to pleasure them, and finally to desire their prayers for us. And
that Christians going astraie, and entangled with sins, are lovingly and
gently to be brought to amendment: that compassion is to be had on them, that
they are with a quiet mind in love, so as becomes, to be borne withal, that
prayer is to be made unto God for them, that he would bring them again into
the way of salvation, to the end that the holy Gospel may be spread
farther abroad, and Christ's glory may be made known and enlarged among all
men.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
WE believe and acknowledge one only God, who is one only and simple
essence, spiritual, eternal, invisible, immutable, infinite,
incomprehensible, unspeakable, almighty, most wise, good, just, and
merciful.

The holy scripture teaches us that in that one and simple divine essence,
there be three persons subsisting, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost.
The father, to wit, the first cause in order, and the beginning of all things:
the son, his wisdom and everlasting word* the holy ghost, his virtue,
power, and efficacy: the son begotten of the father from everlasting, the
holy Ghost from everlasting proceeding from the father and the son: which
three persons are not confounded, but distinct, and yet not divided, but
coessentiall, coeternall, and coequal. And to conclude, in this mystery we
allow of that which those four ancient Counsels have decreed: and we detest
all sec^es condemned by those holy ancient doctors, Athanasius, Hylarie,
Cyrill, Ambrose, and such as are condemned by others agereeablie to Gods word.
Hitherto also belongs the 2. Art.

Artic. 2.
This one God has revealed himself unto men to be such a one, first by the
creation, preservation, and government of his works, then much more clearlie
in his word, etc Seek the rest in the 3. division.

We believe, that we by this one means obtain liberty Art. 19.
of praying to god with a sure confidence, and that it will come to pass that he
will show him self a Father unto us. For we have no entrance to the Father,
but by this Mediator.

Art. 24.
We believe because Jesus Christ is the only advocate given unto us, who also
commands us to come boldly unto the Father in his name, that it is not
lawful for us to make our prayers in any other form, but in that which god
has set us down in his word: and that whatsoever men have forged of the
intercession of Saints departed, is nothing but the deceites and sleightes of
Satan, that he might withdraw men from the right manner of praying. We also
reject all other means whatsoever men have devised to exempt them selves from
the wrath of God. So much as i^ given unto them, so much is derogated from the
sacrifice ^ death of Christ.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
Art. 1.
WE believe, that there is one certain nature and divine power, which we call
God: and that the same is divided into three equal persons, into the father,
into the son, and into the holy ghost: and that they all be of one power, of
one majesty, of one eternity, of one Godhead, and one substance. And although
these three persons be so divided, that neither the Father is the son, nor
the son is the holy ghost, or the father, yet nevertheless we believe, that
there is but one very God: And that the same one god has created heaven, and
earth, and all things contained under heaven.

Art. 2.
We believe, that Jesus Christ the only son of the eternal father, etc.
The rest of this article you shall find in the 6. section, whereunto those
things do properly pertain, which art contained in this second article, of
the Person and office of Christ.

Art. 3.
We believe that the holy Ghost, who is the third person in the Trinity, is
very God, not made, not created, not begotten, but proceeding both from the
Father, and the Son, by a certain mean unknown unto man, and unspeakable:
and that it is his very property to mollify and soften the hardness of man's
heart, when he is once received into the hearts of men, either by the wholesome
preaching of the Gospel, or by any other way: that he does give other men
light, and guide them unto the knowledge of God, to all way of truth, to newnes
of life, and to everlasting hope of salvation.

Art. 3.
Neither have we any other Mediator, and Intercessor, by whom we may have
access to God the father, then Jesus Christ, in whose only name al things are
ob^eined at his fathers hand. But it is a shameful part, and full of
infid^l^tie, that we see every where used in the Churches of our adversaries,
not only in that they will have innumerable sorts of Mediators, and that
utterly without the authority of Gods word (so that, as Jeremy says, the
Saints be now as many in number, or rather above the number of the Cities:
And poor men cannot tell, to which saint it were best to turn them first: and
though there be so many, as they cannot be told, yet every of them has his
peculiare duty and office assigned unto him by these folks, what to give, and
what to bring to pass) But besides this also, in that they do not only
wickedlie, but also shamefullie call upon the Blessed Virgin Christ's Mother,
to have her remember, that she is the Mother, And to Command her Son, and
to use a Mothers authority over him.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. 1.
WE believe in heart, and confess with the mouth, that there is one only and
simple spiritual essence which we call God, eternal, incomprehensible,
invisible, immutable, infinite, who is wholly wise, and a most ^l^ntifull
wellspring of all good things.

Art. 2.
We know God by two means: first by the creation, and preservation and
government of the wholl world. For it is unto our eyes as a most^ excellent
book, wherein all creatures from the least to the greatest as it were certain
charecters and letters are written, By which the invisible things of God may
be seen and know^n unto us, Namely his everlasting power and Godhead, as
Paull the Apostle speaks, Romans Chaper 1. 20. which knowledge suffices to
convince all men and make them without excuse But much more clearlie and
plainly he afterward revealed himself unto (...) in his holy and heavenly
word, so far forth as it is expedient for his own glory, and the salvation
of his in this life.

According to this truth and word of god we believe in one only god (who is one
essence, truly distinguished into three persons from everlasting by mean of
the incommunicable properties) to wit, in the father, in the son, and in the
hol^e ghost. For the father is the cause, fountain, and beginning of all
things visible, and invisible* the son is the word, wisdom, and Image of
the father, the holy ghost is the might and power which proceeds from the
father and the son. Yet so, that this distinction does not make god as it
were divided into three parts: seeing the scripture teaches, that the father,
and the son, and the holy ghost, have a distinct person or subsisting in
their properties, yet so, that these three persons be one only god. Therefore
it is certain, that neither the father is the son, nor the son the father,
nor the holy ghost either the father, or the son. Nevertheless these
persons thus distinguished, are neither divided, nor confounded, nor mingled.
For neither the father nor the holy ghost have taken unto them man's nature,
but the son alone. The father was never without his soon, nor without his
holy Ghost, because every one in one and the same essence is of the same
eternity. For none of these is either first or last, because al three are one,
both in truth and power, and also in goodness and mercy.

And all these things we know as well by the testimonies of holy scripture,
as by the effects: and chiefelie those which we feel in our own selves, and
the testimonies of holy scripture, which teach us to believe this holy
Trinity* are ve^ie common in the old testament: which are not so much to be
reckoned up, as with sound judgment to be selected, such as are these: in the
first of Genesis God says. Let us make man according to our Image and likeness,
etc. and straight after: Therefore God made man according to his own Image and
likeness, male, I say, and female created he them. Again, Behold the man is
become as one of (...) For by that which is said, Let us make man after our
own likeness, it appears that there are more persons in the godhead. But when
it is said, God created, etc. the unity of the godhead is signified. For
although it be not here expresselie set down how many persons there are, yet
that which was obscurely delivered in the old Testament, in the new is made
clearer unto us then the none day. For when our Lord Jesus Christ was baptized
in Iordane, the voice of the father was heard saying, This is my beloved Son:
and the son himself was seen in the waters, and the holy ghost appeared in
the likeness of a dove. Therefore are we also commanded in the common baptism
of all the faithful to use this form, Baptize ye all nations in the name of the
father, and the son, and the holy Ghost. So also in Luke, the Angel
Gabriell speaks to Marie the mother of our Lord. The holy Ghost shall come
upon thee, and the power of the highest shall ouershadow thee, therefore that
holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be called the Son of God. In
like manner, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the holy Ghost be with you. Again, There are three that bear
wi^nes in heaven, the father, the wo^de, and the holy Ghost, whish three are
one. By all which places we are fully taught, that in one only God there are
three persons. And although this doctrine pass all the reach of man's wit, yet
we now steadfastly believe it out of the word of God, looking when we shall
enjoy the full knowledge thereof in heaven. The offices also and effects of
these three persons, which every of them shows toward us, are to be marked.
For the father by reason of his power is called our Creator: the son our
Savior and redeemer, because he has redeemed us by his blood: the holy
Ghost is called our Sanctifier, because he dwells in our hearts. And the
true Church has allwaies even from the Apostles age until these times kept
this holy doctrine of the blessed Trinity, and manteineth it against Jews,
Mahometanes, and other false Christians, and heretics, such as were Marcion,
Manes, Praxeas, Sabellius, Samosatenus, and the like: all which were worthelie
condemned by the fathers of most sound Judgment. Therefore we do here
willingly admit those three Creedes: namely that of the Apostles, of Nice,
and of Athanasius, and whatsoever things they, according to the meaning of
those Creeds, have set down, concerning this point of doctrine.

Artic. 10.
We believe that Jesus Christ in respect of his divine nature is the only
son of God, begotten from everlasting, not made or created (for then he
should be a creature) but of the same essence with the father, and coeternall
with him: who also is the true Image of the fathers substance, and the
brightness of his glory, in all things equal unto him. But he is the son of
god, not only since the time he took upon him our nature, but from
everlasting, as these testimonies being laid together teach us. Moses says,
that God created the world: but Saint John says, That all things w^^e made
by the word, which he calls God: so the Apostle to the Hebrews auoutcheth,
that God made all things by his son Jesus Christ. It follows therefore,
that he who is called both God, and the word, and the Son, and Jesus Christ,
had his being even then, when all things were made by him. Therefore Micheah
the Prophet says, (...) goeing out has been from the beginning, from the
days of eternity: again, He is without beginning of days, and without end
of life. He is therefore that true God, eternal, almighty, whom we pray
unto, worship, and serve.

Artic. 11.
We believe also and confess, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the father
and the son from everlasting, and that therefore he was neither made, nor
created, nor begotten, but only proceeding from them both, who is in order
the third person of the Trinity, of the same essence, glory and majesty with
the father and the son, and therefore he also is true and everlasting God, as
the holy scriptures teach us.

We also believe that we have no access to God, but by (...) ^6.
that one only Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ the righteous, who was
therefore made man (uniting the humanity to the divine nature) that there
might be an entrance made for us miserable men to the majesty of God* which
had otherwise been shut up against us for ever. Yet the majesty and power of
this Mediator (whom the father has set between himself and us) ought in no
case so much to fray us, that we should therefore think another is to be
sought at our own pleasure. For there is none either among the heavenly or
earthly creatures, who does more entirely love us then Christ himself, who
when he was in the shape of God, humbled himself by taking upon him the shape
of a servant, and for our sakes became like unto his brethren in all points*
and if we were to seek an other Mediator, who would vouchsafe us some good
will, whom I pray you, could we find, that would love us more earnestly
then he, who willingly laid his life down for us, when as yet we were his
enemies? If moreover we were to seek another that excels both in sovereign
authority and also power, who ever obtained so great power, as he himself, who
sits at the right hand of God the father, and to whom all power is given in
heaven and in earth? To conclude, who was more likely to be heard of God, then
that only begotten and dearly beloved son of God? therefore nothing but
distrust brought in this custom, whereby we rather dishonor the Saints (whom
we think to honor) in doing these things, which they in their life time were
ever so far from doing, that they rather constantly and according to their
duty abhorred them, as their own writings bear witness. Neither is our own
unworthiness here to be alleged for excuse of so great ungodliness. For we at no
hand offer up our prayers trusting to our own worthiness, but resting upon the
only worthiness and excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose righteousness is
ours by faith, whereupon the Apostle for good cause to exempt us from this
vain fear (or rather distrust) says, that Christ was in all things made like
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in
those things that were to be done with God for the clensing of the peoples
sins. For in as much as he being tempted has suffered, he is also able to
help those that are tempted. And that he might encourage us to come the more
boldly to this high Priest, the same Apostle adds, Having therefore a great
high priest, who has entered the heavens, even Jesus the son of god, let us
hol^ fast this profession. For we have not an high priest that cannot be
touched* with the feling of our infirmities, but he was in all things tempted in
like sort, yet without sin. Let us therefore with boldness approach unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of
need. The same Apostle says, that we have liberty to enter into the holy place
thorough the blood of Jesus. Let us therefore draw near with a constant
persuasion of faith, etc. And again* Christ has an everlasting priesthood.
Wherefore he is able (...) to save them, that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives, (...) make intercession for them. What need many words? when as
Christ himself says, I am the way, the truth, and the life. N^ man comes
to the father but by me. Why should we seek unto our selves any other
Advocate? especially seeing it has pleased God himself to give us his own
son for our Advocate, there is no cause why forsaking him we should see^e
another, lest by continual seeking we never find any other. For God
undoubtedly knew, when he gave him (...) us, that we were miserable sinners.
VVhereupon it is, that a*cording to Christ's own commandment, we only ca^
upon the heavenly father by the self same Jesus Christ ou^ only Mediator,
even as he himself also has taught us in the Lords prayer. For we are sure
that we shall obtain a^^ those things, which we ask of the father in his name.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
CHAP. 3.
THE Churches with common consent among us do Artic. 1.
teach, that the decree of the Nicene Council, concerning the unity of the
divine essence, and of the three persons, is true, and without all doubt to be
believed: T^ wit, that there is one divine essence, which is called, and (...)
God, eternal, without body, indivisible, of infinite power wisdom, goo^nes,
the creator and preserver of all things visible and invisible: and that there
be three persons, of the same essence, and power, which also are coeternal the
father the Son, and the holy Ghost. And they use the name (...) person in
that signification, in which the Ecclesiastical writers have used it in this
cause to signify not a part or qu^litie in another, but that which properly
subsisteth.

They condemn all heresies sprung up against this a^cle, as the Manichees, who
set down two beginnings, Go^ and Eu^l^* they do in like sort condemn the
Valentinia^ Arrians, F^nomians, Mahometistes, and all such like. The condemn
also the Samosatenes, old and new, who wh^^ they earnestly defend that there
is but one person, do cr^^tilie and wickedlie dally after the manner of
Rhetoricians about the Word and the holy Ghost, that they are not distinct
persons, but that the word signifies a vocal word, and the spirit a motion
created in things.

Artic. 21.
We have found this 21. Article set forth three diverse ways.
The first edition 1559. goes thus.
Invocation is an honor, which is to be given only to God almighty, that
is, to the eternal father, and to his son our savior Jesus Christ, and to
the holy Ghost. And God has proposed his son Jesus Christ for a Mediator,
and high Priest that makes in^ercession for us. He testifies, that for him
alone our prai^rs are heard and accep^^d, according to that saying, whatsoever
you ask the fath^^ in my name, he shall give it to you. Again, There is one
Mediator between God and men. Therefore let them that call upon God offer up
their prayers by the son of God, as in the end of prayers it is accustomed to
be said in the Church, through Jesus Christ, etc. These things are needful to
be taught concerning Invocation, as our men have elsewhere more at large
written of Invocation. But contrariwise the custom of inuocating Saints that
are departed out of this life is to be reproved and quite thrown out of the
Church, because this custom transferreth the glory due to God alone unto men,
it ascribes unto the dead an omnipotency, in that saints should see the
motions of men's hearts, yea it ascribes unto the dead the office of Christ the
Mediator, and without al doubt obscureth the glory of Christ. Therefore we
condemn the wholl custom of inuocating Saints departed, and think it is to
be avoided. Notwithstanding it profits to recite the true histories of holy
men, because their examples do profitablie instruct, if they be rightly
propounded. When we hear that David's fall was forgiven him, faith is confirmed
in us also. The constancy of the ancient Martyrs does now likewise strengthen
the minds of the godly. For this use it is profitable to recite the
histories. But yet there had need be discretion in applying examples.

The second edition is thus.
Artic. 21.
COncerning the worship of Saints they teach, the it is profitable to propose
the memory of Saints, tha^ by their examples we may strengthen our faith, and
that we may follow their faith and good works, so far as every man* calling
requires, as the Emperor may follow David's example in making war to beat
back the Turks, for either of them is a King: we ought also to give God
thanks, that he has propounded so many and glorious examples of his mercy in
the Saints of his Church, and that he has adorned hi^ Church with most
excellent gifts and virtues of holy men. The Saints themselves also are to be
commended, who have holilie used those gifts which they employed to the
beautifying of the Church: But the scripture teaches not to invoke Saints,
or to ask help of Saints, but lays only Christ before us for a Mediator,
propitiatour, high priest and intercessour. Concerning him we have
commandments and promises, that we invoke him, and should be resolved that
our prayers are heard, when we fly to this high priest and intercessour, as
John says, Chap. 16. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will
give it you, etc. and Ioh. 14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that I will
do, These testimonies bid us fly unto Christ, they command us to believe
that Christ is the intercessour and peace maker, they bid us trust assuredly
that we are heard of the father for Christ's sake. But as touching the Saints,
there are neither commandments, nor promises, nor examples for this purpose
in the scriptures. And Christ's office and honor is obscured, when men fly to
Saints, and take them for Mediators, and invoke them, and frame unto
themselves an opinion, that the Saints are more gracious and so transfer the
confidence due to Christ unto Saints. But Paull says, There is one Mediator
between God and men* Therefore Christ especially requires this worship, that
we should believe that he is to be sought unto, that he is the intercessour,
for whose sake we are sure to be heard, etc.

In the third edition these things are thus found.
Artic. 21.
TOuching the worship of Saints they teach, that the memory of Saints may be
set before us, that we may follow their faith and good works according to our
calling as the Emperor may follow David's example in making war to drive
away the Turks from his country: for either of them is a King. But the
scripture teaches not to invoke Saints, or to ask help of Saints, because
it propounds unto us one Christ the Mediator, propitiatour, high Priest, and
intercessour. This Christ is to be inuocated, and he has promised that he will
hear our prayers, and likes this worship especially, to wit, that he be
inuocated in all afflictions. 1. Ioh. 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate
with God, etc.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Of Inuocating godly men that are departed out of this life. Artic. 22.
IN the 42. Chapter of Esaie it is written, I am the Lord, this is my name, I
will not give my glory to another: Invocation is a glory most properly
belonging to God, as the Lord says Math. 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. And it is an immooueable and eternal
decree of the first commandment, Thou shall have no strange Gods. It is
necessary therefore that the doctrine touching Invocation should be most purely
vpholden in the Church, for the corrupting of which the Devil, even since the
beginning of mankind, has and will diverse ways scatter seeds. Wherefore we
ought to be the more watchefull, and with greater care to retain the manner of
invocation or adoration set down in Gods word, according to that saying,
whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will do it. In these words
there is an order established, which we ought most constantly to maintain, not
to mingle therewith other (...) contrary to gods word, or which are warranted
by no example approved in the scriptures. There is no greater virtue, no
comfort more effectual, then true invocation* They therefore must needs be
reproved, who either neglect true invocation or corrupt it, as there be diverse
corruptions. Many do not discern their own invocation from that which is
heathenish, neither indeed consider what it is which they speak unto. Of
these the Lord says, John Chapter 4. Ye^ worship ye know not what. He will
have the Church to consider whereto it speaks, saying, We worship that we
know. Many consider not whether or wherefore they shall be heard* They recite
prayers, and yet they doubt, although it be written, Let him ask in faith
without wavering. Of these matters we will speak else where. In this place we
reprove this heathenish corruption, whereby the custom of those that call
upon men departed out of this life, is defended, and help or intercesson is
sought for at their hands. Such inuocatino swarueth from God, and gives unto
creatures virtue, help, or intercession. For they that speak somewhat
modestly, speak of intercession alone. But humane superstition goes on
farther, and gives virtue to them, as many public songs declare. O Marie
Mother of grace, defend the us from the enemy, and receive us in the hour of
death. These shore verses have we heard a Monk of their divinity say before
one thatlaie a dying* and often repeating them, whereas he made no mention of
Christ: and many such examples might be rehearsed.

There are yet also other brainsick opinions. Some are thought to be more
gracious with such or such images: these fra^tike imaginations seeing they are
at the first sight like heathnish conceits, do vndoubledlie both greatly
provoke the wrath of God, and are to be reproved by the teachers, and
sharply to be punished by Godly magistrates, which reproof contains these
three manifest reasons: To ascribe unto creatures omnipotency, is impiety*
Invocation of a creature, which is departed from the society of this life,
ascribes unto it omnipotency, because it is a confession, that it beholds
all men's hearts, and discerns the true sighs thereoffrom feined and
hypocritical. These are only to be given to the eternal father, to his sone
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the holy Ghost. Invocation therefore is not to
be made to men that are departed out of this life. It is to be lamented that
these evils are not perceived: but look to thy self, and weigh what thou
do: in this invocation thou forsakest God, and do not consider what thou
do invoke, and thou know est that those patrones which thou seek, as
Anne and George, see not the motions of thy heart, who if they knew themselves
to be inuocated, they would even tremble, and would not have this honor, due
to God, given to an^e (...) But what kind of invocation is there of the (...)
Albeit we know what answer the Adversaries make (for ^h^y have coined cauills
to delude the truth) yet Gods ^^st^monies are wanting to their answer, and
prayer which ^s without faith (that is, when thou can not be resolved whether
God allow and admit such kind of praying) is in vain.

We remember that Luther often said, that in the old testament it is a clear
testimony of the Messiah his Godhead, which affirms that he is to be
inuocated, and by this property is the Messiah there distinguished from other
Prophets: he complained that that most weighty testimony was obscured and
weakened by transferring prayer to other men. And for this only cause he
said, that the custom of praying to other was to be misliked.

The second reason is, Invocation is vain without faith, and no worship is to
be brought into the church without gods commandment: but there is no one
sentence to be seen, which shows that this prayer made to me^, which they
man teine, pleases God, and is effectual: the prayer therefore is vain. For
waht kind of praying is it, in this sort to come unto Anne or George? I pray
unto the, but I doubt whether thy intercession do me good, I doubt whether thou
hear me, or healpest* me, If men understood these hid sins, they would
curse such kind of prayers, as they are indeed to be cursed, and are
heathenish. Afterward of such faults what outrages ensue? flocking and praying
to particular images, craving certain benefits of every one, of Anne riches
are begged, as of Juno, of George conquests, as of Mars, of Sebastian and Paul
freedom from the plague, of Anthony sauegard for swine, although the
adversaries say they like not these things, yet they keep them still for
gain sake, as plainly appears.

Now let us add the third reason: it is expresselie written, there is one
Mediator between God and men the man Christ Jesus, on him ought we in all
prayer to cast our eyes, and to know the doctrine of the Gospel concerning
him, that no man can come unto God but by confidence in the Mediator, who
together makes request for us, as himself says. No (...) comes to the
father, but by the son. And he bids us fl^e unto himself, saying. Come
unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you: and
he him*selfe teaches the manner of Invocation, when he says. Whatsoever ye
shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you. He names the father,
that thou may distinguish thy invocation from heathenish, and consider what
thou speak unto: that thou may consider him to be the true God, who by
sending his son, has revealed himself, that thy mind may not wander, as
the heathenish woman in the tragedy speaks, I pray unto thee O God,
whatsoever thou art, and* But that thou may know him to be the true God,
who by the sending, crucifying, and raising up again of his son has
revealed himself, and may know him to be such a one as he has revealed
himself. Secondly that thou may know, that he does so for a certainty
receive and hear us, making our prayers when we fly to his son the mediator,
crucified and raised up again for us, and desire that for his sake we may be
received, heard, helped, and saved, neither is any man, received or hear^ of
God by any other means. Neither is this praying uncertain, but he bids
those that pray on this sort to be resolved through a strong faith, that this
worship pleases God, and that they who pray on this manner are assured*lie
received and heard: therefore he says, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
that is, acknowledging, and naming o^ calling upon me as the redeemer, high
Priest, and intercessor: this high Priest alone goes into the holiest place,
that is, into the secret counsel of the deity, and sees the mind of the
eternal father, and makes request for us, and searching our hearts presents
our sorrows, sighs, and prayers unto him.

It is plain that this doctrine of the Mediator was obscured and corrupted,
when men went to the mother Virgin, as more merciful, and others sought other
Mediators. And it is plain that there is no example to be seen in the
Prophets or Apostles, where prayer is made unto men, hear me Abraham, or hear
me O God for Abraham's sake: but prayer is made unto God, who has revealed
himself, to wit, to the eternal father, to the son our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the holy Ghost, that he would receive, hear and save us for the sons
sake. It is also expresselie made to the son, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. Our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and God and our father who has loved us, strengthen you, etc.
and Genesis 48. Jacob names God, and the son the Mediator, when he says. God
before whom my fathers walked, and the Angel that delivered me out of all
troubles (that is the promised Savior) bless these children. Therefore we use
these forms of invocation. I call upon the O Almighty God, eternal father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, maker of heaven and earth, together with thy son our
Lord Jesus Christ, and thy holy spirit, O wise, true, good, righteous, most
free, chaste, and merciful God, have mercy upon me, and for Jesus Christ's
sake, thy son, crucified for us, and raised up again, hear and sanctify me
with thy holy spirit. I call upon the O Jesus Christ, the son of God,
crucified for us, and raised up again: have mercy on me, pray for me unto the
everlasting father, and sanctify me with thy holy spirit. In these form; we
know what we pray unto. And seeing there are testimonies of Gods word to be
seen, which show that this praying pleases God, and is heard, such praying
may be made in faith. These things are not to be found in that invocation
which is made unto men. Some gather testimonies out of Augustine and others, to
show that the Saints in heaven have care of humane affairs. This may more
plainly be showed by Moses and Elias talking with Christ. And there is no
doubt but that such as are in happiness pray for the Church, but yet it
follows not thereupon that they are to be prayed unto.

And albeit we teach that men are not to be prayed unto, yet we propound the
histories of those that are in blessed state unto the people. Because it is
necessary that the history of the Church be by some means known unto all, by
what testimonies the Church is called together and founded, and how it is
preserved, and what kind of doctrine has ben^ published by the fathers,
Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs* In these histories we command all to give
thanks unto God, for that he has revealed himself, that he has gathered
together his Church by his son, that he has delivered his doctrine unto us,
and has sent teachers, and has showed in them the witnesses of him self: we
command al to consider of their doctrine, and to strength their faith by
those testimonies, which God has showed in them. That they likewise consider
the examples of judgment and punishments, that the fear of God may be stirred
up in them we command them to follow their faith, patience, and other virtues,
that they learn that in God is no respect of persons, and desire to have
themselves also received, heard, governed, saved, and helped, as God received
David, Manasses, Magdalene, the thief on the Cross. We also teach how these
examples are to be followed of every man in his vocation: because error in
imitation, and preposterous zeal is often times the cause of great evils. We
also commend the diligence of the Saints themselves, who took heed of De
effusione Sp* sancti, vide obseruat 1. ad hanc Confess. Sect. 4.
wasting Gods gifts in vain. And to conclude, they that are most fools may
gather great stored doctrine out of these histories, which doctrine is
profitable to be published to the people, so that superstition be ^e^ aside.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WITTEMBERG^
CHAP. 1.
WE believe and confess that there is one onel^ God, true, eternal, and
infinite, almighty, ma^^ of all things visible and invisible, and that in
this one (...) eternal godhead there are three properties or persons of them
selves subsisting, the Father, the son, and the holy Ghost. As the
Prophetical and Apostolical scriptures teach, and the Creedes of the Apostles
of Nice and of Athanasius declare.

Of the son of God.
CHAP. 2.
WE believe and confess that the son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, was
begotten of his father from everlasting, true and everlasting God,
consubstantiall with his Father, etc. Look the rest in the 6. division.

Of the holy Ghost.
CHAP. 3.
WE believe and confess that the holy Ghost proceeds from God the Father,
from everlasting, that he is true and eternal God, of the same essence, and
majesty, and glory with the Father, and the son, as the holy Fathers, by
authority of the holy scripture, well declared in the Council of
Constantinople against Macedonius.

Of Invocation of Saints.
CHAP. 23.
THere is no doubt but the memory of those Saints, who when they were in this
bodelie life furthered the Church either by doctrine, or writings, or by
miracles, or by examples, and have either witnessed the truth of the gospel
by Martyrdom, or by a quiet kind of death fallen on sleep in Christ, ought to
be sacred with all the Godly: and they are to be commended to the Church, that
by their doctrine and examples, we may be strengthened in true faith, and
inflamed to follow true godliness.

We confess also, that the Saints in heaven do after their certain manner
pray for us before God, as the Angels *Vide obseru. 1. ad confess. Saxon. sect.
1.
also are careful for us, and all the creatures do after a certain heavenly
manner groan for our salvation, and travel together with us, as Paull
speaks. But as the worship of invocation of creatures is not to be instituted
upon their gronings, so upon the prayer of Saints in heaven, we may not allow
the invocation of saints. For touching the inuocating of them, there is no
commandment, nor example in the holy scriptures. For seeing al hope of our
salvation is to be put, not in the saints, but in our Lord god alone, through
his son our Lord Jesus Christ, it is clear, that not the Saints, but God
alone is to be prayed unto. How shall they call one him, says Paul, in whom
they believe no t? but we must not believe in the saints: how then shall we pr
ay unto them? And seeing it must needs be, that he who i^ prayed unto be a
searcher of the heart, the Saints ought not to be prayed unto, because they are
no searchers of the heart.

Cont^a Colly ridianos.
Epiphanius says, Mary's body was holy indeed* but yet not god* she was
indeed a Virgin, and honorable, but she was not propounded for adoration, but
her self worshipped him, who as concerning his flesh De vera relih. cap. vlt.
was borne of her. Austine says. Let not the worship of dead men b^ any
religion unto us, because if they have lived holily, they are not s^ to be
accounted of, as that they should seek such honor, but rather they will have
him to be worshipped of us, by whom themselves being Ibidem.
illuminated rejoice, that we should be fellow servants of their reward. They
are therefore to be honored for imitation, not to be worshipped for Religion
sake. And again in the same place* We honor them with love, not with service.
Neither do we erect temples unto them, for they will not have themselves so to
be honored of us, because they know that we our selves being good, are the
temple Deciuit. D^^ l. 8. eap. 27.
of the high God. And again, Neither do we consecrate temple^* Priesthoodes,
holy rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices unto the same Martyrs, seeing not they,
but their God, is our God, etc. We neither ordain Priests for our Martyrs,
nor offer sacrifices. Ambrose upon the Romans, Chap. 1. They are wont to use a
miserable excuse saying, that by these men may have access unto God, (...) to
a king by Earls. Goeto: is any man so mad, I pray you, that being
forgetful of his own salvation, he will challenge, as fit for (...) Earl,
the roialtie of a King? And straight after. These me^ think them not guilty,
that give the honor of Gods name to a creature, and leaving the Lord worship
their fellow servants.

But we, say they, worship not the saints, but only desire to be helped
before God by their prayers. But so to desire, as the service of Letanies
shows, and is commonly used, is nothing else but to call upon and worship
saints* for such desiring requires, that he who is desired, be every where
present and hear the petition. But this Majesty agrees to god alone, and if
it be given to the creature, the creature is worshipped.

Some men feign that the Saints see in Gods word, what things God promises,
and what things seem profitable for us: which thing although it be not
impossible to the majesty of God, yet Esai plainly auou^cheth, That Abraham
knows us not, and Israel is ignorant of us: where the ordinary gloss
cites Augustine saying, that the dead, even saints, know not what the living
do, etc.

For that the ancient writers often times in their prayers turn themselves to
Saints, they either simply without exact judgment followed the error of the
common people, or used such manner of speaking, not as divine honor, bur as a
figure of Grammar, which they call Prosopopaeia: VVherby godly and learned men
do not mean that they worship and pray to Saints, but do set out the
unspeakable groaning of the Saints, and of al creatures, for our salvation:
and signify that the godly prayers, whichi Saints thorough the holy ghost
powered out in this world before God, do as yet ring in gods ears, as also the
blood of Abell after his death still cried before god: and in the Revelation
the souls of the Saints that were killed cry, that their blood may be
revenged: not that they now resting in the Lord, are desirous of revenge, after
the manner of men, but because the Lord even after their death, is mindful of
the prayers, which while they yet lived on earth, they powered out for their
own and the wholl Churches deliverance.

Epiphanius himself against Aerius, does also somewhat stick in the common
error, yet he teaches plainly, that the saints are mentioned in the church,
not that they should be prayed unto, but rather that they should not be prayed
unto, nor matched in honor with Christ. We, says he, make mention of the
righteous Fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs,
Confessors, Bishops, Anachoretes, and the wholl company, that we may single
out the Lord Jesus Christ from that company of men, by the honor which we
give unto him, and that we may give him such worship, as by which we may
signify that we think, that the Lord is not to be made equal with any among
men, although every of them were a thousand times, and above, more righteous
then they are.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Artic. 1. ss. 2.
SInce sermons began with us to be taken out of the holy scriptures of God,
and those deadly contentions ceased, so many as were led with any desire of
true Godliness, have obtained a far more certain knowledge of Christ's
doctrine, and far more fervently expressed it in the conversation of their
life. And even as they declined from those things, which had peruerselie crept
into the doctrine of Christ: so they were more and more confirmed in those
things, which are altogether agreeable thereunto: Of which sort are the
Articles, which the Christian Church has hitherto steadfastly believed
touching the holy Trinity: to wit, that God the father, the son, and the
holy ghost are one essence and three persons, and admit no other division or
difference, then the distinction of persons.

Artic. II.
Of Inuocating and worshipping of Saints.
Moreover, that abuse also was reproved and con^^^ed, by which some think
they can so, by fastings and prayers, win and bind unto themselves both the
blessed Virgin Marie that bare God, and other Saints, that they hope by their
intercession and merits they may be delivered from all adversities, as well of
soul as of body, and be enr^^^hed with all kind of good things. For our
Preachers have taught by the commandment of Christ the savior, that that
heavenly father alone is by the same Christ in the holy spirit to be prayed
unto, as he who has promised that he will never deny us any of those things,
which we by a true faith ask of him thorough his son. And seeing the
scripture it self sets before us one only Mediator between God and men,
to wit, the man Jesus Christ, 1. Tim. 2. who both loves us moreentirelie, and
can by authority do more with the father then any other, they rightly
think, that this only intercessour and advocate ought to suffice us. Yet
they do therewithal teach, that the most holy mother of God and Virgin
Marie, and other beloved Saints, are with great diligence to be honored. But
that that thing can not otherwise be done, then if we study to be conversant
in those things, to which they especially gave themselves (namely, to
innocence and sanctification,) and of which they set before us so worthy
examples. For since they with all their heart and soul, and with all their
strength do love God, we can in nothing please them better, then if we also
with them love God from the heart, and by all means possible to make our
selves conformable to him, so far of are they from ascribing their own
salvation to their merits: how therefore should they presume to help any
other with their merits? Nay rather every one of them while they lived here
said with Paull, the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of
the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. For I despise not the
grace of God. seeing therefore they them selves attribute whatsoever they either
be or have to the goodness of god and to the redemption of the Lord Jesus
Christ, we can please them no way better, then if we also wholly rest in the
same things alone: which very thing Saint Augustine also teaches toward the
end of his book, De vera religione.

CHAP. 22. Of Images.
AS touching Images, our preachers reproved this especially out of the holy
scriptures, that adoring and inuocating of them is so openly granted to the
simple people against the express commandment of God. Secondly that so great
cost is bestowed for their worship and ornament: by which rather the hungry,
thirsty, naked, fatherles, sick, and those that are in bonds for Christ, ought
to have been relieved. Lastly because the most part are so persuaded, that
with such worship and cost bestowed upon Images, (both which things God
abhors) they deserve much at gods hand, and that they obtain special help
by this means. Contrariewise the same men do teach, that the ancient writers
(so long as christian faith remained somewhat pure) understood the scriptures,
which forbid worshipping and praying to Images, in this sense, that they thought
it an abominable thing to admit any Images, either graven or painted, in the
Church, although they were not otherwise ignorant, what our liberty is, as in
all external things, so likewise in Images. For they nothing douted but that
it was flat contrary both to the commandments of scripture, and also to the
holy religion. Which may especially be proved even by those things which
blessed Epiphanius in times past Bishop of Salaminium in Cyprus, writes of
himself in an epistle to John Bishop of Jerusalem, which also S. Jerome turned
out of Greek into Latin, because he thought it both Christian, and profitable
to be read, and these are Epiph. his own words.

When we went together to the holy place which is called Beth^* that there I
might make a collectio^ with thee, after the custom of the Church, and was
come to the village which is called Anablotha, and passing by saw there a
lamp burning, and had asked what place i^ was, and had learned that it was a
Church, and was gone in to pray, I found there a veil hanging at the ent y of
the same Church, stained and painted and having the image as it might be of
Christ or some saint (for I do not well remember whose picture it was) when
therefore I had seen this in Christ's Church contrary to the commandment of
the scriptures, that there hong a man's picture, I (...) it* (...) ou^r I
counseled the keepers of that place that they sho^^^ ^in^^ and (...) some poor
body in it. And a l^le after, when (...) had brought an excuse for his delaie
in sending another veil that he had promised, he adds, And now I have sent
that I could find, and I pray thee bed the Elders of the same place tak^ the
veil, that we have sent, of the bearer, and bid that henceforth such vailes as
be contrary to our religion be (...) hanged up in the Church of Christ. Lo
this godly Bishope writes, that it is against the holy scriptures, and
Christian religion to have even Christ's own picture in the Church: and ^h^t in
so plain words, that it may appear to them, that as well the bishop of
Jerusalem himself* and Jerome, as al other m^n of that age thought the some,
and that that faith and custom of (...) images has been always of old in
the Church of Christ, and brought in by the Apostles themselves.

Whereas some say further, that Images be profitable for the instruction of the
Lay people, it appears first of all* that almost all Images were set up for
pomp and superstition rather then for any other use. Secondly neither is that
reason very sound. For although the Lord would instruct and bring to the
knowledge of his goodness the Jews (far more dull then becomes Christians
to be) by diverse outward ceremonies and p^dagogies, yet he was so far from
thinking that the use of Images, was fit and convenient for that purpose,
that he did even by name forbid it unto them. For whoesouer is not instructed
and stirred up to the worship of God by the word of God* and by so excellent
works of his (which he la^eth before us both in heaven and earth, and which are
continually before our eyes and at hand, and which to conclude we so
plentifully enjoy) surely the form of Gods creatures altered by man's cunning,
and so shapen, that stones, trees, mettalls, and other like matter do no
longer retain their own shape such as they received it of God, but carry the
countenance either of men or of beasts, or of other things, will do him no
good. Yea it is certain, that by the workmanship of such Images men are more
withdrawn from the view of Gods works to their own works, or to men's
inventions: so that they do not every where think alike of God, but keep in
religious cogitations until such time as they light upon some Image. But
surely if a man mark it well, the heaven and the earth, and whatsoever is
contained in them, are excellent and worthy Images of God.

The heathens also used a pretense of instruction and teaching, to maintain
their Idols, but the holy fathers rested not in such excuses (Of which matter
Lactantius treats at large in his second book of Institut.) neither could
the heathens better abide to be vpbraided for that they worshipped stones, and
stocks, then can the men of our age, as they which oftentimes confidentlie
affirmed, that they took the Images to be nothing else but Images: and that
they sought nothing else, but to be instructed and admonished by them.

And these things does Athanasius control in these words: Go to, let them
tell me how God is known by Images, that is whether it be for the matter
whereof they consist, or for the form imprinted in that matter. If the matter
serve the turn, what need is there I pray you of the form? For God himself
shines forth even in the matter, before that any thing be framed thereof by
man's hands for all things show forth gods glory. But if the form is self,
which is fitted to the matter, gives occasion to know God, what need such
Images? might not God be known far more excellently by the things
themselves, whereof Images be made? surely the glory of God might much more
visiblie be seen, by the living creatures themselves, either reasonable, or
unreasonable, set before our eyes, then by dead Images which can not m^oue. And
if any man shall say, these things might well be brought against Images, by
which men think they may come to the knowledge of God, but we are to think
otherwise of the Images of our Lord Jesus Christ, and other Saints. Let him in
like sort think that God did many external works in Israel, of which he
commands them to be mindeful for ever: and that he raised up unto them not a
few famous and holy men, whose faith he would never have them to forget. Yet
he never established the memorial of them by such Images: that he might give no
occasion of backsliding or Apostasy, which is wont to follow the worshipping
of Images. Wherefore in the purer primitive church it was abomination to have
even the Image of Christ, as has been before showed. To be short our Preachers
confess that Images of themselves are indifferent, so that no worship or
adoration be done unto them. But it is not enough for a christian man to have a
thing free, but he ought always to have a diligent respect hereunto, whether
the same be profitable for edification* 1. Cor. 10. for nothing is to be
suffered or assayed in the Church, which has not in it some certain use of
edifying. Seeing then it plainly appears what grievous offenses Images in
times past brought forth, and do as yet bring forth* and seeing it cannot be
showed, wh^^ profit can be hoped for thereof (unless peradventure we will be
counted quicker sighted then God himself, and the ancient christians that
were truly Godly, who were so far from taking any profit thereby, that
they even abhorred Images in Churches) all Images and Idols are worthelie to
be abhorred in the Church. Neither can the workmanship of the Cherubins upon
the a^ke of the covenant or other Ornaments of the Temple, which the Patrones
of Images are wont to object unto us, hinder this truth among Christians. For
God had expresselie commanded the Cherubins to be made, but he would not have
them seen of the people. And all the other things were ordained rather for the
beauty of ^he Temple, then to learn any knowledge of God thereby although
from them (as from all the rest of Gods work^s) they which were spiritual,
might take occasion to meditate upon the goodness of god. But it is requisite
also to call this to mind, that we are much more bound to worship God in
spirit and truth then they of old time were: for that we are more plentifully
enriched with Christ's spirit, if we truly believe in him.

THE THIRD SECTION. OF THE ETERNAL PROVIDENCE OF God, and the creation of the
world.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the providence of God. CHAP. 6.
WE believe that all things, both in heaven and in earth, and in all creatures
are sustained and governed by the providence of this wise, eternal, and
omnipotent God. For David witnesses, and says, The Lord is high above all
nations, and his glory above the heavens. Who is as our God who dwells on
high and yet humbles him self, to behold the things that are in heaven and
earth? Again he says, Thou have foreseen all my Psalm. 139. 3.
ways. For there is not a word in my tongue, which thou know not wholly, O
Lord, etc. Paul also witnesleth and says, By him we Acts. 17. 28. Romans 11. 36.
live, move, and have our being. And, of him, and through him, and for him, are
all things. Therefore Augustine both truly and according to the scripture
said in his book de agone Christi, cap. 8. The Lord said, Are not two
sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground
without the will of your father? By speaking thus he would give us to
understand that whatsoever men count most vile, that also is governed by the
almighty power of God. For the truth which said, that all the hairs of our
heads are numbered, says also that the birds of the air are fed by him, and
the lilies of the field are clothed by him.

We therefore condemn the Epicures who deny the providence of God, and all
those, who blasphemouslie affirm, that god is occupied about the poles of
heaven, and tha^ he neither seth nor regards us or our affairs. The
princely prophet David also condemned these men, when as ^e Psalm. 94.
said, O Lord, How long, how long shall the wicked triumph, they (...) the Lord
does not see, neither does the God of Jacob regard it. Understand ye unwise
among the people, and ye fools when will yea wise. He that has planted the
ear, shall he not hear, and he the has formed the cie, how should he not
see? Notwithstanding (...) do not contemn the means whereby the prouidenced
God works, as though they were unprofitable, but w^ reach, that we must
apply our selves unto them, so far as they are commended to us in the word
of God. VVhetfore we mislike the rash speeches of such as say, that if by the
providence of God all things are governed, then all o^ studies and endeavors
are unprofitable. It shall be sufficient, if we leave or permit all things to
be governed by the providence of God, and we shall not need herafter to be
careful or to be taught i^ any matter. For though Paul did confess that he did
sail by the providence of god, who had said Acts. 23. 11.
to him, Thou must testify of me also at Rome, who moreover promised and said,
There shall not so much as one soul perish. Neith^ shall an hair fall from your
heads. Yet the mariners devising how they might find a way to escape, the
same Paul sait^ Acts. 27. 34.
to the Centurion, and to the soldiers, Unless these remain i^ the ship, ye
can not be safe. For God who has appointed euerthing his end, he also has
ordained the beginning and the means by which we must attain unto the end.
The heathens ascribe things to blind fortune and vncertain^ James. 4.
chance, but Saint James would not have us say, To dai^^ to morrow we will go
into such a City, and there buie and sell: but he adds, for that which you
should say, if the Lord will, and if we live, we will do this or that. And
Augustine says, All those things which seem to ^aine men to be done
unadvisedly in the world, they do but accomplish his word, because they are
not do^^* but by his commandment. And in his exposition on the 148. Psalm. It
seemed to be done by chance, that Saull seeking his fathers Asses should light
on the Prophet Samuel: but the Lord had before said to the Prophet, to morrow
I will send unto the a man of the Tribe of Benjamin, etc.

Of the creation of all things, of the Angels, the Devil, and man. CHAP. 7.
THis good and almighty God created all things both visible and invisible by
his eternal word, and preserves the same also by his eternal spirit: as David
witnesses, saying: By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the
Psalm. 33. 6.
host of them by the breath of his mouth. And (as the scripture says) All
things that the Lord created were very good, And made for the use and profit
of man. Now we say, that all those things do proceed from one beginning: and
therefore we detest the Manichees and Ma^cionites, who did wickedly imagine two
substances and natures, the one of good, the other of evil; and also two
beginnings, and two gods, one contrary to the other, a good, and an evil.

Amongst all the creatures, the Angels and men are most excellent. Touching
Angels the holy scripture says, Who Psalm. 104. 4. Heb. 5. 14.
makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. Also, Are they
not ministering spirits sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be
the heirs of salvation? And, the Lord Jesus him self testifies of the Devil
saying, He has been a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the
truth, because the^e is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks
of his owne^ for he is a lier, and the Father thereof. We teach therefore that
some Angels persisted in obedience, and were appo^nted unto the faithful
service of god and men, and that other some fell of their own accord, and
ran headlong into destruction, and so became enemies to all good, and to all
the faithful, etc.

Now touching man, the spirit says, that in the beginning he was created good
according to the image, and likeness of God, that god placed him in paradise and
made all things subject unto him* which David does most nobly set forth in
the 8 Psalm. Moreover God gave unto him a wife, and blessed them. We sai^
also, that man does consist of two and those diverse substances in one person,
of a soul immortal (as that which being separated from the body, does
neither sleep, nor die) and a body mortal, which notwithstanding at the last
judgment shall be raised again from the dead that from thenceforth the wholl
man may continue for ever, in life or in death. We condemn all those, which
mock at, or by subtle disputations call into doubt the immortality of the
souls, or say that the soul sleeps, or that it is a part of God. To be
short, we condemn all opinions of al men whatsoever, which think otherwise of
the creation of Angels, devils, and men, then is delivered unto us by the
scriptures in the Apostolic Church of Christ.

Artic. 1.
OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
WE also believe, that God made all things by hi^ everlasting word: that is,
by his only begotten sonne^ and that he vpholdeth and works all things by
his spirit, that is, by his own power. And therefore that God, as he has
created, so he foreseeth and governs all Art. 3.
things. And albeit man by the same fall became subject to damnation, and so
was made an enemy to god, yet that God never laid aside the care of mankind.
The Patriarks, the promises before and after the flood, likewise the law of God
given by Moses and the holy Prophets, do witness this thing.

Artic. 2.
OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
THis one only God has revealed himself unto men: first, both in the
creation, and also in the preservation, and government of his works, etc.
Look the rest in the first Section, of the scripture, and the second Section,
of God.

Arti^. 7.
WE believe that God, the three persons working together, by his virtue,
wisdom, and incomprehensible goodness has made all things, that is, not
only heaven and earth, and all things therein contained, but also the
invisible spirits, of which some fell head long into destruction, and some
continued in obedience. Therefore we say that they, as they are through their
own malice corrupted, are perpetual enemies to all good, and therefore to the
whole Church* but that these, preserved by the mere grace of God, are ministers
for his glory, and for the salvation of the Elect.

We believe that God has not only made al things, but Art. 8.
also rules and governs them, as he who according to hi^ will disposes and
orders whatsoever happens in the world. Yet we deny that he is the author
of evil, or that any blame of things done amiss, can be laid upon him,
seeing his will is the sovereign and most certain rule of all righteousness,
but he has wonderful rather then explicable means, by which he so uses all the deuiles and sinful men as instruments, that whatsoever they do euillie,
that he as he has justly ordained, so he also turns it to good. Therefore
while we confess that nothing at all is ^o be done, but by the means of his
providence and appointment, we do in all humility adore his secrets that are
hid fr^^ us, neither do we search into those things which be without the
reach of our capacity. Nay rather we apply to our own use that which the
scripture teaches for our qui^^nes and ^ontentation sake, to wit, that God, to
whom all things are subject, with a Fatherly care watches for us, so that
(...) ^o much as a hair of our head f^lleth to the ground, (...) out his will.
and that he has Satan and all ou^ adversary so fast bound, that unless leave
be given them, they cannot do us any little harm.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. 2.
WE know God by two manner of wa^^^ (...) by the making, preserving, and
governing (...) world. For that to our eyes is as a most excellent b^oke, in
which al creatures from the least to the greatest (...) graven, as it were
characters, and certain l^^ters* by which the invisible things of God may be
seen and k^^w^e of v^: namely his everlasting power and godheade, as Paull
^he Apostle speaks, Romans 1. Chap. 10. (...) suffices to convince and make
all men without (...) etc. Look for the rest in the first Section, of the
scripture, (...) in the second Section, of God.

Artic. 12.
WE believe that the father by his word, that is, by the son, made heaven,
(...) and al other creatures of nothing, when he saw it (...) and convenient,
and gave to every one his being, for^^ and diverse offices, that they might
serve their creator, and that he does now cherish, uphold, and govern them
al, according to his everlasting providence and infinite power* and that to
this end, that they might serve man, and man might serve his God. He also made
the Angels, all good by nature, that they might be his ministers, and might
also attend upon the elect: of which notwithstanding some fell from that
excellent nature in which God had created them, into everlasting destruction:
but some by the singular grace of God abode in the first state of theirs* but
the Devils, and those wicked spirits, are so corrupted and defiled, that they
be sworn enemies to good and all goodness, which as thieves out of a watch
towe* lie in wait for the Church and all the members thereof, that by their
iuglings and deceits they may destroy and la^e waste all things. Therefore
being through their own malice addicted to everlasting condemnation, they
look every day for the dreadful punishments of their mischeifes. We
therefore in this place reject the error of the Saduce^, who denied that there
were any spirits or Angels, as also the error of the Manichees, who hold that
the Devils have their beginning of themselves, and are of their own nature
evil, and not corrupted by wilful disobedience.

We believe that this most gracious and mighty God, after he had made al
things, left them not to be ruled after the will of chance or fortune, but
himself does so continually rule and govern them, according to the prescri^^
rule of his holy will, that nothing can happen in this world without his
decree and ordinance, and yet God cannot be said to be either the author, or
guilty of the evils that happen in this world. For both his infinite and
incomprehensible power and goodness streatcheth so far, that even the^ he
decrees and executes his works and deeds justly and holily, when as both
the devil and the wicked do vn^us^^ie. And whatsoever things he does passing
the reach of man's capacity, we will not curiously and above our capacity
inquire into them: Nay, rather we humbly and reverently adore the secret, yet
just judgments of God. For i^ suffices us (as being Christ's disciples) to
learn only those things which he himself teachth in his word, neither do^^
think it lawful to pass these bounds. And this doctrine afordeth us
exceeding great comfort. For by it we know that nothing befalls us by
chance, but all by the will of our heavenly father, who watches over us with
a fatherly care in deed, having all things in subjection to him self, so that
not a hair of our head (which are every one numbered) can be plucked away,
nor the least sparrow light on the ground, without the will of our father. In
these things therefore do we wholly rest, acknowledging that God holds the
Devils and all our enemies so bridled as it were with snaffles, that without
his will and good leave they are not able to hurt any of us: and in this place
we reject the detestable opinion of the Epicures, who fained God to be idle, to
do nothing, and to commit all things to chance.

THE FOVRTH SECTION. OF MAN'S FALL, SIN, AND FREE WILL.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of man's fall, sin, and the cause of sin. CHAP. 8.
MAN was from the beginning created of God afer the Image of God, ^n
righteousness and true holiness, good, and upright: but by the instinct of the
serpent and his own fault, falling from goodness and vprightnes, become subject
to sin, death, and diverse calamities, and such an one as he became by his
fall, such are all his offspring, even subject to sin, death, and sundry
calamities. And we take sin to be that natural corruption of man, deriued^
spread from those our first parents unto us al, through wh^^^ we being dorwned
in evil concupiscenses, and cleene turn^ away from God, but prone to all
evil, full of all wickedness, distrust, contempt, and hatred of God, can do no
good^ our selves, no not so much as think of any. And th at m^^ Math. 12.
is, even as we do grow in years, so by wicked thoughts words, and deeds
committed against the law of God, we bring forth corrupt fruits, worthy of an
evil tree: in (...) respect, we through our own desert, being subject to the
wrath of God arein danger of just punishments: so the we had all been cast
away from God, had not Christ the deliverer brought us back again.

By death therefore, we understand not only bodily death, which is once to be
suffered of all us for sins, but also everlasting punishments due to our
corruption and to (...) sins. For the Apostle says, we were dead in
trespasses and (...) Ephesians. 2.
and were by nature the children of wrath, as well as others. (...) God which is
^itch in mercy, even when we were dead by sinn^, Romans 5.
quickened us together in Christ. Again, As by one man sinne^tred into the
world, and by sin death, and so death went (...) men, for as much as all men
have sinned, etc.

We therefore acknowledge that original sin is in all men: we acknowledge,
that all other sins, which spring hereout, are both called, and are in deed
sins, by wh^^ name soever they be termed, whether mortal or venial, (...)
also that which is called sin against the holy Ghost, whi^^ is never
forgiven: we also confess that sins are not equal, Mar. 3. 1. Ioh. 5. Math.
10. ^1.
although they spring from the same fountain of coruptio^ and unbelief, but
that some are more grievous then other, even as the Lord has said, that It
shall be easier for Sodo^^ then for the City that despises the word of the
Gospel we therefore condemn all those that have taught things contrary to
these, but especially Pelagius and all the Pelagians, together with the
Iouinianistes, who with the Stoikes count all sins equal* we in this matter
agree fully with ^ Augustine, who produced and maintained his sayings out of
the holy scriptures. Moreover we condemn Florinus and Blastus (against whom
also Iraeneus wrote) and al those that make god the author of sin: seeing it
is expressly written, Thou art not a god that loves wickedness, thou hate
all them that work iniquity, and wilt destroy all that speak lies. And
again, when the Devil speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, because he is
a Psa 8. 44. Ioh. 8. 44.
lier, and the father of lying. Yea there is even in our selves sin and
corruption enough, so that there is no need that god should infuse into us
either a new or greater measure of wickedness. Therefore when God is said in
the scripture, to harden, to blind, and to deliver up into a reprobate sense,
it is to be understood, that God does it by just judgment, as a just judge
and revenger. To conclude, as often as god in the scripture is said and
seems to do some evil, it is not thereby meant, that man does not commit
evil, but that god does suffer it to be done, and does not hinder it, and that
by his just judgment, who could hinder it, if he would: or because he makes
good use of the evil of men, as he did in the sins of Iosephes brethren: or
because himself rules sins, that they break not out and rage more
violently then is meet. Saint Augustine in his Enchiridion says, After a
wonderful and unspeakable manner that is not done beside his will, which is
done contrary to his will* because it could not be done, if he should not
suffer it to be done, and yet he does not suffer it to be done unwillingly,
but willingly: neither would he being God suffer any evil to be done, unless
being also almighty he could make good of evil. Thus far Augustine. Other
questions, as, whether god would have Adam fall, or whether he forced him to
fall, or why he did not hinder his fall, and such like, we account amongst
curious questions* (unless perchance the frowardnes of heretics, or of men
otherwise importunate, do compel us to open these points also out of the word
of God, as the godly Doctors of the Church have often times done) knowing that
the Lord did forbid that man should not eat of the forbidden fruit, and
punished his transgression: and also that the things done are not evil in
respect of the providence, will, and power of God, but in respect of Satan,
and our will resisting the will of God.

Of free will, and so of man's power and ability. CHAP. 9.
WE teach in this matter, which at all times has bin the cause of many
conflicts in the Curch* that there is a triple condition or estate of man to be
considered. First what man was before his fall, to wit, upright and free, who
might both continue in goodness, and decline to evil* but he declined to evil,
and has wrapped both himself and al mankind in sin and death, as has bin
showed before* Secondly, we are to consider, what man was after his fall. His
understanding indeed was not taken from him, neither was he deprived of will,
and altogether changed into a stone or stock. Neuettheles these things are
so altered in man, that they are not able to do that now, which they could do
before his fall. For his understanding is darkened, and his will which before
was free, is now become a servile will for it serves sin, not nilling, but
willing: for it is called a will, and not a nilling. Therefore as touching evil
or sin, man does evil, not compelled either by god or the devil, but of his
own accord: and in this respect he has a most free will but whereas we see,
that often times the most evil deeds and counsels of man are hindered by
god, that they cannot attain to their end, this does not take from man
liberty in evil, but God by his power does prevent that, which man otherwise
purposed freely: as, Iosephes brethren did freely purpose to sleie Iosephe:
but they were not able to do it, because it seemed otherwise good to God in
his secret counsel. But as touching goodness and virtues, man's understanding
does not of it self judge aright of heavenly things. For the Evangelical
and Apostolic scripture requires regeneration of every one of us that w^ be
saved. Wherefore our first birth by Adame does nothing 1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 3.
profit us to salvation. Paull says, The natural man perceives not the
things which are of the spirit, etc. The same Paull else were denies, That we
are fit of our selves, to think any good. Now it is evident, that the mind
or understanding, is the guide of the will: and seeing the guide is blind, it
is easy to be seen how far the will can reach. Therefore man not as yet
regenerate has no free will to good, no strength to perform that which is
good. The Lord says in the Ioh. 8.
Gospel, Verily, verily I say unto you, that every one that commits
sin, is the servant of sin. And Paul the Apostle Romans 8.
faith, The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. For i^ is not subject
to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Further more there is some
understanding of earthly things remaining in man after his fall. For God has
of mercy left him wit, though much differing from that which was in him before
his fall* god commands us to garnish our wit, and theirwithal he gives
gifts and also the increase thereof. And it is a clear case, that we can
profit very little in all arts without the blessing of God. The scripture
doubtless refers all arts to God. Yea and the Ethnikes also did ascribe the
beginninges of arts to the Gods, as to the authors thereof.

Lastly we are to consider, whether the regenerate have free will, and how
far forth they have it. In regeneration the understanding is illuminated by
the holy Ghost, that it may understand both the mysteries and will of God.
And the will it self is not only changed by the spirit, but is also endued
with faculties, that of it own accord it may both will and do good. Unless we
grant this, we shall deny christian liberty, and bring in the bondage of the
law. Besides, Iere. 31. Ezech 36.
the Propher brings in god speaking thus, I will put my laws in their minds,
and write them in their hearts. The Lord also says in the gospel. If the
son make you free, then are you Ioh. 7.
free indeed Paull al^o to the Phillip. Unto you it is given, for Christ not
only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. And Phil. 1. Phil. 2.
again, I am persuaded that he that began this good work in you, will preforme
it until the day of the Lord Jesus: Also, It is God that works in you the
will and the deed. Where nevertheless we teach, that there are two things to
be observed: First, that the regenerate, in the choice and working of that
which is good, do not only work passiuilie, but actiuely. For they are moved
of God, that themselves may do that which they do. And Augustine does truly
allege that saying, that God is said to be our helper: For no man can be
helped, but he, that does somewhat. The Manichees did bereeue man of all
action, and made him like a stone and a block.

Secondly, that in the regenerate there remains infirmity. For seeing that
sin dwells in us, and that flesh in the regenerate strives against the
spirit, even to our lives end, they do not red^lie perform in every point that
which they had purposed. These things are confirmed by the Apostle, Romans 7.
Gal. 5. Therefore, our free will is weak, by reason of the relics of the old
Ada^ remaining in us so long as we live, and of the humane corruption, which so
nearly cleaves to them. In the mean while because that the strength of the
flesh and relics of the old man are not of such great force that they can
wholly quench the work of the spirit, therefore the forthfull are called
free, yet so, that they do acknowledge their infirmity, and glory no whit at
al of their free will* For that which Saint Augustine does repeat so often out
of the Apostle, ought always to be kept in mind by the saithfull: What have
thou, that thou have not received? and if the have received it, why do thou
boast, as though thou hadest not received it? Hitherto may be added, that that
comes no^ straight way to pass, which we have purposed. For the events of
things are in the hand of god* For which cause Paul* Romans 1. 19.
besought the Lord that he would prosper his journey. Wherefore i^ this respect
also free will is very weak. But in outward things no man denies but that both
the regenerate and unregenerate have their free will. For man has this
constitution common with other creatures (to whom he is not inferior) to will
some things, and to nill other things. So he may speak, or keep scilence, go
out of his house or abide within. Although herein also Gods power is evermore
to be marked, which brought to pass that Balaam could not Numb. 24. Luc. ^.
go^ so far as he would, and that Zacharias coming out of the Temple, could
not speak as he would have done. In this matter we condemn the Manichees who
deny, that the beginning of evil unto man, being good, came from his free
will. We condemn also the Pelagians, who affirm that an evil man has free
will sufficiently to perform a good pre^ept. Both these are confuted by the
scripture, which sa^^^h to the former, God made man v^right, and to the latter,
If the son make you free, then are y^^ free indeed.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA
MAN being the most perfect Image of God in earth and having the chiefdome of
all visible creatures, consisting of soul and body, whereof this is mortal,
that immortal, after he was made holy of the Lord, he by his own fault
falling into sin, drue wholl mankind with him into the same fall, and made
him subject to the same calamity.

Artic. 8.
And this infection, which men term Original, has so invaded the wholl
stock, that the child of wrath and the enemy of God, can by none other, then
by the divine help of Christ, be cured. For if there be any spark of good
fruit remaining here, it being weakened daily by our sins, declineth tothe
worsse. For the force of evil does get the upper hand, neither does it suffer
reason to bear the sway, nor the most divine faculty of the mind to have the
prehemin^ce.

Artic. 9.
Whereupon we do so at^ribute free will to man, as that knowing and having a
will to do good and evil, we find notwithstanding by experience, that of our
own accord Genesis 1.
we may do evil, but we can neither embrace nor follow any good thing,
except, being illuminated by the grace of Christ, we be stirred up and
effectually moved thereunto. For God is he which works in us both Ephesians. ^.
to will, and to bring to pass, according to his good will. And, Salvation is
of the Lord, destruction of our selves.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Art. 2. Of man.
WE confess that in the beginning man was made of god, in righteousness and
true holiness, after the true Image of God: but he fell into sin of his own
accord, Genesis 3. and ^. Romans 5. 1. Cor. 15. Ephesians. 2. Genesis 6. and ^. Ioh. 3. Romans
3. Psalm. 143. Ephesians. 2.
by the which fall wholl mankind is made corrupt and subject unto damnation.
Hence is it that our nature is defiled, and become so prone unto sin, that
except it be renewed by the holy Ghost, man of himself can neither do, nor
will any good.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA, OR THE WALDENSES.
Of the knowledge of a man's self. Also, of sin, the causes and fruits
thereof, and of the promise of God. CHAP. 4.
FOurthlie touching the knowledge of himself, man is taught, and that after
two sorts. First the knowledge Genesis (...)
of his estate, yet being in his innocence, or void of all fault, that is, of
his nature being perfect, from whence he fell: Secondly the knowledge of his
sin and mortality, into which he fell. The estate and condition of his
innocence and righteousness consists in these points that the Lord in the
beginning made man after his ow^^ Image and likeness, and adorned him with the
gifts of his grace or bounty: that he engraffed in him righteousness and his
spirit, a soul and a body, together with all the faculties and powers
thereof, and so made him holy, just, wise, immortal, and a most pleasant
temple for his heavenly spirit, in the mind, will, memory, and judgment,
and bestowed upon him clear light of understanding, integrity, and a very
ordinate or lawful love toward God and all his creatures: also a full and
absolute obedience, or ability to obey God, the true fear Eccles. 17. Ephesians.
1.
of God, and a sincere heart and nature, that man might be his own possession,
and his proper and peculiar workmanship, created unto the praise of his
glorious grace. Man being placed in this estate had left unto him free will, so
that if he would, he was able to fulfill that commandment which god gave him,
and thereby to retain righteousness both for himself and for all his
posterity after hi^* and every way to enjoy a spirit, soul, body, and an
estat^ Eccles. 15.
most blessed; and further also to make a way unto a fa^re more excellent
glory, by considering that fire and water, life and death, were set before
him: which if he would not consider, nor do his endeavor therein, by choosing
of evil, he might loose all those good gifts.

The second part of the knowledge of a man's selfs (namely before
justification) stands in this, that a man acknowledge aright the state of his
fall, sin, and mor^a^^* For that free liberty of choice which God permitted to
the will of man, he abused, and kept not the law of his justice, but swarued
therefrom, and therein transgressed the commandment of God* insomuch as he
obeyed the deuill^ those lying speeches of his, and gave credit unto them, and
performed to the devil such faith and obedience as was d^^ to God alone:
whereby he stripped and bereaved himself and his posterity of the state of
perfection and goodness of nature: and the grace of God, and those good gifts
of justice, and the Image of God, which in his creation were engreffed in him,
he partly lost them, and partly, corrupted and defiled them, as if with
horrible poison one should corrupt pure wine, and by this means he cast
headlong both himself and all his offspring into sin, death, and all kind of
miseries in this life, and into punishments eternal after this life.

Wherefore the spring and principal author of all evil is that cruel and
detestable devil, the tempter, liar, and manslayer: and next the free will of
man, which notwithstanding being converted to evil, through lust and naughty
desires and by perverse concupiscense, chooses that which is evil.

Hereby sins according to these degrees and after this order may be
considered and judged of. The first and weightiest or most greiuous sin of
all was without doubt that sin of Adam, which the Apostle calls
Disobedience, for the which death reigns over al, even over those also, which
Romans 5.
have not sinned with like trangression as did Adam. A second kind is original
sin, naturally ingendered in us and hereditarie, wherein we are all
conceived and borne Psalm. 51. Ephesians. (...)
into this world. Behold, says David, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin
has my mother conceived me. And Paull, We are by nature the children of wrath.
Let the force of this hereditarie destruction be acknowledged and judged of by
the guilt and fault, by our prones and declination, by our evil nature, and by
the punishment which is laid upon it. The third kind of sins are those
which are called Actual, which are the fruits of original sin, and do
burste out within, without, privily and openly, by the powers of man, that
is, by all that ever man is able to do, and by his members, trangressing all
those things which God commands and forbids, and also running into
blindness and errors worthy to be punished with all kind of damnation. This
doctrine of the true knowlede of sin, is of our men diligently handled and
urged: and to this end were the first and second tables of the law delivered to
Moses of God, that men especially might know themselves, that they are
conceived and borne in sin, and that forthwith, even from their birth, and by
nature, they are sinners, full of lusts, and evil inclinations.

For hereof it comes, that straight even from the beginning of our age, and
so forth in the wholl course of our life, being stained and overcome with many
sins, men do in heart, thoughts, and evil deeds break and transgress the
commandments of God, as it is written, The Lord looked down Psa. 14. Romans 3.
from heaven to behold the children of men, to see if there were a^^ that would
understand, and seek God: all are gone out of the way* they have been made
altogether unprofitable, there is none that Genesis 6.
does good, no not one. And again, When the Lord saw that the wickedness of
man was great in the earth, and all the cogitations of his heart were only
evil continually. And again, The (...) Genesis 8.
said, the imagination of man's heart is evil even from his youth* Ephesians. 2.
And Saint Paull says. We were by nature the children of wrath as well as
others.

Herewithall this is also taught, that by reason of that corruption and
deprauation common to all mankind, and for the sin, transgressions, and
injustice, which ensued thereof, all men ought to acknowledge, according to the
holy scripture, their own just condemnation, and the horrible and severe
vengeance of God, and consequently the most deserved punishment of death, and
eternal torments in he^ whereof Paull teaches us, when he says, The wages of
sin is Romans 6. Ioh. 5.
death: And our Lord Christ, They which have done evil, shall g^^ into the
resurrection of condemnation, that is, into pains eternal, Where shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth.

They teach also that we must acknowledge Look the ^. obseruat. upon this
confess.
our weakness, and that great myserie which is ingendered in us, as also those
difficulties from which no man can ever deliver or rid himself by any
means, or justify himself (that is, procure or get righteousness to himself)
by any kind of works, deeds, or exercises, seem they never so glorious. For
that will of man which before was free, is now so corrupted, troubled, and
weakened, that now from hence forth of it felfe, and without the grace of God,
it cannot choose, judge, or wish fully, nay it has no desire, nor inclination,
much less any ability, to choose that good wherewith God is pleased. For albeit
it fell willingly and of it own accord, yet by it self, and by it own
strength it could not Look the ^ obseruat. upon this confess.
rise again, or recover that fall, neither to this day, without the merciful
help of God, is it able to do any thing at all. And a lit^^ after. Neither
can he which is man only, and has nothing above the reach of this our
nature, help an other in this point. For since that original sin proceeding
by inheritance possesses the wholl nature, and does furiously rage Romans 3.
Esa. 43.
therein, and seeing that all men are sinners, and do want the grace and
justice of God, therefore says God by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias, Put me
in remembrance, Let us be judged together, count thou if thou have any thing
that thou may est be justified: thy first father has sinned, and thy
interpreters (that is, they which teach thee justice) have transgressed against
me. and a little before, speaking of works in the service of god after the
invention of man, he says: Thou have not offered unto me the Ram of the
burnt offerings, neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices: I have not
caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense. And unto
the Hebrews it is written: Sacrifice, and offering, and burnt offerings, and
sin offerings thou would not Heb. 10.
have, Neither did thou approve those things, which were offered according
to the law.

This also must we know that the Lord God for sin does permit and bring all
kinds of afflictions, miseries, and vexations of mind in this life, upon all
men, such as are heat, cold, hunger, thirst, care, and anguish, sore labors,
calamity, adversity, doleful times, sword, fire, diseases, griefs, and at
the last also that intolerable and bitter death, whereby Genesis 2. Genesis 3.
nature is overthrown, as it is written, Thou shall die the death. Again,
Cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days
of thy life; thorns also and thistles shall it bringforth to thee. And yet it
is taught, that men must and ought to bear all these punishments patiently,
seeing that they owe unto God, and have deserved a far more cruel
punishment: Yet they must not be so persuaded as though they deserved any thing
by suffering this punishment, or should receive from God any grace or reward in
recompense for the merit of these punishments, seeing that Paull speaking of a
much more worthy cross and sufferings which the true beleuers take upon them
for Christ's sake, says, that they be not comparable to the glory, which shall
be showed unto us: And these punishments are laid upon us, and are patiently
to be borne, that we may acknowledge the greatness of our sin and how grievous
a thing it is, and there withal our own weakness, needs, and misery, and that
by experience we may kn^^ how wicked, foull, and bitter athing it is, even
above all the we are able to conceive, for a man to forsake the Lord (...) God,
as says the Prophet. And moreover that they whi^ being plunged in these
miseries, and oppressed with these burdens, may again be stirred up to
repentance, and ^ seek for favor and help from God, which is a father (...)
of mercy and compassion. Howbeit this is also expresselie added, that the
labors and torments which holy men do suffer for the name of Christ, that
is, in the cause of eternal salvation, for the holy truth of Christ, are an
acceptable and pleasant sacrifice to God, and have great and large promises,
especially in the life to come: the which thing also did even so fall out with
Christ our head, of whom the epistle to the Hebrews speaks thus, that for
the joy that was set before him, he endured the cross: who also by himself
consecrated and hallowed the cross to them, even to this end, tha^ those
sufferings which we endure for Christ his names sal^^ might be pleasant and
acceptable unto God.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
Art. 9.
WE believe that man being created pure and upright, and conformable to the
image of God through his own fault fell from that grace which he had received,
and thereby did so estraunge him self from God the fountain of all
righteousness and of all good things, that his nature is become altogether
defiled, and being blind i^ spirit, and corrupt in heart, has utterly lost
all that integritic* For although he can somewhat discern between good and
evil* yet we affirm that whatsoever light he has, (...) straightwaies
becomes darkness, when the question is of seeking God, so that by his
understanding and reason he can never come to God* Also, although he be endued
with will, whereby he is moved to this or that, yet insomuch as that is
altogether cap^iuated under sin, it has no liberty at al to desire good, but
such as it has received by grace and of Art. 10.
the gift of god. We believe that all the offspring of Adame i^ infected with
this contagion, which we call Original some, that is, a steine spreading it
self by propagation, and not by imitation only, as the Pelagians thought,
all whose errors we do detest. Neither do we think it necessary to search,
how this sin may be derived from one unto an other. For it is sufficient that
those things which God gave unto Adam, were not given to him alone, but also
to all his posterity: and therefore we in his person being deprived of all
those good gifts, are fallen into all this misery and curse.

Artic. 11*
We believe that this steine is indeed sin, because that it makes all and
every man (not so much as those little ones excepted, which as yet lie hide in
their mothers womb) guilty of eternal death before God. We also affirm,
that this stain, even after baptism, is in nature sin, as concerning the
fault: howbeit they which are the children of God, shall not therefore be
condemned, because that God of his gracious free goodness and mercy, does not
impute it to them. Moreover we say, that this frowardnes of nature does
always bring forth some fruits of malice and rebellion, in such sort, that
even they which are most holy, although they resist it, yet are they defiled
with many infirmities and offenses, so long as they live in this world.

Art. 1^.
OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
WE say also, that every person is borne in sin, and leads his life in
sin: that no body is hable trulic to say, His heart is clean. That the
most righteous person is but an unprofitable servant: That the law of God is
perfect, and requires of us, perfect, and full Obedience: That we are hable by
no means to fulfill that law in this worldly life, that there is no mortal
creature, which can be justified by his own deserts in Gods sight.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art 14. Genesis 1. ^6. (...)
WE believe that God of the slime of the earth created man, after his Image,
that is to say, good, just, and holy, who had power by his own free will, to
frame and conform his will unto the will of God. But when he was advanced to
honor he knew not, neither did he well understand his excellent state, but
wittinglie and willingly d^d make himself subject to sin, and so
consequently unto Genesis 3. 17.
eternal death and malediction, whilst that giving eare^o the words and
subtelties of the devil, he did transgre^^e that commandment of life, which
he had received of the Lord, and so did withdraw and alienate himself from
God (his true life) his nature being altogether defiled and Romans 5. 12.
corrupted by sin, whereby it came to pass, that he made him self subject
both to corporal and to spiritual death. Wherefore being made wicked, and
perverse, and also corrupt in all his wa^es and endeauours, he lost those
excelle^^ gifts wherewith the Lord had adorned him, so that there were but a
few little sparks and small steps of those graces Acts. 14. 16. To. 1. 20. 21.
Ioa. 1. 5.
left in him, the which notwithstanding are sufficient to leave men without
excuse, because that what light soever we have, is turned into palpable
darkness, even as the scripture it self teaches, saying, The light shined in
darkness, (...) the darkness comprehended i^ not: For there John does
manifestly call men da^kenes. Therefore Look the 1. obseru. upon this
confession. Ioh. 3. 27.
whatsoever things are taught, as touching man's free will, we do worthelie
reject them, seeing that man is the servant of sin, neither (...) he do any
thing of himself, but as it is given him from heau^^. For who is so bold as
^o brag that he is able to perform Ioh. 6. 44.
whatsoever he lists, when as Christ himself says, No man can come unto me,
except my father, which has sent me, d^ draw him? Who dare boast of his will,
which hears, that Romans 8. 1. Cor. 1. 14.
All the affections of the flesh are enmities against God? Who will vaunt of
his understanding, which knows, that The natural man can not perceive the
things of the spirit of God? To conclude, who is he that dare bring forth
any one cogitation of his own, which understands this, that we are not 2.
Cor. 3. 5.
Able of our selves to think any thing, but That we are sufficient, it is
altogether of God? Therefore that saying of the Apostle must Phil. 2. 12.
needs remain fi^me and steadfast, It is God which works i^ us both to will,
and to do, even of his good pleasure. For no man's mind, no man's will is able
to rest in the will of God, wherein Christ himself has wrought nothing before.
The Ioh. 15. 5.
which also he does teach us, saying, Without me ye can do ^^thing.

Art. 15.
We believe, that thorough the disobedience of Adam, the sin, that is called
Original, has been spread and poured into all man kind. Now Original sin,
is a corruption of the whole nature, and an hereditarie evil, wherewith (...)
even the very infantes in their Mothers womb ar^ polluted: the which also as
a most noisome root d^t^^ branch out most aboundanlie all kind of sin in
man, and is so filthy and abominable in the sight of God, that it alone is
sufficient to the condemnation of all mankind. Neither are we to believe that
this sin is by baptism utterly extinguished or plu^ked up by the roots,
seeing that out of it, as out of a co^rupt fountain, continual flo^des and
rivers of iniquity do daily spring and flow* how be it to the children of God
it does not tend, neither is it imputed to condemnation, but of the mere
favor and mercy of God it is remitted unto them, not to this end, that they
trusting unto this remission should be rocked a sleep in security, but that
it may stir up often sighs in the faithful by the sense and feeling of this
corruption, and that they should somewhat the more earnestly desire, To
bedeliuered from this To. 7. ^8. 24
body of death Therefore we do condemn the error of the Pelagians, which
affirm, that this Original sin is nothing else but a certain kind of
imitation.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
Art. 2.
ALso they teach that after the fall of Adam al men descended one from another
after a natural manner, have original sin even when they are borne. We
mean by original sin that which the holy fathers, and all of sound
judgment and learning in the Church do so call, namely that guilt, whereby
all that come into the world, are through Adams fall subject to Gods wrath and
eternal death, and that very corruption of man's nature derived from Adam. And
this corruption of man's nature comprehends both the defect of original
justice, integrity, or obedience, and also concupiscence. This defect is
horrible blindness, and disobedience, that is to wit, to want that light and
knowledge of God, which should have been in our nature being perfect, and to
want that vprightnes, that is, that perpetual obedience, that true, pure, and
chief love of God, and those other gifts of perfect nature. Wherefore those
defectes and this concupiscence are things damnable, and of their own nature
worthy of death. And this original blot is sin indeed, condemning, and
bringing eternal death, even now also, upon them, which are not borne again
by baptism and the holy Ghost.

They condemn the Pelagians, who deny original sin, and think that those
defects or this concupiscence are things indifferent, or punishments only,
and not of their own nature damnable and dream that man may satisfy the law
of God, and may for that peculiar obedience b^ pronounced just before God.

These things are thus found in another edition,
Art. 2.
ALso they teach that after Adams fall all men begotten after the common course
of nature are bo^e with sin, that is, without the fear of God, without (...)
in him, and with concupiscence, And that this disease or original blot is
sin indeed, condemning and bringing eternal death even now upon all that are
not borne aga^^^ by baptism and the holy Ghost.

They condemn the Pelagians and others, that deny this original blotte to be
sin in deed, and that they may ^^tenuate the glory of the merit and
benefits of Christ, they do reason that a man may by the strength of his own
reason, be justified before God.

Artic. 18.
Concerning free will, they do teach, that man's will has some freedom to
look the ^obseruat. (...) this (...).
perform a civil justice, and to mal^ choice of things that are within the
reach of reason: but i^ has no power to perform a spiritual justice, without
the holy spirit, because Paul says, The natural man perceives (...) the
things which are of the spirit of God: and Christ says, without me ye can do
nothing. Now this spiritual justice is wrought in us, when we are look the
^^^^eru.
helped of the holy Ghost. And we receive the holy Ghost, when we assent unto
the word of God, that we may be comforted through faith in all terrors of
conscience, as Paul teaches, when he says, That ye may receive the promis of
the spirit through faith. These things almost in as many words says Saint
Augustine lib. 3. Hypog^ess.

We confess that there is in all men a free will, which has indeed the
judgment of reason, not that it is thereby apt without god either to begin, or
to perform any thing, in matters pertaining to God, (...) only in works
belonging to this present life, whether they be good, or evil. In Good works I
affirm those to be, which arise of the goodness of nature, as to be willing to
labor in the field, to desire meat or drink, to desire to have a friend, to
desire apparel, to desire to build an house, to marie a wife, to nourish
cattle, to learn the art of diverse good things, to desire any good thing
pertaining to this present life, all which are not without Gods government, yea
they now are, and had their beginning from God. In evil things I account such
as these, to desire to worship an image, to desire manslaughter. This sentence
of Augustine does notably teach what is to be attributed to free will, and
does put a plain difference between civil discipline or the exercises of
humane reason, and spiritual motions, true fear, patience, constancy, faith,
invocation in most sharp tentations, in the midst of Satan's subtle
assaults, in the terrors of sin. In these surely we had great need to be
guided and look the 2. obseruat.
helped of the holy spirit, according to that saying of Paull, The spirit
helps our infirmity.

We condemn the Pelagians and all such as they are, who teach that by the
only powers of nature without the holy spirit, we may love God above all,
and fulfill the law of god, as touching the substance of our actions. We do
freely and necessarily mislike these dreams: for they do obscure the
benefits of Christ. For therefore is Christ the Mediator set forth, and mercy
promised in the Gospel, because that the law cannot be satisfied by man's
nature, as Paull witnesses, when he says, Romans 8. The wisdom of the flesh
is enmity against God. For it is not subject to the law of God, neither in
deed can be. For albeit that man's nature by it self can after some sort*
perform external works (for it can contain the hands from theft and
murder) yet can it not make Look the 3. obseru. upon this confess.
those inward motions, as true fear, true faith, patience, and chastity
unless the holy ghost do govern and help our hearts. And yet in this place
also do we teach, that it is also the commandment of God, that the earnall
motions should be restrained by the industry of reason and by civil
discipline, as Paul says, The law is a schoolmaster to Christ: Also, The law
is given to the unjust.

These things are thus found in another edition.
Artic. 18.
As touching free will they teach, that man's will has some liberty to work a
civil justice, and to choose such things as reason can reach unto. But that it
has no power to work the righteousness of God, or a spiritual justice,
without the spirit of God: Because that the natural man perceives not the
things that are of the spirit of God. But this power is wrought in the heart,
when as men do receive the spirit of God through the word. These things are
in as many words affirmed by Saint Augustine. Lib. 3. Hypognost: etc. as
before. They condemn the Pelagians, and others, who teach, that only by the
power of nature, without the spirit of God, we are able to love God above all,
also to perform the commandments of God, as touching the substance of our
actions. For although that nature be able in some sort to do the external
works (for it is able to withold the hands from theft and murder) yet it
cannot work the inward motions, as the fear of God, trust in God, chastity,
patience.

Touching the cause of sin, they teach, that albeit God does create and
preserve nature, yet the cause of sin is the will of the wicked, to wit of
the Devil, and of ungodly men, which turns it self from God unto other
things, against the commandments of God: when he speaks a lie, he speaks
of his own.

This is found thus in an other edition.
TOuching the cause of sin, they teach, that albeit God does create and
preserve our nature, yet the cause of sin is the will of the wicked, to weete
of the Devil, and of ungodly men: which will being destitute of Gods help,
turns it self from God, as Christ says, Joan. 8. When he speaks a lie, he
speaks of his own.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
ANd seeing the controversies, which are sprung up, do chiefly pertain unto
two articles of the creed, namely to the article, I believe the remission of
sins, and, I believe the Catholic Church, we will show the fountains of
these controversies, which being well weighed, men may easily understand,
that our expositions are the very voice of the Gospel, and that our
adversaries have sowed corruptions in the Chuch. And first of the article.

I believe the remission of sins.
Here many and great corruptions are devised of our adversaries. I believe,
nay, say they, I doubt: also, Then I will believe, when I shall have merits
enough. Also, they do not say, I believe certainly that remission is given
freely for the Son of God, not for any merits of ours, or any worthiness of
ours. Also, They do not rightly show what sin is, and feign that man is
able to satisfy the law of god, and that by the fullfilling of the law, he
becomes just before God, in this life. Therefore first, as touching sin,
and the cause thereof, we do faithfully retain the doctrine of the true
Church of God. Seeing that God in essence is one, the eternal Father, the
coeternall Son, being the image of the Father, and the coeternall holy
Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the son, of infinite wisdom, power,
and goodness, true, just, bountiful, chaste, most free, as he describes him
self in his law; and seeing he has therefore made the Angels and men, that
being from al eternity he might impart unto them his light, wisdom, and
goodness, and that they should be the temples of God, wherein god might dwell,
that God might be all in all, as Paull speaks: he therefore created them at
the beginning good and just, that is, agreeing with the mind and will of God,
and pleasing him. He also gave them a clear knowledge of God, and of his will,
that they might understand that they were made of God, that they might be
obedient, as it is written in the sift Psalm: Thou art not a God that loves
wickedness. But the deuilles and men abused the liberty of their will, swarued
from God, and by this disobedience they were made subject to the wrath of God,
and lost that vprightnes, wherein they were created. Therefore freewill in the
Devil and in men was the cause of that fall, not the will of god, who neither
wills sin, nor allows it, nor furdereth it, as it is written, When the
Devil speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, and he is the Father of lying.
And 1. Ioh. 3. He that committeh sin, is of the devil, because the devil
sins from the beginning. Now sin, is that, whatsoever is contrary to the
justice of God, which is an order in the mind of god (which he did (...) by
his own voicein the law and in the gospel) whether it be original
disobedience, or actual, for the which the person is both guilty, and
condemned with everlasting punishment, except he obtain remission in this
life, for the Son the Mediators sake. We do also condemn the madness of
Marcion, the Manichees, and such like, which are repugnant in this wholl
question to the true consent of the Church of God.

Of Origenall sin, Artic. 2.
AS touching original sin, we do plainly affirm, that we do retain the
consent of the true Church of God, delivered unto us from the first Fathers,
Prophets, Apostles and the Apostles scholars, even unto Augustine, and after
his time: and we do expresselie condemn Pelagius, and all those who have
scattered in the Church like doting follies to those of the Pelagians. And we
say, that all men, since the fall of our first parents, which are borne by the
coupling together of male and female, do together with their birth bring with
them Original sin, as Paul says, Romans 5. By one man sin entered into the
world, and by sin death. And Ephesians. 2. We were by nature the children of
wrath as well as others. Neither do we dislike that usual definition, if it
be well understood; Original sin is a want of Original justice which ought
to be in us: Because that Original justice was not only an acceptance of
mankind before God, but in the very nature of man a light in the mind,
whereby he might assuredly believe the word of God: and a conversion of the
will unto God, and an obedience of the heart agreeing with the judgment of the
law of God, which was graffed in the mind: and, as we said before, man was
the temple of God. That Original justice does comprehend all these things, it
may be understood by this saying, Man was created after the Image and likeness
of God, which Paul does thus interpret, Ephesians. 4. Put ye on the new man, which
after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, where vndoutedlie by
true holiness he understands all those virtues, which shine in our nature, and
are given by God, not ascited by art, or gotten by instruction (as now those
shadows of virtues, such as they are in men, be ascited) because that then God
dwelling in man did govern him. And when we consider what Original (...)
signify, then the privation opposite thereunto is less obscure. Therefore
Original sin is, both for the fall of our first parents, and for the
corruption which followed that fall, even in our birth to be subject to the
wrath of God, and to be worthy of eternal damnation, except we obtain
remission for the Mediators sake. And this corruption is, to want now the
light or the presence of God, which should have shined in us: and it is an
estranging of our will from God, and the stubbernnes of the heart resisting the
law of the mind, as Paull speaks; and, that man is not the Temple of God,
but a miserable Mass, without God, and without justice. These wants, and this
wholl corruption, we say to be sin, not only a punishment of sin, and a
thing indifferent, as many of the Sententiaries do say, That these evils
are only a punishment, and a thing indifferent, but not sin. And they do
extenuate this Original evil, and then they feign that men may satisfy the
law of God, and by their own fulfilling of the law become just. The Church
must avoid ambiguities. Therefore we do expresselie name these evils,
Corruption, which is often named of the ancient writers, Evil concupiscence.
But we distinguish those desires which were created in our nature, from that
confusion of order which happened after our fall, as it is said, Iere. 17. The
heart of man is wicked. And Paull says, The wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God. This evil Concupiscence we say to be sin, and we affirm, that
this wholl doctrine of sin, as it is propounded and taught in our Churches,
is the perpetual consent of the true Church of God.

Of free will. Art. 4.
Now let us make manifest also the doctrine of free will. Men truly
instructed in the Church have allwaies distinguished between discipline, and
the newnes of the spirit, which is the beginning of life eternal: and they
have taught, that in man there is such freedom of will, to govern the outward
motions of the members, that thereby even the unregenerate may after a sotte
perform that outward discipline, which is an external obedience according to
the law. But man by his natural strength is not able to free himself from
sin and eternal death: but this free^^me and conversion of man unto God, and
this spiritual newnes wrought by the son of God, quickening ^s by his holy
spirit, as it is said, If any man has not the spirits Christ, the same is
not his: and the will having received the holy Ghost, is not now idle. And we
give. God thanks for this unspeakable benefit, that for the son his sake,
and thorough him he gives us the holy Ghost, and does govern us by his
spirit. And we condemn the Pelagians, and the Manichees, as we have at large
declared in another place.

Of the difference of sin. Artic. 10.
SEeing it is said, that sins remain in the regenerate, it is necessary to
have a difference of sins delivered unto us. For out of that saying, Luc. 11.
He went and took unto him seven other spirits worsse then himself, and they
enter in, and dwell there, etc. And of such like sayings it is manifest, that
some, who are regenerate, do grieve and Look the 1. obseru. upon this
confession.
shake of the holy ghost, and are again rejected of God, and made subject to
the wrath of God and eternal punishments. And Ezech. 18. it is written, when
the righteous man shall tur^^ from his righteousness, and commit iniquity, he
shall die therein and, when the wicked man shall turn from his wickedness, and
d^^ judgment and justice, he shall live therein. Therefore it is necessary
that those sins, which remain in holy men in this mortal life, and yet do
not shake of the holy Ghost, be distinguished from other sins, for the which
man is again made subject to the wrath of God, and to eternal punishments. So
Paull, Romans 5. distinguishes between sin that reigns, and sin that
reigns not. And Romans 8. he says, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die:
but if ye mor^ifi^ the decde^ of the body by the spirit, ye shall live. And
in the first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 1. he gives a rule: Fight a good
fight, keeping faith and a good conscience. Therefore when a man does not keep
the faith, but either wittinglie, or by some error loses some part of the
foundation, that is, some article of faith, or allows Idols (as many do,
which are deceived with false opinions, or do not uphold themselves by the
comfort of faith, but are overcome by doubting or by despair, or against their
conscience do break any commandment of God) he does shake of the holy
Ghost, and is made again subject to the wrath of G^ and to everlasting
punishments. Of these men says Paull, Romans 8. If ye live according to the
flesh, ye shall die. And, 1. Cor. 6. Neither fornicatours, nor adulterers, nor
Idolaters, etc. shall inherit the kingdom of God. And that the oath Ezech. 18.
does clearly say, As I live, says the Lord, I do not desire the death of a
sinner, but rather that he be converted, and live. In this oath two parts are
joined together, conversion, and life. God does desire, and that with an oath,
the couersion of man: therefore they do not please him, which retain a
purpose to sin. Now in this number we comprise both the sins of assectate
omission (that is, affectate negligence in a duty, which is contrary to that
saying, This is required, that we be faithful) And also affectate ignorance,
such as is Pharisaicall, and is to be seen in an infinite multitude, which
endeuoreth not to search out the doctrine of the Church, and ignorantly
retains Idols, or does also further the rage which is used in the defense of
Idols. Thus much of those falls, whereby the holy Ghost is shaken of. There
be also other sins in the regenerate, who keep faith and a good conscience,
which do not corrupt the foundation, Look the 2. obseru. upon this confession.
neither are sins against the conscience, but are the relics of Original
sin, as, darkness, doubting, carnal security, wandering flames of vicious
affections, and omissions, or ignorances not affected. Some extenuate these
evils, and name them deformities beside the law of God. But this blindness is
greatly to be reproved, and we must consider both the greatness of the evil
in this wholl pollution, which is contrary to the law and will of God, and
also the greatness of the mercy and benefit of the Son of God, who covers
these great and lamentable wounds in this miserable nature. And Paull
commands us to Resist those euilles by the spirit: that is, Atticus and
Scipio do bridle their corrupt affections by reason, but loseph and Paull do
bridle them by the spirit, that is, by the motions of the holy Ghost, by true
grief, true faith, fear of God, and invocation. Paull, feeling in him self
doubts and other wandering motions, is sorrowful, and by faith persuaded, that
this pollution is covered by the Mediator, and by the fear of God ^oth stay
himself, that he give no place to anger, or to o^^er wandering motions: and
there withal he does invoke God, and desire his help, saying, O Lord create
in me Psa. 50.
a new heart. When we do after this sort withstand that corruption, which as
yet remains in the regenerate, these evils are covered, and it is called
sin that does not reign, or venial sin, and the holy Ghost is not shaken
of.

It is evident that this doctrine concerning the difference of sins, is true,
plain, and necessary for the Church. And yet many know, what manner of
intricate disputations are to be found in the books of our a duersaries
touching the same, etc. Having thus briefly declared the sum of the doctrine
of justification, we should now also declare and confute the arguments, which
are objected against this judgment of ours; but because diverse men do object
diverse things, we have only recited our confession, and offer our selves to
larger declarations in every member of the confession.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of sin. CHAP. 4.
WE believe and confess that in the beginning man was created of God, just,
wise, endued with free will, adorned with the holy Ghost, and happy: but
afterward for his disobedience he was deprived of the holy Ghost, and made the
bondsman of Satan, and subject both to corporal and eternal damnation: and
that evil did not state in one only Adam, but was derived into all the
posterity. And whereas some affirm, that so much integrity of mind was left
to man after his fall, that by his natural strength and good works he is able
to convert and prepare himself to faith and the inuocating of God, it is
flatly contrary to the Apostolic doctrine and the true consent of the
Catholic Church. Romans 5. By one man's trespass evil was derived into all men
to condemnation. Ephesians. 2. When ye were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein
in times past ye walked according to the course of this world, and after the
prince, etc. And a little after, We were by nature the children of wrath as well
as others. He says, Dead in sins, and, the children of wrath, that is,
strangers from the grace of God. But as a man being corporally dead, is not
able by his own strength to prepare^ convert himself to receive corporal
life, so he which is spirituallie dead is not able by his own power to convert
himself, to receive spiritual life. Augustine says. The Lord, that he Tom.
7. contra (...) ^pis^. Pelag. ad (...) Cap. 8.
might answer Pelagius to come, does not say, without me ye can hardly do
any thing, but he says, without me ye can do nothing. And that he might also
answer these men that were to come, in the very same sentence of the Gospel,
he does not say, without me ye can not persit, but, without me ye can not do
any thing. For if he had said, ye can not persit, then these men might say,
we have need of the help of God, not to begin to do good, for w^ hau^ that of
our selves, but to persit it. And a little aster, The preparation of the heart
is in man, but the answer of the tongue is of the Lord. Men not well
understanding this, are deceived, thinking that it apperteineth to man to
prepare the heart, that is, to begin any good thing without the help of the
grace of God. But far be it from the children of promis so to understand it,
as when they heard the Lord saying, without me ye can do nothing, they should
as it were reprove him, and say, Behold, without thee we are able to prepare
our hearts or when they hear Paul the Apostle saying, Not that we are fit to
think any thing, as of our selves, they should also reprove him and say,
Behold we are fit of our selves, to prepare our hearts, and so
consequently to think some good thing. And again, Tom. 9. in Io. tract. 49.
Let no man deceive himself: it is of his own, that he is Satan, it is of
God, that he is happy. For what is that, of his own, but of his sin? take
away sin, which is thy own, and righteousness, says he, is of me. For what
have thou, that thou have not received? Ambrose says, Although it be in man,
to will that which De inuocat. gen^. l. 1. c. 9. Hom. 1. de annu^tiat. beat^
Ma^i^.
is evil, yet he has not power, to will that which is good, except it it be
given him. Bernard says, If humane nature, when it was perfect,, could not
stand, how much less is it able of it self to rise up again, being now
corrupt?

THE FIFTH SECTION. OF ETERNAL PREDESTINATION.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the Predestination of God, and the election of the Saints. CHAP. 10.
GOD has from the beginning freely, and of his mere grace, without any
respect of men predestined or elected the Saints, whom he will save in
Christ, according to Ephesians. 1. 4.
the saying of the Apostle, And he has chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world. 2. Tim. 1. 9.
And again. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given unto us thorough Christ Jesus before the world was, but is made manifest
by the appearance of our Savior Jesus Christ. Therefore though not for any
merit of ours, yet not without a means, but in Christ, and for Christ did God
choose us, and they who are now engrafted into Christ by faith, the same also
were elected. But such as are without Christ, were rejected, according to that
of the 2. Cor. 13. 5.
Apostle, Prove your selves whether you be in the faith. Know you not your
own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you? except you be reprobates. To
conclude, the Saints are chosen in Christ by God unto a sure end, which end
the Apostle declares, when he says, He has chosen us in him, that we should
be holy, Ephesians. 1. 4*
and without blame before him thorough love, who has predestined us to be
adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, for the praise of his glorious
grace. And although God knows who are his, and now and then mention is made
of the small number of the elect, yet we must hope well of al, and not rashly
judge any man to be a reprobate: for Paul says, to the Philippians, I thank
Phi. 1. 3. etc.
my God for you all (Now he speaks of the wholl Church of the Philippians)
that you are come into the fellowship of the Gospel, and I am persuaded, that
he that has begone this work in you, will perform it, as it becomes me to
judge of you all. And when the Lord was demanded, whether there were few that
should be saved? he does not answer and tell them, that fewor more should be
saved, or damned, but rather he exhorts every man, to Strive to enter in at
the straight gate. As Luc. 13.
if he should say, it is not for you rashly to inquire of these matters, but
rather to endeavor that you may enter into heaven, by the straight way.
Wherefore we do not allow of the wicked speeches of some, who say, Few are
chosen, and seeing I know not whether I am in the number of those few, I will
not defraud my nature of her desires. Others there are which say, If I be
predestined and chosen of God, nothing can hinder me from salvation, which is
already certainly appointed for me, whatsoever I do at any time. But if I
be in the number of the reprobate, no faith or repentance will help me, seeing
the decree of god cannot be changed. Therefore all teachings and admonitions
are to no purpose. Now against these men, the saying of the Apostle makes
much. The servant of God must be apt to teach, instructing 2. Tim. 2. 24. etc.
them which are contrary minded, prouoing if God at any time will give them
repentance, that they may know the truth, and that they may come to amendment
out of the snare of the devil, which Li. de bono pr^seuerantiae. Cap. 14.
are taken of him at his pleasure. Beside Augustine also teaches, that both
the grace of free election and predestination, and also wholesome admonitions and
doctrines are to be preached.

We therefore condemn those, who seek other where, then in Christ, whether
they be chosen from all eternity, and what God has decreed of them before all
beginning. For men must first hear the Gospel preached, and believe it: If
thou believe, and be in Christ, thou may undoubtedly reckon of it, that thou
art elected. For the father has reucaled unto us in Christ his eternal
sentence of predestination, as we even now showed out of the Apostle, 2. Tim.
1. This is therefore above all to be taught and well waied, what great love of
the Father toward us in Christ is revealed* we must hear what the Lord does
daily preach unto us in his Mat 11. 18. John. 3. 16.
Gospel, how he calls, and says, Come unto me all ye that labor and are
burdened, and I will refresh you. And, So God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son for it, that al which believe Mat. 18. 14.
in him should not perish, but have life everlasting. Also, It is not the will
of the Father, that any of these little ones should perish. Let Christ therefore
be our looking glass, in whom we may behold our predestination. We shall
have a most evident and sure testimony that we are written in the book of
life, if we communicate with Christ, and he be ours, and we his by a true
faith. Let this comfort us in the temptation touching predestination, then
which there is none more dangerous, that the promises of God are general to
the Luc. 11.
faithful, in that he says, Ask, and ye shall receive: Every one that
asks, receives: and to conclude, in that we pray with all the Church of
God, Our father which art in heaven: and for that in baptism we are ingrafted
into the body of Christ, and are fed in his Church, often times with his
flesh and blood unto everlasting life. Thereby we being strengthened, we are
commanded to work our salvation with fear and trembling, according to that
precept of Paul.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Arti^. ^ss. 3.
HEreupon we confess, that God, before he had created the world, had chosen
all those, to whom he would freely give the inheritance of eternal
blessedness.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
WE believe that out of this universal corruption and damnation, wherein by
nature all men are drowned, God did deliver and preserve some, whom by his
eternal and immutable counsel, of his own goodness and mercy, without any
respect of their works, he did choose, in Christ Jesus, and others he left in
that corruption and damnation, in whom he might as well make manifest his
justice, by condemning them justly in their time, as also declare the riches
of his mercy in the others. For some are not better then others, til such time
as the Lord does make a difference, according to that immutable counsel, which
he had decreed in Christ Jesus before the creation of the world: neither was
any man able by his own strength to make an entrance for himself to that
good, seeing that of our nature we can not have so much as one right motion,
affection, or thought, till God do freely prevent us, and fashion us to
vprightnes.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. 16.
WE believe that God (after that the wholl offspring of Adam was cas^e headlong
into perdition and destruction, thorough the fault of the first man) has
declared and showed himself to be such a one, as he is indeed, namely, both
merciful and just. Merciful by delivering and saving those from condemnation
and from death, whom in his eternal counsel, of his own free goodness, he
has chosen in Jesus Christ our Lord, without any regard at all of their work:
but Just, in leaving others in that their fall and perdition, whereinto they
had thrown themselves headlong.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
THe confession of Auspurge does so mention predestination in the 20. article,
the title whereof is, De fide, Of faith, that it affirms it to be a needles
thing, to dispute of predestination in the doctrine of justification by faith.
Which in what sort it may be said, we have declared in the. 6. obseru. upon
this confess. sect 9. where these words of the confess. are rehearsed.

Also the SAXON CONFESSION Does in the same sense, by the way make mention of
Predestination and Election, about the end of the third Article, where it
treats of faith, which part we have therefore placed in the 9. section.

THE SIXTH SECTION. OF THE REPAIRING OR DELIVERANCE OF MAN FROM HIS FALL, BY
JESUS CHRIST ALONE: AND OF HIS PERSON, NATVRES, OFFICE, and the works of
Redemption.
THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of Jesus Christ, being true god and man, and the only savior of the world.
CHAP. II.
Moreover we beleuee and teach, that the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ,
was from all eternity predestined and foreord^ined of the father to be the
Savior of the world. And we believe that he was begotten, not only then, when
he took flesh of the Virgin Mary, nor yet a little before the foundations of
the world were laid, but before all eternity, and that of the father, after an
unspeakable manner. For Isaiah Isa. 53* Mich. 5. 2.
says, Who can t^l his generation? And Micheah says, Whose egresse has bin
from everlasting. For John says, In the Ioh. 1. 1. Phil. 2. 6.
beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God was the word
etc. Therefore the Son is coequall and consubstantiall with the father, as
touching his divinity, true God, not by name only, or by adoption, or by
special favor, but in substance and nature. Even as the Apostle says
elsewh^re This is the true God, and life everlasting. Paul also says, He has
1. ^oh 5. (...)
made his son the heir of al things, by whom also he made the world: The
same is the brightness of his glory, and the ingraued f^^me of his (...) 2.
person, bearing up al things by his migh^^e word. Likewise in the Ioh 17. 5.
Gospel the Lord himself says, Father glorify (...) me with thy self, with
the glory which I had with the before the world was. John 5 18.
Also else where it is written in the Gospeli, The ^ewe^ tought how to kill
Jesus, because he said that God was his father, making himself equal with
God. We therefore do abhor the blasphemous doctrine of Arrius, and all the
Arrians uttered against the Son of God. And especially the blaspemies of
Michaell Seruetus the Spanyarde, and of his accomplices, which Satan by them
has as it were drawn out of hell, and most boldly and impiouslie spread
abroad throughout the world against the Son of God.

We teach also and believe, that the eternal son of the eternal God was made
the son of man, of the seed of Abraham Mat. 1.
and David, not by the mean of any man, as Hebion affirmed, but that he was
most purely conceived by the holy Ghost, and was borne of Marie, who was
always a Virgin, even as the history of the Gospel does declare. And Paul
says, He took in no sort the Angels, but the seed of Abraham. And John the
Apostle says, He that believes not that Jesus Heb. 2. 16.
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of god. The flesh of Christ therefore was
neither flesh in show only, nor yet flesh brought from heaven, as Valentine
and Marcion dreamed. Mo^eouer our Lord Jesus Christ had not a soul without
sense and reason, as Apollinaris thought: nor flesh without a s^^le, as
Eunomius did teach, but a soull with it reason, and flesh with it senses, by
which senses he felt true griefs in the time of his passion, even as he
himself witnesses when he said, Mat. 26. Ioh. 12.
My soul is heavy even to death. And* My soul is troubled, etc.

We acknowledge therefore that there be in one and the same Jesus Christ our
Lord, two natures, the divine, and the humane nature: and we say that these two
are so conjoined or united, that they are not swallowed up, confounded, or
mingled together, but rather united or joined together in one person, the
proprieties of each nature being safe and remaining still: so that we do worship
one Christ our Lord, and n^^ two, I say, one, true, god and man, as touching
his divine nature, of the same substance with the father, and as touching his
humane nature of the same substance with us, and Like unto (...) all things,
sin only excepted. As therefore we detest the here^^ of Nestorius, which
makes two Christ's of one, and dissolueth the union of the Person, so do we
curse the madness (...) Eutiches, and of the Monophelites, or Monophysickes,
who overthrow the propriety of the humane nature. Therefore we do not teach
that the divine nature in Christ did suffer, or that Christ according to his
humane nature is yet in t^^ world, and even in every place. For we do
neither think nor teach, that the body of Christ ceased to be a true body
after his glorifying, or that it was deified, and so deified, that it put of it
properties, as touching body and soul, and became altogether a divine nature,
and began to be one substance alone: And therefore we do not allow or receive
the vnwittie subtilties, and the intricate, obscure, and in constant
disputations of Schuenkfeildius, and such other vain ianglers about this
matter. Neither are we Schuenkfeildians. Moreover we believe, that our Lord
Jesus Christ did truel^ 1. Pet 4. 1.
suffer and die for us in the flesh, as Peter says. We abhor the most horrible
madness of the Iacobites and the Turks, which abandone the passion of our Lord.
Yet we deny not but that the Lord of glory (according to the saying of
Paul,) 1. Cor. 2. 8.
was crucified for us. For we do reverently and religiously receive and use
the communication of proprieties drawn from the scriptures, and used of all
antiquity in expounding and reconciling places of scripture, which at the
first sight seem to disagree one from another.

We believe and teach that the same Lord Jesus Christ, in that true flesh, in
which he was crucified and died, rose again from the dead, and that he did not
raise up another flesh in steed of that which was buried, nor took a spirit
in steed of flesh, but retained a true body: Therefore whilst that his
disciples thought that they did see the spirit of their Lord Christ, he showed
them his hands and feet, which were marked with the prints of the nails and
wounds, ^uc. 24. 39.
saying, Behold my hands and my feet, for I am he indeed: Handle me and see,
for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.

We believe that our Lord Jesus Christ in the same his flesh did ascend above
all the visible heavens into the very highest heaven, that is to say, the
seat of God and of the blessed spirits, unto the right hand of God the father,
which *although it do signify an equal participation of glory ^ l^o^e the
(...) upon this co^^ess. Ioh. 14. Acts. 3.
and majesty, yet it is also taken for a certain place, of which the Lord
speaking in the gospel, says, That he will go and prepare a place for his.
Also the Apos^le Peter says, The heavens must contain Christ, until the time
of restoring of all things. And out of heaven the same Christ will return
unto judgment, even then, when wickedness shall chiefly reign in the world,
and when Antichrist having corrupted true religion shall fill all things with
superstition and impiety, and shall most cruelly destroy the Church with
fire and bloodshed. Now Christ shall return to redeem his, and to abolish
Antichrist by his coming, and to judge the quick and the dead. For the dead
shall arise, and those Act. 17.
which shall be found alive in that day (which is unknown unto all creatures)
shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and all the faithful shall be
taken up to meet Christ in the air, that thenceforth they may enter with him
into heaven there to live for ever. But the unbelievers or ungodly shall
descend with the devils into hell, there to burn for ever, and never 1. Cor.
15. Mat. 25. 41. 2. Tim. 2.
to be delivered out of torments. We therefore condemn all those which deny
the true resurrection of the flesh, and those which think amiss of the
glorified bodies, as did Ioannes Hierosolymitanus, against whom Jerome wrote.
We also condemn those, which thought both the devils and all the wicked shall
at the length be saved, and have an end of their torments. For the Lord
himself has absolutely set it down, that, Their fire is never quenched, and
their worm never Mar. 9.
dies. Moreover we condemn the Jewish dreams, that before the day of
judgment there shall be a golden world in the earth: and that the godly shall
possess the kingdoms of the world, their wicked enemies being troade under
foot. For the Evangelical truth. Mat. 24. and 25. and Luke 18. and the
Apostolic doctrine in the 2. to the Thessalonians. 2. and in the 2. to Tim. 3.
and 4. ar found to teach far otherwise. Romans 41. 5.


Furthermore by his passion or death, and by all those things which he did and
suffered for our sakes, from the time of his coming in the flesh, our Lord
reconciled his heavenl^ father unto all the faithful, purged their sin,
spoiled death broke in sunder condemnation and hell, and by his resuection from
the dead he brought again and restored life, ar^ immortality. For he is our
righteousness, life, and resuection, and to be short, he is the fullnes and
perfection, the salvation and most abundant sufficiency of all the faithful.
For the Apostle says, So it pleases the Father that all f^^nes should dwell
in him. And, In him ye are complet. Collos 1. and 2. For we teach and believe
that this Jesus Christ our Lord is the only and eternal savior of Look the
1. obse^ua^ this confess.
mankind, yea and of the whole world, in whom are saved by faith all that
ever were saved before the law, under the law, and i^ the time of the
gospel, and so many as shall yet be saved to the end of the world. For the
Lord himself in the Gospel Ioh. 10.
faith, He that enters not in by the door unto the shepf^lde, but climeth up
an other way, he is a thief and a robber. I am the door of the sheep. And
also in another place of the same gospel Ioh. 8. Act. 4.
he says, Abraham saw my days, and rejoiced. And the Apostle Peter says,
Neithere is there salvation in any other, but i^ Christ: for among men there
is given no other name under hea^^ whereby they might be sa^ed. We believe
therefore that thorough 1. Cor. 10.
the grace of our Lord Christ we shall be saucd, even as our fathers were. For
Paull faith, That all our fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank
the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the spiritual rock, that
followed them, and that rock (...) Apoc. 15.
Christ. And therefore we read that John said, That Christ (...) that lamb
which was slain from the beginning of the world. And John. 1.
that John Baptist witnesses, That Christ is that lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world. Wherefore we do plainly and openly profess and
preach, that Jesus Christ is the only redeemer and savior of the world, the
king and high priest, the true and looked for Messiah, that holy and blessed
one (I say) whom all the shadows of the law, and the Prophesies of the
Prophets did prefigure and promise, and that God did perform and send him
unto us, so that now we are not to look for any other. And now there remains
nothing, but that we all should give all glory to him, believe in him, and
rest in him only, contemning and rejecting al other aides of our life. For
they are fallen from the grace of God, and make Christ of no value unto
themselves, whosoever they be that seek salvation in any other things besides
Christ alone.

And to speak many things in few words, with a sinceare heart we believe,
and with liberty of speech we freely profess, whatsoever things are defined
out of the holy scriptures, and comprehended in the Creedes, and in the decrees
of those four first and most excellent counsels holden at Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, together with blessed Athanasius his
Creed, and all other Creedes like to these, touching the mystery of the
incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ: and we condemn al things contrary to
the same. And thus do we retain the Christian, sound, and Catholic faith,
wholly and inviolable, knowing that nothing is contained in the foresaid
Creedes, which is not agreeable to the word of God, and makes wholly for the
sincere declaration of faith.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Artic. 10.
The eternal Counsel of the restoring of man.
ANd though man by this fault was deputed to damnation, and had incurred most
just wrath, yet God the father never ceased to have a care over him, the which
is manifest by the first promises, by the wholl law (which as it is holy, and
good, teaching us the will of God, righteousness, and truth, so does it work
anger, and stir up, not extinguish, sins in us, not through it own fault,
but by ours) and by Christ, ordained and exhibited for this purpose,

Jesus Christ and those benefittes which we reap by him.
Art. 11.
THis Christ the true son of God, being true God and true man, was made our
brother, when, according to the time appointed, he had taken upon him wholl man
(that is, consisting of soul and body) and in one indivisible person united
two natures (yet were not these natures confounded) that he might restore us
being dead to life, and make us fellow heirs with himself. He taking flesh
of the most pure virgin Marie, the holy Ghost working together, flesh, I
say, being sacred by the union of the Godhead, and like unto ours in all
things, sin only accepted (because it behooued our sacrifice to be
unspotted) gave the same flesh to death, for the purgation of all since.

The same Christ as he is to us a full and perfect hope a^^ trust of our
immortality, so he placed his flesh, being raised up from death into heaven,
at the right hand of his almighty father.

This conqueror, having triumphed over death, sin, and all the infernal
devils, sitting as our captain, head and chief high Priest, does defend and
plead our cause continually, til he do reform us to that Image after which we
were created, and bring us to the fruition of life everlasting. we look for
him to come in the end of the world, a true and upright judge, and to give
sentence upon all flesh (being first raised up to that judgment) and to
advance the godly above the sky, and to condemn the wicked, both in soul
and body, to eternal destruction.

Who, as he is the only Mediator, intercessor, sacrifice, and also our high
Priest, Lord, and King, so we do acknowledge, and with the wholl heart
believe, that he alone i^ our atonement, redemption, sanctification,
expiation, wisdom, protection, and deliverance, simply herein rejecting all
mean of our life and salvation, beside this Christ alone. The latter part of
this article we placed also in the second section, which entreats of the
only mediator.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Of Christ, being true God and true man.
WE believe and confess constantly, that Christ in the time hereunto
appointed, according to the promise of God, was given to us of the father, and
that so the eternal word of God was made flesh, that is, that this son of
God, being united to our nature in one person, was made our brother, that we
through him might be made partakers of the inheritance of God.

We believe that this Jesus Christ was conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of
the pure and undefiled Virgin Marie, suffered under Pontius Pilate, crucified,
and dead for our sins: and so by the one oblation of him self, he did
satisfy God our heavenly father for us, and reconcile us to him, and so by
his death he did triumph, and overcame the world, death, and hell. Moreover,
according to the flesh he was buried, descended into hell and the third day he
rose again from the dead. These things being sufficiently approved, he in
soul and body ascended into heaven, and sits there at the right hand, that
is, in the glory of God the father almighty: from thence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead. Moreover, he sent to his disciples, according to
his promise, the holy Ghost, in whom we believe, even as we do believe in the
father, and in the son. We believe that the last judgment shall be, wherein
our flesh shall life again, and every man, according as he has Romans 2. 2.
Cor. 5. Ioa. 5.
done in this life, shall receive of Christ the Judge: to weete eternal life,
if he has showed forth the fruits of faith, which are the works of
righteousness, by a true faith, and unfeigned love: and eternal fire, if he
has committed good or evil, without faith or love.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
CHAP. 4. Toward the middle.
NEither has any man, of all things whatsoever, any thing at all whereby he
may deliver, set free, or redeem himself from his sins and condemnation,
without Ioh. 15.
Christ, by whom alone, they which truly believe, are freed from sin, from
the tyranny and prison of the devil, from the wrath of God, and from death
and everlasting torments. And a little after toward the end of the said fourth
Chap. Together with this point, and after it, considering that both the matter
it self, and order of teaching so requires, the ministers of the Church teach
us after our fall to acknowledge the promise of God, the true word of grace,
and the holy gospel, brought to us from the privy counsel of the holy
Tri^i^ie, concerning our Lord Christ, and our wholl salvation purchased by him.

Of these promise, there be three principal, wherein all the rest are
contained. The first was made in Paradise in these words, I will out enmity
between thee and the woman, Genesis 3.
and between thy seed and her seed. He shall break thine head, and thou shall
bruyse his heel. The second was made to Abraham, which afterward Jacob also
and Moses did reneu^. The third to David, which the Prophets recited and
expounded. In these promises are described and painted forth those 2. Kig. 7.
23.
most excellent and principal works of Christ our Lord, which are the verse
ground work whereon our salvation Ps. 131 89.
stands, by which he is our Mediator and Savior: namely his conception in
the womb of the Virgin Marie, and Isa. 9. 11.
his birth of her also, for he was made the seed of the woman: also his
afflictions, his rising again from death, his sitting at the right hand of
God, where he has obtained the dignity of a Priest and King: of which thing
the wholl life of David was a certain type, for which cause the Lord Ephesians. 34.
calls himself another David, and a Shepherd. And this was the Gospel of
those holy men before the law was given, and since. And Chapter the 6. a little
from the beginning. For this is very certain, that after the fall of Adam no
man was able to set himself at liberty out of the bondage of sin, death,
and condemnation, or come to be truly reconciled unto God, but only by that
one Mediator between God and man, Christ Jesus (through a lively faith in
him) who alone, by his death, and blood shedding, took from us that image of
sin and death, and put upon us by faith the image of 1. Cor. 2.
righteousness and life. For he made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.

But firstmen are taught, that these things are to be believed concerning
Christ: namely that he is eternal, and of the nature of his heavenly father,
the only begotten son, begotten from enerlasting, and so together with the
Father Ioh. 1. Hob. 1. Coloss. 1.
and the holy Ghost one, true, and indivisible God, the eternal, not created
word, the brightness and the Image or engraven form of the person of his
Father, by whom all things, as well those things which may be seen, as
those which can not be seen, and those things which are in heaven, and those
which are in the earth, were made and created.

Moreover that he is also a true and natural man, our brother in very deed,
who has a soul and a body, that is, true and perfect humane nature, which,
by the power of Ioh. 1.
the holy Ghost, he took, without all sin, of Marie a pure Virgin:
according as S. John says, The word was made flesh.

And thus of these two natures, their properties not being changed nor
confounded, yet by a wonderful communication thereof, there is made one
indivisible person, one Christ, Immanuell, our King and priest, our redeemer,
our Mediator, and perfect reconciler, full of grace and truth, so that of his
fullnes we all do take grace for grace: For the law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth, was given and exhibited, by Jesus Christ, being God and man
in one person* This grace and truth are our men taught to acknowledge, and by
faith to behold, in all those saving and wonderful works or affections of
Christ, which, according to the meaning of the holy Scripture, are by a stead
fast faith to be believed and professed: such as are his coming down from
heaven, his conception, birth, torments, death, burial, refurrection,
ascension unto heaven, sitting at the right hand of God, and his coming again
from thence to judge both the quick and the dead. In these principal
affections, as in a chest wherein treasure is kept, are al those wholesome fruits
of our true justification laid up, and are taken out from thence for the elect
and those which do believe, that in Spirit and conscience they may be
partakers thereof through faith: which all hereafter, at the day of our
joyful resurrection, shall be fully and perfectly bestowed upon us. And
toward the end of that Sixth Chapter, these words are added. In this Chapter
also particularly and for necessary causes, to shun and avoid many
pernicious and Antichristian deceites, it is taught concerning Christ his
Look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
presence, namely that our Lord Christ according to his bodily conversation is
not amongst us any longer in this world, neither will be unto the end of the
world, in such sort and manner as he was here conversant amongst us in his
mortality, and wherein he was betrayed, and circumcised, nor yet in the form
of his glorified body, which he got at his resurrection, and in the which he
appeared to his disciples, and the for^^eth day after his resurrection,
departing from them, ascended manifestly into heaven. For after this manner of
his presence and company he is in the high place, and with his father in
heaven, where al tongues profess him to be the Lord, and every faithful one
of Christ must believe that he is there, and worship him there, according to
the scriptures, as also that part of the Catholic Christian faith does
expresselie witness, which is this, He ascended into heaven, he sits as the
right hand of God the father almighty: Also that other article: from thence
shall he come (that 1. These. 4.
is from an higher place, out of heaven with his Angels) is judge both the
quick and the dead. So does Paul also say, The Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shoute, and with the voice Act. 3.
of an Archangell, and with the trumpet of God. And S. Peter says, Whom heaven
must co^taine, until the time that al things be restored. Mar. 16.
And the Evangelist Mark: But when the Lord had spoken with the^, he was taken
up again into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God. And the Angels
which were there present, when he was Act. 1.
taken up into heaven, said, This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come again, as you have seen him go into heaven.

Furthermore this also do our men teach, that the self same Christ, very God
and very man, is also with us herein this world, but after a diverse manner
from that kind of presence which we named before, that is, after a certain
spiritual manner, not object to our eyes, but such a one as is hid from us,
which the flesh does not perceive, and yet it is very necessary for us to our
salvation, that we may be partakers of him, whereby he offers and
communicates himself unto us, that he may dwell in us, and we in him: and
this truly he does by the holy Ghost, whom in his own place (that is, in
steed of his own presence, whereby he was bodelie amongst us) he promised
that he would send unto his Church, and that he would still abide with it by the
same spirit in virtue, grace, and his wholesome truth, at al times, even Math.
28. John. 16.
until the end of the world, when he said thus: It is good for you that I go
hence, for except I go hences, the comforter will not come Ioh. 14.
unto you: but if I go away, I will send him unto you. And again, I will pray
the father, and he shall give you another comforter, (that is, another kind of
comforter then I am) that he may abide i^ you for ever, even the spirit of
truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither
knows him: but ye know him, for he dwellesh in you, and shall be in you. I will
not leave you comforth but I will come to you, namely by the self same spirit
of truth.

Now then even as our Lord Christ by his latter kind of presence being not
visible, but spiritual, is present in the ministers of the Church, in the
word, and in the sacraments; even so also by the self same ministers, word,
and sacraments he is present with his Church, and by these means do the elect
receive him through inward faith in their heart, and do therefore join
themselves together with him, that he may dwell in them, and they in him,
after such a sort, as is not apparent, but hidden from the world, even by that
faith spirituallie: that is to say, in their souls and hearts, by the spirit
of truth, of whom our Lord says, He abides with you, and shall be in you.
And, I will come again Ioh. 14.
unto you.

This judgment and declaration of our says, is not new, or now first devised,
but very ancient Now that this was commonhe taught and meant in the Church of
old, it is plain and evident by the writings of the ancient Fathers of the
Church, and by that decree, wherein it is thus written, and they are the words
of Saint Augustine: Our Lord is above In Io. Tract. 30.
until the end of the world, but the truth of the Lord is here also: for
the body of the Lord, wherein he rose again, must of necessity be in one
place, but his truth is dispersed every where.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
Art. 13.
WE believe, that whatsoever is requisite to our salvation, is offered and
communicated unto us now at length in that one Jesus Christ, as he who being
given to save us, is also made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
and redemption, in so much as whosoever does swerve from him, does renounce the
mercy of the Father, that is, our only refuge.

Artic. 14.
We believe that Jesus Christ, being the wisdom, and eternal son of the
father, took upon him our nature* so that he is one person, God and man. Man,
I say, that might suffer both in soul and also in body, and made like unto
us in all things, sin only excepted, for that his flesh was indeed the
seed of Abraham and David, howbeit by the secret and incomprehensible power of
the holy Ghost, it was conceived in do time in the womb of that blessed
Virgin. And therefore we detest, as contrary to that truth all those heresies
wherewith the Churches were troubled in times past: and namely we detest those
deuillish imaginations of Seruetus, who gave to our Lord Jesus Christ, an
imaginary deity, whom he said to be the Idea and pattern of al things, and
the counterfeit or figurative son of God: to conclude he framed him a body
compacted of three elements uncreated, and therefore he did mingle and overthrow
both his natures.

We believe that in one and the same person, which is Artic. 15.
Jesus Christ, those two natures are truly and inseperablie so conjoined, that
they be also united, either of those natures nevertheless retaining it distinct
propriety, so, that even as in this divine conjunction the nature of the word
reteining it proprieties, remained uncreate, infinite, and filling all places;
so also the humane nature remained, and shall remain for ever, finite, having
it natural form, dimension, and also propriety, as from the which the
resurrection and glorification, or taking up to the right hand of the father,
has not taken away the truth of the humane nature. Therefore we do so
consider Christ in his deity, that we do not spoil him of his humanity.

Art. 16.
We believe that God did declare his infinite love and goodness toward us in
this, that he has sent his son, who should die, and rise again, and
fulfill all righteousness, that Artic. 17.
he might purchase eternal life for us.

We believe that by that only sacrifice, which Jesus Christ offered on the
cross, we are reconciled to God, that we may be taken for just before him,
because we can not be acceptable to him, nor enjoy the fruit of our adoption,
but so far forth, as he does forgive us our sins. Therefore we affirm,
that Jesus Christ is our entire and perfect washing, in whose death we obtain
full satisfaction, whereby we are delivered from all those sins whereof we
are guilty, and from the which we could not be acquitted by any other remedy.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
Art. 2.
WE believe, that Jesus Christ the only son of the eternal Father (as long
before it was determined before all beginnings) when the fulness of time was
come, did take of that blessed and pure virgin, both flesh, and all the nature
of man, that he might declare to the world the secret and hid will of his
father: which will had been laid up from before al ages and generations: and
that he might finish in his humane body the Mystery of our redemption, and
might fasten our sins to the cross, and also that handwriting, which was
made against us.

We believe that for our sakes he died, and was buried, descended into hell,
the third day, by the power of his godhead, returned to life and rose again,
and that the fourth day after his resurrection, whiles his disciples beheld
and looked upon him, he ascended into heaven, to fulfill all things, and did
place in Majesty and glory the self same body, wherewith he was borne,
wherein he lived on earth, wherein he was iested at, wherein he had suffered
most painful torments, and cruel kind of death, wherein he rose again, and
wherein he ascended to the right hand of the father, above all rule, above all
power, all force, all Dominion, and above every name, that is named, not
only in this world, but also in the world to come: And that there he now
sits, and shall sit, till all things be fully perfited. And although the
Majesty, and godhead of Christ be every where abound antlie dispersed, yet we
believe, that his body, as Saint Augustine says, must needs be still in one
place: and that Christ has given Majesty unto his body, but yet has not
taken away from it the nature of a body: and that we must not so affirm
Christ to be God, that we deny him to be man: and, as the Martyr Vigilius
says, That Christ has left us, touching his humane nature, but has not lefe
us, touching his divine nature: and that the same Christ, though he be absent
from us, concerning his manhead, yet is ever present with us, concerning his
godhead.

From that place also we believe that Christ shall come again to execute that
general judgment, as well of them whom he shall find alive in the body, as
of them that shall be already dead.

Artic. 18.
And therefore that our only succor, and refuge is to fly to the mercy of
our father by Jesus Christ, and assuredly to persuade our minds, that he is
the Obteiner of forgiveness for ^^r sins: And, that by his blood, all our
spots of sin, be washed clean: That he has pacified, and set at one, all
things by the blood of his cross: That he by the same one only sacrifice,
which he once offered upon the Cross, has brought to effect, and fulfilled al
things, and that for that cause he said, when he gave up the Ghost, It is
finished, as though he would signify, that the price, and r^nsome was now
fully paid for the sin of mankind.

Art 19.
If there be any, that think this sacrifice not sufficient, let them go in
Gods name and seek a better. We verelie, because we know this to be the Only
sacrifice, are well content with it alone, and look for none other: and,
forasmuch as it was to be offered but once, we command it not to be renewed
again: and, because it was full, and perfect in all points, and parts, we do
not ordeine in place thereof any Art. 21.
continual succession of offerings.

To conclude, we believe that this our selfsame flesh, wherein we line,
although it die, and come to dust, yet at the last shall return again unto
life, by the means of Christ's spirit, which dwells in us: and that then
verily, whatsoever we suffer here in the mean while for his sake, Christ will
wipe away all tears and heaviness from our eyes: and that we through him shall
enioie everlasting life, and shall for ever be with him in glory. So beit.

Art. 17.
OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
WE believe that out most mighty and gracious God when he saw that man had
thus thrown himself into the damnation both of spiritual and corporal death,
and was made altogether miserable and accursed) by his wounderfull wisdom and
goodness, was induced both to seek him, when through fear he had fled from his
presence, and also most lovingly to comfort him, giving unto him the promise of
his own son to be borne of a woman, which should break the head of the
serpent, and restore him to selicitie and happiness.

Art. 18.
Moreover we confess, that God did then at the length fulfill his promise
made unto the Fathers, by the mouth of his holy Prophets, when in his
appointed time he sent his only and eternal son into the world, who took
upon him the form of a servant, being made like unto men, and did truly
take unto him the nature of man, with all infirmities belonging thereunto
(sin only excepted) when he was conceived in the womb of the blessed
Virgin Mary, by the power of the holy ghost, without any means of man. The
which nature of man he put upon him, not only in respect of the body, but
also in respect of the soul: for he had also a true soul, to the intent he
might be true and perfect man. For seeing that as well the soul, as the body
of man, was subject to condemnation, it was necessary that Christ should take
upon him as well the soul, as the body, that he might save them both together.
Therefore contrary to the heresy of the Anabaptists, which deny that Christ
did take upon him the flesh of man, we confess that Christ was partaker of flesh
and blood, as the rest of his brethren were, that he came from the loins of
David, according to the flesh, I say, that he was made of the seed of David
according to the same flesh, and that he is a fruit of the Virgins womb, borne
of a woman, the branch of David, a flower of the root of less, coming of the
Tribe of Judah, and of the Jews themselves, according to the flesh: and to
conclude, the true seed of Abraham and David, the which seed of Abrahame he
took upon him, being made in all things like unto his brethren, sin only
excepted, as has been said before, so that he is indeed our true Emmanuell,
that is, God with is.

Art. 19.
We believe also that the person of the son was by this conception
inseperablie united and coupled with the humane nature, yet so, that there be
not two Sons of God, nor two persons, but two natures joined together in one
person: both which natures do still retain their own proprieties. So that,
as the divine nature has remained always uncreated, without beginning of
days, and term of life, filling both heaven and earth: so the humane nature
has not lost his proprieties, but has remained still a creature, having both
beginning of days and a finite nature. For whatsoever does agree unto a true
body, that it still retains, and although Christ by his resurrection has
bestowed immortality upon it, yet notwithstanding he has neither taken away
the truth of the humane nature, nor altered it. For both our salvation, and
also our resurrection depends upon the truth of Christ's body. Yet these
two natures are so united and coupled in one person, that they could not, no
not in his death, be separated the one from the other. Wherefore that, which in
his death he commended unto his father, was in deed a humane spirit, departing
out of his body: but in the mean season the divine nature did always remain
joined to the humane, even then when he la^e in the grave: so that his deity
was no les^e in him at that time, then when as yet he was an infant, although
for a small season it did not show forth itself. Wherefore we confess that he
is true God, and true man true god, that by his power he might overcome death
^ane true man, that in the infirmity of his flesh he might d^ for us.

Art. 20.
We believe that God, which is both perfectly merciful, and perfectly just,
did send his son to take upon him that nature, which through disobedience had
offended, that in the self same nature he might satisfy for sin, and by his
bitter death and passion pare the punishment that was due unto sin. God
therefore has declared and manifested his justice in his own son being
laden with our iniquities: but has most mercifully powered forth and declared
his gracious goodness unto us guilty wretches, and worchie of condemnation,
whilst that in his incomprehensible love toward us, he delivered up his son
unto death for our sins, and raised him up again from death for our
justification, that by him we might obtain immortality and life everlasting.

We believe that Jesus Christ is that high priest, appo^^ed Art. 21.
to that office eternally, by the oath of his Father, according to the order of
Melchisede^h, which offered himself in our name before his Father with a full
satisfaction for the pa^ifying of his wrath, laying himself upon the al^ar of
the cross, and has shed his blood for the clensing of our sins, as the
Prophets had fore^olde. For it is written, that the chastisment of our peace
was laid upon the son of God, and by his wounds we are healed. Also that he
was carried as a sheep unto the slaughter, reputed amongst sinners and unjust,
and condemned of Pontius Pila^e, as a male factour, though before he had
pronounced him guiltles. Therefore he paid that which he had not taken, and
being just, suffered in soul and body for the unjust, in such sort, that
feeling the horror of those punishments that were due unto our sins, be did
sweat water and blood, and at length cried out, My God, ^y God, why have thou
sorsaken me? All which he suffered for the remission of our sins. Wherefore
we do not without just cause profess with Paul, that we know ^^thi^g but
Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and that we do a^^ount all things as dung,
in respect of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord, finding in his
wounds and stripes all manner of comfort, that can be deserved. Wherefore
there is no need, that o^ her we should wish for any other means, or (...)
any of our own b^aines, whereby we might be reconciled unto God besides this
one oblation once offered, by the which all the faithful, which are sanctified,
are consecrated, or perfected for ever. And this is the cause, why he was
called of the Angel Jesus, that is to say, a savior, because he should save
his people from their sins.

Art. 37.
Last of all we do believe out of the word of God, that our Lord Jesus Christ
(when the time appo^^ted by God but unto all creatures unknown, shall come,
and the number of the elect shall be accomplished) shall come again from
heaven, and that after a corporal and visi^^e m^nner, as heretofore he has
ascended, being adorned with g^^^t glory and majesty, that he may appear as
judge of the quick and the dead, the old world being kindel^d with fire and
flame, and puri^ied by it. Then Look the 2. obserua^. upon this confess.
all creatures, and as well men* as women, and children, as many as have been
from the beginning, and shall be to the end of the world, shall appear before
this high Judge, being s^mmoned thither by the voice of Archangeils, and the
trumpet of God. For all that have been dead shall then rise out of the earth,
the soul and spirit of every one being joined and coupled together again to
the same bodies, wherein before they lived. They moreover, which shall be alive
at the last dare, shell not die the same death that other men have done* but in
a moment and in the twinkling of an eye they shall be changed from corruption,
to an incorruptible nature. Then the books shall be opened, namely the books
of every man's conscience, and the dead shall be judged according to those
things which they have done in this world, either good or evil. Moreover, then
shall men render an account of every idle word which they have spoken,
although the world do now make but a spor^e and a jest at them. Final e, all
the hypocrisy of men, and the deepest secrets of their hearts shallbe made
manifest unto all, so that worthelie the only remembrance of this judgment
shall be terrible and fearful to the wicked and reprobate. But of the godly
and elect it is greatly to be wished for, and is unto them exceeding comfort.
For then shall their redemption be fully perfited, and they shall reap most
sweet fruit and commodity of all those labors and sorrows, which they have
suffered in this world. Then, I say, their innocence shall be openly
acknowledged of all, and they likewise shall see that horrible punishment which
the Lord will execute upon those, that have most tyrannic allie afflicted them
in this world with diverse kinds of torments and crosses. Furthermore the
wicked being convinced by the peculiar testimony of their own conscience, shall
indeed be made immortal, but with this condition, that they shall burn for
ever in that eternal fire, which is prepared for the devil. On the contrary
side the elect and faithful shall be crowned with the crown of glory and
honor, whose names the son of God shall confess before his Father and the
Angels, and then shall all tears be wiped from their eyes. Then their cause,
which now is condemned of heresy and impiety by the magistrates and Judges of
this world, shall be acknowledged to be the cause of the son of God: And the
Lord shall of his free mercy reward them with so great glory, as no man's
mind is able to conceive. Therefore we do with great longing expect that
great da^e of the Lord, wherein we shall most fully enjoy all those things
which God has promised unto us, and through Jesus Christ our Lord, be put
into full possession of them for ever more.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGF.
ALso they teach, that the word, that is, the son of God took unto him man's
nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin Marie, so that the two natures, the
divine and the humane, inseperablie joined together in the unity of one
person, are one Christ, true God and true man: who was borne of the Virgin
Marie, did truly suffer, was crucified, dead, and buried, that he might
reconcile his father unto us, and might be a sacrifice, not only for the
original sin, but also for all actual sins of men. The same also
descended into hell, and did truly rise again the third day. Afterward he
ascended into heaven, that he might sit at the right hand of the father, and
reign for ever, and have dominion over all the creatures, sanctify those that
believe in him, by sending the holy spirit into their hearts, and give
everlasting life to such as he had sanctified. The same Christ shall openly
come again, to judge them that are found alive, and the dead raised up again,
according to the Creed of the Apostles.

In the end of this Article after these words (by sending his holy spirit into
their hearts) these words are found in some editions.
BY sending his spirit into their hearts, which may reign, comfort, and
quicken them, and defend them against the Devil, and the power of sin. The
same Christ shall openly come again, to judge the quick and the dead, etc.
according to the Creed of the Apostles.

Also they teach, that in the end of the world Christ shall appear to
judgment, and shall raise up all the dead, and shall give unto men (to weete,
to the godly and elect) eternal life, and everlasting joys, but the ungodly
and the Devils shall he condemn unto endless torments.

Also we condemn the Origenistes, who imagined, that the devil and the damned
creatures should one day have an end of their pains.

After the first periode of this Article, this is thus found else where.
THey condemn the Anabaptists, that are of opinion, that the damned men and
the deuill^ shall have an end of their torments. They condemn others also,
which now a days do spread abroad Jewish opinions, that before the
resurrection of the dead, the godly shall get the soueragintie in the world,
and the wicked be brought under in every place.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Hitherto pertains a part of the third article.
THe son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Image of the eternal
father, is appointed our Mediator, Reconciler, Redeemer, Iustifier, and
savior. By the obedience and merit of him alone the wrath of God is pacified,
as it is said, Romans 3. Whom he set forth to be a reconciliation through faith
in his blood. And, Heb. 10. It is impossible, that the blood of Bulls should
take away sins. But he offering a sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at
the right hand of God, etc. And although we do not see as yet, Look the 1.
obseru. upon this confession.
in this our infirmity, the causes of this wonderful counsel, why mankind
was to be redeemed after this sort, but we shall learn them hereafter in all
eternity, yet these principles are now to be learned. In this sacrifice there
are to be seen, justice in the wrath of God against sin, infinite mercy
toward us, and love in his Son toward mankind. The severity of his
justice was so great, that there could be no reconciliation, before the
punishment was accomplished. His mercy was so great, that his Son was given
for us. There was so great love in the Son toward us, that he derived unto
himself this true and exceeding great anger. O Son of God, kindle in our
hearts, by thy holy spirit, a consideration of these great and secret things,
that by the knowledge of this true wrath we may be sore afraid, and that
again by true comfort we may be lif^ed up, that we may praise thee for ever.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
WE believe and confess, that the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, be
gotten of his eternal Father, is true and eternal God, consubstantial with his
father, and that in the fullnes of time he was made man, to purge our sins,
and Look the 1. obseruat upon this confess.
to procure the eternal salvation of mankind: that Christ Jesus, being very
God, and very man, is one person only, and not two, and that in this one
person there be two natures, not one only, as by testimonies of the holy
scripture, the holy Fathers have declared, in the Counsels held at Nice,
Ephesus, and Chalcedon. Therefore we detest every heresy which is repugnant to
this doctrine of the Son of God.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
ALSO we believe that our Savior Jesus Christ, being true God, was also made
true man, his natures not being confounded, but so united in one and the same
person, that they shall never hereafter be dissolved. Neither do we differ any
thing in those points, which the Church being taught out of the holy Gospells,
does believe, concerning our Savior Jesus Christ, conceived of the holy
Ghost* borne of the Virgin Marie, and who at the length, after he had
discharged the office of preaching the Gospel, died on the cross, and was
buried, and descended into hell, and the third day he was called back from
the dead unto life eternal: the which life when he had by diverse arguments
proved unto witnesses, hereunto appointed, he was carried up into heaven to the
right hand of his Father, from whence we look that he should come to judge the
quick and the dead. In the mean time let us acknowledge that he is never
thelesse present with his Church, that he does renew, and sanctify it, and as
his only beloved spouse, beutifie it with all sorts of ornaments of virtues:
and in these things we do nothing vary from the Fathers, nor from the common
consent of Christians: we think it sufficient, after this sort to testify
our faith.

THE SEVENTH SECTION. OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVEITA.
Of the law of God. CHAP. 12.
WE teach, that the will of God is set down unto us in the law of God, to
wit, what he would have us to do, or not to do, what is good and just, or
what is evil and unjust* we therefore confess that the law is good and holy,
and that this law is by the finger of God either written in the hearts of
men, and so is called the law of nature, or engraven in the two tables Exodus
20. Deuteronomy. 5.
of stone, and more largely expounded in the books of Moses. For plainnes
sake, we divide it unto the moral law, which is contained in the
commandments or the two tables expounded in the books of Moses, and into the
ceremonial, which does appoint ceremonies and the worship^ of God, and into
the judicial law, which is occupied about political and domestical affairs.

We believe that the Look the 1. obseruat. upon this Confess. Deu. 4. and 12.
wholl will of God and all necessary precepts for every part of this life is
fully delivered in this law. For otherwise the Lord would not have forbidden*
That any thing should be either added or taken away from this law. Neither
would he have commaun^^d us to go straight forward in this, and Not to decline
out of the way either to the right handor to the left.

We teach that this law was not given to men that we should be justified by
keeping it, but that by the knowledge thereof we might rather acknowledge our
infirmity, sin, and condemnation, and so dispairing of our own strength
might turn unto Christ by faith. For the Apostle says plainly, The law
works wrath, and, by the law comes To. 3. 4. Gal. 3.
knowledge of sin. And, If there had been a law given, which could have
justified and given us life, surely righteousness should have been by the law.
But the spirit (to wit of the law) has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them which believe.
Therefore the law was our schoolmaster to Christ, that we might be justified by
faith. For neither could there ever, neither at this day can look* 2. obseru
upon the this conf. Romans 8.
any flesh satisfy the law of God, and fulfill it, by reason of the weakness
in our flesh, which remains and sticks fast in us, even to our last breath.
For the Apostle says again, That which the law could not perform, in as much
as it was weak, through the flesh, that did God perform, sending his own
son in similitude of flesh, subject to sin. Therefore Christ is the perfiter
of the law, and our fullfilling of it, who as he took away the curse of the
law, when as he Gal 3.
was made a cursle for us, so does he communicate unto us by faith his full
filling thereof, and his righteousness and obedience is imputed unto us. The law
of God therefore is Look the 3. obseru. upon this confession.
thus far abrogated, as that it does not henceforth condemn us, neither work
wrath in us. For we are under grace, and not under the law. Moreover Christ did
fulfill all the figures of the law. Wherefore the shadow ceased, when the body
came: so that in Christ we have now all truth and fullnes. Yet we do not
therefore disdain or re^ect the law. We remember the words of the Lord,
saying, I came not to destroy the law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them.
We know that Look the 4. obseruat.
in the law are described unto us the kinds of virtues and vices. We know that
the scripture of the law Look the 5. obseru*
, if it be expounded by the Gospel, is very profitable to the Church, and that
therefore the reading of it is not to be banished out of the Church. For
although the countenance of Moses was covered with a veil, yet the Apostle
affirms, that the veil is taken away and abolished by Christ. We condemn
al things which the old or new heretics have taught against the law of God.

Of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and also of Promises: of the spirit and of the
letter. CHAP. 13.
THE gospel indeed is opposed to the law: for the law works wrath, and
does denounce a curse* but the gospel does preach grace and a blessing. John
Ioh. 1.
says also, The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ. Yet notwithstanding it is most certain, that they which were before
the law, and under the law, were not altogether destitute of the gospel: For
they had notable Evangelical promises, such as these are: The seed of the
woman shall bruise the Serpents head. In thy seed Genesis 3. Genesis 22. Genesis ^0.
Deuteronomy. 8. Act. 3.
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. The scepter shall not be taken
from Judah, until Silo come. The Lord shall raise up a Prophet from amongst his
own brethren, etc. And we do acknowledge that the fathers had two kind of
promises revealed unto them, even as we have. For some of them were of present
and transitory things, such as were the promises of the land of Canaan, and
of victories, and such as are now a days, concerning our daily bread.
Othersome there were then, and also are now, of heavenly and everlasting
things, as of Gods favor, remission of sins, and life everlasting, through
faith in Jesus Christ. Now the fathers had not only outward or earthly, but
spiritual and heavenly promises in Christ. For the Apostle Peter says, that
the Prophets which prophesied of the grace that should come to us, have
searched and inquired of this salvation. Whereupon the Apostle Paul also says,
that the gospel of God was promised before by the Prophets of God in the holy
scriptures. Hereby then it appears evidently, that the fathers were not
altogether destitute of all the Gospel.

And although after this manner our fathers had the gospel in the writings of
the Prophets, by which they attained salvation in Christ through faith, yet the
gospel is properly called that glad and happy tidings, wherein first by John
Baptist, then by Christ the Lord himself, and afterward by the Apostles and
their successors, is preached to us in the world, that God has now performed
that, which he promised from the beginning of the world, and has sent, yea and
given unto us, his only son, and in him reconciliation with the father,
remission of sins, all fulness, and everlasting life. The history therefore
set down by the four Euagelists, declaring how these things were done or
fulfilled of Christ, and what he taught and did, and that they which believed
in him had al fulness, this, I say, is truly called the Gospel. The
preaching also and scripture of the Apostles, in which they expound unto us how
the son was given us of the father, and in him all things pertaining to life
and salvation, is truly called the doctrine of the Gospel, so as even at
this day it loses not that worthy name, if it be sincere.

The same preaching of the Gospel is by the Apostle termed 2. Cor. 3.
the spirit, and the ministry of the spirit, because it is lining, and
workeing thorough faith in the ears, yea in the hearts of the faithful
thorough the illumination of the holy spirit. For the letter, which is opposed
unto the spirit, does in deed signify every outward thing, but more
specially the doctrine of the law, which without the spirit and faith works
wrath, and stirs up sin in the minds of the^, that do not truly believe.
For which cause it is called by the Apostle, the ministry of death: for
hitherto pertains that saying of the Apostle, The letter kills, but the
spirit gives life. The false Apostles preached the Gospel, corrupted by
mingling of the law therewith, as though Christ could not save without the law.
Such also were the Hebionites said to be, which came of Hebion the heretic:
and the Nazarites, which before time were called Myneans. Al which we do
condemn, sincerely preaching the word, and teaching, that the believers are
justified by the spirit only, and not by the law. But of this matter there
shall follow a more large discourse in the title of justification.

And although the doctrine of the Gospel compared with the Pharisees doctrine
of the law might seem (when it was first preached by Christ) to be a new
doctrine, the which thing also Jeremy prophesied of the new Testament, yet in
deed it not only was, and as yet is (though the Papists call it new, in
regard of Popish doctrine, which has of long time ^. Tim. 1.
bin received) an ancient doctrine, but also the most ancient in the world. For
God from all eternity fore ordained to save the world by Christ: and this his
predestination and eternal counsel has he opened to the world by the Gospel.
Whereby it appears that the Evangelical doctrine and religion was the most
ancient of all that ever were, are, or ever shall be: Wherefore we say that all
they err foullie, and speak things unworthy the eternal counsel of God, who
term the Evangelical doctrine and religion, a new start up faith scarce
thirty years old: to whom that saying of Isaiah does very well agree, Woe
unto them that speak good (...) evil, and evil of good, which put darkness
for light, and light^^ darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
sour.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Therefore in the wholl Evangelical doctrine, this ought first and chiefly to
be urged, that we are saved by the only mercy and grace of God, and by
Christ his merittes* whereof that men may know how much they stand in need,
their sins must be very clearelie laid open unto them, by the law, and by
Christ his death.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of the word of God, or the holy Gospel, CHAP. 10.
1. Cor. 4. 2. Cor. 3.
ANd seeing that the administration of thee new test^ meant, and also the word
and the sacraments are lawfully committed to the Ministers of the Church, and
their lippe^ Malac. 2.
ought to preserve knowledge, that the law may be sought at their mouth,
therefore in this Chapter it is further taught, what the word of God, and the
holy gospel is. Now the Preaching of the word of God and of the Gospel, is
the true ministry of grace, instituted and commanded of Christ our Lord,
wherein the full and perfect will of God, touching eternal reconciliation,
necessary to salvation, and made manifest in the holy scripture, is declared
and preached unto all people. This doctrine did Christ give in charge unto his
disciples in the words of this sentence, Goye into all the world, and preach
the Gospel to every Marc. 16.
creature. This doctrine does Peter profess before Cornelius, when he says.
He commanded us to preach unto the Act. 10.
people, and to testify that this is he, that is ordained of God to be the
Judge of the quick and the dead. To him also give all the Prophets wines, that
through his name, all that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.

This ministry is more honorable, greater, and more necessary to salvation,
then are the sacraments: the which is proved by that sentence of the most
excellent Apostle 1. Cor. ^.
Saint Paul, For Christ sent me not to Baptize (that is, not chiefly to do
this) but to preach the Gospel. For only through the pure Gospel, and the
preaching thereof, is faith sowed inwardly in the heart by the holy Ghost,
and from thence also must we conceive and seek the true meaning of God and
Christ, touching all things necessary to salvation, and also touching the
sacraments themselves. Amongst those, who by reason of their age are able to
use their understanding, it is of necessity, that the preaching of the Gospel
go before the receiving of the sacraments. Whereof we may see an evident
proof in those three thousand which were converted by Peter: also in
Cornelius, and Act. 2. Act. 8.
in the Chamberlain we may see, that, according to the example of Phillippe,
the question is thus to be made, Do thou believe with all thy heart? Then it
may be that thou who have true faith grafted in thy heart may receive
profit, by the participation of the sacraments. For without the hearing of the
word of God, which is the saving power of God, no Romans 1.
man shall wittinglie attain unto faith and salvation, according To. ^0.
to that saying of Paull. Therefore faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. And again, How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? Therefore herein our preachers endeavor them selves most earnestly,
that in our Ecclesiastical meetings they may propound unto the people the
sincere word of God, without all mixture or inuentious of men. For which cause
also they do, by an ancient custom, recite in the mother and vulgar tongue,
which may be understood of all, not only those Chapters which are appointed
to be read out of the gospel at certain times, but also all other parts of
holy scripture, and do exhort the people with an earnest desire to hear the
word o^ God, and to frequent those Ecclesiastical meetings, that by the
diligent teaching of the Gospel, and by often repeating it in their sermons,
they may first teach the people repentance and faith, and then the use and
administration of the sacraments, and by this means prepare them to the right
receiving of the sacraments: and afterward also, bo^^ whilst the sacraments
be administered, and after they be administered, they do conveniently instruct
them in all those things which the Lord commanded, and chiefly in those
things which do appertain to the leading of an honest life, and such a one,
as beseems a Christian profession; Math. 28.
as Christ says, Teach them to keep all things which I (...) commanded you.

In this place also it is taught very diligently, and as the matter
requires, touching the difference, which is to be observed betwixt the word,
or doctrine, and work of the law, and betwixt the word and force of the
holy Gospel. The word or ministry of the law and of the old Testament,
is the word of death, fear, and of the letter, also the word of wrath and
the word of malediction: but the word of the new Testament, that is, of the
holy Gospel, is the ministry of faith, and the spirit of cleerenes, or
glory through our Lord Jesus Christ, the word of grace, of the new covenant,
the word of comfort, and the messenger of peace. Of 2. Cor. 3* Ioh. 6.
them both the Apostle writes thus, The letter kills, but the spirit
quickneth. And Christ says, The words which I speak, (...) spirit and life.
Also there is mention made of the use of the (...) law, in the fourth Chapter
of this confession (beginning with these words. This doctrine of the true
knowledge of sin, etc.) (...) is to be seen before in the fourth Section,
whereunto all that Chapter apperteineth.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
WE believe that all the figures of the law are takes away by the coming of
Chist, howbeit we are assured that the truth and substance of them does abide
i^ him, in whom they are all fulfilled. Yet we must use the doctrine of the
law, and the Prophets, both to frame our life aright, and also that we may so
much the more be confirmed in the promises of the Gospel.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
WE believe that all the ceremonies, figures, and shadows of the law, have
ceased at the coming of Christ, so that now even the use of them ought to be
taken away and abolished among Christians. Yet in the mean time, the truth and
substance of them does remain to us in Christ, in whom they are all
fulfilled. And therefore we do still use the testimonies of the law and the
Prophets, to confirm our selves in the doctrine of the gospel, and to lead an
honest life, unto Gods glory, according to his will.

THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE does by the way mention the doctrine of the
Gospel, and of the end thereof, in the 4. and 5. Articles, which we have
placed in the ninth Section, wherein justification, and remission of sins by
faith in Christ, is handled.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
ANd that the benefittes of this Mediator might be known unto mankind, and
applied unto us, there was a promise given straight in the beginning after the
fall of our first parents, and afterward often times repeated, and by voice of
the Prophets declared; but most clearly was it recited by the very Son,
and afterward by the Apostles: And there was a ministry instituted to teach,
and to spread abroad that promise, also there was a Church made, and often
renewed by the same very voice, touching the Son of God our atonement. By
this mynisterie the Son of God always was, is, and shall be effectual in
the believers, as it is said, Romans 1. The Gospel is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes. And he does renew this ministry, when
he says, As my Father sent me, so do I send you also. Go, and preach
repentance and remission of sins in my name. He will that sin should be
reproved in all mankind, as he says, The spirit shall reprove the world of
sin, because they believe not in ^ee. And Romans 1. The wrath of God is
reueiled from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. God will
have his wrath to be acknowledged against all sin, and chiefly against the
contempt of the Son, as he says in the Psalm, Kiss the Son, lest he be
angry, and so ye perish from the way, etc. He will have us truly to be put
in great fear, by the knowledge of our darkness, of our horrible wickedness,
and our stubbernes. And truly God himself does amaz^ our hearts with the
sense of his anger, as Ezechiah sait^, Like a Lion he brake all my bones. And
to this judgment (...) does not only use the voice of the ministry of the
law^ and of the Gospel, but also all calamities be as it were the voice of the
law, admonishing us of the wrath of God, (...) calling us to repentance. Now
when the mind is terrified by this voice that reprooueth sins, then let it
hear the peculiar promise of the gospel, touching the Son of God, and let
him be assured that his sins are freely remitted f^^ the Son of God
hissake, our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our atonement, and that of mercy, not
for any (...) or love of ours.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE
Of the law. CHAP. 6.
WE acknowledge that the l^w of God (whereof the 10. commandments are an
abrigedment) does command the best, the most just, and most perfect works,
and that man is not only bound to obeie the moral precepts of the law, but
also if he should do the works of the 10. commandments, in such perfection
and integrity as the law requires, that he should indeed be counted just
before God for his works, and should obtain eternal salvation by his
merits. But whereas some men do think, that man can come to that state in
this life, as to be able by his works not only to fulfill the 10.
commandments, but also to do more and greater works, then are commanded in
the law, which they call works of supererogation, it is contrary to the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, and it is repugnant to the judgment of
the true Catholic Church. For the law was not given to this end, to signify,
that man might perfectly fulfill the commandments thereof in this life, but
to show to man his imperfection, and to testify of the unrighteousness of man,
and of the wrath of God against all men, and to stir them up to seek
remission of their sins, righteousness, and salvation by faith in the only
Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 3. By the law comes the knowledge
of sin. And, Romans 7. The law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under
sin. And, Romans 8. The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. For it is
not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. And, Galat. 3. Curssed
is every man, that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of De Spirit^^ and litera. cap. 36.
the law, to do them. Augustine says, This first commandment of justice,
wherein we are commanded to love the Lord, with all our heart, with all our
soul, and with all our mind, whereupon follows that other commandment, of
loving our neighbor, we shall fulfill in that life, where we shall see him
face to face. But therefore it is even now also commanded unto us, that we
might be admonished, what it behooves us to require by faith, whether to send
our hope before hand, and by forgetting those things which are behind, what
fore things we should stretch our selves unto. And hereby, so far as I can
judge, he has profited much in this life, in that righteousness which is to be
perfited, who by profiting does know, how far he is from the perfection sf
righteousness. And again. Charity is a virtue, whereby that is loved which is
to be beloved. This is in some August. Ieron^m. e^. 29.
greater, in others lesser, and in some none at all. But the most absolute
love, which now cannot be increased, so long as a man lives here, is not to be
found in any man. For so long as it may be increased, that which is less
then it ought to be, comes of our corruption: by reason of which corruption
there is not a just man in the earth, that does good and sins not: by reason
of which corruption no flesh living shall be justified in the sight of God: for
which corruptions sake, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us: for the which also, though we profit never
so much, yet it is necessary for us to say, Forgive us our debtes, although
all our words, deeds, and thoughts are already forgiven us in baptism. And
again, All the commandments of God are counted Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 19.
as done, when as whatsoever is not done, is notwithstanding pardoned. And
Jerome says, This is only perfection unto men, if they know that they are
imperfect. This is the true wisdom of man, to know that he is imperfect, and
(that I may so speak) the perfection of all just men in the flesh, is
imperfect.

Of the Gospel of Christ. CHAP. 8.
ALthough many precepts of the law of God be contained in the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and Christ himself does teach, that we must not
rend^^ evil for evil, nor look upon a woman wantonlie, and such like: yet we
must not think that the Gospel of Christ is a new law: whereby, as the fathers
in times past were saved under the old testament by the old law, so now men
under the new testament should be saved* by a new law. For except a man take
the name of the law generally for doctrine, as the Prophets now and then do
use the name of the law, certainly the Gospel of Christ, is not properly a
law, as Paull does commonly use the name of the law, but it is a good and
joyful message, touching the son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
only is the purger of our sins, the appeaser of the wrath of God, and our
redeemer and savior.

Neither are the commandments of the law, which are contained in the Apostles
writings, any new law, but they are an interpretation of the old law,
according to the judgment of the holy Ghost, which also were to be seen
before, and that not obscurelie, in the writings of the Prophets. But they are
repeated in the preaching of the gospel of Christ, that the severity of the
law of God, and the corruption of our nature being declared, we might be
stirred up to seek and embrace Christ revealed in his Gospel, and that we
may know after what rule we are to frame our life through faith in Christ.
Wherefore if we will speak properly of the law of God, and Gospel of Christ,
as of Christ we are not to make a new lawgiuer, seeing that he neither has
made a new law, nor instituted a new politi^e kingdom in this earth, so must
we not make a new law of the Gospel, which by more hard and severe
commandments does bring eternal salvation to the doers thereof. But we
think it to be most certain, that the natural, or moral law of the old and
new Testament is one and the same, and that neither the men which lived under
the old Testament, nor those which live under the new Testament, do obtain
eternal salvation, for the merit of the works of the law, but only for the
merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, through faith. Christ out of Isaiah does recite
his office, for the which he was sent into the earth: The spirit of the Lord,
Luc. 4.
says he, is upon me, because he has anointed me: he has sent me to preach
the Gospel to the poor, etc. Here Christ teaches that his proper office is,
not to make a new law, which should terrify and kill miserable sinners, but
to preach the Gospel, which might comfort and quicken sinners. Gal. 4. When
the fulness of time was come, God sent his Son made of a woman, and made under
the law, that he might redeem them which were under the law, and that we by
adoption might receive the right of sons. And Acts. 15, it is said, Why
tempt ye God, to lay an yoke upon the Disciples necks, which neither our
fathers, nor we, were able to bear? but we believe through the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ to be saved, even as they, etc. And Augustine says, Contra
Ad^mantu^ Manichaei discipulu^. Cap. 3.
That people which received the old Testament, was held under certain shadows
and figures of things before the coming of the Lord, according to the
wonderful and most orderly division of times. Yet therein was so great
preaching and foretelling of the new Testament, that in the Evangelical and
Apostolic discipline (though it be painful and divine) no commandments or
promises can be found, which are wanting even in those old books.

THE EIGHT SECTION. OF REPENTANCE AND THE CONVERSION OF MAN.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
CHAP. 14.
THe gospel has the doctrine of repentance Luc. 24.
joined with it: for so said the Lord in the Gospel, In my name must
repentance and remission of sins be preached among all nation* Byrepentance
we understand the change of the mind in a sinful man stirred up by the
preaching of the Gospel and by the holy spirit, received by a true faith, by
which a sinful man (...).
does eftsonnes acknowledge his natural corruption and a^^ his sins, seeing
them convinced by the word of God, and i^ heartily grieved for them, and does
not only bewail and freely confess them before God with shame, but also
does loath and abhor them with indignation, thinks seriously of present
amendment, and of a continual care of innocence and virtues, wherein to
exercise himself holilie all the rest of his life. And surely this is true
repentance, namely an unfeigned turning unto god and to all goodness, and a
serious return from the Devil and from all evil. Now we do expresselie say
that this repentance is the mere gift of god, and not the work of our own
strength. For the Apostle does will the faithful Minister diligently to
Instruct those 2. Tim. 2.
which withstand the truth, if that at any time the Lord will give them
repentance, that they may acknowledge the truth. Also the sinful woman in
the gospel, which washed Christ's feet with her tears, and Peter which
bitterly wept and bewailed his denial of his Master, do manifestly show,
what mind the penitent man should have, to wit, very earnestly lamenting
his sins committed. Moreover the Prodigal son, and the Publican in the
Gospel that is compared with the Pharisie, do set forth unto us a most fit
pattern of confessing our sins to God. The Prodigal son said, Father, I
have sinned against heaven, and against thee, I am not worthy to be called thy
son, make me as one of thy hired servants. The Publican also not daring to
lift up his eyes to heaven, but knocking his breast, he cried, God be merciful
unto me a sinner. And we dout not but the Lord received them to mercy. For
John the Apostle 1. Ioh. 2.
says: If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to purge us from all iniquity. If we say we have not sinned, we
make him a lier, and his word is not in us.

We believe that this sincere confession which is made to God alone, either
privately between God and the sinner, or openly in the Church, where that
general confession of sins is rehearsed, is sufficient, and that it is not
necessary for the obteining of remission of sins, that any man should
confess his sins unto the priest, whispering them into his ears, that the
priest laying his hands on his head, he might receive absolution, because that
we find no commandment nor example thereof in the holy scripture. David
protests and says, I made my fault known to thee, and my unrighteousness
Psa. 32.
did I not hide from thee. I said, I will confess my wickedness to the Lord
against my self, and thou have forgiven the hainousnes ofmy sin. Yea and the
Lord teaching us to pray, and also to confess our sins, said, So shall you
pray, Our father which art in Math. 6.
heaven, forgive us our debtes, even as we forgive our debtors. It is requisite
therefore that we should confess our sins unto god, and be reconciled with
our neighbor, if we have offended him. And the Apostle James speaking
generally of confession, says, Confess each of you your sins one to another.
If so be that any man being overwhelmed with the burden of Jacob. ^.
his sins and troublesome temptations will privately ask counsel,
instruction, or comfort, either of a minister of the Church, or of any other
brother that is learned in the law of God, we do not mislike it. Like as also
we do fully allow that general and public confession, which is wont to be
rehearsed in the Church and in holy meetings (whereof we spoke before) being
as it is, agreeable with the scripture.

All these things which are spoken of the keys, do properly perteine to the
10. Sect.
As concerning the keys of the kingdom of heaven, which the Lord committed to
his Apostles, they prate many strange things, and of these keys they make
swords, spears, scepters, and crowns, and full power over mighty kingdoms,
yea and over men's souls and bodies. But we judging vprightlie according to the
word of God, do say that al ministers truly called, have and exercise the
keys, or the use of them, when as they preach the Gospel, that is to say,
when they do teach, exhort, reprove, and keep in order the people committed
to their charge. For so do they open the kingdom of God to the obedient, and
shut it against the disobedient. These keys did the Lord promise to the
Apostles, in the 16. Chapter of Matthew, and deliue* them in John 20. Chapter,
Mark 16. Luke the 24. when as he sent forth his disciples, and commanded them
To preach the Gospel in all the world, and to forgive sins. The Apostle in
the Epistle to the Cor. says, That the Lord gave to his minister^ (...) Cor.
5.
the ministry of reconciliation. And what this was, he straighwaie makes
plain, and says, The word or doctrine of reconciliation. And yet more
plainly, expounding his words he he adds, that the ministers of Christ, Do
as it were go an imbassage in Christ's name, as if God himself should by his
ministers exhort the people to be reconciled to god, to weet, by faithful
obedience. They use the keys therefore, when as they persuade to faith and
repentance. Thus do they reconcile men to God, thus they forgive sins, thus do
they open the kingdom of heaven, and bring in the believers: much differing
herein from those, of whom the Lord spoke in the Gospel, W^t be unto you
lawyers, for ye have taken away the keie of knowledge. You have not entered in
your selves, and those that would have entered, ye forbad. Rightly therefore
and effectually do ministers absolve, when as they preach the Gospel of
Christ, and thereby remission of sins, which is promised to every one that
believes, even as every one is baptized, and do testify of it, that it does
particularly appertain to all. Neither do we imagine that this absolution is
made any whit more effectual, for that which is mumbled into some priests
ear, or upon some man's head particularly: yet we judge that men must be taught
diligently, to seek remission of sins in the blood of Christ, and that
every one is to be put in mind, that forgiveness of sins does belong unto
him. But how diligent and careful every penitent man ought to be in the
endeavor of a new life, and in sleying the old man, and raising up the new
man, the examples in the gospel do teach us. For the Lord says to him, whom
he had healed of the palsy, Behold thou art made hole, sin no more, lest a
worsse thing Ioh. 5.
come unto thee. Likewise to the adulteres woman, which was delivered, he said,
go thy way, and sin no more. By which Ioh. 8.
words he did not mean that any man could be free from sin, whiles he lived
in this flesh, but he does commend unto us diligence and an earnest care, that
we (I say) should endeavor by all means, and beg of god by prayer, that we
might not fall again into sin, out of which we are risen after a manner, and
that we may not be overcome of the flesh, the world, or the devil. Zacheus
the publicane, being received into favor by the Lord, he cries out in the
Luc. 9.
gospel, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I
have taken from any man any thing by forged cauillation, I restore him four
fold. After the same manner we preach that restitution and mercy, yea and
giving of alms, are necessary for them which do truly repent. And
generally out of the Apostles words we exhort men, saying, Let not sin Romans
6.
reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it through the lusts
thereof. Neither give ye your members as weapons of unrighteousness to sin:
but give your selves unto God, as they that are alive from the dead, and give
your members as weapons of righteousness unto God.

Wherefore we condemn all the ungodly speeches of certain, which abuse the
preaching of the Gospel, and say. To return unto God, it is very easy, for
Christ has purged al our sins. Forgiveness of sins is easily obtained: What
therefore will it hurt to sin? And, we need not take any great care for
repentance, etc. Notwithstanding we always teach, that an entrance unto God
i^ open for all sinners, and that this God does forgive all the sins of the
faithful, Marc. 3.
only that one sin excepted, which is committed against the holy ghost. And
therefore we condemn the old and new Nouatians and Catharines, and
especially we condemn the Popes gaineful doctrine of penance, and against his
Simonie and Simoniacall indulgences we use that sentence of Simon Peter, Thy
(...) periesh with thee, because Act. 8.
thou thoughest that the gift of god might be bought with money. Thou have no
part or fellowshippe in this matter, for thy heart is not upright before God.
We also disalow those, that think that themselves by their own satisfactions
can make recompense for their sins committed. For we teach that Christ alone
by his death, and passion, is the satisfaction, propitiation, and purging of
all sins. Nevertheless we cease not to urge, as was before said, the
mortification of the flesh, and yet we Isa. 53. 1. Cor. 1*
add further, that it must not be proudly thrust upon God, for a satisfaction
for our sins, but must humbly as it becomes the sons of god, be
performed, as a new obedience, to show thankful minds for the deliverance and
full satisfaction obtained by the death and the satisfaction of the son of
God.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
CHAP. 5.
NOw that we know what sin is, in the next place we are taught concerning
holy repentance: which doctrine does bring great comfort to all sinners, and
generally, it is very profitable and necessary to salvation, for all men, as
well for Christians which begin to learn, as for those which have profited,
yea even for sinners that have fallen, yet such which by the grace of God being
converted, Math. 3. Mar. 1.
do repent. Of this repentance John Baptist did preach, and after him Christ,
in these words, Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand. Afterward also the
Apostles preached Luc. 24.
thereof throughout the wholl world, for so it is written, And thus it hehooued,
that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among
all nations. Now this repentance does wholly arise out of a true knowledge of
sin, and the wrath of God: And to attain unto this knowledge, we must use
the full and entire help of the ministry, by peaching to lay open unto us
both the doctrine of repentance or the law, touching that righteousness which is
due unto God, and the sentence of God pronounced against sin, and also of faith
in Christ Jesus, and of that holy satisfaction, which he has made for us, by
suffering most grievous torments. This repentance and saving conversion does
our merciful God, by his peculiar gift, offer, and bestow, and he writes
the same in the hearts of the faithful, even as he says, I will give you a
new heart, and I will put my spirit in the midst of you, and Ezech. 36. Heb. 8.
Ezech. 36. Ierem. 31.
I will cause you to walk in my ways. Again, That you may repent of your
sins, and of your Idolatry. And again, When I was converted, I did repent.

This saving repentance (which does differ very much from the repentance of
Esau and ludas) takes it true and right beginning from this gift of God, who
bestows it, and from the sermons of the word of God, whereby sin is
reproved: and it has this in order first, that it is a fear and terror of
the secret heart before God, and that by repenting and sorowing it does tremble
at this just and severe judgment and reuengement, whereupon arises a heavy,
trembling, and unquiet conscience, a troubled mind, a heart so sorrowful,
careful, and bruised, that a man can have no comfort with himself and of
himself, but his soull is full of all grief, sadness, anguish, and terror,
whereby he is much troubled, because of the fear of that burning wrath, which
he sees in the severe countenance of God. We have an example in David, when he
says, There is nothing sound Psalm. 38.
in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there rest in my bones,
because of my sins. I am become miserable, and crooked very sore: I go
mourning all the day. Such a terror and true sense of sin does work in the
faithful an inward change of the mind and the soul, and a constant detesting
of sin and the causes and occasions thereof. Hereunto it is streightwaie
added, by diligent teaching of the troubled, terrified, and repentant, that
such men ought, in a sincere affection of the heart, with repentance, and an
humble submission of the mind, by their confession and invocation to turn
unto the Lord, and by faith in Jesus Christ our Lord to conceive sure and
undoubted trust in his mercy, to hold fast the apprehended promise, and to
rely wholly thereon; and seeing they have no righteousness of themselves,
earnestly and faithfully to desire of the divine grace, that God would have
mercy on them, and vouchsafe of his grace to forgive them their sins, for
the Son, and his precious merits 1. Ioh. 2. Gal. 3.
sake, who was made an atonement or reconciliation for sin, yea* also a
curse, that he might make or consecrate us as holy unto God. For to such men
(that they may be stirred up to the greater confidence) that sure and precious
promise is propounded, and by preaching ought to be propounded, whereby the
Lord does say, Call upon me i^ Psalm. 50.
the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee: and this they ought to do, as
often as they have need, and so long as they live. Hereof the judgment of
Saint Augustine is extant, Lib. 1. de Penitentia. Cap. 1. No man can well
meditate of repentance, except he be persuaded of the mercy of God toward him,
or, as he says, but he that shall hope for indulgence.

Now al men, which do truly repent them of their sins and in regard
thereof are sorrowful, and mislike themselves, ought to cease from the
committing of evil, and learn to do that which Isa. 1. Luc. 3.
is good: for so writes Esai in that place, wherein he exhorts to repentance.
And John Baptist in the like sort admonishing the people, says, See that you
bring forth, or do, the (...) worthy of repentance: which does chiefly
consist in mortification Coloss. 3. Ephesians. 4.
or putting of the old man, and in putting on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness, etc. as the Apostolic doctrine does signify.
Moreover the penitent are taught, Look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
to come to the Physicians of their souls, and before them to confess their
sins to God, yet no man is commanded or urged to tell and reckon up his
sins, but this thing is therefore used, that by this mean every one may
declare their grief, wherewith they be troubled, and how much they mislike
themselves for their sins, and may peculiarly desire and know that they
obtain of their God counsel and doctrine, how they may hereafter avoid them,
and get instruction and comfort for their troubled consciences, and absolution
by the power of the Keys, and remission of sins, by the ministry of the
Gospel instituted of Christ* and when these things are performed to them of
the ministers, they ought to receive them at their hands with confidence, as a
thing appointed of God, to profit and to do service unto them for their saving
health, and without doubting to enjoy the remission of their sins, according
to the word of the Lord, whose sins you remit, they are remitted. Joan. ^0.
And they relying upon this undoubted faith, ought to be certain and of a
resolute mind, that through the ministry of those keys, concerning the
power of Christ, and his word, all their sins be forgiven them. And therefore
they which by this means and order obtain a quiet and joyful conscience,
ought to show themselves thankful for this heavenly bountifullnes in Christ,
neither must they receive it in vain, or return again to their sins
according to that faithful exhortation of Christ, wherein he commands us to
take heed: Behold then art made wholl, sin Joan. 5. Joan. 8.
no more, lest a worsse thing happen unto thee. And, see that thou sin no
more. Now the foundation, whereon the whole virtue and efficacy of this saving
repentance does stay it self, is the merit of the torments of the death, and
resurrection of our Lord and savior, whereof he him self says, These things
it behooued Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day, Luc. 24.
and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Marc. 1.
name to all people. And again, Repent, and believe the Gospel.

Also they teach, that they, whose sin is public, and therefore a public
offense, ought to give an look the 2. obseruat. upon this confess.
external testimony of their repentance, when God does give them the spirit of
repentance, and that for this cause, that it may be an argument and
testimony, whereby it may be proved or made evident, that the sinners which
have fallen, Marc. 5. and 18.
and do repent, do truly convert them selves: also that it may be a token of
their reconciliation with the 1. Tim. 5.
Church and their neighbor, and an example unto others, which they may fear
and reverence.

Last of all, the wholl matter is shut up with this or such like clause of
admonition, That every one shall be condemned whosoever he be, which in this
life does not repent in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, according to that
sentence pronounced by Christ, Except ye repent* ye shall al in like sort
perish, as they did, who were slain with the fall of the tower of Silo.

Hitherto also pertains that part of the same confession, which treats

Of the time of grace CHAP. 20.
FVrthermore among all other things they teach, concerning the time of grace,
and the fatherly visitation, that men may learn to consider, that all that
time of age, they lead in this life, is given them of God to be a time of
grace, in the which they may seek their Lord and God his grace and mercy,
and that they may be loved of him, and by this means obtain here their
salvation in Christ; whereof the Apostle also made mention in his sermon, which
he preached at Athens, saying, God has assigned Act. 17.
unto man the times, which were ordained before, and the bands of their
habitations, that they should seek the Lord, if so be they might have groped
after him, and found him. And by the Prophet Esaie the Lord says, In an
acceptable time h^^e Isa. 49. ^. Cor. 6.
I heard thee, and in the day of salvation have I helped thee. Behold now,
says Saint Paull, is the acceptable time, no^ (...) the day of salvation.
Therefore at all times the people be admonished, that whilst they live on the
earth, and are in good health and have in their hands, and do presently enjoy
the time of grace offered by God, they would truly repent, and begin the
amendment of their life, and reconcile themselves to God: that they would
stir up their conscience by faith in Christ, and quiet it by the ministry
of the Gospel in the Church, and herein confirm themselves, that God is
merciful unto them, and remitteth all their sins for Christ his sake.
Therefore when they are confirmed in this grace which is offered them to
establish and confirm their calling, and do faithfully exercise themselves in
good works, then at the length they are also in an assured hope to look for a
comfortable end, and they must certenlie persuade themselves, that they shall
assuredly be carried by the Angels into heaven, and eternal rest, as was the
soul of that Luc. 16. Joan. 12. and 14. and 17.
godly Lazarus, that they may be there, where their Lord and redeemer Jesus
Christ is, and that afterward in the day of resurrection this soul shall be
joined again with the body, Joan. 5.
to take full possession of that joy and eternal glory, which can not be
expressed in words. For they shall not c^^e into condemnation, but by making a
way through it, they shall pass from death into life.

The epistle to the Hebrews to stir us up to use such exhortations, says,
Exhort your selves among your selves, exhort Heb. 4.
ye one another daily, so long as it is said to day. Let no man among you be
hardened by the deceit of sin. For we enter into the rest, which have
believed, that is, which have obeyed the voice of God, while we had time given
us. On the other side we must also hold this most assuredly, that if any
man, being polluted with sins, and filthy deeds manifestly contrary to
virtue, do in dying depart out of this world without true repentance and
faith, that his soul shall certainly go into hell, as did the soul of that
rich man, who wanted faith, in the bottomeles pit whereof there is no drop of
grace, and that in the day of judgment that most terrible voice of the Son
of God sounding in Math. 29. Ioh. 5.
his ears shall be heard, wherein he shall say, Depart from me ye curssed
into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels: for
they which have done evil, shall come forth to the resurrection of judgment.

Therefore in teaching they do continually urge this, that no man differ
repentance and turning unto God, till he come to be old, or till he lies
sick in his bed, and in the mean time do boldly practice his wantonness in
sins, and in the desires of the flesh and the world, because it is written, Do
not say, The abundant mercy of the Lord will purge my sins: for mercy and
wrath do hasten with him, and his indignation shall lie upon the sinners. Make
no tarying to turn unto the Lord, and put not of from day to day. For
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou
shall be destroyed, and thou shall perish in time of vengeance. But that
especially is a most dangerous thing, if any man, after he has received
the gift of the grace of God (and that in the testimony of a good conscience)
does of set purpose, and wantonlie sin, and contemn, and make no account of
all those exhortations and allurements, proceeding ou^ of a loving heart, and
that to this end, that he may in time think on that which is for his health,
and repent, and moreover does persist in a bold and blind persuasion of the
mercy of God, and trusting thereto, does sin, and does confidentlie abuse
it, and goes forward in that sort without repentance, even unto the last
pinch, and then beginne^h being forced thereunto by the terrors of death and
the fear of infernal punishments, so late to convert himself, and to call
for the mercy of the Lord, as when the severe and intolerable anger of the
Lord wa^eth hot^^, and punishments rush and break forth, as does the great
violence of floodes, which can not be resisted. Therefore of such a man, (which
thing we speak with sorrow) it is hard to believe that he can truly repent,
and therefore it is to be doubted, lest that be fulfilled in him, which the
Lord does threaten by the Prophet Micheas, That instead of grace he shall feel
the wrath of God, and that it will come to pass that the wrath of God shall
sley him. For in Mich. 3.
a fearful speech does he say thus, Then shall they cry to the Lord, but he
will not hear them, but he will hide his face for them at that time, because
they have continually lived wickedlie. Ezech. 8. Iere. 7. and 11. Isa. 65. and
66.
Yea the Lord himself says, Although they cry in mine (...) with a loud
voice, yet will I not hear them, seeing they would no^ hear my voice, when as
all the day long I spread out my hands to them, and gave them large time and
space for grace. For the which cause the holy Ghost cries out, and says,
Todaie Psalm 95. Heb. 3.
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the gi^uing in the
day of that tentation in the wilderness.

Therefore according to all these things, our men do diligently, and out of
the grounds of the Scripture, exhort, that every man do in time use and
follow this faithful counsel, and necessary doctrine, that so he may turn
away the fear of this most heavy danger, yea that he do not betraie the
health of his own soul. For undoubtedly this horrible danger is greatly to
be feared, lest whatsoever here that does rashly or stubbornly condemn or
neglect this time of grace, so lovingly granted of the Lord, he do receive,
and that worthelie, that reward of eternal punishment, which is due
thereunto: even as saint Ambrose also, amongst many other things, which he
handles diversely Lib. 3. de paenit. qui Augustini esse putatur.
to this purpose, does thus write, and in these words: If any man at the very
point of death shall repent, and be absolved (for this could not be denied unto
him) and so departing out of this life dies, I dare not say, that he
departs hence in good case, I do not affirm it, neither dare I affirm or
promise it to any man, because I would deceive no man, seeing I have no
certeintie of him. Do I therefore say that be shall be damned? neither do I
say that he shall be delivered. For what other thing I should say, I know not*
Let him be commended to God. Will thou then, O brother, be freed from doubting?
repent whiles thou art in health. If thou will repent, when thou can not sin,
thy sins have left thee, and not thou thy sins. Yet that no man may
despair, they teach this also, that if any man, in the last hour of his
life, show out signs of true repentance, which thing does fall out very
seldom (for that is certainly true which is written in the epistle to the
Hebrews, And this will we also do, so that God give us leave to do it) that
such a Heb. ^.
one is not to be deprived of instruction, comfort, absolution, or remission of
sins. For the time of grace does last so long as this lise does last:
wherefore, so long as we live here, it is meet that we should think of that
Prophetical and Apostolical sentence, To day, seeing ye have heard his
voice, harden not your hearts. Now herein do our men labor, and Heb. 3.
endeavor them selves most earnestly, that all men may obeie this loving
commandment and counsel* and that they speedily repent, before the sun be
darkened after a strange manner, and the hills be overwhelmed with darkness,
and that laying sin aside, they would turn them selves to god, by flying
unto him in true confidence, and with a constant invocation, from the bottom
of the heart, and that they do their faithful endeavor, that they be not
repelled from the glory of eternal life, but that they may live with Christ
and his Church in this life for a time, and in the other life for ever.

Amen.
OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
TOuching Repentance they teach, that such as have fallen after Baptism may
find remission, at what time they return again. And that the Church is
bound to give absolution unto such, as return by repentance. Now repentance
or the conversion of the ungodly stands properly of these two parts. The
one is contrition, that is, a terror stricken into the conscience through the
acknowledgement of sin, wherein we do both perceive gods displeasure, and are
grieved that we have sinned, and do abhor and eschew sin, according as
Ioell preaches* Rent your hearts, and not your garments, and turn unto the
Lord your God, etc. The other part is faith, which is begotten in us, by the
Gospel or by absolution, and does believe that the sins are undoubtedly
forgiven for Christ sake, and does comfort the conscience, freeing it from
fears. Of which faith spoke Saint Paull when he says, Being justified by
faith (...) have peace with God. Afterward there must follow the good fruits
of repentance, that is, obedience unto God, according to that saying, We are
debtors not to the flesh, to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die. But if by the spirit ye mortify the works of the flesh,
ye shall live.

They condemn the Nouatians which would not absolve them which having fallen
after baptism returned to repentance. They condemn also those that teach not
that remission of sins comes freely by faith for Christ sake, but labor
to prove that remission of sins comes by the worthiness of contrition, of
charity, or of some other works, and would have men's consciences in time of
repentance to doubt, whether they may obtain remission, and do say plainly,
that this douting is no sin. Likewise they condemn those which teach that
Canonical satisfactions are necessary to redeem eternal pains or the pains
of purgatory. Though Look the 3. obseruat.
we are of that mind that the calamities of this life may be assuaged by good
works, as Esaie teaches Chap. 58. Break thy bread unto the hungry, and the
Lord shall give thee rest continually. Besides they condemn Look the 4.
obseruat.
the Anabaptists, who deny that they that are once justified can again loose
the spirit of God. Also they condemn those that stiflie hold, that some may
attain to such a perfection in this life, as that they cannot sin any more.

This eleventh Article we find in some editions placed in the twelfth place,
and after the first periode we find these words.
Now repentance consists properly of these two parts, one is contrition or
terrors, stricken into the conscience through the sight of sin: The other is
faith, which is conceived by the gospel or by absolution, and does believe that
for Christ sake the sins be forgiven, and comforteh the conscience, and
freeth it from terrors. Then there must follow good works, which are fruits
of repentance.

They condemn the Anabaptists, who deny that men once justified can loose the
spirit of God, and do stiflie hold that some men may attain to such a
perfection in this life, that they can sin no more. In like case the
Nouatians are condemned, which would not absolve such as had fallen after
Baptism, though they returned to repentance. They also that teach that
remission of sins is obtained for our own love or good works, and such as
teach that Canonical satisfactions are necessary to redeem everlasting or
purgatory pains, are wholly misliked of us.

Concerning confession of sins they teach that private absolution is to be
retained still in Churches, though it be a needeles thing in confession to make
a rehearsal of the sins. For it is an impossible thing to reckon up all a
man's offenses, according as the Psalmist says, Who does understand his faults,
etc.

This twelfth Article we find in the place of the eleventh, in some editions,
and it is word for word the same, but that the last words are thus set down,
Though a reckoning up of al sins be not necessary. For it is impossible, as
the Psalmist says, etc.

Art. 3. Of abuses.
Of confession.
THe Divines and Canonists have cast a great mist of darkness chiefly upon
this point of Christian doctrine touching repentance: as not only their
books do testify, but also the consciences of all the godly, which do
confess that the intricate and endless disputations of the divines, and the
infinite traditions about the matter of repentance, was even a fearful
racking of their consciences. For they do no where teach any certainty, how
remission of sins is obtained. And as for faith, there is no word amongst them.
Yea they bid men to be always in doubt of remission of sins. Afterward they
torment men's consciences, with a harsh reckoning up of their faults, and with
satisfactions. For what a snare unto a man's conscience was the tradition, which
requires them to reckon up all their sins.

As for satisfactions, they did obscure and darken the benefit of Christ,
because that even the learned among them did imagine that eternal death was
recompensed by them. But the unlearned were persuaded that forgiveness of the
fault was purchased by such deeds. What that their services for the most part
were not commanded of God? as babbling of prayers, invocation of Saints,
Pilgrimages, and such like stuff. Thus was the pure doctrine of repentance
overwhelmed with an huge heap of unprofitable and evil opinions. And it is
manifest that the godly in many ages past have greatly wished that this
doctrine had been more purelie taught.

Furthermore, it is especially needful that the doctrine of repentance
should be taught in the Church most purelie and sincerely. Therefore our Divines
have labored to clear this point as much as might be. And surely they have
so opened and cleared it, that the soundest even amongst our adversaries do
confess, that in this matter they have weldeserued of the Church for we do
simply and plainly without any Sophistry lay sorth that, which the Gospel
teaches touchingrepentance, that men may perceive how they must return unto
Christ, by what means remission of sins is obtained, what worship and what
works do please God: First we teach that contrition is requisite, thatis, the
true terrors and sorrows of the mind, which feels the wrath of God, is
grieved for sin committed* and cease to do evil. And though these sorrows
be requisite, yet must we know that remission of sins is not granted for the
worthiness of contrition, or of these sorrows, but we must join faith with
them, that is, a trust and confidence of mercy promised for Christ's sake, and
we hold, that our sins are freely forgiven for Christ's sake.

When we once are comforted in these terrors by faith, we do undoubtedly
obtain remission of sins, as we have said before. And this faith our minds
do conceive by the Gospel; also by the absolution, which preaches and
applies the Gospel unto the distressed consciences. And for this cause do our
divines teach, Look the 5. obseru.
that private Absolution is to be retained in the Church, and they set out the
dignity of it, and the power of the keys, with true and very large
commendations: namely because the power of the keys does dispense the Gospel
not only to al in general, but also to every * one in particular: as Christ
says, Thou have won thy brother, etc. and because we must believe the voice
of the Gospel, which is dispensed unto us in absolution by the ministry of
the Church, no otherwise then a voice sounding from heaven.

This wholl benefit of absolution and of this ministry has heretofore been
wholly obscured with the false opinions of such, as taught, that absolution
was naught worth, without sufficient contrition, and did afterward will men to
misdoubt of absolution, because no man knew whether his contrition were
sufficient or not. What else was this but quite to take away from all
consciences the comfort of the Gospel, and to remove out of the Church and
clean to abolish the ministry of the Gospel or the power of the keys?
whodoth not see that these pernicious errors are worthily reproved?

Now seeing that confession yealdeth a place where to bestow absolution in
private, and this custom does uphold the understanding of the power of the
keys, and remission of sins, among the people; besides seeing that this
conference avails much for admonishing and instructing of men, therefore we
do duly retain Confession in our Churches, yet so, as that we teach that
reckoning up of the faults is not necessary by Gods law, and that men's
consciences are not to be clogged with it. For there is no commandment in all
the Apostles writings sounding that way. Again, this rehearsing of all ones
sins is a thing impossible, according to that in the Psalm, Who can
understand his faults. And Jeremy says, The heart of man is corrupt and
unsearchable. But if no sins could be forgiven, but such as are reckoned up,
men's consciences could never be at rest, because they neither see, nor can call
to mind the greatest number of them. Whereby it may easily be gathered, that
the ministry of absolution and remission of sins does not depend upon the
condition of numbering them up all.

The ancient writers also do testify that this counting of sins by tale is
a thing needles. Chrysostom on the Epistle to the Heb. says, Let us reckon of
it, that we have sins, and let not the tongue alone utter it, but the
conscience within us also. And let us not barelie say we are sinners, but let
us reckon up our sins particularly, I do not bid the to bewraie thy self
openly, nor to occuse thy self to other, but to follow the saying of the
Prophet, Lay open thy ways before the Lord, confess thy sins before God,
utter thy sins with prayer before the true judge, not remembering them with
the tongue, but with the conscience, and then in deed may thou hope to find
mercy. That sermon of Chrysostomes, teaches not only what is to be thought
of reckoning up of sins, but does also very wisely join contrition and
faith together, as they are joined by us. First he will have us acknowledge our
sins unfeignedly, and abhor them from our hearts: In the next place he
teaches to add thereunto prayer and faith, which may assure us that we are
forgiven. Elsewhere he says, Acknowledge thy sins that thou may as them
away. If thou are ashamed to show thy sins to any man, then vt* them every day
in thy heart: I say not* go, confess thy sins to thy fellow servant, that may
vpbraide thee with them, butconfes them unto god that is able to cure the^. The
gloss upon the dercees touching penance, the 5. distinct* grants that
Confession was ordained of the Church, and is not commanded in the scriptures
of the old and new Testament: of the same judgment are many of the Doctors.
Wherefore our judgment touching the doctrine of confession is neither new nor
without reason.

Lastly there is most need of all that the godly should be admonished,
touching satisfactions. For there was more hurt and danger in them, then in
numbering up of sins, in as much as they darkened the benefit of Christ:
because that the unlearned thought they did obtain remission of the guilt of
sin for their own works sake: and besides men's consciences were much
distressed if aught were omitted that was enjoined for satisfaction. Again,
ceremonies and pilgrimages, and such like fruitles works, were thought meet
for satisfaction, rather then things commanded of God. And forsooth their
teachers themselves dreamed that eternal death was fully redeemed by them.
Therefore we thought it needful that godly minds should be set free from such
errors, and we teach that their canonical satisfactions, which they call
works not due etc, are neither available for the remission either of the
fault or everlasting punishment, nor yet necessary. It was a custom long
since in the Church, that in public penance such as had fallen and did return
to the Church again, should not be received without some punishment laid upon
them for examples sake: from which custom these satisfactions did spring But
the fathers mind was by such examples to fraie the people from sins: they
did not account that Ceremony to be a just recompense for the fault, or for
eternal death, or for purgatory pains. These things were afterward coined
by ignorant and unlearned men. But those ancient customs Look the 6.
Obseruat.
were in time worn out of use, and laid aside. As for us, we do not burden
men's consciences with satisfactions: but this weteach, that the fruits of
repentance are necessary, and that obedience, the fear of God, faith, love,
chastity, and the wholl renewing of the spirit ought to increase in us.

We give men warning Look the 7. obseruat.
of this also, that sins are eftsonnes punished even by temporal punishments
in this life, as David, Manasses, and many others were punished, and we teach
that these punishments may be mitigated by good works, and the whole practice
of repentance, as Paul declares, If we would judge our selves we should not be
judged of the lord. And repentance deserved (that is, obtained) that God should
alter his purpose, touching the destruction of Niniuie.

Thus whereas before the disputations were intricate and endless, and full of
gross opinions, now that doctrine being purged is delivered to the people so,
as it may be understood, and avail much unto godliness. We do still hold
and set forth the true parts of repentance, Contrition, Faith, Absolution,
Remission of sins, Amendment of the wholl life, Mitigation of present
punishments: and we are in good hope, that the godly will not only not
reprehend any thing in this place* but also will give them thanks which have
purged this point of Christian doctrine, which is requisite and profitable in
all Churches to be expounded most plainly and set out most clearelie.
Christ, says, that the Angels in heaven do rejoice whenever they set a
sinner repent. And therefore the Churches, and the Angels themselves do
rejoice at the pure doctrine of repentance thus set down.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Hitherto perteine first the two last clauses of the third Article. Of the
remission of sins, etc. Which are thus set down.
IT is most certain, that the preaching of Repentance does perteine to all
men, and accuse all men. So also the promise is general, and offers
remission of sins to all, according to those general speeches, Math. 11.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you.
Also Ioh. 3. That every one, which believes in him should not perish. Romans
10. Every one that believes in him, shall not be confounded. Again, He that is
Lord over al, is rich unto al, that call on him. Romans 11. The Lord has shut up
al under disobedience, that he might have mercy on al. Let every one comprise
himself in this general promise, and not give himself to distrust, but let
them strive that they may assent to the word of God, and obey the holy Ghost,
and desire that they may be helped, as it is said, Luc. 11. How much more will
he give the holy Ghost to them that ask it?

Of Repentance. Artic. 16.
BY the mercy of God this part of Doctrine specially is declared in our
Churches with great perspicuitie, whereas the Sente^tiaries have wrapped it in
most intricate Labyrinthes. First we do openly condemn the Catharans, and
the Nouarians, who feigned that neither the elect could fall into sins against
the^ conscience, neither that they who had fallen after their amendme^t were to
be received again, and our confutations of these furies are extant, Neither
dowe go about to make brawlings about the word Repentance: if any man like it
better, let him use the word Conversion, which word the Prophets also have
often used. Moreover we do willing he retain the word Contrition, and we
sale that the first part of repentance or Conversion is Contrition, which is,
truly to tremble through the knowledge of the wrath of God against sins, and
to be sorry that we have offended God: and we say, that there must needs be
some such great fear and griefs in those that are converted, and that they
do not repent, which remain secure and without grief, as it is said, 2.
Cor. 7. Ye sorowed to repentance: And Ezech. 20. Andye shall mislike your selves
in your owns (...) and acknowledge your selves to be worthy of punishment and
instruction. And these true griefs are a feeling of the wrath of God* as is
declared more at large in an other place. But here we reprove our adversaries,
who feign that Contrition does deserve remission of sins, and that
Contrition (...) be sufficient. In either error there be great my^^es. For
remission is given freely for the mediators sake, and what contrition can be
sufficients Yea rather the more the sorrow increases without assurance of
mercy, so much the more men's hearts do she from God, and no creature is able
to sustain the greatness of this sorrow, whereof Esaie speaks, Chap. 38. He
brake all my bones, like a Lion. But those idle dreams of the writers do
declare, that they lead a careless life, and that they are (...) in the
Gospel. Now these true sorrows do arise, when the sin of the contempt of
the Son of God (as is declared in the Gospel*) is repreoued. The spirit
shall reprove the world of sin, because they believe not in me. Ioh. 16.
And by the voice of the Moral law other sins are reproved, as Paull says,
Romans 3. By the law came the knowledge of sin.

As touching private confession, to be made unto the Pastors, we affirm, that
the ceremony of look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
private absolution is to be retained in the Church, and we do constantly
retain it for many weighty causes* yet with all we do teach, that men must
neither command, nor require the recital of offenses in that private talk,
because that recital of offenses is neither commanded of God, nor a thing
possible, and it makes godly minds to doubt, and it makes faith faint.

And this we do much more reprehend, that in the doctrine of Repentance or
conversion, our adversaries do no where make mention of justifying faith,
(whereof we have spoken before) by which alone Remission of sins is truly
received, the heart is lifted up even when it has a feeling of the wrath of
God, and we are freed from the sorrows of hell, as it is written. Romans 5. Being
justified by faith* we have peace. Without this faith sorrows are no better
then the repentance of Saul, Judas, Orestes, and such like, as are mentioned in
tragedies. Neither do our adversaries teach the Gospel, but the law, and
humane traditiones, either omitting this faith, or else fighting against it.
But seeing that (...) true conversion there must be these changes, a
mortification, and a quickening, as it is said Romans 6. and in diverse other
places, for doctrines sake we do divide conversion or repentance into three
parts, into contrition, faith, and new obedience: these things does true
conversion comprehend, as the voice of God, and the true experience of the
Church do declare. Yet do we not make contention either about the manner of
speaking, or about the number of the parts, but we wish that all men may see
those things which are necessary. And it is most necessary for the Church,
that there should be a true, plain, and most clear doctrine, touching the
wholl conversion, which also is very often repeated in those sermons, which
are set down in the scriptures, and that with great perspicuitie, and without
any intricate labyrinthes, as the Baptist and Christ say, Math. 3. Repent,
and believe the Gospel, Again, Repent: Behold the lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world. And Paul says. To. 3. All men are deprived of
the glory of god. Here he speaks o^ contrition, afterward of remission: But
we are justified freely by his grace, through redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, by faith. Therefore it is necessary, that in the doctrine of conversion
or repentance there should mention be made of faith. Neither is it sufficient
that our adversaries say, that they also do speak of faith, and that faith
does go before repentance. For they speak of the doctrine of knowledge, I
believe the forgiveness of sins, to wit, that they be forgiven to others, even
as the devils do know the Creed: but the Gospel does require this true
faith, which is an assurance of the mercy of God, promised for the son of
god his sake, and resting in the Son of God, which says, I believe that
remission of sins is given unto me also, and that freely, not for any
Contrition, not for any my merits, but for the Son of God, who by the
infinite goodness and wisdom of the godhead is appointed a Mediator and
redeemer. I know that the commandment of God is immutable, so that every one
may determine in these griefs, that he is assured lie received into favor
for Christ his sake. This is the proper voice of the gospel: this decree is
brought by the Son out of the bosom of the eternal father, and is sealed up
by his blood and resurrection. Not to assent to this will and decree, is to
contemn the Son of God: and concerning this sin, John says, cap. 3. He
that believes not the Some, the wrath of God abides on him. But he that
believes that his sins be forgiven for this Mediators sake, he does now
certainly receive remission of his sins for Christ his sake, which is
effectual in him, and quickneth and sanctifies him by his holy Spirit: and
being now reconciled, he is undoubtedly accounted just, for the Mediators
sake, and is heir of eternal life. Either to omit, or to corrupt, or to dislike
this necessary comfort, touching conversion, is as much as manifestly to
extinguish the Gospel. As touching this faith, absolution ought both to
admonish us, and also to confirm it, as David was confirmed, when he heard
this absolution, 2. Reg. 12. The Lord has taken away thy sin. So know thou
that the voice of the Gospel does declare remission unto thee also, the which
remission is namely propounded to thee in absolution. Do not thou feign,
that the Gospel does nothing at all pertain to thee, but know that it was
therefore published, that by this means men embracing the Gospel might be
saved* and that it is the eternal and immutable commandment of God, that
thou should believe it. He that does not by this faith embrace the Gospel,
but is still doubting, he does in vain hear the absolution. When as by this
comfort the hearts are quickened, and are now made the dwelling places of God.
Then is it necessary that they should now begin a new obedience, as is said
before. But to return to wicked deeds, is * to shake of God, and again to
loose that righteousness and life, as John says. 1* John. 3. He that does
righteousness, is righteous, he that commits sin, is of the devil. But we
have before rehearsed the sum of the doctrine of new obedience.

Of satisfaction. Arti. 17.
NOw what a confusion there is in their doctrine of Satisfactions, which they
term works not due, enjoined by the Church, it were long to rehearse, and
few before these times have understood it: but we doubt not but that this
wholl part also is true lie and clearly expounded in our Churches. It was a
custom among our first fathers, that they which defiled themselves with
murder, Idols, or filthy lusts, should be barred their company, and
chiefly from their sacrifices. This custom both the Sinagogue retained, and
other nations also, which were not altogether savage, in Asia and in Greece. In
the mean time they which were defiled, wandered up and down, being branded
with the marks of their guiltines, as Orestes, A drastus, and many others. This
custom in the beginning did the Church also keep. Those that were defiled, it
severed from the mutual society, afterward it did not sodenlie receive those
again that did repent, that it might be known that they did vnfeignedlie ask
pardon, and for examples sake it might profit others, but for certain days
absolution was deferred, that they might be seen to ask pardon publikelie. So
was that incestuous Corinthian debarred, and afterward received again, not
without deliberation, 1. Cor. 5. This wholl custom was appointed look the 4.
obseruat.
for examples sake, and is political, nothing at all pertaining to the
Remission of sins. But afterward thorough superstition it so increased, that
fastes and forbearing the company of man or wife, were enjoined for many
years. When these burdens had increased too much, the Bishops did release
them again, and this release of such rites was called Indulgence.

The Monks not considering the history of these things, feigned that eternal
punishment might be recompensed by the punishments of Purgatory, or other
punishments of this life: and they added, that Satisfactions were enjoined of
the Church, that those punishments might be mitigated* and that satisfactions
should be works not due by the law of God. We reject these Monkish fables,
which even they themselves do not understand, and we retain most sure rules,
to wit, That eternal punishments are remitted together with the fault, for the
Son his sake, not for any o^^ satisfactions, according to that which is
written in Hosea, Cap. 13. O death, I will be thy death: O Hell, I will be thy
destruction. Also Romans 5. Being justified by faith, we have peace. Secondly we
say that these not due works, whereof these men speak, are not any worship
of God, or satisfactions, but that they do pertain to this saying, Mat. 15.
They do in vain worship me with the commandments of men* And look the 5.
obseruat. upon this confess.
certainly the power of the keys has no commandment to inioyne such
punishments. Also we fear that this applying of indulgences, by which the Pope
does apply the merits of Saints unto others, is but counterfeit, and that
the indulgences in times paste were nothing else, but a releasing of the
Canons, which did nothing appertain to those satisfactions, whereof the monks
do speak. Now it is another thing to speak of satisfaction which is due, as
of the restoring of theft, of that which has bin gotten by usury, of another
man's wife, or his good name.

This restitution is a work that is due, pertaining to new obedience, as Paull
says, Ephesians. 4 Let him that has stolen steal no more. He that withholdeth
another man's wife, has neither contrition, faith, nor new obedience. Neither
are the commandments of god, touching due satisfaction, which we say ought
to be made, to be mingled with those trifling songs of popish satisfactions.
Also this we confess, that in this life many horrible punishments are spread
over the Church, over Empires, and over families, for certain sins of many
men, yea even of the Elect: as the sedition that was raised up against David,
did not lightly afflict that whole civil regiment, and many holy families.
Therefore we distinguish betwixt eternal punishment, and the punishment of this
life* and we say, that eternal punishment is remitted only for the Son of
God his sake, when we are justified and quickened by faith.

And albeit that even temporal punishments look the 6. obseruat. upon this
confess.
are chiefly mitigated for the Son of God his sake, who is the hearbour for
the Church, because this weak nature can not sustain the greatness of the
wrath of God, as Daniel prays, Chap. 9. For the Lords sake hear thou us,
and have (...) unto our help, etc. Yet we teach this also, that even for the
very* conuersions sake our punishments are mitigated, because that in the
Saints the legal promises being added to their works, are not without their
effect, but have their rewards: Such a promise is this: Give, and it shall be
given unto you. And when Paull says 1. Cor. 11. If we would judge our selves,
we should not be judged, he speaks of wholl repentance, not of those most
vain shadows, which they reason to prevail, although a man fall again into
mortal sin. And in this matter they have devised new iugling tricks. They
confess that these satisfactions are not recompenses, but they say, that we
must admit such satisfactions as chastisements, as Paull does punish the
Corinthian. 1. Cor. 5. That chastisement was excommunication: and we confess,
that they which are guilty of manifest heinous deeds, are by a lawful
judgment and order to be excommunicated, neither is just excommunication a
vain lightning. Yet notwithstanding the power of the Church does not punish by
corporal force, as by prison, or by hunger, but it does only Look the 7
obseruat.
pronounce this sentence; The prison and common punishments do pertain to
civil governors. But such is the frowardnes of certain men, that although
they see themselves convinced by the evidence of truth, yet they seek to
dally by sophistry, lest if they should give place, they should be thought to
have betrayed their fellows. God, which sees the heart, knows, that with a
simple endeavor, we have sought out the truth.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Repentance. CHAP. 12.
Seeing that we must always acknowledge our sins, and believe that they be
forgiven for Christ his sake, we think it also meet that men should always
repent in this life. But diverse men expound repentance diversely; commonly
they make three parts of repentance, Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction.
We will severally and briefly run over these parts* that we may declare
what we may think to be in deed Catholic and Apostolic* in this doctrine
of Repentance.

Of Contrition. CHAP. 13.
WE call Contrition a feeling of the wrath of God* or a sorrow and great fear
of the mind, raised by the knowledge of the greatness of our sins, and the
weightines of the wrath of God. And we think that such a Contrition, as the
law of God does use to stir up in man, is necessarily required in true
repentance: but to teach that it does deserve remission of sins, or that it
is a purging of our sins before God, we think it contrary to the Apostolic
doctrine. God truly does not despise a contrite and an humble heart, as the
Psalm says: but therefore he does not despise it, because the Son of God
our Lord Jesus Christ took upon him a contrite and humble heart, by whose
only contrition and humiliation our sins are purged before God, and his
wrath is pacified. Now we are made partakers of this pacification, when with a
contrite and humble heart we believe, that Jesus Christ alone is our reconciler
with the heavenly Father. Isa. 53. He was wounded for out trangressions, he
was broken for our iniquities: the chastisment of our peace was upon him, and
by his stripes we are healed. 1. Ioh. 2. He is the propitiation for our sins.
Act. 10. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name, all that
believe in him, shall have remission of their sins. Also the examples of
Cain, Esau, Saul, Judas Iscarioth, and such like, do witness, that Contrition
is not a merit of remission of sins. For these men, although they had so
great contrition, that it seemed to them a thing more tolerable to dispatch
their life either by strangling, or by thrusting themselves in with swords,
rather then to suffer those horrible griefs, yet could they not obtain
remission of their sins. The Gloss says, If we look narrowly to the
matter, remission of sins is to be attributed to the grace of God, not to
contrition. Wherefore we confess, that to show forth true repentance,
Contrition is necessary, yet not to this end, that it should be any merit or
purging of our sins before God: but that man, acknowledging the greatness of
his sins, should be stirred up to seek remission of sins and salvation, in
the only free clemency and mercy of God, and that only for Jesus Christ
our Lord his sake, by faith.

Of Confession. CHAP. 14.
THey call confession a reckoning up of sins before a Priest. Therefore such
confession as has hitherto bin used, as it was not commanded of God, so it is
manifest, that the ancient Church did not exact it with such severity, as if
it had been necessary to obtain eternal salvation. And it is not to be
doubted, but that we ought to acknowledge our selves before God to be sinners,
and to confess our sins to God, yea the ancient Ecclesiastical writers do
grant* that it is free for any one to reckon up his sins before man, unless in
some matter man be offended, and the truth, by lauful and divine calling, is
to be declared. Chrysostom says, I will thee, not to bewraie thy self
openly, nor to accuse (...) Chrysin cap. 12. ad Heb. in hom. 31. In Psalm.
Miserere. August. lib. 10. Confess. cap. 3.
self before others: but I counsel thee to obeie the Prophet, saying, Open
thy way unto the Lord. And again, If thou ar^ ashamed to show thy sins to
any man, then utter them every day in thine heart: I say nos, go, confess
thy sins to they fellow servant, that may vpbraide thee with them, but
confess them unto God, that is able to cure them. Now although these words of
Chrysostom use to be expounded of those sins, which were before confessed to
a Priest, yet is this exposition a manifest wresting of the meaning of
Chrysostom: and the Ecclesiastical history does evidently witness, that this
custom of confessing unto a Priest was abrogated in the Ambr. super Luc. de
poe^ten. Did. 1. Cap. ^etrus.
Church of Constantinople. Augustine says, What have I (...) do with men, that
they should hear my confessions, as if they (...) able to heal all my
griefs? They are very curious to know an other man's life, and very slow in
amending their own. Ambrose says, Peter sorrowed and weept, because he erred
as man: I do not final what he said, I know that he wept: I read of his
tears, I do not read of his satisfaction.

And although look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
we think, that it is not necessary to salvation, to reckon up sins before a
Priest, and that it is not any merit of remission of sins: yet we endeavor,
that a general confession of sins, so far as may be, and is lawful, may
be retained in our Churches, and that for two causes. One is, that by this
private conference, the ignorant may be admonished and instructed in necessary
matters: the other, that by this occasion, the Gospel of Christ, touching
remission of sins, may be heard privately (the which Gospel is the true
Keie of the Kingdom of heaven, and absolution from sin) and that by the
hearing of the Gospel, or absolution, faith m aie be either conceived, or
confirmed. For, that we may truly repent, we think that there is nothing
more sure and certain, then that of necessity we should have faith, to this
end, that as the Gospel of Christ does declare it, so we may assuredly
believe that our sins are freely pardoned and forgiven for our Lord Jesus
Christ his sake.

We are not ignorant, if we look unto our works, that we are not one he to
doubt, but also to despair of our salvation, because that our works, seem
they never so good, cannot stand upright before the severe tribunal seat of
God. Neither are we ignorant, that some doubt of the mercy and favor of God
does always cleave to our flesh, so long as we live in the body. But seeing
that God does promise unto us his free mercy for Christ his Sons sake, and
does require of us, that we do obedientlie believe the Gospel of his son,
he therewith also does require, that we mortify the doubting of the flesh, and
have a most assured affiance in his mercy, that we do not accuse his promise
to be so full of deceit, as we are of doubting. And that we may conceive sure
confidence therein, he placed our salvation, not in the merits of our
righteousness, which is imperfect, but only in the merits of his son our
Lord Jesus Christ: whose righteousness, as it is most perfect, so is it most
firm and constant in the judgment of God. Mar. 1. Repent, and believe the
Gospel. He commands us to believe the Gospel, which declares unto us the
certain favor of God toward us for Christ his sake: therefore he will not
have us to doubt of his favor toward us, but that we may conceive sure
considence thereof. Joan 6. This is the work of God, that ye believe in him,
whom the Father has sent. If God require of us, that we believe in his Son,
certeinlie he would not have us to doubt, but that we put our sure confidence
in him. James. 1. If any of you want wisdom, let him ask of him which gives
it, namely of God, who gives, I say, to all men without exception, and
vpbraideth not, and it shall be given him, but let him ask with confidence,
nothing doubting. Hilarie says* In Mat. ca. 5
The kingdom of heaven, which the Prophets foreshewed, John preached, and our
Lord professed to consist in him self, he will have us to hope for, without
any doubting of a wavering will. Otherwise justification through faith is none
at all, if faith itself be doubtful. And In Manueli. cap. 23.
Augustine says, He that does despair of the pardon of his sins, does deny
that God is merciful: he that does distrust of the mercy of God, does great
injury unto God, and, as much as in him lies, Sixtus Pontisex. Tom. 1. Epist.
Sixti Pontisici^.
he denies that God has love, truth, and power, in which things all our
hope does consist. Sixtus says, He which is doubtful in faith, is an
infidel. Wherefore we think that they, who counsel us to doubt of the favor
of God toward us, do ^ot only dissent from the true judgment of the
Catholic Church, but also provide very ill for the salvation of the Church.

Of Satisfaction. CHAP. 15.
AS touching satisfaction, we believe and confess, that the alone passion and
death of the only begotten son of God our Lord Jesus Christ is a
satisfaction for our sins, and that this satisfaction of* Christ is offered
and applied to us by the ministry of the Gospel, and is received of us by
faith. We also confess that after the satisfaction of Christ is applied, and
by faith received, we ought necessarily to do those good works, which God
has commanded: not that by them we might purge our sins before God, but
that we might bring forth good fruits of repentance, and testify our
thankefullnes. For, as touching prayer, fasting, giving of alms, and such like
works, we think that they are diligently to be performed, yet that they have
a far other use, then that they should by their merits either satisfy God
for our sins, or apply unto us the merit of Christ.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of Confession. CHAP. 20.
SEeing that true confession of sins, and such as has it beginning from
godliness, can be performed of no man, whom his repentance and true sorrow of
mind does not force thereunto* it cannot be wrested out by any precept.
Wherefore neither Christ himself, nor the Apostles would command it. Therefore
for this cause our preachers do exhort men to confess their sins, and
therewithal they show what fruit arises hereof, that a man should secretly
seek for comfort, counsel, doctrine, instruction, and at the hands of a man,
that is a Christian, and wise, yet by commandment they urge no man, but do
rather affirm, that such commandments do hinder godliness. For that
constitution of confessing sins unto a priest, has driven infinite souls
unto desperation, and is subject to so many corruptions, that of late it ought
to have been abrogated, and without doubt had been abrogated, if the governors
of Churches of late time had burned with so great a zeal to remove away
stumbling blookes, as in times past Nestorius the Bishop of Constantinople
did burn, who did utterly abolish secret confession in his Church, because
that a certain noble woman, going often to Church, under pretense of doing the
works of repentance, was deprehended to have to do with a Deacon. Infinite
such undoubted sins were committed every where. Moreover the Pontifical laws
do require that the hearer and judge of confession should be so holy, learned,
wise, merciful, that a man can hardly find out, especially among those that
are commonly appointed to hear confessions, to whom he might confess him
self. And now the Schoolmen do think, that it is better to confess sins
to a lay man, then to that Priest, by whom we may not look to be edified in
godliness. This is the sum: That confession brings more hurt then profit,
which sound repentance and true sorrow of the mind for sins committed does
not wring out. Therefore seeing this is the gift of god alone, that we may
repent of our sins, and be truly sorrowful for that we have sinned,
nothing, that may turn to salvation, can be done in this matter by
commandments, as has hitherto been too too manifest even by experience.

THE NINTH SECTION OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH, AND OF good works, and their
Rewards.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the true Justification of the faithful. CHAP. 15.
TO justify, in the Apostles disputation touching justification, does signify
to remitte sins, to absolve from the fault, and the punishment thereof, to
receive into favor, to pronounce a man just. For the Apostle (...) 8.
says to the Romans God is he that justifies, who is he that can condemn? Where
to Justify, and to condemn, are opposed. And in the Acts of the Apostles the
Apostle says, Through Christ is preached unto Act. 13.
you forgiveness of sins, and from all things (from which ye could not be
justified by the law of Moses) by him, every one that believes, is justified.
For the law also in and in the Prophets we read: Deuteronomy. 2. 5.
that If a controversy were risen amongst any, and they came (...) judgment,
the Judge should judge them, that is, justify the righteous, and make wicked
or condemn the wicked. And in the 5. chapter of Isaiah, woe to them which
justify the wicked for rewards. Now it is most certain, that we are all by
nature sinners, and before the judgment seat of God convicted of ungodliness,
and guilty of death. But we are justified, that is, acquitted from sin and
death by God the judge, through the grace of Christ alone, and not by any
respect or merit of ours. For what is more plain then that which Paul says?
All have sinned, and are destitute of the glory of God, and are Romans 3.
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption which is in Christ
Jesus. For Christ took upon him self and bare the sins of the world, and
did satisfy the justice of God. God therefore is merciful unto our sins for
Christ alone that suffered and rose again, and does not impute them unto us.
But he imputes the justice of Christ unto us for our own: so that now we are
not only cleansed from sin, and purged 2. Cor. 5.
and holy, but also endued with the righteousness of Christ, yea and acquitted
from sin, death and condemnation: finally, we are righteous, and heirs of
eternal life. To speak Romans 4.
properly then, it is God alone that justifies us, and that only for Christ,
by not imputing unto us our sins, but imputing Christ's righteousness unto us.

But because we do receive this justification not by any works, but by faith
in the mercy of god and in Christ: therefore we teach and believe with the
Apostle that sinful man is justified only by faith in Christ, not by the
law, or by any works. For the Apostle says, We conclude that man is
justified by faith without the works of the law. If Abraham was Romans 3. Romans
4. G^^. 15.
justified by works, he has whereof to boast, but not with God. For that
says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. But to him that works not, but beleueeth in him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. And again, You are saved
by grace through says, and Ephesians. 2.
that not of your selves: it is the gift of God. Not by works, lest any might
have cause to boast. etc. Therefore because says does apprehend Christ our
righteousness, a^^ does attribute al to the praise of god in Christ, in this
respect (...) is attributed to faith chiefly because of Christ, whom it
receives, and not because it is a work of ours. For it is the gift of God.
Now, that we do receive Christ by faith, the Lord shows at large. Ioa. 6.
where he puts eating for believing, and believing for eating. For as by
eating we receive meat, so by believing we are made partakers of Christ.
Therefore we do not part the benefit of justification, giving part to the
grace of God or to Christ, and a part to our selves our charity, works, or
merit, but we do attribute it wholly to the praise of God in Christ, and that
through faith. Moreover, our charity and our works cannot plea^e God if they
be done of such as are not just: wherefore we (...) first be just, before we can
love or do any just works. We are made just (as we have said) through faith
in Christ, ^ the mere grace of God, who does not impute unto us o^ sins, but
imputes unto us the righteousness of Christ, ye^ and our faith in Christ he
imputes for righteousness vn^^ us. Moreover the Apostle does plainly derive
lo^ from faith saying, The end of the commandment is love, prceeding 1. Tim.
^.
from a pure heart, a good conscience, and a faith vnfeine^ Wherefore in this
matter we speak not of a fained, vain or dead faith, but of a lively and
quicking faith, which for Christ (who is life, and gives life) whom it
apprehends, both is in deed, and is so called, a lively faith, and does
prove it self to be lively, by lively works. And therefore James does
speak nothing contrary to this our doctrine, for he speaks of a vain and
dead faith, which certain bragge^ Iac. 2.
of, but had not Christ living within them by faith. A^^ James also says that
works do justify, yet is he not contrary to Saint Paull (for then he were
to be rejected) but he shows that Abraham did show his lively and justifying
faith by works. And so do all the godly, who yet trust (...) Christ alone,
not to their own works. For the Apostle said: Gal. 2.
again, I live, howbeit not I, but Christ lives in me. But the (...) which now
I live in the flesh, I live through the faith of the son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me. I do not despise the g^^^ of God, for if
righteousness be by the law, then Christ died in vain, etc.

Of Faith and good works: Of their reward, and of man's merit. CHAP. 16.
CHristian faith is not an opinion or humane persuasion, but a sure trust, and
an evident and steadfast assent of the mind, to be brief, a most sure
comprehensi^e of the truth of God set forth in the scriptures and in the
Apostles Creed, yea and of God himself, the chief blessedness, and
especially of Gods promise, and of Christ, who i^ the consummation of all the
promises. And this faith is the ^eere gift of God, because God alone of his
power does give it to his elect, according to measure, and that when, to
whom, and how much he will, and that by his holy spirit, through the means
of preaching the Gospel, and of faithful prayer. This faith has also her
increases, which unless they were likewise given of God, the Apostles would
never have said, Lord increase our says. Now all these things Luc. 11.
which we have said hitherto of faith, the Apostles taught them before us, even
as we set them down: for Paul says, Faith is the ground or sure subsistence
of things hoped for, and the evidence Heb. 11.
or clear and certain comprehension of things which are not s^^^e And again
he says, that all the promises of God in Christ 2. Cor. 1.
are yea, and in Christ are Amen. And the same Apostle says to the
Philippians, that it was given them to believe in Christ. And Romans 12. 2 Thessalonians. 2. and 3.
also, God does distribute unto every man a measure of faith. And again, All
men have not faith, and al do not obey the Gospel. Besides Luke witnesses and
says, As many as were ordained to life, believed. And therefore he also
calls faith, The Act. 13. Romans 10.
faith of Gods elect. And again, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of god. And in an other place he wills me^ to pray for faith. And the
same also calls Faith, Powreful, Tit. 1. Galat. 5.
and that shows it self by love. This faith does pacify the conscience, and
does open unto us a free access unto God, that with confidence we may come
unto him, and may obtain at his hands whatsoever is profitable and
necessary. The same faith does keep us in our duty which we owe to God and
to our neighbor, and does fortify our patience in adversity, it does frame
and make a true confession, and (in a word) it does bring forth good fruit of
all sorts, and good works which are good in deed do proceed from a lively
faith, by the holy Ghost, and are done of the faithful according to the will
or rule of Gods word. For Peter the Apostle says, Therefore giving al
diligence thereunto, join moreover virtue with your faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, etc.

It was said before that the law of God, which is the will of God, did
prescribe unto us the pattern of good works. And the Apostle says, This is
the will of God, even your sanctification, that you abstain from al uncleanness,
and that no man oppress 1 Thessalonians. ^.
(...) deceive his brother in any matter. But as for such works and worships
of god as are taken up upon our own liking, which Coloss. 2.
Saint Paull calls wilworshippe, they are not allowed, not Mat. 15.
liked of God. Of such the Lord says in the Gospel. They worship me in vain,
teaching for doctrine the precepts of men: We therefore disalowe all such
manner of works, and we approve and urge men unto such as are according to
the (...) and commandment of God: Yea and these same works that are
agreeable to Gods will, must be done, not to the end to merit eternal life by
them, for life everlasting, as the Apostle says, is the gift of God: nor for
ostentations sake which the Lord does reject, Mat. 6. nor for lucre, which also
he misliketh, Mat. 23. but to the glory of God, to comment and set forth our
calling, and to yeald thankefulnes unto god and also for the profit of our
neighbors. For the Lord Mat 5.
says again in the Gospel, Let your light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glorify your Father which (...) Ephesians. 4. Coloss. ^.
in heaven. Likewise the Apostle Paull says, Walk worthy of your calling*
Also, Whatsoever you do, says he, either in word, o^ in deed, do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father by him. Let no man
seek his own but every (...) (...) 4. (...) 3.
his brothers. And, let ours also learn to show forth good works for
necessary uses, that they be not unprofitable. Notwithstanding therefore that
we teach with the Apostle that a man is justified by faith in Christ, and not
by any good works, yet we do not lightly esteem or condemn good works:
because we know that a man is not created or regenerated thorough faith, that
he should be idle, but rather that without ceasing he should do those things
which are good and profitable. For in the Gospel the Lord says, A good tree
brings forth good fruit. And again, Whosoever abides in me, brings
forth good fruit. And lastly the Apostle says, W^ (...) the workm^nship of
God, created in Christ Jesus to good works, which (...) 15. (...).
god has prepared, that we should walk in them. And again, Wh^ gave himself
for us, that he might deliver us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a
peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works. We therefore condemn all
those, which do contemn good works, and do babble that they ate needeles,
and ^.
not to be regarded. Nevertheless, as was said before, we do not think, that
we are saved by good works, or that they are so necessary to salvation, that
no man was ever saved without them. For we are saved by grace, and by the
benefit of Christ alone. Works do necessarily proceed from faith: but
salvation is improperlie attributed to them, which is most properly ascribed
to grace. That sentence of the Apostle is very notable, If by grace, then not
Romans 11.
of works: for then grace were no more grace: But if of works, then it is not
of grace: for then works were no more works.

Now the works which we do are accepted and allowed of God through faith*
because they which do them please God by faith in Christ, and also the works
themselves are done by the grace of God through his holy spirit. For Saint
Peter says, that Of every nation, he that fears God, Act. 10. Coloss. 1.
and works righteousness, is accepted with him. And Paul also, We cease not
to pray for you, that you may walk worthy of the Lord, and in all things
please him, being fruitful in every good work. Here therefore we diligently
teach not false and Philosophical, but true virtues, true good works, and the
true duties of a Christian man. And this we do, with all diligence and
earnestnes that we can, inculcate and beat into men's minds, sharply
reproouing the slothfulnes and hypocrisy of all those, who with their mouths
praise and profess the gospel, and yet with their shameful life do dishonor
the same, setting before their eyes in this case Gods horrible threatninges,
large promises, and bountiful rewards, and that by exhorting, comforting, and
rebuking. For we teach, that God does bestow great rewards on them that do
good, according to that saying of the Prophet, Isa 4. Mat. 5. and 10.
Refrain thy voice from weeping, because thy work shall have a reward. In
the Gospel also the Lord said, Rejoice, and be glad, because your reward is
great in the heavens. And, he that shall give to one of these little ones a
cup of cold water, verily I say unto you he shall not loose his reward:
Yet we do not attribute this reward, which God gives, to the merit of the man
that receives it, but to the goodness or liberality, and truth of God, which
promises and gives it: who although he owe nothing unto any, yet he has
promised to give a reward to those that faithfully worship him, notwithstanding
that he do also give them grace to worship him. Besides there are many things
unworthy the majesty of god, and many imperfect things are found in the
works even of the saints, and yet because god does receive into favor, and
embrace the works of them for Christ's sake, therefore he performs Isa. 64.
unto them the promised reward. For otherwise, our righteounesses are compared
to a menstruous cloth* yea, and the Lord in the gospel says, When you have
done al things which are commanded Luc. 17.
you, say, we are unprofitable servants: that which we (...) to do, we have
done. So that though we do teach that god (...) give a reward to our good
deeds, yet withal we teach (...) Augustine, that God does crown in us, not
our deserts, but (...) own gifts. And therefore whatsoever reward we
receive, we say that it is a grace, and rather a grace then a reward: because
those good things which we do, we do them rathe^ by God, then by our selves:
and because Paul says, what (...) thou, that thou have not received? If thou
have received it, Why (...) 1. Cor. 4.
thou boast, as though thou had not received it. And that which the blessed
Martyr Ciprian does gather out of this place, That we must not boast of any
thing, seeing nothing is our own. We therefore condemn those who defend the
merits of men, that they may make frustrate the grace of God.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
NOw we attain unto these so divine benefits, and the true sanctification of
the spirit of God, by Faith (which is the mere gift of God, not by any
either ou^ strength, or merits:) which faith being a sure and undoubted
substance, and laying hold on things to be hoped for from the good will of
God, does send out of it self charity and then very excellent fruits of all
virtues: yet do we not attribute any thing to these works, although they be
the works of godly men, but that salvation which we have obtained, we do
wholly attribute to the very grace of God. And this indeed is the only true
worship of God, to wit, a faith most fruitful of God works, and yet not
putting any confidence in works.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
WE confess the remission of sins through faith in Christ crucified: and
though this faith does without intermission exercise, and show forth it self
in the works of charity, and by this means is tried, yet we do not
attribute righteousness and satisfaction for our sins unto works, which are
fruits of faith, but only to a true confidence and faith in the blood of the
lamb of God shed for us. For we do vnfeignedlie profess, that all things
are given us freely in Christ, who is our righteousness, holiness, redemption,
way, truth, wisdom, and life. Therefore the faithful do work, not to
satisfy for their sins, but only that they may in some sort show them
selves thankful unto God our Lord for great benefits bestowed upon us in
Christ, And in the margent upon the word Thankful. Thankefullnes consists in
requiting of benefits received: but we can requite nothing to God, because he
wants nothing. Therefore we have an eye to those things which he requires
of us: and those a^e, faith, and the works of charity: he requires Faith
toward him self* Charity toward our neighbor.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of Christ our Lord, and of Justification by Faith. CHAP. 6.
THE sixth point of Christian doctrine in our Churches is, as touching sound
and lively faith in Jesus Christ our Lord, and of true Justification by this
Faith. And a little after, Our men are taught to acknowledge this grace and
truth, and in all the saving and wonderful works, which Christ brought to
effect, by faith to behold those things, which, according to the meaning of
the holy scripture, are in a steadfast faith to be beeleeued and professed:
such are these, The coming of Christ from heaven, his conception, nativity,
torments, death, burial, resurrection, ascending into heaven, his sitting at
the right hand of God, and his coming again from thence to judge the quick
and the dead. In these principal effects, as in a chest wherein treasure is
kept, are all those saving fruits of true justification laid up, and from
thence they are taken for the elect and faithful, that in spirit and
conscience by faith they may be made partakers thereof, all which shall
hereafter be perfectly and fully given unto them, in the day of that joyful
resurrection. These things are also (...) in the sixth Section, so far
soorth as they describe the works of Christ, and the fruits thereof.

Out of this foundation, of this justifying faith, and of true and perfect
justification thereby, according to evident and clear testimonies in the
scriptures, we are further taught* First, that no man by his own strength, or
by the power of his own will, or of flesh and blood, can attain unto, or have
this saving or justifying faith, except God of his grace, by the holy ghost,
and by the ministry of the gospel preached, do plant it in the heart of
whom he list, and when he list: Romans 10. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
so that that heart may receive all things, which are offered to salvation, and
made known touching the same, by the Ioh. 3.
public preaching of the word, and by the sacraments instituted of Christ.
Hereof holy John Baptist says, Man can Joan. 6.
take nothing to himself, except it be given him from above. Also our Lord
Christ himself says, No man comes to me, except the Father, which sent me,
do draw him. And a little after, Except it be given him of my Father, that is,
from above, by the holy Mat. 16.
ghost. And to Peter Christ said, Flesh and blood has not reueiled this unto
thee.

Now this faith properly is an assent of a willing heart to the wholl truth
delivered in the Gospel, whereby man is lightened in his mind and soul, that
he may rightly acknowledge and receive for his only Savior, his God, and
Lord Jesus Christ, and upon him, as on a true ^ocke, he may build his wholl
salvation, love, follow, and enioie him, and repose all his hope and
confidence in him: and by this valiant confidence he may lift up him self,
and trust, that for him and his only merit, God is become to him, loving,
gentle, bountiful, and also that in him and for him he assuredly has, and
shall have for ever, eternal life, according to his true promise, which he
confirmed with an Joan. 6.
oath, saying, Verelie I say unto you, he that believes in me has eternal
life. And, This is the will of him that sent me, that he which sees the son,
and believes in him, should have eternal life, and I will raise him up in the
last day. Also, This is life eternal, that they know thee the true God, and
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. And Isaiah, says, By his knowledge shall
my righteous servant justify many. This faith alone, and this inward
confidence of the heart in Jesus Christ our Lord does justify, or make a man
just before God, without any works which he may add, or any merit of his:
of which faith Saint Paull says, Romans 4.
But to him which works not at all, but believes in him that justifies the
wicked man, his faith is imputed for righteousness. And before Romans 3.
he said, But now is the righteousness of God made manifest without the law,
having witness of the law and of the Prophets: to wit, the righteousness of God,
by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe. And in
another place, He that believes Act. 13.
in him, is made righteous. And this righteousness or justification is the
remission of sins, the taking away of eternal punishment, which the severe
justice of God does require, and to be clothed with Christ's righteousness, or
with imputation thereof: also it is a reconciliation with God, a receiueing
into favor, whereby we are made acceptable in the beloved, and fellow heirs
of eternal life. For the confirming of which things, and by reason of our new
birth or regeneration, there is an earnest added, to wit, the holy Ghost, who
is given and bestowed freely, out of that Ephesians. 1.
infinite grace, for Christ his death, blood shedding, and his resurrection. All
these things has Paull described very excellently in his Epistle to the
Romans, where he brings in David speaking in this wise, Blessed are they
whose iniquity Romans 4. Psalm 32.
is forgiven: whereof he speaks in that wholl Chapter. And to the Galathians
he says, God sent forth his Son, that Gal. 4. Romans 8.
we might receive the adoption. Now because ye are sons, God has sent forth
the spirit of his Son, crying in your hearts, Abba, Father. For, whomesoeuer
God does justify, to them he does give the holy Ghost, and by him he does
first regenerate them, as he promises by the Prophet, saying: I will give
Ezech. 11. and 36. Romans 5.
them a new heart, and I will put my spirit in the midst of them, that as
before sin had reigned in them to death, so also then grace might reign by
righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ. And this is the communion
or participation of the grace of God the father, of the merit of Jesus Christ
our Lord, and of the sanctification of the holy Ghost: this is the law of
faith, the law of the spirit, and life, written by the holy Ghost.

But the lively and never drying spring of this justification, is our Lord
Jesus Christ alone, by those his saving works, that is, which give salvation,
from whom all holy men from the beginning of the world, as well before the
law was published, and under the law, and the discipline thereof, as also
after the law, have and do draw, have and do receive salvation, or
remission of their sins by faith in the most comfortable promise of the
gospel: and do apply, and approper it as peculiar to themselves, only for
the sole death of Christ, and his bloodshedding, to the full and perfect
abolishing of their sins, and the clensing from them all, whereof we have
manle testimonies in the Scripture. Holy Peter before the wholl council at
Jerusalem, does prove by sound arguments, that Salvation is not to be found
in any other, then in Christ Jesus alone, Act. 4.
and that under this large cope of heaven, there is no other name given unto
men, whereby we may be saved. And in another place he appealeth to the
consenting voices and testimonies of all the Prophets, who spoke with one
mind, and by one spirit, as it were by one mouth: and thus he said, As
touching this Jesus, all the Prophets bear witness, that through his name, all
Act. 10.
that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins. And to the Heb. 1.
Ephesians. 1. 1. Joan. 2.
Hebrwes it is written, He has by himself purged our sins. and again. We
have redemption through his blood, even the remission of sins. And S, John
says, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he
is the propitiation or atonement for our sins* and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the Heb. 10.
wholl world. And again to the Hebrews, We are sanctified by the offering of
the body of Jesus Christ once made: and a little after he adds, with one
only offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified, namely of
God, by the spirit of God. Therefore al sinners and such as are penitent ought
to fly incontinently thorough their wholl life to our Lord Christ alone, for
remission of their sins, and every saving grace, according Heb. 4.
to that in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Seeing that (...) have a great high
Priest, even Jesus the Son of God, which is entered into heaven, let us hold
fast this profession, which is concerning Christ our Lord: and straight way he
adds, Let us therefore go boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Also Christ him
self crying out, says. He that thirsts, let him come to me, and Joan. ^.
Joan. 6.
drink. And in an other place. He that comes unto me, shall not hunger: and
he that believes in me, shall never thirst. Now they that attain to this
justification by Christ our Lord, are taught, to take unto themselves true and
assured comfort, out of this grace and bounty of God, to enjoy a good and
quiet conscience before God, to be certain of their own salvation, and to
have it confirmed to them by this means, that seeing they are here the sons
of God, they shall also after death in the resurrection be made heirs. In the
mean time they ought Romans 8. Galat. 4.
both to desire to be brought to this, that they may receive the fruit of
perfect salvation, and also cheerefullie to look for it, with that confidence,
according to the promise of the Lord, that such shall not come into judgment,
but that by Ioh. 5.
making away they have already passed from death into life. Of al other points
of doctrine we account this the chiefest and weightiest, as that wherein the
sum of the Gospel does consist, Christianity is founded, and the precious
and most noble treasure of eternal salvation, and the only and lively
comfort proceeding from God, is comprehended. Therefore herein our preachers
do labor especially, that they may well instruct the hearts of men in this
point of doctrine, and so sow it, that it may take deep root.

Of good works, and a Christian life. CHAP. 7.
IN the seventh place we teach, that they, who are made righteous and
acceptable to God, by faith alone in Christ Jesus, and that by the grace of God
without any merits, ought in the wholl course of their life that follows both
all together jointly, and every one particularly, according as the order,
condition, age, and place of every one does require, to perform and exercise
those good works, and holy actions, which are commanded of God, even as God
commands, when he says, Teach them to observe all things, which I have
commanded you. Now these good works or holy actions, are not certain
affections devised of flesh and blood (for such the Lord forbids) but they
are expresselie showed and propounded unto us by the spirit of God, to do the
which God does bind us, the rule and chief square whereof God himself is in
his word: for so he says by the Prophet, Walk not in the commandments of
your Fathers, and Ezech. 2^.
keep not their judgments, and defile not your selves with their Idols: I am
Jehovah your God, walk ye in my commandments, and keep my judgments, and
do them. Likewise Christ says, Teach them those things, which I have
commanded you. Therefore Math. 18.
the 10. commandments, and love, which by faith worke^h righteousness, on the
right hand, and on the left hand, as well toward God as toward our neighbor,
is a certain sum, a most straight square, and a most artificial shaping or
description of all good works. Now an example of this square is the most
holy life of Christ, whereof he himself Math. 11.
says, Learn of me, because I am meek and humble in heart. And what other
thing would he teach, by uttering those eight sentences Math. 5.
of happiness, then to show what manner of life the true children of God ought
to lead, and what be the works which God has commanded.

Therefore according to these things they reach with all care and diligence,
touching the difference, which is to be known and kept, betwixt those works
which are devised and taught of men, and those which are commanded of God.
Those works which are commanded of God, ought not to be interrmitted for
humane traditions. For Christ does grieuoslie reprehend this in them that do
otherwise, and in the Pharisees, saying, Why do you transgress the
commandments Math. 15.
of God for your traditions? And again, In vain do they worship me, seeing
they do only teach the commandments of men. Look the 1. Obseruat upon this
confess. Mar. 7. Isa. 29. Isa. 1. and 64.
But such works as are taught of men, what show soever they have even of
goodness, are in no case to be so highly esteemed, as those, which are
commanded of God. Yea, to say somewhat more, if they be not of faith, but
contrary to faith, they are of no value at all, but are an abomination and
filthiness before the face of God. Now all good works are divided, first,
generally, into those which pertain to all true Christians, according to the
unity of faith and catholic salvation. Secondly they are divided
particularly into those which are proper to the order, age, and place of every
man, as the holy Ghost does severally teach Elders, Masters, the common
sort, Parents, children, the married, the unmarried, and every one, what be
their proper bonds and works. Moreover in this point men are diligently
taught to know, how, and wherein good works do please God. Truly they
please God no otherwise, then in the only name of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
whose name, they ought to be done to the glory of god, according to the
doctrine of Paull the Apostle, who speaks thus, Whatsoever you do in words
and in deeds, do all in the name of our Lord Jesus. And Coloss. 3. 1 Cor. 10.
Ioh. 15.
the Lord himself says, Without me ye can do thing, that is, nothing that
may please God, and be for your salvation. Now to do good works in the name
of Christ, is to do them, in a lively faith in him, whereby we are justified,
and in love, which is poured forth into our hearts by the holy Ghost, in such
sort that God loves us, and we again love him and our neighbor. For the
holy Ghost does sanctify, move, and kindle the hearts of them which are
justified, to do these holy actions, as the Lord says, He Joan. 14. 1
Joan. 2.
shall be in you: And the Apostle, The anointing of God teaches you These two,
Faith and love, are the fountain and square of all virtues and good works,
according to the testimony of the Apostle, The end of the commandment is love
out of a pure 1. Tim. 1. Heb. 11. 1. Cor. 13.
heart and a good conscience, and faith not feigned. And again, Without faith
it is not possible to please God. Also, without love nothing does profit a man.

In the next place they teach, why and to what purpose or end, such good
works, as pertain to Christian godliness, ought to be done, to wit, not in
this respect, that men by these works should obtain justification or
salvation, and remission of sins (for Christ says, When you have done all
those Luc. 17.
things which were commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants. Also
Paull says, Not for the works of righteousness, which Tit. 3.
we have done, but through his mercy has he saved us: wherewith Psa. 143.
al those words of David agree, when he prays, Lord enter not into judgment
with thy servant, because that in thy sight shall no flesh living be
justified.) But Christians are to exercise themselves in good works, for these
causes following. First, that by this mean, they may prove and declare their
faith, and by these works be known to be true Christians, that is, the
lively members and followers of Christ, whereof our Lord says, Every tree
is known by his own fruits. In deed good Luc ^.
works are assured arguments, and signs and testimonies, and exercises of a
lively faith, even of that faith, which lies hid in the heart, and to be
short, of the true fruit thereof, and such as is acceptable to God. Paull
says, Christ lives in me: for in that I now live in the flesh, I live by
faith in the Son of God. And truly it can not be otherwise, but Gal. 2.
that as sin does bring forth death, so faith, and justification, which
arises therout, does bring forth life, inwardly in the spirit, and outwardly
in the works of charity. Secondly we must therefore do good works, that
Christians might confirm and build up their Election and vocation in
themselves, and preserve it look the 2. obseruat. upon this confess. 2. Pet. 1.
by taking heed that they fall not in mortal sins, even as Saint Peter
teaches, among other things writing thus: Wherefore brethren endeavor rather
to make your election and vocation sure, or to confirm it. And how this may
be done, he does briefly declare a little before, Therefore giving all
diligence thereunto, join virtue with your faith: and with virtue, knowledge:
and with knowledge, temperance: and with temperance, patience: and with
patience, godliness: and with godliness, brotherly kindness: and with brotherly
kindness, love. For if these things be among you, and abound in you, they will
make you that ye neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. In which place Saint Peter does evidently show, that we
must endeavor to exercise ourselves in good workse, look the 3. obseruat.
first for this cause, lest that the grace of faith and a good conscience, which
we have, be either lost or defiled, but that it may rather be preserved. (For
the holy Sap. 1. Mat. 12. Luc. 11.
Ghost does fly from Idolaters, and departs from profane men, and the evil
and vnpure spirit does return into an empty and idle house. Also, whosoever
does either loose, or defile a good conscience, what commendable thing, or what
work can he do that is precious and acceptable to God? how shall he give
himself to prayer?) Secondly for this cause, that we may profitte and
increase more and more in this grace, and that we may gain unto the Lord, by
occupying those talents which are committed to our trust: whereof Saint Paull
says, Now we all beholding, 2. Cor. 3.
as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord with open face, are changed into the
same Image from glory to glory: that is, we behold Christ, who is the image
and glory of the Father, and herein we endeavor, that we may be conformed to
the likeness of this Image, by the holy ghost, which does kindle us thereunto,
til this Image does get her perfection, by the blessed resurrection. Thirdly we
must do and exercise our selves in good works, as well for the promises of
this life, as also for the reward of eternal life (whereof mention is made
very often and at large in the holy scripture) and that by faith in Christ
we may have a more easy entrance to the attaining of those rewards, and to
the eternal kingdom of heaven, as S. Peter testifies, saying, If ye do these
things, ye shall never fall. 2. Pet. 1.
For by this means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But chiefelie we
must do the works of mercy, whereby we may benefit our neighbor, whereby
we provide and do for him, and whereof he stands in need, such as these be,
to give alms, to visit the sick, to have a care of them, or to be at hand to
do them service, to teach the simple, by counsel and labor to help others,
to pardon offenses, and such like, which all have the promises of the
bountifullnes of God and of rewards, to do the which Christ our Lord does
exhort in these words, Be ye merciful, Luc 6.
is your Father is merciful. Give, and it shall be given to you; forgive, and
ye shall be forgiven. And in an other place, Sell your Luc. 12.
goods, and give alms: get you bags, which wax not old, a treas^^e that
cannot fail in heaven, where no thief comes, and where the moth corrupts
nothing. Also, When thou make Luc. 14.
a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shall be
blessed, because they can not recompense thee: for thou shall be recompensed at
the resurrection of the just. Also, I was an hungered, I thirsted, I was a
stranger, naked, sick, and in prison, and in all things ye helped me by your
service: Verily I say unto you. In as much as ye did these things to one of
the least of my brethren, ye did them to me. Come hither ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of the
world. By these it is plain and manifest, that those works which proceed of
faith, do please God, and are rewarded with abundant grace, to wit, with the
recompense of al kind of good things and blessings, both in this life, and in
the life to come.

Lastly this doctrine is shut up with this or such like exhortation, that no
man can perfectly do these works of Christian godliness, or fully perform
the commandments of God, and that no man can be found, who does not fail in
any part hereof, and who is clean without sin: as it is written, There is
not a man so just on the earth, who does vprightlie, and not sin: and that
therefore every one ought to Eccles. 7.
seek and to enjoy his perfection, in Christ Jesus, in his grace, precious
sacrifice and merit, by that faith and his justification, which consists in
the remission of sins, if he will not have any thing in himself that may
deserve damnation. For Christ alone is our perfection, and fulfilling of the
law, our life and righteousness, and whosoever receive him by faith, and do
wholly trust in him, these men have all their sins washed away in the
blood of Christ, so that afterward they need not to fear condemnation. For
thus Paull writes, Therefore now there is no condemnation to Romans 8.
them which are in Christ Jesus, which do not walk according to the flesh,
but according to the spirit. For to these men Christ i^ 1. Cor. 1.
made of God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
WE believe that our wholl righteousness does consist Art. 13.
in the remission of our sins, which is also, as David does testify, our
only felicity. Therefore we do utterly reject all other means, whereby men
do think that they may be justified before God, and casting away all opinion
of virtues and merits, we do altogether rest in the only obedience of Jesus
Christ, which is imputed to us, both that all our sins may be covered, and
also that we may obtain grace before god. To conclude, we believe that we
cannot find where to rest our selves, if we decline never so little from this
foundation, but rather we shall be always unquiet, because we are not at peace
with God, till we be certenlie persuaded, that we are loved in Jesus Christ,
because that in our selves we are worthy of all hatred.

Art. 20.
We believe that by faith alone we are made partakers of this righteousness, as
it is written, He suffered, to purchase salvation for us, That whosoever
believes in him should not perish. And this is therefore done, because the
promises of life offered to us in him, are then applied to our use, and made
effectual to us, when we do embrace them, nothing doubting but that we shall
enjoy those things, whereof the Lord by his own mouth has assured us.
Therefore that righteousness, which we obtain by faith, does depend upon free
promises, whereby the Lord does declare and testify, that we are beloved of
him.

Art. 21.
We believe, that by the secret grace of the holy Ghost we are endued with the
light of faith, which is the free gift of God, and is proper to them alone, to
whom it pleased God to give it, so that the faithful have not whereof to
boast in themselves, seeing that rather they are more then double debtors,
because they are preferred before others. And further we believe, that faith is
given to the elect, not that they might once only be brought into the right
way, but rather that they may go forward therein unto the end, because
that as the beginning is of God, so is also the accomplishment.

Art. 22.
We believe, that we, who by nature are the servants of sin, are regenerated
unto a new life, by means of this same faith: and by this faith we receive
grace to live holily, whiles we do embrace that Evangelical promise, that the
Lord will give unto us the holy ghost. Therefore it is so far, that faith
should extinguish the desire to live well and holilie, that it does rather
increase and kindle it in us: whereupon good works do necessarily follow.
Nevertheless, although God, that he may fully save us, do regenerate us, and
frame us to a holy life; yet we confess, that the good works, which we do,
by the direction of his spirit, are not so regarded of God, as that we should
be justified thereby, or deserve to be counted the children of God, because we
should waver with a perpetual doubting and trembling, unless we should rely
upon that only satisfaction, whereby Christ Jesus has discharged us of the
punishment or forfaite for our offense.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
BEsides, though we say, we have no need at all by our own works, and
deeds, but appoint all the means of our salvation to be in Christ alone, yet
say we not, that for this cause men ought to live looselie, and dissolutelie:
nor that it is enough for a Christian, to be Baptized only, and to believe:
as though there were nothing else required at his hand. For true Faith is
lively, and can in no wise be idle. Thus therefore teach we the people, that
God has called us, not to follow riotte, and wantonness, but, as S. Paull
says, Unto good works to walk in them: That we are delivered from the power
of darkness, to the end that (...) should serve the living God: to cut away
all the remnantes of sin, and to work our salvation in fear, and trembling
that it may appear that the spirit of sanctification is in our bodies, and
that Christ himself dwells in our hearts.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
WE believe that the holy Ghost, dwelling in o^^ Art. 22.
hearts, does bestow upon us true faith, that (...) may attain unto the
knowledge of this so great a mystery. The which faith does embrace Jesus Christ
with all his merits, does challenge him unto it self as proper and peculiar,
and does seek for nothing besides him. For it is necessary that either all
those things which are required unto our salvation be not in Christ, or if all
be in him, that then he which by faith possesses Jesus Christ, has also
perfect salvation. Therefore it is an horrible blasphemy against God, to
affirm that Christ is not sufficient, but that we have need of other means
besides him. For thereupon it should follow, that Christ is only in part our
Savior. Wherefore we do justly say with Saint Paull, that we are justified
by faith alone, or by faith with out the works of the law. Yet to speak
properly, we do not mean, that faith by it self, or of it self does justify
us, which is but only as an instrumnet, whereby we apprehend Christ, which is
our justice. Christ therefore himself is our righteousness, which imputes all
his ments unto us: faith is but the instrument, whereby we are coupled unto
him, by a participation and communion of al his benefittes, and whereby we are
kept in that fellowshippe. So that all those our effects are even more then
enough unto us for our absolution from all our sins.

We believe that al our felicity does consist in the remission (...) ^3.
of our sins, which we have by Jesus Christ, and that in it alone al our
righteousness before God is contained, as S. Paul teaches out of the Prophet
David, who declares the happiness (...) 4. (...) 2. (...) 3.
of those men to whom God imputes righteousness with out works. And the same
Apostle says, that we are justified by the redemption made in Christ Jesus. We
therefore leaning upon this, as a sure foundation, do yeald all glory unto
God, having a most base and humble opinion of our selves, knowing full well
who and what manner of creatures we be in deed. Therefore we do not presume of
our selves, or of any of our own merits, but being vpholden by the only
obedience of Christ crucified, we do rest altogether in it: and to the intent
it may become ours, we believe in him. This righteousness alone is all
sufficient, both to cover all our iniquities, and also to make us safe and
secure against all temptations. For it does drive from our consciences all
fear, all horror and dread, whereby we might be hindered from approaching to
God, and need not to imitate the example of our first father, who for fear
flying from the presens of god, went about to hide and cover himself with
fig leaves. And truly if we trusting unto our selves never so little, or to
any other creature, should present our selves before the Majesty of God, it is
certain we should by and by be overwhelmed with it. Therefore every one of us
must rather cry out with David, and say, Lord enter not into judgment with
thy ser^^nt, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.

Art. 24.
We believe, that this true faith, being bestowed upon every one of us by the
hearing of the word of God, and the operation of the holy spirit, does
regenerate us, and make ^s as it were new men, raising us up unto newnes of
life, and setting us free from the bondage of sin. Wherefore this justifying
faith is so far from withdrawing men from a right and holy kind of living,
or from making them more faint in godliness, that on the contrary side no man
without it can perform any good thing, to this end, that God may have the
glory, but men do all things, either in regard of themselves, or else for
fear of just condemnation. Therefore it cannot be, that this holy faith
should be idle in a man. Neither do we speak of a vain and dead faith, but
only of that, which in the Scripture is said, to work by love, and which
moves a man to exercise himself in those works, which God himself has
commanded in his word. But these works which do come from the sincere root
of faith, are therefore good and acceptable unto God, because they be
sanctified by his grace, but are nothing available to justify us. For we are
justified by faith in Christ, y^^ even before such time, as we could bring
forth any (...) work, for our works before faith can no more be good, the the
fruit of a good tree, before that the tree it self be goo^ Therefore we do
good works, yet not to merit any thi^^ by them. For what is it possible for us
to merit? Nay (...) we, by reason of the good works, which we do (if we do
any) are more bound unto God, then God unto us: For (...) he, which works in
us both the will and the deed, of his own (...) mercy. Whereupon it is our
duties always to have a regar^ unto that, which is written, When ye have done
all that is commanded you, say, that we are unprofitable servants, for we have
(...) that which we ought to do. Furthermore, we do not hereupon deny, that
God does recompense good works in those (...) be his, but we affirm that this
recompense comes of his mere grace, because he crowns his own gifts in
us. Yea although we do good works, yet we do not put any ho^^ of salvation
in them. For we are not able to bring forth any works, which are not polluted
with the corruption of (...) flesh* and for that cause be worthy of
punishment: If it we^ granted, that we were able to bring forth any such
work, yet the bare rememberance of our sins were sufficient t^ remove that
work out of the sight of God. Therefore we should always stand in doubt,
staggering as it were this way and that way, and our miserable consciences
should be i^ continnall torment, unless they should rely upon the only merit
of our Savior Christ his death and passion, and rest in it alone.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
THat we might obtain these benefits of Christ's, namely, remission of sins,
justification, and life everlasting* Christ has given his Gospel: wherein
these benefits are laid forth unto us, as it is written in the last of Luc.
that repentance should be preached and remission of sins in his name among
all nations. For whereas all men borne after a natural manner have sin in
them, and cannot truly satisfy the law of God, look the 1. obseruat upon
this confess.
the gospel bewraieth our sin, and shows ^ Christ the Mediator, and so
instructs us touching remission of sins. When as the Gospel does convict
us of sin, o^ hearts thereby terrified must firmly believe, that there is
given unto us freely for Christ's sake, that remission of sins, and
justification by faith, by the which we must believe and confess, that these
things are given us for Christ's sake, who was made an oblation, and has
appeased the fathers wrath for us. Notwithstanding therefore that the Gospel
do require repentance, yet to the end that the remission of our sins may
be certain and undoubted, it teaches us, that remission is given us freely,
that is, that it does not depend upon the condition of our own worthiness, nor
is given for any works that went before, nor for the worthiness of such as
follow after. For then should remission be uncertain, if we should think,
that then only, we obtain remission of sins, when we had deserved it by our
former works, or when our repentance were well worthy of it. For in true
terrors the conscience finds no work which it may oppose against Gods
wrath, but Christ is given and set forth unto us to appease the wrath of God.
This honor must not be transferred from Christ unto our own works, therefore
Paull says, Year saved freely. Again, Therefore by faith, freely, that the
promise might be sure, that is, thus shall remission be certain, when we know
that it depends not upon the condition of our unworthiness, but is given us
for Christ his sake. This is a sure and necessary comfort to all godly
minds, that are terrified with the conscience of their sins. And thus do
the holy fathers teach, and there is a notable sentence in Saint Ambrose,
worthy the remembering, in these words. This God has appointed, that he which
believes in Christ, should be saved, without any work, by faith alone,
receiving the remission of sins. Now this word Faith, does not only
signify a knowledge of the history of Christ, but also to believe and assent
unto this promise, that is proper unto the Gospel, wherein remission of
sins, justification, and life everlasting are promised unto us for Christ's
sake. For this promise also does pertain to the history of Christ, even as in
the Creed unto the history is added this article, I believe the remission of
sins. And unto this one the other articles, touching the history of Christ, are
to be referred. For the benefitte is the end of the history* therefore did
Christ suffer, and rise again, that for him remission of sins and
everlasting life might be given unto us.

These things are found thus in an other edition.
Art. 4.
ALso they teach, that men cannot be justified before God by their own power,
merits, or works, but are justified for Christ's sake thorough faith, when
they believe that they are received unto favor, and their sins forgiven
thorough Christ, who by his death has satisfied for o^^ sins. This faith
does god impute for righteousness unto them before himself. Romans 3. and 4.

For this cause Christ has appointed the ministry of Art. 5.
teaching the gospel, which preaches repentance and remission of sins: and
the preaching of either of these is general, and lays open the sins of all
men, and promises remision of them unto all that believe: for to the end that
remission might not be doubted of, but that all distressed minds might know
that they ought to believe, that remission of sins is undoubtedly granted
unto them for Christ, and not for their own merits or worthiness. All these do
certainly obtain remission of sins. And when as we do in this sort comfort
our selves by the promise of the gospel, and do raise up our selves by faith,
therewithal is the holy spirit given unto us. For the holy spirit is given,
and is effectual, by the word of god and by the Sacraments. When as we do
hear or meditate of the gospel, or do receive the Sacraments, and comfort
our selves by faith, therewithal the spirit of god is effectual, according to
that of Saint Paull, Gall 3. That the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ
might be given to them that believe. And to the Cor. The Gospel is the
ministry of the spirit. And to the Romans Faith comes by hearing* When as
then we do comfort our selves by faith, and are freed from the terrors of
sin by the holy spirit, our hearts do conceive the other virtues,
acknowledge truly the mercy of god, and conceive the true love and the true
fear of god, trust, and hope of gods help, prayer, and such like fruits of
the spirit.

Such therefore as teach nothing concerning this faith, whereby we receive
remission of sins, but will have men's consciences stand in doubt, whether
they obtain remission or no, and do add further, that this doubting is no
sin, are justly condemned. And these also do teach, that men may obtain
remission of sins for their own worthiness: but they do not teach to
believe, that remission of sins is given freely for Christ sake. Here also
are condemned those fantastical spirits, which dream that the holy ghost
is given, or is effectual without the word of god. Which makes them contemn
the ministry of the gofpel and sacraments, and to seek illumination without
the word of god, and besides the gospel. And by this means they draw away
men's minds from the word of god unto their own opinions, which is a thing
very pernicious and hurtful. Such were in old time the Manichees, and
Enthusiasts. And such are the Anabaptists now a days. These and such like
frensies we do most constantly condemn. For they abolish the true use of
gods word, and do falsely imagine that the holy spirit may be received
without the word, and sticking too much to their own fancies, they invent
wicked opinions, and are the cause of infinite breaches.

These things are found thus in another edition.
Art. 5.
FOr the obteining of this faith the ministry of teaching the gospel and
ministering of the sacraments was ordained. For by the word and Sacraments, as
by certain instruments, the holy ghost is given, who works faith, where,
and when it pleases god, in those that hear the gosspell, faith I say, to
believe, that god, not for our own merits, but for Christ, does justify such
as believe, that they are received into favor for Christ's sake.

They condemn the Anabaptists and others, who are of opinion, that the holy
ghost is given unto men without the outward word, thorough their preparations
and works.

Also they teach, that when we are reconciled by faith, Art. 6.
the righteousness of good works, which God has commanded, must follow of
necessity: even as Christ has also commanded: If thou will enter into life,
keep the commandments. But for so much as the infirmity of man's nature is so
great, that no man can satisfy the law, it is needful that men should be
taught, not only that they must obey the law, but also how their obedience
pleases God, lest that their consciences sinck down into despair, when they
see that they do not satisfy the law.

This obedience therefore pleases god, not because it satisfies the law, but
because the person that performs it, is reconciled by Christ, through faith,
and believes that the relics of sin which remains in him be pardoned.
Wherefore we must always hold that we do obtain remiss^ no of sins, and
that a man is pronounced just, freely, for Christ, through faith. And
afterward that this obedience toward the law does also please god and is
accounted a kind of justice and Look the 2 obseruat. upon this confess.
deserves rewards For the conscience cannot oppose it own cleannes or works
unto the judgment of God, as the Psalm. witnesses. Enter not into judgment
with thy servant, for no man shall be justified in thy sight, and John says,
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selue^* if we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive our sins. And Christ says. When
ye have done all that ye can, say ye* we are unprofitable servants. After that
the person is reconciled and become just by faith, that is, acceptable to god,
his obedience pleases God, and is accounted for a kind of justice, as John
says, Every one that abides in him, sins not. and 2. Cor. 1. our
rejoicing is this, the witness of our conscience. This obedience must strive
against evil desires, and daily by spiritual exercises become more pure,
always watching and careful to do nothing against conscience, according to
that saying, The sum of the law is love out of a pure heart, and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned. But they which obey their wicked lusts, and
do against their own consciences, Look the 3. and 4. obs.
living in mortal sin, do neither retain or hold the righteousness of
faith, * nor the righteousness of good works, according to the saying of Paull,
they which do such things shall not enjoy the kingdom of God.

These things are thus set down in an other edition.
ALso they teach, that this faith must bring forth good fruits, and that it is
behoouefull to do the good works commanded of God, because god requires
them, and not upon any hope to merit justification by them. For remission of
sins and justification is apprehended by faith, as Christ himself
witnesses, When you have done (...) these things, say, we are unprofitable
servants. the same also do the ancient writers of the Church teach, for
Ambrose says: This is ordained of God, that he that believes in Christ,
shallbe saved, without work, by faith alone, freely, receiving remission of
sins.

Hitherto also appertains the 20. Article.
THat our adversaries do accuse us to neglect the doctrine of good works, ^t
is a manifest slander; for the books of our divines are extant, wherein they do
godly and profitably teach, touching good works, what works in every calling do
please god. And whereas in most Churches there has bin of a long time no word
of the most special works, namely, of the exercises of faith, and of the
praise of such works as pertain to Civil government, but for the most part
they spent all their sermons in setting forth praises of humane traditions, and
in commending holy days, fastings, the state of Monks, Fraternities,
Pilgrimages, the worship of Saints, Rosiers, and other vnprotable services, now
by the goodness of God the Church is reclaimed unto the true and profitable
worship, which god does require and approve. The Prophets do bewail this
calamity of the Church in very vehement sermons, that the true worship of god
being forgotten, men's ceremonies and a wicked confidence in ceremonies should
have place the chief in the Church. From this error they revoke the Church
unto the true service of God, and unto good works in deed. What can be more
forcibly spoken, then that sermon in the 49. Psalm. The God of Gods, the Lord
has spoken, and called the earth. Here god does preach unto al mankind,
condemning their vain trust in ceremonies, and propounds an other worship,
giving them to understand, that he is highly displeased with them, that in the
Church do so preach ceremonies, that they ouerturne the true worship of God.
Many such like sermons are to be found in the Prophets, as Esaias, Cap. 58. and
Zachar. 7. Michah. Cap 6. and Hosea cries, I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice: and the knowledge of God, rather then burnt offerings. And it is not
unknown that many godly and learned men, have heretofore greatly wished,
that the doctrine touching the comfort of consciences* and the difference of
works, had been more sound. For both these parts of doctrine ought always to
be in the Church, namely the Gospel of faith, for to instruct and comfort the
consciences, and also the doctrine that declares which are good works in
deed, and which is the true worship of god. As for our adversaries seeing that
they do corrupt the doctrine of faith, they cannot afforde any sound comfort
to the consciences: for they will have men to stand in doubt of the remission
of their sins and yet afterward they b^d men seek remission of sin by
their own works: they deu^^ Monkeries, and other such works, and then they
abolish the true worship of God: for prayer and other spiritual exercises are
laid aside, when men's minds are not established i^ a sure trust in Christ.
Moreover their works of the second table cannot please god, except faith go
with them. For this obedience that is but begone, and is imperfect, does
please God for Christ sake alone. Thirdly they debase the works commanded of
God, and prefer man's traditions far before them. These they set out with
most goodly titles, calling them the perfection of the Gospel: but in the
mean time, they speak so coldelie of the duty of a man's calling, of
magistracy, of marriage, etc. that many grave men have doubted, whether these
states of life did please God or no. Therefore our preachers have with great
care and study set forth both these kinds of doctrine, teaching the gospel
concerning faith, and adjoining therewith a pure and holy doctrine of works.

Of Faith.
FIrst, touching faith and justification, they teach thus. Christ has fitly
set down the sum of the gospel, when as in the last of Luke he wills,
that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name. For the
gospel Look the 5 obseruat. upon this confess.
reproves and conuinceth sins, and requires repentance, and withal offreth
remission of sins for Christ sake, freely, not for our own worthiness. And
like as the preaching of repentance is general, even so the promise of grace
is general* and wills all men to believe and to receive the benefit of
Christ, as Christ him self says, Come unto me all ye that are laden* and
Saint Paul says, He is rich toward all, etc. Albeit therefore that
contrition in repentance be necessary, yet we must know that remission of
sins was given unto us, and that we are made just of unjust, that is,
reconciled o^ acceptable, and the sons of God, freely, for Christ, and not
for the worthiness of our Contrition, or of any other works, which either go
before, or follow after But this same benefit must be received by faith,
whereby we must believe that remission of sins and justification is given us
for Christ's sake. This knowledge and judgment brings sure consolation unto
troubled minds, and how necessary it is for the Church, consciences that have
had experience can easily judge. There is in it no absurdity, no difficulty,
no crafty deceit. look the 6. obseruat. upon this confess.
Here needs no disputations of predestination, or such like: for the promise
is general, and detracteth nothing from good works, yea rather it does stir
up men unto faith and unto true good works. For remission of sins is
removed from our works, and attributed unto mercy, that it might be an
undoubted benefit, not that we should be idle, but much more, that we should
know how greathe our obedience does please god even in this our so great
infirmity. Now for any man to despise or mislike this doctrine, whereby both
the honor of Christ is extolled, and most sweet and sure comfort offered unto
godly minds, and which contains the true knowledge of gods mercy, and
brings forth the true worship of God and eternal life, it is more then
Pharisaicall blindness.

Before time when as this doctrine was not set forth, many fearful
consciences assaied to ease themselves by works, some fled to a monastical
life, others did choose out other works, thereby to merit remission of sins
and justification. But there is no sure comfort without this doctrine of the
gospel, which wills men to believe, that remission of sins and
justification are freely given unto us for Christ's sake, and this wholl
doctrine is appointed for the true conflict of a terrified conscience. But we
will add some testimonies. Paull Romans 3. We are justified freely, by his
grace, through redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom god has set forth, to
be a reconciliation thorough faith in his blood. Romans 4. But to him that
works not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness. Ephesians. 2. By grace ye are saved, through faith, and
not of your selves. In these and such like sentences Paull does plainly teach,
that remission of sins and justification are given us freely, and not for
the worthiness of our works. And in the 4 to the Romans he disputes at large,
why this consolation is needful for us, for if the promise did depend upon
the worthiness of our works, it should be uncertain. Wherefore to the end that
we may have sure and firm comfort against the fears of sin and death, and
that our faith may stand fast, it is needful, that it lean only upon the
mercy of God, and not upon ou^ worthiness. Therefore Paul says, Therefore it
is by faith, according to grace, that the promise might be sure. For our works
cannot be set against the judgment of God, according to that saying, If thou
markest our iniquities, who shall indure^t. And therefore Christ is given for a
Mediator to us, and this honor is not to be transfered unto our works.

When therefore we do say, that we are justified by faith, we do not mean,
that we are just for the worthiness of that virtue, but this is our meaning,
that we do obtain remission of sins, and imputation of righteousness by mercy
showed us for Christ's sake. But now this mercy can not be received, but by
faith. And Faith does not here signify only a knowledge of the history, but
it signifies a belief of the promise of mercy which is granted us through
our Mediator Christ Jesus. And seeing that faith is in this sort understood
of a confidence or trust of mercy, Saint Paull, and Saint James, do not
disagree. For where as James says, The Devils believe, and tremble, he
speaks of an historical faith, now this faith does not justify. For the
wicked and the devil are conning in the history. But Paull when he says:
Faith is reckoned for righteousness, he speaks of a trust and confidence of
mercy, promised for Christ's sake: and his meaning is, that men are pronounced
righteouse, that is reconciled through mercy promised for Christ's sake, whom
we must receive by faith. Now this novelty of this figurative speech of Saint
Paull, We are justified by faith, will not offend holy minds, if they
understand that it is spoken properly of mercy, and that herein mercy is
adorned with true and due praises. For what can be more acceptable to an
afflicted and fearful conscience in great greefes, then to hear that this is
the commandment of God, and the voice of the bridgrome Christ Jesus, that
they should undoubtedly believe, that remission of sins or reconciliation is
given unto them, not for their own worthiness, but freely, through mercy, for
Christ's sake, that the benefit might be certain? Now Justification in these
sayings of Saint Paull does signify remission of sins, or reconciliation, or
imputation of righteousness, that is, an accepting of the person. And herein we
do not bring in a new found opinion into the Church of God. For the scripture
does set down at large this doctrine touching faith, and Saint Paul does
especially handle this point in some of his epistles: the holy fathers also
do teach the same. For so says Ambrose in his book, de ^^at. Gent. If so be
that justification, which is by grace, were due unto former merittes, so that
it should not be a gift of the giver, but a ^warde of the worker, the
redemption by the blood of Christ would grow to be of small account, and the
prerogative of man's works would not yeald unto the mercies of God. And of this
matter there be many disputations in Saint Augustine, And these are his words.
For So Much as by the law God shows to man his infirmity, that flying unto his
mercy by faith he might be saved. For it is said, that he carries both the
law and mercy in his mouth. The law to ^onuict the proud: and mercy, to
justify those that are humbled. Therefore the righteousness of God through
says in Christ is revealed upon all that believe. And the M^leuitan Synod
writes. I^ not this sufficiently declared, that the Law works this, that
sin should be known, and so against the victory of sin, men should fly
to the mercy of god, which is set forth in his promises, that the promises of
God, that is the grace of God, might be sought unto for deliverance, and man
might begin to have a righteousness, howbeit not hi^ ^^ne, but Gods?

Of good works.
WHen as we do teach in our Churches the most necessary doctrine, and comfort
of faith, we join therewith the doctrine of good works, to wit, that
obedience unto the law of God is requisite in them that be reconciled. For the
Gospel preaches newnes of life, according to that saying. I will put my laws
in their hearts: This new life therefore must be an obedience toward God.
The Gospel also preaches repentance, and faith cannot be, but only in them,
that do repent, because that faith does comfort the hearts in contrition and
in the fears of sin, as Paul says, Being justified by faith, we have peace.
And of repentance he says, Romans 6. Our old man is crucified, that the body
of sin might be abolished, that we might no more serve sin. And Esaie
says, Where will the Lord dwell? In a contrite and humbled spirit, etc.

Secondly, among good works, the chiefest, and that which is the chiefest
worship of God, is faith, which does bring forth many other virtues, which
could never be in men, except their hearts had first received to believe. How
shall they call (...) him, in whom they do not believe? So long as men's
minds are in doubt, whether God hears them or not, so long as ever they
think that God has rejected them, they do never truly call upon God. But
when as once we do acknowledge his mercy through faith, then we fly unto
God, we love him, we call upon him, hope in him, look for his help, obeie him
in afflictions, because we do now know our selves to be the sons of God, and
that this our sacrifice, that is, our afflictions, does please God. These
services does faith bring forth. Very well therefore said Ambrose, Faith is
the mother of a good will, and of just dealing Our Adversaries will se^e very
honorably to set out the doctrine of good works, and yet concerning these
spiritual works, to wit, faith, and the exercises of faith in prayer, and in
all matters, counsels, and dangers of this life, they speak never a word.
And in deed none can ever speak well of these exercises, if the consciences be
left in doubt, and if they know not that God requires faith as a special
worship of his. And when as that huge show of outward works is cast (as a mist)
before men's eyes, the minds, especially such as be not well instructed, are
led aware from beholding these inward exercises. Now it is very requisite,
that men should be taught and instructed, concerning these inward works and
fruits of the spirit. For these they be that make a difference between the
godly and hypocrites. As for external worship, external ceremonies, and
other outward works, the very hypocrites can perform them. But these
services and duties belong only to the true Church, true repentance, fear,
faith, prayer, etc. These kinds of worship are especially required, and
commended in the Scripture. Psalm 49. Offer unto God the sacrifice of praise*
and, Call on me in the day of trouble, etc.

Thirdly, by this faith, which does comfort the heart in repentance, we do
receive the spirit of God, who is given us to be our governor and helper, that
we should resist sin and the devil, and more and more acknowledge our own
weakness, and that the knowledge and fear of God, and faith may increase in
us: wherefore our obedience to God and a new life ought to increase in us, as
Saint Paull says, We must be renewed to the knowledge of God, that the new law
may be wrought in us, and his Image, which has created us, be renewed, etc.

Fourthlie, we teach also how this obedience, which is but begun only and
not perfect, does please God. For in this so great infirmity, and uncleanness
of nature, the Saints do not satisfy the law of God. The faithful therefore
have need of comfort, that they may know how their slender and imperfect
obedience does please God. It does not please him, as satisfying his law, but
because the persons themselves are reconciled and made righteous through
Christ, and do believe that their weakness is forgiven them, as Paull teaches,
There is now no condemnation to them which are in Christ, etc. Albeit then that
this new obedience is far from the perfection of the Law, yet it is
righteousness, and is worthy of a reward, even because that the persons are
reconciled. And thus we must judge of those works, which are indeed highly to
be commended, namely * that they be necessary, that they be the service Look
the 7* obseru. upon this confession.
of God, and spiritual sacrifices, and do deserve a reward: Nevertheless this
consolation is first to be held touching the person, which is very necessary
in the conflict of the conscience, to weere, that we have remission of sins
freely by faith, and that the person is just, that is, reconciled, and an
heir of eternal life through Christ, and then that our obedience does please
God, according to that saying, Now ye are not under the law, but under grace.
For our works may not be set against the wrath and judgment of God: But the
terrors of sin and death must be overcome by faith and trust in the
mediator Christ, as it is written, O death, I will be thy death. and John. 6.
Christ says, This is the will of the Father, which sent me, that every one
which sees the son, and believes in him, should have life everlasting. and
S. Paull. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. and the Church
always prays, forgive us our trespasses. And thus do the fathers teach,
concerning the weakness of the saints, and concerning faith. Augustine in his
exposition of the 30. Psalm. says. Deliver me in thy righteousness. For there
is a righteousness of God, which is made ours, when it is given unto us. But
therefore is it called the righteousness of God, lest man should think that he
had a righteousness of himself. For, as the Apostle Paull says, To him that
believes in him that justifies the ^^ked, that is, that of a wicked makes a
righteous man, If God should deal by the rule of the law, which is set forth
unto us, he must needs be condemned: If God should as it were deal by the rule
propounded in the law, whom should he deliver? for he finds al men to be
sinners. So says Paul: Al have sinned, and stand in need of the glory of god.
What is this to stand in need of Gods glory? That he should deliver thee, and
not thou thy self. For thou can not deliver thy self. Thou have need of a
Savior. Why do thou vaunt thy self? what makes thee to presume of the law
and of righteousness? See thou not that which does fight within the? do
thou not hear one that strives, and confesses his weakness, and desires aid
in the battle? O miserable man that I am? etc.

Now it may easily be perceived, how needful this doctrine is for the
Church, that men may know, that they do not satisfy the law of God and yet
may have true comfort, knowing how their imperfect obedience does please God.
This doctrine has been horribly darkened, and suppressed heretofore by
certain fond persuasions, wherein unlearned men have imagined against the
authority of the scripture that they can fulfill the law of God, and that
they are just through the fullfilling of the law, etc. And that Monks are
perfect, and do perform more notable and worthy works, then the law does
require. In the mean while there is not a word, how the Mediator Christ is
to be apprehended by faith: but they willed man to doubt, or else to trust in
his own works. But as touching this obedience, we do teach, Look the 3.
obseruat. upon this confess.
that they which commit mortal sins are not just, because god requires this
obedience that we should resist sinful lusts. They then which strive not
against them, but obeie them, contrary to the commandment of God, and do
things against their consciences, they are unrighteous, and do neither retain
the holy spirit, nor faith, that is, confidence and trust of gods mercy. For
confidence, which seeks remission of sins, cannot so much as be in such, as
are delighted with their sins, and remain without repentance.

Fiftlie this point is needful also to be taught, by what means men may do
good works. We showed a little before how our works do please God. In this
place we add how they may be done. look the 8. obseruat
Albeit that men by their own strength be able to do outward honest deeds in
some sort, and must also perform this civil obedience, yet so long as men are
void of faith, they are in the power of the Devil, who drives them to
shameful sins, occupies their minds with wicked and blasphemous opinions,
for that is the kingdom and tyranny of the Devil. look the 9. obseruat.
Moreover, nature by it self is weak, and cannot without gods help,
strengthen it self to the performaunce of any spiritual works. And for that
cause are men taught, that in the Gospel the holy spirit is promised, who
shall aid and govern the minds of them, who do repent and believe the Gospel.
Wherefore in so great infirmity of nature, in the midst of these assaults of
Satan, and in all dangers, faith must be exercised in calling upon God, even
throughout our wholl life, that we may continue always in the faith, and in
our obedience toward God. Therefore Zachary, says. I will pour forth the
spirit of grace, and of prayer, upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitans of Jerusalem. He calls him the spirit of grace, because the holy
spirit does confirm and comfort troubled minds, and bears record, that God
is pleased with us. He calls him the spirit of prayer, to the end, we should
daily exercise our faith in prayer, that by these exercises our faith might be
confirmed, and a new life grow up and increase in us.

There is no doubt but true virtues are the gifts of Go, such as are, faith,
clearenes of judgment in discerning of points of religion, courrage of mind,
such as is requisite in them which teach and profess the Gospel, true care and
pains in governing of Churches, true humility, not to hunt after preferment,
not to be puffed up with populare praise, nor cast down with their disliking and
ill will, true charity, etc. These Princely virtues Paull calls Gods gifts,
Romans 12. Having diverse gifts, according to the grace that is given us. And of
these he says to the Cor. These things works one and the same spirit,
distrubuting to every one, according, etc.

Unto these gifts we must join our exercise which may both preserve the
same, and deserve an increase of them: according to the saying: To him that
has, shall be given. And it is notably said of Augustine. Love deserves an
increase of love to weet, when it is put in use. For good works have rewards,
as in this life, so also after this life, in the everlasting life. Now because
that the Church in this life is subject to the cross, and to the death of the
body, therefore many rewards are differred until the life to come, which
though it be undoubtedly bestowed through mercy for Christ's sake on those
which are justified by the faith of Christ, yet there is also a rewarding of
good works, according to that saying, your reward is great in heaven. By this
it is evident, that the doctrine of good works, is through the goodness of God
purelie and truly taught in our Churches. How full of obscurity and
confusion the doctrine of good works was in former times, all godly minds
know full well. There was none that put men in mind of the difference of man's
traditions and the law of God: none that taught, how good works did please
God, in this so great infirmity of ours. To be brief, there was not one word
of faith, which is most needful unto remission of sins. But now that these
matters be opened and unfolded, godly consciences lay hold of comfort, and
of certain hope of salvation, and do understand which is the true worship and
service of God, and know how it pleases god, and how it does merit at his
hands.

This article is thus set down in an other edition.
Our divines are falselie accused to forbid good works. For their writings
extant upon the ten commandments, and others of the like argument, do bear
witness, that they have to good purpose taught, concerning every kind of life
and duties, what trades of life, and what works in every calling do please
God. Of which things preachers in former times taught little or nothing, only
they did urge certain childish and needles works. As keeping of holy days,
set fasts, fraternities, pilgrimages, worshipping of Saints, friaries,
Monkeries, and such trash whereof our adversaries having had warning, they do
now forget them, and do not preach so concerning these un profitable works, as
they were wont to do. Besides they begin now to make mention of faith, which
they were wont to pas over with silence. But yet they cease not to obscure and
darken this doctrine of faith, while they leave the conscience in doubt and
would have men to merit remission of sins, by their works, and teach not that
we do by faith alone undoubtedly receive remission of sins for Christ's
sake. When as therefore the doctrine of faith, which should be especially above
others taught in the Church, has been so long unknown, as all men must needs
grant, that there was not a word of the righteousness of faith in all their
sermons, and that the doctrine of works only was usual in the Churches, for
this cause our divines did thus admonish the Churches. First that our works
cannot reconcile God unto us, or deserve remission of sins, grace, and
justification, at his hands. But this we must obtain by faith whiles we
believe that we are received into favor for Christ sake who alone is appointed
the Mediator and intercessor by whom the father is reconciled to us. He
therefore that trusts by his works to merit grace, does despise the merit and
grace o^ Christ, and seeks by his own power, without Christ, to come unto
the father, whereas Christ has said expresselie of himself, I am the way,
the truth, and the life. This Doctrine of faith is handled by Paul almost in
every Epistle. Ephesians. 2. ye are saved freely by faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, etc. And lest any here should
cavil, that we bring in a new found interpretation, this wholl cause is
underpropped with testimonies of the Fathers. August. does in many volumes
defend grace and the righteousness of faith against the merit of works. The like
does Ambrose teach in his book, De voca^. Gent. and else where*for thus he
says in the forenamed place. The redemption made by the blood of Christ would
be of small account, and the prerogative of man's works would not give place to
the mercy of God, if the justification, which is by grate, weere due to
merits going before, so as it should not be the liberality of the giver, but
the wages or hire of the labourer.

This doctrine though it be contemned of the unskillful sor^* yet ^ne godly,
and fearful conscience does find by experience, that it brings very great
comfort: because that the consciences cannot be quieted by any works, but by
faith alone, when as they believe assuredly, that God is appeased toward them
for Christ's sat, as Paul teaches, Romans 5. Being justified by faith, we
(...) peace with God. This doctrine does wholly belong to the conflict of a
troubled conscience, and can not be well understood, but where the conscience
has felt a conflict. Wherefore all such as have had no experience thereof, and
all that are profane men, which dream that Christian righteosnes i^ naught
else, but a civil and philosophical justice, are (...) judges of this matter.
In former ages men's consciences were vexed with the doctrine of works, they
never heard any comfort out of the Gospel. Whereupon conscience drove some
into Monasteries, hoping there to merit favor by a monastical life. Others
found out other works, whereby to merit favor, and to satisfy for sin.
There was very great need therefore to teach this doctrine of faith in
Christ, and after so long time to renew it, to the end that fearful
consciences might not want comfort, but might know, that grace and forgiveness
of sins and justification were apprehended and received by faith in Christ.

Another thing, which we teach men, is, that in this place the name of Faith
does not only signify a bare knowledge of the history, which may be in the
wicked, and is in the Devil, but it signifies a faith, which believes, not
only the history, but also the effect of the history, to weete, the article
of remission of sins, namely, that by Christ we have grace, righteousness,
and remission of sins. Now he that knows, that the father is merciful to him
through Christ, this man knows God truly: he knows that God has a care
of him, he loves God, and calls upon him: In a word, he is not without God
in the world, as the gentiles are. As for the deuilles, and the wicked, they
can never believe this article of the remission of sins. And therefore they
hate God as their enemy, they call not upon him, they look for no good thing
at his hands. After this manner does Augustine admonish his reader touching
the name of faith, and teaches, that this word faith, is taken in the
scriptures, not for such a knowledge, as is in the wicked, but for a trust and
cofidence, which does comfort and cheer up disquieted minds.

Moreover our deuines do teach, that it is requisite to do good works, not
for to hope to deserve grace by them, but because it is the will of God that we
should do them. And because that the holy spirit is received by faith, our
hearts are presently renewed, and do put on new affections, so as they are
hable to bring forth good works. For so says Ambrose, Faith is the breeder of
a good will and of good actions For man's powers, without the holy spirit, are
full of wicked affections, and are weaker then that they can do any good deed
before God. Besides, they are in the deuilles power, who drives men forward
into diverse sins, into profane opinions, and into very heinous crimes. As was
to be seen in the Philosophers, who assaying to live an honest life, could not
attain unto it, but defiled themselves with open and gross faults. Such is
the weakness of man, when he is without faith and the holy spirit, and has no
other guide, but the natural powers of man. Hereby every man may see that
this doctrine is not to be accused, as forbidding good works, but rather is
much to be commended, because it shows after what sort we must do good
works For without faith the nature of man can by no means perform the works
of the first and second table. Without faith it cannot call upon God, hope in
God, bear the cross, but seeks help from man, and trusts in man's help.
So it comes to pass that all lusts and desires and all humane d^uises and
counsels do bear swaie, so long as faith and trust in God is absent.
Wherefore Christ says. Without me ye can do nothing. Joan. 15. and the Church
sings. Without thy power there is taught in man, and there is nothing but
that which is hurtful.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Of the remission of sins, and of Justification.
WE said before that these controversies do pertain to the interpreting of
two Articles of the Creed, I believe the remission of sins, and, I believe
the holy Catholic Church. Neither do we speak of not necessary or sight
things. It is most necessary, that in the Church the doctrine touching sin
should be propounded, and that men should know what sin is, and that there
should be an evident difference between polit^call judgments, and the
judgment of God. But seeing our adversaries do not teach aright, what sin
is, they confirm in men an evil security, and many false opinions. Again,
what can be more miserable, then either to obscure, or to be ignorant of this
great benefit, namely the Remission of sins, and deliverance from eternal
death? seeing that there is no difference betwixt the Church and other men, when
as the light is extinguished, concerning free Remission of sins, for the
Sons sake, and concerning Faith, whereby Remission must be received: neither
is there any other comfort drawing us back from eternal death, neither can
there be any true Invocation, without this comfort: and God himself has so
often commanded, that his Son should be heard, and the Gospel kept, which
is a wonderful decree, brought forth out of the secret counsel of the
Godhead, when it was hid from all creatures; therefore it is most
necessary, that the true doctrine, touching remission of sins, should be
kept undefiled.

But in all ages, even from our first fathers time, the devils have scattered
subtle delusions, against the true doctrine, concerning the Son of God, and
especially in this article, whom notwithstanding God has oftentimes refuted,
good teachers being again raised up, that the Church might not utterly
perish. Adam, Seth, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and others after them, did
show the true difference, betwixt the Church of God and other men, and taught
that to the Church was given the promise, touching the Mediator the Son of
God, and touching Remission of sins, and that this Remission is to be
received freely, for the Mediators sake: And they tied Invocation to this
God, which had manifested himself by giving a promise, concerning the
Mediator, and they had external rites given them of God, which were signs of
the promise, and the sinews of the public Congregation. These rites did a
great part of the multititude imitate, omitting the doctrine of the promises
and faith: and when they had devised this persuasion, that men by observing
these rites might deserve remission of sins, they heaped up many ceremonies,
and by little and little boldness went so far (as commonly it comes to pass)
that diverse men devised diverse Gods. So the heathen departed from the true
Church of god, and from the knowledge of the true god, and the promise of the
Redeemer.

The same thing also happened after Moses his time. Ceremonies were appointed for
this cause, that they should be admonitions of the Mediator, of the Doctrine
of Faith, of free remission for the Mediators sake. But they feigned that
sins were forgiven for those rites and sacrifices, and by this superstition
they heaped up sacrifices, and forgot the Mediator, and were without true
comfort, and without true invocation. The same thing happened also after the
Apostles time, the light of the gospel being lost, wherein is propounded free
remission for the Mediators sake, and that to be received by Faith. They
sought remission by Monastical exercises, by single life, by diverse
observations, by the offering in the Mass, by the intercession of dead men,
and many monstrous superstitions were devised, as the histories of the wholl
Church which succeeded the Apostles do declare. Against these errors the
infinite mercy of God has oftentimes restored the voice of the Gospel. And
as among the people of Israel he did often raise up Prophets, which should
purge the doctrine diligently, so in the Church, after the Apostles time, when
the writings of Origin and Pelagius, and the superstition of the people had
corrupted the purity of the gospel, yet notwithstanding, as in a mist, the
light of the gospel was again kindled by Augustine, and him followed Prosper,
Maximus, and others, who reproved the false opinions touching this Article.
Afterward when the Monks were sprung up, and that opinion, which faigneth men
to merit by their works, was a fresh spread abroad, yet there were some of a
better judgment, although they added stable to the foundation: as Hugo,
Bernard, Gilbert, William of Paris, Tauler, Ambrose, Wesell, and others in
other places. And now by the voice of Luther, the doctrine of the gospel is
more cleared, and more evidently restored, and the Lamb showed unto us, as
the Baptist says, Behold the lamb of God, that tak^^^ away the sins of
the world. He that believes in the Son, has eternal life: he that
believes not, the wrath of God abides on him. This same voice of the Gospel
our Churches do pu^l^^^, and that without corruption: and we do discern that
discipline, or righteousness, which a man not regenerat may perform, from the
righteousness of faith, and that newnes, whereof the gospel does preach.

We say that all men are to be restrained by discipline, that is, by that
righteousness, which even the unregenerate ought, and after a sort may
perform, which is an obedience in external actions, according to all the
commandments of God apperterning to all men. look the 1. obseruat. upon this
confess.
Because that God left this liberty in man after his fall, that the outward
members might after a sorre obeie reason and the will, in stirring up or
omitting outward motions: as. Achilles may draw his sword, or put it up into
the sheath: Scipio may restrain his members, so that he meddle not with
another man's wife, as in their place these things are truly and copiouslie
declared. Now it is most certain, that this discipline is commanded of God,
and that the breaking thereof is punished with present and eternal
punishments, even in those which are not converted unto god, according to those
sainges. The law was made for the unjust. He that takes the sword, shall
perish with the sword. Also, Forni^atours and adulterers the Lord will judge.
Also, Woe unto thee which spoilest, because thou shall be spoiled. And although
all men ought to govern their manners by this discipline, and God does
severely command, that all kingdoms should defend this discipline, and he by
horrible punishments does declare his wrath against this outward contumacie:
yet this external discipline, even where it is most honest, is not a
fulfilling of the law, neither does it deserve remission of sins, neither is
it that righteousness, whereby we are accepted before God, nor that light shining
in the nature or men, as righteousness shined in us in our creation, or as new
righteousness shall shine in us in the life eternal. But all this discipline,
is an external government, such as it is, like unto the leaf of a fig tree,
wherewith our first parents after their fall did cover their nakedness: neither
does it any more take away sin, and the corruption of nature and death,
then those fig leaves did. Hence it is, that Paul does so often cry out,
that sin is not taken away by the law. Romans 3. By the works of the law no
flesh shall be justified in his sight, And Romans 8. When it was impossible to
the law to justify, etc. And Gal. 2. If righteousness does come by the law,
then Christ died in vain. And Tit. 3. Not by the works of righteousness, which
we have done, but according to his mercy he has saved us. And it is a reproach
unto the Sin of God, to imagine that any our works are merittes, or the
price of remission of sins, and that they are propitions for sins.
Therefore we do openly condemn those Pharisaical and Pelagian doting dreams,
which fa^gne that that discipline is a fulfill ng of the law of god also that
it does deserve remission, either of congreitie, or of con^^gnity, or that it
is a righteousness, whereby men are made acceptable to God.

And after a few pages in the same Article.
Seeing that the mind is raised up by this faith, it is certain that
remission of sins, reconciliation, and imputing of righteousness is given for
the meant of Christ alone, and that Christ is effectual in us, and does by his
holy spirit quicken the believers, and deliver us from eternal death, and
withal make us heirs of eternal life. So says Paul, Romans 3. We conclude
that man is justified by faith, without the works of the law. Also, we are
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood.
And, Act. 10. To him give all the Prophets wi^nes, that all that believe in
him, shall receive remission of sins.

Now the words are known and manif^st. Faith does signify not only the
knowledge of the history (for that is also in the Deuilles, of whom it is
said, The deuilles do believe, and tremble) but it does signify, to embrace all the Articles of Faith, and among those this article, I do bele^e the remission
of sins, neither do I believe that it is only given to others, but to me
also. This faith is also a confidence, resting in the Mediator, according to
that, Being instified by faith, we have peace. So that Paull speaks of
faith, which consenting to all the articles of the Creed, does behold and
embrace the promise: for it joins together faith and the promise. Romans 4.
Therefore it is by faith, that the premise might be sure.

In expounding the word Justified, it is usually said, To is justified, does
signify, of unrighteous to be made righteous, which being rightly
understood, does agree also to our purpose. Of unrighteous to be made
righteous, that is, acquitted from the guilt, for the son of God his sake,
that is, laying hold by faith upon Christ himself, who (...) our righteousness
(as Jeremy and Paul do say) because that by his merit we have remission, and
God does impute his righteousness to us, and for him does account us just, and
by giving his holy spirit, does quicken and regenerate us, as it is said,
Ioh. 5. This is life in his Son: He that has the Son, has eternal life:
he that has not the Son of God, has not life. And. Romans 3. That he may be
just, and a iustifier. And although newnes is withal begun, which shall be
perfect in the life eternal, whereunto we are redeemed, yet neither for the new
qualities, nor for any works, is any man in this life made just, that is,
acceptable to God, and heir of eternal life, but only for the Mediators
sake, who suffered, rose again, reigns, and prays for us, shadowing and
quickening us. For although virtues are here begun, yet be they still
imperfect, and the relics of sin do stick in us. Therefore we must hold
this comfort, that the person is accepted for the Son of God his sake, his
righteousness being imputed to us, as it is said, Romans 4. Abraham believed God,
and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Also, Blessed are they, whose
inic^ities be forgiven, and whose sins be covered. Therefore this saying must
be understood correlatiuelie, We are justified by faith, that is, we are
justified by confidence in the Son of God, not for our quality, but because
he is the reconciler, in whom the heart does rest in confidence of the promised
mercy for his sake. Which confidence he does raise up in us by his holy
Spirit, as Paull says, Ye have received the Spirit of the a^^ption of the
sons, by whom we cry, Abba, Father.

Here also we must speak of the exclusive member. Paull does often repeat the
word Freely, by which it is most certain, that the condition of our merits
is excluded. Therefore it is said in our Churches, We are justified by Faith
alone, which we so understand, and declare, Freely, for the only Mediators
sake, not for our contrition, or other our merits, we have our sins
forgiven, us and are reconciled to God. For, although contrition and many other
virtues are together with Faith or with this confidence kindled in us, yet
these virtues are not the cause, or the merit of the Remission of sins,
neither does the person please God in regard of them, according to that
saying, No man li^ing shall be justified in thy sight* but the person has
remission, and does certenlie please God, by reason of the Mediator, who must
be apprehended by faith, as it is said, Ephesians. 3. B^ whom we have boldness, and
entrance with confidence, by Faith in him. This wholl doctrine is more manifest
in the true conversion and daily invocation of the godly. When we are in
great fear by the knowledge of the wrath of God, this one comfort is f^rme and
sure, to fly to the Son of God, who says, Come unto me, all ye that labor,
and are laden, and I will refresh you. Also, As I live, I will not the death
of a sinner, but that he return and live. Also, Grace abounds more then
sin. In these griefs if man be taught, to doubt of the remission of sins,
sorrow will have the upper hand, and then follow most grievous murmurings
against God, and desperation, and eternal death: but if man be taught, that
doubting is to be overcome by faith, then shall he understand, that by the
word Faith, is not only signified the knowledge of the story: he shall know
that confidence does rely upon the only Mediator, and he shall perceive
what is meant by these words, Freely, for the Mediator sake, remission is
received by faith alone, and so the person is made acceptable.

This wrestling has at all times instructed some. For though Origin, and many
other ^rit^^s (...) sententiaries have brought forth an impu^e kind of
doctrine, yet in Augustine and certain others we ^eede diverse sentences which
show, that they also received comfort out of th se true fountains. Who although
they d^e (...) speak improperly, of things unlike, because they were (...)
negligent in speaking, yet we may (...) what was their perpetual judgment,
if we will judge (...) Augustine ^^on the Psalm. 31. says. Who be happie^ not
they ^n whom god shall not sinde sins, for those he finds in all men. For
all men have sinned, and are destitute of the glory of God. Therefore if
sins be found in (...) men, it is evident, that none are happy, but those
whose sins it forgiven. This therefore the Apostle did thus commend: Abra^a^
believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Here certainly
Augustine by faith does understand confidence, which receives remission of
sins: and that which is said in Genesis, and in Paull, he does altogether
vnsterstand it, as we expound it. And in his book, De spiritu and litera, he
says, By the law we fear God, and by faith we fly to his mercy. Bernard in
his Sermon, De (...) says, First of all it is necessary to believe, that thou
can not have remission of sins, but by the mercy of God. But a^^^
thereunto, that thou may also believe this, that through him thy sins be
forgiven thee. This is the witness which the holy Ghost does ^i^e in our heart,
saying: T^y sins be forgiven thee. For so does the Apostle think, that a man
is justified freely by faith. In this sentence the judgment of our Churches
is plainly and properly alleged, and like testimonies are to be sound in
this author. Basil also, in his sermon of Humility does most properly set
forth our judgment, in these words: He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the
Lord, saying, that Christ is may unto v^ of God, wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and (...) a^ it is written, He that rejoices, let him
rejoice in the Lord. For this is per^^ct and sound rejoicing in God, when as a
man is not puffed up by reason of his own righteousness, but does acknowledge
that he does stand in need of the true righteousness, and that he is justified
by faith alone in Christ.

Seeing therefore that by this which hoth bin spoken it is manifest, what the
word Faith does signify, in this proposition, We are justified by Faith,
herereupon we may understand, that the Monks and others do dangerously
er^e, which do command those that are turned to God, to doubt whether they
do please God. This common error of doubting is evidently refuted by these
words, Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. Also, Therefore is
righteousness of faith, that the promise might be sure. For so long as men's
hearts are tormented with doubting, they fly from God, they do not rest in
God, nor call upon him: and the promise becomes unto them but a vain sound,
because they give not consent unto it. To conclude, it is the eternal and
immutable commandment of God, that we should believe in the Son of God,
according to this saying, The spirit shall convince the world of sin, because
they believe not in me. Also 1. Ioh. 5. He that believes not God, ma^e^h him a
l^er. Now it is a foolish cavil, when they say, that we mus^e doubt, in
respect of our unworthiness, and not in respect of mercy. For the promise was
therefore given, therefore the Son of God was appointed our Mediator,
because we are unworthy: and that for his sake, having suffered, being raised
up again, and now ^^king intercession for us, and dwelling in us, and
clothing us with his right^^^s^^s, the Father might undoubtedly be merciful
to this (...) lump of ours, being unworthy, and full of (...) to that saying,
There is now no condemnation (...) them which talk in Christ Jesus. Al^o it is
a^sude which they ^ore, that we must doubt, by reason of our unworthiness. For
we are not to doubt, whether our unworthiness do displease God* but with true
sighs let us confess that we are (...) and let us ley to the promise,
whereunto God heth commanded us to assert. Neither is that saying Eccl^^ 9.
^^tlie applied to this doubting, Man know^th not (...) worthy of love, or of
hatred. It is madness to imagine that Solomon should have any such meaning,
that neither the just, nor the unjust ought to determine with them selves,
whether they please or displease God, seeing it is most certain, that they,
which persevere in wicked deeds (...) their conscience, do displease God. But
Solomon does withdraw us from external shows to the wo^de of God: as though
he should say: Do not determine with thy self, that by reason of thy
prosperity thou art in favor with god, or by reason of thy adversity thou art
out of favor with him. Alexander does not therefore please God, because he is
a Conqueror, and enjoys a large empire. Let not Job in his calamity, nor
David in his exile think that they be forsaken of God, because they be
miserable; let them not judge according to these events or outward shows, but
by the word of God: and then even in the midst of our mis^^ie we shall
receive this comfort, As I live, I will not the death of a sinner, etc. God so
loved the world, that he (...) his only begotten Son, that every one that
believes in him should not perish, etc. To conclude, This error of doubting,
is altogether heathenish, and does abolish the gospel, and in true conversion
takes away comfort from them that feel the wrath of God. Men are rather to
be taught, that this is undoubtedly the voice of the gospel, that we should
believe the Son of God, and be assured, that grace does abound much more
then sin: and therefore let us withstand doubting, by wrestling get the vper
hand, and by faith overcome it, that we may have access to God: invoke him,
and give him thanks. These chief points of worship are fearefullie
hindered, when men's minds are shaken with the wanes of doubting, as experience
teaches. Hereof it is evident, why it is necessary, that the decree of the
Tridentine council, which confirms the error of doubting, should be
reproved. Also, by all that which has bin said, it may be understood, that
we do justly find fault with that Syne^doche, whereby some interpret Paul's
words after this sort, We are justified by Faith, that is, by a formed love, as
they speak. For they understand the word faith only of knowledge, and
think that this is the meaning; We are justified by Faith, that is, we are
prepared to righteousness, that is, to other virtues, to wit, obedience and
fulfilling of the law. So this is it only which they say. Man is righteous
for his own virtues: then they will him to doubt, whether he be furnished with
those habites, whereof they speak.

Now we have declared before, that by Faith is signified a confidence resting
in the Son of God the reconciler, for whom we are received, and do please
God, not for our virtues, or fullfilling the law. And seeing that in this same
comfort, the confidence, whereby we do rest in the Son of God, is indeed a
motion, kindled by the holy Ghost, whereby the heart is quickened, and freed
from eternal death, this conversion is called regeneration, Joan. 3. Except a
man be borne again of water, and of the spirit. And now man is made in deed
the dwelling place of God, who is effectual in him: as it is said Joan. 14.
If any man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and
we will come unto him, and will dwell with him. The eternal Father and the
Son, by the holy Ghost, do quicken our hearts, when as by faith they are
raised up in this comfort, as Paull says, Galat. 3. That ye might receive
the promise of the spirit through faith. Therefore we do not speak of an idle
faith: and the unskillful are deceived, whiles they think that remission of
sins does happen to such as are idle, without a certain motion of the mind,
without wrestling, and without a feeling of comfort in true griefs, in that
age which now is able to understand the voice of doctrine, according to that
saying, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God* and because
that in repentance we propound comfort unto the conscience, Look the 6.
obseruat. upon the August. confess.
we do not here add questions of predestination or of election, but we lead al
readers to the word of God, and exhort them to learn the will of God out of
his word, as the eternal Father by express voice commanded. Hear him. Let
them not look for other revelations.

Hitherto also pertains the fifth Article.
Of new obedience.
THe wholl benefit of the Son of God is to be considered: for he will so take
away sin and death, and deliver us from the kingdom of the Devil, that
sin being altogether abolished, and death vanquished, he may restore unto us
eternal life, wherein God may communicate unto us his wisdom, righteousness,
and joy, and wherein God may be all in all. This great benefit he does
begin in this miserable lump of ours, in this life, as it is written, 2.
Cor. 5. If so we shall be found clothed, and nor naked. Also Mat. 10. They that
shall continue to the end, shall be saved. Therefore when we receive remission
of sins, and are reconciled, and sealed by the holy Ghost, it is a horrible
madness to waste these good gifts, as these wasters are discribed in the parable
of the house, that was made clean, and in the second Epistle of Peter, Cap. 2.
it is said If they after they have escaped from the filthiness of the world,
are yet tangled again therein, and overcome, the latter end is worsse with
them then the beginning. Now these good gifts are wasted or powered out, if a
man do not hold the foundation, that is, the Articles of Faith, and either
willingly, or being deceived, imbraceth wicked opinions or Idols: also if a
man do fall greiuouslie against his conscience. These rules are often times
repeated, as Galat. 5. Thy which do such things shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. Therefore it is necessary to have a care to avoid such
falls. If this manifest necessity, the great punishment, to wit, the loss of
eternal life, being set before their eyes, do not move some to do good
works, they show them selves to be of the number of those, of whom it is
said, 1. Ioh. 3. He that commits sin, is of the Devil. Also, If any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his. And there be many causes of this
necessity. First, a debte, that is an immutable order, that the creatures
should obeie God. Therefore Paull says, Romans 8. Ye are debtors* Also, lest
the holy Ghost and faith be shaken of, let there be a care to avoid present
punishments: because it is mo^le certain, that many falls, even of the
Elect, are fearefullie punished, in this life, as the Church speaks in
Micheas. cap. 7. I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him. And the histories of all times do contain fearful examples of
punishments, as David, Solomon, Menasses, Josias, Nabuchodonozor, and
innumerable others were greiuoslie punished. Wherein this is most to be
lamented, that in the verse punishments many sins are heaped up: as in the
sedition raised up against David, and in the renting of the kingdom, for the
sin of Solomon And touching the necessity of doing good works, the Lord
says, Mat. 5. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and of the Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. The
necessity, which is manifold, being thus considered, these questions ensue
thereupon: what works are to be done: How they may be done: In what sort
they do please god* What rewards they have: what is the difference (...) the
(...) the 4. Sect.
of sins: * what sins do shake of the holy Ghost, and what not.

What works are to be done.
IT is the will of god* that Faith and works be governed by his word.
Therefore we must keep the rule, touching good works both internal and
external, contained in the commandments of god, which do pertain to-vs,
as it is said, Ezech. 23. Wa^^eye in my commandments. And these internal and
external works do then become the worship of god, when they be done in
faith, and are referred to this end, that god by this obedience may be
glorified. Now we have showed before, that even the vntegenerate may perform
this external obedience or discipline* as ^icero lives honestly, and for his
pains in government deserves well of all mankind* but his mind is full of
doubts, touching the Providence of god, neither does he know, nor speak unto
the true god in invocation, neither does he know the promises, and he always
doubts whether he be heard, especially when he is in miscrie, and then is he
angry with god, and thinks that he is vn^us^lie punished, ^ei^g he was a
honest Citizen, and profitable for the common wealth. Such darkness in the
mind, is great sin, such as reason, not being i'luminated by god* is not
(...) ^o judge of.

Therefore inward obedience, true knowledge of god, the fear of god* sorrows
in repentance, trust to obtain mercy promised for the Son of god,
invocation, hope, love, joy in god, and other virtues must be begun also in
the regenerate, and they must be referred to a proper end, to wit, that God
may be obeyed. These kinds of true worship cannot be given unto God, without
the light of the gospel, and without faith* which* our adversaries, who will
see me to be ioylie preachers of good works, do neither understand, nor
require: seeing they omit the doctrine of faith, which is a confidence to
obtain mercy, resting in the Son of god, which is an especial work, and
the chief worshipe of God. Of works not commanded of god, we shall speak
hereafter, and we must hold fast that rule, Math. 15. In vain do they
worship me with the commandments of men. And in the Church it falls out
often times, that ceremonies devised by men are more carefully kept, then the
commandments of God, yea the authority of ^ har^^aicall and unjust
traditions is preferred before the commandments of God: as in many ages, for
the unjust and wicked commandment of single life, the commandment of god
concerning true chastity, was horribly violated. Therefore we must consider
of the difference of the law, whereof we will speak again hereafter.

How good works may be done.
GReat is the infirmity of man, and the devil a most cruel enemy, who for
the hatred he bears to God, rages against mankind, and does endeavor all
that he can, especially to destroy the Church, as it is written of Peter. 1.
Pet. 5. Watch, because your adversary the devil goethabout like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour. look the 2. obseruat. upon this confess.
Therefore although men by their natural strength may after a sort perform
the external discipline, yet are they often overcome by this common
infirmity: and the devil also does often times force men, not altogether
savage, to commit horrible factes, as he deceived Eve, and compelled the
brethren of Joseph, David, and others innumerable. Therefore what diligence, or
what aduisement, can be sufficient for this most subtle enemy? Here let us
lay hold upon that most sweet comfort, The son of God appeared to destroy
the works of the Devil. 1, John. 3. The son of God is the keeper of his
Church, as he says, Ioh. 10. Noman shall take my sheep out of my hands. He
does protect us, and also by his holy spirit does confirm our minds in true
opinions: as he does begin eternal life, so does he kindle in our hearts
good motions, faith, the love of God, true invocation, hope, chastity, and
other virtues. We are not Pelagians, but we do humbly ^^e thanks to the
eternal God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to his son Jesus
Christ, and to the holy Ghost, both for the wholl benefit of salvation
restored again to mankind, and also for this benefit, that the Son of God
does dwell in the Church, and does defend it with his right hand against the
furies of the Devils and men, and does drive away the devils from us, and
does uphold us in this so great infirmity of ours, and by his word does
kindle in our minds the knowledge of God, and does confirm and govern our
minds by his holy spirit. We do certainly know that these benefits are in
deed given unto us, as it is said most comfortablie in Zachary, cap. 12. I
will power out upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
the spirit of grace and prayers. He names the spirit of grace, because that in
this comfort, the son of God, sealing us by his holy spirit, does testify
that we are in favor, and that we are delivered from the pains of hell.
Secondly he names the spirit of prayers, because that when we have
acknowledged the remission of sins, we do not now f^ie from God, we do not
murmr against God, but we approach unto him with true faith and hope, we do
ask and look for help at his hands, we love him, and submit our selves to
him: and thus is the beginning of obedience wrought. After that manner says
the Lord. Ioh. 14. I will pray the father, and he will give you another
comforter, even the spirit of truth. The holy Ghost does kindle the light of
truth in our minds, and new motions in our hearts, agreeable to the law of
god. Let^s acknowledge this so great a gift, and let us endeavor to keep it
thankfully, and desire daily to be helped in so great dangers of this life.
The will is not idle, when it has received the holy ghost.

How our now obedience does please God.
THe Pharisie in Luke, cap. 18* does admire and please him self, being
bewitched with this persuasion, that ^e does satisfy the law, and for this
discipline, such as it is ^oth please God. Many such there be among men, who
think themselves secure, if they perform never so little though it be but a
shadow of discipline. But the heavenly ^o^ce does often times accuse the
arrogancy of these men: and therefore the Lord says Luc. 13. Except ye
recent, ye shall (...) in like sort perish* and 1. Ioh. 1. If we say we have
no sin ^^^^liers. Therefore their imagination is vain, which think that
obedience does please god for it own worthies, and that it is a merit of
Condignitie, as they speak, and such a righteousness before God, as is a merit
of eternal life. And yet afterward they do add, that we must always doubt
whether our obedience do please God, because it is evident, that in every one
there is much pollution, many sins of ignorance, and omission, and many not
small blemishes. Here it is necessary that men's consciences should be
instructed aright in either of these points, both concerning our infirmity,
and also concerning the comfort. It is necessary that the regenerate should
have the righteousness of a good conscience, and obedience begun in this life,
as hathbeene said: yet nevertheless, in this life there is still remaining in
our nature, in our soul, and in our heart, very much pollution, which they do
the more see, and bewail, which have received more light then others, as the
Prophets and Apostles, according to that complaint of Paull Romans 7. I see an
other law in my members, which strives against the law of my mind, and makes
me captive to the law of sin. There is as yet in every one a great mist,
manifold ignorance, and many sorrowful doubts, errors in counsels, raised by
distrust, by false opinions, and a vain hope, many vicious flames of lusts,
much neglect of duty, murmuringes and indignations against God in his
punishments: to conclude it is vnsensiclenes and madness, not to be willing to
confess that the fear and love of God is much more cold in us, then it ought
to be. These confessions are repeated in the sermons of the Prophets and
Apostles. Psa. 143. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified. And 1. Ioh. 1. If we say, that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. This confession is
necessary, and man's arrogancy to be reproved. Also the error of our
adversaries, who feign, that men in this mortal life may satisfy the law of
God, and of those, who s^ie, that the evil of concupiscence, which is bred
with us, is not sin, nor an evil repugnant to the law or will of God, is to
be reprehended. These errors does Paul manifestly confute, Romans 7. and 8.

Then must comfort also be joined thereunto. First, let the regenerate person
assure himself, that he is reconciled to God, by faith alone, that is, by
confidence in the Mediator, and that the person is certenlie accounted
righteous, for the Son of God the Mediator, and that freely for his merit.
Secondly, let us confess with true grief, that there remain as yet in the
re^^^erate man many sins, and much pollution, worthy of the wrath of God.
Thirdly, let him nevertheless know, that obedience, and the righteousness of a
good conscience, must be begun in this life, and that this obedience,
although it be very far from that perfection which the law req^ireth, is
nevertheless, in the regenerate, acceptable to God, for the Mediators sake,
who makes request for us, and by his meritte does cover our great and
unspeakable miseries. Thus for the Mediators sake, both the person is
received, and also our works do please God, that in either of them our faith
may shine. Therefore Peter says, 1. Pet. 2. Offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. This comfort is set forth. Romans 8. Now
there is no condemnation to them, which do walk in Christ Jesus. And, Romans 3.
Ye are not under the law, but under grace. In that place this question is
asked, whether our ^^edience do please God, seeing it does not satisfy the
law^ Paull answers, that it does please God, Because we are not under the
law, that is, condemned by the law, but ^e are under grace, reconciled, or
received into s^uour. Romans 8. Who shall (...) Christ has died for us, and is
risen again, and sits at the right hand of God, and makes request for us:
that is, holy men do please God, for the Son his sake, who also offered his
obedience for us, and makes request for us. We must oppose these sayings to
doubting, lest faith and invocation be extinquished: for doubting does weaken
our invocation.

Seeing therefore that we know, both that new obedience is necessary, and that
help is certenlie given us, and that this obedience does please God, although
it be imperfect and needy, let us knowledge the infinite mercy of God, and
give thanks for it, and have a great care how to govern our actions, because
we know, that we are both helped, and that this obedience is acceptable to God
for the Sons sake. And let this necessity be always in our eyes, that if
the benefits of God, to wit, Justification, and regeneration, be shaken of, we
loose eternal life, according to that saying, We shall be clothed, if so be
that we be not found naked. And, Romans 8. If any have not the Spirit of Christ*
he is not his. And always in Justification let there be also a beginning of
newnes of life. The thief hanging on the cr^s^e, has good works, and those
both internal and external: it g^e^ueth him that he had sinned, and he
confesse^h that he is justly punished: then by faith he does acknowledge the
Savior, and desires salvation of him, and therefore he b^areth express
absolution, and the preaching of eternal life, and the promise, and rests in
this voice of the Messiah, and ^ubmmitteth himself to god, and does not bear
the punishment impatiently, but is eased by acknowledging the Messiah, and by
the hope of eternal life, and gives thanks to god: Moreover, to give an
evident token of his confession, he found fault with the other which cursed
Christ. These things are done by him, because this very Messiah, being
partner with him in his punishment, in a wo^de does teach his mind, and by
(...) some comfort the Word is effectual in him, and through (...) the
eternal Father does pour the holy ghost into the heart of this hearer, that
he may kindle in him, joy, love, invocation, hope of eternal life, and other
virtues.

Of Rewards.
PAull says, Romans 6. Eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord: and, they that are reconciled, or justified, Are heirs annexed with
the Son of God, and that for his sake, not for their own merittes. Faith,
receiving remission of sins, and justification, and the hope of eternal
life, do rely upon the Son of god the Mediator, as it is said, Ioh. 6.
This is the will of the Father, that ^^erie one that believes in him, should
have eternal life. And, Romans 5. Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ* by whom we have access through faith unto
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice under the hope of eternal life. He
joins faith and hope together, and affirms, that either of them does rely
upon the Mediator: And it is manifest, that hope ought not to rely on our
works, because it is said, Psalm. 142. No man living shall be justified in thy
sight. But as they which repent are accounted just by faith, for the only
Son of god his sake, and for him, and thorough him are quickened; so for him,
and not for our merits, is eternal life given unto us; as the thief on the
cross hears this promise, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise, Luc. 23.

Neither must we dream, that the Son of god did merit, or give unto us, a
preparation only to eternal life: but let that most comfortable saying of
Hosee be always in our sight: O death, I will be thy death. O hell, I will be
thy destruction. For the Son of God, and thorough him, we are delivered form
eternal death, and translated into life eternal, as he says, I give unto them
eternal life. And. 1. Ioh. 5. He that has the Son, has life. And let hope
be sure and firm, as Peter says 1. Pet. 1. Hope perfectly, that is, look
for eternal life, not with doubtful opinion in: an assured hope, to wit, for
the Mediators sake. And Augustine says well, in his book of meditations, The
certainetie of our whole confidence consists in the blood of Christ. Let us
hold both these points assuredly, that he which repents, does freely by
faith receive remission of sins, and justification for the Son of god his
sake, and that he is an heir of eternal life, as Paull says, Romans 8. As many
as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. And if they be
children, they are also the heiresof God. Yet notwithstanding, this also is
true, look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess. in the 4. Sect.
that they, which, do shake of the holy ghost, falling from faith, or sinning
grieuouslie against their conscience, and do not return unto God by
repentance, are not heirs, as it is said, Gal. 5. They which do such things,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And. 1. Tim. 2. Fight a good fight,
having faith and a good conscience, which some have put away, and as
concerning faith have made shipwreck. And, Math. 25. I was hungry, and ye
gave me not to eat. And, These shall go into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous shall go into life eternal. Now although life eternal life, is
given to the regenerate for the Son of god, yetwithall it is also a reward
of good works, as it is said, Your reward is plentiful in heaven, as a
patrimony is the reward of the labors of a son, although it be given to
the son for an other cause.

Moreover, god has added unto good works certain promises of his, and
therefore even for the good works of holy men, God does give spiritual and
corporal gifts even in this life, and that diuerselie, as it seems good to
his unspeakable wisdom. 1. Tim. 4. Godliness has the promises of the life
present, and of that that is to come Marc. 10. They shall receive a hundred
fold in this life (but with tribulation) and after this life, eternal life.
Mat. 10. Whosoever shall give unto one of these little ones to drink a cup of
cold water only in the name of a disciple, he shall not loose his reward.
Luc. 6. Give, and it shall be given to you. Exodus 20. Honor thy Father and
thy Mother, that thou may live long upon earth. Isa. 33. Bread shall be given
him, and his waters shall be sure: they shall see the King in his glory, that
is, for obedience and good works God does give quiet commonweals, an honest
and meek government, etc. Isa. 58. Break thy bread to the hungry, and thou
shall be as a garden that is watered, etc. The example of the widow at Sarepta
is well known: and the Psalmist says, Substance and riches are in his house.
For seeing that God in this mortal and miserable life does gather his Church,
and will have it to be an honest congregation, he gives there unto many places
of entertainment, he gives nestes to godly poor families, for the bringing
up of their children, and for the spreading abroad of doctrine: to conclude, he
will preserve the society of mankind, householdes, and commonweals, and
that to this end, that a Church may be gathered. Therefore he gives sometime
a government not troublesome, peace, a fruitful land, and other good things,
for the prayers of holy men, for their diligence, and for common necessities
sake: as, for Joseph, Naaman, and Daniel, those kingdoms, wherein they lived,
^lorished the more. And Ierem. 19. The banished in Babylon are commanded, to
pray for the peace, and wholesome government of that place, where they were
intertayned. So also often times punishments are heaped up for the sins of
the Chuch, as is to be seen in the punishment of the tribe of Benjamin, David,
and others. Now god will have us to understand that these benefits are
necessary for the body, and to know that they be given of god: in asking of
them he will have our faith to be exercised, as we shall declare more at large
in a fit place. At this time we have therefore added these few things, that in
this confession there might be also a Testimony in our Churches, that this
true and necessary doctrine, touching good works, is faithfully laid open.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Justification. CHAP. 5.
WE believe and confess, that to do and practice such righteousness, as is
acceptable to God, these virtues be necessary, Faith, hope, and love, and that
man can not of himself conceive these virtues, but does receive them of the
favor and grace of God, and that faith does work by love. But we think that
their judgment does far disagree from the Apostolic and Catholic doctrine,
who teach, that man is made acceptable to God, and accounted just before god,
for those virtues, and that when we come to stand before god in judgment, we
must trust to the merittes of these virtues. For man is made acceptable to god,
and counted just before him, for the only son of God our Lord Jesus Christ,
through faith: and when we appear before the judgment seat of God, we must
not trust to the merit of any of those virtues, which we have, but only to
the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose merit is ours by faith. And because
that before the tribunal seat of God, where the question is of true and
eternal righteousness and salvation, there is no place at al for the merits of
men, but only for the mercy of god, and the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ
alone, who is received of us by faith, therefore we think that the ancient
Fathers our Elders said truly, that we are justified before god by faith
alone. Romans 3. All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and are
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus,
whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood.
Galat. 3. The Scripture has concluded al under sin, that the promise by the
Faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. And, Cap. 5. We
thorough the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness through faith. For in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but
faith which works by love. Hilarie says, It offends the Scribes, that man
should forgive sin (for they beheld^ nothing but man in Jesus Christ) and
that he should forgive that, which the law could not release. For faith alone
does justify. Ambrose says, They are justified freely, because that workeing
nothing, nor requitting any thing, by faith alone they are justified, by the
gift of God. And again, They are evidently blessed, whose iniquities are
forgiven, without any labor or work, and whose sins are covered, no help of
repentance being required of them, but only this, that they believe. Many
places might be alleged as well out of the writings of the Prophettes and
Apostles, as out of the holy Fathers, whereby it is proved, that not only
in the beginning, through the free mercy of god, these virtues, to wit, Faith,
hope, and love, are given unto us, but also afterward throughout our wholl
life, and that in our extreme necessity, we are not able to stand before the
severe tribunal seat of god, but in the confidence of the only free favor of
god, showed unto us in Christ the Son of god. For this is that, both which
Paul teaches, and the Ecclesiastical writers do interpret, That we are
justified before god by faith alone.

Of good works. CHAP. 7.
WE say that good works, commanded of god, are necessarily to be done, and
that, through the free mercy of god, Look the 1 obseruat. upon this confess.
they do deserve certain their own, either corporal, or spiritual, rewards.
But we must not think, that in the judgment of god, where the question is,
concerning the purging of our sins, the appeasing of the wrath of god, and the
merit of eternal salvation, we should trust to those good works which we do.
For all the good works which we do, are imperfect, neither ca^ they sustain the
severity of the judgment of god: but al our confidence is to be placed in the
only mercy of god, for his Son our Lord Jesus (...) his sake. Psalm. 142.
Enter not into judgment with (...) no flesh living shallbe justified in thy
sight. Galat. 5. (...) lu^^eth against the Spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do those
(...) ^e would. Romans 7. I know, that in me, that is, in my flesh, there
dwells no good. Don. 9. We do not present our supplications before thee, for
our own righteousness, but for thy great (...) 22.
tender mercies. Augustine says, Woe to the life of man, be is never so
^omm^ndable, if thou examine i^* setting thy mercy aside. And again: All my
hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is my meri^te, my refuge,
salvation, life, and my resurrection. The mercy of the Lord is my meri^te. I
am not without merit, so long as the Lord of mercies is not wanting. And if
the mercies of the Lord he many, I abound in merittes. Gregory says,
Therefore Gr^^. ^ib. 1. (...) Eze^ch. (...) 7. in ^i^e. (...) in Se^^. 1.
adnu^^iat. Beatae Marciae.
our righteous Advocate shall defend us in the day of judgment, because we
know, and accuse our selves to be unjust. Therefore let us not trust to our
tears, nor to our actions, but to the alledgeing of our Advocate. Bernard
says, Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, not such a
testimony, as that proud Pharisie had, his thought being seduced, and
seducing him, giving witness of himself, and his witness was not true. But then
is the witness true, when the spirit bears witness with our spirit. Now I
believe that this testimony consists in three things: For first of all it
is necessary to believe, that thou can not have remission of sins, but
through the favor of God: Secondly, that thou can have no good work at
all, except the also give it to thee: Lastly, that thou can not deserve
eternal life by any works, except that also be given thee freely.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of Justification, and of Faith. CHAP. 3.
Our preachers do somewhat differ from the late received opinions about those
things which the people were commonly taught, concerning the mean, whereby we
are made partakers of the redemption wrought by Christ, and touching the
duties of a christian man. Those points which we have followed, we will
endeavor to lay open most plainly to your sacred Majesty, and also to
declare very faithfully those places of Scripture, by which we were forced
hereunto. First therefore, seeing that we were taught of late years, that
works were necessarily required to justification, our preachers have taught,
that this wholl justification is to be ascribed to the good pleasure of God,
and to the meritte of Christ, and to be received by Faith alone. To this they
were moved especially by these places of Scripture. As many as received him,
to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in his
name; which are borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God. Ioh. 1. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a
man be borne again a new, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Ioh. 3. No man
knows the Son, but the Father, neither knows any man the Father, but the
Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him. Mat. 11. Blessed ar^ thou,
Simon, the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not revealed this unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven. Mat. 16. No man can come to me, except
my Father draw him. Ioh. 6. By grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not
of your selves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should
boast himself. For we are his workemanshippe, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2. For
seeing it is our righteousness and eternal life, to know God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, and that is so far from being the work of slesh and blood,
that it is necessary to be borne again anew, neither can we come to the
Son, except the Father draw us, neither know the Father, except the Son
reveal him unto us: and Paull does write so expreslie, Not of your selves, not
of works: it is evident enough, that our works can help nothing at all, that
of unjust, such as we are borne, we may become righteous: because that, as we
are by nature the children of wrath, and therefore unjust, so we are not able
to do any thing that is just, or acceptable to God: but the beginning of all
our righteousness and salvation, must proceed from the mercy of the Lord, who
of his only favor, and the contemplation of the death of his Son, did first
offer the doctrine of truth, and his Gospel, sending those that should preach
it: and secondly, seeing that natural man can not, as Paull says, 1. Cor. 2.
perceive the things that are of God, he causes also the beam of his light to
arise in the darkness of our heart, that now we may believe the gospel
preached, being persuaded of the truth thereof, by the holy Spirit from
above, and then forthwith trusting to the testimony of this spirit, in the
confidence of children to call upon God, and to say, Abba, Father, obteining
thereby true salvation, according to that saying, Whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord, shall be saved.

Of good works, proceeding out of faith, through love.
THese things we will not have men so to understand, as though we placed
salvation and righteousness in the slothful thoughts of men, or in faith
destitute of love (which they call faith without form) seeing that we are
sure, that no man can be just or saved, except he do chiefly love, and most
earnestly imitate God. For those which he knew before, he also predestined
to be made like to the image of his Son. But no man can love God above all
things, and worthelie imitate him, but he which does indeed know him, and
does assuredly look for all good things from him. Therefore we cannot
otherwise be justified, that is, as to become righteous, so to be saved (for
righteousness is even our salvation) then by being endued chiefelie with faith
in him, by which faith we believing the Gospel, and therefore being persuaded,
that God has taken us for his adopted children, and that he will for ever
show himself a loving father unto us, let us wholly depend upon his
pleasure. This faith Saint Augustine does call, in his book De Fide and
operibus, Evangelical, To wit, that which is effectual through love. By this
faith we are borne again, and the image of God is repaired in us. By this
Faith, whereas we are borne corrupt, our thoughts, even from our childhoode,
being altogether bent unto evil, we become good, and upright. For hereupon,
we being fully satisfied with one God (the spring of all good things that is
never dry, but runs always most plentifully) we do forthwith show our
selves, as it were, Gods, toward others, that is, toward the true sons of
god, indeauouring by love to profit them, so much as in us lies. For, He that
loves his brother, abides in the light, and is borne of God, and is wholly
given to the new, and to the old commandment, touching mutual love. And
this love is the fullfilling of the wholl law, as Paul says: The wholl law is
fulfilled in one word, namely this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. Gal. 5. For whatsoever the law teaches, hitherto it tends, and this
one thing it requires, that at the length we may be reformed to the perfect
image of god, being good in all things, and ready and willing to do men good,
the which we can never do, except we be adorned with all kinds of virtues.
For who can purpose and do all things (as the duty of a Christian does
require, 1. Cor. 10.) to the true edifying of the Church, and the sound profit
of all men, that is, according to the law of God, and to the glory of god,
except that he both think, speak, and do every thing in order, and well,
and therefore be very familiarlie acquainted with the wholl company of
virtues.

To whom good works are to be ascribed, and how necessary they be. CHAP. 5.
Romans 8.
But seeing that they, which are the Children of God, are rather led by the
spirit of God, then do work any thing themselves, And that Of him, and
through him, and for him, Romans 11.
are all things, therefore whatsoever things we do well, and holilie, are to
be ascribed to none other, then to this one only spirit, the giver of all
virtues. Howsoever it be, he does not compel us, but does lead us being
willing, Working in us both to will, and to do, Philip. 2. Whereupon Saint
Augustine writes very well, That God does reward his works in us. And yet we
are so far from rejecting good works, that we do utterly deny, that any
man can fully be saved, except he be thus far brought by the spirit of
Christ, that he find no want at all in him, touching those good works,
whereunto god has created him. For there be diverse members of the same body,
therefore every one of us have not the same office. 1. Cor. 12. It is so
necessary, that the law should be fullfilled, that Heaven and earth shall
sooner pass away, then that one iotte, or the least point thereof shall be
remitted. Yet because god alone is good, has created all things of nothing,
and does by his spirit make us altogether new, and does wholly lead us (for in
Christ nothing avails but a new creature) none of all these things can be
ascribed to man's strength, and we must confess, that all things are the mere
gifts of god, who of his own accord, and not for any meritte of ours, does
favor and love us. By these things it may sufficienlie be known, what we
believe justification to be, by whom it is wrought for us, and by what mean
it is received of us, also by what places of scripture we are induced so to
believe. For although of many we have aledged a few, yet by these few, any
one, that is but meanly conversant in the scripture, may fully perceive,
that they which read the scriptures shall find every where such kind of
sentences, as do attribute unto us nothing but sin, and destruction, as
Hosee says, and all our righteousness and salvation to the Lord.

Of the duties of a Christian man. CHAP. 6.
NOw it cannot be doubted of, what be the duties of a Christian man, and to
what actions he ought chiefelie to give him self, namely to all those, whereby
every one, for his part, may profit his neighbors, and that first, in
things pertaining to life eternal, that they also may begin to know, worship,
and fear god, and then in things pertaining to this life, that they may want
nothing which is necessary to the sustenance of the body. For as the wholl
law of god, which is a most absolute commandment of all righteousness, is
breiflie contained in this one word, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, so in the performance of this love, it is necessary that all
righteousness should be comprised and perfited. Whereupon it follows, that
nothing at all is to be reckoned among the duties of a Christian man, which is
not of force and effect to profit our neighbor, and every work is so much
the more belonging to the duty of Christian man, by how much his neighbor
may the more be profited thereby. Therefore next after Ecclesiastical
functions, among the chief duties of a Christian man, we place the government
of the Common we ale, obedience to Magistrates (for these be referred to the
common profit) that care which is taken for our wife, children, family, and
the honor which is due to parents, (because that without these the life of man
cannot consist) and lastly, the profession of good arts and of al honest
discipline, because that except these be had in estimation, we shall be
destitute of the greatest good things, which are proper to mankind. Yet in
these, and all other duties pertaining to man's life, no man must rashly take
any thing to him self, but with a right conscience consider, whereunto God
does call him. To conclude, let every man account that his duty, and that so
much the more excellent a duty, the more that he shall profit other men
thereby.

THE TENTH SECTION OF THE HOHOLIE CATHOLIC CHVRCH.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the Catholic Church of God, and of the head of the Church. CHAP. 17.
FOrasmuch as God from the beginning would have men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the truth, therefore it is necessary that always from the
beginning, at this day, and to the end of the world, there should be a
Church, that is, a company of the faithful, called and gathered out of the
world, a communion (I say) of all Saints, that is of them, who do truly
know, and rightly worship and serve the true God in Jesus Christ the Savior,
by the word and the holy spirit, and which by faith are partakers of all
those good graces, which are freely offered thorough Christ. These all are
Cytizens of one and the same City, living under one Lord, under the same
laws, and in the same Ephesians. 2. 1. Cor. 6.
fellowship of al good things, for so the Apostle calls them fellow Cytizens
with the Saints, and of the householde of God, tearming the faithful upon the
earth Saints, who are sanctified by the blood of the Son of God. Of these is
that article of our Creed wholly to be understood, I believe the Catholic
Church, the common ion of Saints. And seeing that there is always but one
God, and one Mediator between God and man, Jesus Christ: also, one shepherd
of the wholl flock, one head of this body, and, to conclude, one spirit, one
salvation, one faith, one Testament, or covenant, it follows necessarily that
there is but one Church, which we therefore call Catholic, because it is
universal, spread abroad thorough all the parts and quarters of the world,
and reaches unto all times, and is not limited within the compass either of
time or place. Here therefore we must condemn the Donatists, who pinned up the
Church within the corners of Aphricke, neither do we allow of the Roman
clergy, who vaunte that the Church of Rome alone in a manner is Catholic.

The Church is divided by some into diverse parts or diverse sorts: not that
it is rent and divided from it self, but rather distinguished, in respect of
the diversity of the members that be in it. One part therefore they make to
be the Church militant, the other the Church triumphant. The militant warreth
still on the earth and fights against the flesh, the world, and the prince of
the world, the devil, and against sin and death. The other being already
set at liberty, is now in heaven, and triumphs over al those being
overcome, and continually reioiceth before the Lord. Yet these two churches
have notwithstanding a communion and fellowship between themselves. The
Church militant upon the earth has ever more had in it many particular
Churches, which must all notwithstanding be referred to the unity of the
Catholic Church. This militant Church was otherwise ordered and governed
before the law, among the Patriarchs, otherwise under Moses, by the law, and
otherwise of Christ, by the gospel. There are but two sorts of people for the
most part mentioned, to wit the Israelites, and the gentiles, o^ they which
of the Jews and gentiles were gathered to make a Church, There be also two
testaments, the old and the new. Yet both these sorts of people have had, and
still have one fellowship, one salvation in one and the same Messiah, in whom,
as members of one bode, they are all joined together under one head, and by
one faith are all partakers of one and the same spiritual meat and drink. Yet
here we do acknowledge a diversity of times and a diversity in the pledges
and signs of Christ promised, and exhibited, and that now the ceremonies
being abolished, the light shines unto us more cleerlie, our gifts and
graces are more abundant, and out liberty is more full and ample.

This holy Church of god is called the house of the living (...) builded of
living and spiritual stones, founded upon a rock, that can not be removed,
upon a foundation, besides which none can b^ 2. Tim. 3.
laid: Whereupon it is called the pillar and foundation of the truth, that
does not err, so long as it relieth upon the rock Christ, and upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. And no marvel, Look the 1. obseruat.
upon this confess.
if it do err, so often as it forsakes him, who is the alone truth. This
Church is also called a virgin, and the spouse of Christ, and his only
beloved. For the Apostle says, I have joined you unto one husband, that I
might present you a chaste virgin unto Christ. The Church is called a flock of
sheep under one shepherd, even Christ, Ezec. 34. and Ioh. 10. also the body
of Christ, because the faithful are the lively members of Christ, having him
for their head.

It is the head which has the pre-eminence in the body, and from whence the
wholl body receives life, by whose spirit it is governed in all things, of
whom also it receives increase, that it may grow up. Also there is but one
head of the body, which has agreement with the body. And therefore the
church cannot have any other head beside Christ. For as the Church is a
spiritual body, so must it needs have a spiritual head like unto it self.
Neither can it be governed by any other spirit, then by the spirit of Christ.
Wherefore Coloss. 1.
Paul says, And he is the head of his body the Church, who is the beginning,
the first borne of the dead, that in all things he might have Ephesians. 5.
the pre-eminence. And in another place, Christ (says he) is the head of the
Church, and the same is the Savior of his body. And Ephesians. 1.
again, Who is the head of the Church, which is his body, even the fulness of
him, which fills all in all things. Again, Let us in all Ephesians. 4.
things grow up into him which is the head, that is Christ, by whom all the
body being knit together receives increase. And therefore we do not allow of
the doctrine of the Romish Prelates, who would make the Pope the general
Pastor, and Supreme head of the Cuhrch of Christ militant here on earth, and
the very Vicar of Christ, who has (as they say) al fullnes of power and
sovereign authority in the Church. For we hold and teach, that Christ our
Lord is, and remains fill, the only universal Pastor, and highest Bishop,
before God his father, and that in the Church he performs all the duties of a
Pastor or Bishop, even to the worlds end: and therefore stands not in
need of any other to supply his room, for he is said to have a substitute,
which is absent. But Christ is present with his Church, and is the head that
gives life thereunto. He did straightly forbid his Apostles and their
successors al superiority or dominion in the Church. They therefore that by
gainesaying set themselves against so manifest a truth, and bring another
kind of government into the Church, who sees not that they are to be counted
in the number of them, of whom the Apostles of Christ prophesied? as Peter 2.
Epist. 2. and Paull Act. 20. ^. Cor. 11. 2 Thessalonians. 2. and in many other places.

Now by taking away the Romish head, we do not bring any confusion or
disorder into the Church: for we teach that the government of the Church,
which the Apostles set down, is sufficient to keep the Church in due order,
which from the beginning, while as yet it wanted such a Romish head, as is now
pretended to keep it in order, was not disordered or full of confusion. That
Romish head does maintain in deed that tyranny and corruption in the Church,
which was brought into the Church. But in the mean time he hinders,
resists, and with all the might he can make, cutteth of the right and lawful
reformation of the Church.

They object against us, that there have been great strifes and dissentions in
our Churches, since they did sever themselves from the Church of Rome, and that
therefore they can not be true Churches. As though there were never in the
Church of Rome never any sects, any contentions and quarrels, and that in
matters of religion, maintained, not so much in the schools, as in the holy
chaires, even in the audience of the people. We know that the Apostle said,
God is not the author of dissension, but of peace. And 1. Cor. 14.
Seeing there is amongst you emulation and contention, are you not carnal? Yet
may we not deny, but that God was in that Church, planted by the Apostle, and
that that Apostolic Church was a true Church, howsoever there were strifes and
dissentions in it. The Apostle Paull reprehended Peter Gal. 2. Act. 15.
an Apostle, and Barnabas fell at variance with Paull great contention arose in
the Church of Antioch, between then that preached one and the same Christ, as
Luke records in the Acts of the Apostles. And there have at all times bin
great contentions in the Church, and the most excellent Doctors of the Church
have about no small matters differed in opinions, yet so, as in the mean time
the Church ceased not to be the Church for all these contentions. For thus it
pleases God to use the dissentions that arise in the Church, to the glory of
his name, the setting forth of the truth, and to the end that such as are
approved* might be manifest. Now as we acknowledge no other head of the Church
then Christ, so we do not acknowledge every Church to be the true Church which
vaunteth her self so to be: but we teach that to be the true Church indeed, in
which the marks and tokens of the true Church are to be found. First and
chiefly the lawful or sincere preaching of the word of god, as it i^ left
unto us in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles which do all seem to lead
us unto Christ, who in the gospel has said, My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them* and they follow (...) 10.
me, and I give unto them eternal life. A stranger they do not hear, but
fly from him, because they know not his voice. And they that are such in the
Church of God, have all but one faith, and one spirit, and therefore they
worship but one God, and him alone they serve in spirit and in truth, loving
him with all their hearts, and with all their strength, praying unto him alone
through Jesus Christ the only Mediator and intercessor, and they seek not
life or Justice but only in Christ, and by faith in him: because they do
acknowledge Christ the only head and foundation ofhis Church, and being
surely founded on him, do daily repair themselves by repentance, and do
with patience bear the cross laid upon them, and besides, by unfeigned love
joining themselves to all the members of Christ, do thereby declare
themselves to be the disciples of Christ, by continuing in the bond of peace
and holy unity: they do withal communicate in the sacraments ordained by
Christ, and delivered unto us by his Apostles, using them in no other manner,
the^ as they received them from the Lord himself* That saying of the Apostle
Paul is well known to all, I received from 1. Cor. 11.
the Lord that which I delivered unto you. For which cause we condemn all such
Churches, as strangers from the true Church of Christ, who are not such, as we
have heard they ought to be, howsoever, in the mean time they brag of the
succession of bishops, of unity, and of antiquity. Moreover we have in charge
from the Apostles of Christ, To shun Idolatry, and to come out of Babylon,
and to have no fellowship with 1. Cor. 10. 1. Joan. 5. Apoc. 18. 2. Cor. 6.
her, unless we mean to be partakers with her of al gods plagues laid upon her.
But as for communicating with the true Church of Christ, we so highly esteem
of it, that we say plainly, that none can live before God, which do not
communicate with the true Church of God, but separate them selves from the
same. For, as without the Arc of Noah there was no escaping, when the world
perished in the flood, even so do we believe, that without Christ, who in the
Church offers him self to be enjoyed of the elect, there can be no certain
salvation: and therefore we teach that such as would be saved, must in no wise
separate themselves from the true Church of Christ.

But yet we do not so strictly shut up the Church within those marks before
mentioned, as thereby to exclude al those out of it, which either do not
communicate in the sacraments (by reason that they want them, or else not
willingly, nor upon contempt, but being constrained by necessity, do against
their wills ^bstaine from them) or in whom faith does sometimes fail, though
not quite decaie, nor altogether die: or in whom some slippes and errors of
infirmity may be found* for we know that God had some friends in the world,
that were not of the common wealth of Israel. We know what befull the people
of God in the captivity of Babylon, where they wanted their sacrifices
seventy ye^es. We know very well what happened to S. Peter, who denied his
Master, and what is wont daily to fall out among the faithful and chosen of
God, which go astraie and are full of infirmities. We know moreover what manner
of Churces the Churches at Galatia and Corinth were in the Apostles time: in
which the Apostle Paull condemns diverse great and hevnous crimes* yet he
calls them the holy Churches of Christ. Yea and it fulleth out sometimes,
that God in his just judgment suffers the truth of his word, and the
Catholic Faith, and his own true worship to be so obscured and defaced, that
the Church seems almost quite rased out, and not so much as a face 1. Reg.
19. Apoc. 7.
of a Church to remain, as we see fell out in the days o^ Eliah, and at other
times. And yet in the mean time the Lord has in this world, even in this
darkness, his (...) worshippers, and those not a few, but even seven thousand
2. Tim. 2.
and more. For the Apostle cries, The foundation of the Lord stands sure and
has this seal, the Lord knows who are his, etc, Whereupon the Church of
God may be termed invisible, not that the men, whereof it consists, are
invisible, but because it being hidden from our sight, and known only unto
God, it cannot be discerned by the judgment of man.

Again, not all, that are reckoned in the number of the Church, are saints,
and the lively and true members of the Church: for there be many Hypocrites,
which outward lie do hear the word of God, and publicly receive the
Sacraments, and bear a show to pray unto God alone through Christ, to
confess Christ to be their only righteousness: and do seem outwardly to
worship God, and to exercise the duties of charity to the brethren, and
for a while through patience to endure in troubles and calamities: And yet they
are altogether destitute of the inward illumination of the spirit of God, of
faith, and sincerity of heart, and of perseverance or continuance to the end.
And these men are for the most part at the length laid open what 1. Joan. ^.
they be. For the Apostle John says, They went out from among us, but they
were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have tarried with us.
Yet these men, whilst they do pertend religion, they are accounted to be in
the Church, howsoever indeed they be not of the Church. Even as traitors in a
commonwealth before they be detected are counted in the number of good
Citizens: and as the cockell and darnell and chafe are found amongst the
wheat: and as wennes and swellings are in a perfect body, when they Math. 13.
are rather diseases and deformities, then true members of the body. And
therefore the Church is very well compareed to a drawnet* which draws up
fishes of all sorts: and to a field, wherein is found both darnell and good
corn. We are to have a special regard, that we judge not rashly before the
time, nor go about to exclude, cast of, and cut away them, whom the Lord would
not have excluded, nor cut of, or whom without some damage to the Church, we
cannot separate from it. Again we must be very vigilant, lest that the godly
falling fast a sleep, the wicked grow stronger, and do some mischief to the
Church.

Furthermore we teach, that it is carefully to be marked, wherein especially
the truth and unity of the Church consists, lest that we either rashly
breed or nourish schisms in the Church. It consists not in outward rites
and ceremonies, but rather in the truth and unity of the Catholic faith. This
Catholic faith is not taught us by the ordinancesor laws of men, but by the
holy scriptures, a compendious and short sum whereof is the Apostles creed.
And therefore we read in the ancient writers, that there was manifold
diversities of ceremonies, but that was always free, neither did any man think
that the unity of the church was thereby broken or dissolved. We say then that
the true unity of the Church does consist in several points of doctrine, in
the true and uniform preaching of the gospel, and in such rites, as the Lord
himself has expressly set down: and here we urge that saying of the Apostle
very earnestly, As many of vt therefore as are perfect, let us be thus in
minded. If Phil. 5.
any man think otherwise, the Lord shall reveal the same unto him. And yet in
that whereunto we have attained, let us all follow one direction, and all of us
be like affected one toward another.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the Church.
THis we hold, that of such lively stones, being by this mean built upon
this lively rock, the Church, and the holy gathering together of all the
Saints, the Spouse of Christ (which being cleansed by his blood, he shall once
in time to come present without blot before his Father) is founded. The which
Church, though it be manifest to the ties of God alone, yet is it not only
seen and known, by certain outward rites, instituted of Christ himself,
and by the word of God, as by a public and lawful discipline* but it is so
appointed, that without these marks no man can be judged to be in this Church,
but by the special privilege of God.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Of the Church.
Math. 1. Ephesians. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Cor. 11. Ephesians. 5. Heb. 12. Joan. 1. Galat. 5.
Romans 1. Joan. 1. 1. Ioh. 3.
WE believe a holy Christian Church, that is, a communion of Saints, a
gathering together of the faithful in spirit, which is holy, and the Spouse
of Christ: wherein all they be Citizens, which do truly confess, that Jesus
is the Christ, the Lamb that takes away the sins of the world, and do show
forth that faith by the works of love. And a little after. This Church of
Christ does labor all that it can, to keep the bonds of peace and love in
unity. Therefore it does by no means communicate with Sects, and the rules
of orders, devised for the difference of days, meats, apparel, and
ceremonies.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of the holy Church, and of the godly institution and government thereof,
and of Discipline. Also of Antichrist. CHAP. 8.
IN the eight place it is taught, touching the acknowledging of the holy
Catholic Christian Church. And first of all, that the foundation and head of
the holy Church is Jesus Christ himself alone, together with the wholl merit
of grace and truth to life eternal, upon whom, and by whom, this Church is
at all times built, by the holy Ghost, the word of God, and the sacraments,
according Math. 16.
to the meaning of that which Christ said unto Peter, upon this rock, (to wit,
whereof thou have made a true confession,) 1. Cor. 3.
I will build my Church. And Saint Paull says, Other foundation Ephesians. ^.
can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And in another
place, And has appointed him over all things to be the head of the Church,
which is his body, and the fullnes of him, which fills all in all things.

Out of these things it is taught, that this is believed, held, and publikelie
confessed, that the holy Catholic Church, being present at every time, and
militant upon earth, is the fellowshippe of all Christians, and is here and
there dispersed over the wholl world, and is gathered together, by the holy
Gospel, out of all nations, families, tounges, degrees, and ages, in one faith
in Christ the Lord, or in the holy Trinity, according to that saying of Saint
John, who speaks thus. And I saw a great company which no Apoc. 7*
man can number, of all nations, peoples, and tongues, standing before the
throne, and before the lamb. This true Church, although while it lies here in
the Lords floor, to wit, in the wide world, and as it were in one heap
confusedly gathered together, contains in it as yet, as well the pure wheat,
as the chafe, the Godly children of God, and the wicked children of the
world, the living and dead members, of the ministers, and of the people, yet
where it is least defiled, or most pure, it may be known, even by these
signs that follow: namely, wheresoever Christ is taught in holy assemblies,
the doctrine of the holy Gospel is purelie and fully preached, the
Sacraments are administered, according to Christ's institution, commandment,
meaning, and will, and the faithful people of Christ does receive and use
them, and by these gathers it self together in the unity of faith and love,
and in the bond of peace, and joins it self in one, and builds it self
hard together upon Christ. There therefore is the holy Church, the house of
God, the temples of the holy Ghost, lively members, the parts of the
heavenly Jerusalem, the spiritual body of Christ, and joints knit together,
the which are joined and coupled each with other, by one head Christ, one spirit
of regeneration, one word of god, the same and sincere sacraments, one faith,
one love and holy communion, one bond of peace, order, discipline, and
obedience, whether the number of this people Math. 15.
be great or small, as the Lord witnesses, Where two or three are gathered
together in my name (in what country and nation, and in what place soever this
be) there am I in the midst of them: and contrarily, where Christ, and the
spirit of Christ, dwells not, and the holy Gospel cannot have any place
granted unto i^, etc. but on the contrary side, manifest errors Look the 1.
obseruat. upon this confess. Romans 5.
and (...) life have their full course, and by getting the upper hand do spread
themselves faite, there most also needs be a Church so defiled, that Christ
will not acknowledge i^ for his well-beloved spouse, seeing that none belongs
to Christ, who has not the spirit of Christ. (...) Christian is also bound
with diligent care to seek after this and such a true part of the holy
Church, and after he has found it, to ioylie and maintain holy communion
and fellowship therewith* as the other part of that point of the Church in our
christian C^^^de does declare, where we do profelie, that we (...) communion
of Saints: and ought altogether, with this fellowship, or spiritual company
of Gods people, to (...) the true unity and concord of Christ's spirit, to Live
and bear good will to all the members, to y^lde obedience thereunto, and
endeavor, by all means possible, to procure the profitte and furtherance
thereof, and in truth to hold agreement therewith, and by no means thorough
s^^bbo^nnes to move schisms, seditions, and sects, against the truth. To
which thing the Apostle exhorts all men, where he says, Ephesians. 4.
So walk or behave your selves, as worthy of the place or vocation whereunto
ye are called, with all humblenes and ^^ekenes, with a quiet mind, and long
suffering, forbearing one another, and endeavor ye to keep the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye
are called in one hope of your vocation: there is one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, ore God, and Father Romans 15. Phil. 2. Romans 12. 1. Cor. 12.
of all, And again, Let every man please his neighbor in in that that is
good to edification. Also, do nothing through s^r^^e, or for vain glory.
Again, Let there not be dissentions among you. He therefore, that in this life
walks according to these commandments, he is a true and lively member of
the holy Church, which brings forth the fruit of Faith and love. look the
2* obseruat. upon this confess. and the 1. obseruat. upon the confesson of
Saxony* in the 4 Section.
But he that loses the spirit of Faith and love in the holy fellowship, must
needs be a deed member.

Together with these things the ministers of our Churches teach, that this is
to be thought of their fellowship, which is in like manner to be thought of any
other Christian fellowship, whether it be great, or small: to wit, that it
self alone is not that holy Catholic Christian Church, but only one part
thereof, as the Apostle writes of the Church at Corinth, Ye are the body of
Christ, and members of him, every 1. Cor. 1^.
one for his part. They teach also that there must be a platform and certain
order of government in the holy Church. For without a platform of order and
outward government, it can not be in good case or go well with it, no more
then it can with any other even the least society. But this platform of
order consists chiefelie in this, that they be both ordinarily called, and
lawfully ordained, who execute due functions in the same, beginning at the
least, and proceeding to those that are of a mean sort, and so sorth even to
the chiefest. The next point is, that every one do well discharge that place,
and as it were his ward, to which he is called, and use watchfulnes, and
suffer nothing to be sound wanting in himself, nor at his own pleasure do
closely convey him self out of the same, or go beyond the bonds thereof, and
meddle with other men's charges, and moreover, that all among themselves submit
themselves one to an other, and al perform obedience from theleast to the
greatest, every man in his own place, whereunto he is called: and do it with
the affection of love, and of his own accord, not of constraint, even for
Christ's sake, and for the care they have of eternal salvation, according as
the Apostles and other holy men have taught, concerning this matter, 1. ^er.
3. Phil. ^.
and after their examples, by which they founded their Churches, and according
to that also that they brought old laws or decreees in to subjection* the which
thing ourministers among themselves do in deed declare and practice. This
laudable order of governing the Church together with lawful discipline, that
is, with the severity of punishments appointed by God, (...) unto it, ought
diligently to be (...) so that the wicked, and such as abide in (...) without
repentance, having their hearts (...) as give not obedience to God, and to his
word, and in the Church are authors of great offenses, and do not repent, or
become better, after due, faithful, and (...) that such, I say, may be
publicly punished, and ^e removed from the holy fellowship, by
Ecclesiastical punishment whic^^ Look the 3 obseruat upon this confess.
commonly is called abandoning, excommunication, or our sing, yet not by the
help of the civil power, but by virtue of the word and the commandment of
Christ. And that this punishment may indifferently be used toward all, no
regard or respect is to be had of persons, of what degree soever they be,
whether they be civil or Ecclesiastical persons, according to that sentence
of the doctrine of Christ, who says, If thy brother trespass against thee,
look the (...).
go, and reprove him between him and thee alone: if he hear thee, thou have
won thy brother: if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two: If he
hear not these, tell it unto the Church: and if he hear not the Church, let
him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a Publicane. And Saint Paull, together
with his fellow ministers, did in express words give a commandment hereof,
writing thus: We command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus 1. Cor.
5.
Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother, that walks
vnordinatelie, and not after the instruction which he received of us. And in an
other place he says. Put from among your selves that wicked man. And yet this
is not to be concealed, that at all times there have been many in the Church,
which seemed to be Christians, and yet were wicked hypocrites, close sinners,
far from repentance, and that there be, and shall be such hereafter, even unto
the end of the world: such as are neither chastned by this discipline of
Christ, neither can easily be excommunicated, or altogether separated from the
Church, but are to be reserved and committed to Christ alone, the chief
Shepherd, and to his coming: as the Lord himself says of these men, that
the Angels in the last day shall first separate such from the righteous, and
cast them into the sierie f^rnace, where shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

Here with all it is also taught, that that mischievous and Dan. 9. Mat. 24.
Mar. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. Pet. 2.
wicked Antichrist, shall sit in the temple of God, to wit, in the Church, of
whom the Prophets, Christ our Lord, and his Apostles have foretold us, and
warned us to take heed of him, that the simple sort among the faithful might
avoid him, and not suffer themselves to be seduced by him. Now in Antichrist we
are to acknowledge a double ouerthwartnes* to wit, dishonestie, and
deceiving: the first is an ouerthwartnes of the mind or meaning, or a bringing
in of false doctrine, clean contrary to the meaning of Christ our Lord, and
of the holy Scripture: whereof the Apostle 2. Tim. 4. 2. Pet. 3.
speaks after this sort: The time will come, when they will not suffer any
longer the holy doctrine, but having their cares ^^^^ing shall after their
own lusts get them an heap of teachers, and shall turn their ears from the
truth and shall be given unto fables. The other evil or offense, that we are
to consider in Antichrist, is a corrupt and naughty life, giving unto others a
very ill example, and is full of horrible sins, hurtful filthiness, and all
kind of vices, which in the Antichristian Church are openly practiced, and
that freely, without any kind of punishment: whereof the Apostle says, This
know 2. Tim. 3.
also, that in the last days shall come perilous times. For men shall be
lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, profane, without natural affection,
such as cannot be pleased, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, not lovers or
desirous of that which is good, traitorous, headie, high minded, lovers of
pleasure more then of God, having a sl^ew of godliness, but have denied the
power thereof: turn away therefore from such. Of which time also Christ
forespake in these words: Math. 24.
And then many shall be offended at these examples, and shall betraie one
another, and have one another. And many false Prophets shall arise, and deceive
many. And because iniquity shall increase many ways, the love of many shall be
cold. But he that (...) to the end, he shall be saved. These words are to be
understood of them, which do continue in the doctrine of Christ, enduring all
adversities, wherewith they are assaied. And in an other Mat* 1^. Math. 11.
place Christ cries out: Woe to the world, because of offenses. And, Blessed is
he that shall not be offended in me.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
Art. 26.
THerefore we believe, that it is not lawful for any man, to withdraw
himself from the congregations, and to rest in himself, but rather that al
men are to defend, and to preserve the unity of the Church, submitting
themselves to the common instruction, and to the yoke of Christ, wheresoever
God does appoint that true Ecclesiastical discipline, although the decrees of
Magistrates do gainesaie it: from which order whosoever do separate
themselves, they do resist the ordinance of God.

Art. 27.
We believe, that very carefully and wisely the true Church (the name whereof
too many do abuse) is to be discerned. Therefore we affirm out of the word
of God, that the Church is a company of the faithful, which agree together in
following the word of God, and in embracing pure religion, wherein also they do
daily profit, growing and confirming themselves mutuallie in the fear of God,
as they which have need daily to go forward and to profit, and who, although
they profit never so much, must notwithstanding of necessity daielie fly to
the remission of sins. Yet we do not deny, but that many Hypocrites and
reprobates are mingled with the faithful, but their guilefull dealing is not
able to take away the name of the Church.

Art. 28.
Therefore, seeing we believe this to be so, we withal boldly affirm, that
where the word of God is not received, and where there is no profession of that
obedience which is due thereunto, nor any use of Sacraments, there (if we
will speak properly) we cannot judge any Church to be. Therefore we condemn
the Papisticall assemblies, because that the pure truth of God is banished
from them, and among them the sacraments of Faith are corrupted, counterfeited,
and falsified, or altogether abolished, and to conclude, among whom all
superstitions and Idolatries are in full force. And therefore we think, that
all they who join them selves to such actions, and communicate therewith, do
separate themselves from the body of Christ. Yet notwithstanding, because that
in Papacy there be some small tokens of a Church, and the substance
especially of Baptism has remained the efficacy whereof does not depend
upon him, by whom it is ministered, we confess, that they which are there
baptized, need not to be baptized the second time, howbeit, by reason of the
corruptions, which are mingled therewith, no man can offer infants there to be
baptized, but that he must defile him Art. ^.
self.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
WE believe, that there is one Church of God, and that the same is not shute up
(as in times past among the Jews) into some one corner or kingdom, but that
it is Catholic, and universal, and dispersed throughout the wholl world. So
that there is now no nation, which may truly complain, that they be shut
forth, and may not be one of the Church and people of God: and that this
Church is the kingdom, the body, and the spouse of Christ: that Christ alone
is the Prince of this kingdom: that Christ alone is the head of this body:
and that Christ alone is the Bridegroom of this Spouse.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. 2^.
W^ believe and confess, that there is one Catholic or Universal Church,
which is the true congregation or company of all faithful Christians, which
do look for their whole salvation from Christ alone, in as much as they be
washed in his blood, and sanctified and sealed by his spirit. Furthermore, as
this Church has been from the beginning of the world, so it shall continue
unto the end thereof. The which appears by this, that Christ is our eternal
King, who can never be without subjects. This Church God does defend against
all the fury and force of the world, although for a small time it may seem to
be very little, and as it were utterly extinguished to the sight of man: even
as in the perilous time of A^hab, God is said to have reserved to himself
seven thousand men, which bowed not their k^^e to Baall. To conclude, this
holy Church is not situated o^ limited in any set or certain place, nor yet
bound and tied to any certain and peculiar persons, but spread over the face
of the wholl earth, though in mind and will, by one and the same spirit,
through the power of faith, it be wholly joined and united together.

Art. 28.
We believe, that seeing this holy company and congregation consists of
those that are to be saved, and out of it there is no salvation, therefore no
man, of how great dignity and pre-eminence so ever, ought to separate and
sunder himself from it, that being contented with his own solitary estate,
he should live apart by himself. But on the contrary side, that all and
every one are bound to associate themselves to this company, carefully to
preserve the unity of the Church, to submit himself both to the doctrine and
discipline of the same, finally to put his neck willingly under the yoke of
Christ, as common members of the same body, to seek the edification of their
brethren, according to the measure of gifts, which God has bestowed upon
every one. Moreover, to the end that these things may the better be observed,
it is the part and duty of every faithful man to separat himself according to
gods word, from all those which are without the church, and to couple himself
unto this company of the faithful, whersoeuer god has placed it, yea though
contrary edicts of Princes and Magistrates do forbid them, upon pain of
corporal death, presently to ensue upon all those, which do the same.
Whosoever therefore do either depart from the (...) Church, o^ refuse to join
themselves unto it, do openly resist the commandment of God.

Art. 29.
We believe, that with great diligence and wisdom it ought to be searched and
examined by the word of God, what the true Church is, seeing that all the
Sects, that at this day have sprung up in the world, do usurp and falselie
pretend the name and title of the Church. Yet here we do not speak^ of the
company of hypocrites, which together with the good are mingled in the Church,
though properly they ^^e not pertain to the Church, wherein they are oneli^e
present with their bodies; but only of the manner, how to distinguish the
body and congregation of the true Church from all other Sects, which do
falsely boast that they be the members of the Church. Wherefore the true Church
may be dis^erned from the false by these notes, First, if the pure preaching of
the Gospel do flourish in it. if (...) have (...) administration of the
sacraments, according t^ Christ his institution: if it do use the right
Ecclesiastical (...) for the restraining of vice: Finally, to knit up (...)
word, if it do square all things to the rule of Gods word* refusing whatsoever
is contrary to it, acknowledgeing Christ to be the only head of the same. By
these notes, I say, it is certain that the true Church may be discerned.
From the which it is not lawful for any man to be severed. Now who be the true
members of this true Church, it may be gathered by these marks and tokens
which be common to al Christians: such is faith, by the virtue whereof, having
once apprehended Christ the only Savior, they do fly sin, and follow
righteousness loving the true God, and their neighbors, without turning either
to the right hand, or to the left: and do crucify their flesh with the
effects thereof, not as if no infirmity at all remained still within them, but
because they do sight al their life long against the flesh by the power of the
spirit, having of ten recourse unto the blood, death, passion, and obedience
of our Lord Christ, as unto a most safe refuge, in whom alone they are assured
to find redemption for their sins, through faith in him. But on the other
side, the false Church does always attribute more unto her self, to her own
decrees and traditions, then to the word of God, and will not suffer her self
to be subject to the yoke of Christ, neither does administer the Sacraments, so
as Christ has prescribed, but at her own will and pleasure, does one while
add unto them, another while detract from them. Furthermore, she does always
lean more to men, then to Christ: and whosoever do go about to lead a holy
life, according to the prescript rule of gods word, whosoever does rebuke and
reprove her faults, as her covetousness, and Idolatry, those she does
persecute with a deadly hatred. By these marks therefore it is easy to
discern and distinguish both these Churches the one from the other.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
ALso they teach, that there is one holy Church, that shall continue always.
Now, to speak properly, the Church of Christ is a congregation of the members
of Christ, that is, of the Saints, which do truly believe, and rightly
obeie Christ: though in this life there be many wicked ones and hypocrites
mingled with this company and shall be to the day of judgment. Now the Church
properly so called, has her notes and marks, to weete, the pure and sound
Doctrine of the Gospel and the right use of the Sacraments. And for the true
unity of the Church, it is sufficient, to agree opon the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and the administration of the sacraments. Neither is it necessary that
humane traditions, or rites instituted by men, should be alike every where,
according as Saint Paul teaches, There is one Lord, one faith, one Baptism,
one God, and Father of all.

These things are thus set down in another edition.
ALso they ^each, that there is one holy Church, which is to continue always.
Now the Church is a congregation of Saints, in which the Gospel is purelie
taught, and the Sacraments rightly administered. And unto the true unity of
the Church, it is sufficient, to agree upon the Doctrine of the Gospel, and
the administration of the Sacraments. Neither is it necessary that humane
traditions, and rites or ceremonies ordained by man, should be alike in all
places, as Saint Paull says, There is one says, one baptism, one God and
Father of all.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Of the Church.
Art. 11.
GOd will have us to understand, that mankind is not ^orne by chance, but
that it is created of God, and created, not to eternal destruction, but that
out of mankind he might gather unto himself a Church, to the which in all
eternity he might communicate his wisdom, goodness, and joy: and he will have
his Son to be seen, for whom and through whom, by his unspeakable
wisdom, and infinite mercy, he has repaired this miserable nature of men.
Therefore amongst men he would at all times have a company, whereunto he
delivered the doctrine, concerning his Son, and wherein the Son himself
did institute and preserve a ministry, to keep and spread abroad that
doctrine, by the which he has bin, is, and will be effectual, and has
converted many to himself, as Paull does manifestly teach: The Gospel is
the power of God to salvation to eu^^ie one that believes.

But it is to be (...) at and to be lamented, that the greatest part of
mankind, being carried away with a horrible rage, should contemn this voice,
and testimony of God, and the Son of God: and that in this company, which
has the name of the Church, there have bin always many diuisons, and that the
true Church has bin overcome by foreign and domestical enemies. When men do
look upon these dissentions, and do see that they which embrace other
doctrines repugnant to the gospel, do get the upper hand in kingdoms,
multitude, and glory, they doubt whether there be any Church of God, which it
is, what manner of Church it is, and where it should be. And for profane men
it is a hard matter to judge hereof: but the true Church does certeinlie know
out of the divine Testament, whence these so great furies of men do arise, and
yet that amongst them the Church of God is preserved; and does discern it from
other nations, and knows which is it, what manner of one it is, and where to
be found. Therefore that all godly men might be the better confirmed against
these doubts, this Article is set before them in the Creed: I believe the
holy Catholic Church. By this profession we affirm, that all mankind is not
rejected of God, but that there is, and shall remain, a certain true Church,
that the promises of God are sure, and that the Son of God does as yet
reign, receive, and save those that call upon him. And being raised up by this
comfort, we do give God thanks, and invoke him, we do desire, receive,
and look for eternal good things at his hand.

By reason of this admonition and comfort, the Article in the Creed is
rehearsed, seeing that the self same doctrine, touching the preserving of the
Church, is very often repeated in sundry Sermons in the book of God: as Isa.
59. This is my covenant with them, says the Lord* my Spirit, which is upon
thee, and my words, which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart ^^t of thy
mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, says the Lord, from henceforth even
for ever. And Christ says, I am with you for ever, even to the end of the
world. Also this is a sweet comfort, that the heirs of eternal life are
not to be found elsewhere, then in the company of those that are called,
according to that saying, Whom he has chosen, them he has also called. Let
not therefore men's minds go astraie, beholding this ragged body of the
Church, and peradventure dreaming, that in other places some, which do not
know the gospel, are notwithstanding holy, and the dwelling house of God, as
Fabius, Scipio, Aristides, and such like. But turn thou thy eyes hither: Know
for a certainty, that in this company of those which are called, some be
chosen, and join thy self to this company by confession and Invocation: as
David says, Psalm. 26. One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that I do
still require, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life, to behold the will of the Lord, an^ to visitte his temple.

We do not therefore speak of the Church, as if we should speak of Plato his
Idea, but we speak of such a Church, as may be seen and heard, according to
that saying, The^ sound is gonne forth into all the earth. The eternal father
will have his son to be heard among al mankind, as he says* Hear him. And,
Psalm. 2. I have set my king upon the holy hill* Sion: I will declare the
decree. The Lord said to me, thou art (...) Son, this day have I begotten
thee. Be wise now therefore ye King: We say therefore, that the visible Church in
this life is: company of those, which do embrace the Gospel o^ Christ, and
use the sacraments aright, wherein God by the ministry of the Gospel is
effectual, and does ren^^ many to life eternal. And yet in this company
there be many, which are not holy, but do agree together, concerning the true
doctrine, as in the time of Marie, these were the Church, to wit, Zachary,
Simeon, Joseph, Elizabeth, Marie, Anne, the teachers, and many other, who
agreed with them in the pure doctrine, and did not hear the Sadduces and the
Pharisees, but Zachary, Simeon, Anne, Marie, and such like, etc. For when the
company is very small* yet God does reserve some remnants, whose voice and
confession is heard, and he does oftentimes renew the ministry, according to
that saying: Except the Iord had left a seed ^n to us, we had been like to
Sodom, etc.

Therefore this description, taken out of the manifest testimonies of the
scriptures, does declare, which is the Church, what it is, and where it is. We
may not doubt* that the Church is tied to the Gospel, as Paull says, If any
man teach another Gospel, let him be accursed. And, Ioh. 10. My sheep hear
my voice. And Ioh. 14, If any man loves (...) he hears my word, and my
Father shall love him, and we will (...) to him, and will dwell with him. And
Ioh. 17. Sanctify them wi^^ thy word, thy word is truth. Therefore the
Sadduces, the Pharisees, and such like Bishops, and others, who set forth an
other doctrine, differing from the Gospel, and do obstinately establish
idolatry, are no members of the Church of God, althouugh they hold a title
and dominions. But it is manifest, that our adversaries teach and defend
another ^inde of doctrine differing from the Gospel, seeing they teach that
the law of God may be fulfilled by our obedience in this life, and that this
obedience does deserve remission of sins: Also, that by this obedience men
are made righteous before god. Also that evil concupiscence is not sin, not
an evil resisting the law of God. Also, that they which are converted, must
doubt, whether they be in state of grace, and that this doubting is not sin.
Also, that dead men are to be prayed unto. Also, that difference of meats,
monastical vows, and other ceremonies chosen without any commandment of
God, are the service of God. Also, that the sacrifice in the mass does deserve
remission of sins, and other things, both for him that makes it, and also
for others that are a live or dead. Also, other manifold and horrible
prophanations of the sacrament. Also, that Bishops may appoint services of
God, and that the violating of those services, which are appointed by them, is
mortal sin. Also, that they may enjoin the law of single life, to any
degree of men. Also, that the rehearsal of all and every offense is
necessary to the obteining of remission of sins. Also, that canonical
satisfactions do recompense the punishments of Purgatory. Also, that those
Synodes, wherein the Bishops alone do give their judgment, can not err. Also,
they which do consecrate oils, and other things, without the commandment of
God, and do attribute thereunto a divine power against sins, and Devils, and
diseases: Also, they which allow of prayers made to cert^ine Images, as though
there were more help to be had: Also, they which do kill honest men, only
for that they dislike these errors, and do proses the truth: These things
seeing they be altogether heathenish and idolatrous, it is manifest, that the
mainteiners thereof, are not members of the Church, but do rule and have
sovereignty, as the Pharisees and Saducies did. Nevertheless there have been,
are, and shall be in the Church of God, such men as do keep the foundation,
although some had, have, and shall have more light, and others less. And
sometime also even the very saints do build stubble upon the foundation,
especially seeing that the misery of these times does not suffer those, which
have the beginnings of faith, to be instructed, and to confer with the better
learned. yet these are in the number of those, whom the Lord commands to be
spared, Ezech, 9. who sigh and are sorry, because that ^rrors are established.

Therefore chiefelie by the voice of the Doctrine we may and ought to iud^e,
which, and where the true Church is, which by the voice of the true doctrine,
and then by the lawful use of the Sacraments, is distinguished from other
natious. And what is the voice of the true doctrine, the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, and the Creedes, do declare. In these the doctrine is
not doubtful, touching the foundation to wit, touching the Articles of faith,
the e^sence and will of God, the Son the Redeemer, the law* the promises,
the use of the Sacraments, and the ministry. And it is manifest, that it is
not permitted to any creature, not to Angels, nor to men, to change that
doctrine, which is delivered of God.

Now what the Church is, the Son of God shows, saying, My kingdom is not
of this world. Also, As my Father sen^ me* so do I send you. By the voice of
the ministers of the Gospel an eternal Church is gathered to god, and by this
voice God is effectual, and turns many to himself. This exceeding great
benefit of God we ought to acknowledge, (...) thankefullie to extol. And
although the Church be a company, that may be seen and heard, yet it is to
be distingui head from political Empires, or those that bear the sword.
Bishops have not authority by the law of God (...) punish the disobedient,
neither do they possess the kingdoms of the world, and yet in the Church
there is an o^der, according to that saying* He ascended, he gives gifts
(...) men, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelist, Pastors, and Teachers. The Son of
God is the high Priest, anointed of the eternal Father, who, that the Church
might not utterly perish, ha^^ given unto it ministers of the Gospel, partly
called immediately by himself, as the Prophets and Apostles, partly chosen by
the calling of men. For he does both allow of the choice of the Church, and of
his infinite goodness he is effectual, even when the Gospel does sound, by
such as (...) chose^ by voices, or in the name of the Church.

Therefore we do retain in our Churches also the public rite of Ordination
where by the mi^isierie of the Gospel is commended to those that are tru^lie
ch^^^n* those manners and doctrine we do ^i^st (...) And touching the
worthiness of the (...) teach ou^ Churches. No (...) then that which the Son
of God s^^th: As my ^ath^^ s^^t me, odo I send you. He also declare^h what
^^^maundements he gives, preach ye the Gospel, and he a^^irmeth, that he will
be effectual by their voice, as the Father shows himself to be effectual by
the Son. Also, we set before men the commandments of God. He that ^ea^eth
you, hears me: (...) that despises you, despises me. Also, Obey them that
have the over ^^ght of you. And yet these sayings do not erect a kingdom
without the Gospel: but they comm^^nd an obed^ence which is due to the voice of
the Gospel. And these things pertain to the ministe^ie: To teach the Gospel,
to administer the Sacraments, to give absolution to them that ask it, and do
not persevere in ^a^if^st offenses: to ordain ministers of the Gospel, being
^i^h^lie called and examined* to exercise the judgments of the Church after a
lawful manner, upon those look the 1. (...) upon this confess.
which are guilty of manifest cr^mes in manners of in d^c^^^ne, and to
pronounce the sentence of excommunication against them that are stubborn, and
again to al solue and pardon them that do repeat. That these things may be
done (...) there be also Consistories appointed in our (...).

We said in the (...) the Church, that there be many in this visible (...) who
notwithstanding in outward (...) do in (...) the true Doctrine. We conde^^^
(...) who s^igned that their ministry ^s not (...) Also we condemn that
(...) which (...) that to be the visible Church, w^^rein ^ll ar^ holy. And we
confess that we are so (...) visible Church in this life, as our Lord says*
Mat. ^2. The kingdom of God, is like unto a draw net, (...) into (...)
w^^rein (...) are gathered both good and bad* but yet they which become enemies
to the true doctrine, cease to be members of this visible congregation,
according to that saying: Is any man teach another Gospel, let him be
acc^^sed.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of the chief Bishop.
THere be those that attribute this to the Bishop of Rome, that he is the head
of the Universal Church, and that he has power in earth, not only to
ordeine civil kingdoms, and to govern all Ecclesiastical persons and
matters, but also to command the Angels in heaven, to deliver souls out of
Purgatory, and to bless, or deliver whom it pleases him. But we acknowledge,
that if the Bishop of Rome were a godly man, and did teach the gospel of
Christ, according to the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, then he had a
ministry of high authority in this earth, to wit, a ministry of remitting
and reteining sins, then which ministry there is nothing greater or more
excellent in this earth. But he alone has not this ministry, but he has it
in common with all those, who by a lawful calling do preach the Gospel of
Christ. For the ministry of remitting or reteining sins, which otherwise is
called the key of the kingdom of heaven, is not given to the free power of the
person of men, but it is so neerelie annexed to the word of the gospel, that
so many as do preach the Gospel, may truly be said to remit, and to retain
sins, to wit, to remit their sins, who by faith do receive the Gospel; to
retain theirs, that do contemn the Gospel. Mar. 16. Preach the Gospel to
every creature. He that shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but he
that will not believe, shall be damned. Hilarie, De Trinit, lib. 6. says. The
father revealed it to Peter, that he should say, thou art the Son of God,
Therefore upon this rock of Confession is the Church builded: this faith is the
foundation of the Church: whatsoever this faith shall loose or bind in earth,
shall be loosed or bound in heaven. Chrysostom says: They which bear the
keys be the priests, to whom the word of teaching, and interpreting the
Scriptures, is committed. Now the keie is the word of the knowledge of the
Scriptures, by which keie the truth is opened to men. Augustine, De Doct^.
Christ. Lib. 1. Cap. 18. says: These keys did he give to the Church, that
whatsoever it loses in earth, should be loosed in heaven: to ^it, that
whosoever would not believe, that his sins are forgiven hi^ in the Church,
they should not be forgiven to him: but whosoever should believe, and being
corrected does turn from his sins, being placed in the lap of the Church,
should, by the same faith and correction be healed. Ambrose says, Sins are
remitted by the word, whereof the Leuite is the interpreter or expounder.
Bernard, in epist. ad Eug. says. The true success^^er of Paull will sat with
Paull, Not that we have dominion over your says, but we are helpers ^f your
joy. The heirs of Peter will hear Peter, saying: Not as though ye were Lords
over Gods heritage, but that ye may be ensamples to the flock. Thomas, in
Summa sua, part, 3. in addit. q. 6. art. 6. says: Because the Church is
founded upon Faith, and the Sacraments, therefore it does not pertain to the
ministers of the Church to make new Articles of Faith, or to set a part those
which are made, neither to appoint new Sacraments, or to take away those,
which are appointed: but this is proper to that excellency of power, which i^
due to Christ alone, who is the foundation of the Church. And therefore, as the
Pope cannot dispense, that any one may be saved without Baptism, so can he
not dispense with any to be saved without confession, because that he binds
by force of a Sacrament. And although Thomas have his opinions, touching
confession, yet this which he says, It does not pertain to the Ministers of
the Church (among whom he reckons the Pope) to make new Articles of Faith,
and to appoint new Sacraments, is in deed an Apostolic and Catholic
judgment. For no other ministry does perteine to the ministers of the
Church, which have their calling from Christ, then that which we ment^oned
before, and which the Apostles of Christ, themselves did execute, touching the
remittting and reteining of sins. Therefore if any thing more then this
ministry be attributed to the Bishop of Rome, this is either given unto him
by man's ordinances, or else it is feigned by the Monks and other flatterers,
against the authority of the word of God.

Of the Church.
Art. 31.
WE believe and co^f^sse, that there is one holy Catholic, and Apostolic
Church, according to the Creed of the Apostles, and the Nicene Creed. 2. That
this Church is so governed of the holy Ghost, that although he suffer it to be
weak in this earth, yet he does ^lwaies preserve it, that it do not perish
either by errors* or by sins. 3. That in this world many naughty men and
hypocrites, are mingled with this Church. 4. That these naughty men and
hypocrites, if by a lawful calling they shall take vponthem the ministry of
the Church, shall not of themselves any whit hinder the truth of the
Sacraments, except they pervert the ordinance of Christ, and teach wicked
things. 5. That in this Church there is true remission of sins. 6. That this
Church Look the ^. obseruat. upon this confess.
has authority to bear witness of the holy Scripture. 7. That this Church
has authority look the ^. ^bser^at.
to judge of all doctrines, according to that, Try the spirits, whether they be
of God. And* Let the other judge. 8. That this Church has authority * to
interpret the scripture.

But where this Church is to be sought, and whether her authority be limited
within certain bounds, diverse men do judge diversely. But we think, that
men are to judge, by the authority, both of the holy Scripture, and also of
the ancient Fathers, that the true Catholic, and Apostolic Church, is not
tied to one certain place or nation, nor to one certain kind of men, but
that it is in that place or nation, where the Gospel of Christ is sincerely
preached* and his Sacraments rightly administered, according to Christ his
institution. Joan. 10. I have said, ye are Gods: He called them Gods, unto
whom the word of God was given, etc. Therefore there is the people or Church
of God, where the word of God is preached. John. 15. Now you are clean,
through the word, which I have spoken to you. Therefore the word of Christ,
which is the Gospel, does declare where that Church is, which is clean in
the sight of God: Romans 1. The Gospel is the power of God to salvation, to
every one that believes. Therefore where the Gospel is, which is
acknowledged by faith, there God has his Church, wherein he i^ effectual unto
eternal life. Chrysostom in his commentaries upon Matthew, Cap. 24. hom. 49.
says. Therefore (...) this time all Christians must go to the Scriptures:
because that (...) this time, since heresy possessed those Churches, there can
be no ^ria^ of true Christianity, neither can there be any other refuge for
Christians, that would willingly know the truth of faith, but only the
^i^ine Scriptures. And a little after, Therefore he that will kn^^ which is the
true Church of Christ, whence may he know it, but only by the Scriptures?
Augustine, Tom. 2. Epist. 166. says. I^ the Scriptures we have learned Christ,
in the Scriptures we hau^ learned to know the Church: these Scriptures we have
in common: why do we not in them ret^ine in common both Christ and the Church?
And again, Tom. 7. in Epist. contra Epist. Peti^iani Donatistae, cap. 2. 3.
and 4. It is a question between up and the Donatistes, where the Church is.
What then shall we does shall we seek the Church in our own words, or in the
words of his head* in our Lord Jesus Christ? I think that we ought to seek
it rather in his words, who is the truth, and does best of all know his bodi^.

Now that which is affirmed, that the Church has author^ti^ to bear witness of
the holy Scripture, to interpret the Scripture, and to judge of all
doctrines, it is not so to be understood, that the Church has absolute
authority to determine what she lists, and also, if it please her, to change
the Scripture, and to feign a new doctrine, and to appoint new worships of
God; but that the Church, as the Spouse of Christ, ought to know the voice of
her husband, and that she has received of her husband a certain rule, to wit,
the Prophetical and Apostolical preaching, confirmed by miracles from heaven,
according to the which she is bound to interpret those places of the
Scripture, which seem to be obscure, and to judge of doctrines. Psalm. 119. Thy
word is a light unto my feet. Romans 3. Having gifts, that be diverse,
according to the grace that is given unto us, whether we have prophecy,
according to the proportion of Faith, etc. 2. Pet. 1. We have a more sur^ ^orde
of the Prophets, to the which ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light,
that shines in a dark place, etc. Origin upon Ierem. Hom. 1. It is necessary
for us to call the holy Scriptures to witness: for our meanings and
interpretations have no creditte, without these witnesses. Jerome upon Math.
23. That which is spoken without authority of the Scriptures, is as easily
contemned, as it is spoken. And August. De Nupt. and Concup. Lib. 2. Cap. 23.
says, This contouersie seeks a Judge. Therefore let Christ judge, and let
him show, what thing it is that his death does profit. This, says he is my
blood, And a little after: Together with him let the Apostle judge, because
that Christ himself also speaks in the Apostle, he cries out and says
touching God the Father. He which spared not his ^wn^ (...) etc. Wherefore the
Church has so far authority to judge of doctrine, that notwithstanding she
must keep her self within the bonds of the holy Scripture, which is the
voice of her husband, from which voice it is not lawful for any man, no not
for an Angel, to depart.

OVT OF THE CONFSSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of the Church.
Art. 15.
FVrthermore we will show, what is taught among us, ^oth touching the Christian
Church, and also touching the holy Sacraments: and touching the Church, this
is it that we teach. The Church or congregation of Christ, (which as yet is in
this world as a stranger from god) is the fellowshippe and company of those,
which addict them selves to Christ, and do altogether trust and rest in his
protection: among whom notwithstanding many shall be mingled, even to the end
of the world, who although they profess the Christian faith, yet they have it
not in deed. This has our Lord taught sufficiently, Math. 13. by the
parable both of the cockle, and also of the Net cast into the sea, i^ the which
the bad fishes are caught with the good. Also, Math. 22. by the parable of the
King, inuiting all men to the marriage of his Son, and afterward, casting him
out, being bound hand and foot, into utter darkness, which had not a wedding
garment. Now these places of Scripture, wherein the congregation of Christ is
commended, to be the Spouse of Christ, for the which he has given himself.
Ephesians. 5. The house of God, the pillar and ground of truth. 1. Tim. 3. Also, The
holy hill of Sion, the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and
the congregation of the first borne, which are written in heaven: I say, all
these places of Scripture do properly pertain to them, who for their sincere
faith* are truly, and in the sight of God, reckoned among the children of
God. For seeing that in these alone the Lord does fully reign, these only,
if we will speak properly, are called the Church of Christ, and the communion
of Saints, in which sense also the name of the Church is expounded, in the
common Articles of faith, those false Christians being excluded, which are
mingled amongst them. Furthermore, the holy Ghost himself does govern this
Church or congregation, and remains with it, as Christ does even to the end
of the world, and does sanctify it, that at the length he may present it unto
himself without spo^or wrinckle, as it is said, Ephesians. 5. Also, this is that
Church which all men are commanded to hear, and he that will not hear her,
is to to be counted as an heathen and Publicane.

And although that, to wit, faith it self, can not be seen, whereby this
Congregation has obtained, to be called the Church and company of Christ, yet
the fruits of that faith may be seen and known, and of them a certain
Christian conjecture be taken. These fruits be cheeflie, a bold profession of
Faith, a true love offering it self to do humble service to all men, a
contempt of all things. Seeing therefore that these be the proper fruits,
wheresoever the holy Gospel and the Sacraments be exercised, thereupon it
may easily be known, where, and who be the Christian Church; so much as is
necessary for us to preserve among us the christian communion, and that in the
same we may be instructed, admonished, and help one an other, according to the
commandment of Christ.

Furthermore, seeing this congregation is the very kingdom of God, wherein
all things ought to be appointed in best order, she has all kind of offices
and ministers: for ^he is the body of Christ himself, compacted of many
members, whereof every one have their proper work. Therefore whosoever do
faithfully discharge such functions* and do earnestly labor in the word
and doctrine, they do represent the Church, and may do all things in the name
thereof, so that whosoever shall either despise them, or refuse to hear them,
he may worthily be said to despise the Church it self.

Now with what spirit or with what spiritual authority we do believe that
they are* furnished, we have declared before, out of most firm foundations of
the Scripture, where we showed, what we thought of the spiritual or
Ecclesiastical offices, and dignity. For they cannot by any means represent
the Church of Christ, or do any thing in the name thereof, which are not
Christ's, and therefore propound no Christian things, but whatsoever is
contrary to the doctrine of Christ. For although it may be, that even the
wicked may teach some good thing, and may also prophecy in the name of
Christ (after their example, to whom the Lord himself does witness that he will
once in time to come say, That he never knew them) Yet it cannot be, that they
can discharge the duty of the Church of Christ, and are to be heard, in his
stead, which do not propound the voice of their husband Christ, although
otherwise they should think ^right of faith, and be counted amongst the
members of the Church, as it does often times falout, when as the very
Children of God are wrapped in errors, and do also publish the same. For the
Church of Christ is wholly addicted to Christ himself. Therefore that cannot
be counted a doctrine, precept, or commandment of the true Church, except it
be the same with the doctrine, precept, and commandment of Christ himself.
And whosoever propounds any other thing in her name (although he were an
Angel from heaven) he is not to be heard: as also the Church in those things
does represent nothing less the^ the Church of Christ.

THE ELEVENTH SECTION. OF THE MINISTERS OF THE CHVRCH, AND OF THEIR CALLING AND
OFFICE.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the ministers of the Church, their institution, and Offices. CHAP. 1^.
GOD has always used his ministers, for the gathering or erecting up of a
Church to himself, and for the governing and preservation of the same, and
still he does, and always will use them, so long as the Church remains on
the earth. Therefore the first beginning, institution, and office of the
ministers, is a most ancient ordinance of God himself, not a new devise
appointed by men. True it is, that God can by his power, without any means,
take unto himself a Church amongst men, but he had rather deal with men by
the ministry of men. Therefore ministers are to be considered, not as
ministers by themselves alone, but as the ministers of God, even such as by
whose means god does work the salvation of mankind. For which cause we give
counsel to beware, that we do not so attribute the things that pertain to our
conversion and instruction unto the secret virtue of the holy ghost, that we
make frustrate the ecclesiastical ministry. For it behooves us always to
have in Romans 10.
mind the words of the Apostle, How shall they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? Therefore faith is
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Ioh. 3.
And that also which the Lord says, in the Gospel. Verelie, verily I say
unto you, he that receives those that I shall send, receives me, and he that
receives me, receives him that sent me. Likewise that a man of Macedonia
appeared in a vision to Act. 16.
Paull being then in Asia, and said unto him, Come unto Macedonia, and help us.
And in another place the same Apostle 1. Cor. 3.
says, We together are Gods laborers, and ye are his husbandry, and his
building. Yet on the other side we must take heed, that we do not attribute
too much to the ministers and ministry, Joan. 6.
herein remembering also the words of our Lord in the Gospel: No man comes to
me except the Father, which has 1. Cor. 3.
sent me, draw him. And the words of the Apostle, Who then is Paull, and who
is Apollo, but the ministers by whom you believed? and as the Lord gave unto
every one. Therefore neither is he that planteth any thing, nor he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. Therefore let us believe that God
does teach us by his word outwardly by his ministers, and does inwardly
move and persuade the hearts of his Elect unto belief by his holy spirit:
and that therefore we ought to render all the glory of this wholl benefit
unto God. But we have spoken of this matter in the 1. Chapter of this our
declaration.

God has used for his ministers, even from the beginning of the world, the
best and most excellent men in the world (for howsoever diverse of them were
^ut simple, for worldly wisdom or Philosophy, yet sure in true divinity they
were most excellent) namely the Patriarchs, to whom he spoke very often by
his Angels. For the Patriarks were the Prophets or teachers of their age,
whom god for this purpose would have to live many years, that they might be,
as it were Fathers, and lights of the world. After them followed M^se^ together
with the Prophettes, that were most famous throughout the wholl world. Besides
after all these ou^ heavenly Father sent his only begotten son, the most
absolute and perfect teacher of the world, in whom is hidden the wisdom of
God, and from him derived unto us by that most holy, perfect, and most pure
doctrine of all other. For he chose unto himself Disciples, whom he made
Apostles. And they going out into the wholl world gathered together Churches
in all places by the preaching of the Gospel. And after they ordained pastors
and doctors in all Churches, by the commandment of Christ, who by such as
succeeded them, has taught and governed the Church unto this day. Therefore God
gave unto his ancient people the Patriarks, together with Moses and the
Prophets: so also to his people under the new covenant he has sent his only
begotten Son, and with him the Apostles and teachers of his Church.

Furthermore, the ministers of the new covenant are termed by diverse names, for
they are called Apostles, Prophets Evangelists, Bishops, Elders, Pastors, and
doctors. The Apostles 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
remained in no certain place but gathered together diverse Churches throughout
the wholl world: which Churches when they were once established, there ceased
to be any more Apostles, and in their places were particular parsons appointed
in every Church. The Prophe^tes in old time did foresee and foretell things to
come, and besides did interpret the scriptures look the 1. obseru. up on this
confession.
and such are found some amongst us at this day. They were called Evangelists,
which were the penners of the history of the Gospel, and were also Look the
2 obseruat.
preachers of the Gospel of Christ, as the Apostle Paull gives in charge unto
Timothy, To fulfill the work of an Evangelist. Look the 3. obseru.
Bishops were the overseers and the watchmen of the Church, which did distribute
food and other necessities of the Church. The Elders were the ancients and as
it were the senators and Fathers of the Church, governing it with the wholesome
counsel. The Pastors did both keep the Lords flock, and also look the 4.
obseru.
provide things necessary for it. The Doctors do instruct, and teach the true
faith and godliness. Therefore the Church ministers that now are, may be called
Bishops, Elders, Pastors and Doctors. But in process of times there where
many more names of Ministers brought into the Church. For some were created
Patriarchs, others Archbishoppes, others suffragans, other Metrapolitanes,
Archpriests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acol^thes, Exorcists, Queristers, Porters,
and I know not what a rabble besides Cardinals, Prouosts, and Priors, Abbots
greater and lesser, gouerners higher and lower. But touching all these we pa^^^
not a rush what they have been in time paste, or what they are now. It is
sufficient for us, that, forasmuch as concerns Ministers, we have the
doctrine of the Apostles.

We therefore knowing certeinelie that Monks and the orders or sorts of them
are neither instituted of Christ, no^ ofhis Apostles, we teach that they are so
far from being profitable, that they are pernicious and hurtful unto the
Church of God. For although in former times they were somewhat tolerable (when
they lived solytarilie, getting their livings with their own hands, were
burdensome to none, but did in all places obey their Pastors, even as lay men,
yet what kind of men they be now, all the world sees and perceives. They
pretend, I know not what vows, but they lead a life altogether disagreeing
from their vows: so that the very best of them may justly be numbered among
those, ^. The^^. ^.
of whom the Apostle speaks: We hear say that there be some among you which
walk inordinatelie and work not at all, but are busy bodies, etc. Therefore
we have no such in our Churches: and besides we teach, that they should not be
suffered to rout in the Churches of Christ.

Furthermore, no man ought to usurp the honor of the Ecclesiastical
ministry, that is to say, greedily to pluck it to him by bribes, or any
evil shifts, or of his own accord. But let the ministers of the Church be
called and chosen by a lawful and ecclesiastical election and vocation, that
is to say, let them be chosen religiously of the Church, or of those which
are appointed thereunto by the Church, and that in due order, without any
tumult, seditions, or contention. But we must have an eye to this, that not
every one that will be elected, but such men as are fit, and have sufficient
learning, especially in the Scriptures, and godly eloquence, and wise
simplicity, to conclude, such men as be of good report for a moderation and
honesty of life, according to that Apostlike rule which Saint Paull gives in
the 1. to Timothy, 3. cap. and 1. to Titus. And those which are chosen, let
them be ordained of the Elders, with public prayer, and laying on of hands.
We do here therefore condemn all those, which run of their own accord being
neither chosen, sent, nor ordained. We do also utterly disalow unfit ministers,
and such as are not furnished with gifts requisite for a Pastor. In the mean
time we are not ignorant that the innocent simplicity of certain Pastors in
the primitive Church, did sometimes more profit the Church, then the manifold,
exquisite, and nice learning of other some, that were over lofty and high
minded. And for this cause we also at this day do not reject the honest
simplicity of certain men, which yet is not destitute of all knowledge and
learning.

The Apostles of Christ do term al those which believe in Christ, Priests,
but not in regard of their ministry, but Exodus 1^. 2. Pet. 1. Apoc. ^.
because that all the faithful being made Kings and Priests by Christ, may
offer up spiritual sacrifices unto God. The ministry then and priesthood are
things far different one from the other. For priesthood, as we said even
now, is common to all christians, so is not the ministry. And we have not
taken away the ministry from the Church* because we have thrust the popish
priesthood out of the Church of Christ. For surely in the new covenant of
Christ, there is no longer any such priesthood, as was in the ancient Church
of the Jews, which had an external anointing, Heb. ^.
holy garments, and very many ceremonies, which were figures and tipes of
Christ, who by his coming fulfilled and abolished them. And he himself
remains the only priest for ever: and we do not communicate the name of
Priest to any of the ministers, lest we should detract any thing from Christ.
For the Lord himself has not appointed in the Church any Priests of the new
Testament, who having received authority from the Suffragane may offer up the
host every day, that is, the very flesh and the very blood of our
savior, for the quick and the dead, but ministers which may teach, and
administer the sacraments. Paull declaring plainly and shortly, what we are
to think of the ministers of the new Testament, or of the Church of Christ,
and what we must attribute unto them, Let a man, says he, thus account of us,
as of the ministers 1. Cor. 4.
of Christ, and dispensers of the mysteries of God. So that the Apostle his
mind is, that we should esteem of ministers, as of ministers. Now the
Apostle calls them as it were vnderrowers, which should only have an eye
unto their master and chief governor, and be as men that live not to
themselves, nor according to their own will, but unto others, to wit, their
Masters, at whose commandment and beck they ought to be. For the minister of
the Church is commanded wholly and in all parts of his duty, not to please
himself, but to execute that only, which he has received in commandment
from his Lord. And in this same place, it is expresselie declared, who is our
Master, even Christ, to whom the ministers are in subjection in all the
functions of their ministry. And to the end that he might the more fully
declare their ministry, he adds further that the ministers of the Church
are stewards and dispensers 1. Cor. 4.
of the mysteries of God, Now the mysteries of God, Paull in many places, and
especially in the 3. to the Ephesians. does call the gospel of Christ. And the
Sacraments of Christ are also called mysteries of the ancient writers.
Therefore for this purpose are the ministers called, namely to preach the
gospel of Christ unto the faithful, and to administer the Sacraments, We
read also in another place in the gospel, Luc. 1^.
of the faithful and wise servant, that his Lord set him over his family, to
give food unto it in due season. Again, (in an other place of the gospel) a
man goes into a strange country, and leaving his house, gives unto his
servants authority therein, commits to them his substance, and appoints
every man his work.

This is now a fit place to speak somewhat also of the power and office of
the ministers of the Church. And concerning their power, some have entreated
and disputed over Luc. 22. Mat. 18.
busily, and would bring al things even the very greatest under their
jurisdiction, and that against the commandment of God who forbad unto his all
dominion, and highly commended humility: In deed there is one kind of power
which is a mere and absolute power, called the power of right. According to
this power all things in the wholl world are subject unto Christ, who is Lord
of al: even as he himself Math. 28. 21 Apoc. 23. and 22.
witnesses, saying: All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. And
again, I am the first, and the last, and behold I live for ever, and I have
the keys of hell, and of death. Again, He has the keie of David, which
opens, and no man shuts, shuts, and (...) man opens. This power the
Lord reserueth to himself, and does not transfer it to any other, that he
might sit idly by, and look on his ministers while they wrought. For Isaiah
says, I will put the keie of the house of David upon his shoulder. And
again, Whose government shall be upon his shoulders. For he does not lay the
government on other men's shoulders, but does still keep, and use his own
power, thereby governing all things. Furthermore, there is an other power of
duty, or ministerial power limited ^ut by him, who has full and absolute
power and authority. And this is more like a ministry then dominion. For we
see that some Master does give unto the steward of his house authority* and
power over his house, and for that cause delivers him his keys, that he may
admit or exclude such as his Master will have admitted, or excluded. According
to this power, does the minister by his office, that which the Lord has
commanded him to do, and the Lord does ratify and confirm that which he
does, and will have the deeds of his ministers, to be acknowledged and
esteemed as his own deeds unto which end are those speeches in the Gospel:
I will give unto Math. 16.
thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou bindest, or
loosest in earth, shall be bound, and loosed in heaven. Again, Whose sins
soever ye remit, they shall beremitted, and Ioh. 20.
whose sins soever yea retain, they shall be retained. But if the the
minister deal not in all things as his Lord has commanded him, but pass
the limits and bonds of faith, then the Lord does make void that which he
does. Wherefore the Ecclesiastical power of the ministers of the Church, is
that function whereby they do indeed govern the Church of god, but yet so as
they do al things in the Church as he has prescribed in his word: which things
being so done the faithful do esteem them as done of the Lord himself: but
touching the keys we have spoken somewhat before.

Now the Look the 5. obseruat. upon this confess.
power that is given to the Ministers of the Church is the same and alike in
all: and in the beginning the Bishops, or Elders, did with a common consent and
labor, govern the Church, no man lifted up himself above an other, none
usurped greater power or authority over his fellow Bishops, for they remembered
the words of the Lord, He which Luc ^^.
willbe the chiefest among you, let him be your servant: they kept in
themselves by humility, and did mutuallie aid one another in the government
and preservation of the Church. Notwithstanding, for orders sake, some one of
the ministers, called the assembly together, propounded unto the assembly the
matters to be consulted of, gathered together the voices or sentences of the
rest, and to be brief, as much as lay in him, provided that there might arise
no confusion. So did S. Peter, as we read in the Acts: who yet for all that was
neither above the rest, nor had greater authority then the rest. Veri^ true
therefore is that saying of Cyprian the Martyr, in his book, De simpl. Cler.
The same doubtless were the rest of the Apostles that Peter was, having an
equal fellowship with him both in hono^^ and power, but the beginning hereof
proceeds from unity, to signify unto us that there is but one Church. Saint
Ierom upon the epistle of Paull to Titus has a sayingnot much unlike this.
Before that by the instinct of the devil there was partaking in religion, the
Churches were governed by the common advise of the Priests: but after that
every one thought, that those whom he had baptized, were his own and not
Christ's, It was decreed, that one of the priests should b^ chosen and set over
the rest, who should have the care of the whole church laid upon him, and by
whose means al schisms should be removed. Yet Ierom does not avouch this as
an order set down of God. For straight way after he adds, Even as, says
he, the priests knew by the continual custom of the Church, that they were
subject to him that is set over them: So the Bishops must know that they are
above the priests, rather by custom, then by the prescript rule of Gods truth,
and they should have the government of the Church in common with them. Thus
far Jerome. Now therefore no man can forbid by any right that we may return
to the old appointement of God, and rather receive that, then the custom
devised by men.

The offices of the ministers are diverse, yet notwithstanding most men do
restreine them to two, in which all the rest are comprehended; to the teaching
of the Gospel of Christ, and to the lawful administration of the Sacraments.
For it is the duty of the ministers to gather together a holy assembly,
therein to expound the word of God, and also to apply the general doctrine
to the state and use of the Church, to the end, that the doctrine which they
teach, may profit the hearers, and may build up the faithful. The ministers
duty, I say, is, to teach the unlearned, and to exhort, yea and to urge them
to go forward, in the way of the Lord, who do stand still or linger, and go
flowlie forward: moreover to comfort, and to strengthen those, which are
fainthearted, and to arm them against the manifold temptations of Satan, to
rebuke offenders, to bring home them that go astraie, to raise up them that
are fallen, to convince the gainsaiers, to chase away the wolf from the
Lords flock, to rebuke wickedness and wicked men, wisely and severely, not
to wink at, nor to pass over great wickedness, and besides to administer the
sacraments, and to commend the right use of them, and to prepare al men by
wholesome doctrine to receive them, to keep together all the faithful in an holy
unity, and to meet with schisms. To conclude, to catechize the ignorant, to
commend the necessity of the poor to the Church, to visit and instruct those
that are sick or entangled with diverse temptations, and so to keep them in the
way of life. Lasty, to look diligently, that there be public prayers, and
supplications made in time of necessity, together with fasting, that is, an
holy abstinency, and most carefully to look to those things which belong to the
tranquillity, safe tie, and peace of the Church. And to the end that the
minister may perform al these things the better, and with more ease, it is
required in him that he be one that fears God, prays diligently, gives
himself much to the reading of the Scripture, and in all things, and at all
times i^ watchful, and does show forth a good example unto al men of holiness of
life. And seeing there must needs be a discipline in the Church, and that
among the ancient fathers excommunication was in use, and there were
ecclesiastical judgments amongst the people of God, wherein this discipline
was exercised by godly men, it belongs also to the ministers duty for the
edifying of the church, to moderate this discipline, according to the condition
of the time and public estate, and according to necessity: whereas this rule
is always to be holde^, that Al things ought to be done to edification,
decently, honestly, without any oppression or tumult. For ^.
the Apostle witnesses, that power was given to (...) of God, to edify, and
not to destroy. And the Lord himself for ^ad the cock^^ (...) be plucked up
in the Lords field, because there would be danger (...) ^^e wheat also should
be plucked up with i^.

But as for the error of the Donatists* we do here utterly derest it, who
esteemed and judged the doctrine and administration of the sacraments to be
either effectual, or not effectual, by the good or evil life of the Ministers.
For we know that the voice of Christ is to be heard, though it be out of the
mouths of evil ministers forasmuch as the Lord himself said, Do as they
command you, but according to their Mat. 22.
works do ye not. We know that the Sacraments are sanctified by their
institution, and also by the word of Christ, and that they are effectual to
the Godly, although they be administered by ungodly ministers. Of which matter
Augustine, that blessed servant of God, did reason diversely out of the
scriptures against the Donatists, yet notwithstanding there ought to be a
straight discipline amongst the ministers. For their must be diligent inquiry
in the Synodes touching the life and Doctrine of the ministers.

Those that offend are to be ^ebuked of the seniours, and to be brought into
the way, if they be not past recovery, or else to be deposed, and as wolves to
be driven from the Lords flock, by the true Pastors, if they be E curable.
For, if they once be false teachers, they are in no wise to be tolerated:
neither do we disalow of general councels if that they be taken up according
to the example of the Apostles, to the salvation of the Church and not to the
destruction thereof.

The faithful ministers also are worthy (as good work men) of their reward,
neither do they offend when as they receive a stipend and all things that be
necessary for themselves and their family. For the Apostle shows that these
things are for just cause offered of the Church, and received of the
ministers, they are likewise of right. 1 Cor. 9. and 1. Tim. 5. and in other
places also.

The Anabaptists, likewise are confuted by this Apostolical doctrine, who
condemn and rail upon those ministers which live upon the ministry.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the ministry of the word:
Art. 15.
WE confess that the Ministers of the Church, are (as Paull terms them) the
fellow laborers of God, by whom he does dispense both the knowledge of
himself, and also remission of sins, turn men to him self, raise them up,
comfort them, and also terrify and judge them: yet so, that notwithstanding
we do ascribe all the virtue and efficacy that is in them unto the Lord, and
give a ministry only to the ministers. For it is certain that this virtue
and efficacy is not to be tied to any creature at all, but is to be dispensed
by the free favor of God, in what manner and to whom it pleases him. For he
that waters is nothing, neither he that planteth, but God that gives the
increase.

Ecclesiastical power.
Art. 16. *Look the 1. obseru. up on this confess.
NOw the authority of the word, and feeding the flock of the lord (which
properly is the power of the keys) prescribing to all, as well high as low,
what to do, ought to be sacred and inviolable: and is to be committed only to
those that are chosen and fit to discharge it, and that either by the divine
service of God, or by the certain and advised suffrage of the Church, or by
their sentence, to whom the Church has assigned this charge.

Art. 17.
The choosing of Ministers.
FOr this function is to be given to none, whom the ministers, and they to
whom this charge is committed by the Church, do not find and judge to be
skillful in the law of God, to be of a blameles life, and to bear a singular
affection to the name of Christ* which, seeing it is the true election of God,
is rightly allowed by the consent of of the Church, Look the 2. obseru.
and by the laying on of the hands of the Priest.

The head and shepherd of the Church.
Art. 1^.
FOr Christ himself is the true head of his Church, and he alone is the
Shepherd, who gives governors, Pastors and Doctors, that by the outward
administration of the keys, they may rightly and lawfully use that
authority. Wherefore we do not acknowledge those that are Shepheardes, and that
head of Rome, which have the bare title and nothing else.

Art. 19.
The duties of Ministers.
THe chief duty of this function is, to preach repentance and remission of
sins through Christ, without ceasing to pray for the people, to give
themselves very diligently without wearines to holy studies, and to the
word of God, and with the word of God, as with the sword of the spirit, and
by all kind of means to persecute Satan with deadly hatred, and to weaken
his force, to defend those citizens of Christ which are sound, and to admonish,
reprehend, and punish those that are infected and by a Godly consent of them
which are chosen out of the ministers and the magistrate, by discipline to shut
out, or by some other fit mean to mulct those, which proceed further in
wickedness, till such time as they do repent and may be saved. For that is the
returning to the Church for a diseased Citizen of Christ, if having changed his
mind and endeavor (whereunto all this discipline does tend) he acknowledge
and confess his error, and does now of his own accord require wholesome
discipline, and by his new endeavor of godliness does rejoice all the godly.

Out of the declaration of the same confession, which Luther him*selfe
approved by his letters, Anno 1537.
WE believe and confess, that mankind, by the only mercy of God, is
justified by faith through Christ, and that the almighty God, by the outward
preaching of the gospel, and the holy seals, does declare, and set before
our eyes that salvation and happiness, which Christ, without any work or merit
of ours, has purchased for us, and given frelie unto us. But we are unjustly
suspected of some as though we did attribute nothing to the preaching of the
outward word, and to the sacraments, or as though we did take that from them,
which the Lord himself does attribute unto them, and by this means should
overthrow and abolish the ordering and guiding of those things wh ch perteine
to the Church: whereas on the contrary side we have a chief regard unto this
that we neither attribute too much nor too little to these things. For we have
learned both out of the holy scriptures, and also out of the Catholic doctor
Austine, That the soul is in miserable servitude if any man take or worship
the signs in stead of the things which they signify. And again, That it is
an error, if any man interpret them vnfruitfullie. We have learned also that
the external gifts are not to be despised, because of the internal gifts:
knowing that Cornelius the Centurion was taught of God, and that yet
notwithstanding he was put over to to hear Peter the Apostle preach, and to be
baptized of him. Therefore that we may walk in the high and plain way, that
is, that we may detract nothing from the word and sacraments, which the
scripture does attribute unto them, and again that we may not give that to the
creature, which is proper to the Creator, and that the ordinance of God may not
be disanulled, but al glory may be given to God alone: to conclude, lest that
by those external things instituted of God, we should too much tie the minds
of the faithful to things created, we so believe touching the ministry of
the word and the Sacraments, as we have professed, which thing also we do
thus declare by that which follows.

Of the ministry of the word of God.
ALthough the Lord has expresselie said, No man comes to me, except my
Father which sent me, do draw him: Yet it was his will, that the Gospel of
the kingdom should be preached to all nations, and that Bishops should
discharge this duty of the ministry, with great care and diligence, and
with special watchfulnes, and be instant in season, and out of season, and by
allmeanes, to gain many unto Christ. For therefore when he was ready to
depart hence into heaven in his body, he said to his disciples: Go ye into
the wholl world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. After the which
manner also Paul the Apostle says, He that descended, is even the same that
ascended far above all heavens, that he might fill all things. And he gave
some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and Teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ.

Now the Lord does use these his Ministers to instruct his Church, so as he
uses meats to nourish us, the sower to sow seed, and Physicians to heal
our bodies. For except he himself do give power and virtue, whereby both the
meat may be turned into nourishment, and the seed may spring up, and also
the medicine may be made effectual, the outward work does nothing at all
profit: So except the Lord do give increase in the heart of the hearer, the
doctrine indeed in him which has not faith, is as it were a watring and
planting, but such as is without efficacy and unfruitful: but being received
by faith into good ground, and being trimmed by the inward husband man the
holy Ghost, does work marue^louslie, and profitte. Notwithstanding it has so
pleased the Lord to moderate the affairs of men, that although by his own
power he does all things in all men, yet he vouchsafes to use the ministers
as workers together. For that saying of Paull is evident: For we together are
Gods laborers, but he adds: Ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods building: to
wit, that we might give unto God all the virtue, efficacy, accomplishing and
perfitting of the work, and to the ministers a service only: whereupon we do
truly say with Paull: Who is Paull then? and who is Apollos? but the
ministers by whom ye believed? and as the Lord gave to every man. I have
planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. So then, neither is he
that planteth, any thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the
increase. And in this sense we do know, and willingly use these speeches,
and testimonies of the holy Scripture: I have begotten you in Christ by the
Gospel; you are the epistle of Christ written by us, not with ink, but with
the Spirit of the living God. And, Whose sins you remitte, they are remitted
to them. Again, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And
again, I send thee to the Gentiles, that thou may open their eyes. Also the
Scripture says of John Baptist, He shall turn the hearts of the fathers to
the children, etc. For when all these things be done (that is, when we are
borne again, when the holy Ghost is given to us, when our sins be forgiven
us, when faith is given us, and our eyes opened, and our hearts turned) one and
the self same Spirit (as the Apostle says) works them all, who by his grace
does lighten their hearts, and draw them unto him, and that after a common
order and mean, to wit, by the instrument or mean of his word: and yet he
might draw us without all means, and without any instrument, whether, as
much, and whom ^t pleases him, Therefore let no man glory in me^, but in him
that gives the increase. Again, let no man despise men, which are ^ent of the
Lord, of whom he p^on^unceth, He that hears you, hears me: and he that
despises you, despises me. This is our opinion touching the ministry of the
word, agreeable, as we hope, to the Scripture and sound writers: which also we
have found often in Luthers, and in his friends books.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of those that teach in the Church, and who they be that govern them. CHAP. 9.
IN the ninth place it is ^aught concerning the acknowledging of the shepherds
of souls o^ lawful ministers of sacred functions in the holy Church:
according to the degrees and orders of diverse cures, and first that these are
especial members of the holy ecclesiastical communion, and Christ his look
the 1. obseru. up on this confession. Mat. 10. Luc. 10. Io^n. 1^. 1. Cor. 4.
vicegerentes that is, they who supply his place, he that hears them, hears
Christ, he that despises them, despises Christ, and his heavenly father. For
to these is the ministry of the word and sacraments lawfully committed. But
ministers ought not of their own accordto prease forward to that calling: but
ought according to the example of the Lord and the Apostles, to be lawfully
appointed, Math. 10. Mar. 1. 6. and 3. Act. 1.
and ordained thereunto: and that after this manner, that from among a people
that is sound in religion and fears God, such men may be chosen and called
to the administration of holy functions, as are strong and mighty in faith,
fearing God, and having gifts requisite for the ministry, and be of an honest
and blameless life. And again, tha^ above all things these be proved and
tried by examination 1. Tim. 2.
whether they be such, and so afterward, prayers and ^^stings being made, they
may be confirmed or approved of the elders, Look the 2. obseru. Heb. ^.
by laying on of hands, Look the 3. obseruat.
Hereof speaks the author of the epistle to the Hebrews. Every high Priest
is taken from among men (that is to say) from among the faithful, and such as
are a spiritual priestehood.) And Paull, laying before Timothy his own
example, says, What things thou have h^^^d ^. Tim. 2.
of me before many witnesses, the same deliver to faithful men, which shall be
able to teach others also. Of such Priests or ministers and of 1. Tim. 3. Tit.
1.
making, ordeining and consecrating them, and how the ordeining of them ought to
be handled, the Apostle teaches evidently and plainly in his Epistles to
Timothy and Titus.

Therefore it is not permitted to any among us to execute the office of the
ministry, or to administer holy functions of the Lords, unless, according
to this custom of the primitive Church, and order appointed by God, he come to
this function, and be called and assigned thereunto: which thing may also
maniefestlie appear by the ancient Canons of the Church. Saint Cyprian has
in like sort set down the manner of ordaining Priests. According to these
things, the ministers of lower degree, especially they which are called Look
the 4. obseruat.
Deacons, are a long time deteyned with our Elders, and kept in exercise: and
this thing they do very seriously, making a straight trial and examination
of their faith and diligence, following herein the example of the primitive
Church, and also of Christ himself, who kept his disciples with him for the
space of three years. Also the Apostles dealt so by others, to the end that
afterward godly men and such as were illuminated with the heavenly light,
might be taken and ordained from among them to higher degrees, and to the
executing of greater functions, and that they might have testimony as well
from the common sorre, as from their Elders, that they were fit^e men, and
worthy of that place.

Together with these things it is taught, that by the executing of that charge,
wherein they be lawfully placed, they are bound to this, that they take care for
the souls of men committed to their charge, and for their everlasting
salvation, and faithfully employ their service unto them, by teaching of the
word of God and administering the sacraments according to Christ his meaning and
ordinance, that they be an example and allurement to practice all virtue, make
prayers for them, bring them out of sins and errors, and inquire after the
will of God, and search the same in the holy scriptures, by diligent reading
and continual meditation: as the Apostles also exhort men to these things:
Saint Peter writes thus, Feed the flock of God which depends 1. Pet. 5.
upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for fi^thie
lucre, but of a ready mind. In like sort Paull writes to Timothy a Ruler,
and Bishop, But be thou sober, and watch in 2. Tim. 4.
all things, suffer adversity, do the work of an Evangelist, make thy
ministry fully known, or with all diligence. Again, Be thou 1. Tim. 4.
an example to the faithful, in speech, in con^^sation of life, in love, in the
spirit, in faith, in pureness. Till I come be instant in reading, exhorting, and
teaching. Despise not the gift of grace which is in thee, which was given to
thee by prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the company of the
Eldership. These things exercise, and give thy self unto them, that all men
may see how thou pros^^^st* take 2. Tim. 3.
heed to thy self, and unto learning, and abide in these things. For in doing
this thou shall save both thy self, and them that hear thee. Such Ministers
ought also to deliver sound and wholesome doctrine such as they have received
from Christ and the Apostles, out of holy scripture, and, being all alike
minded, through one Spirit to teach the same in their sermons, according to the
ordinance of S Paull, who writes thus, Keep the true pattern of the wholesome
words, which 1. Tim. ^.
thou have heard of me, in faith and in love, which is in Jesus Christ. And
again, But abide thou in those things, that thou have learned, and are
committed unto thee, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that thou
have known the holy Scriptures of a child, which are able to make the wise
unto salvation, through the faith which is Jesus Christ. And elsewhere: charge
certain says he, that they teach no other thing.

But peculiar mention is made thereof, that they which have the spiritual
government of Churches, and do their endeavor in them, ought not themselves,
nor by others, to use civil power or constraint, to force men to believe, nor
to exercise Lordly authority over the faith and people of God, according to
the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles. The Lord spoke thus to the Apostles,
and in them to all faithful and true Preachers of the Gospel, Ye know that
they who are rulers of the people have domination ouerthem Mat. 2^.
whose rulers they are, and they that are great Lords exercise authority over
the people that are subject to them. But it shall not be so among you. But if
any man among you will be great, let him be your servant, and he that will be
chief among you or bear rule, let him be your minister. Eu^n as the Son of
man came not to be (...) 1. Pet. 5.
unto: but that he himself might minister to others, and ^^ve hi^ life, as a
price, for the redemption of many. Peter also says, N^^ as being Lords over
the people, or the Lords inheritance, but a^ they 2. Cor. 1.
who are an ensample to the flock. And Paull, Not that we are Lords over
your faith, but because we are helpers of your joy. But the gainsaiers are
with a quiet mind to be forborne, and by reasons grounded on the truth of
holy scripture to be refuted and convinced, and pains must be taken that they
2. Tim. 2. Tit. 3.
may suffer themselves, to be bettered by wholesome doctrine as the Apostle
gives in charge touching this matter.

And after other things.
Besides it is taught, that all the people ought to perform obedience (and
that with a great affection of love toward them) to such lawful, Godly, and
faithful pastors of souls and that they ought to assure and undoubtedly to
pers^^de themselves very well of them, obe^e them, ^se their help in matters
pertaining to salvation, yield them due honor, and perform all convenient
duties, toward them, where^ to they are bound by Gods word and that
according to the Math. 10. Lac 10. Ioh. 13. Heb. 13.
Doctrine of Christ who says, He that re^ei^eth you, receireth me, and he that
hears you, hears me. And also in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Obeie them
that have the oversight of you, and submi^ your selves, for they watch for your
souls, as they that must giu^ 1. Tim. 5.
account for them. And the Apostle, Elders that rule well, are worthy double
honor, especially, they that are occupied in the word and Doctrine.
Furthermore, they ought tobe provided for, that they may have a competent
living, and such things as are needful for the mantinance of the body,
according to the Lords ordinance, whereof Paull speaks 1. Cor. 9.
after this sort, The Lord has so appointed that they which preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel.

And to the end that the danger of an idle, secure, and Look the 5. obseruat
upon this confess.
Sodomiticall life may be avoided, and so they may be an example to the
flock, whereof they have charge, and that by a feeling of the burdens of this
common life, they may learn to understand the misery of men, and may by this
means be touched and have compassion on the miseries of others, for these
causes, I say, this is taught, that they, whose ability of strength is such
Look (...) 6. obseruat. upon this confess.
, especially those, on ^^^me as yet the greatest and painfullest charge of the
people, is not laid, should themselves with their own hands get their
living, that they be not a burden to the Churches, especially in the beginning
of their buildinges, and reparations, or also intimes of long persecution, or 2
Cor. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
otherwise by reason of the weaker sorce, and that they give not place to vain
vol^ptu^us, and riotous sloth, as those who faithfully follow Saint Paul's
doctrine, and who have the Lords speech before their ^^es, saying, it is a more
happy Act. 20.
thing to give, then to take.

And if so be that some one of these Pas^ors slip into sin or errors, or be
somewhat neglig^n^ in looking to this charge, he ought by the ordinary and
lawful discipline of the Church to be brought into the ware again, and to be
chastised, but if he will not repent, nor be healed* then he ought first to be
removed from the executing of his charge and from the ministry, and
afterward as an unprofitable servant, as a member which causes offense, a d^^e
braun^h, and vnsauotie salt to be cast out or banished from the fellowship of
the Church and inioying of salvation, of whom the Lord says, that this salt
is henceforth good for nothing, that which Math. 5. Joan. 15. Mat 5. 1. Tim. 5.
Paull also teaches, when he says, Those that offend (meaning those that are
elders) reprove or chastise before al men, that the rest also m^ie stand in
fear. But the people ought so to be have themselves toward such teachers,
either grown out of kind, or entangled with errors, or toward other elders
also not repenting, and excommunicated, as the holy scripture shows, and
first Christ says. Take ye heed of false Prophers, Mat. 7.
which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly are ra^ening wolves, ye
shall know ahem by their fruits, and Paull. Now Romans 16.
I beseech you breethren mark those diligently which cause division and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, for
they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies.

Of the keys of Christ. CHAP. 14.
THe fourteenth Chapter of Ecclesiastical doctrine is of the Lords keys, of
which he says to Peter, I will Math. 16.
give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and these keys are the
peculiar function or ministry and administration of Christ his power, and his
holy spirit, which power is committed to the Church of Christ, and to the
ministers thereof, unto the end of the world: that they should not only by
preaching publish the holy gospel, although they should do this especially,
that is, should show forth that word of true comfort, and the joyful message*
of peace, and new tidings of that favor which god offers: but also that to
the believing and unbelieving they should publikelie or privately denounce and
make known, to wit, to them his favor, to these his wrath, and that to al in
general, or to every one in particular, that they may wisely receive some into
the house of God, to the communion of saints and drive some out from thence,
and may so through the performance of their ministry, hold in their hand
the scepter of Christ his kingdom, and use the same to the government of
Christ his sheep.

Therefore the condition, and proper office of the keys is, first to open and
loose, that is, in Christ to appease and still the conscience of the faithful
ones, and of those that turn again by repentance: to make it known unto them
that their sins be forgiven, and to strengthen the^ in a sure hope of
salvation: and by this means to open the kingdom of heave unto them, to give
them courage against all temptations, and to stir up stedfastnes and
chearefullnes in them. And all these things are done by the faithful
Shepherds of souls in the Lords stead, not doing this of them selves, but
upon Christ his commandment, not by their own and proper virtue, but by
Christ's, and by the efficacy of his word and sacraments, as those that are
stewards and dispensers of the mysteries of God, and ministers only. In the
administration of which things, they may use some semelie and indifferent
ceremonies, that is which are no way necessary, such as are look the 6.
obseruat. 1. Cor. 4. ^. Co. 3. and 5.
to lay on hands, or to reach out the right hand, or else they may omit them.

On the other side the office and proper work of the keys of Christ is, to
shut and bind, that is, by the commandment of Christ, and the authority of
this office given by him to the Church, which is his power and scepter, to
denounce against all stubborn impenitent, unbelieving, and other such like
sinners, Gods horrible judgment and his intolerable wrath, which no nature
can abide, and his severe sentence: and so by the word of Christ, according to
the quality of the offense to reprove sin, to sever them from the
fellowship of Christ our savior, and from the fruit and participation of the
sacraments, and to cast them out of the christian Church, and in a word to
shut the kingdom of heaven upon them, and at the length to deliver them to
Satan.

This power of his scepter and spirit has the Lord granted and delivered to
the holy Apostles and in them to all ministers of Churches, lawfully ordained
that they might exercise it in his stead: and he granted it to them by these
words, As the Father has sent me, so do I send you also. And by and John 20.
by he adds these words, Rec^^ue ye the holy Ghost. If ye forgive any men
their sins, they are forgiven them, and if ye (...) any man's sins, they are
retained. Moreover a manifest example of using the power of the keys is laid
out in that sinner 1. Cor. 5.
of Corinth and others, whom Saint Paull, together with the Church of that
place, by the power and authority of our Lord Ies^ Christ and of his spirit,
threw out from thence and delivered to Satan: and contrariwise, after 2. Cor.
2.
that God gave him grace to repent, he absolved him from his sins, he took him
again into the Church to the communion of saints and sacraments, and so opened
to him the kingdom of heaven again. By this we may understand that these
keys, or this divine function of the Lords is committed and granted to
those, that have charge of souls and Look the 7. obseru.
to each several Ecclesiastic all societies, whether they besmal, or great. Of
which thing the Lord says to the Churches, Verily I say unto you, whatsoever
things ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. And straight after: For
where two or three Mat. 18.
be gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Moreover
this is likewise taught look the 8. obseru.
that every Christian, so often as he needs these keys of the Lord, ought to
require them particularly for himself of the pastors of souls of that Church
or fellowship, of which himself is a part, and to which he belongs, and
that he use them with full confidence, no other wise then if he received them
of Christ himself, seeing that Christ has delivered them unto the Pastors
and that he by no means doubt, that by the ministry of these Ioh. 20. Luc.
10. Mat. 10. Ioh. 13.
keys, through the virtue and power of Christ his sins are forgiven him, and
that he is freed from them, according to Christ his own saying, whose sins
you forgive, etc. And, He that hears you, hears me: and he that receives
you (in the be half, to wit, of the Ecclesiastical ministry, and in his
time of neeed) receives me: and contrarily, He that despises you, despises
me.

This is also taught and handled, * that the Priests ought Look the ^. obseru.
not to use these keys of the Lord otherwise, then according to the meaning and
will of Christ, which is declared expresselie in his word, and according to the
sure, flat, and express determinations of his judgment: and that they do not
any manner of way, according to men's opinions, much less after their own
mind or lust, abuse these keys: for so it would come to pass, that the keys
should swa^ue from their office. And this is to be taken heed of, that it be
not by this means fulfilled in the misusing of them, which the Lord has
said by the Prophet: For you, says he, is this commandment, Malac. 2.
O ye Priests, if you will not hear it, nor consider it in your hearts, to
give glory to my name, says the Lord of hoastes, I will send a curse upon
you, and will curse your blessings, as I have cursed them already, because you
regard not in your hearts the fear of the Lord.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
SEeing that we are not made partakers of Christ, but Art. 25.
by the Gospel, we believe that that good order, which by the authority of the
gospel is confirmed, ought to be kept sacred and inviolable: and that therefore
Pastors are necessarily required in the Church, upon whose shoulders the
burden of teaching the word, and administering of the Sacraments, does lie,
whom also we ought to honor and reverently to hear, if so be that they
being lawfully called, do discharge their duty: not as though God did stand
inneed of such stays and inferior helps, but therefore rather, because that so
it seems good to him to govern us as it were by using this bridle. Therefore
we detest all those fanaticall spirits, who, as much as in them lies, desire
that both this sacred ministry or preaching of the word and the
administration of the Sacraments, were utterly abolished.

Art. 29.
We believe that this true Church ought to be governed by that regiment or
discipline, which our Lord Jesus Christ has established, to wit so, that there
be in it Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, that the purity of Doctrine may be
retained, vices repre^sed, the poor, and others that be in misery, according
to their necessity, may be provided for and that there may be holy
meetinges, for the edifying both of small and great.

Art. 30.
We believe that all true Pastors, in what place soever they be placed, have
the same, and equal authority among themselves given unto them, under Jesus
Christ the only head, and the chief and alone universal Bishop, and that
therefore it is not lawful for any Church, to challenge unto it self
Dominion or sovereignty over any other Church.

Art. 31.
We believe that it is not lawful for any man, upon his own authority, to
take upon him the government of the Church, but that every one ought to be
admitted thereunto by a lawful election, so near as may be, and so long as
the Lord gives leave. And this exception we do expresselie add, because
that sometime (as it fell out also in our days, the state of the Church being
disturbed) it was necessary, that some should be raised up of the Lord
extraordinarily, which should repair the ruins of the decayed Church.
Nevertheless howsoever it be, we believe, that this rule is* Iwa^es to be
followed, that all Pastors and Elders should have a testimony of their
calling.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
FVrthermore (we believe) that there be diverse degrees of Ministers in the
Church: whereof some be Art. 5.
Deacons, some Priests, some Bishops: to whom is committed the office to
instruct the people, and the wholl charge, and setting forth of Religion. Yet
notwithstanding, we say, that there neither is, not can be any one man, which
may have the wholl superiority in this universal state: for that Christ is
ever present to assist his Church, and needs not any man, to supply his
room, as his only heir to all his substance, and that there can be no one
mortal creature, which is able to comprehend, or conceive in his mind the
Universal Church, that is to wit, all the parts of the world, much less
hable rightly, and duly to put them in order, and to govern them. For all
the Apostles, as Cyprian says, were of like power among themselves, and the
rest were the same, that Peter was. And that it was said indifferently to
them all, Feed ye: indifferently to them all, Go into the whole world.
Indifferently to them all, Teach ye the Gospel. And, as Hierome says, All
Bishops wheresoever they be, be they at Rome, be they at Eugubium, be they at
Constantinople, be they at Rhegium, be all of like preeminence, and of like
priesthood. And, as Cyprian says, There is but one Bishoprike, and a pee^
thereof is perfitlie and wholly holden of every particular Bishop. And
according to the judgment of the Nicene Council, we say, that the Bishop of
Rome has no more jurisdiction over the Church of God, then the rest of the
Patriarchs, either of Alexandria, or of Antioche have. And as for the Bishop of
Rome, who now calls all matters before himself alone, except he do his
duty, as he ought to do, except he minister the Sacraments, except he
instruct the people, except he warn them and teach them, we say, that he
ought not of right once to be called a Bishop, or so much as an Elder. For a
Bishop, as says Austine, is a name of labor, and not of honor: that the man,
that seeks to have preeminence, and not to profit, may understand, himself
to be no Bishop. And that neither the Pope, nor any other wordly creature can
no more be head of the wholl Church, or a Bishop over all, then he can be the
Bridegroom, the light, the salvation, and life of the church* For these
privileges, and names belong only to Christ, and be properly, and only fit
for him alone. And that no Bishop of Rome did ever suffer himself to be called
by such^ proud name and title, before Phocas the Emperors time, (who, as we
know, by killing his own Sovereign Mauritis the Emperor, did by a traiterous
villainy aspire to the E^pire.) Which was about the sixth hundred and thirteent^
year after Christ was borne. Also the Council of Carthage did circumspectly
provide, that no Bishop should be called either the highest Bishop, or chief
Priest. And therefore, sithenc^ the Bishop of Rome will now a days so be
called, and challenges unto himself an Authority, that is none of his:
besides that, he does plainly contrary to the ancient counsels, and
contrary to the old fathers: We believe, that he does give to himself, as it
is written by his own companion Gregory, a presump^uouse, a profane, a
Sacrilegious, and an antichristian name: that he is also the King of pride,
that he is look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess. Art. 6.
Lucifer, which prefers himself before his Brethren: that he has forsaken
the faith, and is the forerunner of Antichrist.

Further we say, that the Minister ought lawfully, duly, and orderly to be
preferred to that office of the Church of God, and that no man has power to
wrest himself into the holy Ministry at his own pleasure. Wherefore these
persons do us the greater wrong, which have nothing so common in their
mouths, as that we do nothing orderly, and comely, but all things
troublesomelie, and without order: And that we allow every man to be a
priest, to be a teacher, and to be an Interpreter of the Scriptures.

Art. ^.
Moreover we say, that Christ has given to his Ministers power to bind, to
loose, to open, to shut. And (we say) that the office of loosing consists
in this point: that the Minister, either by the preaching of the Gospel,
offers the merits of Christ, and full pardon to such as have lowly and
contrite hearts, and do unfeignedly repent themselves, pronouncing unto the
same a sure, and an undoubted forgiveness of their sins, and hope of
everlasting salvation: Or else that the same minister, when any have offended
their brothers minds with some great offense, or notable, and open crime,
whereby they have, as it were, bannished, and made themselves strangers from
the common fellowship, and from the body of Christ, then after perfect
amendment of such persons, does reconcile them, and bring them home again, and
restore them to the company, and unity of the faithful. We say also, that
the minister does execute the authority of binding and shutting, as often as
he shuts up the gate of the kingdom of heaven against unbelieving, and
stubborn persons, denouncing unto them Gods vengance, and everlasting
punishment: Or else, when he does quite shut the^ out from the bosom of the
church, Look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
by open excommunication. Out of doubt, what sentence soever the Minister of
God shall give in this sort, God himself does so well allow it, that
whatsoever here in earth by their means is loosed, and bound, God himself
will loose, and bind, and confirm the same in heaven. And touching the keys,
wherewith they may either shut or open the kingdom of heaven, we with
Chrysostom say, They be ^^e knowledge of the Scriptures: with Tertullian we
say, They be the interpretation of the Law: and with ^usehius we call them the
word of God. Moreover that Christ's Disciples did receive this authority, not
that they should hear the private confessions of the people, and listen to
their whisperings, as the common massing priests do every where now a days,
and do it so, as though in that one point lay all the virtue, and use of the
keys: but to the end, they should go, they should teach, they should publish
abroad the Gospel and be unto the believing a sweet sauoure of life unto
life: and unto the unbelieving, and unfaithful, Look the 2. obseru. upon this
confess.
a sauoure of death unto death: and that the minds of godly persons being
brought low by the remorse of their former life and errors, after they once
begone to look up unto the light of the Gospel, and believe in Christ, might
be opened with the word of God, even as a door is opened with a key.
Contrariwise, that the wicked and wilful, and such, as would not believe, nor
return into the right way, should be left still as fast locked, and shut up,
and, 2. Tim. 3.
as S. Paul says, wax worse, and worse. This take we to bethe meaning of the
keis: and that after this sort men's consciences be either opened, or shut. We
say that the Priest in deed i^ * Look the 3. obseru.
a judge in this case, but yet has no manner of right to challenge an authority
or power, as Ambrose says. And therefore our Savior Jesus Christ, to reprove
the negligence of the Scribes, and Pharisees in teaching, did with these words
rebuke them, saying: Woe be unto you Scribes, and Phariseis, which Luc. 11.
Mat. 21.
have taken away the keis of knowledge, and have shut up the kingdom of heaven
before men. Seeing then the keie whereby the way, and entry to the kingdom of
God is opened unto us, is the word of the Gospel, and the expounding of the
law, and Scriptures, we say plainly, where the same word is not, there is not
the keie. And, seeing one manner of word is given to all and Mat. 16.
one only keie belongs to all, we say, there is but one only power of all
ministers, as concerning opening, and shutting. And, Look the 4. obseruat.
upon this confess.
as touching the Bishop of Rome, for all that his flattering Parasi^es sing these
words in his ears, To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, (as
though these keis were fit for him alone, and for no body else) look the 4.
obseruat. upon this confess.
except he go so to work, as men's consciences may be made pliaunt, and be
subdued to the word^ of God, we deny, that he does either open, or shut, or
has the keys at all. And although he taught, and instructed the people (as
would god he might once truly do, and persuade himself, it were at the
least any piece of his duty) yet we think his keie to be never a whitte
better, or of greater force, then other men's. For who has severed him from the
rest? Who has taught him more ^unninglie to open, or better to absolve, then
his breethren?

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. 30.
WE believe, that this Church ought to be ruled and governed by that spiritual
regiment, which God himself has delivered in his word, so that there be
placed in it pastors and ministers purelie to preach, and rightly to
administer the holy Sacraments: that there be also in it seniours and Deacons,
of whom the Senate of the Church might consist, that by these means true
religion might be preserved, and sincere doctrine in every place retained and
spread abroad: that vicious and wicked men might after a spiritual manner be
rebuked, amended, and as it were by the bridle of discipline kept within their
compass: that the poor in like manner, and those that be afflicted, may be
relieved either with aid or comfort, according to the several necessity of
every one. For then shall all things in the Church be done in due and
convenient order, when faithful and godly men are chosen to have the
government of the same, even as Saint Paull has prescribed in the first to
Timothy the 3. and the first to Titus.

Art. (...)
We believe that the Ministers, Seniours, and Deacons, ought to be called to
those their functions, and by the lawful election of the Church to be
advanced into those rooms, earnest prayer being made unto God, and after the
order and manner, which is set down unto us in the word of God. This
especiall^ (...) one ought to take diligent heed of, that he do not b^
^^lawfull means thrust himself into those offices. For (...) must wait,
until he be called of God himself, that he (...) have a certain testimony
of his vocation, and may know (...) is from the Lord. Yet in what place of the
world (...) the ministers of the word of God do keep, they have (...) them
the same and equal power and authority, being (...) them equally the
ministers of Christ the only universal (...) and head of the Church.
Moreover, lest that this holy (...) of god be despised and brought into
contempt, it is the (...) of all men to have a very honorable and reverent
opin^^^^ of all the Ministers of the word, and Seniours of the Church, even
for that works sake, wherein they do labor: also to be at peace and unity
with them, and as much as possibly may be, to abstain from all manner of
quarrelings and contentions one with another.

Art. 14.
OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
COncerning Ecclesiastical orders they teach, that no man should publikelie in
the Church teach or mininister the Sacraments, except he be rightly called:
according as Saint Paull gives commandment to Titus, To ordain Elders in
every City.

Out of the Articles concerning abuses.
Of the power Ecclesiastical.
Art. 7.
THere have bin great controversies touching the power and authority of
Bishops, in which many have incommodiously mingled together the ecclesiastical
power, and the power of the sword. And out of this confusion there has sprung
very great wars and tumults, while that the Popes, bearing themselves bold
upon the power of keys, have not only appointed new kinds of worship and
service of God, and burdened men's consciences by reserving of cases and by
violent excommunications, but also have labored to transfer wordlie
kingdoms from one to an other, and to spoil Emperors of their power and
authority. These faults did godly and learned men long since, reprehended in
the Church, and for that cause, our divines were feign, for the comfort of
men's consciences, to show the difference betwe^ne the Ecclesiastic all and
civil powers. And they have taught that either of them because Gods
commandment is duetifullie to be reverenced, and honored, as the cheifest
blessings of god upon earth.

Now their judgment is this, that the power of the keys, or the power of
Bishopps, by the rule of the Gospel, is a power, or commandment from God, of
preaching the Gospel, of remitting or retaining sins, and of administering
the Sacraments. For Christ does send his Apostles with this charge, As the
father has sent me, so send I you. Receive ye the holic Ghost: whose sins ye
forgive, they are forgiven them, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained.
Mar. 16. Go and preach the Gospel to every creature, etc. This power is put
in execution, only by teaching or preaching the Gospel, and administering the
sacraments, either to many jointly, or to several persons, according to their
calling. For they be not corporal things but eternal, that are granted unto
us, as an eternal righteousness, the holy Ghost, life everlasting. These things
cannot begotten but ^y the ministry of the word and Sacraments. As Paull
says, The Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that
believes. Seeing then that the power ecclesiastical concerns things eternal,
and is put in use only by the ministry of the word, it hinders not the
political government, look the 1. obseru.
no more then does the* skill of music or singing For the civil government is
occupied about other matters, then is the Gospel Look the 2. obseru.
the Magistrate is to defend, not the minds, but the bodies, and bodelie
things, against manifest injuries, he restreineth men by the sword and
corporal punishment, that he may uphold peace, and a civil justice.
Wherefore the Ecclesiastical and civil powers are not to be confounded. The
Ecclesiastical power has a peculiar commandment to preach the Gospel and
administer the Sacraments. Let it not by force enter into another charge, let
it not turn wordlie kingdoms from the right owners. Let it not abrogate the
Magistrates laws, let it not withdraw from them lawful obedience, let it not
hinder judgments touching any civil ordinances and statutes, or contractes,
let it not prescribe laws to the magistrate, touching the for me of a common
wealth, as Christ says, My kingdom is not of this world. Again, Who made me
a judge or a di^id^r over you. And Paull to the Philip. 3. Our conversation is
in heaven. 2. Cor. ^0 The weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty in
god, to throw down the imaginations, etc. Thus do our divines discern and
distinguish the duties of each power one from the other, and do warn all men
to honor both powers and to acknowledge both to be the good gift and blessing
of God.

(...) the (...) this (...).
* If so ^e that the Bishopes have any power of the sword, they have it not as
bishops by the commandment of the Gospel, but by man's law given unto them of
Kings and Emperors, for the civil government of their goods. Yet this is a
kind of function and charge diverse from the ministry of the Gospel.

Therefore when as the question is touching the jurisdiction of Bishops, rule
and dominion must be distinguished from Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Again,
by the Gospel, or as they t^ar^e it, by Gods law, Bishops, as they be
Bishops, that is, such as have the administration of the word and sacraments
committed to them, have no jurisdiction at all, but only to forgive sin, also
to know what is true doctrine, and Look the (...).
to reject such doctrine as will not stand with the Gospel, and * to debar
from the communion of the Church such as are noto^iousl^e wicked, not by humane
force and violence, but by the word of God. And * herein of necessity the
Churches ought by the law of God to perform obedience unto them, according to
the saying of Christ, he that hears you, hears me. But when as they teach
or determine any thing contrary to the Gospel, then have the Churches a
commandment of God, which forbids obedience to them. Mat. 7. Beware of
false Prophets. Gal. 1. If an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel, let
him be accursed. 2. Cor. 13. We cannot do any thing against the truth, but for
the truth. Also, This power is given us to edify, and not to destroy. So do
the Canons command. 2. quaest. 7. Cap. Sacerdotes, and Cap. Oues. And
Augustine in his treatise against Petilians Epistle says, Neither (...) the
(...).
must we subscribe to Catholic Bishops, if they chance to erre^^ hold
opinions which he against the Scriptures. If so be * that they have any other
power or jurisdiction, in hearing and understanding certain cases, as nam^lie
of Ma^rin^ony and tithes, etc. They hold it by man's law: and that in such
places where the ordinary judges failing, the Princes are constreined, will
they, nil they, to minister justice to their subjects for mainteining of peace.

And a few lines after.
So often as we handle this place, by and by our adversaries cry out, that the
Bishops authority being ouerthrow^e, there followethdisorder, that the peoples
behavior cannot be ordered, that the common sort was lusty and vnb^^dled, and
in a word there follows a hellish life, such a one as is painted out by
Euripides in this verse. (...).

They complain also, that when as some laws are abrogated, the common people
takes it as a pat^erne, how to deal with all the rest. And so shaking of the
boodes and reins of discipline and order, they take an excessive lib^rlie to
themselves, which b^eedeth infinite offenses, ^^^^ches be tweene Princes,
scatrering of Churches. (...) wars, and desolations. To conclude, they (...)
here, what an enemy to mankind want of government is, and how many nices and
calamities arising out of this fountain, do ouerslow the (...) of man.

They aduile therefore for the (...) of these so great evils, to establish the
authority of Bishops to (...) the laws that have been in use before, and
also to bear with the inconveniences (if there be any in them) in respect of
the common weakness of men, and for quietness sake to dissemble them:
especially seeing there can no state or order be apppointed which is without
all manner of faults. Here also they bring in that old saying. That an evil
well couched, is not to be stirred. They rehearse man^e examples, how great
overthrows followed upon the remoouing of laws and the change of the form
of government, in the Cities of Athens, Sparta, Rome, and diverse others. At
Rome how often did the dissentions of the Consulles and the Tribunes stir up
great civil wars?

Though these senator like declamations be very plausible, and incense the
minds of many against us, yet they may be confuted by most true and
substantial arguments. First therefore we desire that these our accusers
would turn over the history of the Church from time to time, and that they
would not think that those notable men, the Prophets and Apostles, were
without common sense and reason and so hard hearted, that they cared not for the
peace and quiet of their country, or so barbarous and cruel, that they made
no great account of the discipline, laws, and good order of the kingdom. For
those most wise, virtuous, and grave men, Esaie, Jonas, Jeremy, John Baptist.
Look the ^. obseruat.
Christ, Peter, James, and Paull, Did both know what a great good civil
concord is, and loved their country and countriemen, and also were greatly
grieved to behold the discords and renting a sunder of those notable common
wealths. How often did Christ weep, when he spoke of the discordes and
Tu^^l^es of his nation, and the sacking of the city? Albeit therefore the
Prophets and Apostles did very well know and greatly like of those civil
duties. Yet were they constrained by the commandment of God to wa^re against
the devils kingdom, to preach heavenly doctrine, to collect a Church unto
God, and to imploye their service to the eternal salvation of a great number
of men. These are the first laws that ever were given, and are to be preferred
before all other. Th^^ sha^ have no other Gods. Thou shall not take the name of
God in vain. And this concerning the son, This is my beloved son, hear
him. These laws must needs be obeyed, The true doctrine of God and his true
worship must needs be embraced and received* and all errors, that ^end to the
dishonor of God, must be abhorred and forsaken, though all the world should
break and fall down. No humane thing must be preferred before Gods
commandment, not out life, nor friends, not the concord and agreement of
neighbors and countriemen. Moses, a very wise man, and no doubt a politic
man, lays upon the tribe of Leui the charge of teaching: and knowing what
great conflicts and dangers teachers shall meet withal, he forewarneth them of
that which he took to be most difficult of all other. And charge them that
the defense of true doctrine be most dear unto them, for so he says, Deuteronomy.
33. These shall keep thy w^rde, and shall forget their parents, children, and
brethren. And hereof we have experience, that it is no small burden that is
laid upon the teachers of the word Our men are cruelly dealt with in many
places. We are sore oppressed, and the discord in our country brings no
small g^^efe unto us. But, as was said before, the commandment of God
concerning the embracing of the true doctrine of God and renouncing of errors,
must be preferred before these great inconveniences, We are not ignorant what
wife men have written, of changing and altering laws. We remember well the
saying of Plato, that as the manners of doting parents, so the customs and
fashions of our country, though none of the wisest, are to be borne with all.
But these precepts have their bounds and limits, within which they must b^
res^rained. Bondage without (...) may be borne but idolatry is not to be borne
with, nor the light of the Gospel to be extinquished.

Again, why do our adversaries de^lame of such a moderation, unto us, when
as they in the mean while murder the Cytizens and members of Christ? They
might easily establish peace, and maintain the author of good order, if they
world abolish superstition and unjust laws. But now they contend not for the
safty of the Church, but for their own profi^tes and pleasures. They would not
have the Idolatry of the Mass nor praying to the dead spoken against:
because they cannot abide that their gain should decrease. They forbid
wandering lusts, because the vnm^ried state is best for the keeping of their
goods. These things are in all menseies. Therefore let them l^au^ of their
Senator like inuectiues, wherein, to use the old Poets words under a fair
color they seek to establish sha^eles factes. Hereto I ad^oine also the other
part of our defense both true and unfeigned. We do not shake of government to
bring in disorder. We reach that the ministry of the gospel is most highly
to be reverenced and obeyed in those things, which (according to the gospel) do
properly belong to the ministry thereof. And he is a wicked and an accursed
wretch, that does not with reverence entertain as mo^te beautiful the feet
of such is bring tidinges of peace. And as for the civil power, which be^reth
the sword, it has been highly commended and approved in our writings.
Wherefore it is a vile slander that they object against us, that we be enemies
of government.

Hitherto also belongs the ss. in the end of this 7. Article.
THey allege against us also other sayings which command obedience, Obeie
those that are set over you. How (...) must we answer, that obedience is most
necessary in such things, as belong properly to this ministry ordained of
god. For these sayings do not allot unto Bishops a kingdom without the
Gospel. Christ gave them certain commandments, and those he will have us
obeie. Again he forbad that any new found worship should be set up in the
Church, and such he will not have us yeald unto. There are certain bonds and
limits prefixed, within which both the Pastors authority and our obedience
must contain it self. But these limits do those Bishops most malapertlie
remove, who proudly challenge to themselves a triple power, whereby they
establish most pernicious errors; to wit, a princely and supreme power of
interpreting the Scriptures. Secondly a power of erecting new worship and
service of god Thirdly, a sovereign power of making laws. And thus they
transform the Church into an humane government. They imagine, forsooth, that
as the Prince or highest Judge in a Realm is to interpret the law, and as the
Prince has power to make new laws, so the Bishopes must have a power in the
Church, not unlike that. And they cannot abid^ that the Church should be
governed by the dumb writings (as they call them) of the Prophets and
Apostles, which because sometime they scarce make the matters plain enough,
which they do set down, the ambiguity bredeth dissentions and discords. Here
therefore there must needs be say they a definitive voice of some sovereign or
high Judge, to interpret that which is ambiguous and doubtfullie written. And
except all be tied to stand to their interpretation, there will be no end of
strife and controversies. Again, unless they may according as times and
occasions require make laws what a disorder would there follow? These things
are set out with big words, and they carry a show of probability in them,
because they are an imitation of the civil government And surely such
conceits as these, have in all ages, from the beginning of the world, hurt
the Church greatly and still will hurt it. The godly are therefore to be
admonished, that they be not overtaken with these subtilties and sleights. God
will have his Church governed by his word, which Christ and his Apostles have
Ieste unto the Church, and he will have this his voice to sound in the Church by
the mouths of his ministers. And though it do contain a wisdom, that is
far from reasons teach, yet the word of the Prophets and Apostles is sure and
not doubtful. Therefore Peter says, Ye do well in attending to the word of
the Prophets, as to alight in the darkness Besides the Church has the gift of
interpretation, that is, the understanding of the heavenly doctrine, but that
is not tied to the name or degree of Bishops: and therefore it is no power of
interpreting like to the power of a Prince or highest Judge. But those that are
learned in the word of God and borne again by his spirit in what place soever
they be, they assent unto the word of God, and understand the same some more
some less. Men must therefore judge wisely of those huge Bulwarks of the
peoples power. Touching laws, to be made by the Bishops, Petersaith in a word,
Why do yea tempt God, laying a yoke on them, etc.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Order.
Art. 2^.
IT is evident by the holy Scriptures, that al they which are in deed
Christians, are consecrated in baptism by Christ the son of God, to be
spiritual priests, and that they ought always to offer up to God spiritual
sacrifices Neither is it unknown, that Christ in his Church has instituted
ministers, who should preach his Gospel, and administer the sacraments.
Neither is it to be permitted to every one, although he be a spiritual
Priest, to usurp a public ministry in the Church, without a lawful
calling. For Paull says, Let all things be done honestly and decently among
you. And again, Lay hands suddenly on no man. Wherefore we do not account it
an unprofitable thing, to prove, as it were by certain steps, the faith of
them that are to be admitted to the public ministry of the Gospel. And it
seems not a little to further concordand unity, to keep a due order among the
Ministers of the Church.

But the holy Scripture does not teach us, that Christ has instituted in his
Church such Priests, as should be Mediators between God and men, and pacify
the wrath of God toward men, by their sacrifices, and apple the merit of
Christ to the quick and the dead, without the preaching of the Gospel, and
administration of the Sacraments For if we will speak of the great and true
Mediatoure, There is but one Mediator between God and men, Jesus Christ the
Son of God Look the 2. obseru. upon this confess.
. If we will speak of the Mediator of praying every godly man is made a
Mediator each for other through Jesus, because that their duty does require,
that they should commend one another health to God in their prayers: the which
duty also then every one does perform, when they say the Lords prater in
faith. If we speak of the sacrifices which do purge our sins, and appease
the wrath of God, then is there one only sacrifice, which does purge us, and
reconcile God unto us, to wit, the sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
was once made on the Cross. And as Christ does die no more, death has no more
Dominios over him, so this sacrifice of his shall never be made again, but by
his one oblation, as it is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews, He has made
perfect for ever those that be sanctify. If we speak of the remembrance of
this one sacrifice, and of the applieng of the merit thereof, then the public
ministers of the Church, which do teach the Gospel publikelie, and administer
the Sacraments according to the institution of Christ, do not only make a
true and right remembrance of this purging sacrifice, but do also apply, by
their dispensation, the merit of this sacrifice to all those, that do receive
the Gospel and the Sacraments by faith. Therefore we cannot see what use
there is of those kind of men in the Church, which are ordained for this
purpose, that they may have authority to sacrifice for the quick and the
dead. Paull, when as in his Epistles to the Corinthians and Ephesians, he
rehearses those offices and ministeries which are necessary to the edifying
and preseruingof the Church, he reckons Prophettes, Apostles, Evangelists*
Pastors, Doctors, and such like: but in this rehearsal he makes no mention
at all of private Priests, of which sort the world is now full* neither is it
like that he world have omitted this kind of Priests, if either Christ had
appointed it, or if it had been profitable and necessary for the Church: And
Paull writes that a Bishope ought to be ap^e to teach: And Jerome teaches
that A Priest and a Bishop are all one. Therefore it is evident, that excepta
Look the 2 obseruat. upon this confess.
Priest be ordained in the Church to the ministry of teaching, he can not
rightly take unto him neither the name or a Priest nor the name of a Bishop.

OVT OF THE CONFSSION OF SVEVRLAND.
Of the Office, dignity, and power of Ecclesiastical Persons.
Artic. 13.
TOuching the ministry, and dignity of the Ecclesiasticalorder, we do thus
(...) that there is no power in the Church, but that which tends to edifying,
^ Cor. 10. Secondly that we must nor think otherwise or any man in this
state, then Paull would have men to esteem, either of him self, or of Peter
and Apollo and others, As of the servants of Christ, and the dispensers of the
mysteries of God, in ^^ome this is chiefelie required, that they be faithful
For these be they which have the keys of the kingdom of God, and the power to
bind and loose (...) ^o remit or retain sins* yet that power is so limited,
that they be nevertheless the ministers of Christ, to whom alone the right
and authority to open heaven, and forgive sins, does properly pertain. For
neither he which planteth, nor he that waters, is any thing, but God that
gives the increase. 1. Cor 3. Neither is any man of himself fit to think
any of those things as of himself, but if any man be found fit thereunto,
he has it all of God. Who gives to whom it pleases him, to be the
ministers, and preachers of the new Testament, to wit, so far forth as he
gives them a mind, faithfully to preach the meaning and understanding of the
Gospel, and uses them hereunto* that men may be brought by a true faith to
his new covenant of grace. Furthermore these be they, which do minister unto
us the dead letter (that is, such a doctrine of truth, as pearceth no farther
then to humane reason) but the spirit which quickneth, and does so pearee into
our spirit and soul, that it does thoroughly persuade our heart of the truth.
These are the true fellow*labourers of the Lord, 1. Cor. 3. opening in deed
heaven, and forgiving sins (...) those, to whom they declare the doctrine of
faith, (...) means of the grace and spirit of God. Whereupon Christ sending
out his Apostles to exercise this duty, he breathed upon them, saying, Take
ye the holy Ghost. And further more he adds, whose sins ye remit, etc.

Hereof it is manifest, that the true and fit ministers of the Church (such as
be bishops, Seniors, anointed and consecrated (can do nothing but in respect
of this, that they be sent of God. For how shall they preach (says Paull)
except they be sent? That is, except they receive of God both a mind, and
power to preach the holy Gospel aright and with fruit, and to feed the
flock of Christ. And also, except they receive the holy Ghost, who may
work together with them, and persuade men's hearts. Other virtues wherewith
these men must be endued are rehearsed, 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. Therefore they which
are in this sort, sent, anointed* consecrated and qualified* they have an
earnest care for the flock of Christ, and do labor faithfully in the word
and doctrine, that they may feed the people more fruitfullie* and these are
acknowledged and accounted, of our preachers for such Bishops, as the Scripture
every where speaks of: and every Christian ought to obey their
commandments. But they which give them selfs to other things they place them
selfs in other men's seats, and do worthelie take unto them selves other names.
Yet notwithstanding the life of any man is not so much to be blamed, as that
therefore a Christian should refuse to hear him, if peradventure he teach
something out of the chair of Moses or Christ (that is, either out of the law
of God, or out of the holy gospel) that may serve for edification. They
which bring a diverse or a staunge voice, whatsoever they be, they are in no
account or estimation, with the sheep of Christ. Ioh. 10. Look before the 3.
obseru. upon the August confess. Also after sect. 17 3. obsern. up on the same
coufess. of August.
Yet they which have a seculare power and sovereignty, they have it of God him
self, howsoever they be called: therefore he should resist the ordinance of
God, whosoever should oppose himself to that temporal government*

These things do our Preachers teach, touching the authority of
Ecclesiastical persons: so that they have great injury offered to them in
that they are blamed, as though they sought to bring the authority of
Ecclesiastical prelates to nothing, whereas they never forbad them that
worldly government and authority, which they have. But they have often
wished, that they would come nearer to the Ecclesiastical commandments, and
that either they them selves would instruct and faithfully feed the
consciences of Christians, out of the holy Gospel, or that at the least wise
they would admit others hereunto, and ordeine such as were more fit for this
purpose. This is it, I say, that out Preachers have oftentimes requested of
the Prelates them selves, so fair have they been from opposing themselves at
any time to their spiritual authority.

But whereas we could not either bear any longer the doctrine of certain
Preachers, but being driven thereunto by necessity, we have placed others in
their room: or else have retained those also, which have renounced that
Ecclesiastical superiority; We did it not for any other cause but for that
these did plainly and faithfully declare the voice of our Lord Jesus christ,
the other did mingle therewith all man's inventions. For so often as the question
is, concerning the holy Gospel, and the doctrine of truth, Christians must
wholly turn them selves to the Bishop of their souls the Lord Jesus Christ,
and not admit the voice of any stranger by any means, wherein
notwithstanding neither we, nor they do offer violence to any man: for Paull
says, All things are yours, whether it be Paull, or Apollos, (...) Cephas, or
the world, or life, or death, whether they be things present or things to
come, even all are yours, and ye Christ's, and Christ Gods. Therefore seeing
that Peter and Paull are ours, and we are not theirs, but Christ's, and that
after the same manner, that Christ himself is his Fathers, to wit, that in
all things, which we are, or may be, we might live to him alone. Furthermore,
seeing to this end we have power to use all things (yea even men themselves of
what sort soever they be) as though they were our own, and are not to suffer
that any man, or any thing should hinder us therein, no Ecclesiastical
persons may justly complain of us, or object to us, that we are not
sufficiently obedient to them, or that we do derogate any thing from their
authority, suing that the thing it self does witness, that we have attempted
and done all those things according to the will of God, which we have
attempted against the will of Ecclesiastical persons. These therefore be those
things, which we teach, touching the office, dignity, and power of the
Ministers of the Church, whom they call Spiritual: the which that we may
credit, we are moved thereunto by those places of Scripture, which for the
most part we rehearsed before.

THE TWELFT SECTION. OF TRVE AND FALSE SACRAments in general.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA*
Of the Sacraments of Christ. CHAP. 19.
GOD even from the beginning added unto the preaching of the word his
sacraments or sacramental signs in his church. And this does the holy
scripture plamlie testify. Sacraments be mystical signs or holy rites or
sacred actions ordained of God him self, consisting of his word, of outward
signs and of things signified: whereby he keeps ^o continual memory and
eftsoon calls to mind in his Church his great benefits bestowed upon man,
and whereby he seals up his promises and outwardly represents and as it
wear offers unto our sight those things which inwardly he performs unto
us, and therewithal strengthens and increases our faith through the working
of Gods spirit in our hearts: lastly whereby he does separate us from all
other people and religions, and consecrateth and binds us wholly unto
himself, and gives us to undo stand that he requires of us.

These Sacraments are either of the old testament or of the new. The
sacraments of the old testament were circumcision, and the pascall lamb,
which was offered up in sacrifice and for that cause isreferred to the
sacrifices which were in use from the beginning of the world. The sacraments of
the new testament, are baptism and the supper of the Lord. Some there are
which reckon seven sacraments of the new testament. Of which number we grant
that repentance, matrimony and the ordination of ministers (we mean not the
popish but the Apostolical ordination) are very profitable ordinances of God
but no sacraments. As for confirmation and extreme unction, they are mere
devises of men, which the Church may very well want without any damage or
discommoditie at all: and therefore we have them not in our Churches, because
there be certain things in them which we can at no hand allow of. As for that
merchandise which the Romish prelates use in ministering their sacraments we
utterly abhor it. The author and institutor of al sacraments is not any man,
but God alone, for men can by no means ordain sacraments, because they
belong to the worship of God, and it is not for man to appoint and prescribe a
service of God, but to embrace and retain that which is taught unto him by the
Lord. Besides, the sacramental signs have Gods promises annexed to them which
necessarily require faith, now faith staieth it self only upon the word of
God. And the word of God is resembled to writings or letters, the sacraments to
seals, which the Lord alone sets to his own letters: Now as the Lord is
the author of the sacraments, so he continually works in that Church, where
they be right lie used, so that the faithful when they receive them of the
ministers do know that the Lord works in his own ordinance, and therefore
they receive them as from the hand of God: and the ministers faults (if there
be any notorious in them) can not hurt them seeing they do acknowledge the
goodness of the sacraments to depend upon the ordinance of the Lord. For which
cause they put a difference in the administration of the sacraments, between
the Lord and the Lords ministers confessing that the substance of the
sacraments is given them of the Lord, and the outward signs by the hands of
the ministers.

Now the principal thing, that in all the Sacraments is offered of the Lord,
and chiefly regarded of the godly of all ages (which some have called the
substance and matter of the sacraments) is Christ our savior, That only
sacrifice and the lamb of God slain from the beginning of the world, the
rock also of which all our Fathers drank, by whom all the elect are
circumcised with circumcision made without hands, through the holy spirit,
and are washed from all their sins, and are nourished with the very body
and blood of Christ unto eternal life.

Now in respect of that, which is the chief thing, and the very matter and
substance of the sacraments, the sacraments of both the testaments are equal.
For Christ the only mediator and savior of the faithful is the chief thing
and substance in them both, one and the same God is author of them both. They
were given unto both Churches, as signs and seals of the grace and promises
of God, which should call to mind and renew the memory of Gods great benefits
to them, and should distinguish the faithful from althe religions in the
world: lastly, which should be received spirituallie by faith, and should bind
the receivers unto the Church, and admonish them of their duty: In these* I
say, and such like things, the sacraments of both Churches be not unequal,
although in the outward signs they be diverse.

And in deed we do yet put a greater difference between them: for ours are
more firm and durable, as those which are not to be changed to the end of the
world. Again, ours testify that the substance and promise is all ready
fulfilled and performed in Christ, whereas the other did only signify that
they should be performed. And ours are more simple, and nothing paineful,
nothing so sumptuous, nor so full of ceremonies: Moreover they belong to a
greater people, that is dispersed thorough the face of the wholl earth. Again,
because they are more excellent, and do (by the spirit of God) stir up in us
a greater measure of faith, therefore a more plentiful measure of the spirit
does follow of them.

But now since that Christ the true Messiah is exhibited un to us, and the
abundance of grace is powered forth upon the people of the new testament, the
sacraments of the old law are surely abrogated and ceased, and in their steed
the sacraments of the new testament are placed: namely, for circumcision,
Baptism, and for the pascall lamb and sacrifices, the Supper of the Lord.

And as in the old Church the sacraments consisted of the word, the sign, and
the thing signified, so even at this day they stand as it were of the same
parts. For the word of God makes them Sacraments, which before were none: for
they are consecrated by the word, and declared to be sanctified by him who
first ordained them. To sanctify or consecrate a thing, is to dedicate it unto
god and unto holy uses, that is, to take it from the common and ordinary use,
and to appoint it to some holy use. For the signs that be in the Sacraments
are drawn from common use, to things eternal and invisible. As in baptism
the outward sign is the element of water, and that washing is visible, which
is done by the minister. The thing look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
signified is regeneration, and the clensing from sin. Likewise in the Lords
Supper, the outward sign is bread and wine, taken from things commonly used
for meat and drink. The thing signified is the body of Christ, which was
given, and his blood which was shed for us, and the communion of the body and
blood of the Lord: wherefore, the water, bread, and wine, considered in their
own nature, and out of this holy use and institution of the Lord, they are
only that which they are called, and which they were said then to be* But
let the word of God be once added to them together with invocation upon his
holy name, and the renewing of their first institution and sanctification, and
then these signs are consecrated and declared to be sanctified by Christ. For
Christ's first institution and consecration of the sacraments stands yet in
force in the Church of God, in such sort that they which celebrate the
sacraments, no otherwise then the Lord himself from the beginning has
appointed, have still even to this day the use and benefit of that first and
most excellent consecration. And for this cause in the administration of the
sacraments the very words of Christ are repeated. And forasmuch as we learn
out of the word of God, that these signs were appointed unto an other end and
use, then commonly they are used unto, therefore we teach that they now in
this their holy use do take upon them the names of the things signified, and
are not still called bare water, bread or wine, but water is called
regeneration, and washing of the new birth, and the bread and wine the body
and blood of the Lord, or the pledges and sacraments of his body and blood,
not that the signs are turned into the things signified, or cease to be that
which in their own nature they are, (for then they could not be sacraments,
which should consist only of the thing signified, and have no signs) but
therefore do the signs bear the names of the things, because they be
mystical tokens of holy things: and because that the signs and the things
signified are sacramentallie joined together: joined together, I say, or united
by a mystical signification, and by the purpose and will of him, who first
instituted them. For the water, bread and wine, are not common, but holy
signs. And he that instituted water in baptism, did not institute it with
that mind and purpose, that the faithful should only be dipped in the water
of baptism: and he which in the supper commanded the bread to be eaten, and
the wine to be drunk, did not mean that the faithful should only receive
bread and wine, without any further mystery, as they eat bread at home in
their own houses, but that they should spiritually be partakers of the things
signified, and by faith be truly purged from their sin and be partakers of
Christ also.

And therefore we cannot allow of them which attribute the consecration of the
Sacraments to I know not what syllables, to the rehearsal of certain words
pronounced by him that is consecrated, and that has an intent of consecrating,
or to some other accidental things, which are not left unto us either by the
word, or by the example of Christ or his Apostles. We do also mislike the
doctrine of those, that speak no otherwise of the Sacraments, then of common
signs, not sanctified, nor effectual. We condemn them also, who because of
the invisible things do despise the visible signs, and think them
superfluous, because they do already enjoy the things themselves: such were
the Messalians, as it is recorded. We do disallow their doctrine also, who
teach that grace and the things signified are to be so tied and included in the
signs, that whosoever do outwardly receive the signs, must needs inwardly
participate the grace and the things signified, what manner of men soever they
be.

Notwithstanding as we esteem not the goodness of the sacraments by the
worthiness or unworthiness of the ministers, so likewise we do not weigh them by
the condition of the receivers. For we know that the goodness of the Sacraments
does depend upon the faithfulness or truth and the mere goodness of God. For
even as Gods word remains the true word of God, wherein not only bare
words are uttered when it is preached, but therwithall the things signified by
the words are offered of God, although the wicked and unbelievers hear and
understand the words, yet they enjoy not the things signified, because they
receive them not by a true faith: Even so the sacraments consisting of the
word, the signs, and the things signified, continue true and perfect
Sacraments, not only because they be holy things, but also for that God also
offers the things signified, howsoever the unbelievers receive not the
things which are offered. This comes to pass, not by any fault in God, the
author and offerer of them, but by the fault of men, who do receive them
without faith, and unlawfully, whose unbelief cannot make the truth of God of
no effect.

Romans 3.
Now, forasmuch as in the beginning, where we showed what the sacraments were,
we did also by the way set down to what end they were ordained, it shall not
be necessary to trouble our selves with repeating any thing which has been
already handled. Next therefore in order it remains to speak severally of
the sacraments of the new Testament.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the force, and efficacy of the Sacraments.
Art. 2^.
THe signs, which in the Church of Christ be called Sacraments, are two,
Baptism and the Lords supper. These being tokens of secret things, do not
consist of bare signs, but of signs and things also. For in Baptism water
is the sign, and Look the 1. and 2. obseru. vpvpon this confess.
the thing it self is regeneration, and to be taken by adoption to be the
people of God. In the Lords Supper, bread and wine be the signs, * but the
thing is the communication of the body of Christ, salvation purchased for us,
and the remission of sins. These things are received by faith, as the signs
be received with the corporal mouth, and the wholl fruit of the Sacraments is
in the thing it self. Whereupon we affirm that Sacraments are not only
tokens of humane society, but also pledges of the grace of God, by which the
ministers do work together with the Lord (to that end, which he does promise,
offer, and bring to pass) yet so (as we said before of the ministry of the
word) that all the saving power is to be ascribed to the Lord alone.

Out of the declaration of the same confession.
Of holy signs.
SAcraments are visible paterns, instituted of god, of the grace, good will,
and promises of God toward us, sure testimonies, and holy remembrances, the
which under earthly signs do represent unto us, and set before our eyes
heavenly gifts, and do withdraw the mind from earthly to heavenly
things: moreover, they be tokens of Christian brotherhood and fellowshippe.
Therefore a sacrament is not only a sign, but it is made of two things, to
wit, of a visible or earthly sign, and of the thing signified, which is
heavenly: the which two although they make but one Sacrament, yet it is one
thing which is received with the body, another thing which the faithful
mind, being taught by the spirit of god, does receive. For the signs and the
things signified by the signs do cleave together only by a certain
mystical mean, or, as others speak, by a Sacramental union: neither be they
so made one, that one in nature is made the other, or that one is contained in
the other. For either of them (the which thing also holy Gelasius did
acknowledge) does keep it own propriety. Therefore the outward signs are
not the self same thing, substantiallie and naturally, which they do
signify, neither do they give it of themselves, and by their own power, no
more then the minister does, but the Lord uses the minister, and the signs,
and the word, to this end, that of his mere grace, when, and so much as
pleases him, he may represent, declare, look the 1. obseru. upon this
confess.
visibilie show, and set before our eyes his heavenly gifts, and all this
according to his promise.

Now, as it does derogate nothing from the ministry of the word, when it is
said, that the outward preaching of the word does profit nothing, except the
inward husband man give the increase, (for Paull says, He that planteth, and
he that waters, is nothing, but god that gives the increase,) so he does not
make the Sacraments of no effect, which says, that not they, but God himself
does purge us, that is, which does attribute the force of the sacrament to the
Creator. For Peter said, Baptism does save us: but he adds, Not whereby the
filth of the flesh is washed away, but in that a good conscience makes request
unto God. For as in other creatures, as in the Sun, the Moon, the Stars,
fire, precious stones, herbs, and such like things, which God does use as
instruments toward us, we ought not to put any confidence, nor admire them as
the causes of any benefit: so our trust ought not to rest in outward signs,
nor the glory of God be transferred unto them, as they be outward signs
(howbeit the Lord does use their help toward us, and they be holy ordinances)
but by them our trust must lift up it self to him, being both the author of
the sacraments, and the Creator of all things. And seeing that the Sacraments
are the institution and work of the Lord himself, the faithful do receive
them, not as certain superfluous inventions of men, as at the hand of men, but
as his heavenly gifts, and that at the hand of the Lord. For as touching the
word of the Gospel, which he preached, the Apostle writes thus* When ye
received of us the word, whereby ye learned God, ye did not receive it as the
word of men, but, as it was indeed, as the word of God, who also works in
you that believe. The like reason is there of the Sacraments. Therefore as a
little before we testified, that we do, and always did receive these
sentences and speeches of Scripture, touching the Ministry of the word,
Look the 2 obseruat. upon this confess.
the Minister does convert, remit sins, open the eyes and hearts of men, give
faith and the spirit* so, being well understood, we do acknowledge also these
speeches, touching the Sacraments, the Minister through Baptism does
regenerate, and wash away sins: he does distribute, and give the body and
blood of the Lord: For Ananias said to Paull, Arise and be baptized, wash
away thy sins, by calling on the name of Jesus. Also, Jesus took bread,
gave it to his Disciples, and said, this is my body. Also it is manifest, that
the ancient Fathers, did use such kind of speeches, because that by this
means they would propound and commend more royally the gifts of God.
Moreover, seeing that the institution and work of the word and of the
Sacraments proceeds not from men, but from God, we do here reject the error
of the Donatistes, and of the Anabaptists, who esteemed the holy gifts of god
according to the worthiness, or unworthiness of the minister.

Now in that heavenly gifts are represented unto us by earthly things, it
comes so to pass by a certain singular goodness of God, who by this mean
would help our weakness. For the weakness of man's wit does understand all
things the better, if they be resembled by visible things. Therefore the Lord
would by Sacraments set before the eyes of mortal men his heavenly gifts and
his promises, as it were a linelie picture in a certain table: that is, those
things, which are perceived by the mind, he delivered to us in sensible things.

Whereupon we do gather, that the Sacraments do apperteine to them which are
in the Church. For profane men do scoff at our Sacraments, insomuch as they
esteem them according to the external things only. But they which have
faith, understand the mysteries of the Sacraments: and they which receive them
in a true and lively faith, receive them with fruit: if they be received
without faith, they do hurt: not that the good gifts of God do hurt of
themselves, but because that they being not received aright, do hurt, through
our default. Furthermore, the Sacraments are badges of the people of God. For
by these we are gathered together into a holy company, and we profess our
faith. For it pleased the Lord by this mean to gather his people to himself,
and as it were to mark them with this sign, whereby also he might put every
one in mind of his duty.

Now of this kind there be two Sacraments in the Church of Christ, Baptism,
which is called the font of regeneration: and the supper of the Lord, which is
called the body and blood of the Lord, or the communion of the body and blood
of the Lord. And now we will speak severally of them: for hitherto we have
discoursed of the Sacraments in general, as before God we do believe, and
wherein we hope that Luther will not think any thing wanting.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Art. 5.
THe same Sacraments are used in the Church, to (...) Baptism at our entrance
into the Church, and the supper of the Lord in due time when we are come to
typer years, Look the 1. obseru upon this confess.
to testify our faith and brotherly charity, as in baptism was promised.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of Sacraments in genrall.
CHAP. II.
AS touching the Sacraments, we teach that they be external, earthly (as they
which consist of the elements) and visible signs, consecrated by the word of
God, and by his own mouth appointed hereunto, to signify and witness to us
that self same spiritual and invisible grace and truth, whereof they have
the name, and which they are also sacramentallie. These sacraments no man
either did, or can institute, but the Lord and God himself Christ Jesus, into
whose hands the Father has delivered al things. And Ioh. 13.
he has instituted and appointed them for great and saving causes, and such as
are necessary for this Church and all those that believe: to wit, that like as
by the preaching of the word, so by the administration of the visible
Sacraments and the mysteries thereof, faith might be helped and furthered, and
that there might be an assured testimony and confirmation of the favorable
and well pleased will of God toward us, and that they might give witness to
that truth which is signified by them, and should reach it out (as does the
word) to be apprehended by faith, and that the minds of the faithful, in the
receiving of them, should by faith receive the grace and truth whereof they be
witnesses, and applying it unto themselves, should make it their own, and
confirm themselves therein, and on the other side, by giving themselves to
God, should consecrate, and as it were by an oath religiously bind them
selves, to serve him alone, and as it were be joined together among themselves,
by the joining and knitting, as of one spirit, so also of one body, to wit, of
the Church, of the fellowship of saints, Ephesians. 4.
and of love.

And according to these things, the Sacraments (as in times past Circumcision
was) may be called the holy covenants Genesis 17.
of god with his Church, and of the Church with God, the minsters of faith and
love, by which the joining and union of God and Christ, our Lord with these
believing people, and theirs again with Christ, is made and perfited, and that
among themselves in one spiritual body of the Church: by which also, even as
by the word, Christ, and his spirit do cause in the faithful, that is, in
those that use them worthelie, a precious participation of his excellent merit,
neither does he suffer them to be only bare and naked ministers and
ceremonies, but those things that they signify and witness outwardly, that
does he work inwardly, to salvation, profitablie, and effectually: that is,
he cleanses, nourishes, satisfies, loses, pays, remitteth, and confirms.

They therefore which contemn these Sacraments, and through stubbornnes will
not suffer them to be of any force with themselves, and making small account
of them, do esteem them as trifles, or do otherwise abuse them, contrary to
the institution, will, or commandment of Christ, all these do greeuouslie
sin against the author thereof, who has instituted them, and make a very
great hazard of their salvation. But if some man would willingly use these
sacraments according to the institution of Christ, and yet cannot have leave
look the 1. obseru. up on this confession.
either entirely, or withourt deceit, so to do as he would, as if peradventure
one that is taken be kept in prison, or if one should be hindered by sickness, or
should live in strange countries among the enemies of the truth: such a man,
in such a case, if he do wholly and truly believe the holy Gospel, may by
that faith be saved, although he have not the use of the Sacraments: whereof
Augustine upon John. cap. 16. has this worthy saying, Believe, and thou have
eaten: seeing that the Sacraments are not necessary to salvation, but only
by the addition of a certain condition.

Also we teach this, that the sacraments of themselves, or by their own
virtue, for the works sake, or for the only outward action, that is, for the
bare participation, receiving, and use thereof, can not give grace, nor a
justifying or quickening faith to any, which before was not inwardly quickened
by the holy ghost, and has no good motion within himself: I say, the
Sacraments can not give to any such either grace, or justifying and quickening
faith, and therefore they can not justify any man, nor inwardly quicken or
regenerate any man's spirit: for faith must go before, whereby the holy ghost
does inwardly quicken, and lighten man, and stir up or cause good motions in
the heart. Without this faith there is neither any justification nor
salvation: neither do the Sacraments of, or by themselves, help any whit
hereunto, as in the holy scripture manifest examples of this matter are found
in many places, especially in Judas, who received the sacrament of the Lord
John. 13.
Christ himself, did also execute the function of a preacher, and yet he
ceased not to remain a Devil, an hypocrite, and the lost son: neither was
he made better by the Sacrament, or by the use thereof, neither did this profit
his Act. 5.
any thing to salvation. Also in Ananias and his wife, who had been baptized
of the Apostles, and had also without doubt received the Lords supper, and yet
notwithstanding they did continue in their wickedness, injustice, and lies
against the holy ghost, the sacraments did neither take away their wickedness,
nor give the^ the saving or justifying faith, which makes the heart the better
by repenting, and gives it to God an upright and obedient heart, and does
appear the conscience. Therefore the Sacraments did not give this conscience
and this faith unto them: as Circumcision, and the Sacrifices of the old
testament, did not give a lively and justifying faith, without the which faith
those thus auailed nothing to eternal salvation or justification. And so does
Saint Paull speak of all these things in his Epistle. Romans 4.
to the Romans, and brings in the example of Abraham and does witness, that he
had faith and righteousness, which is available with God, before that he was
circumcised. (...) like sort he writes of the people of Israel, that they
also were baptized, and they all did eat one and the same spiritual meat and
did all drink the same spiritual drink: but with many of the God was not
pleased. And therefore, even in the abundance of all these things, they were
thought unworthy to be received, and they were rejected of God. For if a dead
man, or one that is unworthy, do come to the Sacraments, certainly they do
not give him life and worthiness, but he that is such a one does load himself
with a far greater burden of fault, and sin, seeing that he is unworthy:
the which thing the Apostle does expresselie declare in the doctrine touching
the Supper of the Lord, where he says* whosoever 1. Cor. 10.
does eat of this bread, or drink of this cup of the Lord unworthily, he is
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: Also, He does eat and drink
judgment to himself.

Lastly, this also must be known, that the verity of the Sacraments does
never fail them, so that they should become not effectual at any time: but
in the institution of Christ Look the 2. obseruat. upon this confess.
they do always exercise their virtue and efficacy, in witnessing, sealing,
confirming, unto the worthy receivers, present grace and salvation, but unto
the unworthy, their fault and condemnation, whether they be administered by a
good and honest Priest, or by a close sinner. For so long as the ouerthwartnes
of such wicked hypocrites is not as yet publicly known, neither punished
more gently or severely by the Ecclesiastical Discipline, neither they which
have behaved themselves more stubbornly have bin excommunicated, those
Sacraments which they do administer, may be received of them, if so be that
they do administer them, according to the will, mind, and institution of
Christ, the which thing also the constitutions of the ancient Church do
confirm. For the virtue and efficacy of the Sacraments, does neither consist
in him, nor depend on him, who does either administer them, whosoever he be, or
does receive them, but it consists in the institution, and in the
commandment that was most absolute and mighty in authority, and in the
word of the author of the Sacraments, to wit, of our Lord Jesus Christ, on
which one thing they do rely, and have from thence whatsoever they are able
to do. Nevertheless the ministers must thoroughly look to it, and take good
heed, lest whilst by their labor they be serviceable to others, They
themselves become reprobates, or worthy to be rejected: 1 Cor. 9. Mat. 7.
and also lest they give holy things to dogs, or cast pearls before swine.
Also the people must endeavor by all means to take heed, that they do not in
any case receive the Sacraments with the offense of the Church, and the proper
danger of the salvation of their souls, that is to there own fault and
judgment, whereof we made mention before*

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
WE believe that there be Sacraments adjoined to Art. 34.
the word, for the more ample confirmation thereof* to wit, that they may be
pledges and tokens of the grace of god, whereby our weak and rude faith may be
helped. For we confesth at these outward signs be such, that God* by the
power of his holy Spirit, does work by them, that nothing may there be
represented to us in vain: yet we think that the wholl substance and truth of
them is in Christ Jesus, from whom if they be separated, they be nothing else
but vain shadows and smokes. Also Artic. 35. We acknowledge that there be
only two Sacraments, common to the wholl Church, etc. That which follows,
pertains to the 13. Sect*

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
Moreover we allow the Sacraments of the Church, Art. 10.
that is to say, certain holy signs, and Ceremonies, which Christ would we
should use, that by them he might set before our eyes, the Mysteries of our
Salvation, and might more strongly confirm the Faith, which we have in his
blood, and might seal his grace in our hearts* And these Sacraments,
together with Tertullian, Origin, Ambrose, Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom,
Basil, Dionysius, and other Catholic Fathers, we do call Figures, Signs,
Marks, Badges, Prin^s, Copies, Fourmes, Seals, Signettes, Similiu^des,
paternes, Representations, Remembrances, and Memories, and we make no doubt
together with the same Doctoures, to say that these be certain visible words,
Seals of Righteousness, and Tokens of Grace. And we do expresselie pronounce,
that in the Lords Supper there is truly given unto the Believing the body
and blood of our Lord, the Flesh of the Son of God, which quickens our
Souls, the meat that comes from above, the Food of Immortality, of Grace,
Truth, and Life, and that the same Supper is the communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ: by the partaking whereof we be revived, strengthened, and fed
unto Immortality: and whereby we are joined, united, and incorporated unto
Christ, that we may abide in him, and he in us. Besides this, we acknowledge,
that Art. 11.
there be two sacraments, which, we judge, properly ought to be called by this
name: that is to say, Baptism, and the Sacrament of thanksgiving. For thus
many we see were delivered and sanctified by Christ, and well allowed of the
old Fathers, Ambrose, and Augustine, and such others.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. 33.
WE believe, that God having regard to our dulnes and infirmity, did institute
Sacraments for us, that by them his promises might be sealed to us, and that
they might be most certain pledges of his heavenly love toward us, and of
his gifts bestowed upon us, for the cherishing and sustaining of our faith.
These Sacraments he added to the word of the Gospel, that he might more
lively set before our external senses, both those things which he declares
unto us in his word, and those also which he works inwardly in our hearts:
and to confirm more and more in us that salvation, which he vouchsafes to
communicate unto us. For the Sacraments are signs and visible tokens of
internal and visible things, by the which, as by certain means, God
himself works within us, by the power of the holy Ghost. Therefore they be
not vain or idle signs, neither yet ordained of God to deceive or frustrate
us of our hope. For the truth of our Sacraments is Jesus Christ, without whom
they are of no value. Moreover, that number of Sacraments suffices us, which
Christ himself our true and only Doctor, has instituted: and those are
only two, to wit, the Sacrament of baptism, and the Sacrament of the holy
supper of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
Art. (...)
SEeing that in this life many evil ones and hypocrites are mingled with the
Church, and have fellowshippe with it in the outward signs and pleadges, the
Sacraments administered by such as are evil, may lawfully be used, according
to the saying of Christ, The Scribes and Pharisees sit (...) Moses chair, etc.
For the sacraments, and the word of God are effectual, by reason of the
institution and commandment of Christ, though they be delivered by wicked and
evil men. They condemn the Donatists and such like, who said it was not
lawful for the people to use the minister* of evil men in the Church, and
held opinion, that the ministry of evil men was quite without fruit and
effect.

The beginnining of this 8. Article is else where thus set down.
THough the Church, to speak properly, be a congregation of Saints and true
believers, yet seeing that in this life many hypocrites and evil men be
mingled with it, it is a lawful thing, to use the sacraments, ministered by
the hands of evil men, etc.

Touching the use of the sacraments they teach, that they were instituted, not
so much to be notes of profession amongst men, as to be signs and pleadges of
Gods good (...) toward us, set before the eyes, to stir up and confirm
faith in them which use them. Therefore we must use sacraments so, as we must
join faith with them, which may believe the promises that are offered and
declared unto (...) by the Sacraments. By this faith we receive both the grace
promised, which is represented by the sacraments, and also the holy Ghost.
Therefore they condemn that Pharisaicall opinion of the Papists, which
suppresseth the doctrine of faith, and does not teach that faith, which
believes that grace is freely given us for Christ's sake, is necessary in
the use of the sacraments, but imagines that men are just* for the very use
of the sacraments, even by the work done, and that without any good affection
of him that uses it.

This article we find thus in another Edition.
COncerning the use of the Sacraments, they teach that they were ordained, not
so much to be mar^es and badges of profession amongst men, as that they should
be signs or testimonies of the will of God toward us, set forth unto us, to
stir up and confirm faith in such as use them. Whereupon they condemn those
that teach, that the sacraments do justify by the work done, and do not teach
that faith to believe remission of sins is requisite in the use of sacraments.

OVT OF THE CONFSSION OF SAXONY.
Art. 12.
Of the sacraments.
THe Church also is discerned from other Gentiles by by certain rites or
ceremonies instituted of God, and usually called Sacraments, as are Baptism,
and the Lords Supper: which notwithstanding are not only signs of a
profession, but much more (as the ancient Fathers said) signs of grace: that
is, they be ceremonies added to the promise of the Gospel touching grace, that
is, touching the free remission of sins, and touching reconciliation, and the
wholl benefit of our redemption: the which are so instituted, that every man
may use them, because they be pledges and testimonies, which declare that the
benefits promised in the Gospel do appertain to every one. For the voice of
the Gospel is general: this use does be are witness that this voice does
appertain to every one which uses the Sacraments.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of the Sacraments.
Art. (...)
THe word Sacrament, as also the word Mystery (which interpreters do
expound Sacrament) is very large. But because some have thought it good to
restrain it to the number of seven Sacraments, we will briefly run over
every one, that we may show what we find wanting in the doctrine that some
have broched, and what may seem to be repugnant to the meaning of that
Church, which is in deed Catholic or orthodoxe.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of the Sacraments.
Art. 16.
SEeing that the Church of Christ does live here in the flesh (howbeit not
according to the flesh) it pleased the Lord also to teach, admonish, and exhort
it by the outward word. And that this might be done the more commodiouslie,
he would also have his to make much of an external society among them selves.
For which cause he gave unto them holy signs, among which these are the
chiefest, Baptism, and the Lords Supper: the which we do not only think
therefore to have had the name of Sacraments among the Fathers, because they are
visible signs of invisible grace (as Saint Augustine does define them) but
also for that purpose, because that by them we do consecrate our selves unto
Christ, and do bind our selves as it were by the oath or Sacrament of faith.

THE THIRTEENTH SECTION.
OF THE SACRAMENT OF Holy Baptism.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of holy baptism. CHAP. 20.
Baptism was instituted, and consecrated by God, and the first that baptized
was John, who dipped Christ in the water in Jorden. From him it came to the
Apostles, who also did baptize with water. The Mat. 28.
Lord in plain words commanded them To preach the Gospel, and to baptize in
the name Act. 2.
of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. And Peter also, when diverse
demanded of him what they ought to do, said to them, in the Acts, Let every
one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and you shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. Whereupon Baptism is
called of some a sign of in^tiation of Gods people, as that whereby the
elected of God are consecrated unto God

There is but one Baptism in the Church of God* for it is sufficient to be
once baptized or consecrated unto God. For baptism once received does continue
all a man's life, and is a perpetual sealing of our adoption unto us. For to be
baptized in the name of Christ, is to be enrolled, entered, and received into
the covenant, and family, and so into the inheritance of the sons of God,
yea and in this life to be called after the name of God, that is to say, to be
called the Son of god, to be purged also from the filthiness of sins, and to
be endued with the manifold grace of God, for to lead a new and innocent life.
Baptism therefore does call to mind, and keep in remembrance the great
benefit of God performed to mankind: for we are al borne in the pollution of
sin, and are the Sons of wrath. But God, who is rich in mercy, does
freely purge us from our sins, by the blood of his Son, and in him does
adopte us to be his sons, and by an holy covenant does join us to himself,
and does enrich us with diverse gifts, that we might live a new life. All these
things are sealed up unto us in Baptism. For inwardly we are regenerated,
purified, and renewed of God through the holy Spirit: and outwardly we receive
the sealing of most notable gifts, by the water, by which also, those great
benefits are represented, and, as it were, set before our eyes to be looked
upon. And therefore are we baptized, that is, washed and sprinkled with
visible water. For the water makes clean that which is filthy, refreshes
things that fail and faint, and cools the bodies. And the grate of God
deals in like manner with the soul, and that invisible, and spirituallie.

Moreover by the Sacrament of Baptism God does separate us from all other
religions and people, and does consecrate us a peculiar people to himself. We
therefore by being baptized, do confess our faith, and are bound to give unto
God obedience, mortification of the flesh, and newnes of life, yea and we are
billed soldiers for the holy warfare of Christ, that all our life long we
should fight against the world, Satan, and our own flesh: Moreover, we are
baptized into one body of the Church, that we might well agree with all the
members of the Church in the same religion and mutual duties.

We believe that look the 1. obseru. upon this confession.
that of al other is the most perfect manner of baptism, wherein Christ was
baptized, and which the rest of the Apostles did use in baptism. Those things
therefore which by man's devise were added afterward, and used in the Church,
Look the 2. obseru.
we think them nothing necessary to the perfection of Baprisme. Of which kind
is exorcisme, and the use of lights, oil, salt, spattle, and such other
things, as namely that baptism is twice every year consecrated with diverse
ceremonies. For we believe that the baptism of the Church, which is but one,
was sanctifed in Gods first institution of it, and is consecrated by the word,
and is now of full force, by; and for the first blessing of God upon it.

We teach that baptism should not be ministered in the Church by women or
midwiues. For Paul secludeth women from Ecclesiastical callings: but Baptism
belongs to Ecclesiastical offices. We condemn the Anabaptists, who deny
that young infants, borne of faithful parents, are to be baptized. For
according to the doctrine of the gospel theirs is the kingdom of God. And
they are written in the covenant of God. And why then should not the sign of
the covenant be given to them? Why should they not be consecrated by holy
baptism, who are gods peculiar people, and in the Church of God? We condemn
also the Anabaptists in the rest of their opinions, which they peculiarly do
hold against the word of God. We therefore are not Anabaptists, neither do we
agree with them in any point that is theirs.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Art. 21.
Of Baptism.
Baptism, according to the institution of the Lord, is the font of
Regeneration, the which the Lord does give to his chosen in a visible sign,
by the ministry of the Church, in such sort, as we have declared before. In
which holy font we do therefore dippe our infants, because that it is not
lawful for us to reject them from the company of the people of God, which are
borne of us (who are the people of God) so long as they be not pointed out by
the voice of God, especially seeing that we ought godly (...) presume of
their election.

Out of the Declaration of the same Confession, sent unto Luther.
Of Baptism.
Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein the Lord by a visible sign does testify his
grace unto us, whereby he does regenerate us, and cleanse us from our sins,
and also receive us to be his people, that we may live to Christ, die to the
old Adam, and be partakers of the good things of Christ. For we all are borne
sinners, whereupon we have need of regeneration, and the purging of our
sins, which comes to pass by the free mercy of God, whereby also we are
received into the covenant, that being buried into his death, we may rise
again in newnes of life, the which thing is taught more at large in the
Apostles writings. But the goodness of God does in deed give vuto us these
heavenly gifts, and also uses a sign hereunto, that it may declare these
things unto us, and by pouring them into our senses, might allure us to more
excellent things, that so the wholl glory might be proper to God, and yet the
holy institution of the sign might not be made frustrate. For it is most
truly said, Baptism does save us: but it is added of Peter, Not that which
washes away the filth of the body. And the Baptist says, I in deed do
baptize you with water, but he (that is* Christ) shall baptize you with the
holy Ghost, and with fire. Whereunto the holy Council of Nice having
respect, did say, Our Baptism is to be considered, not with sensible eyes,
but with the eyes of the mind.

Also Baptism is a badge: for it serves to our confession. For this we do
plainly confess in the Church, that we together with our children and al our
family do profess the Christian religion, that the members of that body
whereof Christ is the head, to whom we have given our names, are received of
him into the number of those soldiers, who by the good guiding of Christ do
through al their life exercise a warfarre against the world, Satan, and the
flesh.

Hitherto also apperteineth the 5. Art. ss. 2. of the confession of Basil,
which before was placed in the 12. Sect.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of holy Baptism. CHAP. 12.
TOuching holy Baptism it is taught, that men must believe and profess, that
this is a Sacrament or wholesome ministry of the new Testament* instituted of
Christ the Lord, concerning which the faithful ministers have in charge, that
by the administration hereof, they benefit the holy Church. This Sacrament
consists of an outward washing, that is done with water, with calling on the
name of the holy Trinity (that of the element and word may arise August.
(...) in Joan. cap* 13.
and be jointly withal made a Sacrament) and that washing is used both to
signify, and to witness a spiritual washing, and inward clensing of the holy
Ghost from the disease of hereditarie sin, and from other sins, the guilt
of which is here forgiven and taken away, and to the atteining of a new manner
of birth, or regeneration: whereupon it is called the sacrament of the new
birth, that is, of regeneration, or a washing with water in the word of life*
For we believe Act. 2. and 22.
that whatsoever by* Baptism, as by a Sacrament added to the word of the
Gospel, is in the outward ceremony signified and witnessed, all that does the
Lord God work and perform inwardly: that is, that he washes away sin,
John. 3. Tit. 3. Ephesians. 5. Galat. 3. Rom 6. 1. Pet. 3*
begets a man again, and bestows salvation upon him, and through the
washing of water, cleanses by the word the society of his Church, cloatheth
and appareleth it with his Son, burieth and takes away sin, and gives
testimony to, and seals the peace of a good conscience. For Baptism is not
a washing away of the outward filth of the flesh, but the stipulation or
promise that a good conscience makes unto God. For the bestowing of these
excellent fruits was holy Baptism given and granted to the Church, which
the faithful shepherds of souls ought to administer, and which the faithful
people of Christ, touching the receiving thereof, ought to use lawfully but
once only: yet, in deed and truth, troughout their wholl life.

And although Baptism in the primitive Church was for the most part ministered
to such, as were well grown and of discretion, after a confession of faith
made by them, according to Christ's commandment: yet this is taught, that young
children also, who are reckoned in the number of gods people, in like sort are
by this ministry to be beneficed toward the attaining of salvation, that
they likewise may be consecrated and dedicated to Christ, according to this
commandment, when he says, Suffer ye the little ones to come to Mat. 1^.
(...) and forbid them not: because unto such belongs the kingdom of God.
Therefore according to the word of the Lord, and many other testimonies and
other promises made to this beloved age of Children, especially when as also
there is extant an example of that ancient mynisterie ordained of God, to wit,
circumcision, which by reason of the covenant belonged not only to those of
discretion, but therewithal Genesis 17.
also to young children. For these causes do our ministers without any doubt,
and boldly, baptize children in the name of the holy Trinity, applying unto
them a sign of most effectual virtue, and a most sure witnesbearing of that
thing which by Christ's own words is assigned to this age, and is imparted unto
it. For so Christ in general, and without exception, gives in charge, not
touching some, but touching all, Teach ye all nations, and baptize them, in the
name of the father, Math. 28. Act. 4.
the Son, and the holy Ghost. And so over children this most holy name is
called upon, in which alone there is salvation.

This is further also taught, that they who are once lawfully and truly
baptized, when they come to years, ought to do their endeavor, that they may
learn to acknowledge and know what holy Baptism is, and therewithal the
Catholic and Christian faith (without which Baptism avails nothing) to the
end that afterward when they do desire to be partakers of the Lord his Supper,
they may with their own mouths, and of their own accord, make profession of
their faith, and may renew their sanctification, by which they were consecrated
to the Lord. And such, that is, which are thus instructed, our ministers
receive unto this covenant of holy Baptism, and Look the 1. obseru. upon
this confess.
by the laying on of hands do testify to them, that grace is contained in
baptism to strengthen them to the warfarre of faith, and so after a convenient
and godly manner, and with use of pure ceremonies, and such as are profitable
to edifying, they bring them to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, without any
reiteration of Baptism, as there are evident tokens and examples to be seen
of this matter in the primitive Church, which is the true and best maistresse
of the posterie, and goeing before leads us the way. For if so be that a man
should even after a true manner enjoy the Baptism of Christ, and should by
means hereof be buried with Christ into his death to newnes of life, if
afterward, his life being prolonged, he should not, according to the doctrine
of the holy Gospel, show forth a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ,
brotherly love toward all those, that are consecrated to the Lord, and so
should lead a life unworthy his place or calling, and unworthy of God and his
neighbor, and should not in baptism conceive a lively hope of life
everlasting; such a one should assuredly give certain testimony of himself,
that he had in vain received grace in holy Baptism, wherein the name of the
holy Trinity was called on over him, Exodus 2^.
the which thing God the Lord, as his word declares, suffers by no means to
escape unrevenged or unpunished.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
Art. 35.
WE acknowledge that there be two only Sacraments common to the wholl Church*
whereof the the first is Baptism, the which is given to us to testify our
adoption, because that therein we are ingrafted into Christ's body, that being
washed in his blood, we may also be renewed to holiness of life by his Spirit.
This also we say, Although we are baptized but once, yet the fruit of Baptism
does pertain to the wholl course of our life, that this promise, to wit, that
Christ will always be unto us sanctifi ation and justification, may be sealed
up in us with a sure and firm seal. Further more, although Baptism be a
sacrament of faith and repentance, yet seeing that God does together with the
Parents account their posterity also to be of the Church, we affirm, that
infantes, being borne of holy parents, are by the authority of Christ to be
baptized.

Art. 38.
We say therefore that the element of water, be it never so frail, does
notwithstanding truly witness or confirm unto us the inward washing of our
souls in the blood of Jesus Christ, by the virtue and efficacy of the holy
ghost.

Art. 1^.
OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
WE say, that baptism is a sacrament of the remission of sins, and of that
washing, which we have in the blood of Christ* and that no person, which will
profess Christ's name, ought to be restrained, or kept back there from: no
not the very babes of Christians: for so much as they be borne in sin, and
pertain unto the people of God.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. ^4.
WE believe and confess, that Jesus Christ, which is the end of the law, has
by his own blood shedding made an end of all other propitiatory sacrifice
for sins. Also that Circumcision, which was done by blood, being abolished,
he has instituted Baptism in the place thereof, whereby we are received into
the Church of god, and separated from all other nations, and all kind of
strange religions, being consecrated unto him alone, whose badge and
cognizance we wear. Finally, Baptism is a token unto us, that he wilb our
God for ever, who also is our gracious father. Therefore the Lord has
commanded all his to be baptized with pure water, In the name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, To signify that the blood of Christ does
internallie, through the operation of the Spirit, perform and effect that in
the soul, which water does externallie work in the bodies. For as water being
poured upon us, and appeering in the body of him that is baptized, moistning
the same does wash away the filthiness of the body, so the blood of Christ,
washing the soul, does cleanse it from sin, and does make us the sons of
God, which before were the children of wrath. Not that this material water
does these things, but the sprinckling of the precious blood of the Son of God*
which is unto us as the read sea, where though we must pass, that we may
depart from the tyranny of Pharoh, that is, the Devil, and enter into the
spiritual land of Canaan. Therefore the ministers verily do deliver unto us
the sacraments, and the visible thing, but it is the Lord himself that gives
it unto us, that is represented by the sacrament, namely* the gifts and
invisible graces, washing, purifying* and clensing our souls from all spots
and iniquiries, renewing in like manner, and filling our hearts with all
comfort, and, to conclude, giving unto us a certain persuasion of his
Fatherly goodness, clothing us with the new man, and putting of the old man,
with all his deeds. For these causes do we believe, that every one, that
desires to obtain eternal life, ought to be baptized with one baptism, *and
that once alone, which never afterward is to be iterated, seeing that we
cannot be borne twice.

Neither does this baptism profit us only at that moment, when the water
rests upon us, and when we are sprinkled with it, but it is available
throughout the wholl time of our life Therefore here we do det^st the error
of the Anabaptists, who are not only content with one only baptism, and
that once received, but do also condemn the Baptism of infants, yea of those
that be borne of faithful Parents: but we by the same reason do believe that
they ought to be baptized and sealed with the sign of the covenant, for the
which in time past the infants amongst the Israelites were circumcised, that
is, by reason of the same promises made unto our infantes, that were made unto
others. And verily Christ has no less shed his blood to wash the infantes of
the faithful, then he did for the washing of those that are of riper years.
Therefore it is meet that that they should receive the sign or sacrament of
the thing which Christ has wrought for their sakes, as in the law the Lord
commands, that the sacrament of the death and Leuit. 12. 6.
passion of Christ should be communicated to children newborn, by offering up
the lamb, for them, which was a sacrament of Christ to come. Furthermore, that
which circumcision did perform to the people of the Jews, the same does
Baptism perform to the children of the faithful. For the which cause Paull
calls Baptism, The circumcision of Christ.

OVC OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
Art. ^.
COncerning baptism they teach* that it is look the 1. obseru. upon this
confsse.
necessary to salvation, as a ceremony ordained of Christ. Also, that by
baptism the grace of God is offered. And that young infantes are to be
baptized, and that they being by baptism commended unto God, are received into
Gods favor, and are made the sons of God, as Christ witnesses, speaking of
little children in the Church* Mat. 18. It is not the will of your heavenly
father, that any of these little ones should peris^. They condemn the
Anabaptists, which allow not the baptism of infantes, and Look the 1. obseru
up upon this confess.
hold that infantes are saved, though they die without baptism, and be not
within the Church of God.

This in another edition is set down in this sort.
TOuching baptism they teach, that it is Look the 2. obseru.
necessary to salvation, and that by baptism the grace of God is offered. That
children are to be baptized, and such as by baptism be presented to God, are
received into his favor. They condemn the Anabaptists, that allow not of
childrens Baptism, and hold that Children are saved without baptism.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Art. 1^.
Baptism is an entire action, to wit, a dipping, and the pronouncing of these
words, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. We do often expound the sum of the doctrine of the Gospel
comprehended in these words. I baptize thee, that is, I do witness, that by
this dippin thy sins be washed away, and that thou art now received of the
true God, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has redeemed thee by
his Son Jesus Christ, and does sanctify thee by his holy Spirit. I baptize
thee into the name, that is, inuocating of this true god, whom thou shall
acknowledge, and invoke and distinguish from all other feigned gods, and
shall assure thy self, that those benefits are given to thee, which he
promised in the gospel: that thou art a member of the Church of God, which is
redeemed by the Son, and sanctified by the holy Ghost. Let them remember
this meaning of this covenant, who by reason of their age are capable of
doctrine, and being confirmed by this testimony, let them believe that their
sins be forgiven them, and that they are in deed members of the Church of
God, and let them in a true faith invoke the true God: as Abraham
considedering of circumcision, did behold the promise of the seed to come,
understand that he was a member of the Church of God, and that the curse was
taken away from him also, by that seed, of whom it was said in the promise,
Genesis 12. In thy seed shall all nations be blessed. So also does Peter teach 1.
Pet. 3. That Baptism is a stipulation or promise that a good conscience makes
unto God, by the resurection of Jesus Christ, which is at the right hand of God
He does namely call it a stipulation, whereby God does make a covenant with
thee, and receives thee unto favor, the wounds of thy conscience being
healed, and thou in like sort do make a covenant with God, to invoke this
true God, and to believe that thou art saved by the Son of God, who is raised
up from death, and now does reign. So this Son of God, sitting at the right
hand of the eternal Father, is effectual in thee, as also Paull says to the
Gal. You that are baptized, have put on Christ. And Look the 1. obseru. up on
this confess.
that the holy Ghost is given in Baptism, Paull affirms it in his Epistle to
Titus, saying: By the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost. And in John it is said, Except a man be borne again of water and of the
spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Therefore we teach Look
the 2. obseru.
that Baptism is necessary: and we do once only baptize every one, as
every one was but once only Circumcised: but we do often make mention of the
most profitable doctrine, touching the signification thereof, and the mutual
covenant.

We do also baptize infants, because it is most certain that the promise of
grace does perteine also of infants, Look the 3. obseru.
and to those only, which are ingrafted into the Church: because that of these
it is said, Suffer little ones to come unto me, because that to such
apperteineth the kingdom of heaven. And Origin writes upon the sixth to the
Romans, That the Church received the custom of baptizing infants from the
Apostles. Neither do we think that this custom is only an idle ceremony,
but that the infants are then in deed received and sanctified of God, because
that then they are grafted into the Church, and the promise pertains to such.
And of this matter there be many things written and published in our
Churches, whereby the Anabaptists are refuted.

Also out of the 19. Art.
Of Confirmation.
IT is well known, that the manner of consecrating oil was magical and
execrable: and therefore these annointings, wherein there is use of oil, are
not to be tolerated, and in old time they used these ceremonies otherwise then
now they be used. In the ceremony of confirmation there was a trial of
doctrine, wherein every one did rehearse the form of doctrine, and did openly
profess that they did mislike the madness of the Heathen, and of Heretics, and
that they would be and remain members of the true Church, and never forsake
that true opinion which they did then profess. This custom was profitable to
instruct men, and to keep them in the true knowledge of god. And in out
Churches the like things be done in Catechizing the younger sort, Look the
^. obseruat. upon the confess. of Bohem. Sect. 8.
and in private confession, wherein the Pastoures do examine the doctrine of the
people. But as touching the ceremony of confirmation, which the Bishops do
now retain, what else is it, but a vain shadow?

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Baptism. CHAP. 10.
WE acknowledge that Baptism is to be ministered, as well to infants, as to
those that are grown to full age, and that it is to be used in the Church,
even to the end of this world, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the holy Ghost, according to Christ his institution.

Also we believe and confess, that Baptism is that sea, into the bottom
whereof, as the Prophet says, God does cas^ all our sins, and forgive them
for Christ his Sons sake, thorough faith. But whereas some affirm, that
sin remaining in man after baptism, is not indeed sin of it own nature,
we think it to be a more pernicious error, then the common sort of men does
judge it to be: For, although we do not doubt, but that sin which remains
after baptism, is forgiven to the faithful for Christ, and, by the free
mercy of God, is not imputed any longer before the tribunal seat of God;
yet if a man weigh and consider the nature thereof, it is in deed in it self
sin, by reason whereof, as Augustine said before, No man living is justified
in the fight of God* and, there is not a just man in the earth, which does
good, and sins not. Romans 7. I see another law in my members, rebelling
against the law of my mind, and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which
is in my members. Here Paull speaks of sin, which remains after baptism,
and he affirms, that it does rebel against the law of his mind, that is,
against the affection of the holy Ghost. Now, that which rebelleth against the
holy Ghost, undoubtedly it is necessary, that it be very sin indeed. For this
is the nature of sin, that it strive against the holy Ghost. And Galat. 5.
it is said: The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh: and these are contrary one to the other, so that ye cannot do the same
things that ye would. Here again Paull speaks of sin remaining after
baptism: and does manifestly attribute to it the nature of sin, to wit, to
lust against the Spirit, to be contrary to the Spirit, and to hinder, that
righteousness may not be perfect in man. Therefore sin remaining after
baptism, of it nature is indeed sin, although it be not imputed to him that
believes, but is forgiven for Christ. And therefore Augustine in his book, De
Nupt. and Concup. ad Valor. Lib. 1. Cap. 25. says, It is answered, that the
concupiscence of the flesh is forgiven in Baptism, not that there should be no
concupiscence, but that it should not be imputed to sin. For although the
guilt be already discharged* yet the sin remains, till all our infirmity
be healed, etc. And again, De Baptis. paru^lorum, and de Cons. Did. 4. Cap.
Per Baptismum: Through Baptism it is brought to pass, that the flesh of sin
be made void, yet it is not so made void, that ingendered concupiscence
should not remain in the flesh, but that it should not hurt.

Moreover we teach, that he which is baptized in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, is sprinkled with a spiritual
anointing, that is, is made a member of Christ through faith, and endued with
the holy Ghost, that the ears of his mind may be opened, and the eyes of
his heart lightened, to receive and understand heavenly things. And it is
evident, that the use of outward anointing was lawful in that government
which Moses instituted, and that outward anointing was used also in the
Church, after that the Gospel was published. But it is also evident, that in
the law of Moses, there was a time for shadows, but now, Christ being
revealed, it is the time of truth, and the use of external anointing
pertains to the rudiments of the world. Concerning the abrogating of these
rudiments, Paul says, Col. 2. If ye be de^d with Christ from the rudiments of
the world, why, as though ye (...) in the world, are ye burdened with
traditions. And Dyoni^i^^, In Caelest. Hierar. De Baptis.
whom they call Areopagita, and whom they think to have written out the
ceremonies, which the Apostles delivered to the Church, does insinuate, that an
outward anointing was used in the Church, but with all he does insinuate, and
that not obscurelie, that this ceremony was taken, partly from the heathnish
annointings which wrestlers did use, and partly out of the law of Moses. But
by what authority, or with what profitte, we may take examples of the
Heathen, how to worship God, and to administer his Sacraments, that saying of
Moses, Deuteronomy 12 does witness, Take heed that thou do not imitate the heathen,
and enquire after their ceremonies, saying, As these nations worshipped their
Gods, so will I do likewise. Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God. And
that saying of Christ, Mat. 15. In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrine, the precepts of men. And it is not to be doubted, that the ceremonies
of Moses, whereof one part is the use of external anointing, do pertain to
the rudiments of this world, to whose decrees Paull said before that we are not
tied: and whereof he says in another place, Seeing th^^ ye know God, yea,
rather are known of God, how turn ye again unto impotent and beggarly
rudiments, whereunto, as from the beginning, ye will be in bondage again?
Furthermore, how can it truly be affirmed, as Fabianus writes, that the
making or ceremony of the outward anointing, should be taught of the Apostles,
seeing that the Acts of Counsels do witness, that this Ceremony was
instituted of Syluester? And the Ecclesiastical history does sh^we, that the
Apostles had no purpose to make laws concerning holy days, but to teach men
true godliness, and an upright conversation: how muchlesse did they purpose, to
institute external annointings in the Church, and to bring in shadows, where
the sun does shine most clearly.

There were added unto Baptism certain other ceremonies also, of salt,
durte, apparel: but because these are not thought necessary, no not of
themselves, amongst whom they are used, and are in some sort an idle
imitation of those ceremonies, which Christ sometime used in doing miracles,
there is no cause why we should take any care for them, whilst we are
conversant in so many necessary things.

Of confirmation. CHAP. 11.
WE do not doubt, but that the Apostles in the beginning, when the Gospel was
revealed, and confirmed in the day of Pentecost, did by the laying one of
hands, give unto the believers in Christ that wounderfull gift of the holy
Ghost, to wit, that they might speak with tongues. But of a personal and
temporal fact of the Apostles, a general and temporal sacrament can not be
ordained in the Church, without the special commandment of God. And it is a
horrible thing to be heard, that the Sacrament of confirmation (such as the
Bishops Suffragans use to give unto Children) should excel in dignity the
Sacrament of Baptism. For thus some of them are not In decret. epist.
Mel^iadis. To. 1. in Act is Council.
ashamed to write of the sacrament of Confirmation: As one thing, say they, is
done of the greater, that is, of the chief Bishops, which cannot be done of
the lesser: so is it to be worshipped, and embraced with greater reverence. For
to the Apostles it was commanded of God, that by the laying on of hands, they
should give, to those that believe in Christ, the gifts of the holy Ghost.
Now we must not understand this properly of those private gifts of the holy
Ghost, which are necessary to every one unto salvation (for those the
faithful receive by the preaching of the Gospel, and by baptism) but we must
understand it of the public gifts of the holy Ghost, to wit, speaking with
diverse tounges, and other gifts, which then were necessary for the public
confirmation of the Gospel touching Christ. Therefore after that the authority
of the Gospel was sufficiently confirmed by such miracles, as that
wounderfull gift of tongues did cease, so also the ceremone of laying on of
hands, whereby that gift was given, did altogether, as touching this thing,
cease. Otherwise of a shadow we must make a general Sacrament of the Church,
and those that are sick, must be shadowed over, because that many were healed
by the shadow of Peter. In like sort we must make a general Sacrament of the
laying one of napkines, because that many were healed of their diseases, when
Paulls napkins were laid upon then: and we must ^e upon the dead, because that
Paul by stret^ching himself upon a young man, did raise him up from death.
And yet the Pastors of Churches must not have liberty, to have no regard to
instruct children and youth i^ that doctrine which is in deed Godly, but they
must be forced hereunto, to teach the Catechism very diligently.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of Baptism. CHAP. 17.
AS touching Baptism we confess, that which the Scripture does in diverse
places teach thereof, that Romans 6. 1. Cor. 12. Gal. 3. Tit. 3. Act. 22. 1. Pet.
3.
we by it are buried into the death of Christ, made one body, and do put on
Christ: that it is the font of regeneration* washes away sins, and saves
us. But all these things we do so understand, as Saint Peter has interpreted
them, where he says, To the figure whereof, Baptism, that now is, ^^swering,
does also save us, not by putting away of the filthe of the flesh, but the
profession of a good conscience toward God. For without faith it is impossible
to please God. And, we are saved by grace, and not by our works. And seeing
that Baptism is a Sacrament of that covenant, which God has made with those
that be his, promising that he will be their god, and the god of their seed,
and that he will be a revenger of wrongs, and take them for his people; to
conclude, seeing it is a token of the renewing of the Spirit, which is wrought
by Christ: therefore our Preachers do teach, that it is to be given to Infants
also, as well as that in times past under Moses they were circumcised: For we
are in deed the Children of Abraham, and therefore that promise, I will be thy
God, and the Gal. 3.
God of thy seed, does no less perteine unto us, then it did to that ancient
people.

THE FOVRTENTH SECTION. OF THE HOLY SVPPER OF the Lord.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of the holy Supper of the Lord. CHAP. 21.
THE Supper of the Lord (which is also called the Lords table, and the
Eucharist, that is, a thanksgiving) is therefore commonly called a supper,
because it was instituted of Christ in that his last supper, and does as yet
represent the same, and in it the faithful are spirituallie fed and nourished:
For the author of the supper of the Lord, is not an Angel or man, but the
very son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, who did first of all consecrate it to
his Church. And the same blessing and consecration does still remain amongst
all those who celebrate no other supper, but only that, which the Lord did
institute, and at that do recite the words of the supper of the Lord, and in
all things look unto Christ only by a true faith, at whose hands as it were
they do receive that which they do receive, by the ministry of the ministers
of the Church. The Lord by this sacred rite would have that great benefit to be
kept in fresh remembrance, which he did for mankind, to weet, that by giving
up his body to death, and shedding his blood, he has forgiven us all our
sins and redeemed us from eternal death and the power of the devil, and does
now feed us with his flesh and gives us his blood to drink, which things
being apprehended hended spirituallie by a true faith, do nourish us up to
life everlasting. And this so great a benefit is renewed, so often as the supper
is celebrated. For the Lord said, Do this in remembrance of me.

By this holy Supper also it is sealed up unto us, that the very body of Christ
was truly given up for us, and his blood was shed for the remission of our
sins, lest that our faith might somewhat waver. And this is outwardly
represented unto us, by the minister, in the sacrament, after a visible manner,
and as it were laid before our eyes to be seen, which is inwardly in the
font muisiblie performed by the holy Ghost. Outwardly bread is offered by
the minister, and the words of the Lord are heard, Receive, eat, this is my
body, take it, and divide it amongst you: drink ye all of this, this is my
blood. Therefore the faithful do receive that which is given by the minister
of the Lord, and do eat the bread of the Lord, and drink of the Lords cup.
But yet by the working of Christ through the holy ghost, they receive also the
flesh and blood of the Lord, and do feed on them to life everlasting. For the
flesh and blood of Christ is true meat and drink unto everlasting life, yea
Christ himself, in that he was delivered for us, and is our savior, is that
special thing and substance of the supper, and therefore we suffer no thing to
be put in his place.

But that it may the better and more plainly be understood, how the flesh and
blood of Christ are the meat and drink of the faithful, and are received by
the faithful to life everlasting, we will add moreover these four things.
Eating is of diverse sorts: for there is a corporal eating, whereby meat is
taken into a man's mouth chewed with the teeth, and is swallowed down into the
belly. After this manner did the Capernaits in times past think, that they
should eat the flesh of the Lord, but they are confuted by him, John. 6. For as
the flesh of Christ can not be eaten bodily, without great wickedness and
cruelty, so is it not meat for the belly, as all men do confess. We therefore
disalow that Canon in the Popes decrees, Ego Berengarius, de consecrat.
Distinct. 2, For neither did godly antiquity believe, neither yet do we
believe, that the body of Christ can be eaten corporally, and essentiallie,
with a bodily mouth.

There is also a spiritual eating of Christ's body, not such a one, whereby it
may be thought, that the very meat is changed into the spirit, but whereby
(the Lords body and blood remaining in their own essence and propriety) those
things are spiritually communicated unto us, not after a corporal, butafter a
spiritual manner through the holy Ghost, who dothapply and bestow upon us those
things (to wit, remission of sins, deliverance, and life everlasting, which
are prepared for us by the flesh and blood of our Lord, which were given for
us: so as Christ does now live in us, and we live in him, and does cause us to
apprehend him by a true faith, to this end, that he may become unto us such a
spiritual meat and drink, that is to say, our life. For even as corporal meat
and drink do not only refresh and strengthen our bodies, but also do keep
them in life, even so the flesh of Christ delivered, and his blood shed for us,
do not only refresh and strengthen our souls, but also do preserve them alive,
not because *Look the 1 obseruat. upon this confess.
they be corporally eaten and dronken, but for that they are communicated unto
us spirituallie by the spirit of God, the Lord saying, The bread which I will
give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of this world: also, my flesh
(to wit, corporally eaten) profits nothing, it is the spirit which gives
life. And, the words which I speak to you, are spirit and life. And as we must
by eating receive the meat into our bodies, to the end that it may work in us,
and show his force in our bodies, because while it is without us, it profits
us not at all; even so it is necessary, that we receive Christ by faith, that
he may be made ours, and that he may live in us, and we in him. For he says,
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me, shall not thirst any more. And also, He that eats me, shall
live through me, and he abides in me, and I in him. By all which it appears
manifestly, that by spiritual meat we mean not, an Imaginary, but the very
body of the Lord Jesus, given to us, which yet is received of the faithful,
not corporally, but spiritually, by faith: in which point we do wholly follow
the doctrine of our Lord and savior Christ, In the 6. of John. And this eating
of the flesh, and drinking of the blood of the Lord, is so necessary to
salvation, that without it no man can be saved. This spiritual eating and
drinking is also without the supper of the Lord, even so often as, and
whersoeuer a man does believe in Christ. To which purpose that sentence of S.
Austin does happily belong* why do thou prepare thy teeth and belly?
Believe, and thou have eaten.

Besides that former spiritual eating, there is a sacramental eating of the
body of the Lord, whereby the faithful man is partaker, not only
spirituallie and internallie, of the true body and blood of the Lord, but also
outwardly, by coming to the table of the Lord, does receive the visible
sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord True it is, that a faithful man
by believing did before receive the food that gives life, and still receives
the same, but yet when he receives the sacrament, he receives something more.
For he goes on in continual communication of the body and blood of the Lord,
and his faith is daily more and more kindled, more strengthened, and
refreshed, by the spiritual nourishment. For while we live, faith has
continual encreasings: and he that outwardly does receive the sacraments with
a true faith, the same does receive not the sign only, but also does enjoy
(as we have said) the thing it self. Moreover, the same man does obey the
Lords institution and commandment, and with a joyful mind gives thanks
for his and the redemption of all mankind, and makes a faithful remembrance
of the Lords death, and does witness the same before the Church, of which body
he is a member. This also is sealed up to those which receive the sacraments,
that the body of the Lord was given and his blood shed, not only for men in
general, but particularly for every faithful communicant, whose meat and
drink he is to life everlasting. But as for him that without faith comes to
this holy table of the Lord, he is made partaker of the sacrament only, but the
matter of the sacrament, from whence comes life and salvation, he receives
not at all: And such men do unworthily eat of the Lords table. Now they which
do unworthily eat of the Lords bread and drink of the Lords cup, they are
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and they eat and drink it to their
Judgment. For when as they do not approach with true faith, they reproach and
despite the death of Christ, and therefore eat and drink condemnation, to
themselves.

We do not then so join the body of the Lord and his blood with the bread
and wine, as though we thought, that the bread is the body of Christ, more then
after a sacramental manner, or that the body of Christ does lie hid
corporally under the bread, so as it ought to be worshipped under the forms
of bread, or yet that he which receives the sign, receives the thing it
self. The body of Christ is in the heavens, at the right hand of his Father.
And therefore our hearts are to be lifted up on high, and not to be fixed on
the bread, neither is the Lord to be worshipped in the bread, though
notwithstanding the Lord is not absent from his Church, when as they celebrate
the Supper. The Son being absent from us in the heavens, is yet not
withstanding present amongst us effectually. How much more Christ the son of
righteousness, though in body he be absent from us in the heavens, yet is
present amongst us, not corporally, but spirituallie, by his lively
operation, and so, he himself has promised in his last supper to be present
amongst us. John. 14. 15. and 16. Whereupon it follows, that we have not the
Supper without Christ, and yet have an unbloody and mystical Supper, even as
all antiquity called it.

Moreover we are admonished, in the celebration of the supper of the Lord, to
be mindeful of the body whereof we are made members, and that therefore we be at
concord with all ourbrethren, that we may live holily, and not pollute our
selves with wickedness, and strange religions, but perseuering in the true
faith to the end of our life, give diligence to excel in holiness of life. It
is therefore very requisite, that purposing to come to the supper of the Lord,
we do try our selves, according to the commandment of the Apostle, first
with what faith we are endued, whether we believe that Christ is come to save
sinners, and to call them to repentance, and whether each man believe that he
is in the number of them, that being delivered by Christ, are saved, and
whether he have purposed to change his wicked life, to live holilie, and
persevere through Gods assistance in true religion, and in concord with his
brethren, and to give worthy thanks to God for his delivery, etc.

We think that rite, manner, or form of the Supper to be the most simple and
excellent, which comes nearest to the first institution of the Lord, and to
the Apostles doctrine. Which does consist, in declaring the word of God, in
godly prayers, the action it self that the Lord used, and the repeating of
it, the eating of the Lords body and drinking of his blood, the wholesome
remembrance of the Lords death, and faithful giving of thanks, and in an holy
fellowship in the union of the body of the Church. We therefore disalow them,
which have taken from the faithful one part of the sacrament, to wit, the
Lords cup. For these do very grieuouslie offend against the institution of
the Lord, who says, drink you all of this, which he did not so plainly say
of the bread. What manner of Mass it was, that the Fathers used, whether it
were tolerable, or intolerable, we do not now dispute. But this we say
freely, that the Mass (which is now used throughout the Romish Church) for
many and most just causes, is quite abolished out of our Churches, which
particularly we will not now recite for breuities sake. Truly we could not
like of it, because that of a most wholesome action, they have made a vain
spectacle, also because it is made a meritorious matter, and is said for money:
likewise because that in it the Priest is said to make the very body of the
Lord, and to offer the same reallie, even for the remission of the sins, of
the quick and the dead. Add this also, that they do it for the honor,
worship, and reverence of the saints in heaven, etc.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Art. 22.
Of the Lords Supper.
WE say that the supper is a mystical thing, wherein the Lord does in deed
offer, unto those that are his, his body, and blood, that is, himself, to this
end, that he may more and more live in them, and they in him: not that the
body and blood of the Lord are either naturally united to bread and wine, or
be locallie here enclosed, or be placed here by any carnal presence, but that
bread and wine, by the institution of the Lord, are signs, whereby the true
communication of his body and blood is exhibited of the Lord himself, by the
ministry of the Church, not to be meat for the belly, which does perish,
but to be nourishmet unto eternal life. We do therefore use this holy meat
oftentimes, because that being admonished hereby, we do with the eyes of
faith behold the death and blood of Christ crucified, and meditating upon our
salvation, not without a taste of heavenly life, and a true sense of life
eternal, we are refreshed, with this spiritual, lively, and inward food,
with an unspeakable sweetness: and we do rejoice with a joy that cannot be
expressed in words, for that life which we have found, and ^e do wholly, and
with all our strength, power out thanksgiving for so wonderful a benefit of
Christ bestowed upon us. Therefore we are most unworthily charged of some, who
think that we do attribute very l^^le to these holy signs. For these things
look the 1. obseru. upon this confess.
be holy, and to be reverenced, as those which were instituted and received, of
our high Priest Christ, exhibiting unto us, after their manner, as we have
said, the things signified, giving witness of the things done, representing
very difficult things unto us, and by a certain wonderful Analogy of
things signified, bringing light to those most evident mysteries. Moreover,
they minister aid and help even to faith it self: and, to conclude, they do
serve in stead of an oath, to bind him that is entered into the profession of
Christianity. Thus holilie do we think of the sacred signs. But we do
always attribute the force and virtue of quickening and sanctifying to him,
who is life it self, to whom be praise for ever.

Amen.
Out of the declaration of the same confession. Of the holy Supper of the Lord.
THe Supper of the Lord is a Sacrament, to wit, the holy institution of the
Lord, whereby he does renew and witness unto us his bountifullnes, to wit, the
communion of his body and blood, and that by a visible sign. For by bread
and wine he does declare unto us what he gives, namely himself, to be the
nourishment of our life: for he by his body and blood does feed us to life
eternal. Therefore the very gift of God (that is, the body and blood of the
Lord, to wit, the body of the Lord delivered unto death for us, and his blood
shed for the remission of sins) is the chiefest part of this Sacrament. For
the body and blood of Christ is thus made or prepared to be the lively meat
of our souls. The Son of god does die in the flesh for us, that he might
quicken us, he pours out his blood, that he might cleanse us from our sins.
To conclude, he raises up his body from the dead, that our bodies may
receive hope, and strength to rise again. Thus therefore does the Lord offer
himself to be eaten and possessed of us, and not a certain false imagination
of a man, or an idle picture, in his stead. For, beside him there is nothing
in heaven, or in earth, that may feed and satiate our souls. Now we do
indeed eat the body, and we do indeed drink the blood of our Lord, but not so
rawlie, as the Papists have hitherto taught, to wit, the bread being changed
into natural flesh, substantiallie (that is, corporally, or carnally) or the
body being included in the bread, but spirituallie, that is after a spiritual
manner, and with a faithful mind. The Lord is eaten indeed, and with fruit,
by faith, that now he may live wholly in his, and his in him.

Moreover, these holy gifes of God (which are not given of any other, then of
the Lord himself) according to the institution of the Lord, are represented
unto us by visible signs, to wit, bread and wine, and offered to our senses,
not that we should rest in them, but that our weakness may be helped, and we
may lift up our hearts unto the Lord, knowing that here we must think upon
greater things, to wit, not of eating bread, or drinking wine, but of
receiving the Lord himself, with all his gifts, by a faithful mind.
Therefore when the guestes see the bread on the board, they set their (...)
upon the body of Christ, when they see the cup, they set their minds upon
the blood of Christ: when they see the bread broken, and the wine poured out,
they consider how that the body of Christ was tormented, and his blood poured
out for their sakes: as by bread the bodies are nourished and strengthened, as
by wine the minds are made merry; so the godly do believe, that by the body
of the Lord, delivered unto death for them, they are fed to everlasting life
also, that by his blood poured out upon the cross, their consciences are
renewed: to conclude, they do feel the quickening power of Christ, which does
confirm them. In this sort is the supper of the Lord, accomplished
spirituallie, thus are the bread and wine a sacrament unto us, and not bare and
naked signs. Hereupon now arises a very great rejoicing, and thanksgiving,
for so great benefits, also apraising, and confessing of the name of God: here
those works, which the Lord once finished, are renewed, and represented: but
especially the death of the Lord is repeated, which although it once happened,
and now is past, yet unto the faithful it is as yet fresh and present. For the
remembrance of the death of Christ, which we make in the Supper, is far more
noble and holy, then theirs, who in some profane banquet are mindful of
their companion, when they drink the wine that he gave them. For among these,
he that is absent works nothing: but in this holy supper of the faithful
the Lord is present, and does work effectually by the spirit in the hearts
of them, as he, who, according to his promises, is in the midst of them.

By these things it is most evident, that in the holy supper we do not take
away our Lord Christ from his Church, nor deny that his body and blood is
there received to be our nourishment unto life eternal: but we together with
our predecessors, and the chief Prelates of our Religion, did, and as yet to
this day, do deny, that the very body of Christ is eaten carnally, or
that it is present every where corporally, and after a natural manner. For
we do openly confess, according to the Scriptures, and with all the holy
Fathers, that Jesus Christ our Lord left this world, and went to his Father:
and that he now sits at the right hand of his Father in heavenly glory,
from whence he shall never descend, or be drawn down into this earthly and
transitory world. For the true presence of Christ in the supper, is heavenly,
not earthly, or carnal. Also we deny that the bread is turned into the body
of Christ miraculously, so that the bread should become the verybody of Christ
naturally, and substantially, yet after a spiritual manner. To conclude, we
deny that the body of Christ is united with the signs, by any other then a
mystical mean, whereof we have spoken sufficiently in the general
consideration of a sacrament. Seeing therefore we have expresselie said and
written with the holy Fathers, Tertullian, Hierome, Ambrose, and Augustine,
that the bread is a figure, token, and sign of the body of Christ; and also,
that by bread and wine the body and blood of the Lord are signified, This is
it which we would make manifest, to wit, that the bread is not the very body
of the Lord, but a token, or a sacrament of his body. And yet we do not
therefore speak these things, as though we did simply deny all kind of the
presence of Christ in the supper: for that kind of presence which now we have
confessed, does remain true, without any prejudice to these kind of
speeches. Morouer, the word This, in this sentence This is my body, does not
only show bread unto our corp^rall eyes, but therewith also it shows the
very body (...) Christ unto the eyes of our mind.

Also we confess, that this use of the supper is so holy, a^^ profitable, that
whosoever shall worthelie, that is, with ^ true faith, eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup of the Lord, he does receive heavenly gifts from the
Lord: (...) Whosoever shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup,
^^worthelie, that is, without faith, (by which alone we are made partakers of
the Lord, and of salvation) He does (...) and drink judgment unto himself,
as Paull wrote to the Corinthians. Wherefore we do often put this diligently
i^to the heads of our people, that they take heed, that none of them abuse
the Lords table, but that every one examine himself, and then eat of that
bread, and drink of th^^ cup. Also, the Lords Supper is a badge unto us;
for as one lofe, and one wine, are made of many grains and grapes, so we,
being the wholl multitude of the faithful, are gathered together to be one
bread, and one body. By this we testify in an outward profession, that we are
redeemed by the blood of Christ, and made the members of Christ, to whom we
give thanks, in whom we are confederates, and do promise to perform mutual
duties one toward another.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Of the Supper of the Lord.
WE confess that the Lord Jesus did institute his Art. 6.
holy Supper, that his holy passion might be remembered with thanksgiving, his
death declared, and Christian charity and unity, with true faith testified.
And as i^ Baptism (wherein the washing away of our sins is offered by the
Minister of the Church, and yet is wrought only by the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost,) true water remains; so also in the Supper of the Lord
(wherein together with the bread and wine of the Lord, the true body and the
true blood of Christ is offered by the Minister of the Church) bread and wine
remains. Moreover, we do firmly believe, that Christ himself is the meat
of faithful souls unto life eternal, and that our souls by faith in Christ
crucified, are fed and moistened with the flesh and John. 11. Ephesians. 1. 4. and
5. Col. 1.
blood of Christ; so that we, being members of his body, as of our only
head, do live in him, and he in us, wherein at the last day, through him, and
in him, we shall rise again to eternal joy and blessedness.

And in the marginall note, upon these words, Our souls.

For it is a spiritual meat, and therefore it is received of a faithful
soul, that is, the souls are made full, strong, mighty, peaceable, quiet,
merry, and lively to all things, as the body is by the corporal meat. Also
upon those words. The members of the head. And so man is made a spiritual
member of the body of Christ. And in the margent upon these words, To be
present: to wit, Sacramentallie, and by a rememberance of faith, which lifts
up a man's mind to heaven, and does not pull down Christ, according to his
humanity, from the right hand of God.

Now we do not include into the bread and drink of the Lord, the natural,
true, and substantial body of Christ, which was borne of the pure Virgin Mary,
suffered for us, and ascended into heaven. Therefore we do neither worship
Christ Col. 3. Heb. 1. and 10.
in the signs of bread and wine, which we do commonly call the Sacraments of
the body and blood of Christ: but Act. 3. 2. Tim 4.
in heaven, at the right hand of god the Father, from whence he shall come to
judge the quick and the dead.

OVT OF THE CONFSSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of the holy Supper of the Lord. CHAP. 13.
IN the thirteenth place we teach, touching the Supper of the Lord instituted
in the new Testament, that we must believe with the heart, and profess with
the mouth, that it is a Sacrament instituted of Christ our Lord, in his last
Supper, and that in express form of words; that is, that concerning bread
and wine, he has pronounced, tha^ Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Luc. 22.
they be his body, and his blood, and that they were delivered to his
Apostles, and so in like sort to the whole universal Church, for a monument of
his death, and that all men should lawfully use the participation thereof,
even to the end of the world. Of this Sacrament the Evangelists do write,
and especially Saint Paull, whose words even t^ this day are thus read in
the Church: I have received of (...) 1. Cor. 11.
Lord, that which I also have delivered unto you, to wit, that the (...) Jesus,
in that night, wherein he was betrayed, took bread, etc. A^^ a little after,
When ye come together (to wit, to the Supper (...) the Lord) Let one tarry for
an other. Therefore according (...) these things, we believe with the heart,
and confe^e with the mouth, that this bread of the Lords Supper is the body
of the Lord Jesus Christ, delivered for us: and th^^ this Cup, or the wine in
the Cup, is likewise shed for us for the remission of sins. And this we
affirm according to the express words of Christ, wherein he says, This is
my body, This is my blood. Which words may not be taken or understood of any
other thing, nor be otherwise referred, then only to the bread, and cup of
the Lord: and the body and blood of the Lord can not be understood of any
other, then of the only true and proper body of Christ (which he made meat
by his torments) and of his blood, which being largely poured out of his
body, he appointed to be drink for his Church: for he had not a natural
body, and another blood. Therefore our Ministers do teach, that to these
certain words pronounced by Christ our Lord, (wherein he does peculiarly
pronounce, witness, and institute bread to be his body, and wine to be his
blood) I say, to these words no man may add any thing, no man may detract
any thing from them: but every man in these words is to believe Look the 1.
obseru. upon this confess.
that, which of them selves they signify, an^ that no man ought to turn from
them, either to the right hand, or to the left.

Yet to expound the meaning of this faith, we do further teach, that although
the bread be the body of Christ, according to his institution, and wine be his
blood, yet neither of these do leave it nature, or change or lose it
substance, but that the bread is, and does remain bread, and that the wine
is, and does remain wine, as also the holy August. I^ Joan. Tract. 80. and
Epist. 23. ad Bonifa.
Scripture does give this it own name to either of them. Otherwise, if it
should cease to be an element, it should not be a Sacrament, seeing that a
Sacrament is then made, when the word is added to the element. Neither could
it signify, or bear witness, if it had nothing in stead of that thing,
whereof it is a Sacrament, or if the thing signified should have any other
manner of presence, then that which is Sacramental. Wherefore this speech,
Bread is the body, and, wine is the blood of Christ, is a Sacramental
speech, to wit, that these two distinct things, do remain the self same
thing, which in their own nature they be, and yet by reason of a Sacramental
union, or Sacramentallie, they be that also, which they do signify, and
whereof they do testify, and yet not in their own nature, or after a
natural manner, but by the institution, pronouncing, or witnessing of the
author, as Paull does excellently expound this, where he thus writes, The
cup which we bless, is it not the communion of the 1 Cor. 10.
blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ?

Now, both the good, and the wicked do use this Sacrament, and yet the true
believers do receive it to life, and those which do not believe, do receive
it to judgment and condemnation. And although either of them do receive this
Sacrament, and Look the 2. obseruat. upon this confess.
the truth thereof Sacramentallie and outwardly, yet the believers do receive
it spirituallie, and so to their salvation: without which spiritual receiving,
there is no worthy receiving in the Sacramental use. For by this mean we are
ingrafted into Christ, and into his body, and by this mean is that true
union, and communion of Christ with his Church, made* and in like sort by this
mean is the communion of the holy Church, which is a certain spiritual
body, made amongst and with them selves, whereof the Apostle writes, There is
one bread, and we being many are one body, seeing we are all made partakers
of one bread. 1. Cor. 10*


Moreover, we are further taught, that with this ministry, or Sacrament of
the Lord, no other thing ought to be done, or taken in hand, then that one
thing, which was showed, ordained, and expresselie commanded of Christ
himself, as when he reached bread, severally, and peculiarly to his
Disciples, and in express words, said, Take, eat, the is my body: and in
like sort, when he reached to them the (...) severally, and peculiarly,
saying, Drink ye all of this, Th^^ (...) my blood: Thus therefore, according
to this commandment, the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ must be
distributed only, and be received in common of the faithful, or believing
Christians: but it must not be sacrificed, (...) set before them, or lifted up,
or showed forth, to this end, the there it may be worshipped, or kept, or
carried about. A^^ both these must be received in several elements, the body
peculiarly and severally, and also his holy blood severally, as either of
them were of the Lord instituted, reache^ forth, and given in common to all his
Disciples, severally. And this doctrine was used in the first holy Church,
an^ this Sacrament was wholly distributed in both parts, and so received. But
he that beside, or contrary to these commandments, and institution of
Christ, dare bring in any other thing, or somewhat more, and use it with this
Sacrament, or wantonelie invent therein at his pleasure, he does manifestly,
and malapertly against our Lord, who instituted this Sacrament, and commits
a thing clean contrary to his holy Testament, and last will, which was
declared in his own words, and that expresselie.

Also this Sacrament ought to be received and administered, without adoration,
and without that worship which is due to God alone: yet with a due kind of
religion, and reverence, and chiefly with that, which is the chiefest of all,
namely with faith and examination of himself, which in this action is most
acceptable to Christ our Lord, and most profitable for men, which also Saint
Paull taught the 1. Cor. 11.
first Church, and exhorted it hereunto, saying, Let every man try or examine
himself, and so let him eateof that bread, and drink of that cup. For he
that eats, and drinks unworthily, does eat and drink his own judgment,
or condemnation, because he dis^erneth not the Lords body. And in another
place, ^. Co^. 13.
Prove your selves, whether ye are in the faith: examine your selves: know ye
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?
Now I pray unto God, that ye do no evil. If so be that any man approach to
this table, without such a trial, and not making himself worthy, who has
not first examined himself, what manner of faith he has, with what purpose he
came to this sacrament, or how he had prepared himself hereunto: I say, such
a man should greatly profane and reproach this sacrament, yea the wholl
institution hereof appointed by Christ. For which cause the Ministers of our
Churches do admit none to this Sacrament, neither give it unto any, but to
such as are noted to come unto it seriously, and do, so much as in them
lies, prepare themselves hereunto after such a manner, as becomes Christian
godliness.

Now when the congregation does come together to celebrate the use of the
Lords Supper, and be partakers thereof, then according to the example of the
primitive Church, our ministers do teach in their holy Sermons concerning
Christ, and concerning the grace, which through him, and in him is given to
sinners, and especially concerning his death, the shedding of his blood, and
the redemption and salvation purchased thereby. After that the wholl Church
does join together in faithful prayers unto God, to obtain this, that they
may indeed use this Sacrament worthelie. Loo kethe 3. obseur.
Moreover, in the next place absolution from sins is lawfully administered,
the words of the institution are rehearsed, and the people by exhortation is
stirred up, to a reverent consideration of this mystery, and to a cheerful
and serious contemplation of the benefits of God, the sacrament is reverently
with all godliness distributed* and the people of the faithful, Look the 4.
obseruat.
most commonly falling down on their knees, do receive this sacrament with
thanksgiving, with gladness, with singing of hymns, or holy songs, and they
show forth the death of the Lord, and admonish themselves of all his benefits,
to the confirmation of their faith, in a true communion with Christ, and his
body. And all this we do, according to the meaning of those things, which are
commanded in the holy Scripture, especially according to the saying of
Christ, Do this in remembrance of me: and Paul Luc 2^. 1. Cor. 11.
says, So often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall
show forth the death of the Lord, till he come.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
Art. 36.
WE affirm that the holy Supper of the Lord, to wit, the other Sacrament, is
a witness to us of (...) uniting with our Lord Jesus Christ, because that he is
not only once dead, and raised up again from the dead for us, but also he
does in deed feed us, and nourish (...) with his flesh and blood, that we
being made one wi^^ him, may have our life common with him. For although* he
be now in heaven, and shall remain there, till (...) come to judge the world;
yet we believe, that by the secret and incomprehensible virtue of his Spirit,
he do^^ nourish, look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
and quicken us with the substance of his body and blood being apprehended by
faith. But we say, that this is done spirituallie, not that we may
counterfeit an imagination or thought in stead of the efficacy and truth, but
rather, because this mystery of our union with Christ is so high a thing, that
it surmounteth all our senses, yea and the wholl order of nature: to conclude,
because that it being divine and heavenly, cannot be perceived nor
apprehended, but by faith.

Art. 37.
We believe, as was said before, that as well in the Supper, as in Baptism,
God does in deed, that is, truly and effectually give, whatsoever he does
there sacramentallie represent: and therefore with the signs we join the true
profession and fruition of that thing, which is there offered unto us:
Therefore we affirm, that they which do bring pure faith, as it were a
certain vessel, unto the holy supper of the Lord, do indeed receive that,
which there the signs do witness, namely, that the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, are no less the meat and drink of the soul, then bread and wine are
the meat of the body. Also out of the 38. Art. a little after the beginning.
And also that that bread and wine, which is given us in the supper, is indeed
made unto us spiritual nourishment, in as much as they do offer unto our eyes
to behold, that the flesh of Christ is o^^ meat, and that his blood is our
drink. Therefore we reject all those fantastical heads, which do refuse
these signs and tokens, seeing that Christ our Lord has said, This is my
body: and, This cup is my blood.

Art. 12.
OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
WE say, that Eucharistia, that is to say, the Supper of the Lord, is a
Sacrament, that is, an evident Representation of the body, and blood of
Christ, wherein is set, as it were, before our eyes, the death of Christ, and
his Resurrection, and whatsoever he did, whilst he was in his Mortal Body:
to the end we may give him thanks for his death, and for our deliverance:
and that by the often receiving of this Sacrament, we may daily renew the
remembrance thereof, to the intent, we being fed with the body, and blood of
Christ, may be brought into the hope of the Resurrection, and of everlasting
life, and may most assuredly believe, that, as our bodies be fed with
bread, and wine, so our souls be fed with the body, and blood of Christ. To
this Banquet we think the people of God ought Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. ^^rm. ^. cap.
^.
to be earnestly bidden, that they may all communicate among themselves, and
openly declare, and testify both the godly society, which is among them,
and also the hope which they have in Christ Jesus. For this cause, if there had
De consecr. Did* 1. cap. omnes.
been any, which would be but a looker on, and abstain from the holy
Communion, him did the old Fathers, and Bishops of Rome in the primitive
Church, before private Mass came up, excommunicate, as a wicked person, and as
a Pagane. Neither was there any (...) at that time which did communicate
alone, whiles other looked on. For Distinct. ^. cap. secul^res.
so did Calixtus in times past decree, That after the consecration was finished,
all should communicate, except (...) had rather stand without the Church
doors. For th^^ (says ^e) did the Apostles De consecr. Did. 2. cap. Peract.
appoint, and the same the holy Church of Rome k^ep^^h still. Moreover, when
the people (...) to ^he holy Communion, the Sacrament ought to be given them
in both kinds: for so both Christ has commanded, and the Apostles in every
place have ordained, and all the ancient Fathers and Catholic Bishops have
followed the same. And who so does contrary to this, he (as Gelasius says)
commits Sacrilege. De cons. di^^. ^. cap. (...).
And therefore we say, that our adversaries at this day, who having violently
thrust out, and quite forbidden the holy Communion, do without the word of
God, without the authority of any ancient Council, without any Catholic
Father, without any example of the primitive Church, yea and without reason
also, defend, and maintain their private Masses, and the mangling of the
Sacraments, and do this, not only against the plain express commandment
of Christ, but also against all antiquity, do wickedlie therein, and are
very Churchrobbers.

We affirm, that the bread, and wine are the holy, and heavenly mysteries of
the body, and blood of Christ, and that by them Christ himself, being the
true bread of eternal life, is so presently given unto us, as that by Faith
we verily receive his body, and blood. Yet say we not this so, as though we
thought, that the nature, and substance of the bread and wine, is clearelie
changed, and goes to nothing, as many have dreamed in these latter times,
and yet could never agree among themselves upon their own dreams. For that
was not Christ's meaning, that the wheaten bread should lay aparte his own
nature, and receive a certain new divinity: but that he might rather change
us, and (to use Theophilactes words) might transform us into his body. For
In Ioa. ca. 6.
what can be said more plainly, then that, which Ambr^^^ De sacra. lib. 4.
cap. 4.
says, Bread and wine remain still the same, they were before: and yet are
changed into another thing: Or rhat which Gela^i^^ says, The substance of the
bread, or the nature of the wine cease In Dialogi^ 1. and 2.
not to be: Or that which Theodor^tus says, After the consecration, the
mystical signs do no^ cast of their own proper nature: for they remain
still in their former substance, form, or kind: Or that which Augustine
says, That which ye see, is the Bread, and In sermon. ad Infantes. Decons. did.
2. cap. Qui man^^casti. In Mat. 15.
Cup, and so our eyes do tell us: but that which your Faith requires to be
taught, is this: The bread is the body of Christ, and the cup is his blood:
Or that which Origin says, The bread, which is sanctified by the word of God,
as touching the material substance thereof, goes into the belly, and is cast
out into the privy: Or that which Christ himself said, not only after the
blessing Luc. 22.
of the cup, but also after he had ministered the communion: I will drink no more
of this fruit of the Vine. It is well known, that the fruit of the vine is wine,
and not blood. And in speaking thus, we mean not to abase the Lords Supper,
or to teach, that it is but a cold ceremony only, and nothing to be wrought
therein: (as many falsely slander us, we teach) For we affirm, that Christ
does truly, and presently give himself wholly in his sacraments: In
Baptism, that we may put him on: and in his Supper, that we may eat him by
Faith, and Spirit, and may have everlasting life by his Cross and blood. And
we say not, this is done slightly, or coldelie, but effectually, and truly
For although we do not touch the body of Christ with teeth and mouth, yet we
hold him fast, and eat him by faith, by understanding, and by Spirit. And it
is no vain faith, that comprehends Christ: neither is it received with cold
devotion, that is received with understanding, Faith, and the Spirit. For
Christ himself altogether is so offered, and given us in these mysteries, that
we may certainly know we be flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones: and
that Christ continues in us, and we in him.

And therefore in celebrating these mysteries, the People are to good purpose
exhorted, before they come to receive the holy communion, to lift up their
hearts, and to direct their De ^^ns. di^^* 1. cap. (...) ^o.
minds to heaven ward: because he is there, by whom we must be fed, and
live. Cyrillus says, when we come to receive these mysteries, all gross
Imaginations must quite be banished. The Council of Nice, as it is alleged by
some in Greek, plainly forbids us to be baselie affectioned, or bent
toward the bread and wine, which are set before us. And, as Chrysostom very
aptelie writes, we say, That the body of Christ is the dead carcass, and we
our selves must be the Egles: meaning thereby, that we must fly on high, if we
will come to the body of Christ. For this Table, as Chrysostom says, is a
table of Egles, and not of Iaies. Cyprian also: This bread, says he, (...)
Dom^ni.
is the food of the soul, and not the meat of the b^llie. And Saint
Augustine says; How shall I hol ie him, being absent? How shall I reach my
hand up to heaven, to lay hol^^ upon him sitting there? In Joan. ^ract. 5^*
He answers, Reach thither thy Faith, and then thou have laid hold on him.

Neither can we away in our Churches with these shows, and sales, and
markettes of Masses, nor with the carrying about, and worshipping of the bread,
nor with such other Idolatrous and Blasphemous sondnes: which none of them can
prove, that Christ, or his Apostles ever ordained, or left unto us. And we
justly blame the Bishops of Rome, who without the word of God, without the
authority of the holy Fathers, without any example of antiquity, after a
new guise, do not only set before the people the sacramental bread to be
worshipped as God, but do also carry the same about upon an ambling Palfraie,
whither soever themselves ^ourney: in such sort, as in old times the Persians
^^re, and the Relics of the Goddess Isis were solemnlie carried about in
procession: and have brought the sacraments of Christ to be used now as a stage
play, and a solemn sight: to the end, that men's eyes should be fed with
nothing else, but with mad gasinges, and foolish gaudies, in the self same
matter, wherein the death of Christ ought diligently to be beaten into our
hearts, and wherein also the mysteries of our Redemption ought with all
holiness, and reverence, to be executed. Besides, where they say, and sometime
do persuade fools, that they are able by their Masses to distribute, and
apply unto men's commodity all the merits of Christ's death, yea, although
many times the parties think nothing of the matter, and understand full little
what is done, this is a mockery, a heathenish fancy, and a very toie. For it
is our faith, that applies the death, and cross of Christ to our benefit,
and not the act of the Massing Priest. Faith had in the sacraments Ad Romans ca.
3. lib. 3.
(says Augustine) does iustisie, and not the sacraments. And Origin says:
Christ is the Priest, the Propitiation, and Sacrifice: which propitiation
comes to every one by mean of Faith. And so, by this reckoning, we say,
that the Sacraments of Christ, without Faith, do not once profitte those,
that be alive* a great deal less do they profitte those that be dead.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. 3^.
WE believe and confess, that Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior has
instituted the holy Sacrament of his supper, that in it he might nourish and
sustain those, whom he has regenerated and engrafted into his family, which
is the Church. But those which are regenerate, have in them a double life, the
one carnal and temporal, which they brought with them from their first
nativity, the which is common unto all: the other spiritual and heavenly,
bestowed upon them in their second nativity, which is wrought in them by the
word of the Gospel, in the union of the body of Christ, the which is
peculiar to the elect alone. And as god has appointed earthly and material
bread, fi^e and convenient for the preservation of this carnal life, which,
even as the life it self, is common unto all: so for the conservation of that
spiritual and heavenly life, which is proper to the faithful, God has sent
lively bread, which came down from heaven, even, Jesus Christ, who nourishes
and sustaineth the spiritual life of the faithful, if he be eaten, that is,
applied and received by faith, through the Spirit. But to the intent that
Christ might figurate and represent unto us this spiritual and heavenly
bread, he has ordained visible and earthly bread and wine for the Sacrament
of his body and ^^ode: whereby he testifies, that as truly as we do
receive and hold in our hands this sign, eating the same with our mouths,
whereby afterward this our life is sustained; so truly we do by faith
(which is in ^^e^de of our soul* hand, and mouth) receive the very body and
true blood of Christ our only Savior, in our selves* unto the conservation
and cherishing of a spiritual life within us. And it is most certain, that
Christ, not without good cause, does so carefully commend unto us this his
Sacrament, as one that does indeed work that within us, whatsoever he
represents unto us by these his holy signs: although the manner it self,
being far above the teach of our capacity, can not be comprehended of any:
because that all Look the 1. obseru. upon this confess.
the operations of the holy Ghost are hidden and incomprehensible. Neither
shall we err in saying, that, Look the 2 obseru.
that which is eaten, is the very natural body of Christ, and that which is
drunk^, is the very blood of Christ: yet the instrument or means* whereby we
do eat and drink them, is not a corporal mouth, but even our soul and
spirit, and that by faith. Christ therefore sits always at the right hand
of his Father in heaven, and yet for all that does not any thing the less
communicate himself unto us by faith. Furthermore, this Supper is the
spiritual table, wherein Christ does offer himself to us, with all his
benefits, to be participated of us, and brings to pass, that in it we are
partakers, as well of himself, as of the merit of his death and passion. For
he himself, look the ^. obseruat.
by the eating of his flesh, does nourish, strengthen, and comfort, our
miserable, afflicted, and comfortles soul, and in like manner, by the drinking
of his blood, does refresh and sustain the same. Moreover, Look the 4.
obseruat.
although the signs be coupled with the things signified, yet both of them are
not received of all. For an evil man verily receives the Sacrament unto his
own condemnation, but the thing or truth of the Sacrament he receives not. As
for example, Judas, and Simon Magus, both of them did receive the Sacramental
sign, but as for Christ himself signified thereby, they received him not. For
Christ is communicated to the faithful only. Last of al, we with great
humility and reverence do communicate the holy Sacrament in that assembly
of Gods people, celebrating the memorial of our Savior Christ's death with
thanksgiving, and making there a public confession of Christian faith and
religion. No man therefore ought to present himself at this holy Supper,
which has not first examined himself, lest that eating this bread, and
drinking of this cup, he do eat and drink his own damnation. Moreover, by
the use of this Sacrament, a most ardent love is kindled within us, both
toward God himself, and also toward our neighbor. Therefore we do here
worthelie reject, as a mere profanation, all the toies, and damnable devises
of men, which they have pres^med to add and mingle with the Sacraments:
affirming that all the godly are content with that only order and rite,
which Christ and his Apostles have delivered unto us, and that they ought to
speak of these mysteries after the same manner, as the Apostles have spoken
before.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
The 2 Article, out of the edition of Wirtemberge Anno. 1531.
TOuching the Supper of the Lord, they teach, that the body and blood of
Christ are there present Look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
in deed, and are distributed to those that eat of the Lord (...) Supper, and
they condemn those that teach otherwise.

The same 10. article in the edition newly corrected, anno 1540. is thus set
down.
TOuching the Supper of the Lord they teach, that together with the bread and
the wine the body and blood of Christ are truly exhibited to them that eat
of the Lords Supper.

Hitherto also pertains the first article, of the abuses, which are changed
in the outward rites and ceremonies. This article is, of the Mass
Our Churches are wrongfullie accused, to have abolished the Mass. For Look
the 2. obseru.
the Mass is retained still among us, and celebrated with great reverence. Yea
and almost all the ceremonies that are in use, saving that, with the songs in
Latin we mingle certain Psalms in Dutch here and there, which be added for
the peoples instruction. For therefore we have need of ceremonies, that the may
teach the unlearned, and that the Preaching of Gods word may stir up some
unto the true fear, trust, and invocation of God. This is not only commanded
by S. Paul, to use a tongue that the people understand, but man's law has also
appointed it. We use the people to receive the sacrament together, if so be
any be found fit thereunto. And that is a thing that does increase the
reverence and due estimation of the public ceremonies. For none are admitted,
except they be first proved, and tried. Besides we use to put men in mind of
the worthiness and use of a sacrament, what great comfort it offers unto
them, which repent, to the end that men may learn to fear God, and believe
in him, and to use prayer and supplication unto him, looking for all good
things at his hands. This is the true worship of Christians. These services,
of fear, faith, prayer, hope, etc. God does like of. When therefore these
services are performed, and exercised in the use of ceremonies, then does the
using of the sacraments please God. So that when as the people is used to the
ceremony, and advertised of the true use thereof, the Masses are said with us
after meet and godly manner. And thus all things are ordered in the Church
with greater gravity and reverence, then in times past. It is not unknown
that these many ages past there has been common and open complaint made by
good men, of the abuse and profaning of Masses. For it is easy to be seen,
how far this abuse has spread it self in all temples and Churches, what
kind of men they are that say the Masses, flat contrary to the prescript of
the Canons. Also how shamefullie they are turned (...) a matter of cursed
lucre. For many there be that say Masses, without repentance, only for the
bellies sake. The^ things are too open and manifest to be kept any longer ^
hugger mugger. Surely it seems that never any religion thing since the world
began was so commonly turned (...) gain, as the Mass. But Saint Paull does
fearefullie threaten them, which deal otherwise with the sacraments, thee is
beseeming the dignity of them, where he says, He that ^^^th this bread and
drinks this cup unworthily, is guilty of the b^^ and blood of the Lord. And
in the 10. commandments, it is written, He that abuses Gods holy name,
shall not escape unpunished As therefore the world has often heretofore been
justly punished for ^dolatrie, so doubtless this shameless profani^^ of Masses
will be fearfully revenged with grievous plagues And it may well be that the
Church in these latter times i^ punished with blindenes, discord, and wars,
and many other plagues, chiefelie for this one cause. And yet these o^^ and
gross abuses have the Bishops (who cannot be ignorant of them) not only
borne with all, but also smoth^^ laughed at them. And now, all to late, they
begin to complain forsooth of the calamity of the Church, when as (...)
other thing has been the occasion of the broiles of these times, but the
abuses themselves, which were now become too open and evident, that modest men
could no longer bear them. I would to God that the Bishops had (as by their
office they might have) long before this brideled, and restrained the
covetousness or impudency, whether of Monks, or of some others, who changing
the manner of the old Church, have made the Mass a money matter.

But it shall not be amiss now to show, whence these abuses did spring at the
first. There is an opinion spread abroad in the Church, that the Supper of the
Lord is a work, which being once done by the Priest, deserves remission of
sins both of the fault, and of the punishment, not only for hi^ that does
it, but also for others: and that because of the work done, although it be
done without any good intent of the doer. Likewise, that if it be applied in
the behalf of the dead, it is satisfactorie, that is, it deserves remission
of the pains of purgatory. And in this meaning they take the word Sacrifice,
when they call the (...) a sacrifice, namely a work, that being done in the
behal^e of some others, does merit for them both remission of the (...) and of
the punishments, and that because of the very work done, even without any
good intent of him that (...) they mean, that the Priest in the Mass does
offer a sacrifice for the quick and the dead. And after this persuasion was
once received, they taught men to seek forgiveness of sins, and all good
things, yea and that the dead were f^eed from punishments, by the benefit of
the Mass. And it made no matter, what kind of men they were, that s^^ed the
Masses: for they taught that they were very available for others, without any
good motion of the vser. Afterward a question arose, whether one Mass said
for many, was as available, as several Masses for several persons. And this
disputation did augment the number of Masses, and the gain that came in by
them, out of measure. But we dispute not not now of the gain, we only accuse
the impiety of them. For our Divines do prove planlie, that this opinion, of
the meriting and applying of the Mass, is both false and impious. This is the
state of this controversy between us and them.

And it is no hard matter for the godly to judge of this point, if a man will
but weigh the arguments that follow First, we have proved before, that men do
obtain remission of sins freely by faith, that is, by sure trust to obtain
mercy for Christ's sake. It is then impossible for a man to ob^aine remission
of sins for another man's work, and that without any good motion, that is,
without his own faith. This reason does very evidently overthrow that
monstrous and impious opinion, touching the merit and application of the Mass.

Secondly, Christ's passion was an oblation and satisfaction not only for
original sin, but also for all other sins, as it is written, in the
epistle to the Hebr. We are sanctified by the oblation of Christ once offered.
Again, By one oblation he has made perfect for ever those that are
sanctified. To conclude, a good part of the Epistle to the Heb. is spent in
confirming this point, that the only sacrifice of Christ did merit remission
of sins, or reconciliation, for others. Therefore (says he) the Leuiticall
sacrifices were often times offered in one manner, because they could not take
away sins. But Christ by his sacrifice has (...) once satisfied for the
sins of all men. This honor of Christ's sacrifice must not be transferred
from him to the work of a Priest. For he says expresselie, that by one
oblation the Saints are made perfect. Besides, it is a wicked thing to place
that trust in the work of a priest, which should only lean and stay it
self upon the oblation and intercession of Christ the high Priest.

Thirdly, Christ in the institution of the Lords supper, does not command
the Priests to offer for others, either quick or dead: upon what ground then
or authority was this worship ordained in the Church, as an offering for sins,
without any commandment of God? But that is yet more gross and far from al
reason, that the mass should be applied to deliver the souls of such as are
dead. For the mass was ordained for a remembrance, that is, that such as
received the supper of the Lord, should stir up and confirm their faith, and
comfort their distressed consciences, with the remembrance of Christ's
benefits. Neither is the mass a satisfaction for the punishment, but it was
instituted for the remission of the fault, to wit, not that it should be a
satisfaction for the fault, but that it might be a sacrament, by the use
whereof, we might be put in mind of the benefit of Christ, and the forgiveness
of the fault. Seeing therefore that the applying of the Supper of the Lord for
the deliverance of the dead, is received without warrant of scripture, yea
quite contrary to scripture, it is to be condemned, as a new and ungodly
worship or service.

Fourthlie, a Look the 3. bsetu. bpon this con^^^^ion.
Ceremony, in the new covenant, without faith meriteth nothing, neither for him
that uses it, nor for others. For it is a dead work, according to the saying
of Christ, The true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and truth.
The same does the 11. Chap. to the Heb. throughout prove. By faith Abell
offered a better offering unto God. Also, without faith it is impossible to
please God. Therefore the mass does not merit remission of the fault, or of the
punishment, even for the very works sake performed. This reason does
evidently overthrow the merit, as they call it, which arises of the very
work that is done.

Fiftlie, the applying of the benefit of Christ is by a man's own faith, as
Paull witnesses, Rom 3. Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation
through faith in his blood, and this applying is made frelie: And therefore it
is not made by another man's work, nor for another man's work. For when we use
the sacrament, this application is made by our own work, and by our own
faith, and not by another man's work. For surely if we could have no remission,
but by applying of masses, it should be very uncertain, and our faith and
trust should be transferred from Christ unto the work of a Priest, and so is it
come to pass, as all men see. Now faith placed in the work of a man is wholly
condemned. These arguments with sundry other do witness for us, that the opinion
of the merit, and applying of the mass for the quick and the dead, was for
good causes misliked and reproved. Now if we would stand to consider, how
far this error is spread in the Church, how the number of masses increased,
and how through this sacrifice, forgiveness both of the fault, and of the
punishment, is promised to the quick and the dead, it will appear that the
Church is disfigured with shameful blots by this profanation. There never fell
out a waightier cause in the Church, O noble Emperor, or more worthy for good
and learned men to debate of; it is the duty of all the Godly, with most
fervent prayers to crave at gods hand, that the Church might be delivered from
these foul enormities. All Kings and Bishops must with all their might
endeavor, that this wholl matter may be rightly laid forth, and the Church
purged.

Sixtlie, the institution of a sacrament is contrary to that abuse. For there
is not a word set down of any oblation for the sins of the quick and the
dead, but a commandment to receive the body and bloood of Christ: and, to
do it in the remembrance of the benefit of Christ. This remembrance does
signify, not a bare representing of the history, as it were in a show, as
they dream that are the Patrons of merit, by reason of the work wrought, but
it signifies by faith to remember the promise and benefit, to comfort the
conscience, and to render thanks for so great a blessing. For the principal
cause of the institution was, that our faith might then be stirred up and
exercised, when we do receive this pledge of Gods grace. Besides, the
institution ordeineth, that there should be a communication, that is, that the
ministers of the Church should give vntoothers, the body and blood of the
Lord. And this order was observed in the primitive Church. Saint Paull is
witness to the Corinths: when as he commands, That one should st^^ for
another, that there might be a common partaking of the Sacrament.

Now that the abuses of the private Mass be discovered* for as much as they
all for the most part were used for the application for the sins of other
men, and do not agree with the institution of Christ, therefore they are left
of (...) our Churches. And there is one common Mass appointed according to the
institution of Christ, wherein the Pastors of the Churches look the 4. obseru.
do consecrate themselves, and give unto others, the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ: and this kind of mass is used every Look the 5 obseru.
holy day, and other days also, if any be desirous to use the sacrament. Yet
none are admitted to the communion, except they be first tried, and examined.
We adioyne moreover godly sermons, according as Christ commanded, that there
should be sermons, when this ceremony is used. And in such sermons, men are
both taught diligently in other articles and precepts of the Gospel, and also
put in mind, for what use the sacrament was instituted, to weet, not that this
ceremony could merit for them remission of sins, by the work done, but that
the sacrament is a testimony and a pledge whereby Christ witnesses unto us,
that he performs his promises. And in our sermons as men are taught
diligently concerning other articles and precepts of the gospel, so are they
also put in mind, for what use the sacraments were instituted, to weete, not
that the ceremony should merit remission of sins by the bare work wrought:
but that the sacrament should be a testimony and a pledge, whereby Christ does
testify, that he performs his promise, and that his promises pertain unto
us, that Christ gives us his body, to testify that he is effectual in us,
as in his members, and his blood, for a witness unto us, that we are washed with
his blood. The sacrament therefore does profit them, that do repent, and seek
comfort therein, and being confirmed by that testimony, do believe that
remission of sins is given them indeed, and are thankful unto Christ for so
great a benefit. And so the application of the benefit of Christ is not by an
other man's work, but by every man's own faith, and his own use of the
sacrament. For when we in in our own persons use the Sacrament, Christ's
institution of it does belong unto us. This kind of use of the sacrament is
holy, and to be taught in the Churches, which does give light unto the
doctrine of faith, and of the spiritual exercises, and true worship, and
brings unto the consciences of the godly very great comfort and strength of
faith, Before these days the Church has been far otherwise taught,
touching the use of the sacrament, there was no word of any thing, but that
this work was to be done. But no man spoke any thing of faith, or the comfort
of consciences. And men's consciences were racked with over great care and
pains of confessing themselves. This they took to be the purity which the
gospel requires, whereas the gospel does require true fear, true faith, and
trust, comfort us by the use of this sacrament, that they which do truly
repent may assuredly believe, that God is become merciful unto them by
Christ, though that our nature be frail and unclean, and though that this our
imperfect obedience be far from the perfection of the law.

By all this that has been said, it is clear that the mass that is in use
amongst us, does a gree with the institution of Christ, and the manner of the
primitive Church. And besides it does notably lay open the true use of the
sacrament, Such a common work was there in the Church of old time* as
Chrysostom does witness, who says, that the Priest did stand at the altar,
and call some unto the communion, and put back others. And by the decrees of the
Nicen Synod it is evident, that some one did celebrate the Li^urgie, as the
Grecians call it, and did minister the body and blood of the Lord to allthe
rest. For these are the words of the decree. Let the Deacons in their order
after the Priests receive the holy communion of a Bishop, or of a Priest. Here
he does expresselie say, that the Priests did receive the sacrament of some
one, that ministered it. And before Gregory's time there is no mention of any
private Mass. But as often as the old writers speak of a Mass, it is evident
that they speak of a Mass, that was common. Seeing therefore that the rite and
manner of the mass used with us has authority out of scripture, example from
the old Church, and that we have only rejected certain intolerable abuses,
we hope that the use of our Churches cannot be misliked. As for other
indiffer^^ rites and ceremonies, they are for the most part observed according
to the vusal manner. But the number of Masses i^ not alike. Neither was it the
use in the old times, in the Churches whereunto was greatest resort, to have
mass every day, as the Tripartite history. lib. 9. cap. 38. does witness.
Again (says he) in Alexandria eueri fourth and sixth day of the week the
scriptures are read, and the Doctors do interpret them, and all other things
are done also, except only the solemn manner of oblation (...) offering.

This Article we find else where placed in the third place, among those wherein
the abuses that be changed are reckoned up in this manner.

Of the mass. Art. 3.
Our Churches is wrongfullie accused, to have abolished the Mass. For Look
the 2. obseruat.
the Mass is retained still among us, and celebrated with great reverence. Yea
and almost all the ceremonies that are in use, saving that, with the songs in
Latin we mingle certain Psalms in Dutch here and there, which he added for
the peoples instruction. For therefore we have need of ceremonies, that the may
teach the unlearned, and that the Preaching of Gods word may stir up some
unto the true fear, trust, and invocation of God. This is not only, commanded
by S. Paull, to use a tongue that the people understand, but man's law has also
appointed it. We use the people to receive the sacrament together, if so be any
be sound fit thereunto. And that is a thing that does increase the reverence
and due estimation of the public ceremonies. For none are admitted, except
they be first proved, and tried. Besides we use to put men in mind of the
worthiness and use of a sacrament, how great comfort it brings to fearful
consciences, that they may learn to believe God, and to look for and crave al
good things at his hands. This worship does please God, such an use of the
Sacrament does nourish piety toward God. Therefore it seems not that Masses
be more religiously celebrated among our adversaries, then with us. But it is
evident, that of long time this has bin the public, and most grievous
complaint of al good men, that Masses are filthilie profaned, being used for
gain. And it is not unknown, how far this abuse has spread it self in all
Churches, of what manner of men Masses are used, only for a reward, or for
wages, and how many do use them, against the prohibition of the Canons. And
Paull does greeuouslie threaten those, which handle the Lords Supper
unworthily, saying, He that shall eat this bread, or drink the cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Therefore, when we admonished the Priests of this sin, private Masses were
laid aside among us, seeing that for the most part, there were no private
Masses, but only for lucres sake. Neither were the Bishops ignorant of these
abuses, who if they had amended them in time, there had now been less
dissension. Heretofore, by their dissembling, they suffered much corruption to
creep into the Church: now they begin, though it be late, to complain of the
calamities of the Church, seeing that this hurly burly was raised up by no
other mean, then by those abuses, which were so evident, that they could no
longer be tolerated. There were many dissentions, concerning the Mass, and as
touching the Sacrament. And peradventure the world is punished, for so long a
profaning of Masses, which they, who both could, and ought to have amended it,
have so many years tolerated in their Churches. For in the ten commandments
it is written, He that abuses the name of the Lord, shall not escape
unpunished. And from the beginning of the world, there neither was, nor is any
divine thing, which might seem so to be employed to gain, as is the Mass.

There was added an opinion, which did increase private Masses infinitely, to
wit, that Christ by his passion did satisfy for Original sin, and appointed
Mass, wherein an oblation should be made for daily sins, both mortal, and
venial. Hereupon a common opinion was received, that Mass is a work, that
takes away the sins of the quick and the dead, and that for the doing of
the work. Here m^n began to dispute, whether one Mass said for many, were
of as great force, as particular Masses said for particular men. This
disputation has brought forth an in finite multitude of masses. Concerning
these opinions our preachers have admonished us, that they do disagree from the
holy Scriptures, and hurt the glory of the passion of Christ. For the passion
of Christ was an oblation and satisfaction, not only for Original sin, but
also for all other sins, as it is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews: We
are sanctified by the oblation of Jesus Christ once made. Also, By one oblation
he has made perfect for ever those that are sanctified. Also the Scripture
teaches, that we are justified before God through faith in Christ, when we
believe that our sins are forgiven for Christ his sake. Now, if the Mass do
take away the sins of the quick and the dead, even for the works sake
that i^ done, then justification comes by the work of Masses, and not by
faith, which the Scripture can not aware withal. But Christ commands us to
do it in remembrance of himself: therefore the Mass is instituted, that
faith, in them which use the Sacrament, may remember what benefits it
receives by Christ, and that it may raise up, and comfort a fearful
conscience. For this is to remember Christ, to wit, to remember his benefits,
and to feel and perceive, that they be in deed exhibited unto us. Neither is
it sufficient to call to mind the history, because that the Jews also, and
the wicked can do that. Therefore the Mass must be used to this end, that
there the Sacrament may be reached unto them, that have need of comfort, as
Ambrose says, Because I do always sin, therefore I ought always to
receive a medicine. And seeing that the Mass is such a communion of the
Sacrament, we do observe one common Mass every holidaie, and on other days,
if any will use the Sacrament, when it is offered to them, which desired it.
Neither is this custom newly brought into the Church. For the ancient
Fathers before Gregory's time make no mention of any private Mass: of the
common Mass they speak much. Chrysostom saitth, That the Priest did daily
stand at the altar, and call some unto the Communion, and put back others.
And by the ancient Canons it is evident, that some one did celebrate the
Mass, of whom other Priests and Deacons did receive the body of the Lord.
For so the words of the Nicen canon do sound: Let the deacons in their order
after the Priests receive the holy communion of a Bishop, or of a priest. And
Paul concerning the communion commands, that one tarry for another, that so
there may be a common participation. Seeing therefore that among us the Mass
has the example of the Church out of the Scripture, and the Fathers, we hope
that it cannot be disliked, especially for that our public ceremonies are
kept of us for the most part alike unto the usual ceremonies: only the
number of Masses is not alike, the which, by reason of very great and manifest
abuses, it were certainly far better to be moderated. For in times past
also in the Churches, whreunto was greatest resort, it was not the use to have
mass said every day, as the Tripartite history. lib. 9. cap. 38. does
witness. Again (says he) in Alexandria every fourth and sixth day of the week
the scriptures are read, and the Doctors do interpret them, and all other
things are done also, except only the solemn manner of oblaion (...)
offering.

Art. (...)
Of both kinds of the Sacrcament.
ANd because that we do celebrate the common mass, that the people may
understand, that they also are sanctified through the blood of Christ, and
learn the true use of this ceremony, either part of the Sacrament in the
Supper of the Lord is given to the Laity, because the Sacrament was
instituted, not only for a part of the Church, namely for Priests, but also
for the rest of the Church. And therefore the people does use the Sacrament, as
Christ appointed it. And certainly Christ says, Math. 26. Drink, ye all
of this, where he says manifestly, concerning the cup, that all should
drink. And that no man might cavil, that it does only appertain to the
Priests, the ordinance of Paul to the Corinthians does witness, that the wholl
Church did in common use either part. This custom remained a long time even
in the latter Churches, neither is it certain, when, or by what author it was
changed. Cyprian in certain places does witness, that the blood, was given to
the people: for thus he writes to Cornelius the Pope: How do we teach, or
provoke them, to shed their blood, in the confession of his name, if we deny
the blood of Christ to them, which (...) in this warfare? or how shall we make
them fit for the cup of Martyrdom, if we do not first admit them, by the
right of communication, to drink in the Church the cup of the Lord? And
Jerome says, The Priests do minister the Eucharist, and divide the blood of
the Lord to the people. In the Decrees there is a Canon of Pope Gelasius, which
forbideth the Sacrament to be divided: these be the words: We do understand,
that certain men, having received the portion of the holy body only, do
abstain from the Cup of the holy blood: who, because that I know not by
what superstition they are taught to be tied hereunto, either let them
vnfeignedlie receive the wholl Sacraments, or let them be put back from the
wholl Sacraments, because that one, and the self same mystery cannot be
divided, without great sacrilege. In the Tripartite History it is written, in
the reprehension of Theodosius the Emperor (whom Ambrose would not admit to
the communion, without repentance, because that at Thessalonia he had too
grieuoslie revenged the death of a few Soldiers which were slain in an
vprour, and had murdered seven thousand Citizens) here, says Ambrose, How
can thou with these hands receive the holybody of the Lord? with what rashness
can^^ thou take into thy mouth the Cup of that holy blood? etc. Therefore it
is evident, that it was the custom of the ancient Church, to give either
part of the Sacrament, to the people: only a new start up custom does take
away one part from the people. Here we will not dispute, what men are to
think, concerning a received custom, contrary to the authority of the
Apostolic Scripture, contrary to the canons, and contrary to the example of
the Primitive Church. For all godly men do understand, that, touching
Christian doctrine, consciences are to ask counsel at the word of the Lord,
and that no custom is to be allowed, which is contrary to the word of God. And
although in the Latin Church custom has changed the ancient manner, yet it
does not disalowe, or forbid it: neither in deed ought humane authority to
forbid the ordinance of Christ and the most received custom of the ancient
Church. Therefore we have not thought it good, to forbid the use of the wholl
Sacrament: and in that ceremony, which ought to be the co^enant of mutual love
in he Church, we would not, contrary to charity, be hard to other men's
consciences, which had rather use the wholl Sacrament, neither did we think,
that any cruelty should be used in that matter: but so much as in us lies,
together with the ceremony, we have restored the holy doctrine touching the
fruit of the ceremony, that the people may understand, how the Sacrament is
laid before them, to comfort the consciencies of them that do repent. This
doctrine does allure the godly to the use and reverence of the Sacrament. For
not only the ceremony, was before maimed, but also the chief doctrine,
touching the fruit thereof, was utterly neglected. And peradventure the maiming
of the ceremony did signify, that the Gospel touching the blood of Christ
(that is, the benefit of Christ his death) was obscured. Now, by the benefit of
God, the pure Doctrine concerning faith, together with this ceremony, (...)
renewed, and restored.

This Article we find placed else where in the first place, amongst those,
wherein the abuses, which are changed, are reckoned, after this manner.
EIther kind of the Sacrament in the Lords Supper is given to the laity,
because that this custom has the commandment of the Lord, Math. 26. Drink
ye all of this: where Christ does manifestly command, concerning the cup,
that all should drink. And that no man might cavil, that it does only
appertain to the Priests, the example of Paul to the Corinthians does
witness, that the wholl Church did in common use either part. This custom
remained a long time even in the latter Churches, neither is it certain, when,
or by what author it was changed. Cyprian in certain places does witness, that
the blood, was given to the people: The same thing does Hierome testify:
saying, The priests do minister the Sacrament, and distribute the blood of
Christ to the people. Yea, Gelasius the Pope commands, that the sacrament be
not divided, Did. 2. de consecr. cap. Comperimus. Only a new custom,
brought in of late, does otherwise. But it is manifest, that a custom brought
in, contrary to the commandments of God, is not to be allowed, as the Canons
do witness, Did. 8. Cap. Veritate, with that which follows. Now this custom
is received, not only against the Scripiure, but also against the true Canons,
and the examples of the Church. Therefore if any had rather use both parts of
the Sacrament, they were not to be compelled to do otherwise with the offense
of their conscience. Look the ^. obseru.
And because that the parting of the Sacrament does not agree with the
institution of Christ, we use to omit that procession, which hitherto has
been in use.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Of the holy Supper of the Lord.
BOth Baptism and the supper of the Lord are pledges* and testimonies of
grace, as was said before, which do admonish us of the promise, and of our
whole redemption, and do show, that the benefits of the Gospel do pertain
to every one of those, that use these ceremonies. But yet here is the
difference: by Baptism every one is ingrafted into the Church: but the Lord
would have the supper of the Lord to be also the sinew of the public
congregation, etc.

The rest that follows, pertains to the 15. Sect. till you come to these
words that follow. Even as also in the very words of the supper there is a
promise included, seeing he commands that the death of the Lord should be
showed forth, and this supper distributed, till he come. That the rore we may
use this sacrament with the greater reverence, let the true causes of the
institution thereof be well weighed, which pertain to the public
Congregation, and to the comfort of every one. The first cause is this: The
Son of God will have the voice of his gospel to sound in a public
congregation, and such a one as is of good behavior: the bond of this
congregation he will have this receiving to be, which is to be done with great
reverence, seeing that there a testimony is given of the wonderful
conjunction betwixt the Lord and the receivers: of which reverence Paull
speaks, 1. Cor. ^1. saying. He that receives unworthily, shallbe guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord. Secondly, God will have both the sermon, and
the ceremony it self to be profitable, bo^^ for the preservation, and also
for the propagation of the memory of his passion, resurrection, and benefits.
Thirdly, He will have every receiver to be singularly confirmed by this
testimony, that he may assure himself that the benefittes of the Gospel do
pertain to him, seeing that the sermon is common: and by this testimony, and
by this receiving he shows that thou are a member of his, and that thou art
washed in his blood, and that he does make this covenant with thee. Ioh. 15.
Abide in me, and I in you. Also, I in them, and they in me. Fourthlie, he will
have this public receiving, to be a confession, whereby thou may show, what
kind of doctrine thou do embrace, and to what company thou do join thy
self. Also he will have us to give th^nkes publicly, and privately in this
very ceremony, to God the eternal Father, and to the Son, and to the holy
Ghost, both for other benefits, and namely for this infinite benefit of ou^
redemption and salvation. Also he will that the members of the Church should
have a bond of mutual love among themselves. Thus we see that many ends do
meet together. By the remembrance of these weighty causes, men are invited to
the reverence and use of the sacrament: and we teach how the use may be
profitable. We do plainly condemn that monstrous error of the Monks, who
have written, that the receiving does deserve remission of sins, and that for
the works sake, without any good motion of him that uses it. This
Pharisaicall imagination is contrary to that saying, Habac. ca. 2. The just
shall live by his faith. Therefore we do thus instruct the Church, that they
which will approach to the Supper of the Lord, must repent or bring conversion
with them, and having their faith now kindled, they must here seek the
confirmation of this faith, in the consideration of the death, and
resurrection, and benefits of the Son of God: because that in the use of this
sacrament, there is a witness beating, which declares that the benifits of the
Son of god do pertain to thee also: also there is a testimony, that he
joins thee as a member to himself, look the 1. obseru. upon this confess.
and that he is in thee, as he said. Ioh. 17. I in them, etc. Therefore we give
counsel, that men, do not think, that their sins be forgiven them for this
works sake, or for this obedience, but that in a sure confidence they behold
the death and merit of the Son of God, and his resurrection, and assure
themselves that their sins are forgiven for his sake, and that he will have
this faith to be confirmed by this admonition, and witness bearing: when as
faith, comfort, the joy of conscience, and thanksgiving do after this sort
increase, the receiving is profitable. Neither are any Look the (...) obseru.
admitted to the Communion, except they be first heard, and absolved of the
Pastor, or his fellow ministers. In this trial the ruder sort are asked, and
oftentimes instructed, touching the wholl doctrine, and then is absolution
published.

Also men are taught, that Sacraments are actions, instituted of God, and that
without the use whereunto they are ordained, the things themselves are not to
be accounted for a Sacrament: but in the use appointed, Christ is present in
this communion, Look the ^. and 4. obser.
truly and substantiallie, and the body and blood of Christ is in deed given
to the receivers: ^ that Christ does witness that he is in them, and does make
them his members, and that he does wash them in his blood, as Hilarie also
says, These things being eaten and drunk, (...) cause, both that we may be in
Christ, and that Christ may be in (...) Moreover in the ceremony it self we
observe the usual order of the wholl ancient Church, both Latin and Greek.
We use no private Masses, that is, such wherein the body* and blood of Christ
was not distributed; as also the ancient Church, for many years after the
Apostles times, had no such Masses, as the old descriptions, which are to be
found in Dyo^^sius, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Augustine, and others, do show. And
Paul 1. Cor. 11. Does command, that the Communion should be celebrated when
many do meet together. Therefore in the public congregation, and such as is of
good behavior, prayers, and the creed, are rehearsed or sung, and Look the
5. obseruat.
lessons appointed vsualllie for holy days, are read. After that there is a
sermon of the benefits of the Son of God, and of some part of doctrine; as
the order of time does minister an argument. Then the Pastor does rehearse a
thanksgiving, and a prayer for the whole Church, for them that are in
authority, and as the present necessity requires: and he prays to God,
that for his Sons sake, whom he would have to be made a sacrifice for us, he
would forgive us ou^ sins, and save us, and gather, and preserve a Church.
Then he rehearses the words of Christ, concerning the institution of the
Supper, and he himself takes, and distributeth to the receivers, the wholl
Sacrament: who come reverently thereunto, being before examined and absolved,
and there they join theirs with the public prayers. In the end they do
again give thanks. All men, which are not altogether ignorant of antiquity,
do know that this rite, and this Communion, does for the most part agree with
the writings of the Apostles, and with the custom of the ancient Church,
even almost to Gregory's time: which thing being so, the custom of our
Churches is to be approved, not to be disalowed: but our Adversaries misliking
our custom, do defend many errors, some more foul and gross, others
colored with new deceites.

Many heretofore have written, that in the mass there is an oblation made for
the quick and the dead, and that it does deserve remission of sins, both for
him that makes it, and for others, even for the works sake. And thus were
most of them persuaded, and as yet are like unto the Pharisees, and the
heathen. For after the same manner the Pharisees and the Heathen did dream,
that they for the works sake, did deserve, for them selves, and for others,
remission of sins, peace, and many other good things Or although those,
which were not so blind, did speak more modestly, and said, that they did
deserve, but not without the good intention of the sacrificer, yet they
imagined that those sacrifices were merits, and a ransom. By reason of this
opinion there were a multitude of sacrifices, and the crafty means of gain
were increased. Such is the merchandise of Masses, and the profanation of the
Lords Supper, almost throughout the wholl world. But God will have corrupt
kinds of worship to be reproved, and abolished. Therefore we (...) ^implie
and in deed propound the voice of God, which does condemn those errors, and
with all our heart we affirm before God, and the wholl Church in heaven and in
earth, that there was one only sacrifice propitiatory, or whereby the wrath
of the eternal Father against mankind is pacified, to wit, the wholl
obedience of the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, who was crucified, and
raised up again. This is that only Lamb, which takes away the sins of
the world. Ioh. 1. Of th^^ only sacrifice mention is made. Heb. 10. By one
only sacrifice he made perfect for ever those that are sanctified. And this
sacrifice is applied to every one, by their own faith, when they hear the
Gospel, and use the sacraments, as Paull says, Romans 3. Whom God has set
forth to be are conciliation through faith in his blood. And Habac. 2. The just
shall live by his faith. And 1. Pet. 1. Being sanctified in the spirit, unto
obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Other sacraments in the
old Testament were typical: whereof we shall speak more at large in their
place, and they did not deserve any remission of sins: and all the
righteousness of holy men at all times, were, are, and shall be sacrifices of
praise, which do not deserve remission, either for them that did offer them, or
for others. but they are services which every one ought to perform: and are
acceptable to God for the Mediators, and our high priest the Son of God his
sake, as it is said, Heb. 13. By him we offer the sacrifice of praise always
to God.

That this is an unchangeable and eternal truth, it is most manifest. And
whereas certain fragments, which they call the Canons of the mass, are
alleged against this so clear light of the truth, it is also manifest that
the Greek and Latin Canons are very unlike the one to the other, and that
the Greek Canons do disagree among themselves in a most weighty matter: and
it appears that in the Latin Canon many iagges and pieces were by little and
little patched together of ignorant authors. The ancient Church does use the
names of Sacrifice and oblation: but thereby it understands the whole action,
prayers, a taking of it, a remembrance, faith, a confession, and thanksegiuing.
This wholl inward and outward action, in every one that is turned to God, and
in the wholl Church, is indeed a sacrifice of praise, or thanksgiving and a
reasonable service. And when the Lord says, Ioh. 4. The true worshippers shall
worship the lord in spirit and in truth, he affirms that in the new
testament outward sacrifices are not commanded, which of necessity should be
made, although there were no motions of the holy ghost in the heart, as in the
law it was necessary, that the ceremony of the Pass over should be kept. But
touching the supper of the Lord it is said, 1. Cor. 11, Let every man examine
himself, etc. So the supper of the Lord does profit him that uses it, when
as he brings with him repentance and faith, and another man's work does
nothing at all profit him.

Furthermore, concerning the dead, it is manifest, that all this show is
repugnant to the words of the institution of the Supper, wherein it is said,
Take ye, eat ye, etc. Do ye this in remembrance of me. What does this
apperteine to the dead, or to those that be absent? and yet in a great part of
Europe many masses are said for the dead: also a great number not knowing what
they do, do read Masses for a reward. But seeing that all these things are
manifestly wicked, to wit, to offer, as they speak, to the end that they may
deserve for the quick and the dead: or for a man to do he knows not what,
they do horribly sin, that retain and defend these mischievous deeds. And
seeing that this ceremony is not to be taken for a sacrament, without the use
whereunto it was ordained, what manner of Idolworship is there used, let godly
and learned men consider. Also it is a manifest profanation, to carry about
part of the Supper of the Lord, and to worship it: where a part is utterly
transferred to an use clean contrary to the first Institution, whereas the
text says, Take, eat: and this show is but a thing devised of late. To
conclude, what be the manners of many Priests and Monks in all Europe, which
have no regard of this saying, 1. Cor. 11, Let every man examine himself?
Also, Whosoever takes it unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood
of the Lord. Every man of himself does know these things.

Now, although the chief Bishopes and hypocrites, who seek delusions to
establish these evils, do scoff at these complaints, yet it is most
certain, that God is greeuouslie offended with these wicked deeds, as he was
angry with the people of Israel for their prophanations of the sacrifices.
And we do see evident examples of wrath, to wit, the ruins of so many
kingdoms, the spoil and waste that the Turks do make in the world, the
confusions of opinions, and many most lamentable dissipations of Churches. But
O Son of God, Lord Jesus Christ, which wast crucified and raised up again
for us, thou which art the high priest of the Church, with true sighs we
beseech the, that for thine, and thy eternal Fathers glory, thou would
take away Idols, errors, and abominations* and, as thou thy self did
pray, Sanctify us with thy truth, and kindle the light of thy Gospel, and
true invocation, in the hearts of many, and bow our hearts to true
obedience, that we may thankefullie praise thee in all eternity. The greatness
of our sins, which the profanation of the Supper of the Lord these many
years has brought forth, does surpass the eloquence of Angels and men. We
are herein the shorter, seeing that no words can be devised sufficient, to set
out the greatness of this thing, and in this great grief we beseech the Son
of God, that he would amend these evils, and also for a further declaration,
we offer our selfs to them, that will hear it. But in this question we see
that to be chiefly done, which Solomon says, He that sings songs to a
wicked heart, is like him that powers vinegar upon nitre.

Our adversaries know, that these persuasions of their sacrifice, are the
sinews of their power and riches: therefore they will hear nothing that is
said against it. Some of them do now learn craftelie to mitigate these
things, and therefore they say, The oblation is not a merit, but an application:
they deceive in words, and retain still the same abuses. But we said before,
that every one does by faith apply the sacrifice of Christ to himself, both
when he hears the Gospel, and then also, when he uses the Sacraments: and
it is written, 1. Cor. 11. Let every man examine himself. Therefore Paull
does not mean, that the ceremony does profitte another that does not use it.
And, the Son of God himself did offer up himself, going into the holy of
holies, that is, into the secret counsel of the Divinity, seeing the will of
the eternal Father, and bearing his great wrath, and understanding the causes
of this wonderful counsel: these weighty things are meant, when the text
says, Heb. 9. He offered himself. And when Esaie says, Cap. 53. He will make
his soul an offering for sin. Now therefore what do the Priests mean, who
say, that they offer up Christ? and yet antiquity never spoke after this
manner. But they do most grieuouslie accuse us. They say, that we do take
away the continual sacrifice, as did Antiochus, who w^^ a type of Antichrist.
We answered before, that we do retain the wholl ceremony of the Apostolic
Church: and this is the eontinuall sacrifice, That the sincere doctrine of the
Gospel should be heard, that God should be truly inuocated: to conclude, as
the Lord says, Ioh. 4. It is to worship the Father in Spirit and truth: we
do also herein comprehend the true use of the Sacraments. Seeing that we
retain all these things faithfully, we do with great reverence retain the
continual sacrifice, they do abolish it, who many ways do corrupt true
invocation, and the very Supper of the Lord, who command us to invoke dead
men, who set out Masses to sale, who boast, that by their oblation they do
merit for others, who do mingle many mischievous errors with the doctrine of
Repentance and remission of sins, who will men to doubt, when they repent,
whether they be in favor, who defile the Church of God with filthy lusts,
and Idols. These men be like unto Antiochus, and not we, who endeavor to obeie
the Son of God, who says, Ioh. 4. If any man loves me, he will keep my
wor^^

Of the use of the wholl Sacrament.
LEt Sophistry be removed from the judgments of the Church. All men know,
that the Supper of the Lord is so instituted, that the wholl Sacrament may be
given to the people, as it is written, Drink ye all of this. Also the custom
of the ancient Church, both Greek and Latin, is well known. Therefore we
must confess, that the forbidding of one part is an unjust thing. It is great
injury to violate the lawful Testaments of men: Why then do the Bishopes
violate the Testament of the Son of God, which he has sealed up with his
own blood? But it is to be lamented, that certain men should be so impudent,
as to feign sophistry against this so weighty an argument, that they may
establish their prohibition; the refutation of whom, the matter being so
clear and evident, we do omit.

In an other place this Article is not distinguished from that which went
before, but is thus joined with it: To conclude, we must also speak in few
things of the use of the wholl Sacrament. Let sophistry be removed, etc.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of the Eucharist. CHAP. 9.
WE believe and confess that the Eucharist (for so it pleased our forefathers
to call the Supper of the Lord) is a Sacrament, instituted of Christ himself,
and that the use thereof is commended to the church, even to the latter end of
the world. But because the substance is one thing and the use thereof an other
thing, therefore we will speak^ of these in order. Touching the substance of
the Euchar^^^ we thus think and teach. Look the ^. obseruat upon this confess*
that the true body of Christ, (...) his true blood is distributed in the
Eucharist: and we refute them that say, that the bread and wine of the
Eucharist, Look the 2. obseru.
are signs of the body and blood of Christ being only absent. Also we
believe that the omnipotency of Go^ is so great, that in the Eucharist he may
either annihilate^^ substance of bread and wine, look the 3. obseru*
or else change them into (...) body and blood of Christ: but that God does
exercise (...) his absolute omnipotency in the Eucharist, we have no certain
word of God for it, and it is evident, that the ancient Church was altogether
ignorant of it. For as in Ezech where it is said of the City of Jerusalem,
described on the out side of a wall, This is Jerusalem, it was not necessary
that the substance of the wall should be changed into the substance of the
City of Jerusalem; so when it is said of the bread, This is my body, it is
not necessary that the substance (...) bread should be changed into the the
substance of the bod^ of Christ: Look the 4. obseruat.
but for the truth of the sacrament it is sufficient* that the body of Christ
is in deed present with the bread and in deed the very necessity of the
truth of the Sacrament does seem to require, that true bread should remain,
with the true presence of the body of (...) For as to the truth of the
Sacrament of Baptism it is necessary, that in the use thereof there should be
water, and that true water should remain; so it is necessary in the Lords
Supper, that there should be bread in the use thereof, and that true bread
should remain, whereas if the substance of bread were changed, we should have
no proof of the truth of the Sacrament. Whereupon both Paull, and also the
ancient Ecclesiastical writers do call the bread of the Eucharist, even
after con^ecration, bread. 1. Cor. 11. Let^ man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that bread, and* And, Whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup of the Lord unworthily, etc. And Augustine in his Sermon to young
children says* That which y^u have seen, it i^ the bread, and the (...) the
which thing also your eyes do witness unto you: but that which your faith
desires to learn, is this: the bread, is the body of Christ, the cup, is his
blood.

Now as touching the use of the Eucharist, first, although we do not not deny,
Look the 5. obseru.
but that whole Christ is distributed, as well in the bread, as in the wine of
the Eucharist: yet we teach, that the use of either part ought to be common to
the wholl Church. For it is evident, that Christ being nothing at all
terrified by any dangers, which afterward humane superstition invented, or by
other devises, gave unto his Church both parts to be used. Also it is evident,
that the ancient Church did use both parts for many years. And certain
writers do clearelie witness, that they which do receive bread alone, do not
receive the wholl Sacrament Sacramentallie (for so they speak) and that it is
not possible to d^^ide one and the self same mystery, without great
sacrilege. Wherefore we think that the use of both parts is in deed
Catholic and Apostolic, and that it is not lawful for any man, at his
pleasure to change this institution of Christ, and a ceremony of such
continuance in the ancient and true Church, and to take away from the laity,
as they call them* one part of the Eucharist. And it is to be marueiled at,
that they who profess themselves to defend the ceremonies of the ancient
church, should so far swerve from the ancient church in this point.
Moreover, seeing that the word Sacrifice i^ very large, and does generally
signify a holy worship, we do willingly grant, that the true and lawful
use of the Eucharist may in this sense be called a Sacrifice: howbeit the
Eucharist, according to the institution of Christ, is so celebrated, that
therein the death of Christ is showed forth, and the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ is distributed to the Church, and so it is truly called an
appliing of the meritte of the passion of Christ, to wit, to them, which
receive the Sacrament.

Neither do we condemn godly lessons, and prayers, which use to go before,
and to follow consecration, as they call it, and the dispensation of the
Eucharist: yet in the mean time it is not lawful for us, to dissemble, or to
allow of those errors, which have been added to this holy (...) rather by the
ignorance of private men, then by ^nie lawful consent of the true Catholic
Church. One (...) this, that of the worship, which ought to be common (...)
Church, there is made a private action of one Priest, (...) does alone to
himself mumble up the words of (...) Supper, so also he alone does receive
the bread (...) For Christ did institute the Eucharist, not that i^ (...)
private action of one man, but that it should be a (...) of the Church. ^.
Therefore to the right action of the Eucharist, two things at the lest are
requisite, to wit, the minister of the Eucharist, who blesses, and he, to
whom the Sacrament of the Eucharist is dispensed. For when Christ did institute
this Sacrament, he did not eat thereof alone, but he did dispense it to his
Church, which then was present with him, saying, Take ye, eat ye, etc. And,
Drink ye all of this, etc. This institution of Christ the ancient and true
Catholic Church did so severely observe, that it excommunicated them, which
being present whilst this holy Sacrament was administered, would not
communicate with others. Anacl^^us in his first Epistle says, After that
consecration is finished, let a^^ communicate, except they had rather stand^
without the Church doors. And he adds, For so both the Apostles appointed,
and the holy Church of Rome keeps is still. Also, the Antiochian Council,
cap. 2. says: All those which come into the Church of God, and hear the holy
Scriptures, but do not communicate with the people in prayer, and can not
abide to receive the Sacrament of the Lord, according to a certain proper
discipline, these men must be cast out of the Church. Dionysius in his book,
De Eccles. Hierarc. says, The Bishop, when he has praised the divine
gifts, then he makes the holy, and most excellent mysteries* and those
things which before he had praised, being covered and hid under reverent
signs, he brings into sight, and reverently sh^wing forth the divine
gifts, both he himself does turn to the holy participation thereof, and does
exhort the others to participate them: to conclude, when the holy communion is
received, and delivered to all, he rendering thanks, does make an end of these
mysteries. Therefore we think it necessary* to the retayning of the
institution of Christ in the celebration of the Eucharist, and that we may
follow the example of the ancient and true Catholic Church, that the private
Masses of the Priests may be abrogated, and that the public communion of
the Lords Supper may be restored.

Another error is this, that the Eucharist is such a sacrifice, as ought to be
offered daielie in the Church, for the purging of the sins of the quick and
the dead, and for the obtaining of other benefits, both corporal and
spiritual. This error is evidently contrary to the Gospel of Christ, which
witnesses, That Christ, by one oblation, once only made, has made perfect
for ever those that be sanctified. And, because that Christ by his passion and
death, has purchased remission of sins for us, which also is declared unto
us by the Gospel in the new Testament, therefore it is not lawful to
sacrifice any more for sin: for the Epistle to the Hebrews says, Where
there is remission of sins, there is no further oblation for sin. For
whereas Christ says, Do this in remembrance of me, he does not command to
offer his body and and blood in the Supper unto God, but to the Church* that
the Church, by eating the body, and drinking the blood of Christ, and by
showing forth the benefit of his death, may be admonished of that oblation of
the body and blood of Christ, which was made once only on the Cross for
the purging of our sins. For so Paull does interpret this saying of Christ,
saying, So often as ye shall eat (he does not say, offer) this bread, and
drink this cup, show ye forth the death of the Lord, till he come. And
truly we confess, that the ancient Ecclesiastical writers did call the
Eucharist, a sacrifice, and an oblation: but they expound themselves, that by
the name of Sacrifice they mean a remembrance, a showing forth or a preaching
of that Sacrifice* which Christ did once offer upon the Cross: as also they
call the memorial of the Passover, and of Pentecost, the Pa^seouer and
Pentecost it self.

The third error is this, that many do think, that the oblation (as they call
it) of the Eucharist, is not of it self a propitiation for sins, but that it
does apply the propitiation and merit of Christ to the quick, and the dead. But
we have already showed, that the Eucharist properly is not an oblation, but
is so called, because it is a remembrance of the oblation, which was once made
on the cross. Moreover, the application of the merit of Christ, is not made by
any other outward instrument, then by the preaching of the gospel of Christ,
and by dispensing those sacraments, which Christ has instituted for this use:
and the merit of Christ being offered, and applied, is not received but by
faith. Marc. 16. Preach the Gospel to every creature. For by the ministry of
the Gospel the benefits of Christ be offered, and applied to creatures, that
is, either to the Jews, or to the Gentiles. And it follows, He that shall
believe, and be baptized, he shall be saved: because that by the receiving of
the sacraments, and by faith, the benefits offered, and applied, be received
Romans 1. The gospel is the power of God to salvation, to every (...) that
believes* that is, the ministry of the gospel is the instrument ordained of
God, whereby God is able and effectual, to save all those, which believe the
gospel. Therefore the Preaching of the gospel does offer, or, if it likes
any man so to speak, does apply salvation to all men, but faith does receive
salvation offered and applied. Now in the private Mass, bread and wine are so
handled, that the Priest does neither publicly declare the Gospel of Christ,
but does softly mumble up to him*selfe certain words, and especialie the
words of the Supper, or of consecration^ neither does he distribute bread and
wine to others, but he alone takes them: therefore there can be no applying
(...) the merit of Christ in the private Mass. This did our true Catholic
Elders well perceive, who, as we have declared before, did so severely
require, that they which were present at the Mass, and did not communicate,
should b^ excommunicated.

The fourth error is this, which we have already touched* in that they do
require, that the words of the Supper, or o^ consecration, may be rehearsed
softly in the Eucharist, seeing that these words are a part of that gospel,
which according to the commandment of Christ, is to be preached to all
creatures. For although our ancetors did sometimes cal^ the Eucharist a
mystery, yet they did not so call it with thi^ purpose, that they would not
have the words of the Suppe^ to be rehearsed before the Church in the
Eucharist publike*lie, and in a tongue commonly known, but because th^^ in
the Eucharist one thing is seen, and another thing understood. For Christ
himself also is called a mystery, who nevertheless is not to be hid* but to
be preached to al^ creatures. And because that in the receiving of the
Sacrament it is necessarily required, that we should have faith, and faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, it is most necessary, that
in the Eucharist the word of the supper, that is, the word* of the Son of
God, should be publicly rehearsed: for this word is the preaching of the
Gospel, and the showing forth of the death of Christ. Therefore that the
Church may understand what is done in the Eucharist, and what is offered unto
her to be received, and that she ma^e confirm her faith, it is necessary,
that in the Eucharist ^he words of the Lords Supper should be rehearsed
publicly.

The (...) ^rror is this, that one part of the Eucharist is used in (...) a
singular worship of God, to be carried about, and to (...) up. But the holy
Ghost does forbid, that any worship of God should be appointed without the
express commandment of god. Deuteronomy. 12. You shall not do every one of you, that
which seems good in his own eyes. And again, That which I command thee, that
only shall thou do to the Lord: see that thou add nothing thereunto, nor
detract any thing from it. And Math 1^. In vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines the precepts of men. Clemens in his second Epi^^le to James, and
in three Chapters, De Consecr. Did. 2. says: Certeinlie so great bu^nt
offerings are offered on the altar, as may be sufficient for the people: if so
be that any thing remain till the next ^aie, let them not be kept, but with
fear and trembling, by the diligence of the Clearkes, let them be consumed. We
are not ignorant, how they use to delude these words of Clemens, by feigning a
difference betwixt the work of those that are ready to die, and those that be
ready to consecrate. But it is evident, that the bread, which uses to be
carried about, and to be laid up to be adored, is not reserved for those that
be weak, but in the end is received of them that do consecrat. Cyrill, or,
^. others think, Origin, upon the 7. Chap. of Leuit. says. For the Lord
concerning that bread, which he gave to his Disciples, said unto them, Take
it, and eat it, etc. He did not differ it, neither did he command it to be
reserved till the next day. Peradventure there is this M^steri^ also contained
therein, that he does not command the bread to be carried in the high way,
that thou may always bring forth the fresh loaves of the word of God, which
thou cariest within thee, etc.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of the Eucharist. CHAP. 18.
AS touching this reverent Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, all
those things, which the Evangelists, Paul, and the holy Fathers have left in
writing thereof, our men do sincerely teach, commend, and inculcate: and
thence they do with a singular endeavor always publish this goodness of
Christ toward his, whereby he does no less at this day, then he did in that
his last supper, vouchsafe to give, by the Sacraments, his true body, and his
true blood, to be eaten, and to be drunk, in deed, as the meat and drink
of their souls, whereby they may be nourished unto life eternal: he gives
it, I say, to all those, who from their hearts have given their names, to be
reckoned among his disciples, when as they do receive this Supper, according
to his institution: so that now he may live and abide in them, and they in him,
and be raised up by him in the last day, to a new, and immortal life,
according to those words of eternal truth. Take, and eat, This is my body,
etc. Drink ye all of this, This ^uppe is my blood, etc. Now, our preachers
do most diligently withdraw the minds of the people* both from all
contention, and also from all superfluous and curious inquiry, unto that which
only is profitable, and whereunto only Christ our Savior had respect: to
wit, that being fed with him, we may live in him, and through him, and lead
such a life, as is acceptable to God, holy, and therefore everlasting and
blessed: and with all, that we among our selves may be one bread, and one
body, which are partakers of one bread in that holy Supper. Whereby it
comes to pass, that we do very religiously, and with a singular reverence
both administer, and receive the divine sacraments, that is, the holy Supper
of Christ. By these things which are thus in deed, as we have set them down,
your sacred Majesty, O most gracious Emperor, does know, how falselie our
adversaries do boast, that our men do change the words of Christ, and tear
them in pieces by humane glosses, and that in our Suppers nothing is
administered but meree bread, and mere wine, and also that among us the Supper
of the Lord is contemned, and rejected. For our men do very carefully teach
and exhort, that every man do in a simple faith embrace these words of the
Lord, rejecting all devises of men, and false glosses, and remoouing away all
kind of wavering, do wholly addict their mind to the true meaning thereof:
and to conclude, do oftentimes, with as great reverence as they may, receive
the Sacraments, to be the lively food of their souls, and to stir up in
them a grateful rememberance of so great a benefit: the which thing also uses
now to be done among us, much more often and reverently, then heretofore was
used. Morouer, our Preachers have always hitherto, and at this day do offer
themselves with all modesty and truth, to render a reason of their faith and
doctrine, touching all those things which they believe and teach, as well about
this Sacrament, as about other things, and that not only to your Sacred
Majesty, but also to every one that shall demand it.

Of the Mass. CHAP. 19.
FVrthermore, seeing that after this manner, Christ hat^ instituted his Supper,
which afterward began to be called the Mass, to wit, that therein the
faithful being fed with his body and blood, unto life eternal, should show
forth his death, whereby they are redeemed; our Preachers by this mean giving
thanks, and also commending this salvation unto others, could not choose but
condemn it, that these things were every where neglected. And on the other
side, they which do celebrate the masses, do presume to offer up Christ unto
his Father, for the quick and the dead, and they make the Mass, to be such a
work, as that by it alone almost, the favor of God and salvation is obtained,
howsoever they do either believe, or live. Whereupon that most shameful, and
twice and thrice impious sale of this Sacrament has crept in, and thereby it
is come to pass that nothing at this day, is more gainefull then the Mass.
Therefore they rejected private Masses, because the Lord did commend this
Sacrament to his Disciples to be used in common. Whereupon Paul commands the
Corinthians, when they are to celebrate the holy Supper, to stay one for 1.
Cor. 11.
another, and denies that they do celebrate the Lords Supper, when as every
man takes his own Supper whilst they be eating. Moreover, whereas* they
boast, that they do offer up Christ in stead of a sacrifice, they are
therefore condemned of our men, because that the Epistle to the Hebrews does
plainly witness, that as men do once die, so Christ was once offered, that he
might take away the sins of many, and Heb. 9.
that he can no more be offered again, then he may die again: and therefore
having offered one sacrifice for sins, he sits for ever at Heb. 10.
right hand of God, waiting for that which remains, to wit, that his enemies,
as it were a footestoole, may be trodden under his feet. For with one oblation
has he consecrated for ever them, that are sanctified.

And whereas they have made the Mass to be a good work, whereby any thing may
be obtained at Gods hands, our Preachers have taught, that it is repugnant to
that, which the Scripture does teach in every place, that we are justified,
and receive the favor of god by the spirit of Christ and by faith* for which
matter we alleged before many testimonies out of the Scriptures. So, in that
the death of the Lord is not commended to the people in the Mass, our
Preachers have showed that it is contrary to that, that Christ commanded, to
receive these Sacraments, in remembrance of himself: and Paul, that we might
show forth the death of Christ, till he come. And whereas many do commonly
celebrate the Masses, without all regard of godliness, only for this cause,
that they may nourish their bodies, our Preachers have showed, that that is so
execrable a thing before god, that if the Mass of it self should nothing at al
hinder godliness, yet worthily and by the commandment of God, it were Isa. 2.
to be abolished* the which thing is evident even out of Esaias only. For our God
is a Spirit, and truth, and therefore he cannot abide to be worshipped, but in
Spirit, and truth. And how grievous a thing this unreasonable selling of the
Sacraments is unto the Lord, our Preachers would have men thereby to
conjecture, that Christ did so sharply, and altogether against his accustomed
manner, taking unto himself an external kind of reuengement, cast out of the
Temple those that bought and sold, whereas they might seem to exercise
merchandise, only in this respect, that they might further those sacrifices,
which were offered according to the law.

Therefore, seeing that the ^i^e of the Mass, which was wont to be celebrated,
is so many ways contrary to the Scripture of God, as also it is in every
respect diverse from that, which the holy Fathers used, it has been very
vehemently condemned amongst us out of the pulpit, and by the word of God it
is made so detestable, that many of their own accord have altogether
forsaken it: and elsewhere, by the authority of the Magastrate, it is
abrogated. The which thing we have not taken upon us for any other cause, then
for that throughout the whole Scripture, the Spirit of God does detest nothing
so much, neither command it so earnestly to be taken away, as a feigned and
false worship of himself. Now, no man that has any spark of religion in
him, can be ignorant, what an in^u^^able necessity is laid upon him that
fears God, when as he is persuaded, that God does require a thing at his
hands. For any man might easily foresee, how many would take it at our
hands, that we should change a^y thing about the holy rite of the Mass,
neither were there any, which would not rather have chosen in this point, not
only not to have offended your sacred Majesty, but even any Prince of the
lowest degree. But when as herewithal they did not doubt, but by that common
rite of the Mass, God was most grieiouslie provoked, and that his glory, for
the which we ought to spend our lives, was darkened, they could not but take it
away, lest that they also, by winking at it, should make themselves partners
with them in diminishing the glory of god. Truly, if god is to be loved, and
worshipped above all, godly men must bear nothing less, then that which he
does hate and detest: And that this one cause did constrain us to change
certain things in these points, we take him to witness, from whom no secet is
hid.

THE FIFTEENTH SECTION. OF ECCLESIASTICAL MEETINGES.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of holy and Ecclesiastical meetings. CHAP. 22.
ALthough it be lawful for all men, privately at home to read the holy
Scriptures, and by instruction to edify one another in the true religion; yet
that the word of God may be lawfully preached to the people, and prayers and
supplications publicly made, and that the sacraments may be lawfully
ministered, that collectio^ may be made for the pore, and to defray al necessary
charges of the Church, or to supply the wantes, it is very needful there should
be holy meetings and Ecclesiastical assemblies. For it is manifest that in the
Apostolic and primitive Church there were such assemblies frequented of godly
men. So many then as do despise them, and separate themselves from them, they
are contemners of true religion, and are to be compelled by the Pastors and
godly* Magistrates, to surcease stubbornly to separate and absent themselves
from sacred assemblies. Now Ecclesiastical assemblies must not be hidden and
secret, but public, and common, except persecution by the enemies of Christ
and the Church will not suffer them to be public. For we know what manner
assemblies the primitive Church had heretofore in secret corners, being under
the tyranny of Roman Emperors. Let those places where the faithful meet
together be decent, and in all respects fit for gods Church. Therefore let houses
be chosen for that purpose, or Churches that are large and fair, so that they
be purged from al such things, as do not beseem the Church. And let all
things be ordered, as is most meet for comelines, necessity, and godly
decency, that nothing be wanting which is requisite for rites and orders, and
the necessary uses of the Church.

And as we believe that God does not dwell in temples made with hands, so we
know that by reason of the word of god, and holy exercises therein celebrated,
places dedicated to God and his worship are not profane, but holy, and that
therefore such as are conversant in them, ought to behave themselves
reverently and modestly, as they which are in a sacred place, in the presence
of God and his holy Angels. All excess of apparel therefore is to be
abandoned from Churches and places where Christians meet in prayer, together
with all pride, and whatsoever else does not beseem Christian humility,
decency, and modesty. For the true ornament of Churches does not consist ^n
Iuorie, gold, and precious stones, but in the sobriety, godliness, and virtues
of those, which are in the Church. Let all things be done comely and orderly
in the Church: to conclude, Let all things be done to edifying. Therefore let
all strange tongues keep silence in the holy assemblies, and let all things
be uttered in the vulgar tongue, which is understood of all men in the
company.

Of prayer, singing, and Canonical houers. CHAP. 23.
TRue it is, that a man may lawfully pray privately in any tongue that he
does understand: but public prayers ought in the holy assemblies to be made
in the vulgar tongue, or such a language as is known to all. Let all the
prayers of the faithful be powered forth to God alone through the mediation of
Christ only, out of a true faith and pure love. As for invocation of Saints, or
using them as intercessors, to entreat for us, the priesthod of our Lord Christ
and true religion will not permit us. Prayer must be made for Magistracy, for
Kings and all that are placed in authority, for Ministers of the Church, and
for all necessities of Churches in any calamity, and specially in the
calamity of the Church, prayer must be made both priuatellie, and publicly,
without ceasing. Moreover we must pray willingly, and not by constraint, nor
for any reward: neither must we superstitiouslie tie prayer to any place, as
though it were not lawful to pray but in the Church. There is no necessity,
that public prayers should be in fo^^e and time the same or alike in all
Churches. Let all Churches use their liberty. Socrates in his history says,
In any country or nation wheresoever, you shall not find two Churches which
do wholly agree in prayer: The authors of this difference I think were those
which had the government of the Ch^ ^hes in all ages. If so be any do agree,
it deserves great commendation, and is to be imitated of others.

Besides this, there must be a mean and measure, as in every other thing, so
also in public prayers, that they be not ouerlong, and tedious: let therefore
the most time be given to teaching of the gospel, in such holy assemblies:
and let there be diligent heed taken, that the people in the assemblies be not
wearied with ouerlong prayers, so as when the preaching of the gospel should
be heard, they through wearisomnes either desire to go (...) themselves, or to
have the assembly wholly dismissed. For unto such the sermons seem to be
ouerlong, which otherwise are brief enough. Yea and the Preachers ought to
keep a mean. Likewise the singing in sacred assemblies ought to be moderated,
where it is in use. That long, which they call Gregory's song, has many gross
things in it. Wherefore it is upon good cause rejected of ours, and of all
other reformed Churches. If there be any Churches which have faithful prayer in
good manner, and no singing at all, they are not therefore to be condemned for
all Churches have not the commodity and opportunity of singing. And certain
it is by testimonies of antiquity, that as the custom of singing has been
very ancient in the East Churches, so it was long or it was received in the
West Churches.

In Ancient time there were Canonical hours, that is, known prayers framed
for certain hours in the day, and chaunted therein, often repeated, as the
Papists manner is: which may be proved by many of their lessons appointed in
their hours and diverse other arguments. Moreover they have many absurd
things (that I say no more) and therefore are well omitted of our Churches,
that have brought in their stead matters more wholesome for the whole Church of
God.

Hitherto also pertains the beginning of the 25. Art.
Of Catechizing.
THe Lord enjoined his ancient people to take great care and diligence in
instructing the youth well, even from their infancy, and moreover commanded
expressly in his Law, that they should teach them, and declare the mystery of
the Sacraments unto them. Now for as much as it is evident by the writings of
the Evangelists and Apostles, that God had no less care of the youth of his
new people, seeing he says, Suffer little Children to come unto me, for of such
is the kingdom of heaven; Therefore the Pastors do very wisely, which do
diligently and betimes Catechize their youth, laying the first grounds of
faith, and faithfully teaching the principles of our religion, by expounding
the ten commandments, the Apostles Creed, the Lords prayer, and the doctrine
of the sacraments, with other like principles and chief heads of our
religion. And here let the Church perform her faithfullnes and diligence in
bringing the Children to be catechized, as being desirous and glad to have her
children well instructed. That which follows in this Article, is contained in
the sixteenth section.

Also, CHAP. 28.
Of the goods of the Church, and right use of them.
THe Church of Christ has riches through the bountifulnes of princes, and the
liberality of the faithful, who have given their goods to the Church: for the
Church has need of such goods: and has had goods from ancient time, for the
manteinance of things necessary for the Church. Now the true use of the
Church goods, was, and now is, to manteine learning in schools, and in holy
assemblies, with all the service, rites, and buildinges of the Church: finally
to manteine teachers, scholars, and ministers, with other necessary things,
and chieftelie for the succor and relief of the pore. But for the lawful
dispensing of these Ecclesiastical goods, let men be chosen that fear God,
wise men, and such as are of good report for government of their families.
But if the goods of the Church by injury of the time, and the boldness,
ignorance, or covetousness of some be turned to any abuse, let them be restored
again, by godly and wise men, unto their holy use: for they must not wink at
so impious an abuse. Therefore we teach that Schools and Colleges, whereinto
corruption is crept in doctrine, in the service of god, and in manners, must be
reformed, that there must order be taken, godly, faithfully, and wisely, for
the relief of the poor.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA
Holy meetings.
WE think that holy meetings are so to be celebrated, Art. 23.
that above all things the word of God be propounded Look the 1. obsetu. upon
this confession.
to the people every day publicly, in a public place, and appointed for
holy excercises: also that the hidden things of the Scripture may daily be
searched out and declared* by those that are fit thereunto: that the faith of
the godly may be exercised, and that we may continually be instant in
prayer, according as the necessity of all men requires. As for other
unprofitable and innumerable circumstances of ceremonies, as vessels,
apparel, vailes, torches or candelles, altars, gold and silver, so far
forth as they serve to pervert religion; but especially Idols, which are set
up to be worshipped, and give offense, and all profane things of that sort, we
do remove them far from our holy meeting.

Of Heretics and Schismatiks.
Art* 24.
ALso we remove from our holy meetings all those, who forsaking the property
of the holy Church, do either bring in, or follow strange, and wicked
opinions, with which evil the Catabaptistes are chiefelie infected: who, if
they do obstinately refuse to obey the Church and Christian instruction, are
in our judgment to be bridled by the Magistrate, lest by their contagion they
infect the flock of Christ.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of Catechizing. CHAP. 2.
IN the second place they teach the Christian Catechism, that is, a Catholic
doctrine, and an instruction made with the mouth, which agrees in
Christianisme, with the ancient Church and holy fathers: and this doctrine or
instruction is the inward or secret thing, and the marrow, and the keie to the
wholl holy Scripture, and contains the sum thereof: It is comprehended in
the 10. commandments, in the Catholic, Christian, and Apostolic Creed,
wherein be 12. Articles, which are expounded and confirmed, by the Nicen, and
Athanasius his creed, and by godly, Catholic, and general Counsels: also,
in the form of prayers, to wit, of that holy prayer which the Lord appointed,
and in a summarie doctrine touching the sacraments, and such duties, as we
owe, or be proper, regard being had to every man's place and order, in diverse
and distinct kinds of life, whereunto he is called of God: and there is an
open confession and profession made, that this Christian doctrine is that true,
full, perfect, and well pleased will of God, necessary to every faithful
Christian unto salvation.

This Catechism, which does contain in it the full and Catholic doctrine of
Christianisme, and the knowledge of most weighty things spoken of before, our
preachers do use in stead of a sure rule, method, and table of al those things
which they teach, and of all their sermons and writings: and this they do
faithfully care for, and bestow all their labor therein, that this wholl
ordinary doctrine of the principles of true faith, and Christian godliness, and
the doctrine of the foundation, may be imprinted in the bottom of the hearts
of Christians, and thoroughly ingrafted in the minds and life of the hearers,
and that after this manner. First that all may know, that they are bound to
yield an inward and outward obedience to the law: and therefore they must
endeavor to perform and fulfill the commandments of God, both in their heart,
seeing that the law is spiritual, and in their deeds, by loving God above all
things, and their neighbor as themselves.

Secondly, they must well learn and bear in mind, and be able readily to
rehearse, and to believe from the heart, to keep, and to profess with the
mouth, the chief points of the Catholic, Christian, and Apostolic Creed, and
to testify a christian piety by actions, or manners, and a life which may
beseem it. Therefore they do also in their sermons, by expounding it, lay
open the true and sound meaning, and every mystery, which is necessary to
true and eternal salvation, and is comprehended in the Articles of faith, and
in every part thereof, and confirm it by testimonies taken out of the holy
scriptures, and by these holy scriptures, they do either more largely or
briefly declare, expound, and lay open the meaning, and the mysteries. And in
all these things they do so behave them selves, that concerning the order which
the Apostles brought in and propounded, they labor to instruct not only
those which be of riper years, who being come to lawful age, are able
presently to understand; but also so to teach little children, that they being
exercised, even from their childood, in the chief points of the covenant of
god, may be taught to understand the true worship of god. For this cause, there
be both peculiar Ecclesiastical assemblies with children, which do serve for
the exercise of catechizing* and also the parents, and those that are requested
of the parents, and used for witnesses (who are called Godfathers, and
Godmothers) at Baptism, are put in mind of the duty, and faith, which they
owe, that they also Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.
may faithfully instruct their beloved children, train them up in the discipline
of the Lord, and from the bottom of their hearts, pray unto God for these,
and all other the children of the faithful of Christ. But chiefelie they which
are newly instructed, before they be lawfully admitted to the Supper of the
Lord, are diligently taught the christian catechism, and the principles of
true religion, and by this means they are furthered toward the obtaining of
saving repentance, virtue, and the efficacy of faith. Afterward, all the rest
are also instructed, that all together being lightened with the knowledge of
God, and of the Saints, every man may walk, with all honesty and
godliness, in his place, and in that order, whereunto he is called of God, and
ma^e by this means sanctify the name of God, and adorn the true doctrine.

Thirdly, in the catechism these things are taught, to invoke one true God
in a sure confidence, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to pray, and that
not for themselves only, and their private affairs, but also for the whole
Christian Church, in all countries, for the ministers of the Church, and also
for the civil Magistrate, who is ordained of God, and chiefelie for the
Emperors and your Princely Majesty, for his most noble children, and wholl
posterity, for his counselors, and all those that be subject to his
government, praying, that it would please our gracious God to grant and to
give unto your Princely and his Royal Majesty, a long life, heaped with all
good things, and a happy government, and also a bening, gentle, and fatherly
mind and affection of the heart toward al those that behave themselves
vprightlie, are well affected, do humbly obaie, do show themselves faithful
and loving subjects, and those that do in truth worship God the Father,
and his son Jesus Christ. And, to be brief, we teach, that prayers may be
made faithfully for all men, for our friends and enemies, 1. Tim 2.
as the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles does command us,
and as examples do show, that the very first and holy Church did. For which
cause, we are also instant with the people, that they would diligently and in
great numbers frequent the holy assemblies, and there be stirred up, out of
this word of God, to make earnest and reverent prayers.

Now whatsoever is contrary to this Catholic and Christian kind of
catechizing, all that we do forsake and reject, and it is strongly confuted
by sure reasons, and such as do lean unto the foundations of the holy
Scripture, so far forth as God does give us grace hereunto, and the people is
admonished to take heed of such.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
WE believe because Jesus Christ is the only Advocate Art. 24.
given unto us, who also commands us to come boldly unto the Father in his
name, that it is not lawful for us to make our prayers in any other form,
but in that which God has set us down in his word: and that whatsoever men
have forged of the intercession of Saints departed, is nothing but the deceites
and sleightes of Satan, that he might withdraw men from the right manner of
praying.

These things were also set down in the 2. Section but for an other purpose
and the other part of this Article is to be found in the 16. Section.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
WE make our prayers in that tongue, which all our Art. 1^.
people, as meet is, may understand, to the end they may (as S. Paull
counsels us) take common commodity by common prayer: even as all the holy
Fathers, and Catholic Bishops, both in the old and new Testament, did use
to pray them selves, and taught the people to pray too: lest, as Saint
Augustine says, Like Parotes, and Oules we should seem to speak that we
understand not.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Article 14. which is entitled, of the Supper.
GOd will have the ministry of his Gospel to be public, he will not have
the voice of the Gospel to be shut up in corners only, but he will have it to
be heard, he will have himself to be known and inuocated of all mankind.
Therefore he would that there should be public and well ordered meetings, and
in these he will have the voice of the Gospel to sound, there he will be
inuocated, and praised. Also he will that these meetings, should be witnesses
of the confession and seuering of the Church of God from the sects and opinions
of other nations. John assembled his flock at Ephesus, and taught the Gospel:
and by the use of the Sacraments, the wholl company did declare, that they
embraced this doctrine, and did invoke this God, who delivered the Gospel,
and that they were separated from the worshippers of Diana, Jupiter, and other
Idols. For God will be seen, and have his Church heard in the world, and have
it distinguished by many public signs from other nations. So no doubt the
first Fathers, Adam, Seth, Enoch* Noe, Sem, Abraham, had their meetinges: and
afterward the civil government of Israel had many rites, that their
separation from the Gentles might be more evident. Also God gave a peculiar
promise to his congregation, Math. 18. Wheresoever two or three be gathered
together in my name, I will be in the midst of them. Also, What soever they
agreeing together, shall desire, it shall be done to them. And in the 149.
Psalm, His praise is in the Church of the Saints. And the promises, wherein
God does affirm that he will preserve his Church, are so much the sweeter,
because we know that he does preserve, and restore the public ministry in
well ordered meetinges: as also in the very words of the Supper this promise
is included, where he commands, that The death of the Lord should be showed
forth, and this Supper distributed, till he come, etc.

Hitherto also pertains the last part of the 12. artilce of this confession,
where these things are found, touching the revenues of Monasteries.
IN many places the Churches want Pastors, or else Pastors want living.
These men ought chiefelie to be relieved, out of the revenues of rich
Monasteries: then the studies of those which be poor must thereby be
furthered, and in some places Schools may be erected, especially seeing that
it is necessary that the church should discharge the expenses of many poor,
that they might learn, that so out of that number Pastors and ministers may
be chosen, to teach the Churches. Also hospitals are thence to be relieved,
wherein it is necessary, that the poor, which have been sick along time,
should be nourished. A great part of the revenues in these countries is by the
goodness of god transferred to such uses, which are indeed godly, to wit, to
nourish Pastors, the poor, and Scholars, to erect Schools, and to relieve
hospitales: that which remains is bestowed in every Monastery upon the
guiding and ordering of things partaining to their houses: and to think that
this is not very sumptuous, it is but foolishnes. As for the richer Abbotes in
these days, upon what uses they lavish out the revenues, the examples of many
do declare* whom we could name, who do both hate learning, Religion, and
virtue, and do waste th^se alms rauenouslie* and either set no Pastors over
their Churches, or if they have any, they suffer them to statue.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Hitherto pertains first the 11. Article, Of this confession.
WE think that it is most profitable, that children and young men be examined
in the Catechism by the Pastors of their Church, and that they be commended,
if they be godly and well instructed, and that they be amended, if they be ill
instructed. The rest is to be seen in the 14. sect. where the confirmation
used in Papisticall Baptism is handled.

Hitherto also pertains the 16. Art. ss. 2.
Of Prayer.
BY prayer god is inuocated, and true invocation is a work of faith, and can
not be done without faith. Now faith does behold Christ, and rely upon his
merits only. Wherefore, except thou shall apply unto thy self the merit of
Christ by faith, prayer will stand thee in no stead before God. Now prayer is
necessarily required for this purpose, that by a due consideration of the
promises of God, faith may be stirred up and kindled in us. Therefore it is not
absurdly said, that sins are clean taken away by prayer: yet must it not so
be understood, as though the very work of prayer, of it own merit, were a
satisfaction for sins before God; but that by prayer faith is stirred up and
kindled in us, by which faith we are made partakers of the merit of Christ, and
have our sins forgiven us, only for Christ his sake. For before that we do
by prayer invoke God, it shall be necessary, to have the merit of Christ
applied to us, and received by faith. Therefore it can not be, that prayer
should be such a work, as that for the merit thereof we might obtain
remission of our sins before God. Psalm. 108. Let his prayer be turned
into sin. But it is not possible that prayer should be turned into sin, if
of it self it were so worthy a work, as that sin thereby should be purged.
Isa. 1. When you shall stretch out your hands, I will turn my eyes from you:
and when you shall multiply your prayers, I will not hear you. But God would
not turn away is eyes from prayer, it of it own worthiness it were a
satisfaction for our sins. Augustine upon the 108. Psalm. says: That prayer
which is not made through Christ, does not only not take away sin, but
also it self is made sin. Bernard de Quadrages. Ser. 5. says: But some
peradventure do seek eternal life, not in humility, but as it were in
confidence of their own merits. Neither do I say this, let grace received
give a man confidence to pray: but no man ought to put his confidence in his
prayer, as though for his prayer he should obtain that which he desires. The
gifts which are promised do only give this unto us, that we may hope to
obtain even greater things, of that mercy which gives these. Therefore let
that prayer, which is made for temporal things, be restreined to these wants
only: also let that prayer, which is made for the virtues of the soul, be
free from al filthy, and unclean behavior: and let that prayer, which is made
for life eternal, be occupied about the only good pleasure of God, and that
in all humility presuming, as is requisite, of the only mercy of God.

Of Alms. CHAP. 18.
WE do diligently commend alms, and exhort the Church, that every man help
his neighbor, by every duty that he may, and testify his love. But whereas
it is said in a certain place, That alms do take away sin, as water does
quench fire, we must understand it according to the analogy of faith. Eor what
need was there, to the taking away of our sins, of Christ his passion and
death, if sins might be taken away by the merit of alms? And what use were
there of the ministry of the Gospel, if alms were appointed of God for an
instrument, whereby the death of Christ might be applied to us? Therefore, that
Christ his honor may not be violated, and the ministry of the Gospel may
retain it lawful use, we teach, that alms does thus take away sin, not
that of it self it is a worthy work, whereby sin may either be purged, or
the merit of Christ applied, but that it is a work and fruit of charity
toward our neighbor, by which work we do testify our faith and obedience,
which we owe unto God Now where faith is, there Christ alone is acknowledged to
be the purger of sins. Therefore, seeing that alms does testify, after their
manner, that Christ does dwell in the Godly, it does also testify that they
have remission of sins. For except alms be a work of charity, which may
bear witness to faith in Christ, it is so far from signifying, that man has
remission of sins through Christ, that it does even stink in the sight of God,
If I shall distribute (says Paull) all my substance, that it may be meat for
the poor, and shall not have love, it profits me nothing. Therefore we teach,
that good works must be done necessarily, that God is to be inuocated, and
that alms is to be given, that we may testify our faith and love, and obeie
the calling of God. But in true repentance, we teach, that we obtain remission
of sins, only for the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, through
faith, according to that which Peter says, To him do all the Prophets bear
witness, that through his name, every one that believes in him does receive
remission of sins.

Of Canonical hours. CHAP. 27.
AVgustine writes in a certain place, that Ambrose the Bishop of Millane* did
ordain, that the assemblies of the Church should sing Psalms, whereby they
might mutuallie comfort themselves, whilst they looked for adversity, and
stir up them selves to bear the cross: lest the people, says he, should
pine away with the yrckesomnes of mourning. This singing, because it was used
in a tongue commonly known, it had both a godly use, and deserved great
praise. And by the Canonical decree it appears, that those hours, which they
call Canonical, were an appointment of certain times, wherein the wholl holy
Scripture should be publikelie ouerrunne every year, as in the schools there
be certain hours appointed for interpreting of authors. Such a distribution of
hours was peradventure not unprofitable for that time, and in it self it is
not a thing to be condemned. But to appoint a special kind of priests, to
chaunt out those Canonical hours, and to sing them in a strange tongue, which
commonly is not known to the Church, or is not our country tongue, and that
in some place in the night, and in the day time without any intermission, new
singers very often taking one an others course, and to make hereof a worship,
not to this end, that by patience, and the comfort of the scripture we might
have hope, as Paul says, but that by the merit of this work a man might
mitigate the wrath of God, and purge the sins of men before God; this is it
that is contrary to the meaning of that Church, which is in deed Catholic. 1.
Cor. 14. When ye come together, according as every one of you has a psalm, or
has doctrine, or has a tongue, or has revelation, or has interpretation,
let all things be done unto edifying. Hierom upon the Epist. to the Ephesians. Cap.
5. says, Singing and making melody to the Lord in your hearts. Let young men
hear these things, let them hear, whose office it is to sing in the Church,
that we must sing to God, not with the voice, but with the heart, and that the
throat and the jaws are not to be greased with some sweet liquore, as they
use to do, that play in Tragedies, etc.

Now that which was spoken, touching the use of a tongue that is commonly
known, it must be understood, nor only of the singing of Psalms, but also
of all the parts of Ecclesiastical ministry. For as Sermons and prayers are
to be made, in a well known tongue to the Church, so also must the Sacraments
be dispensed in a speech that is known. For, although it be lawful at some
time to use a strange tongue, by reason of the learned, yet the consent of the
Catholic Church does require this, that the necessary ministeries of the
Church be executed in our country speech. 1. Cor. 14. I had rather in the
Church to speak five words with my understanding, that I mayalso instruct
others, then ten thousand words in a strange tongue. Innocentius the third, De
offi. Iud. Ord. C. Quoniam, says: Because that in many parts within one City
and Diocese, there be people of diverse languages mingled together, having
under one faith diverse rites and customs, we do ^^reictlie command, that the
Bishops of such Cities, or Diocesses, do provide fit men, who, according to
the diversity of ceremonies, and language, may execute among them the divine
duties, and minister the Ecclesiastical Sacraments, instructing them both by
the word, and by their example. Therefore they are to be said to do godly and
Catholiquelie, who do so appoint the dispensation of the Sacraments, the
singing of Psalms, and the reading of holy Scripture, that the Church may
understand that which is said, read, or sung, and the spirit may receive fruit,
thereby to comfort the mind, and to confirm the faith, and to stir up love.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of the singing and prayers of Ecclesiastical men. CHAP. 21.
ANd for that cause, to wit, that men should not wincke at that offending of
God, which might be committed under a color of his service, then which nothing
can offend him more greeuouslie, our Ministers have condemned the most of those
things, which were used in the singings and prayers of Ecclesiastical men. For
it is too too manifest that these have degenerated from the first appointment
and use of the Fathers. For no man, which understands the writings of the
ancient Fathers, is ignorant of this, that it was a custom among them, wisely
to rehearse, also to expound a few Psalms with some Chapter of the scripture,
whereas now adays many Psalms are chaunted, for the most part without
understanding, and of the reading of the Scripture, there be only the
beginnings of Chapters left unto us, and innumerable things are taken up one
after an other, which serve rather for superstition, then for godliness.
Therefore our ministers did first of all detest this, that many things, which
were contrary to the Scriptures, are mingled with holy prayers and songs: as
that those things are attributed to Saints, which are proper to Christ alone;
namely to free us from sin, and other discommodities, and not so much to
obtain, as to give us the favor of God, and all kind of good things.
Secondly, because they are increased so infinitely, that they cannot be sung,
or rehearsed with an attentive mind. Now it is nothing but a mocking of God,
whatsoever we do in his service without understanding. Lastly, because that
these things also were made meritorious works, and to be sold for no small
price, that we may say nothing hereof, that against the express commanndement
of the holy ghost, al things are there said and sung in that tongue which not
only the people does not understand, but many times also, not they themselves,
which do live of those kinds of singing and prayers*

THE SIXTEENTH SECTION. OF HOLY DAYS.
FASTES, AND THE CHOICE OF MEATS, AND OF THE VISITATION OF THE SICK, AND THE
CARE THAT is to be had for the dead.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of Holiedaies, Fastes, and choice of meats. CHAP. 24.
ALthough religion be not tied unto time, yet can it not be planted and
exercised, without a due dividing and allotting out of time unto it. Every
Church therefore does choose unto it self a certain time, for public
prayers, and for preaching of the Gospel, and for the celebration of the
Sacraments: and it is not lawful for every one to overthrow this apointment
of the Church at his own pleasure. For except some due time and leisure were
allotted to the outward exercise of religion, out of doubt men would be quite
drawn from it by their own affairs. In regard hereof we see that in the
ancient Churches, there were not only certain set hours in the week
appointed for meetinges, but that also even the Lords day, ever since the
Apostles time* was consecrated to the religious exercises, and unto a holy
rest, which also is now very well observed of our Churches, for the worship
of God, and increase of charity. Yet herein we give no place unto the Jewish
observation of the day, or to any superstitions. For we do not account one
day to be holier then an other, nor think that resting of it self is liked of
God. Besides we do celebrate and keep the Lords day, and not the Saboth, and
that with a free observation.

Moreover, if the Churches do religiously celebrate the memory of the Lords
nativity, curcumcision, passion and resurrection, and of his ascension into
heaven, and sending the holy ghost upon his disciples, according to christian
liberty, we do very well allow of it. But as for festiual days ordained to
men, or the saints departed, we cannot allow of them. For indeed such feasts,
must be referred to the first table of the law, and be long peculiarly unto
God. To conclude, these festival days which are appointed to saints, and
abrogated of us, have in them many gross things, unprofitable, and not to be
tolerated. In the meanetime we confess, that the remembrance of saints, in
due time and place, may be to good use and profit commended unto the people in
sermons, and the holy examples of holy men set before their eyes, to be
imitated of all.

Now, the more sharply that the Church of Christ does accuse surfeting,
drunkenness, al kind of Iustes andintemperancie, so much the more earnestly it
does commend unto us Christian fasting. For fasting is nothing else but an
abstaining and temperancie of the godly, and a watching and chastising of our
flesh, taken up for the present necessity, whereby we are humbled before God,
and withdraw from the flesh those things, whereby it is cherished, to the
e^de it may the more willingly and easily obaie the spirit. Wherefore they
do not fast at all, that have no regard of those things, but do imagine
that they fast, if they stuff their bellies on a day, and for a set or
prescribed time do abstain from certain meats, thinking that by this very
work wrought they shall please God, and do a good work. Fasting is a help of
the prayers of the saints, and of all virtues. But the fastes, wherein the
Jews fasted from meat, and not from wickedness, pleased God nothing at all, as
we may see in the book of the Prophets.

Now fasting is either public or private. In old time they celebrated public
fastes in troublesome times, and in the affliction of the Church. Wherein they
abstained altogether from meat unto the evening, and bestowed all that time in
holy prayers, the worship of God, and repentance. These differed little from
mourninges, and lamentations, and of these there is often mention made in the
Prophets, and especially in the second chapter of Ioell. Such a fast should
be kept at this day, when the Church is in distress. Private fastes are used
of every one of us, according as every one feleth the spirit weakened in him.
For so far forth he withdraws that which might cherish and strengthen the
flesh. All fastes ought to proceed from a free and willing spirit, and such a
one as is truly humbled, and not framed to win applause and liking of men, much
less to the end that a man might merit righteousness by them. But let every
one fast to this end, that he may deprive the flesh of that which would
cherish it, and that he may the more zealouslie serve God.

The fast of Lent has testimony of antiquity, but none out of the Apostles
writings: and therefore ought not nor cannot be imposed on the faithful. It is
certain that in old time there were diverse manners and uses of this fast,
whereupon Ireneus, a most ancient writer, says, Some think that this fast
should be observed one day only, others two days, but others, more, and
some forty days. Which variety of keeping this fast began not now in our
times, but long before us, by those, as I suppose, which not simply holding
that, which was delivered them from the beginning, fell shortly after into
another custom, either through negligence, or ignorance. Moreover, Socrates,
the writer of the history, says, Because no ancient record is found,
concerning this matter, I think the Apostles left this to every man's own
judgment, that every one might work that which is good, without fear, or
constraint.

Now as concerning the choice of meats, we suppose that in fasting* all that
should be taken from the flesh, whereby it is made more lusty and untamed and
wherein it does most immoderately delight, whereby the flesh is most of al
pampered, whether they be fish, spices, dainties, or excellent wines. Otherwise
we know that all the creatures of God were for Genesis 2. Tit. 1.
the use and service of men. All thing which God made are good, and are to be
used in the fear of God, and due moderation, without putting any difference
between them. For 1 Cor. 11.
the Apostle says, To the pure, all things are pure. And also, whatsoever is
sold in the shambles, eat ye, and ask no question, 1. Tim. 4.
for conscience sake. The same Apostle calls the Doctrine of those which
teach to abstain from meats, The doctrine of Devils, His reasons be these,
that God created meats to be received of the faithful and such as know the
truth, with thanksgiving: because that whatsoever God has created, it is
good, and is not to be refused, if it be received with giving of thanks. The
same Apostle to the Colloss. reprooueth those, which by an over much abstinence
will get unto themselves an opinion of holiness. Therefore we do altogether
mislike the Tatians, and the Encratites, and all the Disciples of Eustathius,
against whom the Council of Gangrya was assembled.

Also out of the 25. Chapter toward the end.
Of Comforting and visiting the sick.
Seeing that men do never lie open to more grievous temptations, then when they
are exercised with infirmities, or else are sick and brought low with
diseases, it behooves the Pastors of the Churches, to be never more vigilant
and careful for the safety of the flock, then in such diseases and
infirmities. Therefore let them visit the sick betimes, and let them be
quickly sent for of the sick, if the matter shall so require. Let them
comfort and confirm them in the true faith. Finally, let them strengthen them
against the dangerous suggestions of satan: In like manner let them pray with
the sick person at home in his house, and if need be, let them make prayers
for the sick, in the public meeting. And let them be careful, that they may
have a more happy passage out of this life. As for popish visiting with the
extreme unction, we have said before, that we do not like of it, because it
has many absurd things in it, and such as be not approved by the Canonical
scriptures.

Of the burial of the faithful and of the care which is to be had for such as
are dead, of purgatory, and the appearing of spirits.
THe scripture wills that the bodies of the faithful, as being temples of the
holy ghost, which we truly believe shall rise again at the last day,
should be honestly without any superstition committed to the earth, and
besides that we should make honorable mention of them which have godlilie died
in the Lord, and perform al duties of love to such as they leave behind them,
as their widows and fatherles children. Other care to be taken for the dead,
we teach none. Therefore we do greatly mislike the Cynikes, who neglected the
bodies of the dead, or did very carelesselie and disdainfully cast them into
the earth, never spoke so much as a good word of the dead, nor any whit
regarded those whom they left behind them. Again, we condemn those which
are too much and preposterouslie officious toward the dead, who like
Ethnikes do greatly lament and bewail their dead (we do not discommend that
moderate mourning, which the Apostle does allow, 1 Thessalonians. 4. but judge it an
unnatural thing, to be touched with no sorrow) and do sacrifice for the dead,
and mumble certain prayers, not without their penny for their pains, thinking
by these their duties, to deliver these their friends from torments, wherein
they being wrapped by death, they suppose they may be rid out of them again
by such lamentable songs. For we believe, that the faithful, after the bodily
death, do go directly unto Christ, and therefore do not stand in need of the
help or prayers for the dead, or any other such duty of them which are alive.
In like manner we believe, that the unbelievers be cast headlong directly into
hell, from whence there is no return opened to the wicked, by any duties of
those which live.

But as concerning that which some teach concerning the fire of Purgatory, it
is flat contrary to the Christian faith, (I believe the remission of sins,
and life everlasting) and to the absolute purgation of sins made by Christ:
and to these sayings of Christ our Lord: Verily, verily I say unto John. 5.
you, he that hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come unto condemnation: but Ioh. 1^.
has passed from death unto life. Again, He that is washed, needs not save
to wash his feet, but is clean every whitte, and ye are clean. Now that
which is recorded of the spirits or souls of the dead, sometime appearing to
them that are alive, and craving certain duties of them, whereby they may be
set free, we count those apparitions among the delusions, crafts and deceits of
the devil, who as he can transform himself into an Angel of light, so he
labors tooth and nail either to overthrow the true faith, or else to call
it Deuteronomy. 18.
into doubt. The Lord in the old Testament forbad to enquire the truth of the
dead, and to have any thing to do with Spirits. And to the glutton, being bound
in torments, as the truth of the gospel does declare, is denied any return
to his brethren. The Lord by his word pronouncing and saying. They have Moses
and the Prophets, let them hear them* if they Luc. 16.
heave not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe, if one shall
arise from the dead.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Art. ^.
THe Church of Christ does herein labor all that she can, to keep the bonds
of peace and love in unity. Therefore she does by no means communicate with
sects, and the rules of orders, devised to make a difference of days, meats,
apparel, and ceremonies.

Art. 10. ss. 1. and ^.
No man can prohibit that, which Christ him self has not prohibited. For this
cause we know that auricular confession, holy days dedicated to saints, and
such like things, had there beginning of men, and were not commanded of God,
as on the other side we know, that the marriage of ministers was not forbidden,

And again, No man can forbid those things which Art 10. ss. 4. ^c.
God has permitted: therefore we think, that it is not by any means
forbidden to receive meats with thanksgiving.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Hitherto perteine, first, those things which are to be found in the 15. Chap.
about the midst, concerning the keeping of hole days and fastes.
IN like sort many of the ancient ceremonies, and such as were brought in by
custom, so near as may be, are retained among us even at this day: Look the
1 obseru. v*pon this confess.
of this sort be certain days appointed for feasts and holy days, the
mattens, that is, morning sermons, evening assemblies, the Lords days, which
be holy days, and special feast days added thereunto, which are consecrated
to the celebrating of the works of Christ, as to his nativity, his Passion,
resurrection, etc. Look the 1. obseru.
and such as be dedicated to the remembrance of holy men, as of the Virgin
Marie, of the Apostles, and of other Saints, and chiefly of those saints, of
whom there is mention in the holy scriptures: and all these things be done of
us, that the word of God may be taught, that God may be worshipped and served,
and that he may be glorified among us.

That which follows, and is to be referred, to this place, is taken out of
the 17. Chap.
IN like sort also our ministers (as it is meet for christian men to do) to
the glory and praise of God, do celebrate holy days consecrated to the
Virgin, and the remembrance of hi^, Look the 2. obseruat. upon this confess
and the wholl 2. Sect. where in is entreated of the lawful ho*nour of Saints.
do make and sing godly and christian songs of her, and with pleasure both
diligently, and that they may confirm themselves, rehearse those great
things wherewith God has adorned her above al other women, and they al
rejoice one with another, and show themselves most thankful for the
salvation which is purchased to mankind, and with all Christian people they
confess and profess, that she is happy, and they praise God for all these
things: and so much as lies in them, they do faithfully follow and imitate
the holy life and good manners of that Virgin, and they do indeed execute that,
which she commands to them that ministered in the Marriage at Cana, and do
always desire to be in heaven with her. And all these things they do according
to the meaning of the holy scriptures.

And a little after.
And thus do we teach that the Saints look the ^ obseruat.
are truly worshipped, when the people on certain days, at a time appointed,
do come together to the service of God, and do call to mind and meditate upon
the benefits of God, which he has bestowed upon holy men, and through them
upon his Church, and therewithal does admonish it self, concerning their
calling, or place which they held, their doctrine faith, life, and exercises of
godliness, and the last end of their life, to the end that it may be as it were
built up in the same truth by the word of God, and may praise God, and give
him thanks for those men, and in their name, and may sing Look the ^.
obseruat.
profitable songs, and such as are free from superstition, and may raise and
stir up themselves to the like obedience, imitation of their faith, works,
and deeds, godliness, holiness, and honesty: and that they may call upon God,
that he would vouchsafe to give unto them, to enjoy their company and
fellowship, as well here in the time of grace, as hereafter in eternal glory.
All which things are in few words comprehended in the epistle to the Hebrews
where it is said. Remember them which have the oversight over ^eb. 13.
you, which have declared unto you the word of God: whose faith follow,
considering what has been the end of their conversation.

Of Fasting. CHAP. 18.
TOuching true and Christian fasting, we teach, that it is an outward work of
faith, comprehending in it worship, which is done by exercising the body to
abstinencie, Math. 6.
joining therewithal prayers, and giving of alms, and that it is due to God
alone: and that among Christians, according as their strength will suffer, and
their affairs and business desire and permit, at what time soever they use it,
in any society either general, or particular, it must be done without
hypocrisy or superstition, as the holy scriptures do witness: and Paull among
other things, does thus write. Cor. 6. Luc. 5. 1. Co^. 7.
of it, Let us approve our selves as the ministers of God, by fasting etc. And
Christ says. Then they shall fast. And again Paull says in another place,
That ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer. Now fasting does not
consist in the choice of meat, which a man uses, but in the moderate use of
meat, and in exercising, chastising, and bringing under the unruly flesh
before god: and chiefelie the matter consists in the spirit and in the heart,
to wit, how, for what cause, with what intent and purpose a man does fast, and
how, and by what mean the godly may exercise a wholesome and acceptable fast
unto God: and on the other side, to know when they should not fast, but rather
take heed that they do not fast, Isa. 56. Math. 6.
it is expressed in the Prophet, and manifestly taught of Christ himself.

What is to be thought of the choice and difference of meats, every man ought
to learn out of the doctrine of Christ, that by this mean what doubt soever
is in this point, it may be taken away, and decided. Then Christ called the
multitude unto him, and said: Hear, and understand. Math. 15. Mar. 7.
That which goes into the mouth defiles not the man, but that which comes
out of the mouth, that defiles the man, that is, makes him guilty. Also, out
of the doctrine of the Apostle, whose words are thus: I am persuaded through
the Lord Jesus, that nothing Romans 14.
is unclean of it self, but unto him, that judges any thing to be unclean,
to him it is unclean. But if thy brother be grieved for the meat, now walk
not thou charitablie: Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. For
the kingdom of God is not meat nor drink, but righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost. Christians indeed are not tied to any law in this
case, yet so, that they be not an offense to the weaker sort: therefore the
Apostle adds: All things indeed are pure, but it is evil for the man which
eats with offense: And in 1. Cor. 8.
another place he writes: Meat does not make men acceptable to God: for
neither if we eat, have we the more; neither if we eat not, have we the less.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
Art (...).
TO conclude, we think that Purgatory is a feigned thing, coming out of the
same shop* whence also Monastical vows, Pilgrimages, the forbidding of
marriage, the use of meats, a ceremonial observation of certain days,
auricular confession, indulgences, and such like things have proceeded, by
which things certain men have thought that they do deserve favor, and
salvation* But we do not only reject all those things, for a false opinion
of meritte added thereunto, but also because they are the inventions of men,
and a yoke laid upon the consciences of men, by men's authority.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
ANd as for their bragges, they are wont to make of Art. 14.
their Purgatory, though we know, it is not a thing so very late risen
amongst them* yet is it no better then a blockish, and an old wives devise.
Augustine indeed sometime says, there is such a certain place: sometime he
denies not, but there may be such a one: sometime he doubts: sometime again
he utterly denies, that there is any at al, and thinks, that men are
therein deceived by a certain natural good will, they bear their friends
departed. But yet of this one error has their grown up such a harvest of
those Massemongers, that the Masses being sold abroad commonly in every
corner, the Temples of God became shoppes, to get money: and seely souls were
borne in hand, that nothing was more necessary to be bought. In deed there
was nothing more gain full for these men to sell.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
Of Abuses that be taken away.
Of putting difference between meats, and such like Popish traditions.
IN this corporal life, we have need of traditions, that Art..
is, of the distinctions of times and places, that all things may be done
orderly in the Church, as Paull wills: Let all things he done in order, and
so as is meet and decent. Therefore the Church has her traditions, that is,
she appoints at what times, and where, the Church shall come together. For
this civil end it is lawful to make traditions. But men that are not
acquainted with the doctrine of Christ, are not content with this end* but they
join superstitious opinions unto traditions, and by superstition multiply
traditions out of measure. Of this there has been complaint made in the
Church not only by late writers, as Gerson, and others, but also by Saint
Augustine. Wherefore it is needful to admonish the people, what to think of
the traditions which are brought into the Church by man's authority. For it is
not without cause, that Christ and Paull do so often speak of traditions,
and admonish the Church to judge wisely of traditions. There was a common
opinion, not of the common sort alone, but also of the teachers in the Church,
that the difference of meats and such like works, which the Ecclesiastical
traditions do command, are services of God, which deserve remission of sins:
Also that such kinds of worship, are Christian righteousness, and as
necessary, as the Leuiticall ceremonies in the old Testament ever were; and
that they cannot be omitted without sin, no not then, when they might be
omitted without danger of giving offense. These persuasions have* brought
forth many discommodities. First the doctrine of the Gospel is hereby
obscured, which teaches, that sins are forgiven freely by Christ. This
benefit of Christ is transferred unto the work of man. And by reason of this
opinion, traditions were especially increased, because that these works were
supposed to deserve remission of sins, to be satisfactions, and to be
Christian righteousness. Moreover, for this cause especially does S. Paull so
often, and so earnestly give us warning, to beware of traditions, lest that
Christ's benefit should be transferred to traditions, lest the glory of Christ
should be obscured, lest that true and sound comfort should be withheld from
men's consciences, and in a word, lest that faith, that is, trust of the mercy
of Christ, should be quite smothered. These dangers Saint Paull would have
avoided. For it is greatly needful that the pure doctrine of the benefit of
Christ, of the righteousness of faith, and of the comfort of consciences,
should be continued in the Church.

Secondly, these traditions have obscured the Commaundemenss of God: for this
kind of schooling was thought to be spiritual, and the righteousness of a
Christian man. Yea, the traditions of men were set aloft above the
commandments of God. All Christianity was placed in the observation of
certain festival days, rites, fastes, and form of apparel. These beggarly
rudiments carried goodly titles, namely, that they were the spiritual life,
and the perfection of a Christian. In the mean while, the commandments of
God touching every calling were of small estimation: that the Father brought
up his children, that the Mothet bare them, that the Prince governed the common
wealth, these works were little set by. They were not taken to be any service
of God. The minds of many stood in a continual mamering, whether marriage,
magistracy, and such like functions of a civil life, did please God or no.
And this doubtfullnes did trouble many very much. Many forsaking their
callings, leaving the commonwealth, did shut up themselves in monasteries, that
they might seek that kind of life, which they thought did more please God,
yea which they supposed, to merit remission of sins.

Thirdly, the opinion of necessity did much vex and disquiet the
consciences. Traditions were thought necessary. All this matter of the
ceremonies and traditions in general does properly belong to the 17. section
next following: but for as much as here is entreated of days, meats, and fasts,
it was requisite that it should be brough in this sect. because the generals
cannot well ^e severed from particulars.
And yet no man, though never so diligent, did ever observe them al, especially
for that the number of them was infinite. Gerson writes, That many fell into
desperation, some murdered themselves, because they perceived well, that they
could not observe the traditions. And all this while they never heard one
comfortable word of grace and of the righteousness of faith.

We see that the Summists and divines gather together the traditions, and seek
out qualifications of them, for the vnburdening of men's consciences: but even
they cannot satisfy themselves, nor wind themselves out: and sometimes also
their very interpretations themselves do snare men^ consciences. The schools
also and pulpits were so busied in numbering up the traditions, that they had no
leisure to handle the Scripture, or to search out more profitable doctrine of
faith, of the Cross, of hope, of the excellency of civil affairs, or of the
comfort of men's consciences in sore tentations. Wherefore many good men have
often complained, that they were hindered by these contentions about traditions,
that they could not be occupied in some better kind of doctrine. When as
therefore such superstitious opinions did cleave fast unto the traditions, it
was necessary to admonish the Churches, what they were to judge of traditions,
to free godly minds from error, to cure wounded consciences, and to set out
the benefit of Christ. We do not go about to weaken the authority of
Ecclesiastical power, we detract nothing from the Look the 3. and 5.
obseruat. upon this confess. in the 11. Sect.
dignity of Bishops: we do not disturb the good order of the church.
Tradititions rightly taken, are better liked: but we reprove those Jewish
opinions only.

Thus therefore we teach, touching ceremonies brought into the Church by man's
authority. First, touching traditions, which are opposed to the commandment
of God, or can not be kept without sin, the Apostles rule is to be followed*
We must obey God rather then men. Of this sort is the tradition of single life.
Secondly, touching other ceremonies, which are in their own nature things
indifferent, as Fastes, Festival days, difference of apparel, and the like,
we must know that such observations do neither merit remission of sins, neither
yet are they the righteousness or perfection of a Christian, but that they are
things indifferent, which, where is no danger of giving offense, may welbe
omitted.

This judgment of ours has these evident and clear testimonies in the
Gospel, to the end that it may admonish the Church, that the Gospel be not
oppressed and obscured by superstitious opinions. Romans 14. The kingdom of God
is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
Here Paull teaches plainly, that a Christians righteousness is the spiritual
motions of the hearr, and ^ot the outward observation of meats and days,
etc. Colloss. 2. Let no man judge you in meat, drink, or a part of a a holy
daic. He forbids that their consciences should be judged, that is, that
their consciences should be condemned in the use of such things: but will
have them counted altogether indifferent things, and such as pertain not to
the righteousness of the Gospel. Then there follows along and a weighty
speech, both of the rites of Moses, and of the ceremonies appointed by the
authority of man. For Paull speaks namely of both kinds, denying them to
be the righteousness of a Christian, and forbidding to burden the consciences
with such traditions. If ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the
world: why, as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with traditions?
Touch not, taste not, handle not. Mat. 15. All that enters into the mouth,
defiles not the man. And in that place Christ excuses his disciples, that had
broken a tradition, that was in use among them, and he adds a notable saying,
They worship me in vain with the commandments of men. He denies man's
precepts to be true duties, available unto righteousness before God. Wherefore
they are not the righteousness of a Christian, nor yet necessary duties.

Yet for all that it is apparent, how wonderfully the services invented by man
have multiplied and increased in the Church unto this day. The Monks did
daily heap up ceremonies both with new superstitions, and also with new ways
to bring in money. And these trifles were thought to be the chiefest worship of
God, and the greatest godliness, whereas Christ does by a most grave and
weighty oracle forbid, that such ceremonies should be accounted for seruiuices
of God. For he does not forbid the appointing of traditions unto a civil end
and use, that is, for good orders sake, but he denies that any such be any
worship of God, in saying, In vain do they worship me. And he teaches that
true worshippes be works commanded of God, as fear, faith, love, patience,
chastity, walking in ones calling, doing of ones duty, etc. Act. 15. Peter
says, Why do ye tempt God, laying a yoke on the disciples neck, which
neither we, nor ou^ Fathers were able to beare^ but by the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ we believe to be saved, as do also they. Here Peter shows, that
remission of sins and salvation comes to us by Christ and not by the rites
of Moses, or the law; and does also give us to understand, that such do
greiuouslie sin, which do burden men's consciences with such ordinances. For
it is no slight reproof, when he says, Why tempt ye God? And, 1. Tim. 4. He
terms the forbidding of meats, marriages, and such like traditions,
doctrines of Devils. But why does he use such a sharp speech? His meaning was
not that there should be no ordinances at all, or that no differences of places
and times should be observed: but then he accounts them to be doctrines of
devils, when as the benefit of Christ is attributed unto them, when they are
reputed for righteousness, and for necessary services of God, when an opinion
of necessirie is fastened to them, and men's consciences are racked, and faith
made of no force by them. These discommodities Christ and his Apostles would
have to be diligently avoided, and for that cause they cry out so often, and
so earnestly against traditions. And it is a wonder, that the patrones of such
superstitious opinions about traditions, are no whitte moved with such
thundering speeches.

Now as for us, we teach that those traditions are not to be condemned, which
command nothing against the laws of God, and have a civil use and end,
namely, such as are ordained to this end, that things might be done orderly
in the Church. Of which sort are the traditions about holy days, the Lords
dare, the Nativity, Passover, and the rest: also about the holy readings and
lessons, and such like. Now all rites of this kind we reteyne very willingly
in our Churches. And yet the Church is taught, to know, what to think of such
customs, to wit, that they do not merit remission of sins, that they are
not the righteousness of a Christian, nor necessary duties unto christian
righteousness, but indifferent things, which a man may omit, where there is
no danger of giving offense. This qualifying of traditions does set free the
consciences from superstitious opinions, and from that old torture and
racking. And ye^ it brings great commendation to traditions, because it
shows the true use of them. All modest men will more willingly obey the
tradititions, after they understand that their consciences are set free from
danger in private, and that they must so far obey, as that the common peace
be not disturbed, nor the weak ones hurt. Again, this interpretation does
defend and preserve public good manners and discipline, because it
commands to avoid offenses. Also to observe public holy days, the
meetings in the Churches, readinges, etc. do serve for examples, and to
accustom the youth, and the common sort thereto. Therefore such ordinances
are not to be broken, but rather with common care and travel to be furthered.

These be the true and meet commendations of traditions, which no doubt do
greatly stir up such as are godly and stayed, to love, defend, and adorn
the public orders. The Gospel teaches to think reverently, not only of
other civil laws and orders, but also of Ecclesiastical, and seeks the
true use of them. Yet notwithstanding it appoints degrees, and will have the
doctrine touching Christ, and things that are heavenly and everlasting,
discerned from the schooling, or Pedagogie of the Church. This liberty,
whereof we speak now, was not unknown to the Fathers. For Augustine says,
This whole kind of things has free observations; and to this purpose he
discourses at large. Irenaeus says, The disagreement in Fasting does not
break of the agreement in Faith. The Tripartite history gathers together
many examples of rites disagreeing one from the other, and in the end adds a
notable saying, It was not the Apostles mind, to prescribe any thing touching
holy days, but to preach godliness, and a good conversation. But in so
manifest a matter, it is needles to heap up many testimonies.

But our adversaries do here make great outcries, That by this doctrine
public discipline and order is overthrown, and disorder and anarchie brought
in. Likewise, that good works and mortification of the flesh are abolished,
according to Iouinians surmise* These slanders we have partly refuted
already: there is no confusion or anarchie brought in, nor the public
discipline overthrown, when as we teach, that traditions, which have a civil
end and use, ought to be observed. And we teach also that offenses must be
foreseen and avoided. But touching mortification, we answer thus: True and
unfeigned mortification is to bear the cross, to endure dangers, troubles,
and afflictions. This kind of obedience is the worship of God, and a
spiritual work, as the Psalm. teaches: A sacrifice to God is a troubled
spirit, etc. We teach moreover that another kind of exercise is necessary. It
is the duty of every Christian to bridle his flesh, even by bodelie
discipline, labors, temperancie, meditation of heavenly things, and such
other exercises, fit for his age. The nearest and proper end whereof must be
this, that fulness and idleness do not prick him forward to sin, and that his
mind may be stirred up, and made more apt for heavenly affections. It is not
to be thought, that these exercises are a worship of God, that deserve
remission of sins, or that they be satisfactions, etc. And this discipline
must be continual: neither can certain days be set and appointed equally
for all. Of this discipline Christ speaks: Beware that your bodies be not
oppressed with surfeting. Again, This kind of Devils does not go out, but
by fasting and prayer. And Paull says, I chastise my body, and bring it in
bondage. Wherefore we do not mislike fastings, but superstitious opinions,
which be snares for men's consciences, that are put in traditions. Moreover,
these exercises, when as they are referred unto that end, that we may have
our bodies fit for spiritual things, and to do our duties, according to a
man's calling, etc. they are good in the godly, and Look the 1. obseru. upon
this confess.
meritorious works, as the example of Daniell does testify. For they be
works, which God requires to this end, that they may subdue the flesh,

This former article we found placed elsewhere in the fifth place amongst those,
wherein the abuses, that are changed, are reckoned up.

Of the difference of meats.
IT has been a common opinion, not of the common Art. 5.
sort alone, but also of such as are teachers in the Churches, that the
differences of meats, and such like humane traditions, are works available
to merit remission both of the fault, and of the punishment. And that the
world thus thought, it is apparent by this, that daily new ceremonies, new
orders, new holy days, new This treatis of ceremonies repeated generally does
prope^^^e pert^^^ unto the (...) here (...) in the (...) article.
fastes, were appointed: and the teachers in the Churches, did exact these
works, at the peoples hands, as a service necessary to deserve justification
by, and they did greatly terrify their consciences, if aught were omitted. *
Of this persuasion of traditions many discommodities have followed in the
Church. For first the doctrine of grace, is obscured by it, and also the
righteousness of faith, which is the most especial point of the Gospel, and
which it behooves most of all to be extant, and to have the pre-eminence in
the Church, that the merit of Christ may be well known, and faith, which
believes that sins are remitted through Christ, and not for any works of
ours, may be exal^ed far above works. For which cause also Saint Paull
labors much in this point: he remooueth the law and humane traditions, that
he may show that the righteousness of Christ i^ a far other thing, then such
works as these be, namely, a faith, which believes that sins are freely
remitted through Christ. But this doctrine of Saint Paull is almost wholly
smothered by traditions, which have bread an opinion, that by making
difference in meats and such like services, a man must merit remission of
sins and justification. In their doctrine of repentance there was no mention
of faith: only these satisfactorie works were spoken of: Repentance seemed to
stand wholly in these.

Secondly, these traditions obscured the Commandments of God, that they
could not be known, because that traditions were preferred far above the
commandments of God. All Christianity was thought to be an observation of
certain holy days, rites, fastes, and attire. These observations carried a
goodly title and name, that they were the spiritual life, and the perfect
life. In the mean season Gods commandments touching every man's calling,
were of small estimation. That the father brought up his children, that the
mother bare them, that the prince governed the common wealth, these were
reputed worldly affairs, and imperfect and far inferior to those glistering
observations and orders. And these errors did greatly torment good minds,
which were grieved that they were hande-fasted to an imperfect kind of life,
in marriage, in Magistracy, and in other civil functions. They had the Monks
and such like men in admiration, and falselie imagined, that their orders did
more deserve remission of sins and justification.

Thirdly, traditions brought great danger to men's consciences, because it was
not possible to keep them all, and yet men thought the observation of them to
be necessary duties. Gerson writes, that many fell into despair, and some
murdered themselves, because they perceived that they could not keep the
traditions: and all this while they never heard the comfort of the
righteousness of faith, or of grace. We see the Summistes and divines gather
together the traditions, and seek qualifications of them; to unburden men's
consciences: and yet all will not serve, but some times they bring more snares
upon the conscience. The schools and pulpits have been so busied in gathering
together the traditions, that they had not leisure once to touch the scripture,
and to seek out a more profitable doctrine, of faith, of the cross, of hope,
of the dignity of civil affairs, of the comfort of consciences in perilous
assaults. Wherefore Gerson and some other divines have made grievous complaints
that they were hindered by braules about traditions, that they could not be
occupied in some better kind of doctrine. And Saint Augustine forbids that
men's consciences should be burdened with such kind of observations, and does
very wisely warn Ianuarius to know, that they are tobe observed
indifferently: for so he speaks: Wherefore our ministers must not be
thought, to have touched this matter unadvisedly for hatred of the Bishops, as
some do falselie surmise. There was great need to admonish the Churches of
those errors, which did arise from mistaking of traditions: for the Gospel
drives men to urge the doctrine of grace, and of the righteousness of faith, in
the Church: which yet can never be vnderstord, if men suppose that they can
merit remission of sins, and justification, by observations of their own
choice. Thus therefore they have taught us, that we can never merit remission
of sins and justification, by the observation of man's traditions: and
therefore that we must not think, that such observations are necessary
duties. Hereunto they add testimonies out of the scriptures. Christ excuses
his disciples, Math. 15. which kept not the received tradition, which yet
seemed to be about a matter not unlawful, but indifferent, and to have some
affinity with the washings of the law, and says, They worship me in vain
with the precepts of men. Christ therefore requires no unprofitable worship:
and a little after, he adds, All that enters in at the mouth de^ileth not the
man. Aagine, Romans 14. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink. Col. 2. Let
no man judge you in meat, or drink, in a Sabbath, or in an holy day.
Again, If ye be dead with Christ, from the rudiments of the world, why, as
though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with ^raditions, Touch not, taste
not, handle not? Act. 15. Peter says, why tempt ye God, laying a yoke upon the
ne^ks of the disciples which neither we, nor our fathers were able to bear?
but by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we hope to be saved, as did also
they. Here Peter forbids to burden the consciences with many rites,
whether they be of Moses, or of any others appointing: and 1. Tim. 4. he
calls the forbidding of meats, a doctrine of devils: because that it is
flat against the gospel, to appoint or do such works, to the end that by them
we may merit remission of sins or justification, or because that there could
be no Christianity without them.

Here our adversaries object against us, that our ministers hinder al good
discipline and mortification of the flesh, as Iouinian did. But the contrary
may be seen by our men's writings. For they have alwais taught, touching the
cross, that Christians must suffer afflictions. This is the true, earnest, and
unfeigned mortification, to be exercised with diverse afflictions, and to be
crucified with Christ. Moreover they teach, that every Christian must so by
bodily discipline, or bodily exercises and labor, exercise and keep under
himself, that fulness and sloth do not prick him up to sin, nor that he may
by such exercises merit such remission of the fault, or of eternal death: and
this corporal discipline must always be plied, not only in a few, and those
set days, according to the commandment of Christ, Take heed that your
bodies be not oppressed with surfeting. Again. This kind of devil is not
cast out but by fasting and prayer: And Paul says, I chast^^e my body, and
bring it under subjection. Where he plainly shows, that he did therefore
chastise his body, not that by disscipline he might merit remission of sins,
but that his body might be apt, and fit for spiritual things, and to do his
duty, according to his calling. Therefore we do not condemn fasts themselves,
but the traditions, which prescribe certain days and certain meats, with
danger to the consciences, as though such works as these were necessary
duties.

Yet many of the traditions are observed among us, which tend unto this end,
that things may be done orderly in the Church, as namely the Look the 1.
obseru. upon this confess.
order of lessons in the Mass, and the chiefest holy days. But in the mean
time men are admonished, that such a service does not justify before god, and
that there is no sin to be put in such things, if they be left undone, so it
be without offense This liberty in humane rites and ceremonies was not
unknown to the fathers. For in the East Church they kept Easter at another
time then they did in Rome: and when as they of the Church of Rome accused the
East Church of schism for this diversity* they were admonished by others, that
such fashions should not be alike every where. And Ireneus says: the
dissagreement about fasting does not break of the agreement of faith. Besides,
Pope Gregory in the 12. distinction insinuates, that such diversity does not
hurt the unity of the Church: and in the Tripartite history, lib. 9. many
examples of different rites are gathered together, and these words are there
rehearsed, The mind of the Apostles was, not to give precepts of holy days,
but to preach godliness and a good conversation.

What is then to be thought of the Lords day, and of such like rites used in
Churches? Hereunto they answer, that it is lawful for the Bishops or Pastors to
appoint ordinances, whereby things may be done in order in the Church, not that
by them we should merit remission of sins, or satisfy for sins, or that
men's consciences should be bound to esteem them as necessary services, and
think that they sin, when they violate any one of them, though it be without
the offense of others. So Paull ordained, that weomen should cover their heads
in the congregation, that the Interpreters of scripture should be heard in
course or order in the Church.

Such like ordinances it behooves the Churches to keep for charity, and
quietness sake, so far forth, that one offend not another, that all things
may be done in order, and without tumult in the Church: but yet with this
caution, that men's consciences be not burdened, so as they should account them
as things necessary to salvation, and think they did sin, when they break
any one of them without offense of others: as no man would say that a woman
does offend, if she come abroad with his head uncovered, without the offense
of any.

Of this sort is the observation of the Lords day, of Easter, of Pentecost, and
such like holy days, and rites. For they that think, that the observation of
the Lords day was appointed by the authority of the Church in stead of the
Sabbath, as necessary, they are greatly deceived. The scripture requires
that the observation of it should now be free: for it teaches that the
Mosaicall ceremonies are not needful after ^he gospel is revealed. And yet
because it was requisite to appoint a certain day, that the people might know
when to come together, it seems that the Church did for that purpose appoint
the Lords day: which day for this cause also seemed to have better liked the
Church, that in it men might have an example of Christian liberty, and might
know, that the observation, neither of the Sabbath, nor of any other day, was
of necessity.

There are extant certain monstrous disputations, touching the changing of
the law, and the ceremoies of the new law, and of the change of the change of
the Sabbath, which did al spring up of a false persuasion, that there should be
a worship in the Church, like to the Leuiticall worship: and that Christ gave
the charge of devising new ceremonies, which should be necessary to salvation,
to the Apostles and Bishops. These errors crept into the Church, when as the
doctrine of faith was not plainly enough taught. Some dispute, that the
observation of the Lords day is not in deed of the law of God, but as it were
of the law of God: and touching holy days, they prescribe, how far it is
lawful to work in them. What else are such disputations, but snares for men's
consciences.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Of Anointing.
MOre over, that which now is called, Extreme anointing, Art. 19. ss. 2.
was in times past a kind ofhealing, as it is evident out of the Epist. of
Saint Ieames, cap. 5. Now it is become a show full of superstition. They say
that sins be forgiven through these anointinges, and they add there-unto
invocation of the dead, which also must of necessity be disliked. Therefore
these ceremonies are not kept in ou^ Churches neither in times past did the
Church think tha^ they were necessary. But for the sick we do make godly
prayers, publicly, and priuatlie: as also the Lord has promised that he
will assuage even corporal griefs in the^ that ask it of him, according to
that saying, Psalm 49* Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee. Also we use burialles, having there at a decent assembly, godly
admonitions, and songs, etc.

The first part of this.19. Article, which is of confirmation. was placed in
the thirteenth Section. Hitherto also pertains the beginning of the 20.
Article so far as it speaks of a certain time appointed for the service of
God.
NAtural reason does know that there is an order, and the vnderstainding of
order, is an evident testimony of god: neither is it possible that men should
live without any order, as we see that in familes there must be distinct times
of labor, rest, meat, and sleep: and every nature, as it is best, so does
it chiefelie love order throughout the whole life. Also Paull commands, That
all things in the Church be done decently and in order. Therefore there has
been at al times, even from the beginning of mankind, a certain order of
public meetinges, there has been also a certain distinction of times, and
certain other ceremonies, and that without doubt full of gravity, and
elegancie, among those excellent lights of mankind, when as in the same
garden or cottage there satte together, Sem, Abraham, Isaac, and their
families* and when as that Sermon which Sem made, concerning the true God, the
Son of God, the distinction of the Church, and other nations, being heard,
afterward they together used invocation.

That which follows, because it treats of indifferent Traditiditions in
general, is placed in the next Section.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Fasting.
Art. 1^.
WE think that Fasting is profitable, not to this end, that either by the merit
of it work it might purge sins before God, or apply the merit of Christ to
him that does Fast; but that, by sobriety it may bridle the flesh, lest that
man being hindered by surfeting, and dronkennes, he be the less able to obeie
the calling of God, and discharge his duty negligentlie. But we shall have a
fit place hereafter to speak of Fasting.

Also, Article 28. Of fasting.
FAsting has it praise and use, But now we do not speak either of necessary
fasting, when as a man must needs fast for want of meat, or of an allegorical
fasting, which is to abstain from all vices: but we are to speak of two
usual kinds of fasting, whereof the one is a perpetual fast, and this is a
sobriety, which is always to be kept, in meat and drink, throughout the
wholl course of a man's life. for it is never lawful for us to rauine, and to
follow surfeting, and dronkennes. There is another fast, which is for a day,
when as sometimes we abstain from meat the wholl day, such as was used in
the old Testament, Leuit. 16. Also the examples of Iosaphat, of the Ninevites,
and others, do witness the same thing. This kind of fasting was also used
after the publishing of the Gospel, as appears, Act. 13. and 14. But
afterward there followed a great difference in Churches touching the observation
of such a kind of fasting: and as this difference brought no discommoditie to
the Church, so it testified, that the use of this fasting was free. And there
is a worthy saying among the ancient fathers, touching this variety: The
difference, say they, of fastings does not break of the agreement of faith.

Now although some men do think, that Christ by his example did consecrate,
the fast of Lent, yet it is manifest, that Christ did not command this fast,
neither can the constitution of our nature abide it, that we should imitate the
example of Christ his fasting, who did abstain full 40. dates, and 40.
nights, from all meat and drink. Also Eusebius does declare, and that not
obscurelie, That the use of this Lenten fast was very free in the Church.
Moreover Chrysostom, in Genesis cap. 2. Hom. 11. says, If thou can not fast*
yet thou may abstain from sins: and this is not the least thing, nor much
differing from fasting, but fit to overthrow even the fury of the Devil

Neither was there any choice of meats appointed, because the Apostle had
said, To the clean, all things are clean. But in the observation of such
fastes, we must chiefly mark the end. The ancient fathers did sometimes
fast whole days together, that they might give themselves to public prayer,
and by this discipline might admonish their Church, and especially the youth,
of dangers that were past, or present, or hanging over their heads, and might
stir them up to repentance, whereby the wrath of God might be assuaged. This
is the godly, and profitable end of these fastinges.

Others do fast, That by the merit of this work, they may purge their
sins before God, or, as some do speak, Apply unto themselves the merit of
Christ, by their fasting. But this end is utterly to be condemned. For first,
the only death of Christ is the purging of our sins. Secondly, fasting was
not ordained for this use, that it should be a work, whereby the merit of
Christ may be applied to us. For, fasting is either joined with true
repentance, and then the merit of Christ is applied to him that repents by
faith, which is the chief part of repentance, before a man does begin or
end his fasting: or else fasting is without repentance, and then it is
abominable in the sight of God, so far is it from applying the merit of
Christ to him that fasteth. Isa 58. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that
a man should afflict his soul for a day, and to bow down his head as a
bulrush? Augustine Epist. 86. ad Casulanum, says, I reuoluing that in my
mind, which is written in the Evangelical and Apostolic Scriptures, and in
that wholl instrument which they call the new Testament, do see that fasting
is commanded. But on what days we ought not to fast, and on what days, we
ought to fast, I do not see it defined, either by the commandment of the
Lord, or of the Apostles. And by this I think, that rather a releasing, then
a binding to fasting, is the more fit and apt, not to obtain righteousness
(wherein the beutie of the Kings daughter does consist inwardly) which is
obtained by Faith, but yet, to signify a perpetual rest. And Chrysostom,
Tom. 4. de Ieiun. Quadrag. Hom. 73. says: If we come daily hither, and fast
the wholl Lent, and do not change our life to the better, it will be an
occasion of our greater condemnation. By these testimonies it is evident, that
it is neither Apostolic* nor Catholic, to think that fasting is a work,
whereby either sins are purged before God, or the merit of Christ is applied.

Hitherto also pertains the 29. Article. Of the consecrating of water, salt,
wine, and other things.
WE confess, that the forbidding of water, whereby the Leuitical uncleanness
was purged, was ordained of god in the old testament. Also we acknowledge that
miracle whereby the Prophet Elizeus did heal the barren waters of ^ericho, by
casting in of salt. And we embrace that, which Paull writing to Timothy,
says, Every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, which is
received with thanksgiving* for it is sanctified by the word of God, and by
praie^ But where as in the new Testament, water is consecrated, which they call
holy water, by the sprinkling whereof venial sins are taken away, and
Devils are driven away: and whereas salt also is consecrated, to make
things wholesome, which otherwise be hurtful, it seems neither to be
Apostolic, nor Catholic. For we are not commanded by the word of God to
imitate the Leuitical sprinkling, or Elizeus his miracle, but it was used by
man's arbitrament and pleasure: and therefore it pertains to this saying of
Christ, In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of
men. And it is evident that the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, which is
made by the word of the Gospel, by Baptism, and the Lords Supper, and
received by faith, does purge us from our sins. That therefore which is
proper to the blood of Christ, which by the ordinance of god was shed for our
sins, ought not to be attributed towater, consecrated by the appointment of
man. And as touching that Elizeus did heal the barren waters by salt, there
is a miracle set before our eyes, that thereby we may confirm that credit,
which we ought to give to the preaching of the Prophet; but it is not set
before us to be imitated without a special calling of God: because the miracles
of the Saints use not to be general* but personal.

And as touching that which Paull says, that creatures are sanctified by the
word of God, and by prayer, he means not that creatures, as for example,
salt, flesh, eggs* herbs, are to be coniured, that Satan by the use of them
may be driven away; but that all creatures are by the word of God every one
appointed to their outward use, which then serve for our good, when we use them
well, by faith, and praying unto God. So God created salt, to season meat, and
to preserve flesh from putrefying: he created water, to serve for drink, or
washing, or watering, and not to drive away the Devil. In deed in Baptism,
he ordained Look the 1. obseru. up on the confess. of Saxony Sect. 13.
water to wash away sins: but this is not the general end why water was
created, but a special ordinance, appointed by a special word of God. For,
as touching the general creation and sanctification of God, there is no word
of God, that does witness, that the creatures, which we before have rehearsed,
by coniurings are made profitable hereunto, that they may take away sins,
and chase away the devils. Now that which is brought in without the word of
God, to another use then God has ordained it unto, it cannot be done in faith,
but it becomes an abuse, and does rather bring destruction, then salvation,
Romans 14 Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. And Cyprian, Epist. 2. Lib. 2.
says. If Christ alone is to be heard, we are not to consider what any other
before us has thought good to be done, but what Christ, who is before all,
has done: for we ought not to follow the custom of men, but the truth of
God, etc.

Hitherto also pertains Chap. 22. of the same confession.

Of extreme unction.
WE confess that the Apostles anointed the sick with oil, and that the sick
recovered their bodelie health. Also we confess, that the Epistle, which
bears the name of James, does command, that the Elders of the Church be
called unto the sick, that they may anoint them with oil, and pray for them,
that they may obtain health. But th^se things were then practiced profitably,
when as yet the Minister of the Church were endued with the gift of healing the
s^cke corporally, and wonderfully. But after that this gift ceased, the
Gospel being confirmed in the Church, the thing it self does witness, that
this ceremony of Anointing is now idly, and unfruitfully used. For they
which now are anointed, use not by this anointing to recover their bodelie
health* yea this anointing is not used, but on them, of whose bodelie health
men do despair. Neither is there any word of God, which does promise, the
Gospel of Christ being published, that this outward anointing should be of
any force to take away sins, and to give a spiritual and heavenly health.
Notwithstanding the Ministers of the church are bound by duty, to visit the
sick, and to pray together with the Church for their health, look the 1.
obfcruat. upon this confess.
and to comfort them as well by the preaching of the Gospel, as by dispensing
of the Lords Supper. And this is a godly anointing, whereby the holy Ghost
is effectual in the believers.

CHAP. 24. Of the remembrance of the dead.
ALthough in deed there is no difference, between a Saint resting in Christ,
and a faithful man departed (for every one which dies in the faith of
Christ, is a Saint) yet because it has pleased some to put a difference
betwixt these two, we also thought it good to make two several Chapters
thereof. And first, we think, that it belongs to a godly mind, to make
decent mention of his elders which have died in the faith of Christ, and to
show forth toward their posterity and friends which are alive, in all
duetifull manner that we can, that thankefullnes, which is due to those
benefits, which we received of them. Secondly, faith requires of us, that we
do not think that the dead are nothing, but that they do in deed live
before God: to wit, that the godly do live blessedlie in Christ: and that the
wicked do live in an horrible expectation of the revelation of the judgment
of God. Also, charity requires, that we should wish all peace and happiness
to them that are dead in Christ. This also is to be added, that, to testify
the hope of our resurrection, we must bury our dead decently, so near as may
be, and as the time, and conditions of men will suffer. Look the ^. obseruat.
upon this confess.
Therefore we think it is a profitable thing, that at burialls those things be
rehearsed, and expounded out of the holy Scriptures, which do serve to
strengthen our faith in the horror of death, and to confirm our hope of the
resurrection.

But that the dead are helped by those usual watchings, prayers, and
sacrifices, and that by the merits thereof, they be either delivered from
their pains, or obtain a greater felicity which is in heaven, there is no
testimony out of that doctrine which is in deed Prophetical and
Apostolical. For there is one only merit of eternal life, and we have one
only redemption and deliverance, to wit, the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ:
and this merit is made ours, when we believe in Christ, and we have nothing to
do with it, when we do not believe the Gospel of Christ. Ioh. 3. God sent not
his Son into the world, that he should condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. He that believes in him, shall not be
condemned: but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he
believes not in the only begotten Son of God. Therefore if any man shall
depart out of this life in the faith of Christ, he has all the merit of
Christ, and needs no other. For God, which gave his Son, does also give al
things with him, as Paul says. But he that departs hence without Christ,
cannot be helped by any merittes of men, because that without Christ there is
no salvation. Cyprian against Demet. Tract. 1. says: When a man is once
departed hence, there is no place left for repentance, there is no effect of
satisfaction: here life is either lost, or held fast: here we must provide for
eternal salvation, by the service or worship of God, and by the fruit of
faith. And Hierome upon the Epistle to the Gal. Cap. 6. says: We are taught by
this small sentence, though obscurelie, a new point of doctrine which lies
hid, to wit, that whilst we be in this present world, we may help one an
other, either by prayers, or by counsel: but when we shall come before the
tribunal seat of Christ, it is not Job, nor Daniell, nor Noe, that can
entreat any thing for us, but every man shall bear his own burden. For, as
touching that which is cited out of the Machabees, That sacrifices were offered
for the sins of the dead, the Author himself of the book does doubt, in the
end of the book, whether he has written well, and craves pardon, if in any
point he has erred. Therefore let us pardon him that without any authority of
the holy Scripture he affirms, that the dead are freed from their sin by
the sacrifices, and prayers of them that be alive. And Tertullian says,
Oblations are made one day every year for them that are dead: But this was
either received without authority of the word of God, from the customs of the
heathen, as many other things were; or by the name of Oblation we must
understand a public rememberance of those which died in the faith of Christ,
and a thanksgiving for those benefittes which God bestowed upon them.

CHAP. 25. Of Purgatory.
ALthough we ought not to doubt, but that the Saints have their Purgatory fire
in this life, as the examples of David, Ezechias, Jonas, and others do witness,
yet it is not without cause doubted, whether that after this life there be such
a Purgatory, as the common sort of men do think there is, wherein the souls
be so long tormented, till either by their punishment they do satisfy for
their sins, or be redeemed by Indulgences. For if Purgatory be such a thing,
it is much to be merueiled at, that neither the Prophets, nor the Apostles have
in their writings delivered unto us any thing thereof certeinelie, and
plainly, but rather do teach, and that not obscurely, the clean contrary.
Mar. 16. Preach ye the Gospel to every creature: he that shall believe, and be
baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not believe, shall be condemned.
Here be two degrees of men placed: the one, of them, which believe the Gospel,
and they are pronounced, saved: the other, of them, which do not believe the
Gospel, and these are pronounced, condemned: there is no mean betwixt these
two. For either thou do depart out of this life in the faith of Jesus
Christ, and then thou have remission of thy sins for Christ his sake, and the
righteousness of Christ is imputed to thee. Therefore he which dies, being
accompanied with Christ, he wants nothing toward the obteining of true and
eternal life: but he which departs from hence without Christ, goes into
eternal darkness.

If beside these two degrees there were some other third state of souls in an
other world, certeinlie Paul, Who was taken up into Paradise, and into the
third heaven, and saw many secret things, would not have envied the Church this
knowledge. But see, when he does of set purpose write to the Thessalonians,
concerning Christians that sleep, he makes no mention at all of any
Purgatory, but rather wills them, Not to be sorofull, even as others which
have no hope. Therefore if there were any such state of souls in another
world, as the common people thinks there is, Paull could not be withh^ld, but
in so fit a place he would plainly have declared this state of souls, and
would have prescribed a mean unto the Church, whereby miserable souls might
be delivered from their torment. But the true and Catholic Church in deed,
has plainly showed that she has no certainty at all concerning this third
kind of the state of souls in another world. Chrysostom in his second sermon
of Lazarus, says, If thou have violently taken any thing from any man,
restore it, and say, as does Zacheus, If I have taken from any man by forged
cauillation, I restore fourefoulde. If thou art become an enemy to any man,
be reconciled before thou come to judgment. Discharge all things here, that
without grief thou may behold that tribunal seat. Whilst we be here, we
have many excellent hopes. But so soon as we depart thither, it is not then
in our power to repent, nor to wash away our sins. And again, He that in
this present life shall not wash away his sins, shall not find any comfort
afterward.

Augustine, although he place certain men in the midst, betiwxt them, that
be very good, and those that be very evil, to the one sort whereof he
seems to assign the place of Purgatory, yet in other places he doubts of
that matter, and does not define any certainty. Therefore we must so think
of this opinion of Augustine, as he requires, that is, we must receive that,
which is confirmed, either by the authority of the Scripture, or by probable
reason. But it is evident, that those places of the Scripture, which are
commonly cited, to establish Purgatory, are wrested from the natural, to a
strange sense, and are far otherwise expounded, even of the a^ncient writers
themselves. And those reasons which Augustine brings for his opinion, do seem
to lean to this foundation, That we obtain remission of our sins and life,
not only for Christ his sake, through faith, but also for the merits of our
works. But how this agrees with the true Apostolic doctrine, we have before
declared. Wherefore we think, that this speculation of Purgatory fire, is to
be left to it own authors, and that we must chiefly do this, as Paull
exhorts us, that we may confirm our selves one another with speeches
touching the assured faith of our resurrection, and salvation in Christ Jesus,
for whose sake God does so favor the faithful, that in the midst of death
he preserves them, and gives them true peace.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of prayers and fastinges. CHAP. 7.
These things which are mingled in this 7. and after in the 10. c. touching
Prayers, did apperteine to the 15. Sect if they might fitly have been
separated.
WE have among us prayers and Religious fastes, which are most holy works
and such as do very much beseem Christians: whereunto our Preaehers do most
diligently exhort their hearers. For true fasting is as it were a renouncing
of this present life, which is always subject to evil lusts and desires, and
a meditation of the life to come, which is free from all perturbation. And
prayer is a lifting up of the mind unto God, and such a familiar speech with
him, as no other thing can so greatly set a man on fire with heavenly
affections, and more mightelie make the mind comformable to the will of God.
And though these exercies be never so holy, and necessary for Christians, yet
seeing that a man's neighbor is not so much benefited by them, 1. Cor. 13.
as man is prepared, that he may with fruit and profit have regard of his
neighbor, they are not to be preferred before holy doctrine, godly
exhortations and admonitions, and also other duties, whereby our neighbor
does presently receive some profit. Whereupon we read of our Savior, that in
the night time he gave him self to prayer, and in the day time to doctrine,
and to heal the sick. For as love is greater then faith and hope, so to
believe those things, which come nearest unto love, to wit, such as bring
assured profit unto men, are to be perferred before all other holy functions:
whereupon S. Chrysostom writes, that Among In Math. Hom. 48.
the wholl company of virtues, fasting has the last place.

Of the Commanding of Fastes. CHAP. 8.
But because that no minds, but these that be ardent, and peculiarly stirred
up by the heavenly inspiration, can either pray, or fast aright, and with
profit, we believe that it is far better, after the example of the Apostles,
and the former and more sincere Church, by holy exhortations to inuit men
hereunto, then to wring them out by precepts, such especially, as do bind
men under pain of deadly sin: the which thing the Priests that were of
late took upon them to do, when as then the order of Priests had not a little
degenerated. But we had rather leave the placetime, and manner, both of
praying, and also of fasting, to the arbitrament of the holy Ghost, then to
prescribe them by certain laws, especially such, as may not be broken
without some sacrifice of amends. Yet for their sakes that be the younger, and
more imperfect sort, our Preachers do not dislike, that there should be an
appointed time and means, both for prayer, and also for fasting, that as it
were by these holy introductions to exercises they might be prepared hereunto,
so that it be done, without bynding of the conscience. We were induced thus to
think, not so much for that all compulsion being against a man's will, is
repugnant to the nature of these actions, but rather, because that neither
Christ himself, nor any of his Apostles, have in any place made mention of
such kind of precepts: and this does In Math. hom. 47.
Chrysostom also witness, saying: Thou see that an upright life does help
more then all other things. Now I term an upright life not the labor of
Fasting, nor the bed of hair, or ashes, but if thou do despise money, no
otherwise then it becomes thee, if thou burn with charity, if thou nourish
the hungry with thy bread, if thou overcome thy anger, if thou do not desire
vain glory, if thou be not possessed with envy: for these be the things
that he teaches* for he does not say, that he will have his fast to be
followed, howbeit he might have proponed those 40. days unto us: but he says,
Learn of me, because I am meek, and lowly in heart. Yea rather on the
contrary side, says he, eat all that is set before you.

Moreover, we do not read, that any solemn or set fast was enjoined to the
ancient Church, but that fast of one day. For those fastes, which as the
scripture does witness, were ordained of Prophets, and of Kings, it is
certain, that they were no set fastes, but enjoined only for their time, to
wit, when as evident calamities, either hanging over their heads, or presently
pinching them, did so require it. Seeing therefore that the Scripture, as S.
Paull does affirm, does instruct a man to every good work, and yet is
ignorant of these fastes which are extorted by precepts, we do not see, how it
could be lawful for the successors of the Apostles, to ouercharge the Church
with so great and so dangerous a burden. Truly, Irenaeus does witness, that
in times past the observation of fast in Churches was diverse, and free, as it
is read in the Ecclesiastical history, lib. 8. cap. 14. In the same book
Eusebius makes mention, that one Apollonius, an Ecclesiastical writer among
other arguments used this for one, to confute the doctrine of Montanus the
heretic, Because he was the first that made laws for fastes. Thereupon
Chrysostom says in a vertaine place, Fasting is good, but let no man be
compelled thereunto. And in another place he exhorts him that is not able to
fast, to absteyne from deinties, and yet affirms, that it does not much
differ from fasting, and that it is a strong weapon to repress the fury of
the Devil. Moreover, experience also it self does more then prove, that
these precepts concerning fastes, have bin a great hinderance to godliness.

Therefore when we saw it very evidently, that the chief men in the Church,
did beside the authority of the Scripture, take upon themselves this power, so
to enjoin fastes, as to bind men's consciences under pain of deadly sin,
we did loose the consciences out of these snares, but by the Scriptures, and
chiefly by Paul's writings, which do with a singular endeavor remove these
rudiments of the world from the necks of Christians. For we ought not lightly
to account of that saying of Paull: Let no man condemn you in meat and
drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath
days. And again, Therefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of
the world, why, as though ye lived in the world, are ye burdened with
traditions? For if S. Paull, then whom no man at any time did teach Christ
more certainly, do earnestly affirm, that through Christ we have obtained
such liberty in outward things, that he does not only not give authority
to any creature, to burden those which believe in Christ, no not so much as
with those ceremonies and observations, which notwithstanding God himself
appointed, and would have to be profitable in their time; but also denounces,
that they be fallen away from Christ, and that Christ shall nothing at all
profitte them, who suffer themselves to be addicted thereunto; what shall we
then think of those commandments, which men have devised of their own
brain, not only without any oracle, but also without any example worthy
to be followed, and which are therefore made unto many not only beggarly
and weak, but also hurtful, not elements, that is, rudiments of holy
discipline, but also impediments of true godliness? How much more unjustly
shall any man take unto himself authority over the inheritance of Christ, to
oppress him with such kind of bondage? and how far shall he remove us from
Christ, if we submit our selves unto him? For who does not see the glory of
Christ, to whom we ought wholly to live, whom he has wholly redeemed to
himself, and restored to liberty, and that by his blood, to be more obscured,
if beside his authority, we do bind our conscience to those laws, which are
the inventions of men, then to those which have God for their author, although
they were to be observed, but only for their time? Certainly it is a less
fault to play the Jew, then the Heathen. Now it is the manner of the heathen;
to receive laws for the worship of God, which have their beginning from man's
invention only, God never being asked counsel of in the matter. Wherefore if
in any matter at all, certainly here that saying of Paull takes place: Ye
are bought with a great 1. Gor. 7.
price, be not made the servants of men.

Of the choice of meats CHAP. 9.
FOr the same cause was that forbearing and choosing of meats enjoined and tied
to certain days, which S. Paull, writing to Timothy, calls the doctrine of
Devils. Neitheir is their answer sufficient. Who say that these things be
spoken only against the Manichies, En^ratites, Tatians, and Marcionites, who
did wholly forbid certain kinds of meats and marriage. For the Apostle in
this place has condemned those, which command to abstain from meats, which
G^d has created to be taken with thank^giuing, etc. Now they also which do but
forbid to take certain meats, on certain days do nevertheless command men
to abstain from those meats, which God has created to be taken, and are cousin
germans to the doctrine of the Devils, the which also is evidently seen by
the reason, which the Apostle adds. For, says he, Whatsoever God has
created, it is good, and nothing is to be refused, that is received with giving
of thanks. Here he does not take exception against any times, although no man
favored frugalitie, temperance, and also choice chastisments of the flesh, and
lawful fasting, more greatly then he did, Certainly a Christian must be
frugall, and sometime the flesh must be chastised by diminishing the daily and
accustomed portion or diet, but base meats, and a mean, does serve better to
this purpose, then any kind of meats: to conclude, it is meet for
Christians, now and then to take upon them a lawful fast, but that must not be
an abstinence from certain, but from all meats, nor from meats only, but
also from all the deinteis of this life whatsoever. For, what kind of fast is
this? what abstinence? only to change the kind of deinties, (the which thing
at this day they use to do which are counted more religious then others) seeing
that Saint Chrysostom does not account it to be a fast, if we continue
wholly without meats, even unto the evening, except together with absteining
from meats, we do also contain our selves from those things which be
hurtful, and bestow much of that leisure upon the study and exercise of
spiritual things.

That by prayers and fastes we must not look to merit any thing. CHAP. 10.
Moreover, our Preachers have taught, that this fault is to be amended in
prayers and fastes, that commonly men are taught to seek to obtain, I know
not what merit, and justification by these works. For, As we are saved by
grace, through faith, so also are we justified. And touching the wotkes of the
law (among the which prayers and fastes are reckoned) Paull writes thus: For
we through the Gal* 5.
Spiritwaite for the hope of righteousness through faith. Therefore we must
pray, but to this end, that we may receive of God, not that we may hereby
give any thing unto him. We must fast, that we may the better pray, and
keep the flesh within the compass of it duty, and not before God to deserve
any thing for our selves. This only end and use of prayers, both the
Scripture, and also the writings and examples of the Fathers do prescribe
unto us. Moreover, the case so stands with us, that although we could pray
and fast so religiously, and so perfectly do all those things which God
has enjoined us, that nothing could more be required of us (which hitherto no
mortal man has at any time performed) yet for all this we must confess,
that we are unprofitable servants. Therefore what meritte can we dream of.

THE SEVENTEENTH SECTION* OF CEREMONIES, AND RITES, WHICH ARE INDIFFERENT, in
general.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of Rites, Ceremonies, and indifferent things. CHAP. 27.
Unto the ancient people in old time were given certain ceremonies, as a
kind of schooling or pedagogie, to those which were kept under the law, as
under a Schole master, or Tutor: but Christ the deliverer being once come, and
the law taken away, we which believe are no more under the Romans 6.
law, and the ceremonies are vanished and worn out of use. And the Apostles
were so far from reteining them in the Church of Christ, or reparing them, that
they witnessed plainly, that they would not lay any burden upon the Church.
Wherefore we should seem to bring in, and set up Iudaisme again, if so be we
should multiply Ceremonies, or Rites in the church, according to the manner of
the old church. Therefore we are not of their judgment, who would have the
Church of Christ kept in with many and diverse Rites, as it were with a
certain schooling or pedagogie. For if the Apostles would not thrust upon the
Christian people the ceremonies and rites, which were appointed by God, who is
there (I pray you) that is well in his wi^tes, that will thrust upon it the
inventions devised by man. The greater that the heap of ceremonies is in the
Church, so much the more is taken, not only from Christian liberty, but also
from Christ and from faith in him: whilst the people seek those things in
ceremonies which they should seek in the only Son of God Jesus Christ,
through faith. Wherefore a few, moderate, and simple rites, that are not
contrary to the word of God, do suffice the godly. And that there is found
diversity of rites in the Churches, let no man say therefore that the
Churches do not agree. Socrates says, That it were not possible to set down
in writing all the ceremonies of the Churches, which are thoroughout Cities and
Countries: No Religion does keep every where the same ceremonies, although
they admit and receive one and the self same doctrine touching them: for
even they which have one and the self same faith do disagree among them
selves about ceremonies. Thus much faith Socrates, and we at this day having
diverse rites in the celebration of the Lords Supper, and in certain other
things, in our Churches, yet we do not disagree in doctrine and faith, neither
is the unity and society of our Churches rent a sunder. For the Churches have
always used their liberty in such rites* as being things indifferent, which
we also do at this day.

But yet notwithstanding we admonish men to take heed, that they count not
among things indifferent such as indeed are not indifferent, as some use to
count the Mass, and the use of Images in the Church, for things indifferent*
That is indifferent, (says Jerome to Augustine) which is neither good, nor
evil, so that whether you do it, or do it not, you are never the more just,
or unjust, thereby. Therefore, when things indifferent are wrested to the
confession of faith, they cease to be free, as Paull does show, that it is
lawful for a man to eat flesh, if no man do admonish him that it was offered
to Idols: for then it is unlawful, because he that eats it, does seem to
approve Idolatry by eating of it.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of things indifferent.
Art 25.
THose things which be called, and are properly things indifferent, although a
godly man may in all places, and at all times use them, freely, yet he must
only use all things according to knowledge, and in charity, to wit, to the
glory of God, and to the edifying of the Church, and his neighbors.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
IN this Section also may the tenth Article of this confession be placed, which
we have partly referred to the first Section, where mention is made of humane
Traditions, partly to other Sections, as occasion served.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of accessories or things indifferent, to wit, of Ecclesiastical traditions,
constitutions, rites, and ceremonies, and of Christian liberty. CHAP. 15.
TOuching this accessorie kind, humane traditions, constitutions, and
ceremonies brought in by a good custom, men are taught that these be things
inferior in degree, and less necessary, then are the gifts of the ordinary
Ministry: yea, that they be instituted and appointed in regard of the
Ecclesiastical ministry, and to serve thereunto: and yet that they are with
an uniform consent to be retained in the Ecclesiastical assemblies of
Christian people at the common service of God, according to the doctrine of the
holy Apostles: Let al things be done in your meeting (to wit in the Church)
decently, and in order. Also, God is not the author of Confusion, but of peace.
But they must always be kept with this caveat, and within these bounds, that
they be not taken for foundations, whereupon salvation must stey it self, or
for a worship, which is appointed of God without any difference; and that they
do not rather, or more straigthly bind the consciences of men, then the
commandments of God do; and that they be not lifted up or preferred before
them, but that they be taken for an ornament, decency, honest show, and
laudable discipline; and so, that they do not violate the Christian liberty
of the Spirit of God, and of faith, nor disturb charity: and on the other
side, that no man, by pretending a show of Christian liberty, do withdraw
himself from such constitutions* as be godly, and serve to a good use.

John. 8. Romans 6. Romans 8. Act. 15. Psa. 18. and 110. Romans 8. 2. Tim. 1. Iac. 1.
Now by the name of Christian liberty is chiefly understood that liberty,
whereby through Christ we are freed from sin, and the curse, and the yoke of
the law: secondly, the receiving of the Spirit of a ready will, or of the
voluntary Spirit of the Sons of God, whereby they do earnestly, and with
pleasure, and of their own accord, exercise the works of faith toward God, and
charity toward their neighbor; and by the law of charity, the mind is
stirred up to perform these things, rather of love, then of debt, or any
compulsion: Also, whereby we are made free from all bond of conscience to any
humane traditions, that a man may not be tied in such sort, or rather more
strictly, unto these, then to the commandments of God: And lastly, that no
man may fuffer his conscience to be seared thereby, as with an hot iron.
Therefore according to these things, al those humane traditions and ceremonies,
which do obscure or take away the glory, honor, worship, and grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and do withdraw the people from true and sincere faith, and
in a word, in respect whereof the commandments of God are broken, neglected,
and lightly regarded, and the word of God is not exercised, or handled
according to it own sincerity and truth, they are not only not to be
observed, but to be avoided. For Christ our Lord does sharply reprove those
Pharisees, and Masters of the Jews, by the name of such rites and traditions,
and for Math. ^. Isa. 29.
that they do observe such, when he says, Very well has Esaias prophesied of
you, hypocrites, as it is written: This people honors me with their lips,
but their heart is far away from me. But they worship me in vain, seeing
that they teach such doctrine, as is delivered, and brought in by men. For ye
lay the commandments of God aparte, and observe the traditions of men. And
holy Paull does admonish us, to take heed of such toies devised by men, when
he says, Beware, l^st there be any that spoil you through philosophy, and
vain deceit, through the traditions of men, according to the rudimentes of the
world, and not after Christ. Did. 8. and 11. cap. consuetud.
Whereof also there be Canons extant in the Canon law, and the words be these.
We praise custom, yet that only, which is known to use nothing contrary to
the Catholic faith. Wherefore those rites only, and those good ceremonies are
to be observed, which among the people of God, do build up one only, and
that a true faith and a sincere worship of God, concord, charity, and true
and Christian, or religious peace. Therefore, whether they have their beginning
and be brought in of Bishops, or of Ecclesiastical Counsels, or of any other
authors whatsoever, the simpler sort are not to care for it, neither to be
moved or disquieted, but to use them to good, because they are good, and to
observe this only rule therein, as always to put their greatest confidence
in those things only, which are of God, settle their only and chief refuge
in those things, and with all diligence take heed, that they be not withdrawn
by such ceremonies from those things, which are the chiefest of all, and
whereon religion is founded, and so by consequent from the things themselves.
For those divine and wholesome things are to be preferred in every respect,
before all other things of all men, and the conscience ought to be bound to
them alone. For the Lord himself did pronounce a Woe against those Elders of
the Jews, who preferred their own traditions before the commandments of
God, and those which were the lesser before things of greater weight: You Mat.
13. Lu^. 11.
leave, says he, the weightiest matters of the law, as judgment, and mercy,
and fidelity. These ought ye to have done, and not to have lef^e the other.

And although our Preachers do not keep all rites alike with other Churches,
the which thing neither can be, neither is necessary to be done, that in all
places, where there be Christian assemblies one and the same ceremonies should
be used, yet they do not withstand, or oppose themselves to any good and
godly constitution, neither are they so minded, as that for the ceremonies
sake they would raise up any dissensions, although they should think that
some of them were not very necessary, so that they be not found to be
contrary to God, and to his worship, and glory, and be such, as do not
diminish true faith in Jesus Christ, which alone does purchase righteousness.
Howbeit in this place, and in this point, it must not be passed over with
silence, to wit* that we ought by no means to burden the people with many
superfluous, and grievous traditions, such as the Mosaical traditions were
under the law. For the Apostles forbad that this should be done, as also holy
Peter said unto certain concerning this matter: Why do ye tempt God Gal. 5.
in laying a yoke upon the necks of the disciples? Also, Be ye not, says
Paul, entangled with the yoke of bondage. For which cause also Christ did
vehemently inueigh against the Scribes, Luc. 11.
saying, Woe also be to you Scribes, for ye lay burdens upon men's shoulders,
which can scarce be borne.

Also men are taught to acknowledge this, that humane traditions do not
contain a perpetual and immutable law, but as they are for just causes
instituted of men, so also they may upon just and weighty causes, and if the
matter so require, be broken, abrogated, and changed without any sin*
according to the example of the Apostles, who Math. 15. Marc. 7.
did transgress the traditions of the Elders, when as they did eat bread with
unwashed hands, and did not observe the same fastes with others, add yet they
were not by this means guilty of any sin: also according to the example of
the first and holy Church, upon which the Apostles, and the wholl council
laid this commandment by the holy ghost, that they should abstain from the
eating of those things which were sacrificed Act. 15.
to Idols, and of blood, and of that which is strangled. Notwithstanding,
after that the causes and occasions, for the which this decree was made, in
process of time did vanish away, even this Apostolical constitution did grow
out of use. Neither in these things ought we to care for the offense of the
wicked, who are offended with this thing, as the Lord says, Let them alone,
they be blind, and guides of the blind. And Mat. 15.
on the other side, we must take diligent heed hereunto, that Romans 14. 1. Cor.
8. Mat. 15.
no offense be given to little ones, by a rash, froward, and wicked using of
Christian liberty: for this also the Lord says, Woe be to that man by whom
offense comes.

Now if so be that there be any unlikeness in traditions, and external
ceremonies, and if any diversity which is not hurtful be found in
Ecclesiastical assemblies, certeinlie no man ought to be so ignorant in these
things, as for this cause to be offended therewith, or to take offense at
others, and in this respect to reproach or hurt others, or to be an author of
sects and also of factions, seeing that there was never in all places one, and
the same form of an Ecclesiastical constitution in this point, neither is at
this day the same. The which thing also is mentioned in the books of the Canon
law in these words: The holy Church of Rome does know, Did. 12. Cap. Scit.
that constitutions, and customs being diverse, according to time and place,
do nothing at all hinderthe salvation of the faithful, if the Canonical
authority be not against them. Rather it becomes every sound Christian to
be content in his conscience to rest in that, if he see Christians to have the
one spirit of Phil. 2. Ephesians. 4.
Christ, and with agreeing minds to hold and follow his true meaning, and one
and the same doctrine, in all these things, and chief points of faith. For he
that has not this Romans 8.
Spirit of Christ, he is not Christ's, as the Apostle does* witness, although he
use all, and every kind of ceremonies, or constitutions. Therefore whosoever
be Christ's, this is their duty, as in all other such like things, that as
members of one body, they do suffer, and bear one with an other in charity,
without the which no thing can profit any whit, according 1. Cor. 13.
to the meaning of the Apostolic doctrine.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
Art. 32.
WE believe that it is expedient, that they which be chosen to be governors in
any Church, do wisely look unto it among them*selues, by what means the
wholl body may conveniently be ruled, yet so that they do never swerve from
that which our Lord Jesus Christ has instituted. Yet this does not hinder, but
that every place may have their peculiar constitutions, as it shall seem
convenient for them.

Art. 32.
But we exclude all humane devises, and all those laws, which are brought in
to bind men's consciences under pretense of the word of God: and we do only
like of those, which serve for the nourishing of concord, and to keep every
one in due obedience, wherein we think that we are to follow that, which our
Lord Jesus Christ appointed touching excommunication, which we do allow of, and
together with it additions, think to be Look the 1. obseru. upon this confess.
necessary.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
Art. 15. Epist. ad (...) 119.
AS touching the multitude of vain and superfluous Ceremonies, we know, that
Saint Augustine did greeuouslie complain of them in his own time: and
therefore have we cut of a great number of them: because we know, that men's
consciences were encombred about them, and the Churches of God ouerladen with
them. Nevertheless we keep still, and esteem not only those Ceremonies,
which we are sure were delivered to us from the Apostles, but some others too
besides, which we thought might be suffered without hurt to the Church of God:
for that we had a desire that all things in the holy congregation might, as
Saint Paull commands, be done with comelines, and in good order. But as for
all those things, which we saw were, either very susuperstitious, or utterly
unprofitable, or noisome, or mockeries, or contrary to the holy scriptures,
or else unseemly for sober and discreet people, whereof there be infinite
numbers now a days, where the Roman Religion is used, these, I say, we have
utterly refused without all manner exception, because we would not have the
right worshipping of God to be any longer defiled with such follies.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BEGIA.
Art. (...)
IN the mean time we believe that it is in deed profitable, that the Elders
which do govern in Churches, should appoint some order among themselves, so
that they do diligently take heed, that in no case they do swerve, or decline
from those things, which Christ himself, our only master, has once
appointed. Therefore we do reject all humane inventions, and all those laws,
which were brought in to be a worship of God, that men's consciences should any
way thereby be snared or bound: and we receive those only, which are fit,
either to cherish, or manteine concord, or to keep us in the obedience of God.
And hereunto look the 1. oseru. upon this confess.
excommunication is chiefelie necessary, being used according to the
commandment of the word of god, and other additions of Ecclesiastical
discipline annexed thereunto.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
Art. 15.
COncerning Ecclesiastical rites, which are ordained by man's authority, they
teach, that such rits are to be observed, as may be kept without sin, and do
tend to quietness, and good order in the Church: as namely, set holidaies, and
certain godly psalms, and other such like rits. But yet touching this sort of
rites they teach, that men's consciences are not to be burdened with
superstitious opinions of them, that is, it must not be thought that these
humane ordinances are righteousness before God, or do deserve remission of
sins, or are duties necessary unto the righteousness revealed in the gospel.
But this is to be thought of them, that they are indifferent things, which
without the case of offense may be omitted. But such, as break them with
offense, are faulty as those which do rashly disturb the peace of the
Churches.

Such traditions therefore, as cannot be observed without sin, are rejected
of us, as the tradition of single life. We reject also that impious opinion of
traditions and vows, wherein they feign, that worships invented by man's
authority do merit remission of sins, and are satisfactions for sin, etc.
Of which like false opinions, touching vows and fastings, not a few have been
spread abroad in the Church by unlearned men.

This Article is thus to be found in another edition.
COncerning Ecclesiastical rites, they teach, that those rites are to be
observed, which may be kept without any sin, and are available for
quietness and good order in the Church, such as are set holiedaies, feasts, and
such like.

Again out of the 7. Article, touching abuses of the same confession, These
words that follow perteine to this place, and the rest vno the eleventh
section.
Of the authority of the ministers.
Here also be many things which might very fitly have bin referred to the
former Sect. by reason of special examples of meats, and holy days, here
rehearsed: but seeing that the title of this page is general, it could not here
be pretermitted.
BEsides these things, there is a controversy, whether Bishops or Pastors have
power to ordeine ceremonies in the Church, and to make laws of meats, and
holy days, and degrees, or orders of ministers. They that ascribe this power
to the Bishops, allege this testimony for it. I have yet many things to
say unto you, but you cannot bear them away now. But when that spirit of
truth shall come, he shall teach you all truth: They aledge also the examples
of the Apostles, which commanded the Christians to abstain from blood, and
that which was strangled. They allege the change of the Sabbath into the Lords
day, contrary as it seems to the moral law, and they have no examples so
often in their mouths, as they change of the Sabbath. They will needs have the
Churches power and authority to be very great, because it has dispensed with
a precept of the moral law. But of this question our men do thus teach, that
the Bishops have no power to ordeine any thing contrary to the Gospel, as was
showed before. The same also do the Canons teach* distinct. 9. Moreover it is
against the scriprure, to ordeine or require the observation of any
traditions, to the end that we might merit remission of sins, and satisfy
for sins by them. For the glory of Christ's merit receives a blow, when as
we seek by such observations to merit remission of sins and justification.
And it is very apparent, that through this persuasion traditions grew into an
infinite number in the Church. In the mean while the doctrine of faith, and of
the righteousness of faith, was quite smoothered: for ever and anon there were
new holiedaies made, new fastes appointed, new ceremonies, new worshippes for
Saints ordained, because that the authors of such gear supposed by these works
to merit remission of sins and justification. After the same manner
heretofore did the penitential Canons increase, whereof we still see some
footings in satisfactions.

Again, many writers imagine, that in the new testament there should be a
worship like to the Leuitical worship the appointing whereof god committed to
the Apostles and Bishops, wherein they seem to be deceived by the example of
the law of Moses, as if the righteousness of the new testament were the outward
observing of certain rites, as the justice of the law was. Like as therefore
in the law it was a sin to eat swines flesh, etc. so in the new testament
they place sin in meats, in days, in apparel, and such like things: and
they hold opinion, that the righteousness of the new testament can not stand
without these. From hence are those burdens, that certain meats defile the
conscience, that it is a mortal sin to omit the canonical hours, that
fastinges merit remission of sins, because they be necessary to the
righteousness of the new testament, that a sin in a case reserved, can not be
pardoned, but by the authority of him that reserved it: whereas the Canons
speak only of reserving of canonical punishments, and not of the reserving
of the fault. Whence then have the Bishops power and authority of imposing
these traditions upon the Churches, for the burdening of men's consciences? For
there are diverse clear testimonies which inhibit the making of such
traditions, either for to deserve remission of sins, or as things
necessary* to the righteousness of the the new testament, or to salvation.
Paull to the Coloss. 2. Let no man judge you in meat, drink, or a piece of a
holy day, in the new moon, or in the Sabbath. Again, If ye be dead with
Christ, from the rudiments of the world, why as though ye lived in the world,
are ye burdened with traditions, as: Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all
do perish with the using, and are the precepts and doctrines of men, which
have a show of wisdom* And to Titus, he does plainly forbid traditions. For
he says, Not listening to Jewish fables, and to the precepts of men, that
abhor the truth. And Christ, Mat 15. says of them, which urge traditions,
Let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind. and he condemns such
worships, Every plant which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be
rooted up. If Bishops have authority to burden the Churches with innumerable
traditions, and to snare men's consciences, why does the scripture so often forbid
to make and to listen to traditions? why does it call them the devils
traditions? has the holy ghost warned us of them to no purpose?

It remains then, that seeing constitutions ordained as necessary, or with
opinion of meriting remission of sins by them, are flat repugnant to the
gospel, because that it is not lawful for any Bishops to appoint or urge any
such worship. For it is very requisite, that the doctrine of Christian liberty
should be manteined in the Church, because that the bondage of the law is not
necessary unto justification, as it is written to the Gal. Come not ye under
the yoke of bondage again. It is necessary that the chiefest point of all the
gospel should be holden fast, that we do freely obtain remission of sins
and justification by faith in Christ, and not by any observations, nor by any
worship devised by man. For though they seek to qualify traditions, yet the
equity of them can never be seen nor perceived, so long as the opinion of
necessity remains, which must needs remain, where the righteousness of faith
and Christian liberty are not known. The Apostles commanded them to abstain
from blood: who observes that now a days? and yet they do not sin that
observe it not: for the Apostles them selves would not burden men's consciences
with such a servitude: but they forbad it for a time, for offense sake. For in
that decree the perpetual intent and mind of the gospel is to be considered:
^carselie any canons* are precisely kept, and many grow out of use daily,
yea even among them that do most busily defend traditions: Neither can there
be sufficient care had of men's consciences, except this equity be kept, that
men should know, that such rites are not to be observed, with any opinion of
necessity, and that men's consciences are not hurt though traditions grow out
of use.

The Bishops might Look the 1. obseru. upon this confess.
easily retain lawful obedience, if they would not have men to observe such
traditions, as can not be kept with a good conscience. But now they command
single life, and they admit none, except they will swear not to teach the
pure doctrine of the Gospel. The Churches do not desire of the Bishops, that
they would repair peace and concord with the loss of their honor, which yet
good Pastors ought to do: only they desire that they would remit unjust
burdens, which are both new, and received contrary to the custom of the
Catholic Church. It may well be, that some constitutions had some probable
causes, when they began, which yet will not agree to latter times. It is
evident, that some were received through error. Wherefore it were for the Look
the ^. obseruat.
chief Bishops gentleness, to mitigate them now, for such a change would not
overthrow the unity of the Church. For many humane traditions have been
changed in time, as the Canons themselves declare. But if it can not be
obtained, that those observations may not be released, which can not be kept
without sin, then must we follow the Apostles rule, which wills to obey God
rather then men. Peter forbids Bishops to be Lords, and to be imperious over
the Churches. Our meaning is not to have Look the 3. obseru.
rule taken from the Bishops. But this one thing is requested at their hands,
that they would suffer the gospel to be purely taught, and that they would
release a few observations, which can not be observed without sin. But if
they will remit none, let them look how they will give account to God for
this, that by their wilfulnes they give occasion of schism.

Also in the same 7. Art. touching Abuses, this exposition is found thus in
another edition.
NOw come I to the question in hand, touching the laws of bishops: concerning
which first this most certain rule is to be holden, That it is not laufull for
any to make laws repugnant to the commandment of God. That sentence of
Saint Paull is well known: If an Angel from heaven teach any other Gospel,
let him be accursed. Upon this foundation, which is sure and immooueable, the
rest may easily be reared. Now there be three orders of the decrees of
Bishops. Some do constreine a man to sin, as the law of single life, the
laws of private Mas^es, wherein is made an oblation and application for the
quick and the dead. And the opinion of transsubstantiation breeds a wicked
adoration. Also the commandment of praying to the dead. It is an easy matter
to give sentence of these laws. For seeing they do manifestly oppugn the
commandment of God, the Apostles rule is, We ought rather to obeie God then
men.

The second order is of those rites, which concern things in their own
nature indifferent, such as are the laws touching the difference of meats,
and days, and such like things. But when false opinions are joined unto these
things, they are ^o more indifferent. Now our adversaries do, some more, some
less, tie unto them absurd and false opinions, for the which both those laws
and rites are to be cast of, lest any corrupt worship should be established.
The most part do feign, that the works of man's traditions, as
satisfactions, and such like, do merit remission of sins. This opinion is
apparantlie false: for it remooueth the benefit of Christ unto man's traditions.
And there needs here no long confutation: we will content our selves with one
thundering saying of Saint Paull, Ye are made void of Christ, whosoever are
justified by the law: Ye are fallen from Christ. This saying teaches, that men
do not merit remission of sins by the proper works, either of Gods law, or
of man's traditions. Others being put in mind, what gross absurdity there is
in this first error, they begin to talk more modestly of traditions. But
yet they houlde still an error, that is not to be borne with all. They say,
That these works, though they do not deserve remission of sins, yet are
they services of God, that is, works, the immediate end whereof is, that God
by them might be honored. This error also must be stiffelie withstoode. For
Christ says plainly, They worship me in vain with the precepts of men.
And Paull does expresselie condemn will worship to the Coloss. And seeing
that the worship of God must be done in faith, it is necessary that we
should have the word of God, that may testify that the work pleases God. For
how can the conscience offer a work unto God, unless there be a voice of God,
which may declare, that God will so be worshipped or served with this honor?
But ungodly men understanding this Doctrine of faith, have in all ages with
damnable boldness devised worshippes, without commandment or word of God,
which thing if it be lawful to do, you can show no cause why the heathenish
sacrifices, slaing of dogs, sacrifices offered at Lampsacum to Priapus, and
such like monstrous worship should not please God. Whether has man's
foolehardines rushed, not only amongst the Ethnicks, in feigning worships,
but also among the Popish rout in devising eftsons new and foolish ceremonies,
in prayer to the dead, in the worshipping of saints, and in the babbling of
Monks. Here therefore let us be watchful, and not suffer laws to be thrust
upon the Churches, which prescribe works without the commandment of God, as
Gods worship and man's righteousness. And whereas all our adversaries, even
they that speak most modestly, do tie this opinion of worship unto those
works, let us know, that it is a good work to withstand them, and by
violating such traditions to show a pattern, by which the godly may know
what to judge of them. As Eusebius writes of Attalus, That he was commanded
by God to speak unto a certain man which ate nothing but bread, salt, and
water, that he would use common meat, lest he should bring others into error.
Moreover this second error which makes these works to be the worship of
God, brake farther. For many in the Church were deceived through a perverse
emulation of the Leuiticall ceremonies, and did think that there should be
some such rites in the new Testament, and that they are the worshipe of God, or
things whereby God will be honored, yea and that they are righteousness. And for
that cause they gave authority to the Bishops to ordain such rites and such
services. This Pharisaicall error Christ and his Apostles noted, who taught,
that the worship of the new Testament is repentance, the fear of God, faith,
and the works of the ten commandments, as Paull says, The kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost. For he that in these serves Christ, pleases God, and i^ approved of
men. The Monks fained themselves to be Nazarites. The Mass Priests that
sacrifice for the dead, would have men think that they imitate Aaron offering
sacrifices. But these examples do not agree: the rites of Monks, and the
Priests mercenary Masses, have no word of god for them, yea there are many
fond opinions mingled with them, which of necessity must be reproved in our
Churches.

The third error is the opinion of necessity, wherein they imagine that the
Church is like unto other humane gouernmentes. For they surmise that it is a
kingdom, wherein the Bishops, as if they were Kings, have power to make new
laws, that are besides the Gospel, and that they must of necessity be obeyed
(even as the Princes laws must necessarily be obeyed) especially seeing this
life of man can not be without traditions. And this opinion of the necessity
of these things has stirred up contentions, whilst every one defends his
own rites invented by man, as simply necessary. But Christ and his Apostls
teach, that such rites set forth without Gods commandment, are not to be
taken for things necessary. Against this liberty enacted and established by
Gods authority, the opinion which maintains that the violating of traditions
about things indifferent, though it be not in a case where offense may be
given, is not to be received. Hitherto belongs the saying of Paull, Let no
man judge you in meat and drink, and intercourse of ^olie days, etc. For to
judge signifies to bind the consciences, and to condemn them that do not
obeie. Again, Gal. 5 Stand in the liberty wherein Christ has made you free.

Hitherto it has bin showed in what respect it is not lawful to appoint
traditions, or to approve them. Now some man may ask whether we would have
this life of man to be without order and rites? No surely. But we teach that
the true Pastors of the churches may ordein public rites in their churches,
but so, as it be only for an end belonging to the body, that is, for good
orders sake, to wit* such rites, as avail for the instruction of the people:
As for example, set days, set lessons, and such like, and that without any
superstition, and opinion of necessity, as has bin said before, so that it
may not be counted any sin to violate any of these ordinances, so it be
not with giving offense. But if so be that they be broken with offense there,
where the Churches are well ordered, and there is no error in doctrine, let him
that in such place breaks the^ know, that he does offend, because he
disturbeth the peace of the Church well ordered, or does withdraw others from
the true ministry. This reason does sufficiently warrant the authority of
profitable traditions, and lays no snare on men's consciences. So the Church
in the beginning of it, ordained set days, as the Lords day, the day of
Christ's nativity, Easter, Pe^ticost, etc. Neither did the church dispense with
the moral precepts, but Gods own authority abrogated the ceremonies of Moses
law. And yet it was meet that the people should know when to come together to
the hearing of the Gospel, and unto the ceremonies which Christ did ordain.
And for that cause certain days were appointed to that use, without any such
opinions as were above mentioned. And the general equity abides still in the
moral law, that at certain times we should come together to these godly
exercises: but the special day, which was but a ceremony, is free. Whereupon
the Apostles retained not the seventh day, but did rather take the first day
of the week for that use, that by it they might admonish the godly both of
their liberty, and of Christ's resurrection. Look the 4. obseruat.
The things objected against this may easelie be taken away. The Apostles
decree touching things offered to Idols, and fornication, was moral, and
perpetual: but in that which they added, touching blood, and that which was
strangled, they had regard of offense giving at that time. For it was an use
even before the Apostles time, that such as then were conquered by the Jews
should abstain from blood and things strangled. The Apostles therefore have
laid no new thing upon those, that were joined unto their fellowshippe, but as
yet they kept the old usual rite, which was pleasing both to the godly Jews,
and such as joined with them in the society of Christ. As for that which
Christ says, I have yet many things to say unto you: doubtless he meant not
those foloish ceremonies that the Popes have brought in, nor any new articles
of faith, but a farther illumination of that gospel, which he had already
delivered. And therefore afterward he adds touching the office of the holy
ghost, that he should not bring any other kind of doctrine, but should
enlighten the minds of the Apostles, that they should understand the Gospel
touching the will of God, which before had bin taught. Therefore he says;
Joan. 14. He shall teach you all things, and shall bring al things to your
remembrance, which I have showed you. Again, He shall not speak of himself,
but what he has heard, that shall he speak.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Of traditions, that is, of ceremonies instituted in the Church, by man's
authority.
ALthough for orders sake there must needs be some Art. 20.
decent and seemly ceremonies; yet notwithstanding men that are given to
superstition do soon pervert those ceremonies, falselie imagining that such
observations do merit forgiveness of sins, and are accepted for righteous in
the sight of God: and do turn the signs into Gods, like as many have
ascribed a godhead unto Images: and many, either of superstition, or by
tyranny, do heap up ceremonies: and superstition has increased in the Church
the ceremonies of satisfaction, as they call them. Nebuchadnesar and Antiochus,
because they are of opinion, that consent in Religion is available to the
peaceable government of their kingdoms, do ordain such service of God, as
they will hane indifferently observed of all their subjects. There new laws,
and new Gods were erected, not of superstition, but by tyranny. Thus we
observe that amongst men true and false religion are confounded, and each
changed into other, and we marvel at the cause, why men do not steadfastly
continue in the truth revealed by God. But the word of God pronounces, that
men are set on by Devils to fall away from God: and the nature of man being
blind* curious, and inconstant, loves to play with diverse opinions. Against
these great mischiefs God armeth and confirms his Church, and delivers a
sure and certain doctrine, which is contained in the books of the Prophets
and Apostles, and in the Creedes* Wherefore it is necessary to consider, what
those laws, or rites be, and whence they had their beginning.

The first rule therefore is this: It is lawful for no creature, neither for
Angels, nor for men, neither for Kings nor for look the 1. obseruat. upon
this confess.
Bishops to make laws, or ordeine ceremonies, disagreeing from the word of God.
Horribly sinned the King of Babylon, although he excelled in wisdom and
valor, when he commanded his Image to be worshipped; and all men do sin
that obey such proclamations or laws: even as Eve sinned, when she departed
from the commandment of God, for the lying persuasion of the Devil. But
generally the rule is to be observed, which is set down. Act. 5. We ought
rather to obey God then men. Such are the edicts, which command to call upon
dead men, or to embrace false doctrine, or to use ungodly worship. Touching
all these, that Rule of the first commandment is to be holden, 1. Cor. 10.
Fly from Idols. Such is also the law of the single life of Priests, which
many can not observe without sin. And albeit we know what opinion politic
and expert men do hold of the change of laws, yet God has so commanded
obedience, that still he would have us fast tied unto himself, and to agree
with his wisdom and righteousness. From whence do arise those unchangeable and
perpetual rules, Exodus 20. Thou shall have no strange Gods. Also, Acts 5. We
ought rather to obey God then men. Also Gal. 1. If any man teach you any
other Gospel, let him be accursed.

The second rule. For as much as it is usual to add superstition to those
works, which otherwise in their own nature were indifferent, as to eat, or
not to eat flesh, it is necessary to reprove such superstitions and errors,
as are in this sort added, and in the practice of our liberty, examples of
this doctrine may modestly be showed. And that error is not among the least,
which the folly of many teachers, and for the most part of the people
brings in, in that they teach and think that fasting and such like works
deserve forgiveness of sins, both of the guiltines, and of the pain: as both
Thomas does write of satisfactions, and many also do say the same. This
Pharisaicall imagination easily intangleth the minds of men, and darkeneth
the light of the doctrine of the benefits proper to Christ, and of free
forgiveness of sins, and of faith. For when as men think that they merit
remission of sins by these their ceremonies, they take away the honor due
unto Christ, and give it unto these ceremonies, and are somewhat puffed up with
vain confidence. Yet afterward when they be in true sorrow, they fall headlong
into many doubts, which turn to their destruction. And of it self it is a
great sin, not to know the benefits of God. For this cause Paull so
earnestly contendeth for the abolishing of circumcision, and other ceremonies
of the law of Moses, for fear lest the true acknowledgement of the Mediator
might be clean put out, if men should think that they deserved remission of
sins, and were made righteous by this observation of the law and ceremonies
of Moses, as the Pharisees did avouch. And oftentimes Paull admonishes to
beware that the light of the Gospel be not darkened by new ceremonies of man's
invention. This second error is not so evident, but yet very dangerous.
After that some men see that this Pharisaical error can not be defended, they
come to this: Although, say they, these ceremonies deserve not remission of
sins, yet are these traditions defended, because they are good works and
services of God: as in the law of Moses the abstinence of the Nazarites,
although it deserved not remission of sins, yet it pleased god, and was a
service acceptable unto God. With this color certain of late have learned to
paint traditions, which yet strive not about these indifferent matters, but go
about to establish other foul errors, and the opinion of the power of Bishops.
But it is necessary for the godly here to beware of deceitful doctrine.
There is a great error even in this colorable reason: neither is that example
well alleged out of Moses. The works ordained and commanded by God do far
differ from works not commanded nor ordained by God, but only devised by
man's invention. The works ordained in the law of god, were services of god,
although they deserved forgiveness of sins. But wilworships devised by men,
neither have bin, nor are any service of god* God does not allow this boldness of
men, which notwithstanding has always been usual, to devise new worship,
that is, such as is immediately intended to honor God withal. Therefore the
word of God cries out, Math. 15. In vain do they worship me after the
ordinances of men. And every where in the Apostles, and in Paull, this boldness
is reproved. But the true service of God are those works, that he has
commanded, which are done in the acknowledgement and confidence of the
Mediator, to the end, that God may be obeyed, and that we may profess him
to be the true God, whom we so worship. So also Ezec. 20. he calls us back
to the commandment of God, saying: Walk not after the ordinances of your
fathers, but walk in my commandments. And often are such warnings repeated,
And Psalm. 118. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet. And Number. 15. Let them not
follow their own imaginations.

The third error is this. Hypocrites do imagine that such works are a kind
of perfection: as Monks do prefer their vows full of vanity before the
civil and householders life: whereas God by his wonderful providence has so
joined mankind together in fellowshippe, and in these travels and dangers
would have our faith, prayer, and confession, or liberallity one toward an
other, or patience, and other virtues, to be tried.

The fourth error is, the opinion of necessity, as some do write, That the
fasting of Lent is necessary, and other things are arbitrarie. Neither is it
only a torment^of conscience, to judge that he is no Christian nor member of
the Church of God, that eats flesh on the Satursdaie, or observes not the
fast of Lent; but it is also an error that darkneth great matters* as the
doctrine of the righteousness of the Gospel, and of the Church, what manner of
Church it is, and how the members of the Church are to be discerned, not by
meat and drink, but by faith, prayer, and other virtues. And against the
opinion of necessity it is expressly said, Col. 2. Let no man judge you in
meat or drink. And Galat. 5. Stand in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
you free, and be not again entangled with the yoke of bondage. And that
opinion of necessity has always bread great discord: as in time past there
was great contention about Easter day, and about leven, and now also many such
like contentions have risen.

The fifth error. To the former opinions this error also is added, that the
Bishops take to themselves authority to ordain new kinds of worshipe, and to
bind consciences, as Gregory has ordained, That married men translated to the
order of priesthood should forsake the company of their wives, and the
constitution of confession commands to reckon up sins, and decrees have
been made of differences of meats, and fasting, and such like. Of such
traditions there are also late books setforth, full of labyrinths, wherein it is
written, that the transgressions of such ceremonies are mortal sins, yea
though they be committed without giving offense to others. Gerson sought for
some mitigations, but the true comfort is the voice of the Gospel, which would
have the understanding of this liberty to be made known and maintained in the
Church, namely by remoouing those errors whereof has been spoken. But
ceremonies invented by man, such as are seemly, devised for order, may be
observed without any opinion of merit, worship, or necessity, as has been
aforesaid out of the Col. 2. Let no man judge you in meat or drink. And Peter
says, Act. 15. Why do ye tempt God laying upon the necks of the disciples a
yoke, which neither your fathers, nor we were able to bear.

The third rule. Those errors being removed, whereof the Church must needs
be admonished, afterward we both observe certain ceremonies, which are
comely, and made for good order, and also teach that they ought to be
observed, even as men can not live without order. And Paull says, 1. Cor. 14.
Let all things be done decently, and in order. And there is a saying of
Athanasius, Ceremonies are profitable, but with knowledge of the truth, and in
measure. It is plain, that this last word is opprossed to superstition, which
then also daily increased ceremonies, and darkened the truth, and burdened
consciences, and the Churches. But we thank God the everlasting Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who for his Son, and by him gathers an eternal Church,
for that even from the first beginning of mankind he has preserved the
public ministry of the Gospel, and honest assemblies, who himself also
has set a part certain times for the same: and we pray him that henceforth he
will save and govern his Church. And we diligently teach, that al men ought
to help to maintain the public ministry, and avoid offenses, and
dissentions that scatter the Church, as in it proper place more at large is
declared.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of Ecclesiastical ceremonies.
Art. 35.
WE acknowledge, that by Christ the Son of God two ceremonies were ordained
in the Church, Baptism, and the Lords Supper, which are also to be observed,
according to the institution of Christ. We confess also, that the Apostles did
appoint certain ordinances in the Church, That all things be done decently,
and in order, as Paull speaks, such as they be, that are set down. 1. Cor.
14. and 1. Timoth. 2. The Apostles also, in ordaining Ministers of the Church,
used laying on of hands, which being retained out of the custom of the old
law, and not being commanded to the Church, may be freely observed. They
ordained also in the Acts of the Apostles, That the gentiles should beware of
eating of that which was strangled, and of blood: not that this observation
should be for ever among the Gentiles, but for a time, and so long to continue,
till this eating were no more offensive. We confess this also that it is
lawful for the Bishops, with the consent of their Church, to appoint holy
days, lessons, and Sermons, for edifying, and for instruction in the true
faith in Christ. But it is not lawful for them to thrust upon the Church the
ceremonies of the old law for the holy service wherewithal God alone is
worshipped. Neither is it lawful either to restore the old ceremonies of the
law, or to devise new, to shadow forth the truth allreadie laid open, and
brought to light by the Gospel: as in the day light to set up candles, to
signify the light of the Gospel, or to carry banners and crosses, to signify
the victory of Christ through his cross. Of which sort is all that wholl
furniture of massing attire, which they say does shadow out the wholl passion
of Christ, and many other things of that kind. Much less is it lawful to
ordain ceremonies, and holy rites, by the merit whereof sin may be purged
and the kingdom of heaven purchased. For of that former kind of ceremonies and
holy rites, Christ out of Esaias preaches, saying, In vain, do they worship
me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men. And Paull says, Let no man
judge you in meat, or drink, or part of an holy day, or of the new Moon,
etc. Hitherto may be added the testimonies of Augustine and others, touching
the observation of such ceremonies. But touchgin the latter kind of
ceremonies, it is manifest, that they are wicked rites, and reprochful to the
death and resurrection of Christ, by whose only merit, we have deliverance
from sin, and inheritance of eternal life by faith.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of humane traditions. CHAP. 14.
FVrthermore, touching the traditions of the Fathers or such as the Bishops and
Churches do at this day ordain, this is the opinion of our men. They reckon
no tradirions for men's traditions, but such as are condemned in Scripture, but
such as are contrary to the law of God, such as bind the conscience about me
at, and drink, and times, and other outward things, such as forbid marriage to
them who have need thereof, to live honestly, and the rest of that stamp. For
such as agree with the Scripture, and were ordained for good manners and the
profit of men, although they be not word for word expressed in the Scriptures,
nevertheless in that they proccede from the commandment of love, which
orders all things most decently, they are worthily to be accounted rather of
God, then of man. Of this sort were those set down by Paull, that women should
not pray 1. Cor. 14. 1. Cor. 14*
in the Church bareheaded, nor men with their heads covered, that they who are
to communicate together should tarry one for another: that no man should speak
with tongues in the congregation without an interpreter: that the Prophets
without confusion should deliver their Prophecies to be judged by them that sit
by. Many such the Church at this day for good cause observes, and upon
occasion also makes new, which who so refuses, he despises the authority,
not of men, but of God, whose tradition, it is, whatsoever is profitable. For,
whatsoever truth is said or written, by his gift it is spoken and written, who
is truth, as Saint Augustine has godly written. But often times there is
disputing about that, what tradition is profitable, what not: that is, what set
forward godliness, what does hinder it. But he that shall seek nothing of his
own, but shall wholly dedicate himself to the public profit, he shall easily
see, what things are agreeable to the law of god, what are not. Furthermore,
seeing the estate of Christians is such, that they are also helped by injuries,
the Christian will not refuse to obey, no not unjust laws, so they have no
wicked thing in them, according to the saying of Christ, If any man compel
thee to go with him one mile, go with him two. Even so surely the Christian
ought to become all unto al, that he may study to do and suffer all things, so
that they be not contrary to the commandments of God, to pleasure and profit
men withal. Hence it comes to pass, that every man, so much the more
willingly obeys the civil laws which are not repugnant to religion, the
more fully he is endued with the faith of Christ.

THE EIGHTEENTH SECTION.
OF WEDLOCK, SINGLE LIFE, AND Monastical vows.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of single life, wedlock, and householde government. CHAP. 29.
SVuch as have the gift of chastity given unto them from above, so as they can
with the heart, or wholl mind be pure and continent, and not be grieuouslie
burned with lust, let them serve the Lord in that calling, as long as they
shall feel themselves endued with that heavenly gift: and let them not lift
up themselves above others, but let them serve the Lord daily in simplicity
and humility. For such are more apt for doing of heavenly things, then they
which are distracted with private affairs of their family: but if again the
gift be taken away, and they feel a continual burning, let them call to mind
the words of the Apostle, It is better to marry, then to burn.

1. Gor. 7.
For wedlock, which is the medicine of incontinencie, and continency it
self, was ordained by the Lord God himself, Mat. 13.
who blessed it most bountifully, and wills man and woman to eleaue one to the
other inseperablie, and to live together in great love and concord. Whereupon
we know the Apostle said, Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed
undefiled. Heb. 13. 1. Cor. 7.
And again, If a Virgin marry, she sins not. We therefore condemn
Poligamie, and those which condemn second marriages. We teach that marriages
ought to be made lawfully, in the fear of the Lord, and not against the
laws, which forbid certain degrees to join in matrimony, lest the marriages
should be incestuous. Let marriages be made with consent of the parents, or such
as be in steed of parents, and for that end especially, for the which the
Lord ordained marriages: and let them be confirmed publicly in the church,
with prayer, and blessing of them. Moreover, let them be kept holilie, with
peace, faithfulness, duetifulnes, love, and also purity of the persons coupled
together. Therefore let them take heed of brawlings, debates, lusts, and
adulteries. Let lawful judgments and holy Judges be established in the
Church, which may maintain marriages, and may repress all dishonestie, and
shamefulnes, and before whom the controversies in matrimony may be decided,
and ended.

Let children also be brought up of the Parents in the fear of the Lord, and
let Parents provide for their children, remembering the saying of the Apostle,
He that provides not for his own, has denied the faith, and is worsse then
an infidel. 1. Tim. (...)
But specially let them teach their children honest sciences, whereby they may
maintain themselves: let them withdraw them from idleness, and plant in them a
true confidence in god in all these things: lest they through distrust, or
overmuch careless security, or filthy covetousness wax lose, and in the end
come to no good. Now it is most certain, that those works which Parents do
in a true faith by the duties of marriage, and government of their families,
are before God holy and good works in deed, and do please God no less, then
prayers, fastings, and alms deeds. For so the Apostle has taught in his
Epistles, especially in those to Timothy and Titus. And with the same Apostle
we account the doctrine of such as forbid marriage or do openly dispraise, or
secretly discredit it as not holy, or clean, amongst the doctrines of
Devils. And we do detest unclean single life, licentious lusts, and
fornications, both open, and close, and the continency of dissembling
hypocrites, when as they are of all men most incontineut. All that be such, God
will judge. We do not disalow riches, and rich men, if they be godly, and use
their riches well, but we reprove the sect of the Apostoliques, etc.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of holy wedlock.
WE think that wedlock being appointed of God Art. 37.
for all men, that be fit for it, and are not called to some other thing, is
nothing repugnant to the holiness of any degree. The which as the Church does
consecrate and establish, with a solemn exhortation and prayer, so it is the
duty of the Magistrate, to see that it be worthelie kept, and maintained,
look the 1. oseru upon this confess.
and that it be not dissolved, but upon just cause. Therefore we do far
reject this Monastical single life, and this wholl slothful kind of life of
superstitious men, which is nothing else but an abominable devise, as being
as much repugnant to the Church, as to the common wealth.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Hitherto pertains first, that which is set down in the 19. Chap. of this
confession in these words.
FOr this cause it is thought to be good, and well standing with wisdom (so
far undoubtedly as may be done by conscience) that Priests, to the end that
they may so much the more diligently exercise themselves in the study of the
holy Scriptures, and may the more readily and profitablie serve the Church of
God, be free, and exempted from all affairs and burdens of civil
conversation, seeing that it behooves them to fight valiantly for the faith of
the gospel of God, and if it may be, to be also free from wedlock, to this
end, that they may be the more ready and free to do that which is for the
increase and furtherance of the salvation of the people, and that many
harmfull impediments may be turned from them, which do concur with that
kind of life, and do often times withhold, and hinder the due works of the
ministry. For which causes our ministers think, that they are more ready
pressed, and more fit for the Ecclesiastical Ministry, which are unmarried:
yet they mean such unmarried persons, as have this peculiar gift given to them
of God, that they may remain such, and so give themselves wholly to the
Ministry. This thing is so observed among us, as is meet: yet is it neither
taken for a sin, neither does any man disdain at it, if Priests, upon just
and lawful causes, be married. For holy Paull teaches, how such ought to be
chosen to this function, 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1.
yea the holy Ghost himself does permit that Bishops and Elders should have
their lawful and honest wives, and he does in no case give them liberty,
contrary to order and the discipline of God, to entertain concubines, or
otherwise so to live, as that they may thereby give offense to others. And
concerning marriage, it is thus written, It is better to marie, then to sin
so many ways, and to burn with so great dishonestie: for which sins, not
only the Priest, but also every Christan, without respect of persons, both
ought, and shall worthelie, by excommunication be cast out of the Church.

Also, CHAP. 19. Of single life and of Wedlock.
COncerning the condition of single life, virginity, and widowhead, our
Preachers do teach, that every man has free liberty, either to choose it to
himself, or to refuse it: for by way of a law nothing is commanded of God to
men touching these things: neither is this thing appointed of God, neither is
it on the other side forbidden: for which cause no man ought to be enforced
thereunto against his will, nor be driven from it. And as concerning the Church,
and certain men, and chiefly the ministers of the church, our men have taught
from the beg^nning, and do now teach, first, that the gift of chastity, by the
peculiar goodness of God, and of the holy ghost, both in times past was given,
and at this day also is given to some, for the singular use and profit of the
Church, as Christ his speech does evidently witness. Every man, says he, does
not receive these words, that is, that Math. 19.
a man should keep himself single without a wife, but they 1. Cor. 7.
to whom it is given, And holy Paull also does both place and celebrate this
amongst peculiar gifts, and whereunto some are peculiarly called. And
moreover, the examples of certain in the Prophetical and Apostolical
writings, and of John Bapist, and of many ministers, and Look the ^. obseruat.
weomen ministers of the Church, do witness this thing.

In the second place they teach that this gift is not of flesh and blood (for
the Lord by distinguishing does remove and separate from hence that unableness
which is in this kind) but of the spirit which is ielous, who from his heart
has a care and pleasure in the glory of God, and in his own and his
neighbors salvation, and also in the Ministry of the Church, and for this
cause he does of his own accord abstain from wedlock: Therefore the Lord
says, Those which Mat. 19.
have made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven: that is, who be
such, as might be married, yet they do omit and abstain from it, because of the
affection of the inward heart and their love toward God, and his word, and for
the pleasure and joy which they receive thereof: and through this gift of the
spirit, whose virtue and power does overcome the motions of nature, they do
preserve the pureness as well Look the 3. obseru.
of the spirit, as of the body: howbeit this thing is not in them without
labor and difficulty, even as it is a thing of no small labor and difficulty
for all Christian men to forsake, and to want the use of other pleasant things,
and also such as are profitable for this life, as friends, riches, and money.

Thirdly, that single life is to be chosen, and taken with a true intent and a
godly meaning, that is, not to this end, or with this purpose, that a man
would by this means merit or get unto himself, or to another, remission of
sins, and eternal life, and so consequently salvation it self. For there is
no continency or chastity, nor any humane action, or other virtue, which can
merit: the only innocence and death of the only begotten Son of God our
Lord Jesus Christ does perform and perfect this thing. Neither must the thing
be received with this meaning, as to think that some dignity is added to the
holy ministry of the Church by reason of this gift: or that the works of
those that be unmarried in this ministry, are to be preferred in merit and
dignity before the works of married men: but as the Lord says, that it may
be received for the kingdom of heaven: that is, in such sort, as he which for
the gift spoken of before, is fit to lead a single life.

As therefore by these things he may with less hindrance and more easily, and
readily with great leisure, and more commodiouslie employ his labor to the
salvation of the Church and holy assemblies, even so he may be a more
convenient minister then others, of the same salvation, which Christ has
purchased for him: (and whereof that he may be partaker by faith* it is given
him freely of grace, and wherein he does keep and uphold him self) seeing
that it is certain, that by the state of marriage many lets, many cares, and
many things whereby necessary quietness is disturbed, are cast in our way. And
this is it which Paul says, I would that you should be without such cares. He
that is unmarried, is 1. Cor. 7.
careful for those things which pertein to the Lord, how he may please the
Lord. Also, I think that this is good for the present necessity. Also, to that
which is seemlie to perform diligence, by serving the Lord without
distraction. And before we rehearsed the voice of the Lord who says, that
there be some, who for the kingdom of heaven, do abstain from marriage. And
holy Paull says, He that gives not his virgin to be married, does the
better. For which cause it is taught, that all they, who of their own accord
do take and choose unto themselves this kind of life, ought carefully to have
regard hereunto, that in such a life they may with a singular and earnest
endeavor exercise godliness, and be holy, as Paull commands, as well in
body, as in spirit, and give more light then others, by the honesty of their
actions, by the labors of such trades as beseem a Christian profession, by
doing all that they can for the benefit of the Church, and by yielding their
service to the sick, and to other needy members.

This gift and purpose of such which do thus in this matter consecrate
themselves to God, and such an exercise of their godliness, is commended of our
men, and they do faithfully persuade men hereunto: but they do persuade, as we
said, and not compel: the which thing Paull also does, who writes 1. Cor. 7.
thus: Concerning Virgins I have no commandment of the ^^rd, but I deliver my
judgment, which have received this mercy of the Lord, that I may be
faithful. I think it good for a man to be such a one: and he concludes after
this sort, He is more happy, in my judgment, if he remain such a one, that
is, unmarried, then if he marry: and I think that I have the spirit of God.
In like sort, in comparison of others, there be bountiful and peculiar
promises, and singular rewards offered unto those, that keep themselves
single, to wit, that their worthy works Mat. 17.
shall be recompensed with a great reward, and that no man shall in vain for
sake any thing, as house, father* brother, so also his wife etc. as the
Apostles did, for the Lords cause. Furthermore it is taught, that they which
have received this gift of God, and being thoroughly proved and tried in this
behalf, do of their own accord serve the Lord and the Church, they are taught
I say, together with other gifts to make great account of this gift, and to
keep it diligently, lest that by any evil lusts, or by any allurements of
occasions, they do loose it. Yet notwithstanding if any good, faithful, and
diligent man chance to be assaulted with such a tentation, as to fear in
himself the heat and wicked fact of lust, then there is no snare laid for
such a one, neither is there any danger of entrapping his conscience, but he
that is in this case, let him be put over Look the 4. obseru.
to take counsel of the Elders, and governors of the Church, who have the
spirit of God, that all may be done in the Church in order, decently, with
honesty of the example, and with the using of all due consideration. Then
verily, if upon these things thus done, he does lawfully change his kind
of life, he does not sin, seeing that he obeys the counsel of the holy
Ghost: and the holy Church ought not for this cause to contemn him, nor to
make any thing the less account of his ministry. Notwithstanding, if for
this cause he should be contemned, which the Church can not do without sin,
it were certainly better for him, by this means to preserve his soul,
(although he should be one of the common sort of Christians only) then by
persisting in his ministry with sin, to loose and condemn it.

But although it seems to come nearer to the example of the Primitive Church,
that worthy and honest married men may be chosen to take the charge of souls
in the Church, the^ to give them leave to change their kind of life, who
before being unmarried, did labor diligently in the ministry of the Lord, yet
notwithstanding our men do not ground the worthiness, holiness, and virtue of the
Ecclesiastical ministry, no more then they do of Christian salvation, upon
either of these kinds, to wit, neither upon the state of single life, nor of
wedlock: neither is there any other thing sought or looked for (as it is
before declared) more then that only profit, and opportunity, which falls
into a single life, and is commended of the holy Ghost. After these things
they do thus consequently teach touching wedlock, that such a condition of
life, though it have many difficulties, punishments, and curses joined with it,
wherewith after the fall of man, both mankind* and this order is opressed, yet
that it is in this wise holy, and acceptable unto God, because that God
himself did in the beginning ordain it, and afterward Christ our Lord did
confeciate it, and does daily consecrate it in those that are his, and that in
such sort, that their children also be holy, and that moreover God has
offered unto it peculiarly singular promises, and blessings, which are
contained in the Scriptures. Thence therefore must al true Christians know,
that whosoever do choose this kind of life so as it becomes them, and with
an upright purpose do both give them selves thereunto, and be conversant
therein, they do not only not sin, but they do, and accomplish that,
which God would have them to do: and that they lead such a kind of life, as
God does peculiarly call some unto, and that they do serve the self same
Lord, whom the unmarried men do serve.

THE FRENCH CONFESSION does condemn Monastical vows, and the forbidding of
Marriage, Artic. 24. which we have inserted in the 16. Sect.

OVT OF THE ENGLISH CONFESSION.
WE say, that Matrimony is holy, and honorable in all sorts and states of
persons: as in the Patriarchs, in the Prophets, in the Apostles, in the holy
Martyrs, in the Ministers of the Church, and in Bishops: and that it is an
honest, and lawful thing (as Chrysostom says) for a man, In Tit. 1. (...)
11. Theo. (...) Tit. 10.
living in Matrimony, to take upon him therewith the dignity of a Bishop.
And, as Sozomenus says of Spiridon, and as Nazianzene Eusebius. lib. 10 cap. 5.
says of his own Father, we say, that a good, and diligent Bishop does
serve in the Ministry never the worse, for that he his married, but rather the
better, and with more hablenes to do good. Further we say, that the same
law, which is by constraint, takes away this liberty from men, and
compels them against their wills, to live single, is the doctrine of
devils, as Paull says: and, that ever since the time of this law, a
wonderful uncleanness of life, and manners in Gods ministers, and sundry
horrible enormities have followed, as the Bishop of Augusta, as Faber, as Abbas
Panormitanus, as Latomus, as the Tripartite Work, which is annexed to the
second Tome of the Counsels, and some other champions of the Popes band, yea
and as the matter it self, and all histories do confess. For it was righlie
said by Pius the second Bishop of Rome, that he saw many causes, Plat. in
vita Pi^. 2.
why wives should be taken away from Priests: but that he saw many more, and
more weighty causes, why they ought to be restored to them again.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
Art. 5. Of Abuses.
Of the marriage of Priests.
WHereas the Doctrine of Christ makes honorable mention of marriage, and
wills men to use the same, not only for procreation sake, but also to
bridle and avoid lusts: now a days the marriages of Priests are not only
by the popes law, but also by a new and unwonted cruelty forbidden, and such
as be made and contracted are dissolved and broken. Which is so much the more
unseemly, for that these things are done in the Church, which, as she ought
most of all to abhor and detest filthiness, so should she with great care
defend Wedlock, for the avoiding of many greeuos enormities. Besides, seeing
that in all heathenish common wealths that were but meanly well ordered*
marriage was in great account, for very weighty causes; what is there less
seemly in the Church, then either to break in sunder the most holy kno^ of
wedlock, or to punish marriage with punishments of death, as though it were a
most heinous offense? Whence is it, that this cruelty has spread it self
into the Church, in which mutual love should flourish most of all? Moreover
the matter it self does testify how much beast lines, and how many vilanies
this popish law of single life does bring forth: no voice of man is able to
show, how many vices have issued forth of this fountain into the Church. For
(to say nothing of Epicures, who blush at nothing) how many good and godly
men have had all success in striving with their natural weakness, and at the
last have fallen into horrible despair? Now whereto tends this new cruelty,
but that those innumerable vilanies might be confirmed in the Churches, and
that wicked men might sin more freely? This matter needs no disputation at
all. For this now law defended by our adversaries, which forbideth Priests to
marie, and dissolueth those that are contracted, is flat contrary to the law
of nature, to the law of god, to the Gospel, to the constitutions of ancient
synods, and to the examples of the ancient Church. Only in this calling we
need the godliness and equity of the most excellent Emperor, whom we beseech
for his godliness and duties sake that he would seek some remedy for the
Church by abolishing this tyrannical law. For as all unjust cruelty does
displease God, so that most of all, which is exercised against godly and
learned Priests, which deserve well of the Church.

And in this case we have not only the word of God threatening most grievous
plagues against them, which exercise cruelty on the Priests, but also there
are examples to be seen in all ages which do plainly testify, that such
threatenings are not in vain. For to let posse infinite other examples, the
Tribe of Benjamin was almost quite destroyed, for abusing the Priests wife
that came thither as a stranger. For when as the dead body of the woman, which
died after she had been so abused, was cut in pieces, and sent to all the
Princes of Israel, all the people judged that such outrage ought most
severely to be revenged. And when they could not get the authors of this
shameful fact to be delivered unto them, for to be punished, the wholl Tribe of
Benjamin receiving a great overthrow, was punished for it. Now in these days
the Priests are vexed with sundry injuries: they are (when no other crime is
objected unto them but marriage) racked with most horrible torments, and so put
to death, their miserable wives and little children, being thrown out of house
and home, wander up and down, as banished persons, without any certain place
of abode, or house to dwell in. Paull calls The forbidding of marriage the
Doctrine of Deuilles: which to be true, not only these filthy vices, which
the single life has brought into the Church, but also the cruelty, which by
reason of this law is exercised upon Priests, and their wiue^ and Children,
do testify plainly. For the Devil is a murderer, and he is chiefelie
delighted with the miseries of the godly. But the deuisers of such counsel
shall one day have their just reward from God. We judge that such cruelty is
not worthy for Christians to use, nor profitable to the Church of God.

Whereas they object the authority of the Popes law, why do they not
allege the authority of the Canons against those shameful examples of
unclean single life, and those vilanies, that were worthy of most severe
punishment? The authority of the Popes decree, which is contrary to the law
of nature, and the commandment of God, should be of no weight. Men are so
made by nature, that they should be fruitful. Whereupon the lawiers say, That
the conjunction of man and woman is by the law of nature. And the same the
first book of Moses teaches in the first and second Chapters. Again, when
Saint Paull says, To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, it is
certain, that he bids all which are not apt for a single life, to join in
marriage. And Christ does admonish, that all are not fit for a single life, when
he says, All men do not reeeiue this thing. Moreover, neither men's laws,
nor any vows, are of force, which are against the commandment of God. And
the event it self does testify, that nature cannot be changed by man's law.
For we see what vile filthiness this single life does bring forth, and if there
be any honest men which endeavor to keep themselves chaste, they preceiue
right well how great a burden, how great danger there is in this thing, and
they do especia^llie bewail this slavery of their order.

Certain men went about in the Nicen Synod to make a law to forbid Priests
the use of their wives. This law was refused by the holy Synod: and the Latin
Churches in the old time was not so severe in this point: for they did put
from the ministry only such, as when they had taken upon them any
Ecclesiastical function, did afterward marry wives, yet they did not forbid
marriage. But this is a new law of the Pope, unknown to the ancient Churches
and Synods, which does wholly forbid marriages, and breaks of such as are
contracted. But it is evident, that either part of this decree is flat
contrary to the Gospel. They allege against us the authority of the Church,
and of synodes, which the Popes them selves that were authors of this decree,
did impudentlie contemn, and godly Priests did evidently withstand this new
law. For the Ecclesiastical histories do testify, that it was never laid
upon the Churches, without great contentions and resistance. The Bishop of
Tarracon writes to Syricius the Pope, That the Priests of Spain could not be
brought to admit that law which for bad them the use of their wives. What a
stir does Syricius keep there? How sharply does he write? For these are
the words of Syricius, which are unmeet for a Pope: Let him tell me,
whosoever he be, a hunter after lusts, and a Master of vices. And thereupon he
wresteth the words of S. Paull to his cause, which are most far from it: They
which live in the flesh can not please god. A man may doubt suerelie, whether
it may better be attributed to his ignorance, or his impudency, that he
speaks so disdainefully of marriage. For he goes about nothing else but to
forbid Priests the use of their wives, which then they had married.

But the Popes that succeeded after were yet more hard and cruel. When the
Archbishop of Mentz did in a Synod rehearse the Popes decree touching the
putting away of wives in Germany, the Priests were so kindled in their anger
that they threatened to set upon the Archbishop himself. And it was in deed
both an unworthy, and cruel thing, to put away their wives, which they then
had But at last either force, or superstition got the upper hand. Cyprian was
far more equal and gentle to such women as had not kept their vowed
chastity. For he writes in the first book, the 11. Epist. If they will not,
or cannot endure it* it is better they should marry, then that they should
fall into the fire through their importune lusts. In any wise let them give no
offense to the breethren or sisters. Besides this, unjust laws are not wont
to be perpetual. We do therefore entreat the most excellent Emperor, that
among many other enormities of the Church, he will also consider the faults
of this law: in which case that also is to be weighed. The nature of man does
as it were wax old, and is become weaker. Wherefore there must be care had
that vices do not increase: Neither must the laws themselves be seeds of
vices. Plato says very wisely, that Laws must be made for virtues sake. Now
whether this tradition of single life be maintained for pieties sake, or for
some other purpose, it is no hard matter to determine. Last of all, seeing that
Christ has especially commended the care of the ministers of the Gospel to
the godly, we desire therefore that the most excellent Emperor would
restrain this cruelty, which has a long time bin exercised upon godly
Priests, and would rather consult with the Church, then with our adversaries,
in that behalf. Surely love and merciful dealing should flourish in the
Church. Wherefore the true church does greatly abhor unnecessary cruelty,
and would not have the Priests put to death for a tyrannical tradition. She
would also have the poor Wives and Children of Priests favorably dealt with.
All whose lives and saftie the Church does commend unto thee, O most merciful
Emperor. All the godly wheresoever, are touched with their miseries and do
in heart desire Christian lenity in this behalf, and do also with tears
jointly commend learned and honest men that are profitable to the Church
together with their wives and children, unto thee, whom they se both to be
endued with an excellent and heroi^all goodness and kindenes, and also to have
used in this cause very notable moderation, which does let us understand that
thou art careful of bringing some remedy unto the common wealth. The Church
would not have thee to be a minister of another man's cruelty. The greatest
honor of Kings is that which Esaie gives to them when he says, that they
should be nurse fathers to the Church: that is, that kingdoms and the
maintenance of peace and of humane society should not only serve for the
profit of the body, but also should further the gospel, namely when as they
both rule the Priests, and also grant peace and quietness to Cities, that the
youth might be trained up in religion, and men might be instructed. The Church
therefore does beseech thee to remember that the care of defending the godly
Priests, as of certain nourslings, lies upon thee. It belongs unto this
calling to be a succor for innocence, to save from injuries, especially such
as are weak, which are not able to defend themselves, as namely godly women,
children, and orphans or the fatherles. Among which you may well think that
the wives and children of Priests, which are right orphans in deed, are left
unto your charge by the Lord. The Church, as most full of natural affection
and love, does not only approve of the mutual love of married folks one to
another, and of the love of parents to their children, but is also touched with
the miseries of those that are forlorn and fatherles. And surely she judges
in so great goodness of your nature that there is no inhumanitie or want of
natural affection. Wherefore she is in good hope that the murders, and
executions of Priests, and the banishment of their wives and children do
grieve thee not a little. The Church also does give thee warning to look to it,
lest many points of Christian doctrine, the unfolding and laying open whereof
is very necessary, be smothered up, whiles godly and learned ministers are
put to death, and whiles men are driven from the study of Christian doctrine.
What else do our adversaries seek, but that all good learning and true
doctrine may be rooted out or oppressed, and men may only depend upon the
authority of such as do bear rule, and that they might esteem the dreams of
unlearned men, though never so impious, never so absurd, for oracles. Our
adversaries imagine that this barbarous bondage is the best, and surest for
their Lordly rule. And in deed it is very evident, how the Church in many
places i^ oppressed with this bondage. Now though liberty may not be granted
to disanull such determinations, as be received by good authority, and though
men ought not to depart either from the scriptures, or from the decrees of the
ancient Synods, wherein they have determined of Christian doctrine, yet is it
not meet that the authority of the church should be pretended for all such
abuses and faults, as the latter and worser age has brought into the Church.
And surely men do flatter and deceive themselves too much, if they think that
there be no faults conveyed into the church by the desires of covetous men, and
by those Labyrinthes and obscurities, of the doctrine and traditions of the
schoolmen. For now a days good men are not so much in danger for their
marriage sake, as for their care and desire they have to purge and bring to
trial the doctrine of Christ. Which care the Bishops ought wisely to direct
and further. For to them especially is the care of setting forth the
maintenance of true doctrine commended: they should be the ringleaders and
furtherers of this most holy and ftuitfull care and study. But it belongs
not to the Bishop alone but also to godly Princes, and especially to the
Emperor, to understand the gospel purely, to judge of opinions, to be war
and watchful that no wicked opinions be received or roo^ed* and to abolish
Idolatry with all his might and maine.

By chese and such like duties did many valiant and notable men deserve well
at the hands of godly men, as Gedeon, Ezechias, Josias, and Constantine, and
sundry others. Wherefore you must think it your duty also to take heed, lest
such things, as be godly and profitablie brought to light and reformed by God
and learned men, be smothered again, and lest that wicked abuses be
established by your authority. The Psalm says, for thy temples sake in
Jerusalem, the King shall offer gifts unto thee* The proper gifts that Kings
are to bestow upon the Church are, to search out true doctrine, and to see that
good teachers be set over the Churches, to give diligence that the
controversies of the Church may be rightly decided: Not to take away true and
holy doctrine, but to raise it up, and to set it forward, and to defend it,
and rightly to set it in order, and to maintain the quiet concord of the
Church. By these true gifts, most noble Emperor, you may adorn the Church
of Christ, which especially both Christ himself requires, and the Churches,
that are rent and torn in most horrible manner, do crave at your hands.

Last of all, seeing that humane traditions ought to give place to times and
opportunities, especially in the Church, wherein there should be more regard
had of the salvation of the godly, and of love, and public peace, then of
any humane traditions, it were a great deal better to make show of abrogating
this seely tradition of single life, then to strengthen lusts, to dissolve
marriages, to exercise cruelty against the Priests and their wives and
children, to oppress true and holy doctrine, and to make hauock of the
Church. We do therefore commend this matter of their marriage unto your piety
and bounty, O noble Emperor, as that which has no difficulty or doubt
fulness in it. For they that be governors both may and ought to abolish an
unjust law. And the laws of single life, whether they be new, or old, belong
only to humane equity, in mitigating whereof the authority of the Church
should be of great force. We could bring very many examples out of the
histories of all times and countries, in which there might be seen horrible
examples of judgments, which followed upon unclean lusts. Among many other
causes of the general flood, there is mention made of fleshly lusts. Afterward
five cities were swallowed up in an opening of the earth, so as the lake called
Asphalites was left as a perpetual monument of that punishment: when the
Israelites were departed out of Egypt, and diverse had defiled them selves by
going in unto Moabitish weomen, the twelve Princes of the tribes were hanged
up, and 24. thousand men were slain. The Cana^ites after this were clean
rooted out, and among the causes thereof, incestuous copulations are namely
reckoned up: shortly after followed the overthrow of the tribe of Benjamin,
for abusing the Levites wife. After this David was driven out of his kingdom
for adultery. And Jeremy in diverse places cries out, that these three,
Idolatry, oppressions, and adulteries, are the causes of those great
calamities, which overwhelmed the wholl nation of the Jews then, when they
were carried captives to Babylon. These things are written for this purpose,
that we might know certainly that God is displeased with wandering lusts of
uncleanness: and that unclean and incestuous persons do not fall into
punishments by chance, but are punished of God. Therefore the destructions of
heathnish Cities also do put us in mind of the wrath of God against these
villainies, Sibaris was overthrown: Athens, Sparta, and Thebes, being tossed
with civil wars, received due punishment of their filthiness. And Rome when
it brought forth many Neroes and Heliogabales, at length it came to ruin, the
Empire being rent into sundry parts by the wars of sundry barbarous
nations. There is also a long Catalogue in Aristotle of Cities, wherein there
happened chaunges of government and seditions, for unclean lusts. Besides all
which punishments Paul warns the church that there is another judgment that
follows upon these lusts, and that is madness, or fury, as it is written.
Romans 1. and Ephesians 4. And it may well be, that this judgment has seized
upon our Ecclesiastical governors, who for the most part are open
Epicures, open defenders of Idols, that they may get wealth and authority, and
scoff at those heavenly sayings, which threaten vengeance upon Idolaters,
unclean persons, and Parricides. They vaunte that they do all things well,
which they do for their kingdoms sake, and that such are good subjects, and
love quietness and peace, that allow of errors and open naughtines, that they
may uphold the majesty of the Popes kingdom. The wholl world can bear
witness that there is a God that does revenge all filthiness, uncleanness, and
oppression. Wherefore though they now deride and scoff at these speeches, yet
let them know, that they shall one day stick fast in those punishments,
whereunto the world it self does call them.

Seeing then it is a clear case, that the law of single life is directly
against the commandment of God, we think that the Priests and others do
very well, which join in honest marriage, as Paull says, that a Bishop
must be chosen that is the husband of one wife. We judge also that the rulers
both may, and ought to abolish this law of the Pope. For they are foulie
deceived, that think either that marriage is forbidden to priests by Gods law,
or else that the Kings or the Bishops may make a law to forbid them marriage.
And if that rulers will not help the Church in this behalf, yet the godly
do well which follow the Apostles rule, which says, That we must rather obey
God, then men. To conclude, seeing the defense of the Popes law has many
faults joined with it, as namely the strengthening of wandering lusts,
superstitions, and murdering of godly Priests, every one may see that our
Churches deal well in abolishing and condemning that law of the Pope. And we
beseech the most renowned Emperor, that he will not defile himself, wirh
defending that unclean single life, and with the blood of the Priests: for it
is written, Blessed is he that has pity o^ the poor and needy, the Lord
shall deliver him in the cuill day.

This article we found elsewhere placed in the second place, amongst those
wherein the abuses that are changed be mentioned.
Of the marriage of Priests. Art. 2.
THere was a common complaint of the examples of such priests, as were not
co^tinent. For which cause also Pope Pius is reported to have said, that there
were certain causes for which marriage was forbidden to priests, but there
were many waightier causes why it should be permitted again. For so Platina
writes. When as therefore the Priests among us sought to avoid these public
offenses, they married wives, and taught that it was lawful for them selves to
join in marriage. First, because that Paull says, To avoid fornication, let
every man have his wife. Again, It is better to marry, then to burn.
Secondly Christ says, All men do not receive this word: where he shows
that all men are not fit for a single life, because that God created man for
procreations sake. Genesis 1. It is not in man's power, without a special gift
and work of God, to alter his creation. Therefore such as are not meet for a
single life, ought to join in matrimony. For no law of man, no vow can take
away the commandment of god and his ordinance. By these reasons our Priests
do prove that they may lawfully marry wives. And it is well known, that in
the ancient Churches Priests were married. For Paull says, that a Bishop must
be chosen which is a husband. And in Germany about 400. years ago, the
Priests were by violence compelled to live a single life, who then were so
wholly bent against the matter, that the Archbishop of Mentz, being to publish
the Pope of Rome his decree in that behalf, was almost murdered in a tumult
by the Priests in their anger. And the matter was handled so contrary to law,
that they did not only forbid marriages for the time to come, but also such as
were then contracted, contrary to all laws divine and humane, contrary to the
Canons themselves, that were before made not only by Popes, but also by most
famous Councels. And seeing that the world decaying, man's nature by little and
little waxes weaker, it is behoouefull to look well to it, that no more vices
do ouerspread Germany.

Furthermore, God ordained marriage to be a remedy for man's infirmity. The
Canons themselves do sa^e, that the old rigor is now and then in latter
times to be released for the weakness of men. Which it were to be wished might
be done in this matter also. It is very like that if marriage be forbidden any
longer, we shall at length want Pastors in the Church. Seeing then that there
is a plain commandment of God, seeing the use of the Church is well known,
seeing that the impure single life brings forth very many offenses,
adulteries, and other enormities worthy to be punished by the godly
magistrate, yet it is a marvel, that greater cruelty should be showed in no
other thing, then against the marriage of Priests. God has commanded to
honor marriage: the laws in all well ordered common welthes, even among the
heathen also have adorned marriages with very great privileges. But now men
are cruelly put to death, yea and Priests also, contrary to the mind of the
Canons, for no other cause, but only for marriage. Paul calls that a
doctrine of Devils which forbids marriage. 1. Tim. 4. which may now very
well be seen, when as the forbidding of marriage is maintained by such
punishments. But as no law of man can take away the law of God, no more can
any vow whatsoever. Therefore Cyprian gives counsel, that those women should
marry, which do not keep their vowed chastity. His words are these in the first
book, the 11. Ep. If they will not, or are not able to endure, it is far better
they should marry, then that they should fall into the fire by their importune
desire. In any wise let them give no offense to their brethren or sisters. Yea
and the Canons use a kind of equity toward such, as before their ripe years
did vow chastity, as hitherto the use has been.

To this place also belongs the 6. Art.
Of the vows of Monks.
WHat is taught amongst us, touching the vows of Monks shall be better
understood, if you call to mind what was the state of Monastaries, and how
many things were every day committed in the Monasteries, contrary to the
Cannons. In Augustines time Colleges were free, but afterward, when discipline
was corrupted, every where vows were laid upon them, that as it were by a new
devised prison, the discipline might be restored again. Over and besides vows
by little and little many other observations were added. And these bands and
snares were cast upon many, before they came to ripe years, contrary to the
Canons. Many through error fell into this kind of life unawares, who though
they wanted no years, yet they wanted discretion to judge of their strength
and ability. They which were once got within these snares, were constrained to
abide in them, though by the benefit of the Canon, some might be set at
liberty. And that fell out rather in the Nonneries, then in the Colleges of
Monks, because the weaker sex was more to be spared. This rigor and severity
misliked many good men hertofore, when they saw young maids and young men
thrust up into Monasteries, there to get their living, and saw what an unhappy
success this counsel had, what offenses it bred, and what snares it laid
upon men's consciences. They were grieved that the authority of the Canons was
wholly neglected and contemned in a thing most dangerous. To all these evils
there was added, such a persuasion of vows, which as it is well known, did in
former times mislike the Monks themselves, if any of them were somewhat stouter
then the rest. They taught forsooth that vows were equal to B aptisme: touching
single life, they taught that it merited remission of sins, and justification
before God: yea farther, that the Monks life did not only merit righteousness
before God, but more then that, because it observed, not only the
commandments, but also the Counsels in the Gospel. And thus they taught,
that the Monks profession was better then Baptism, that the Monks life did
merit more, then the life of Magistrates, of Pastors, and such like, which in
the obedience of Gods commandment followed their calling, without any such
religion of man's making. None of these things can be denied, they are to be
seen in their writings. What fell out afterward in the Monasteries? In old
time there were Schools for the study of Divinity, and other arts, which
were profitable to the Church, and thence were Pastors and Bishops taken. But
now the case is altered. It is needeles to rehearse their vows. In old time
they came together into such places to learn, but now they feign, that it is
a kind of life taken up to merit remission of sins and justification: yea
they say, it is a state of perfection, and prefer it to all other kind of
life's that God ordained. We have therefore mentioned these things, amplifying
nothing odiouslie, to the end that the doctrine of our men touching this matter
might be understood.

First, touching such as join in marriage, thus they teach with us, that it is
lawful for any to marry, that is not fit for a single life: forasmuch as
vows can not take away Gods ordinance and commandment. The commandment of
God is, To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife. And not only the
commandment, but also the creation and ordinance of God, compels such unto
marriage, as without the special work of God are not exempted, according to
that saying, It is not good ^or man to be alone. They therefore that are
obedient to this commandment and ordinance of God do not offend. What can be
said against these things? Let a man amplify the bond of a vow, as much as
he will, yet can he never bring to pass that the vow shall take away Gods
commandment. The Canons teach, That in every vow the right of the superiou^
is excepted: much less therefore can these vows, which are contrary to Gods
commandment, be of force. If so be that the bond of vows had no cause* why
it might be changed, then should not the Roman Bishops have dispensed
therewith. For in deed it is not lawful for man to disanull that bond, which
does simply belong to the law of God. But the Roman Bishops have judged very
wisely, that in this bond there must an equity be used: therefore they are
often read to have dispensed with vows. The history of the King of Arragon,
being called back out of a Monastery, is well known, and there be many
examples of our time.

Secondly, why do our adversaries exaggerate the bond, or the effect of the
vow, when as in the mean time they speak not a word of the very nature of a
vow, which ought to be in a thing possible, which ought to be voluntary, and
taken up of a man's own accord, and with advise or deliberation. But it is not
unknown, how perpetual chastity is in the power of a man. And how many
amongst them is there, that does vow of his own accord, and with advise?
Wenches and young maids, before they know how to judge, are persuaded, yea
sometimes also compelled to vow; wherefore it is not meet to dispute so
rigorously of the bond, seeing that all men confess, that it is against the
nature of a vow, which is not done of a man's own ^ccord, or unadvisedly. The
canons for the most part do disanull vows, which are made before one be 15.
years of age, because that before one come to that age, he seems not to have
so much judgment, as to determine of a perpetual life. Another Canon
permitting more to the weakness of men, does add some years more, for it
forbids a vow to be made, before one be 18. years of age. But whether of
these shall we follow? the greatest part has this excuse, why they forsake
Monasteries, because that for the most part they vowed before they came to
this age.

Last of all, although the breaking of a vow may be reprehended, yet it
follows not, that the marriages of such persons are to be dissolved. For
Augustine in his 27. quest. 1. Cap. of Marriages, does deny that they ought to
be dissolved: and his authority is not lightly to be esteemed, although others
afterward have thought otherwise. And although the commandment of God,
touching wedlock, does free most men from vows, yet our men do also bring
another reason concerning vows, that they be frustrate, because that all the
worship of God, instituted of men without the commandment of God, and chosen
to merit remission of sins and justification, is wicked, as Christ says:
They do in vain worship me with the commandments of men. And Paull does
every where teach, that righteousness is not to be sought, out of our
observations, and those worships, which are devised by men, but that it comes
by faith to those that believe that they have God pacified and reconciled to
them for Christ, not for any of their merits. But it is evident, that the
Monks did teach, that these made or counterfeited religions do deserve
remission of sins and justification, and that they do satisfy for sins.
What else is this, then to detract from the glory of Christ, and to obscure,
and deny the righteousness of faith? wherefore it follows, that these vows
thus used were wicked worships, and therefore they be of no value. For a wicked
vow, and that which is made against the commandment of God is of no force,
neither ought a vow to be a bond of iniquity, as the Canon says. Paul says,
Ye are made void of Christ, which seek to be justified by the law, ye are
fallen from grace: that is, they which do think, that by their own works
they do merit remission of sins, and that they do please God, for their
own fulfilling of the law, and do not perceive, that for Christ his sake they
do freely receive by faith remission of their sins, through the mercy of
God, and that they do please God through Christ, they do loose Christ,
because they do transfer the confidence which is due to Christ, and to the
promise of God unto works. Also they oppose to the wrath of God, not Christ
the propitiatour, but their own works, therefore they do transfer the
honor, which is due unto Christ, unto our works. Now it is manifest, that the
Monks do teach this, that by their observations they do deserve remission of
sins, because they find God merciful unto them for these observations.
Wherefore they teach men to trust to their own works, not to the propitiation
of Christ. This is a wicked confidence, and is contrary to the Gospel, and in
the judgment of God it shall be sound to be vain. For our works can not be
opposed to the wrath and judgment of God: the wrath of God is then only
appeased, when as we do by faith lay hold upon the free mercy, promised for
Christ's sake. Therefore they loose Christ, which place their confidence, not in
Christ, but in their own works.

Moreover the Monks have taught, that their kind of life is a state of
perfection, because they did observe not only the commandments, but also the
counsels. This error is chiefelie contrary to the gospel, because they have
feigned that they do so satisfy the commandments, as that they can also do
somewhat more: and hereupon arose that horrible errorwhich they have feigned,
that they had merits of super erogation. These they have applied for others,
that they might be satisfactions for other men's sins. If any man will
odiouslie exaggerate these things, how many things might herehearse, whereof
the Monks themselves are now ashamed? It is no light offense, in the Church to
propound unto the people a certain worship devised by men, without the
commandment of God, and to teach, that such a worship does justify men:
because that the righteousness of faith in Christ, which ought especially to be
taught in the Church, is obscured, when as those marvelous religions of
Angels, feigning of poverty, and humility, and of single life, are cast
before men's eyes. Moreover the commandments of God and the true worship of
God are obscured, when as men do hear, that Monks alone are in that state of
perfection: because that Christian perfection is this, to fear God sincerely,
and again to conceive great faith, and to trust assuredly, that God is
pacified toward us for Christ his sake, to ask, and certainly to look for help
from God in all our affairs, according to our calling: and outwardly to do
good works dilligentlie, and to tend upon our vocation. In these things does
true perfection and the true worship of God consist: it does not consist in
singlenes of life, in beggarie, or in vile apparel.

The people also does conceive many pernicious opinions of those false
commendations of the monastical life. They hear that single life is praised
above measure, therefore they live in marriage with offense of conscience. They
hear that beggars only are perfect, therefore they keep their possessions,
and buy and sell, with offense of conscience. They hear that the gospel gives
counsel, not to revenge: therefore some that lead a private life are not afraid
to revenge themselves: For they hear that it is a counsel, not a
commandment. Others do think that all Magistracy and civil offices are
unworthy a Christian man. We read examples of men, who forsaking wedlock, and
leaving the government of the common wealth, have hid themselves in
Monasteries. That they called, to fly out of the world, and to seek a kind
of life, which is more acceptable to God* neither did they see, that God is to
be served in those commandments, which he himself has delivered, not in the
commandments, which are devised by men. That is a good and perfect kind of
life, which has the commandment of God for it warrant. It is necessary to
admonish men of these things. And before these times Gerson did reprehend this
error of the perfection of Monks, and he witnesses, that in his time this
was a new or strange voice, that the Monastical life is a state of perfection.
Thus many wicked opinions do cleave fast unto vows, as that they merit
remission of sins and justification, that they are Christian perfection, that
they do keep the counsels and commandments, that they have works of
supererogation. All these things, seeing they be false and vain, do make vows
to be of no effect.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Of Wedlock.
Art. 1^.
THe truth concerning Wedlock did at all times remain sincere in the Church
only. For the Church, does know, that God does most severely forbid
wandering lusts amongst mankind, and that he would have chastity so to be
understood, and performed, as he himself has ordained it, that we also may
know, that he is a pure and a chaste mind, and may discern him from devils,
who through the hatred they bear to God, are delighted with the confusions of
lusts, and do drive forward this weak nature of man, that it may be
horribly defiled. Wherefore both the Heathen did every where admit ceratine
foul examples, and Heretics at all times have spread abroad monstrous
opinions touching wedlock, as Clemens Alexandrinus, and Epiphanius do
declare. And the Turkish manners, and the law of the Pope, concerning single
life, have caused a great deformity in this last old age of the world. But
Paull does affirm, that it is a sign of evil Spirits, to forbid marriage.

Wherefore we do very carefully keep the sincere doctrine of God touching
marriage, and by the mercy of God our civil Magistrates have appointed, and
do defend judgments for Marriage matters in their government, and they do
severely punish those wicked deeds which are contrary to the law of God, and
know that by the commandment of God they are enjoined to have a care to
defend chastity, and wedlock. And we retain this true definition* agreeing
with the commandments of God, and the custom of the Apostolic Church.
Marriage is a lawful and indissoluble conjunction, only of one man and of
one woman, to be kept because of the commandment of God, who by this mean
will have mankind associated, chastity to be understood, and lusts not to
wander. God in the beginning did consecrate this order, saying thus, They shall
be two in one flesh, to wit, one man, and one only woman inseperablie joined
together. And again, this first law was established of Christ, Math. 19. Now
that this coupling together may be lawful, we do immutably observe the
differences of persons, that we may not make a mixture of those persons, who
by the law of God are not permitted to couple together. look the 1. obseruat.
upon this confess.
Also we keep the rules of the Canon law, touching other nearer degrees, as
there be ordinances to be seen delivered with grave and wise deliberation in
our Consistories.

Moreover, we know it is the will of God, that Marriage should not be for
bidden to any persons, that be fit thereunto, and which, without Marriage,
could not live without danger of their conscience, as it is written, Genesis 2.
Math. 19* 1. Cor. 7. Therefore we give leave to Priests and other persons, to
marie, which had rather live godly in Marriage, then in a single life to have
wounded consciences, so that they may not invoke God, and live holilie. In
affiances, even according to the ancient laws, we will have the consent of
the Parents also, seeing that Parents are moved with a probable reason.
Touching diuorcementes, this rule is most firmly held, that they do sin, who
either by adultery, or by forsaking, be the first cause of distraction: and
adulterers and adultresses, and he and she that does fosake the other, are
condemned by the voice of them that preach in our Churches, and of the Judges
in our Consistories, and they be severely punished of our Magistrates. But the
innocent person (when as the matter being well known, he is set free) is not
forbid to marry, that he may invoke God, and live holilie. For seeing that
the Lord does expresselie set at liberty the innocent person, Math. 19. when
as the other party is polluted with adultery, we must understand a setting
at liberty, not in name only, but in deed. And Paull speaks after the
same manner, in the case of forsaking. This our custom does also agree with
the ancient Church. The other laws which we have in our Consistories, look
the 2. oseru.
do agree with the Canon law: and we do truly propound unto the people the
wholl doctrine touching marriage and chastity.

We affirm, that all commixtions, and spilling of the seed without marriage,
are sins condemned of god, Look the 3. obseru.
as mortal sins, and such as drive out of men the holy Ghost, and that many
grievous punishments are spread throughout mankind, by reason of lusts, as
it is written, Fornicatours and adulterers God will judge. And there is a
threatening of these punishments set down, Leuit. 18. Now we count that to be
chastity, both to keep purity in a single life, and also to have the laws
of wedlock observed: and we affirm wedlock, as we did before describe it, to
be a society instituted, and consecrated of God, and that this very society,
and the duties of a life in wedlock, do please God. And we condemn all
those fanaticall spirits, Basilides, Tatianus, Carpocrates, and such like,
whereof some by one means, and some by another, did either condemn wedlock,
or did approve filthy confusions. Also we condemn that Popish law, which
forbids Priests to mary, and gives occasion of destruction to a great
multitude of men, and for the same cause we do utterly dislike the
monastical vows of single life. Touching other causes we shall speak
hereafter: for those popish laws and vows are flat contrary to the law of
God. The Lord said, It is not good for man to be alone: He said, that is, by
his unspeakable wisdom he decreed in this sort to make mankind, that by the
society of man and woman it might be propagated. And H^ made them two, that
there might be a Church, and he established these bounds, that lusts might not
straie abroad: for he would have an understanding of chastity to be in
mankind.

Although God had said and decreed these things, yet Tatianus, the Pope, and
the Monks do say the contrary: who when as they forbid marriage, do give
occasion to many men, being otherwise fit unto virtue, to heap up many
horrible sins, by reason whereof very many do fall headlong into eternal
destruction, and the wrath of God is the more kindled against wholl mankind. A
law of man* being contrary to the decree of God, and to the very work of
God instituted and established in the creation, and also to the commandments
of God, and that law, which is the fountain of great wickedness and heinous
deeds, for the which both many do perish, and the wrath of God is the more
kindled, yea which law the holy Ghost does affirm to have it beginning from
the devil, is in no case to be laid upon the Church, but by the consent of
all godly men to be abolished. Now it has fallen out very often within these
30. years, that Priests, whose manners were blameles, and honest, have
chiefelie been put to death because they were married. Thus the Devil goes
about to establish his law by most cruel murders, and he has for his
instruments, most impudent writers, Ecchius, Faber, Pighius, who has
expresselie written, That a Priest does less offend, if he be an adulterer,
then if he marry a wife. It is an unworthy thing that these, who will be
counted Christians, should write and speak such things. Wise men do see that
in this declining age of the world, both the nature of men is more weak, and
by little and little there is greater releasing and confusion of discipline. And
at all times a license in this kind did immediately go before the destroying
of cities, and the ruins of kingdoms. Therefore such as are governors ought
to be more vigilant and severe in mainteining discipline, in strengthening the
laws of wedlock, in punishing and prohibiting wandering lusts: touching which
matter we rejoice that our admonitions be extant for all posterity, and we
also desire the Son of God, our Lord Jesus Christ, the keeper of his Church,
and a true lover of charity, that he would bow the minds of governors to
listen to wholesome counselles, and repress the devil, which kindeled the
flames of lusts, and hinder evil examples, that they may not be far
spread. The minds and hearts of all godly men do tremble, when they read,
and hear of such foul and horrible heathnish examples: the which truly
afterward were accompanied both with blindness in the minds, and with other
outrages, which were pernicious to wholl nations, as in the histories of the
heathen examples do every where offer themselves to all men. The Scedasian^
had cast into a well two daughters of Spartanus being deflowred: afterward, as
it were in the very same footestep, the army of the Lacedaemonians was slain,
and the Empire changed. But there be many examples of all ages. We our selves
do remember, that certain Bishops, who were famous for their nobility,
and their wits, were slain in adultrie. But we beseech the Son of God,
that for this cause he would preserve many, and bow them unto chastity, that
he may sincerely be inuocated of many. As for those things which are alleged
of our adversaries for the defense of single life, they are as well applied to
the matter, as that saying of Christ to Solomon, which Tacianus did allege out
of the Gospel according to the Egiptians, I came to destroy the works of the
woman: Tacianus did thus interpret it, I came to destroy, that is, to abolish
wedlock: Look the 4. obseruat.
whereas the words of Christ did speak of the fall of Eve, and of the miseries
that followed that fall, as also John does write, The son of god came to
destroy the works of the Devil.

Hitherto also pertains the 21. Art. of the same Confession.
Of the Monastical life.
WE omit a larger rehearsal out of ancient writers, of those, who either
departed into the wilderness, as did An^onius, or erected like Colleges or
Schools, as did Basilius: for diverse men had diverse causes of separating them
selves. We speak now of the present Monks, which are not in the wilderness, but
are Colledgesof men either learned, or unlearned, which do live more
commodiouslie in the open light, and in places of greatest resort, then other
men do. They have those pleasures which they desire, some one, some another:
and they have much more leisure, then other men have* that live either in
civil, or in domestical affairs. Neither do they now transfer unto
themselves those ridiculous praises of perfection, and of a conte^platiue life,
as in times past some did. And seeing that there is great difference in diverse
societies of men* we will not preach to the evil, who for the kitchins, and al
licentiousnes, do love those dark places: but those, of whom there is hope of
amendment, we do earnestly request, for the glory of God and their own
salvation, that they would think upon these sayings: Thou shall have no strange
Gods. Fly from Idols. What manner of thing is the Monastical life now a
days? It has very much wicked worship, and vanity: their Masses for the
quick and the dead they set out to sale, and this is the greatest gain that
Monasteries for the most part have: there is used invocation of the dead,
heaped up with very foul superstitions: as with the adoring of Images, with
indulgences, and other iugling tricks. The study of doctrine is either none at
all, or very corrupt. These only causes are great enough, why men, which are
not profane, ought to depart out of such societies: because that the vows,
which wrap the^ in a kind of life, wherein is the worship of Idols, are
without doubt frustrate, according to the first commandment which is
immooueable, eternal, and the rule of all other commandments, Thou shall
have no strange Gods, Exodus 20. They do bring a testimony out of Paull, 1.
Tim. 5. Concerning widows, They have lost their first faith: But the answer is
sure and clear, although Paul should speak of vows, yet would he in no case
allow of such vows, as are joined with the worship of Idols, and with many
errors. But there be also many other lies in vows. They promise chastity and
poverty: but how many of them be fit to lead a single life, they themselves do
know. And touching poverty, they know that the far greater part does there
rather seek kitchins well furnished, then for poverty and hunger.

Now we must also consider of this: let eloquent men excuse and praise the
Monastical life as they list, yet always this opinion is confirmed in men,
that are not profane, by this example, that such works, chosen by man's
divise, are the worship of God: that is, such works whereby God does count
himself to be honored. This opinion is to be reproved and to be pulled out of
the minds of men, and men are to be drawn back to the commandments of God,
according to this saying, Math. 15. In vain do they worship me with the
commandments of men. Also, walk not after the commandments of your
fathers, but walk ye in my commandments. This is a true and notable
reprehension of the Monastical life. Now if they do faigne hereunto merits
and perfections, the gospel of Christ touching the righteousness of faith and
true worship, is the more obscured: because it is a foul and horrible lie,
that monastical observations should merit remission of sins, or be of so great
value, as is Baptism, as Thomas does expressly say: Neither was antiquity
ignorant of this reprehension. There is a narration extant, whether it be true,
or written only for doctrines sake, yet does it show forth the judgments of
godly men: They write, that when Antonie, desired to know, how much he had
profited before God in those external exercises, there was showed unto him a
cobblers house at Alexandria, being next door to him. He therefore going in
speaks to the goodman of the house, questioneth with him concerning doctrine,
and exercises of godliness. The cobbler answers sincerely touching doctrine.
Afterward he says, that in the morning in a short prayer he gives thanks to
God, both for other benefits, and that he sent his son: then that he does
ask remission of his sins for the Sons sake, and pray that God would
preserve the Church, and his family: also that he prays to the Son, tomake
intercession for us: and that he does rest in this faith, and does his
domestical affairs joyfully, and provide that his Children may be well
taught. And use thou no other streighter exercise, says Antonie? why, says
he, does he labor a little, trow you, that provides how his family shall be
manteined? and many things do often times happen, which do surely vex him
that governs a house, beside other burdens which he has common with the
Citizens. Do thou not see, how many private and public miseries there be
in this life? and to bear these well, and in them to exercise faith and
patience, do thou not think it a warfare hard enough? Antonie went his way,
and understood that he was admonished, not to prefer his own exercises,
before the duties of this common life. These, and other like narrations are
read, which although th ey be so written for doctrines sake, yet they do
declare the judgments of learned men. Neither is it now needful to ad a longer
discourse, especially seeing that no man is ignorant, how that in those
places, where Monks be, there is much wicked superstition in Monasteries, and
that the studies of doctrine are either none at all, or very corrupt. To
deliberate of the means how to amend these things we leave it to them, that
are in authority.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
Of wedlock. CHAP. 21
WE confess that wedlock is a kind of life, instituted and approved of God,
and that it is Look the 1. obseru.
a mystery, that is, as commonly it uses to be expounded, a great Sacrament,
in Christ and his Church, as Paull says. And because Christ does evidently
affirm, that wedlock does perteine to this present life and the administration
of the things of this life do consist of public laws being made upon right
and probable reason, therefore we teach that it is lawful to marry in these
degrees of consanguinity and affinity which look the 2. oseru.
the politic laws, which are the ordinances of God, do permit. Also we teach,
that those which be young ought not to marie without the authority of their
parents, and that the marriage which is contracted by a rash and unlawful
consent of young parties without the authority of them, in whose power they
are, is not to be counted as ratified* For although there be certain cases,
wherein it is lawful to marry without the consent of parents, yet it seems
not good to make a general rule thereof, as though every consent of young
parties, should ratify the contract of marriage, and as though privy marriages
were to be approved. For not only the commandment of God does require,
that children should honor their Parents, but also natural reason does
command, that the consent of parents should be requested in making a
marriage: hitherto also are children called by the politic laws. And there
is a decree of Pope Euarastus extant, the words whereof be these: Marriage as
we heave hard of our Fathers and have found it delivered unto us of the
Apostles, and their successors, is not otherwise made lawful, but when a wife
is sought for at their hands, and affianced by the nearest Parents, who
seem to have authority over the maid or woman, and in whose custody she is.

Morouer we do not dout, but that they which are in deed lovers of honesty, do
think that it is not free for the lay men only, as they call them, but also
for the ministers of the Church, to marry. For the Epistle to the Hebrews
says, Marriage is honorable in all men, and the bed that is undefiled. And
Paull aloweth of Marriage in a Bishop, and affirms that the forbidding of
Marriage is a spirit of errors, and a doctrine of Deuilles. For though this
saying of Paull is commonly expounded of the Tatians and Eucratians, who
thought that Marriage does nothing at all differ from whoredom, yet
notwithstanding seeing that marriage is forbidden in the popish decrees, it is
forbidden by the same reasons, by the which marriage is wholly condemned, and
not in one kind of men only. For that saying is alleged out of Leuiticus*
Be ye holy, because I am holy: and that of Paull, Not in chamberings and
wantonness: And again, They which are in the flesh, cannot please God, But
seeing that these sayings of the Scripture do perteine to all men, certainly
they might drive all godly men from marriage, if they were fitly applied to
forbid marriage unto Priests. But we hope that all good men do think more
honestly of marriage, and that they do not dislike of that in the ministers
thereof, which they did approve in the Church it self, especially seeing
that there be manifest examples of the Church, when as yet it was but fresh and
more pure, wherein it was lawful, both for the Apostles, which was the highest
degree in the Church, and also for Bishops, to have their wives. And we think
that this thing is so to be understood, that it was not only lawful for the
ministers of the Church to be married, before they were ordained ministers, but
also to marry after theirordination. For which opinion there be very evident
arguments.

Neither ought the vow of chastity to be any hinderance herin, because that
such a vow beingtaken upon a man by humane superstition, without the authority
of the word of god, and against faith, is not acknowledged of God, and wedlock
also has it chastity, that he which before had vowed chastity, and marries
a wife in the Lord, does indeed fulfill the vow of chastity. Seeing
therefore that the word of God is evident, touching th e honesty of wedlock,
the examples of the Apostles and Bishops of the primitive Church be evident,
the weakness of man's nature is evident, dangers of single life be evident, and
seeing that the offenses, which unchaste Priests do give* are evident, we do
verily hope that it will come to pass, that they which have the government of
the Church, will not go forward severely to maintain and defend this
constitution touching the marirage of Priests, but favorably to interpret
it. For so it shall come to pass, that there may be both fewer and less
offenses in the Church, and that many good men's consciences may be relieved.
Also we hope that it will come to pass, that all good Bishops and princes
will permit them, who, by a lawful divorce* are separated from their
adulterous wives or husbands, to use that liberty of marrying again in the
Lord, which the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ has granted to them, Math.
5. and 16.

Hitherto also pertains the 26. Article, Of Monastical vows.
THere is no doubt but that godly, just, and lawful vows are to be kept and
paid, and that wicked vows are to be disanulled. But it is not without cause
made a matter of controversy, in what kind of vows monastical vows,
touching virginity or single life, poverty and obedience, are to be placed.
For it is evident, that single life, is not commanded by the word of God: also
it is evident, that although the estate of single persons be in public
dangers quiet, and more fit and commodious to execute the public Ministeries
of the Church, then is theirs, which use it not, yet we must not think, that
this kind of life is of it self before the tribunal seat of God more
excellent, and more holy, then is marriage. For as in Christ there is neither
Jew, nor Grecian, neither servant nor free man, as Paull says, so in Christ,
there is neither married, nor unmarried. And as, In Christ Jesus circumcision
avails nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God, and a new
creature: so also does single life avail nothing, and wedlock avails
nothing, but to be renewed in Christ Jesus, and to obeie the calling of Christ.
In the Council held at Gangrum there was this Canon: If any of those, who for
the Lords sake do keep virginity, is lifted up against those that be
married, let him be accursed. And another Canon says, If any man, for
continency, as it is thought, does wear a cloak, as believing that hereby
he has righteousness, and does despise others, who with reverence do wear
other common and usual kinds of garments, let him be accursed. And Augustine
De bono coniugali, Cap. 21. dares not prefer the virginity of the Baptist,
before the wedlock of Abraham.

Therefore he that does vow virginity or single life, does either vow it, as
a singular worship of God (And then, because cause the state of single life
is not commanded by the word of God, this vow pertains to the
commandments of men, whereof Christ, says, In vain do they worship r,
(...) teaching for doctrines the precepts of men.) Or else he works it, as a
merit of remission of sins, and of life eternal, and then it is evidently a
wicked vow, whereunto no man is bound. It is to no better purpose to vow
poverty. For either thou art poor by condition or estate, and possessest no
earthly substance: (And then this cross, which God has laid upon thee, thou
must bear it patiently, which moreover if thou do vow, thou do nothing
else, then if in thy sickness thou should vow, that thou woulded always be
sick, or that in thy infamy, thou should always vow to be infamous:
which kind of vow is rather a madness, then godliness.) Or else thou do
possess substance, and vowest that, forsaking thy substance, thou will always
lead a poor life, and get thy living by begging, and obtain, by the merit of
this vow, eternal life: and then this vow is first of all repugnant to the love
of thy neighbor, which requires, that by thy begging thou be not troublesome
to any, further then necessity compels: secondly it is contrary to faith in
Christ, because that he alone is the merit of eternal life. Therefore it is
evident, that this kind of vow is unlawful and wicked. But so to forsake thy
substance, as to give it to a common use, is not to follow after poverty, but
to provide a more certain and bountiful living for thy self: the which what
manner of worship it is before God, it cannot be unknown. And as for
obedience, it is either referred to God, and then it is not an arbitrarie vow,
but of due necessity, of which obedience it is said, Obedience is better then
sacrifice: Or else it is referred to man, and then of their own accord they
are to perform those duties, which the subject owes to the Magistrate,
children to the Parents, servants to their Lords, and scholars to their
schoolemasters. These things does God look for at men's hands, whether they
be vowed, or not vowed: but yet with this condition, that we do always rather
obeie God, then men. But to vow obedience unto man, without a special calling
of god, that by the works of such obedience, a man may not only perform a
singular worship unto God, but also purge his sins before god, it is
altogether superfluous (because that Christ says, They worship me in vain
with the traditions of men) and also wicked, because the obedience of Christ
alone, which he performed to god his Father, has purged our sins, and
reconciled us with god. By all these things it is manifest, that the kind of
vowing single life, poverty, and obedience, does not agree with that doctrine
which is indeed Catholic, especially seeing that certain men are not
afraid, to make this kind of vowing equal with Baptism.

The former part of this 12. c. might more commodiouslie have bin referred ^o
the 17* Sect. where we entreated of true Christian liberty if those things,
which follow had not hindered it.
OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of Monkerie. CHAP. 12.
AND for the same cause, that all our Justification does consist in faith in
Jesus Christ, whereupon we have liberty given to us in all external things,
we have permitted the bonds of Monkerie to be released among us. For we saw
that this liberty of Christians was vehemently challenged in every place by
S. Paull, whereby every christian man does assure himself, that
alrighteousnes and salvation is to be sought for only in Christ Jesus our
Lord, and is also assured, that he must at all times use all the things of
this life, as to the profitte of our neighbors, so to the glory of God: and
that all which he has is to be arbitrated, and moderated by the holy Ghost,
who is the giver of true adoption and true liberty, and that he ought freely
to permit them to be appointed, and bestowed both to the relief of his
neighbors, and also to the advancement of the glory of God. Seeing that we
retain this liberty, we show ourselves to be the servants of Christ: when we
betray it to men, addicting our selves to their inventions, we do like
runnagates, forsake Christ, and fly to men. The which thing we do so much
the more wickedlie, because that Christ has freed us by his blood not by a
vile or common price, and has redeemed us to himself from the deadly
slavery of Satan. And this is the cause, why S. Paul writing to the
Galathians, did so much detest it, that they had addicted themselves to the
ceremonies of the law, though they were commanded of God, whereas
notwithstanding, as we declared before, that might be far better excused,
then to submit themselves to the yoke of those ceremonies, which men have
feigned of their own brain. For he did write, and that truly, that they
which admit the yoke, of those ceremonies, despise the grace of God, and
count the death of Christ as a thing of nothing: and thereupon he says, That
he is afraid, lest that he had bestowed his labor among them in vain: and he
exhorts them, That they would stand steadfast in that liberty, wherewith
Christ has made us free, and not to be entangled again, with the yoke of
bondage.

Now it is evident, that Monkerie is nothing else then bondage of traditions
devised by men, and in deed of such as Paul has by name condemned in the
places which we alleged. For undoubtedly they which profess Monkerie do
addict themselves to those inventions of men for hope of merits. And hereupon
it is, that they make it so heinous an offense, to forsake those inventions,
and to embrace the liberty of Christ. Therefore, seeing that as well our body,
as ^. Cor. 6.
our spirit, belong unto God, and that in a double respect, to wit, of our
condition, and Redemption, it can not be lawful for Christians, to make
themselves slaves to this Monastical servitude, much les then for profane
servants, to change their Masters. Moreover it can not be denied, but that by
such like bondage, and vows to live after the commandment of men, a certain
necessity (as it always uses to be) of transgressing the law of God is
brought in. For the law of Mat. 15.
God does require, that a Christian man should, as much as lies in him, imploie
his service to the benefit of the Magistrate, his parents, kindred, and others,
and of all those, whom the Lord has made his neighbors, and brought to him
to be delivered, in what place, time, or manner soever their necessity shall
require it. Then let him embrace that kind of living, whereby he may chiefly
provide for the affairs of his neighbors, neither let him choose a single
life, but let him know that to renounce marriage, and to make himself an
Eunuch for the kingdom of heaven, that is, to further godliness, and the glory
of God, it is a peculiar and a special gift of God. For that edict which Paull
did publish, stands firm and steadfast, neither can any vows of men make it
frustrate; For the avoiding of whordome let every man (he excepteth none) have
his own wife, and every woman her own husband. For all men do not receive
that word, of taking upon them a single life for the kingdom of heaven, as
Christ himself does witness, then whom no man did more certainly know, and more
faithfully teach, either of what force man's nature is, or what is acceptable to
his Father. Now it is certain, that by these Monastical vows, they which do
make them are bound to a certain kind of men, so that they think it not
lawful to show themselves obedient and dutiful any longer, either to the
Magistrate, or to their parents, or to any men (only the chief governor of
the Monastery excepted) nor to relieve them with their substance, and least of
all to marry a wife, though they be greatly burned, and therefore they do
necessarily fall into all kinds of dishonesties of life.

Seeing therefore that it is evident, that these Monastical vows do make a
man, which is freed from the service of Christ, to be in danger, not so much
of the bondage of men, as of Satan, and that they do bring in a certain
necessity of transgressing the law of god, (according to the nature of all
such traditions as are devised by men) and that therefore they be manifestly
contrary to the commandments of god, we do, not without cause, believe,
that they are to be made frustrate, seeing that not only the written law, but
also the law of nature does command to disanull a promise, if being kept it
be a hindrance to good manners, not only to religion. Therefore we could not
withstand any which would change a monastical life, which is undoubtedly a
bondage to Satan, for a Christian life, as also we could not withstand others
of the Ecclesiastical order, who marrying wives, have embraced a kind of
life, whereof their neighbors might look for more profitte, and greater
honesty of life, then of that kind wherein they lived before. To conclude,
neither did we take upon us to drive them from the right of wedlock, who among
us have perseuered in the ministry of the word of god, whatsoever chastity
they had vowed, for the causes before specified, seeing that Saint Paull the
chief mainteiner of true chastity, does admit even a Bishop to be a married
man. For we have lawfully preferred this one law of god before all laws of
men, For the avoiding of whoredom, let every have his own wife. Which law
truly, for that it has been rejected so long time, all kinds of lust, even
those which are not to be named (be it spoken with reverence to your sacred M.
O noble Caesar) have more then horribly overthrown this Ecclesiastical order,
so that at this day amongst men there be none more abominable then they,
which bear the name of Priests.

THE NINTEENTH SECTION.
OF THE CIVIL MAGISTRATE.
THE LATTER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of Magistracy. CHAP. 30.
THE Magistracy, of what sort soever it be, is ordained of God him self, for
the peace and quietness of mankind: and so, that he ought to have the chiefest
place in the world: If he be an adversary to the Church, he may hinder and
disturb it very much: but if he be a friend and a member of the Church, he is
a most profitable and excellent member thereof, which may profit it very
much, and finally may help and further it very excellently. His chiefest
duty is, to procure and maintain peace and public tranquillity. Which
doubtless he shall never do more happily, then when he shall be truly
seasoned with the fear of God and true religion, namely when he shall after
the example of most holy Kings and Princes of the people of the Lord,
advance the preaching of the truth, and the pure and sincere faith, and shall
root out lies, and all superstition, with all impiety and Idolatry, and
shall defend the Church of God. For in deed we teach that the care of religion
does chiefly appertain to the holy Magistrate: let him therefore hold the
word of God in his hands, and look that nothing be taught contrary
thereunto. In like manner let him govern the people committed to him of God
look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
with good laws, made according to the word of God. Let him hold them in
discipline, and in their duty, and in obedience, let him exercise judgment by
iudgeing vprightlie, let him not accept any man's person, or receive bribes:
let him deliver widows, fatherles children, and those that be afflicted from
wrong: let him repress, yea and cut of such as are unjust either by deceit, or
by violence. For he has not received the sword of God in vain. Therefore let
him draw forth this sword of God against Romans 13.
all malefactors, seditious persons, thieves, or murderers, oppressors,
blasphemers, perjured persons, and all those whom God has commanded him to
punish or execute. Let him suppress stubborn heretics (which are heretics
in deed, who cease not to blaspheme the majesty of God, and to trouble the
Church, yea and finally to destroy it: but if so be it be necessary to
preserve the saftie of the people by war, let him do it in the name of God,
so that he first seek peace by all means possible, and use it not save only
then, when he can save his subjects no way but by war. And while as the
Magistrate does these things in faith, he serves God by those works, as with
such as be good works, and shall receive a blessing from the Lord.

We condemn the Anabaptists, who as they deny that a christian man should
bear the office of a magistrate, so also they deny that any man can justly
be put to death by the Magistrate, or that the Magistrate may make war, or
that oaths should be performed to the Magistrates, and such like things. For
as God will work the saftie of his people by the Magistrate, whom he has
given to be as it were a father of the world, so all the subjects are
commanded to acknowledge this benefit of God in the Magistrate: therefore let
them honor and reverence the Magistrate, as the minister of God, let them love
him, favor him, and pray for him, as their father, and let them obey all his
just and equal commandments: Finally, let *Look the 2. obseruat.*
them pay all customs and tributes and all other duties of the like sort,
faithfully and willingly. And if the common saftie of the country and
justice require it, and the Magistrate do of necessity make war, let them
lay down their life, and spend their blood for the common saftie and defense
of the Magistrate, and that in the name of God willingly, valiantly, and
cherefullie. For he that opposes himself against the Magistrate, does procure
the wrath of god against him. We condemn therefore all contemners of
Magistrates, as rebels, enemies of the common wealth, seditious villains, and
in a word, all such as do either openly or closely refuse to perform those
duties which they ought to do, etc.

THE CONCLUSION.
WE beseech God our most merciful Father in heaven, that he will bless the
Princes of the people, and us, and his wholl people through Jesus Christ our
only Lord and Savior, to whom be praise, and thanksgiving, both now and
for ever.

OVT OF THE FORMER CONFESSION OF HELVETIA.
Of Magistracy.
Seeing that every Magistrate is of God, his chief duty (except it please him
to exercise a tyranie) consists in this* to defend religion from all
blasphemy, and to procure it, and, as the Prophet teaches out of the word of
the Lord, to put it in practice, so much as in him lies. In which part truly
the first place is given to the pure and free preaching of the word of God,
the instruction of the youth of Citizens, and a right and diligent teaching in
Schools, lawful discipline, a liberal provision for the Ministers of the
Church, and a diligent care for the poor. Secondly to judge the people
according Look the 1. obseruat. upon this confess.
to just and divine laws, to keep judgment and justice, to maintain this
public peace, to cherish the common wealth, and to punish the offenders,
according to the quantity of the fault, in their riches, body, or life: which
things when he does, he performs a due worship or service to God. We know,
that though we be free, we ought wholly in a true faith holilie to submit our
selves to the Magistrate, both with our body, and with all our goods, and
endeavor of mind, also to perform faithfulness, and Look the 2. obseruat.
the oath which we made to him, so far forth as his government is not
evidently repugnant to him, for whose sake we do reverence the Magistrate.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BASIL.
Of Magistracy.
Moreover, God has assigned to the Magistrate, who is his minister, the sword
and chief external power, Romans 13.
for the defense of the good, and to take revenge and punishment of the evil.
Therefore every Christian Magistrate ( Look the 1. obserua. upon this confess.
in the number whereof we also desire to be) does direct all his strength to
this, that among those which are committed to his credit, the name of God may
be sanctified, his kingdom may be enlarged, and men may live according to his
will, with an earnest rooting out of all r^ughtines. And in the margent, This
duty also was enjoined to the heathenish Magistrate, how much more to the
Christian Magistrate ought it to be commended, as to the true substitute of God?

Also, Art. 11. Sect. 1. 3. and 4.
We do clearelie protest, that together with all other doctrines, which are
directly contrary to the sound and pure doctrine of Jesus Christ, we do not
only not receive, but, as abominations and blasphemies, reject and condemn
those strange and erroneous doctrines, which the spirits of hurleburlie, among
other damnable opinions do bring forth, saying, etc. that Magistrates can not
be Christians. And in the margent, The Magistrate does then show himself to be
a good Magistrate, when he is a true Christian.

THE CONCLUSION.
LAst of all, we submit this our Confession to the judgment of the holy
Scripture of the Bible, and therefore we promise, that if out of the foresaid
Scriptures we may be better instructed, we will at all times obey God and his
holy word, most thankefully.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BOHEMIA.
Of the civil power, or civil Magistrate. CHAP. 16.
FVrthermore, it is taught out of the holy Scripture, that the civil
Magistrate is the ordinance of God, and appointed by God: who both takes his
original from God, and by the effectual power of his presence, and continual
aid is maintained to govern the people in those things which appertain to
the life of this body here upon earth: whereby also he is distinguished from
that spiritual Romans 13.
state: whereof is that worthy sentence of Paull, There is no power but of god,
and the power that is, is ordained of god. Then according to these points, all
they that being endued with this authority do bear public offices, of
what kind soever they be, being in the degree of Magistrates, necessarily
must know, acknowledge, and remember this, that they are Gods deputies, and in
his stead, and that God is the Sovereign Lord and King, even of them all, as
well as of other men, to whom at length in the last day they must give an
account, of the degree wherein they were placed, of their dominions, and of the
wholl administration of their government, whereof it is expresselie written in
the book of Wisdom, and else where.

Sap. 6.
And seeing they do govern instead of God upon earth, and are his
Lieuetenants, it is meet that they frame themselves to the example of the
superior Lord, by following, and resembling him, and by learning of him mercy
and justice. As touching these therefore such an instruction has been
delivered, that they who are in authority ought to do good unto others,
according to that which Christ says, Luc. 22.*
They that are mighty are called gracious, or bounteous Lords, and that in
regard of their duty they are especially bound thereunto, and that this is
their special charge, that they cherish among the people without respect of
persons, justice, peace, and all good things that are appertaining unto the
time: that they protect and defend their peaceable subjects, their rightes,
their goods, their life and their bodies, against those that wrong, and
oppress them, or do any ways indammage, or hurt them: also against the
unjust violence of the Turks, together with others that do the like, to
succor and defend them: and so to serve the Lord God herein, that they bear
not the sword in vain, but valiantly, courageously, and faithfully use the
same to execute the will and works of God therewith. Hereof in the holy
Scripture such are called Gods, and of Saint Paull, Psalm. 82. John. 10. Romans
13. 1. Pet. 2.
the Ministers of God. The Magistrate, says he, is the Minister of God for thy
good; who is sent, as Peter says, to take vengeance on those that do evil,
and to give honor unto those that do good.

But for as mueh as the Magistrate is not only the power of God, in that
sort, as the scripture does ascribe that title even to an heathen Magistrate,
as Christ said unto Pilate, Thou could have no power over me, unless it were
given thee from Ioh. 19.
above: but the Christian Magistrate ought also to be a partaker, Apoc. 1. and
1^. 1. Tim. 6. Isa 49. Math. 15. Lu. 13.
and as it were, a minister of the power of the Lamb Jesus Christ, whom God
has in our nature made Lord and King of Kings, that Kings of the earth, who in
times past had been heathen, might come under the power of the Lamb, and give
their glory unto the Church, and become nources thereof: which then began to
be fulfilled, when they received Christian religion, and made them nestes under
the tree of mustard seed, which is faith. Then for this cause the Christian
Magistrate is pecularlie taught to be such a one, that he should well vs^ this
glory and portion of his authority, which he has common with the Lamb, and
that he betray it not to Satan and to Antichrist, unless he will be transformed
into that beast, and hideous Monster, which carries the beast, and that he be
not ashamed of the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, and that by this authority
of his he set forth the truth of the holy gospel, make way for the truth
whersoeuer, be a defender of the ministers and people of Christ, suffer not so
far as in him lies Idolatry, or the tyranny of Antichrist, much less
follow the same, although he be driven to sustein some harm therefore, and so
lay down his crown before the Lamb, and serve him together with the
spiritual Kings and priests of the holy Church, that is, with all the
faithful, and Christians that are called to eternal life. Whereunto also the
second psalm does exhort Magistrates* Psalm. 2.
which it is profitable often to remember, where it is thus read, And now ye
Kings understand, and be ye learned that judge the earth serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice unto him with trembling, Hereupon it follows and is
concluded by force of argument: namely, that whosoever does use in such sort
as has been said, this ordinary power of God and of the Lamb, with patience
in their adversities, as well on the right, as on the left hand, they shall
receive for this thing, and for their labor a large and infinite reward and
blessing of God upon earth, and also in the life to come, through faith in
Christ: and contrariwise upon the wicked, cruel, and bloodthirstie, that
repent not, shall come the pains of Psalm. 82. Sap. 6.
fearful vengeance in this life, and after this life everlasting torment.

Moreover the people also are taught of their duty, and by the word of god are
effectually thereto enforced, that al and every of them, in all things, so
that they be not contrary unto God, perform their obedence to the superior
power, first to the Kings Majesty, then to all Magistrates, and such as are in
authority, in what charge soever they be placed, whether they be of themselves
good men, or evil; so also to al their ministers, and such as are sent with
commission from them, to reverence and honor them, and yeald unto them all
things, whatsoever by right are due unto them; and to perform and pay unto
them, honor, tribute custom, and such like whereunto they are bound. But in
things perteining to men's souls, to faith and eternal salvation, of those
the people is taught, Look the 2. obseruat.
that they ought to obey no man more then God, but God only and his holy word
above al things Math. 22.
and especially, according to that which the Lord commands, Give unto Caesar
the things which are Cesars, and unto God the things which are Gods. But if
some should attempt to remove any from this Christian and true opinion, they
ought to follow the example of the Apostles, who with a bold courage nothing
at all daunted answered the Magistrate and counsel of Jerusalem in this
manner, We ought rather to obey Causa. 11 Quaest. 3. Cap. Si Dominus.
God, then men. Whereof also is to be seen the judgment of the old fathers,
and of the Canon law: where they thus write, and these are the words of S.
Jerome: If the Lord (or magistrate) command those things that are not contrary
to the holy scriptures, let the servant be subject to the Lord: but if (...)
any thing contrary, let him rather obey the Lord of his p^^rit then of his
body. And a little after. If it be good which the Emperor commands, do the
will of him that commands: if it be evil, answer, we ought rather to obey
God then men.

THE CONCLUSION.
ANd hitherto have been informed and showed unto your Majesty in this writing
the reasons and causes of our faith and doctrine and Christian religion: fuch
doctrine as the ministers of our Churches, all and singular, every one
according to the gift of god granted unto him, do with one consent of
judgment hold, talk of, and preach, and do constantly manteine and fight
for the same, not with the power of this world, but by holy scriptures, against
those that impugn it, or by teaching do spread abroad contrary errors
thereunto. Neither yet without that modesty that becomes the profession of
Christians, do they stubbournly rather then rigiouslie persist in this
doctrine, or have at any time heretofore persisted: but if any thing be found
herein not well taken by them, and that by certain grounds out of the word of
god (which ought to be the rule of judgment unto all men) peaceably, and with
a meek spirit (as it ought to be done) be showed unto them, they are ready
and forward, and thereunto, as always heretofore, so now they offer
themselves, that after due consideration and true knowledge of the truth had,
they will most gladly, and thankfully receive that doctrine which shall have
better foundations, and willingly reform whatsoever shall have need to be
amended. Wherefore most excellent King, and gracious Lord, may it please your
Majesty to examine this our confession, and after diligent and due
consideration had, to way and consider whether any man worthelie and for just
cause, may reject, and condemn this doctrine, as not agreeable to the holy
scripture, nor Christian. Verily we are of opinion, that if any man presume
to despise, or condemn this doctrine, he must of necessity also condemn the
holy scripture, from whence it was taken, and the ancient, and true Christian
Doctors, with whom it agrees, and also the holy lie Church it self, which
from the beginning, and that constantly, (...) and does teach. And hereby your
Majesty may graci^^slie perceive and determine, whether the complaints and
accusations of our adversaries, and such as favor not us and our teachers, be
just, or not. Wherefore most humbly we pray, that your sacred Majesty will
give no place or credit to our adversaries, in those matters which diverse ways
without any ground they charge us withal, when as without all humanity they
accuse us, our ministers and preachers, as if we had an other religion, and
taught an other doctrine, then that which at this present we offer unto your
Majesty; or that we presume stubbournlie to take in hand, or do attempt any
other thing against God, and your Majesty, and contrary to the institutions
of this common wealth, and to the public law of the kingdom of Bohemia. And
your Majesty may well call to your remembrance that we have every way, and
at all times, behaved our selves obedientlie and peaceably, and in all things
which may turn or belong to the preservation of your Majesty's person, and to
the public good, and commodity of the whole realm: in all such things, I say,
we have indeauoured not to be behind others: and hereafter also we offer our
selves most ready to perform the same, according to our allegiance and
duty. Neither do we think it only a point of virtue, and to apperteine unto
honesty alone and the good estate of the common wealth, to yield our selves
subject and faithful to your majesty, for peace, concord and the rewards of
this life, but much rather we acknowledge that it pleases God, and that so is
his will, that every one for conscience sake should be obedient to the
Magistrate, and should reverence, love, honor, and highly esteem him: even as
our teachers also do deal both with us, and with the people to perform this,
and oftentimes by teaching out of the word do in force it upon us both.

Here we commend our selves unto your Majesty, as to the fatherly and liberal
tuition, care and protection of our most gracious Lord, and do most humbly
beseech of your Majesty, that unto these things, which on the befalfe of
Christian religion we have tendered unto your Majesty, we may receive a
courteous answer* and such as God may be pleased withal. The almighty and
everlasting God graciously preserve your Majesty in continual health, to the
profit, benefit, and increase of his holy Christian Church. Amen,

Proverb. 20. Mercy and truth preserve the King, for his throne is
established with mercy.

OVT OF THE FRENCH CONFESSION.
Art. 39.
WE believe that God would have the world to be governed by laws, and by
civil gouernmenr, that there mai^ be certain bridles, whereby the immoderate
desires of the world may be restrained, and that therefore he appointed
kingdoms, common wealths, and other kinds of principality, whether they come
by inheritance, or otherwise. And not that alone, but also whatsoever
pertains to the state of righteousness, as they call it, whereof he desires
to be acknowledged the author. Therefore he has also delivered the sword into
the hands of the Magistrates, to wit, that offenses may be repressed, not
only those which are committed against the second table, but also against the
first. Therefore, because of the author of this order, we must not only
fuffer them to rule, whom he has set over us, but also give unto them all
honor and reverence, as unto his ambassadors, and ministers assigned of him
to execute a lawful and holy function.

Also, Art. 40.
THerefore we affirm that we must obey the laws and statutes, that tribute
must be paid, and that we must patiently endure the other burdens, to
conclude, that we must willnglie suffer the yoke of subjection, although the
Magistrate, be infidells, so that the sovereign government of God do remain
wholl or entire, and nothing diminished. Therefore we detest all those, which
do reject all kind of dominion, and bring in a community and confusion of
goods, and who, to conclude, do go about to overthrow al order of law.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF BELGIA.
Art. 3^.
WE believe that the most gracious and mighty God did appoint Kings, Princes,
and Magistrates, because of the corruption and deprauation of mankind, and
that it is his will that this world should be governed by laws, and by a certain
civil government, to punish the faults of m^n, and that all things may be done
in good order among men. Therefore he h^th armed the Magistrates wi^h the
sword, that they may punish the wicked, and defend the good. Moreover it is
their duty, not only to be careful to preserve the civil government but
also to endeavor that the ministry may be preserved, that all Idolatry and
counterfeit worship of God may be clean abolished, that the kingdom of
Antichrist may be overthrown, and that the kingdom of Christ may be
enlarged. To conclude, it is their duty to bring to pass, that the holy word
of the gospel may be preached every where, that all men may serve and
worship God purelie and freely, according to the prescript rule of his word.

Moreover all men of what dignity, condition, or state soever they be, ought
to be subject to their lawful Magistrates, and pay unto them subsidies and
tributes, and obey them in all things, which are not repugnant to the word of
God. Also they must pour out their prayers for them, that God would vouchfafe
to direct them in all their actions, and that we may lead a peaceable and
quiet life under them with all godliness and honesty. Wherefore we condemn the
Anabaptists, and all those troublesome spirits, who do reject higher powers,
and magistrates, overthrow all laws and judgments, make all goods common, and
to conclude, do abolish and confound all those orders and degrees, which God
has appointed among men for honesties sake.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF AVSPVRGE.
COncerning civil affairs they teach, that such civil Art. 16.
ordinances, as be lawful, are the good works and ordinances of God, As Paull
witnesses, The powers which are, be ordained of God. They teach therefore that
it is lawful for Christians to bear offices, to sit in judgment, and to
determine of matters by the Princes laws, or by the laws of the common
wealth, to appoint punishments according to law, to make lawful wars, to
go to war, to deal in bargains and contractes, by laws to hold his own,
to take an oath at the request of the Magistrates, to contract lawful
marriage, and to follow such crafts and sciences as are approved by law.

They condemn the Anabaptists, which forbid Christians these ci^ill offices.
They likewise condemn them which have placed perfection under the Gospel, in
the renouncing of civil offices, whereas it is spiritual, that is, it
consists in the motions of the heart, in the fear, faith, love, and
obedience of God. For the Gospel speaks of a certain eternal righteousness
of the heart, yet does it not take away Civil, or domestical government,
but requires most of all to have them preserved in this bodelie life, as the
ordinances of God, and that we should exercise love and charity in such
ordinances. Wherefore Christians most of necessity obeie the magistrates laws
that now a^e, save only where they command and set forth any sin. For in
such case they must obeie god, rather then men. Act. 4.

These things are thus found in another edition.
Art. 1^.
COncerning civil things, they teach that such civil ordinances as are
lawful ar^ the good works of god, that christians may lawfully bear office,
sit in judgments, determine matters by the Princes or country laws,
lawfully appoint punishments, lawfully make war, be soldiers, make
bargains and contractes, by law hold their own, take an oath when the
magistrates require it, marry a wife, or be given in marriage. They condemn
the Anabaptists, which forbid Christians to meddle with civil offices: as also
those that place the perfection of the Gospel, not in the fear of God and
says, but in forsaking civil offices. For the gospel teaches an everlasting
righteosnes of the heart. In the mean time it does not dissalow order and
government of common wealths, or families, but requires especially the
preservation and maintenance thereof, as of Gods own ordinance, and that in
such ordinances we should exercise love and charity. Christians therefore must
in any wise obeie their Magistrates, and laws, save only then, when they
command any sin. For then they must rather obeie God then men.

We condemn the Anabaptists which do spread Jewish opinions a fresh. They
imagine that the godly before the resurrection, shall possess the kingdoms of
the world, and the wicked and ungodly in all places be destroyed and brought
under. For we are sure that seeing the godly must obeie the Magistrates that
be over them, they must not wring their rule and authority out of their
hands, nor overthrow gouernmentes by sedition, forasmuch as Paul wills
every soul to be subject to the Magistrates. We know also that the Church in
this life is subject to the cross, and that it shall not be glorified till
after this life, as Saint Paull says, We must be made like to the image of
the Son of God, And therefore we do condemn and detest the folly and
deuilish madness of the Anabaptists.

THE CONCLUSION.
THese are the principal articles that seem to have any doubt or
controversy in them. For though we might have spoken of many more abuses, yet
to avoid tediousnes, we have only set down the chiefest, by which it is
easy to judge of the rest. There have bin great complaints of Indulgences and
Pilgrimages, and of the abuse of excommunication, Parishes have been diverse
ways molested by Catchpoles therehaue been many braules and bickerings
berweene parish Priests and Monks about this, who had greater right to the
parish, and about commissions, burials and extraordinary sermons and other
innumerable things* such like matters we have pretermitted, that fuch as are
the principal in this cause, being shortly set down, might the better be
understood. Neither have we here spoken or written any thing to any man's
reproach. Only we have rehearsed such things, as seemed necessary to be
spoken, to the end that it might be seen, that nothing is received among us
in doctrine or ceremonies, contrary to the scripture, or the Catholic
Church. For it is evident, that we have most diligently taken heed that no
new or wicked opinions should creep into the Church. These articles above
written we thought good to exhibit according to the Emperors his highness edict
wherein our confession might be extant, and the sum of that doctrine, which
our teacher do deliver among us, might be seen and known. If any thing be
wanting in this confession, we are ready, if God permit, to yeald a more full
information thereof according to the scriptures.

Another edition has it thus.
WE have set down the sum of the doctrine of the Gospel that is needful
for the Churches. And we are out of doubt that this our judgment in these
points is in deed the doctrine set forth in the writings of of the Prophets
and Apostles, and whereunto the universal Church of Christ does agree and
consent, and whereto the best learned writers of the Church do give testimony
in many places. And we offer our selves to make a more large and ample
explication of these things when need shall require. Now we beseech God, the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he will vouchsafe to rule, preserve,
purge, and increase his Church, which he has purchased and redeemed by the
blood of his son.

Amen.
The faithful, and subjects to the Emperors Majesty.
John Duke of Saxony Elector. George Marquis of Brandembrough. Ernest Duke of
Luneborough. Philip the Lantgraue of the Hesses. John Frederick Duke of
Saxony. Frances Duke of Luneborough. VVolfgang Prince of Anhalt. The Senate
and Magistrates of Nurnborough. The Senate of Reutling.


OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SAXONY.
Artic. 23. Of the civil Magistrate.
BY the benefit of God this part also of doctrine of the authority of the
Magistrate, that bears the sword, and of the authority of Laws and
Judgments, and of the wholl civil state is god^ily set forth: and by great
travel, and many writings the manifold and great furies of the Anabaptists and
other fantastical men are refuted. We teach therefore that in the wholl
doctrine of God delivered by the Apostles and Prophets, the degrees of the
civil state are avouched, and that Magistrates, Laws, order in judgments and
the lawful society of mankind* are not by chance sprung up among men. And
although there be many horrible confusions, which grow from the Devil, and the
madness of men, yet the lawful government and society of men is ordained of
God, and whatsoever order is yet left by the exceeding goodness of God, it is
preserved for the Church sake, as it is said Romans 13. and Psalm. 126. Except the
Lords ke^pe the City, in vain he watches, that keeps it, etc. Therefore in
themselves they are things good, to bear the authority of a Magistrate, to
be a Judge, to be a minister, to execute judgments, to make lawful wars,
and to be a soldiour in lawful wars, etc. And a Christian man may use these
things, as he uses meat, drink, medecines, buying and selling. Neither does
he sin that is a Magistrate, and discharges his vocation, that exercises
judgment, that goes to war, that punishes lawfully those that are
condemned, etc. And subjects owe unto the civil Magistrate obedience, as Paull
says Romans 13. Not only because of wrath, that is, for fear of corporal
punishment, wherewith the rebellious are rewarded by the Magistrate, but also
for conscience sake, that is, rebellion is a sin that offends God, and
withdraws the conscience from God.

This heavenly doctrine we propound unto the Churches, which establishes
lawful authority, and the wholl civil state, and we show the difference of
the Gospel, and the ciu^l^ government. God would have all men to be ruled and
kept in order by civil government, even those that ate not regenerate, and in
this government, the wisdom, justice, and goodness of God toward mankind, is
most clearelie to be seen. His wisdom is declared by order, which is in the
discerning of virtues and vices and in the society of mankind under lawful
government, and in contracts guided and disposed by marvelous wisdom. Then the
justice of God appears in civil government, in that he will have open sins
to be punished by the Magistrates, and when they that are in authority do not
take punishment on offenders, God himself miraculouslie draws them unto
punishment, and proportionablie does lay upon grievous sins, grievous
punishment in this life: as it is said, Mat. 26. Whosoever takes the sword,
shall perish with the sword. and Heb. 3. Whoremongers and adulterers, God will
judge. In these punishments God will have to be seen the differences of
virtues and vices, and will have us learn that God is wise, just, true, and
chaste. The goodness of God also toward mankind is seen* in that he preserves
the society of men after this order. And for that cause does he maintain it,
that from thence his Church may be gathered, and he will have common wealths to
be places for the enterteinment of his Church. And the civil government is one
thing, which keeps in order all men, even those that are not regenerate: and
forgiveness of sins, and righteousness in the heart, which is the beginning of
life and of eternal salvation, which by the voice of the gospel is effected
in the hearts of them that believe, is another thing. Both these benefits god
has bestowed upon mankind, and will have us to understand the difference of
civil justice, and light in our hearts. Neither does the gospel condemn or
overthrow common welthes or families. And although it belong not to those that
teach in the Church, to give particular laws of politic government, yet the
word of God does generally teach this of the power of the Magistrate*

First, God would that the Magistrate without all doubt should sound forth the
voice of the moral law among men, touching discipline, according to the 10.
commandments or the law natural; that is, he would have by the voice of the
Magistrate, first sovereign and immutable laws to be propounded, forbidding
the worship of Idols, blasphemies, periuries, unjust murders, wandering lusts,
breach of wedlock, theft, and fraud in bargains, contracts, and judgments.

The second duty. Let the Magistrate be an obseruer of these divine and
immutable laws, which are witnesses of God, and chief rules of manners, by
punishing all those that transgress the same. For the voice of the law without
punishment and execution is little available to bridle and restrain men.
Therefore it is said by S. Paull, Romans 13. The Magistrate is a terror to him
that does evil, and gives honor to them that do well, And well has it
been said of old, The Magistrate is a keeper of the Law, that is, of the
first and second Table, as concerning discipline and good order.

The third duty of the civil Magistrate is to add unto the law natural,
some other laws, defining the citcumstances of the natural law, and to keep
and maintain the same by punishing the transgressors: but at no hand to
suffer or defend laws contrary to the law of God or nature, as it is written,
Esai. 10. Woe be to them that make wicked laws. For kingdoms are the ordinance
of God, wherein the wisdom and justice of God, that is, just laws ought to
rule, even as the wise King, and one that feared God, Iosaphat said, 2. Chron.
19. Ye exercise not the judgment of men, but of God, who is with you in
judgment. Let the fear of God be with you, and do all things diligently.
For although many in kingdoms do despise the glory of God, yet
notwithstanding this ought to be their especial care, to hear and embrace the
true doctrine of the Son of God, and to cherish the Churches. as the 2.
Psalm speaks, And now ye Kings understand, and be learned ye that judge the
earth. And Psalm. 23. Y^e Princes open your gates, that is, open your kindomes
to the gospel, and give entertainment to the Son of God. and Esa. 49. And
Kings and Queens shallhe thy nurces, that is, let commonwelthes be nurces of
the Church, let them give entertainment to the Church, and to godly studies.
Let Kings and Princes themselves be members of the Church, and rightly
understand the doctrine thereof, and give no help unto those that establish
false doctrine, and exercise unjust cruelty, and remember this saying, I will
honor them that honuor me. And Daniell in the 4. Chap. exhorts the King of
Babylon, to acknowledge the wrath of God, and to show mercy to the bannished
Church, when he says, Redeem thy sins with righteousness and with mercy
toward the poor, and there shallbe a healing of thy transgression. And since
they are among the principal members of the Church, let them provide that
judgment be rightly exercised in the Curch, as Constantine, Theodosius,
Arcadius, Martian, Charles the great, and many godly Kings have provided,
that judgment in the Church should be sincerely executed. But of the
difference of both states, namely of the ministry of the gospel, and the
civil magistracy, there are many writings in our Church, which declare, that
we teach no fantastical nor seditious opinions, but do show the necessary
doctrine delivered in the gospel touching both degrees, profitable to
godliness, and common peace.

Thanks be to God.
THis is the sum of that doctrine, which by the blessing of God with one
consent we teach in our Churches, which to be the sincere meaning of the
doctrine delivered from God in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and
in the Creedes, we nothing doubt, and it may be understood out of the ancient
and purer writers, to be agreeable to the ancient and pu^er Churches. Now the
matter it self declares, that we have not sought to dispute about newfangled,
curious and subtle questions, neither do strive about authority or riches,
but only to unfold and bring to light from the great darkness of traditions
and opinions, that doctrine which is necessary to the true invocation of God,
to true worship, to the right knowledge of the Son of God, and to the
salvation of souls, and do in most simple and plain manner propound the
same unto the Churches. For all wise men must needs confess that there was
much obscurity and many errors in the doctrine of the Monks, and many snares
of conscience in the Popes traditions: and whether doctrine is true, plain,
evident, profitable for consciences, and for manners, comparison does declare.
For we avoid not the judgments of the Godly, yea rather we desire thatthe
wholl true Church of God, that is, all the faithful and learned, wheresoever
they are, may understand what we say, who we doubt not will be witnesses that
this doctrine is the consent of the true Catholic Church of God. Also we
offer our selves at any time, to a more full declaration in in every point;
and we think that this rehearsal of our doctrine now made is agreeable to the
confession exhibited at Auspurge, Anno. 1530.

For as much therefore as the doctrine, which we here recite, is true, and
necessary for the Church, we entreat that our Churches may not be condemned,
as if they either embraced errors, or foolishlie or seditiouslie stirred up
strife without any weighty cause. The truth, and weight of the matters may
deliver us from this unjust accusation. Next after a godly manner, we admonish
the Council itself. They see that old abuses and many great errors are as
yet sticking in the Church, because in all ages even from the beginning of
mankind the devil continues scattering his seed of error, and since that
time through the ignorance of men, by superstition they are either confirmed,
or do shoot forth again. And now for that the vanity of many superstitions
is known, the times require a reformation, and unless the governors provide
that the truth may be brought to light, great division in opinions is like to
follow: especially because in this last age of the world great confusion is to
be feared. Therefore let the council see to it, that they condemn not a
manifest truth. And if in a godly sort they will deliberate how they may provide
for the churches, and if a more ample declaration shall be demanded of us, men
learned, of understanding* loving the truth and fearing god must be chosen, to
consult together of these so weighty matters* Neither let them only strive with
us in number of vices, seeing it is manifest by many preiudices, of what
opinion the Bishop of Rome, and others are, that are adicted unto him, who now
by the space of many years have not only set forth against us edicts written
with blood, but also have slain many of our side: and there be many that
neither understand, nor look after any truth of doctrine, but being already
corrupted with profane persuasions, do think this to be an especial part
of politic men, to defend the present state and to maintain their own
authority. And for this purpose they seek fit Ministers* by sophistical
iugling to ^est out the truth. Wherefore now we testify that we will not
reject the truth, although it be condemned by the judgments of such men. And
we openly profess, that we consent not to the Council of Trent, which
heretofore has sent abroad decrees partly false, partly captious and
sophistical: but do earnestly request that both we may be heard in the same
matter, and that the errors before confirmed by the decrees of the Tridentine
Council may be reformed. And we reverently bese^ch the most worthy Emperor
Carolus Augu^^us that he give not leave to the Adversaries to oppress the
truth by their presumption, and to strengthen their cruelty which they
exercise against innocents, and to stare up greater dissension by their unjust
decrees. And now we commend the Church and our selves to the Son of God our
Lord Jesus Christ, who we know, by the voice of the Gospel gathers together
to himself an everlasting Church: and we pray him that he would govern us,
and not suffer the light of his Gospel to be extinguished, nor the assemblies
of them that rightly call upon him to be dispersed.

AN ADDITION.
AND we request all that teach in the Churches ne^re adjoining or else where,
that receive the Confession exhibited at Auspurge, 1530. that when they read
these things, if in any point they find any want, they would lovingly
admonish us thereof: for that it was not our purpose to bring up any other
kind of doctrine, but plainly to recite the sum of the Confession of
Auspurge, and the common consent of these Churches* and we desire that we may
be favorably, and not quarrelouslie judged of. We purpose not to stir up
new contentions: but especially we pray to the Son of God our Lord Jesus
Christ, that was crucified for us, and rose again, that prayed in his agony,
that we might be one in God, that he would make us also in the most Churches
one in himself. We whose names are subcribed hereunto, who do now teach in
the Churches and Universities under mentioned, do protest that in this writing,
which we desire to have rightly and not quarrelouslie understood, we have
recited the common doctrine published in the Churches and Universities, wherein
we teach the Gospel, and we are persuaded that this is the true, sincere, and
incorrupt doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, agreeing with the Apostles and
Prophets and with the Creedes, and that it is necessary for the Churches, and
we pray our Lord Jesus Christ, who was crucified for us, and rose again, that
he would mercifully govern and defend these Churches.

Also we offer our selves to further declaration in every Article. This was
written Anno 1551. Iulie. 10. in the town of Wirtemberge, where the Pastors
of the Churches near adjoining were met together, etc.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF WIRTEMBERGE.
The Conclusion, which is placed in the latter end of the 35. Chap.
WE have rehearsed those things, which seem good both to be approved, and also
to be refuted, or amended in the Ecclesiastical doctrine, and in the wholl
administration of the Church. And if any thing be spoken either more briefly,
or more obscurelie, then so great a matter would require, our Preachers do
promise that they will expouud them more largely, and more cleerlie. That
which remains, we beseech all the godly through Jesus Christ the son of
God, our only Savior, that (which thing we hope they will do of their own
accord) every one according to his office and calling, would take unto
himself a true and earnest endeavor to reform the Church. It can not be
denied, but that hitherto for these many years not only the discipline of
the Church has decayed, and the manners thereof have been corrupted with
great and horrible vices, and they have very much degenerated from the
honesty of our Elders, but that also the doctrine of the Church has been
depraved in suffering and bearing with corruptions: which if hereafter they be
either dissembled, or confirmed, every man that is but meanly wise may
consider, how great evils are like to follow in the Church of God. Those
execrations and cursings are well known, whereunto the law of god does addict
the transgressors of his word. And Josias the King of Judah, was endued with an
heroical mind, when he repaired the Church, and although the wrath of god was
by his godly repentance and obedience mitigated (after that the Book of the
law was found out, and well known) that those punishments, which the Church of
god at that time had deserved, through the neglect of his word and their
impiety, might be differred till another time yet notwithstanding such was the
severity of god against the contemners of his word, and the impenitent, that
the King although he were very godly, could not altogether take it away from
them, and appease it. Now we think that in these times the wrath of god is no
less, yea much more grievously kindled, and set on fire against the assembly
of his Church, (by reason of so many heinous wicked deeds and offenses, which
even in that people which glories in the name of god, are more evident, then
that they can be denied, and more clear, then that they may be excused) then
in times past, when as yet the Son of god was not made known to the world by
his gospel: And the judgment of god shall be so much the more severe, by how
much his benefits are the greater, which he seems to have bestowed, both in
the former, and also at these present times upon unthankful men.

But both many other things have need of amendment in the Church and ministry
thereof, and especially the doctrine of repentance, Justification, and the use
of the Sacraments, and single life of the Ministers of the Church, do require a
godly amendment. If these things by the mercy of God, and by the diligence
and care of all good men shall be restored, according to the writings of the
Prophets and the Apostles, and according to the true Catholic consent of the
ancient and purer Church, we shall not only give unto god the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ a most acceptable worship, but also the wholl Christian world
shall be stirred up, to declare their thankfulness and obedience in all duetifull
manner that they may. We truly do not know of any error in our Preachers,
either in doctrine, or in the other administration of the Church: yet we do not
doubt, but that they are endued with so great modesty and godliness, that if
they be admonished by the testimony of the heavenly doctrine and by the true
consent of the Catholic Church, they will in no case be wanting to the
edifying of the church And as much as lies in us, and in our government, we
will do our endeavor, that the mercy of godhelping us, none of those duties
may be pretermitted of us, whereby we hope that the true quietness of the
Church, and salvation in Jesus Christ the son of god, may be preserved.

OVT OF THE CONFESSION OF SVEVELAND.
Of Seculare Magistrates. CHAP. 23.
IN the former points we have declared, that our Preachers do place that
obedience which is given unto Magistrates, among good works of the first
degree, and that they teach, that every man ought so much the more diligently
to apply himself to the public laws, by how much he is a more sincere
Christian, and richer in faith. In the next place they teach, that to execute
the office of a Magistrate, it is the most sacred function, which can happen
unto man from God, whereupon also it is come to pass, that they which are
endued with public authority, are in the Scriptures called Gods. For when as
they do justly and orderly behave themselves in their function, it goes
well with the people both in doctrine, and in life: because that God does use
^o to moderate our affairs, that for the greater part, the safety and
destruction of the subjects does depend upon them which are the governors.
Wherefore none do more worthelie execute Magistracy, then they which of all
others are the most Christian, and Bishops and other Ecclesiastical men were
promoted by most godly Emperors and kings to an external government in civil
affairs. Wherein though they were religious and wise, yet in this one point
they offended, because they were not able to discharge both those functions
sufficiently, and it was necessary, that either they should be wanting to the
Churches in ruling them by the word, or to the common wealth, in governing it
by authority.

THE CONCLUSION.
THese be the chief points, most mighty and religiuos Emperor, wherein our
Preachers have somewhat swarued from the common doctrine of preachers, being
forced thereunto by the only authority of the Scriptures, which is worthelie
to be preferred before all other traditions. These things, being so declared,
as the shortness of time would give us leave, we thought it good to offer the^
to your sacred Majesty, and that to this end, that we might both give account
of our faith to thee, whom next unto God we do chiefelie honor and
reverence, and might also show how necessary it is, speedely and earnestly to
consult of a way and mean, whereby a thing of so great importance, may be
known, diligently weighed, and discussed, as the honor which we do
chiefelie owe to God (in whose chief matter it behooves us to be conversant
with fear and and trembling) does require. Secondly, it is a thing worthy of
your sacred Majesty, (which is so much commended for the name of religion and
clemency). To conclude, the very mean to attain to that certain and sound
peace, which your sacred Majesty goes about, does require it: which peace,
seeing that we do vary about faith and religion, can no other ways be
obtained, then when as before all other things the minds be plainly
instructed concerning the truth.

But peradventure it might seem needeles, that we in these matters should use
so many words, seeing that the most famous Prince Electour of Saxony and others
have very largely and soundly declared unto your sacred Majesty those things,
which at this day are in controversy in our holy Religion. But because that
your sacred Majesty has desired that all they, who have any interest in this
business, should declare unto you their judgment concerning Religion, we also
thought it our duty, to confess those things unto your sacred Majesty, which
are taught among us. Howbeit this matter is so large, and comprehends so many
things, that even those things which we have declared on both sides, are as
yet fewer, and more briefly declared, then that we may hope, presently to
have some certeintie determined in the controversies, and that such, as may be
approved, not of all, but at the least of a good part of Christian people: So
few is the number of those that do subscribe to the truth. Therefore seeing
that this matter is so weighty, so diverse and, manifold, and can not fruitfully
be decided, except it be well known and sifted of many, we beseech your sacred
Majesty, and most humbly request you by god and our Savior, whose glory
without doubt you do chiefly seek, that you would procure, as speedily as may
be, that a general, free, and a Christian Council in deed may be summoned,
which hitherto has seemed so necessary a thing* both to your sacred Majesty,
and also to other Princes of the sacred Empire, for the setting of
Ecclesiastical affairs at a stay, that almost in all assemblies throughout the
Empire, which have been gathered together since the beginning of this variance
about religion, both your sacred Majesty's commissioners and other Princes of
the Empire, have openly witnessed, that there was no other way in these
matters, to bring that to pas which might be wholesome. Whereupon in the last
assembly held at Spire, your sacred Majesty gave occasion to hope, that the
Bishop of Rome would notwithstand it, but that such a Council might with speed
be summoned.

But if so be that in time we may not have opportunity for a general
Council, yet at the lest your sacred majesty may appoint a Provincial
assembly, as they call it, of the learned men of every degree and state,
whereunto all, for whom it is expedient to be present, may freely and safely
resort, every man may be heard, and all things may be weighed, and judged, by
such men, whom it is certain, as being endued with the fear of God, to make
the chiefest account of the glory of God. For it is not unknown, how
gravely, and diligently in times past both Emperors and Bishops behaved
themselves in deciding the controversies of faith, which notwithstanding were
oftentimes of much less moment, then those which do presently trouble
Germany, so that they thought it not an unworthy thing for themto examine the
self same things the second, and the third time. Now he that shall consider,
how things stand at this present, he can not doubt, but that at this day there
is greater need, then ever was heretofore, of greater faithfulness gravity,
meeknes, and dexterity, to this end, that the Religion of Christ may be
restored into her place. For if so be that we have the truth, as we do
undoubtedly believe, how much time and labor, I pray you, is requisite that
they may know the truth, without whose consent or patience at the least, sound
peace can not be obtained? But if we do err (from the which we do not doubt
but we be far) again the matter will not require slothful diligence nor a
short time, that so many thousand men may be called into the way again. This
diligenee and time it shall not be so unseemly for your Majesty to bestow,
as it is meet that you should express his mind toward us, in whose stead you
do govern over us, to wit, the mind of Jesus Christ the Savior of us all
who, seeing that he came with this mind, to seek, and to save that which was
perished, so that he vouchsafed also to die, that he might redeem them which
were lost, there is no cause, why your sacred Majesty should think much,
although you should undoubtedly believe, that we are fallen from the truth, to
leave the ninty nine sheep in the wilderness, and to seek for the hundredth,
and to bring it back into the sheepefolde of Christ, that is, to prefer this
business before all other things, that the meaning of Christ in every of these
things, which at this present are in controversy, may out of the Scriptures be
plainly and certeinlie laid open unto us, though we be but a few in number
and of the meaner sort, and we for our parts will show our selves willing to be
taught, (only let all obstinacy be removed) so that it may be lawful to
hear the voice of our shepherd Jesus Christ: and let all things stay and rest
upon the Scriptures (which teach whatsoever is good) whereunto we shall be
called. For if it should so fall out, that the care of teaching us being
rejected, there should compendious forms of Edicts be sought (which we do
nothing fear whilst the matter is in the hand of your sacred Majesty) it can
not be said, into what straightes innumerable thousands of men should be
brought, to wit, of those, whom, as being persuaded that God is chiefly to
be heard, and then that those things which follow as opinions must stay upon
the undoubted oracles of God, these sayings of our Savior do always appale:
Fear not them which kill the body. He that shall loose his soul, shall find
it. He that shall not hate Father and Mother, etc. yea even his own soul, he
can not be my Disciple. He that shall be ashamed of me, before this froward and
adulterous nation, of him will I be ashamed before my Father and his Angels,
And such like.

Many men being moved with these thundering speeches, have resolved with
themselves to suffer all extremity: and many for fear of death do rather
seek delays, but yet waiting for a fit opportunity, if they should be dealt
withalin this matter by authority, before they be dealt withal by doctrine,
and by force, before their error should be made known unto them. For of what
force a sound persuasion of Religion is, and how it makes men to make no
account not only of their goods, but also of their lives, it has bin seen
more then sufficiently in very many, even within these 10. years (that we may
say nothing of the former ages) who have willingly suffered not only
banishments and proscriptions, but also torments, and death it self, rather
then they would suffer themselves to be withdrawn from that judgment which
they had conceived, and which they believed to be true. If now a days when as
there is contention of those lighter matters, there be but a few to be found,
whom a man may bring to unfeigned concord, except they may be persuaded of the
law, or the equity of conditions, how, when as the controversy is of
Religion, shall we look for true peace, and an undoubted tranquillity in
these matters, to wit, such a one as your sacred Majesty goes about to
establish, except that on both sides it be agreed upon, what things they be
that God does approve, and what things be agreeable to the Scriptures? For as
Religion, by right, and by the custom of al nations, is preferred before all
other things, so there never was any more vehement or sharp fight among men,
then that which is undertaken for Religion. But we, seeing that your sacred
Majesty has used such an unspeakable clemency toward your enemies, and those
such, as have pretermitted no kind of hostility, that we may let pass other
things, have not without cause received great hope, that you will so moderate
all things even in this matter also, that you will much more seek for the
praise of goodness and courtesy in us, who are most desirous of your safety
and honor, as we have in deed testified, and do from the bottom of ourhearts
desire yet farther to testify. For we have dealt so moderately in all points,
that we have made it evident enough to all good men, that it was never in our
mind to hurt any man, or deceitful to increase our commodities by the
discommodities of other men. In deed we have sustained dangers for this cause,
and spent exceeding much, but we have not gained no not so much as a little
thereby, this one thing excepted, that we being better instructed, touching the
goodness of God showed unto us through Christ, we have begun (by the grace of
God) to hope better of those things which are to come: and of that we do by
right make so great account, that we do not think that we either have done, or
suffered any thing as yet worthy thereof, seeing that it is an inestimable
thing, and to be preferred above all things, which are in heaven or in earth.
We have bin so far from emparing the riches of Ecclesiastical men, that when
the husbandmen were in an vprour, we, to our great costs and dangers, defended
them to their uses. The Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, as surely as we
would that he should love us, is the only thing that enforces us, and has
caused us to do all these things, which we seem to have altered.

Therefore let it please your sacred Majesty rather to follow the examples of
these most mighty and in deed happy Emperors, Constantine, Iouinian,
Theodosius, and such like, who both by doctrine daily taught in all meekenes
by most holy and vigilant Bishops, and also by Councels lawfully assembled,
and by a wise discussing of al things, did deal with them that erred, and
assaied all means to bring them again into the way, before that they would
determine any thing more sharply against them; then to follow those, who it is
certain had such counselors, as were most unlike to those ancient and holy
Fathers in deed, and received an event nothing answerable to the godliness of
those Fathers. In consideration hereof let not your sacred Majesty be
withdrawn with this, that the chiefest matters, which are now in controversy,
were decided long since, and chiefly in the Council held at Constance,
especially seeing you may see, that of those innumerable, no less holy then
necessary decrees of the former Counsels, there is not so much as the least
point observed of our Ecclesiastical men, and that they have so degenerated in
all things, that no man which is but endued with common sense, does not cry
out, that there is need of a Council, to restore Religion, and the holiness of
the Ecclesiastical order. But if that does like them so well which was decreed
at Constance, how comes it to pass, that by no means at all that decree
ever since took place, that Christian Counsels should be assembled every tenth
year? the which thing was at that time decreed. For by this mean much
godliness and faith might either be recovered, or preserved.

But what is he that will not confess, that so often as the disease waxes
fresh, so often the remedy is to be used, and they which have the truth in deed
do never think it much, both that good men should teach it, and also defend it
against the evil sort, where any fruit thereof may be hoped for? Now when as
so many thousand are so miserably entangled in the opinions of our religion,
who can deny that there is hope of most plentiful fruit, and such as has
justly enforced al those that are governed by the spirit of Christ, that
omitting all other things whatsoever, contemning all kind of labor and cost,
they may give themselue wholly to this one thing, that the doctrine of Christ,
which is the mother of all righteousness and salvation, may be worthelie weighed
or considered, purged from al errors, and offered in it natural color to all
those that love godliness and the true worship of God, to the end that a peace,
and and such as may be firm for even, and a true setting of al holy things at
a stay, may be restored and confirmed to the sheep of Chrtst, for whom he
has shed his blood, which are now too much troubled and wa^ering. The which
peace can by no other mean, as we said, be restored and confirmed unto them, as
being certain that in other things they are in some sort to yeald or to give
place, but in the matter of godliness, they are so to stick, and bend themselves
to the word of God, that if they had a thousand lives, they should offer them
to be tormented, rather then to yeald one jot, or in the least point, which
they are persuaded to be the word of God. Now if one only soul be of more
value then the wholl world, what ought we to do for the salvation of many
thousands? Certeinlie seeing we are allured by so great a hope, both by this,
that they which are accused to your sacred Majesty of error, do desire
nothing else but that they may be taught, and have wholly addicted themselves
to the holy scriptures, which are fully sufficient to confute every error:
and also thereby, that Christ our Savior has made so large a promise, that
where even two or three be gathered together in his name, there he will be in
the midst of them, and grant unto them any thing whereupon they shall agree.

These things, most godly Emperor, we do here rehearse for no other cause,
then to show our selves obedient to your sacred Majesty, which would have us
also to declare what is our judgment, concerning the reforming of religion.
For otherwise we have good hope that your sacred Majesty has of late very
well considered, and does sufficiently perceive, what necessity does enforce
us thereunto, what fruit does allure us, and to conclude, how worthy a thing
this is for your sacred Majesty, which is so much praised for religion and
clemency, that all the best learned and most godly men being called
together, they may find out of the divine scriptures, what is to be thought
of every point of doctrine, which are at this time in controversy, and then
that it be expounded by the fit Ministers of Christ, with all meekenes and
faithfulness, to them which are thought to be detained in errors.
Notwithstanding herewithall it is to be feared, that there will not be men
wanting, who will do their endeavor to withdraw your sacred Majesty from
this: unto these men it seemed good to us in this sort to make auswere as it
were before your Majesty. Let it please your sacred Majesty, according to your
most excellent clemency, for which you are renowned, to take and interpret in
good part both this same, and all other things, (which we have here expounded
and confessed, for no other respect, then to defend the glory of Christ Jesus
our God, as our duty requires, and, as it is meet we should, to obey your
sacred Majesty) and to count us among those, who truly do from our hearts
desire to show our selves no less obedient and addicted to your Majesty in
all humble subjection, then were our Elders, being ready in this point, so
far as is lawful, to spend both our goods and our lives. The King of glory
Jesus Christ grant unto your sacred Majesty, both in this and in all other
matters, to do all things to his glory, and preserve it long, and advance it
happily both in health, and in flourishing estate, to the safety of all
Christendom.

Amen.
VERY BRIEF OBSERVATIONS UPON ALL THE FORMER HARMONY.
Wherein the doubtful sayings of every Confession are made plain, the dark
speeches opened, and besides such as in outward show seem to be contrary one
to the other, are with modesty reconciled: And to be brief, such things
wherein there is yet any controversy (which in deed are very few) are
favorably marked and noted, that they also may at length through Gods
assistance come to be agreed upon, by a common consent of all the Churches.

1. Cor. 14. 32. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

Phil. 3. 15. Let us therefore so many as be perfect be thus minded: and if ye
be otherwise minded, God shall reueal even the same unto you. Nevertheless, in
that whereunto we are come, let us proceed by one rule, that we may mind one
theng.

VERY BRIEF OBSERVATIONS UPON THE FORMER HARMONY, ACCORDING TO THE ORDER OF
THE SECTIONS.
IN THE FIRST SECTION.
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
Obs. 1. pa. 7.
ACcording to the ancient custom. This ancient custom we do thus far
allow, that liberty be left to every Church to use, or not to use those
Postills, as they call them: yet so as we advise them to beware, lest this
culling out of some parts of the Scripture, bring in a neglect of the other
parts.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
Joining our Prayers with all Saints in heaven. We learn in many places of the
holy Scripture, that the Angels, according to the nature of their ministry
which they are sent to perform, do further the salvation of the godly: and
it is evident by that saying, Love does not fall away, and by the 6. chap.
ver. 10. of the Apoc. that the spirits of the Saints taken up unto Christ, do
with their holy desires, in some sort help forward the grace and goodness of
God, touching the full deliverance of the Church. And thus we acknowledge, that
as well this, and other places of the same confefsion, as also that place in the
23. Chap. of the confession of Writemberge, which follows after in the 2.
Section, page 45. are to be interpreted. And we acknowledge no other
intercession or entreating either of the blessed Angels, or of the spirits of
holy men, that are now departed from us.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Obser. 1. pa. 13.
OF whose authority there was never doubt made. What books these be, may be
seen outit of the French and Bellgian Confessions, where they are all reckoned
up one by one. And though that in the Catalogue of the books of the new.
Testament there are some to to be found of which there has been some doubt
made sometimes by the ancient Doctors of the Church, yet at length by the
common consent of the whole Catholic Church even they also were received and
acknowledged for canonical. And therefore there is no cause, why they should
now be refused, for the scruples that some make about them.

IN THE 2. SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Heluetia.
FOr as touching their nature and essence they are so joined together. Obsar.
1. pa. 19.
Lest any man should slander us, as though we did make the persons al existing
together, but not all of the same essence, or else did make a God of diverse
natures joined together in one, you must understand this joining together, so
as that all the persons (though distinct one from the other in properties) be
yet but one and the same whole godhead: or so, that all and every of the
persons have the whole and absolute godhead.

Upon the same.
WE reject not the gods only of the Gentiles, but also the Obser. 2. pa. 20.
images of Christians. By Christians understand such as call themselves
Christians in deed, but yet do retain the use of images for the service of
religion, against the express commandment of God.

Upon the former Confession of Heluetia.
Rejecting herein all means of life and salvation save Christ Obser. 1. pa. 23.
alone. Understand it thus, that here are excluded and condemned all those
means that use to be matched with, or made inferior unto Christ, by such as
be superstitious: and not isntrumental means, ordained by the word of God*
whose help god does so use, that the whole force of the outward ministry is
to be ascribed wholly to God alone, as is plainly set down afterward in the
12. Section, in the declaration of this self same confession, where it
entreats of the ministry and sacrifices.

Obser. 1. pa. 26.
Upon the Confession Of Bohemia.
IS above all to be honored with high worship. To wit, with religious
worship, and such as properly respects the conscience, which is all wholly
due to God alone, as it is in plain terms afterwades set down, lest any
man should think, that that false and impious distinction of Latria, dulia,
and hyperdulia (if so be that it be referred to religious worship) should
here be confirmed. For otherwise as for civil honor, which is due to the
higher powers, and to some other for honesty and orders sake, we are so far
from rejecting it, that we teach, that seeing it is commanded of God, it
cannot be neglected of us, without some wound of conscience.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. pa. 27.
SHe was made a dear companion of Christ by the holy Ghost through faith.
Understand this of that peculiar grace and mercy which was bestowed upon Marie
alone, whereby she was made the Mother of God that bare him, and was also
endued with an excellent faith: and not as though any duties of the only
Mediator Christ, either of redemption or of intercession, were to be
attributed to her, as afterward in plain words is expresselie declared.

Obser. 3. pa. 27.
Upon the same.
MVch less their images. The meaning of this is, that we are bound to honor
in the Lord both the saints that are alive, and also the memory of them that
are dead. But to their images we are not to give any show of worship whether
religious or civil, for as much as that cannot be attempted without abominable
superstition.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
Obs. 1. p. 37.
OFfer up their prayers by the Son of God, as in the end of the prayers it
is accustomed to be said, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, etc. These words do
not excuse the popish prayers unto Saints, which they conclude with this
term of words, for that he speaks here, of godly prayers unto God, and
not of Idolatrous and superstitious prayers to saints.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
Obs. 1. p. 43.
THere is no dout but such as are in bliss pray for the Church, etc. Look
the first observation upon this confession above in the 1. Section.

Upon the same
VVAsting Gods gifts in vain. Concerning wasting and Obs. 2. p. 44.
losing of the spirit and of the gifts of the same, look the first observation
upon this confession in the 4. Section following.

IN THE 4. SECTION.
Obs. 1. p. 68.
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
THey teach also that we must acknowledge our weakness. The terms of
imbecillitie and difficulty, which this confession uses in many places, must
be referred either to the regenerate (in whom the spirit struggling with the
flesh, can not without a wonderful conflict get the upper hand) or else unto
that strife between reason and the affections, whereof the Philosophers speak,
in which not the spirit with the flesh (for the spirit is through grace in the
regenerate only) but the relics of judgment and conscience, (that is, of the
Image of God) which for the most part are faulty, do strive with the will
wholly corrupted: according to the saying of the Poet, I see the better, and
like it well, but follow the worse, etc. Which thing is largely and plainly
set forth in the latter Confession of Heluetia.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. p. 68.
IT could not rise again or recover that fall. This is thus to be taken, not
as though the first grace does find us only weak and feeble before
regeneration, whereas we are rather stark dead in our sins, and therefore
we must be quickened by the first grace, and after we be once quickened by the
first, be helped by the second following, and confirmed and strengthened by the
same continuing with us to the end of our race.

Upon the Confession of Belgia.
Obs. 1. p. 7^.
THerefore whatsoever things are taught as touching man's free will, etc. This
general word Whatsoever we take to appertain to those things only, which
either the Pelagians, or Papists, or any other have taught, touching this
point, contrary to the authority of the Scripture.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
Obs. ^. p 74.
THat which in this confession is said touching the liberty of man's nature to
perform a civil justice, and cited out of the 3. book hypognosticon (which
is fathered upon Augustine) we are taught it out of another place of the same
Father, namely in his book de gratia ad Valentinum. Cap. 20.) whose words are
these. The holy Scripture if it be well looked into does show, that not only
the good wills of men (which God makes good of evil, and having made them
good, does guide them unto good actions and to eternal lfie) but also those
which are for the preservation of the creature in this life, are so in gods
power, that he makes them bend, when he will, and whether he will, either to
bestow benefits upon some, or to inflict punishments upon others, according as
he does appoint in his most secret, and yet without doubt most just judgment.

Upon the same,
THis spiritual justice is wrought in us, when we are helped by the holy
Ghost. And a little after, In these sure we had Obs. 2. p. 74. and 75.
need to be guided and helped of the holy Spirit, according to that saying of
Paull, The Spirit helps our infirmities, etc. Understand this not of any
natural faculty, which unto any good thing in deed, is none at all, but of
the will regenerated, which is very weak, except it be aided by another
grace, even unto the end. And so also must it be understood which is said a
little after, that The law of God can not be fullfilled by man's nature, to
wit, though it be changed and renewed, according as we have declared in the
former observations upon the confession of Bohemia, which we advise you to
look over.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. pa 75.
Man's nature can by it felfe perform, etc. By it self, that is, by it own
proper and inward motion, yet so, as the working and goodness of God, who
vpholdeth the society of men, is not excluded, which does not indeed renew a
man, but preserves that reason which is left in him (though it be corrupt)
against the unbridled affections, and disperseth the darkness of the mind,
lest it ouerspread the light that remains, and represseth the disorder of the
affections, lest they burst forth into act.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
Obser. 1. pa. ^0.
THat which is both here and elsewhere in this Confession, and now and then in
the Confession of Auspurge, repeated, touching the shaking of and losing the
holy Spirit, we take it thus, that it is chiefly meant of the gifts which are
bestowed, even upon those also which pertain nothing to the Church (as in
Socrates, Aristides, Cicero, and some others there shined certain sparks of
excellent virtues) Secondly of those gifts also, which are bestowed upon those
that are so in the Church, that yet they are not of the Church, nor truly
regenerated by the Spirit of adoption, as may be seen in the examples of
Saull, Judas, and such others. For as concerning the spirit of sanctification,
which is only in those that are truly regenerated, it is never taken wholly
from them; but only the force and working thereof for a time interrupted,
whilst lusts do bear swaie in the heart, even as drunkenness does not take
away the mind it self, but only the use of the mind for a time.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. pa ^1.
NOR are sins against the conscience. We take the meaning to be this. That
the elect are said to sin not against their wholl conscience, or so as sin
reigns in them, but that albeit they often yield and fall down, yet they rush
not into sins with a full purpose and deliberation, and that as yet the
spirit (though for a time it yeldeth to the flesh) does wrestle and strive in
them, till at length by power from above it gets the upper hand again.

IN THE 6. SECTION.
Obser. 1. pa. 92.
Upon the latter Confession of Heluetia.
THis Jesus Christ our Lord is the only and eternal Savior of mankind, yea
of the wholl world. This which is said distinctlie of saving the wholl world,
we take to be meant of the restoring of the world at the last: wherein
notwithstanding men must not harken to vain speculations, which are besides
the word of God.

Upon the former confession of Heluetia.
Obser. 1. pa. 94.
Simply rejecting all mean. Look the 1. observation upon this confession in
the 2. Section, where these very same words are set down.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
Obser. 1. pa. 97.
COncerning Christ his presence, etc. Concerning the presence of Christ in his
church ever since his ascension, and so to continue until his second coming,
we teach this in plain and evident words: (And we do not think that the
brethren are of any other mind in this point) Namely that the person of Christ
may not be divided, but that both the substance of the natures and their
essential proprieties, ought evermore of necessity to be kept and retained.
And therefore that Christ according to his deity is truly and essentiallie
with us in the earth, as he is also in heaven, not only as filling a place,
(in which manner he is every where) but also by his peculiar saving virtue; in
respect whereof he is said not only to be, but also to dwell in the Saints
alone, and in none else. But according to the humane nature being above the
heavens, he is neither visiblie nor invisibly now in the earth, but only hy
his effectual working and most mighty power, when as the god head by means
of the Communication of his humanity with us spirituallie by faith, works
that in the believers, which he works to their salvation.

Upon the Confession of Belgia.
Obs. 1. p. 103
But two natures joined together in one person: that is, united
hypostaticallie, or per sonallie.

Obs. 1. p. 108
Upon the Confession of Saxony.
We do not see as yet, etc. To wit, plainly and perfectly.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Obse. 1. page 108.
TO procure the eternal salvation of mankind, that is, to bring to pass.

IN THE 7. SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Heluetia.
Obs. 1. page 110.
THe wholl will of God, etc. Understand, as concerning those things which men
are bound to perform to God, and also to their neighbors.

Obs. 2. page 111. Obs. 3. page 111. Obs. 4. page 111. Obs. 5. page 111.
Any flesh, that is, any man, although he be regenerate.

The law of God, to wit, the moral law, comprehended in the 10. Commandments.

In the law, to wit, in the moral law.

The Scripture of the law, to wit, the ceremonial law.

IN THE 8. SECTION.
Upon the Cenfession of Bohemia.
Obs. 1. page 218.
Moreover the penitent are taught: Vnderstanstand those penitent, whose sins
are examined in the Ecclesiastical judgment: who are enjoined to give a
testimony of their repentance, til the sentence of absolution be prounced: yet
so, that every Church may keep her liberty, both in this kind of examination,
and also in the testimony of repentance and, in the administration of private
absolution.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. page 219.
AN external testimony of their repentance. Look the observation that does
immediately go before this.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
Obs. 1* page 223.
THey may find: yea and it may in deed be given to those, which do truly
repent.

Obs. 2. page 223.
Upon the same.
ANd that the Church: That is, the Presbytery, or the College which does
represent the Church, as Mat. 18. 17. Therefore this can not fitly be
understood, either of al kind of sinners, or else of private absolution, but
only of those, which were first bound by the Presbytery. For certainly the
wholl assembly of the Church can not be said to absolve the penitent, which is
a part of the holy Ministry, (as shall hereafter be made evident in the 11.
Sect.) but to gathertogether those who do satisfy it, so much as in it lies,
to wit, by the consent and approbation of it.

Upon the same.
Obs. 3. page 224.
THat the calamities of this life may be assuaged by good works, yet not so, as
though any good works did deserve this mitigation, but it is of the mere
mercy and grace of God.

Upon the same.
THey condemn the Anabaptister, who deny that they who be once justified,
can again lose the Spirit of God, etc. We also Obs. 4. page 224.
do condemn the Anabaptists, although we do deny, that they which are once
justified do altogether lose the holy Ghost, but yet not so, as they do
deny it. For they confound the holy Ghost, not only with the spirit of the
flesh, but also with those Satanicall furies, wherewith they be tossed. Again,
neither do they know, neither will they know, what faith is, and who are in
deed justified. But we do teach, that the holy Ghost is to be discerned by
the word of God, that is, by the Prophetical and Apostolical writings, from
the Spirit of darkness, although he do transform himself into an Angel of
light: And we distinguish the gifts of the holy Ghost which are without
repentance (to wit, the Spirit of adoption, and an assured persuasion, which is
proper to the Elect and to those that are truly justified) from the temporal
gifts, of which sort is that counterfeit or resemblance of faith, to wit,
atemporall faith. Neither do we deny, that the motions, even of those gifts
which are without repentance, are discontinued, and sometimes almost
extinguished, yet so, that the very true root being once planted in those,
that be truly justified, does persevere in them without repentance even to
the end.

Upon the same.
Obser. 5. pa. 226. 227.
THat private absolution is to be retained in the Church, etc. but also to
every one in particular, etc. How far and upon what condition, private
absolution is to be retained in the Church, we have declared a little before in
the first observation upon the Confession of Bohemia. But here it is in deed a
miracle, to have that applied to the use of the keys, which Christ spoke of
private admonition between private persons, to wit, Thou have gained thy
brother.

Upon the same.
Obser. 6. pa. 229.
THose ancient customs were in time worn out of use. Be it that those
painful punishments and satisfactions, which can not, especially at these
times, be brought into use again, but that they will do more hurt then good, be
worn out of use, yet notwithstanding this does nothing hinder but that every
church, as it knows what is expedient, may appoint a certain kind of
Censure or Ecclesiastical discipline, which it may use, where need so
requires, that the Church may be satisfied, as we have noted before in the
first observation upon the Confession of Bohemia, and hereafter in the 10.
Sect. and in the third observation upon the Confession of Bohemia.

Upon the same.
Obser. 7. pa. ^2^.
WE give men warning of this also, etc. How temporal punishments may be said,
sometime to be differred, and some time to be mitigated by good works we have
declared a little before, to wit, in the third observation upon this confession.
Moreover, the word merit, both in the words which follow (Repentance deserved
that God should alter his purpose, touching the destruction of Niniuie:) and
also in other places* wheresoever either this or other Confessions do use it,
it is without doubt thus to be taken, for that which we say, to obtain, and
to get, as it is often times used among the ancient Latin deuines. And
whereas God here is said to have changed his mind, we do not doubt, but that
our brethren do understand it, as spoken after the manner of men, as when he
is said to Repent him of some thing: or else it is to be referred to the
outward preaching of Jonas. For as concerning God himself, it was only a
threatening, and not a sentence decreed.

Upon the confession of Saxony.
Obs. 1. page 231.
WE affirm that the Ceremony of private absolution is to be, retained in the
Church. How far we think that this private confession and absolution is to
be retained in the Church, we have declared a little before, to wit, in the
first observation upon the Confession of Bohemia.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. page 232.
In true Confession there must be these chaunges, a mortification and a
quicking, Romans 6. etc. This is most truly said, but in a diverse sense. For
neither is contrition, or a sense of sin, which is a fruit of sin common to
al, signified by the name of mortification (insomuch as it is a gift of the
holy Ghost, proper to the Elect) but an abolishing of the old man or of the
flesh, or of that natural corruption, which taking it beginning of that
contrition or sorrow, which is according to God, (whereof that place Psalm. 5.
19. and Esa. 66. 2. is understood) is by little and little perfited in the elect,
and is the beginning of true conversion, whereunto on the other side quickening
is answerable, that is, a certain restoring, as it were from death unto life,
of the mind, which was before in a manner dead in that corruption: and being
persuaded of the free remission of sins in Christ, by faith, it begins to
hate sin, wherewith it was delighted: to love God, whom it hated, and to
conclude, to will well, and to do vprightlie.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. pa. 233.
To shake of God, and again to loose, etc. Look those things which are noted
in the first observation, of the 4. Section upon this Confession.

Upon the same.
Obser. 4. pa. 234.
This wholl custom was appointed for examples sake, and is political, etc. We
do think that this custom of publious satisfaction before the Church is in
such sort political, that notwithstanding it may be referred to the
Ecclesiastical order, and may altogether be distinguished from those
punishments which are meerelie civil, and from those which are to be
inflicted by the civil Magistrate. For although such a public kind of
acknowledging and d^te^^ing of sins, being made in the Church, is in no case
to be thought, to be of any value before God for the ransom of our sins
(such less that it should be a Sacrament) yet we do not doubt, but that this
abasing is both acceptable to God, and commodious for the edifying of the
Church, and that in such places, wherein it may be fruitfullie used.

Upon the same.
Obser. 5. pa. 234.
Has no commandment to inioyne such punishments, etc. But it has a
commandment lawfully to bind and to loose, and to try by diligent search,
which is true repentance. Concerning which thing look what we have spoken a
little before in the 2. observation upon the confession of Auspurge, and is
hereafter taught more at large in the 11. Section, where we do expresselie
entreat of the power of the keys.

Upon the same.
Obser. 6. pa. 235.
Are chiefly mitigated for the Son of God, etc. Where the question is of
the Church of God, we say, that all blessings, without any exception, are
bestowed upon it, and the members thereof, not chiefelie, but only for the
Son of God his sake. And these words, Even for the very conuersions sake our
punishments are mitigated, because that in the Saints the legal promises
being added to their works are not without their effect, but have their
rewards, etc. ought, as they seem, to be thus taken, by adding to them this
interpretation, They are not without their effect, but that must be of mere
grace, and in respect of Christ alone, in whom God does vouchsafe even to
reward both the Saints themselves, and also good works* having no regard to
the blemishes of their works* as we have said before in the 3. and 7.
obseruatious upon the confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Obser. 7. page 236.
I^ does only pro^unce this sentence, etc. To wit, according to the
Ecclesiastical judgments and censures, whereof we (...) before, and not by
any civil authority* (...) as they be^^armed in Papacy, use to do.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Obser 1. page 238*
ALthough we think, that it is not necessary to salvation, to reckon (...)
etc. yet we endeavor, that a general confession of (...) be retained in our
Churches, etc. Seeing that these things perteine not to the Doctrine of faith,
but unto the use of Ecclesiastical discipline (of the liberty whereof in
particular Churches we have oftentimes spoken elsewhere) we do not think it
good, that this law should be brought into our Churches, being made, and
received in other places, beside the word of God, and the custom of the
ancient pure Church, which did never require private confession of every one
of those which did profess the Christian Religion, but only of them, of
whose sins knowledge was taken in the assembly.

IN THE 9. SECTION.
Obser. ^. page 254*
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
BUT such works as are taught of men, what show soever they have even of
goodness, are in no case to be so highly esteemed, as those whieh are
commanded of God. Understand this of those works which yet are not
willworship, and devises of man's brain. For such are wholly to be rejected, as
is also said of such, a little after, that are not of faith, but contrary to
faith.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. page 25^.
By taking heed that they fall not into mortal sin. Look the 2.
observation upon the Saxony Confession in the 4. Sect.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. page 25^*
First for this cause, that is, for diverse causes, whereof this is one, Lest
that the grace of faith which we have already, etc.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
Obs. 1 p. 26^
THe Gospel bewraieth our sin. These words ^eeme thus to be understood,
that the Gospel should bewray all kind of sin, yet not properly and by it
self. For the proper difference between the law and the Gospel, is to be held
fast, to wit, that the Gospel does properly, reprove the sin of infidellity,
and by an accident all other sins also: but the law does properly reprove
all sins whatsoever are committed against it.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. page ^66.
And deserves reward. Touching the word of meriting or deserving, which this
Confession uses often in this Section. Look before in the 8. Sect. the 7.
obseruat. upon this same Confession, and look the 1. obseruat. upon the
Confess. of Wirtemb. in this Section. And again after in the 16. Sect. the
first obseruat. on this Confess.

Upon the same.
Obs. 3. page 266.
Living in mortal sin. Look before in the 4. Sect. the 2. obseruat, upon
the Confess. of Saxony

Obs. 4. page 266.
Nor the righteousness of works. Look before in the 4. Sect. the 1. obser.
upon the Confession of Saxony.

Upon the same.
Obs. 5. page 268.
And like as the preaching of repentance is general, so the promise of grace.
General, that is offered to all sorts of men indefinitely, as well to one as to
another, without difference of country, sex, place, time, or age. But we can
not conceive how repentance and the promise of grace can be said to be preached
universally to every nation, much less, to all men particularly, for as
much as experience does plainly prove that to be untrue.

Upon the same.
Obs. 6. p. 269
Here needs no disputation of predestination. Even as we do abhor curious
disputations, that is, such as pass the bounds of Gods word, touching
predestination (of which sort we take these words to be meant) as most
dangerous matters for grievous falls: so we affirm, that whatsoever the holy
ghost does teach touching this point in the holy Scriptures, is warily and
wisely to be propounded and believed in the Church, as well as other parts of
Christian Religion: which thing the Doctors of the Church, both old and new,
did, and among the rest Master Luther himself in his book, de seruo arbitrio,
and else where.

Upon the same.
Obs. ^. pa^ 273.
That they be necessary. We take them to be necessary, because they do
necessarily follow the true faith, whereby we are justified, not that they
concur unto the working of our justification in Christ, as either principal
or secundarie causes, for that faith it self, as it is an inherent quality
does not justify, but only in as much as it does apprehend and lay hold on
Christ our righteousness.

Obs. 8. pa* 275.
Upon the same.
Albeit that men by their own strength, be able to do outward honest deeds,
etc. Look in the 4. Sect. the 3. obseruat. upon this Confess.

Obs. 9. page 275.
Upon the same.
Moreover nature by it self is weak. Without Christ and without regeneration,
the nature of man can do nothing but sin. For God by his grace does create
the hability of thinking, willing, and doing well, not helping the old man in
that he wants, but by little and little abolishing it. According to that
saying, When we were dead in sins, etc. Ephesians. 2. But touching the weakness of
our nature, look that which was said, in the 1. observation upon the
Confession of Bohemia. Section. 4.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
BEcause that God left this liberty in man after his fall. Here also look in
the 4. Sect. the 1. obseru. upon the Confession Obs. 1. page 282.
of Bohemia, and the 3. upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. pa^* 292.
Therefore although men by the natural strength. Look here again the 1.
observation upon the Confession of Bohemia in the 4. Sect. and also the 9.
obser. upon the Confess. of Auspurge in this same Sect.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Obs. 1. page 300.
WE teach that good works are necessarily to be done, and do deserve, etc.
That is, obtain, and that (as it is ^ell added by and by after) by the free
mercy and goodness of God. Touching which point look the 7. obser. upon the
Confession of Auspurge in the 8. Section. the 2. obser. upon the same Confess.
in this Sect. Also touching the necessity of good works, look the 7. obser.
upon the same Confess. in this self same Sect.

IN THE 10. SECTION.
Upon the latter Confession of Heluetia.
Obser. 1. pa. ^08.
ANd no marvel if it err. How and in what respect the visible Church
considered universally is said to err, it is afterward declared more fully
in this same Confession.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
Obser. 1. pa. ^16.
THe Heathenish life. This saying the breethren in Bohemia did themselves
expound thus unto us in their letters, to wit, that they speak here of the
notes of the visible Church, which are all jointly to be considered, that
look where both the errors of Idolaters and heretics and impiety of life do
openly ouerflow, there it can not safely be affirmed, that the visible Church
of Christ is to be seen, or is at all. And yet notwithstanding there is no
doubt to be made but some secret true members of Christ, and such as it may be
are only known to God, be there hid, and therefore that there is a Church
even in Popery, as it were overwhelmed and drowned, whence God will fetch out
his elect and gather them to the visible Churches that are restored and
reformed, whereas Popery never was, nor is the true Church.

Upon the same.
But he that loses: In what sense we think that a true Obser. 2. pa. 316.
faith may be lost, we have declared before in the fourth Sect. in the first
observation of the Confession of Saxony, and else where.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. pa. 318.
By Ecclesiastical punishment, which is commonly called, etc. We take this to
be so meant, as that notwithstanding every Church has her liberty left unto
her what way to exercise such discipline, as is before said in the 1. obser.
upon this same confess. in the 8. Sect. As for this particular cursing, to wit,
of this or that man, if the word be taken for a (...) vnrepealable casting out
from the Church of God, (...) it to God alone; and therefore we would not (...)
in our Churches. For the Church uses only (...) as determines nothing
finally, following S. (...) 22.

Obser. 4. pa. 318.
Upon the same.
(...) that is, reprove him, and admonish him (...).

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
Obser. 1. pa* 329.
The sentence of excommunication, etc. Look before in the 3. obser. upon the
confess. of Bohemia in this same section.

Obser. 1. pa. 332.
Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Has authority to bear witness of the holy scripture. This authority and
right you must understand in this respect that the true Church of God
discerning the Canonical books of the scripture from al others teaches and
defends that nothing is to be added to or taken from the canon of the old
Hebrew, or the new Scripture of the Christians.

Obser. 2. pa. 332.
Upon the same.
Authority to judge al doctrines and to interpret scripture. To this we yeald,
with these cautions. First, that in the iudgeing of controversies, not any
judges whatsoever do take unto them selves the name of the Church: but that as
the matter and importance of the cause does require, judges lawfully chosen,
whether more or fewer, whether in an ordinary assembly of a particular
Church, or in a more general meeting, ordinary or extraordinary, provincial
or general, be appointed to judge of the matter. Secondly, that there be free
obedience, and free giving of voices. Thirdly, that all controversies be
determined out of the word of God alone, yet so as the fathers judgments be
not condemned, but laid to the only rule of Gods word (according as they
themselves would have us to do) Now the Church is said to judge of doctrine,
not that it is above the truth of the doctrine, or that the doctrine is
therefore true, because the Church has so judged, but in as much as the Church
being taught and confirmed out of the word by the holy Ghost, does
acknowledge and hold fast the true doctrine and teach men to hold it fast, and
condemns, and rejects, and teaches to reject all other strange doctrines.

IN THE 11. SECTION.
Upon the latter confession of Heluetia.
Obs. 1. page 339.
ANd such are found among us, etc. To wit, interpreters of the Scriptures, that
were endued with a special gift of the spirit thereunto. For as touching the
visions of Prophets, and those extraordinary motions, and inspirations of the
holy spirit, this gift, as also the gift of tongues and of healings, being
fitted for the confirmation of the church, when it was beginning, is now long
since ceased, after that the wholl Counsel of God touching our salvation, was
plainly revealed, howbeit God yet can, when he will, raise it up again.

Obs. 2. page 339.
Upon the same.
And were also Preachers of the Gospel. Such as the Apostles did join unto
themselves as helpers, and sent them now to this place, now to that: and these
also are no more in use, since the Churches were settled in good order: Of which
sort, diverse are mentioned in the Acts, and in the Epistles of the Apostles.

Upon the same.
Obs. 3. page 339.
Bishops were the overseers and watchmen of the Church which did distribute,
etc. Taking this name for those, which in a more strict signification are
called Deacons, and are distinguished from them, which attend upon the
preaching of the word.

Upon the same.
Obs. 4. page 339.
Provide things necessary for it. To wit, spiritual things, by teaching,
reproouing, correcting, instructing both all in general, and man by man
particularly, yet tied to their special flocks and charges.

Upon the same
Obs. 5. page 343.
Now the power given to all the ministers. To wit, of the word, that is, the
Pastors, and Doctors, whose diverse functions are afterward more fully set
forth.

Upon the former Confession of Heluetia.
Obs. 1. page 347.
BY the voice of God. As namely if at any time, the lawful ordinary vocation
being quite abolished (as it has fallen out under the Papacy, God by his
spirit has extraordinarily raised up certain men. Which thing when it
appears by their fruits, then the liking and approbation of the Church
reformed being added thereunto, they are confirmed in their calling. For
otherwise while the lawful order of calling stands in the Church, no man may
enter into the ministry, but by that door.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. page 347.
By the laying on of hands of the Priest. By Priest, take that they mean him
that is appointed out of the College and company of the Pastors, for to set
him, that is lawfully chosen, as it were into the possession of his
ministry, in the fight and presence of the wholl Church. Now as touching the
very rite of this ordination, every Church has it own liberty, so that both
alike, superstition and occasion of superstition, be avoided.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
Obs. 1. page 351.
BY laying on of hands. Look before the 2. observation upon the former
Confession of Heluetia, and look after in the 14. chap. of this same Confess.
and the 1. obser. upon this Confess. in the 13. Sect.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. page 351.
Hereof speaks the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Yet not properly,
for he disputes of the Leuiticall Priesthood, which was abrogated by Christ,
and not of the ministry under Christ.

Upon the same.
Obs. 3. page 352.
Are a long time, etc. Let the reader thus take these words, not as though this
same order were prescribed unto all and singular Churches, or were observed of
all: seeing we neither have any commmaundement touching that matter, neither can
it every where be performed: But that this is very carefully to be looked
unto, that none but he that is furnished with learning, and an approved
integrity and vprightnes be advanced to any Ecclesiastical functions.

Upon the same.
Obser. 4. pa. 354.
And Sodomiticall life. That is, of an unclean life given to riot, and
excess. as Ezech. cap. 16. ver. 49. charge the inhabitants of Sodom.

Upon the same.
Obser. 5. pa. 355.
Especially those, etc. Once again this is to be taken, as that we must know
that this law of working with their own hands, is not prescribed to the
Churches.

Obser. 6. pa. 356.
Upon the same.
Such as are to lay on hands. Touching this ri^e look before in the 2.
obseru. upon the former Confession of Heluetia.

Obser. 7. pa. 357.
Upon the same.
To each several Ecclesiastical societies. That is, to Presbyteries or
consistories, which stand of Pastors and Elders: and unto whom properly the
dispensing and ordering of the Keys, and Ecclesiastical Censures do belong.
As afterward is taught in the fifth observation upon the Confess. of Auspurge.

Obser. 8. pa. 357.
Upon the same.
That every Christian, so often as he needs these Keys, etc. ought to
require them. This is to be interpreted by those things, which we spoke of
private absolution in the eight Section, in the 1. observation upon this
Confession, and the first upon the Confession of Saxony.

Upon the same.
Obser. 9. pa. 358.
That the priests ought not. Whom they mean by the name of Priests it has
bin already showed before in the 2. obser. upon the former Confession of
Heluetia, and shall straight after be repeated in the 3. observation upon the
English Confession, in which signification it is henceforward to be taken in
all the Confessions.

Upon the English Confession.
Obser. 1. pa. 361.
ANd is Lucifer. It is grown to a custom to call Satan Lucifer, the Prince of
Devils, upon a place of Esaie misunderstood of some of the aunciet Fathers.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. pa. 361.
By open excommunication. There is also a certain kind of excommunication
which is not public or open, and is used only for a trial of repentance.
Again, this is so to be taken, that (as we have often before admonished) all and
singular Churches may keep their holy liberty both in or^aining and putting
in practice this manner of discipline. So that there be good heed taken that
the flock be not infected with a contagion of obstinacy, and that the sacred
mysteries be not cast to dogs and swine.

Obser. 3. pa. 362.
Upon the same.
Unto the unbelieving a savor of death. This must be understood, to be the
accidental, and not the proper end of the Ministry of the Gospel, arising
not of the Gospel it self, but of the contempt of the Gospel. But this
application of the similitude of the keys (for the opening of all men's
consciences) which this Confession does often use, seems to be somewhat far
from the meaning of Christ.

Upon the same.
Obser. 4. pa. 362.
That the Priest in deed. Touching the name of Priests, look the 2.
observation upon the former Confession of Heluetia. Again it must be
understood that (when the question is of Ecclesiastical Censures) the lawful
intelligence of the S^^gniorie must go before the Priests iudgeing. That
which is said* touching power or authority, must be understood of civil power,
which Ecclesiastical functions have not at all: or else, of the authority of
making laws to men's consciences, which rests wholly in Christ the only
lawgiuer, according to whose prescript and appointment, his ministers ought to
judge and determine in the Churches.

Obser. 5. pa. 363.
Upon the same.
Yea and the Bishop of Rome: and a little after, except he go to work. By
Bishop understand not him, that now sitting Pope at Rome is called of other and
terms himself universal Bishop, but such a Pastor, as being lawfully called
in the Church of Rome (if there were any true Church to be found) did with his
fellow laborers discharge a Christian ministry.

Obser. 1. pa. 365.
Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
No more then does the skill of Music, namely because it has a diverse scope,
not that there is no more affinite or agreement between the Ecclesiastical
ministry and the civil government, then between a musition and a magistrate,
when as they do both tend directly unto the self same only, though by means
distinct and diverse one from the other: and also both the Ministers in matters
civil be subject to the Magistrate, and the Magistrate in matters belonging to
conscience is subject to the Ecclesiastical ministry, and one does lean and
stay it self upon the other, and one aid and succor the other.

Von the same.
Obs. 2. page 365.
The Magistrate is to defend, not the mind, but the bodies. This also is to be
understood, as that notwithstanding this, the Magistrate is the keeper and
defender of both tables of this law.

Upon the same.
Obs. 3. page 366.
If so be the Bishops have, etc. This do we also acknowledge to be most true:
but we say, that it was neither lawful for the Princes to derive this power
unto Bishops, nor for the Bishops to take it when it was offered, because the
Lord has so distinguished these two, as he has also severed them the one from
the other. And the Apostle does expressly forbid ministers to entangle
themselves in the things of this life: yea and the Apostles them selves did
cast of even the care of the alms from themselves unto the Deacons, that they
might attend upon the word and prayers.

Upon the same.
Obs. 4. page 366.
To debar the wicked, etc. To wit, by the judgment and verdict of the
Presbytery lawfully gathered together, and not by the will and determination
of any one man, as was noted before in the third obseru. upon the English
Confession.

Upon the same.
The Churches must perform unto them, To wit, to the Ministers Obs. 5. page
366.
of the word, and to the Elders, and not to such alone as now by the law of man
carry the name of Bishops, as proper and peculiar to themselves alone, which is
common to all Pastors equally, as Hierome can testify.

Upon the same.
Obs. 6. page 3^6.
If so be they have any other power, etc. they have it by man's law. It seems
the band of marriage should be excepted, the knowledge whereof, by Gods law,
belongs to the Pastors, and namely in this respect, that it can not be
judged firm and sure, or void and frustrate, but by the word of God,
according to that: That which God has coupled, let not man put asunder:
touching which point look the 1. obseru. upon the former confession of
Heluetia, and the 2. upon the Confess. of Wirtemb. in the 18. Section.

Obs. 7. page 368.
Upon the same.
Christ. Though Christ would also be the Minister of the circumcision, yet we
would not have him raunged in the same order with others, whether they be
Prophets or Apostles.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Obs. 1* page ^72.
IF we speak of the Mediator of praying. Look the 2. obseru. upon the
Confession of Saxony in the 1. Sect.

Obs. 2. page 373.
Upon the same.
That except a Priest be ordained. To wit, when question is of such Elders or
Priests, as did attend upon the preaching of the word. For there was also
another fort of Elders whom the Apostle calls governors, 1. Cor 12.

IN THE 12. SECTION.
Obse. 1. page 380.
Upon the latter Confession of Heluetia.
THe thing signified is regeneration. That is, the blood of Christ, by virtue
whereof we are regenerated and washed from our sins. For to speak properly,
the thing signified by the water, is the blood, and by sprinkling the washing
from sins and regeneration is signified.

Obs. 1. page 382.
Upon the former Confession of Heluetia.
THe thing it self is regeneration. Look the Observation that went next
before upon the latter Confession of Heluetia. Obs. 2. page 382.


But the thing is the communication of the body, etc. that is, the body and
blood of Christ, communicated to us spirituallie by faith, to the remission of
sins, and to eternal life.

Upon the declaration of the said former Confession of Heluetia.

Obs. 1. page 383. Obs. 2. page 384.
Visiblie show, that is, show by setting forth visible signs.

Upon the same.
The Minister does convert. To wit, as the isntrumental outward cause, which
the holy spirit uses, to work those things inwardly, which are preached to
us outwardly,

Upon the confession of Basil.
Obser 1. pa. 386.
TO testify our faith. Hereunto add also the other ends and effects, which
are more fully set forth in other confessions.

Obser. 1. page 387.
Upon the confession of Bohemia.
EIther entirely. Entire, that is, lawful liberty, such as ^oth agree with
Christ his institution.

Obser 2. page 389.
Upon the same.
They do always exercise their virtue. This must warily be understood. For
properly the sacraments do witness, seal, or confirm no other thing, but
grace and salvation. The condemnation of such as use them unworthily does not
flow from any virtue or power of the sacraments, which does avail only to
salvation, but only from the fault of the vnworthe themselves, (whereby it
comes to pass, and that by an accident) that whilst they receive the signs
alone, and that unworthily, they deprive themselves of the virtue of the
sacraments: and yet for all that they cease not on gods behalf to be perfect
sacraments, whether they be given to the worthy, or to the unworthy: touching
which point, look after in the 14. Section the 1. and 2. observations upon the
confession of Auspurge.

IN THE 13. SECTION.
Obser. 1. pa. 396.
Upon the lattter Confession of Heluetia.
THat is the most perfect form of Baptism, etc. Understand by form, the
external ceremony, whether it be of dipping, or of sprinkeling.

Obser. 2. pa. 396.
Upon the same.
We think them nothing necessary, etc. Yea we have utterly rejected some of
them, as mere superstitious, some as being manifestly brought by the
negligence of Bishopps, from the Baptism of those which be of age, unto the
baptism of infantes, and some, to be short, as altogether unprofitable, as it
is clearelie expounded in the Confession of Writemberge.

Obser. 1. pa. 400.
Upon the Confession Of Bohemia.
BY the laying on of hands, etc. This wholl ceremony is profitablie kept in
the churches of Bohemia, not as a point of Doctrine, but as a part of
Ecclesiastical discipline, without (...) preiodice to the liberty of other
Churches: seeing that it is no where commanded in the writings of the (...)
does this confession therefore approve (...) which they d^e falselie call a
(...) which is added, that they which are thus (...) into the covenant of
Baptism, it is (...) a little after, to wit, so far forth (...) that grace
which they received in Baptism, is by this (...) manifest to the Church, and
to them that are baptized.

Obser. 1. pa. 403.
Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
THat it is necessary to salvation, etc. Understand this by those things,
which afterward were declared in the agreement made at Wirtemberge 1536. the
29. of May, where these words be read: Master Luther and his fellows do
agree upon this, that by the power of Christ, even those which are not
Baptized, may be saved: But it is necessary that these should not contemn
Baptism. And hence it is that they will have infants to be Baptized of
necessity, etc

Obser. 2. pa. 404.
Upon the same.
And hold that infants are saved, and. Look the former observation. We also
condemn the Catabaptists, who do either forbid the Baptism of Infants, or
else teach, that it is by no means necessary.

Obser. 1. pa. 405.
Upon the confession of Saxony.
ANd that the holy Ghost is given in Baptism, etc. That is, that it is in
deed offered indifferently to all, but is received only by faith, and not
given, to wit, through faith for the works sake: And that it is so received,
as that neither faith, nor the efficacy of Faith, are necessarily to be
referred to that very moment, wherein any one is baptized. Moreover in the
very form of the administration of Baptism, we use in our Churches to
declare, that baptism is not only a pledge of our Renewing, but also, and that
chiefly lie of the remission of sins.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. page 405.
That Baptism is necessary, etc. Look the 1. obseru. upon the Confess. of
Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Obs. 3. page 405.
And to those only, etc. And a little after, Because that then they be grafted
into the Church. How we understand this grafting look before in the former
Confession of Heluetia, Art. 21.

IN THE 14. SECTION
Upon the latter Confession of Heluetia.
NOt as they be corporally eaten. The aduerb (so far as) understand to be used
causallie, for because, as if he Obs. 1. page 413.
had said, not that they be eaten corporally, etc. But in this place and other
places else where afterward so understand these aduerbs corporally, and
spirituallie, that by them not the thing signified, which is received, but the
manner of receiving it is declared, namely, to be not corporal, but
spiritual, that is, not of the external mouth, but of the faithful mind.

Upon the former Confession of Heluetia.
THese things be holy, and to be reverenced, etc. by holy understand those
things, which are appointed to a most holy use, not those wherein consists
any inherent holiness. Obs. 1. page 417.
In like manner by reverent, understand those things which are to be received
with outward comelines, and in that order, which might testify an internal
reverence: namely, when our minds are lifted up unto God, not that any
worship ought to be yealded to the signs themselves, or that those rites,
which are either in their own nature superstitious, or else may easily be
turned into superstition, ought to be used in the holy service of the Lord.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
THat which of themselves they do signify, etc. that is, to say, of the true
bread and wine, and also of the very body, that was given for us, and of the
very blood, that Obs. 1. page 422.
was shed for us. As for that attribution wherein the bread is said to be the
body, and wine to be the blood, even in this Confession it is evidently set
down, that it ought to be interpteted by a sacramental metonymie.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. page 423.
And the truth thereof. By the word truth in this place understand, not the
fruit of the Sacraments, which is received of the faithful only, neither
yet the very body and blood of Christ (seeing that they also can not be
received but by faith, to salvation) but the bread and the wine, the which
(whether worthy, or unworthy communicantes do approach) are never, in respect
of God, offered to be received, without the thing signified, because the truth
of God depends not upon the worthiness, or unworthiness of the communicants.
Yet hereby it cannot be concluded, that both of them are received of every one,
because both of them are always offered by God to al indifferently.
Concerning which matter look before in the 12. Section and second observation
upon the confession of the Waldenses, or Bohemians, and also very fully
hereafter in the first observation upon the confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. page 425.
Moreover absolution from sins, is lawfully administered, etc. look the 8.
Section upon the Confession of Bohemia, Auspurge, and Saxony.

Obser. 4. page 425.
Upon the same.
Most commonly falling down on their knees, etc. In this rite also suppose
that every Church ought to have her liberty not that we do utterly in it
self condemn this manner (so that the caution be added, whereof we spoke of
late in the 4. obser.) but because that for the rooting of the superstitious
worshipping of the bread out of men's minds, it were more expedient that that
ceremony in most places were abolished in the receiving of the signs
themselves: whereof look before in the first observation upon the former
confession of Heluetia.

Obser. 1. (...) 426.
Upon the French Confession.
THe substance of his body and blood, etc. The French Churches have witnessed
in general Synods, that they after the example of the ancient Fathers do use
the word substance: not as if the very substance of Christ were conveyed into
the bread, or derived into us any manner of way, either corporal, or
unspeakable, or that it were applied to our corporal substance (seeing that
it verily is now in heaven, and no where else, unto the last day, and we in
earth and no where else) but to meet, with the slander of those men, which
think that we in stead of the very body and blood of Christ do place only
his merits, or his spiritual force and operation, whereas notwithstanding we
do teach, that we though spirituallie and mystically, yet not withstanding
truly) do participate Christ himself, not that either we should cleave
essentiallie unto him, or he unto us, but that his life is derived into us.
Look also concerning this matter in the first observation upon the confession
of Auspurge, in this Section.

Upon the confession of Belgia.
Obs 1. page 431.
ALL the operations of the holy Ghost are hidden, etc. That is to say, both
when the proper force of the holy spirit, which is incomprehensible, is
regarded, and seeing that his effects do exceed our senses. Both which do
come to pass in these mysteries.

Upon the same.
Obs. 2. page 431.
That which is eaten, etc. Namely by faith, as it is often iterated in this
confession, that is to say, that which is received spirituallie, by the mind,
by believing, as the sign is eaten and dronken corporally. For the words
eating and drinking can no otherwise be spoken of the mind and of faith (which
are the only instruments of receiving the very body and blood of Christ)
then metaphoricallie or metonymicallie.

Upon the same.
Obs. 3. page 432.
By the eating of his flesh, and drinking of his blood, etc. That is (as has
been said in the former observation) by a spiritual participation, the which
sometimes by reason of the sacramental receiving, and (sometimes by reason of
that spiritual life, which Christ ingendereth in us is metaphoricallie
signified, by the names of eating or drinking.

Obs. 4. page 432.
Upon the same.
Although the sacraments be joined to the thing, etc. Of the sacramental
union we have spoken before, in the second observation upon the Confession of
Bohemia.

Upon the confession of Auspurge.
Obs. 1. page 432.
THat the body and blood of Christ are there in deed, and are distributed, etc.
We also do allow of this, namely that the word of God is not deceitful, and
therefore as often as the holy signs are rightly given, that is, according to
Christ his institution, that then also the thing signified by the sign (which
is the very body of Christ crucified for us, and the very blood of Christ
shedd for us) is also given to be received. But we affirm that the thing
signified is no otherwise coupled with the sign, then sacramentallie. The
truth of which sacramental conjunction, does not consist in this, that
wheresoever the sign is, there the thing represented by the sign, should also
be present, but in this, that that which God promises by the sign, he also
does offer to be received. Therefore we hold that the body of Christ is not
really present in, with, or under the bread, otherwise then after this
sacramental manner* both because it is a true body, being circumscribed in his
local situation, and also has truly ascended from the earth, above the
heavens, that be subject to our sight, and shall there remain (from whence he
exercises a government over al these beneath, even as he is man) until he
come truly from thence to judge both quick and dead. Moreover we do also
avouch that as the signs are offered to the body, so the things signified
are offered to the mind* and therefore that the signs are received of every
one with the hand and mouth, that come unto the supper: the which unto some,
namely, to the worthy receiuets, do turn unto salvation, but unto others,
that is, the unworthy communicants* by reason of the profanation of the signs,
and contempt of the thing signified, they do turn to condemnation. As for the
things signified those we affirm to be truly, and effectually apprehended,
only of those that be endued with a right mind and a true faith,, and that
always unto salvation, whereunto the distance of place is no hinderance, by
reason of the unspeakable operation of the holy Ghost. And yet not so as that
the substances should be mingled betwixt themselves, or cleave together in any
place (for Christ's flesh abides in heaven, and ours upon the earth) but that
(these things being mystically united* which in true distance of situation are
separated) we might draw from the flesh of Christ all gifts necessary for our
salvation, and especially that lively iuise whereby we are nourished to
eternal life. Therefore whatsoever they pretend which are of the contrary
judgment, the controversy is not either of the sign, or of the things
signified, or of the truth of the sacraments, or of the receiving of them, or
of the effects; but of the only definition of the sacramental conjunction,
and also of the manner of receiving the things signified. Both which we
contend to be so interpreted by some out of the word of God, that if their
opinion be once granted, both the truth of Christ's body, his assention into
heaven, and his second coming is consequently overthrown. Look the
exposition of this article expressed in the diverse editions of the Auspurge
confession, though not after the same manner, and in the same words, and for
the full declaration thereof look in the admonition lately set forth by our
brethren the Neustadians in the 5. chapter, out of the which our agreement in
this point of doctrine rightly declared does appear.

upon the same. Art. 1. Of the abuses.
Obser. 2. pa. 433.
For the Mass is retained still amongst us, etc. The Princes, and Divines in
the assembly at Newburdge testified in the year 1561. as is manifest by the
decrees of that assembly, that they by the word Mass, do understand the
administration of the Supper, and do from the bottom of their hearts detest
the Romish Mass. And although we do abhor all contentions about words, and
do acknowledge that the word Mass is not newly sprung up in the latin
Church: yet seeing that the original of this term (namely because alms were
sent from the faithful in their usual meetings at their love feasts) is long
since abolished, and seeing that this word has these many years broken out
into great abomination, and so great, that none so gross or execrable was
ever heard of, we do not with out cause together with the thing abolish the
name it self out of our Churches. As for the holy liturgy there, we think
that it is most rightly celebrated, where it is most simply and most nearelie
unto the first institution observed. And seeing it is manifest that the
ceremonies in the Roman Liturgy are partly in them selves unprofitable,
partly tending rather to an ambitious show and pomp, then to edification,
partly ridiculous, and partly either in themselves superstitious, or else
ready to be turned into superstition. Therefore the most of them, or in a
manner all, we have in every place utterly swept away. Yet so as that the
Church has her liberty leftin things indifferent, as it is meet, and shall be
declared in the 17. Section. As for the speaking or singing of any thing in the
public Liturgy, in such a tongue, as is unknown to the common people,
unless there be an interpreter, the Apostle does plainly forbid it, 1. Cor.
14.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. pa. 436.
A Ceremony, in the new covenant, without faith does merit nothing, etc. No,
nor yet in the old Testament: yea neither any ceremony, nor faith it self
does merit any thing, but whereas the external work being performed with
faith, according to Gods commandment, is acceptable unto him, all that we
teach out of Gods word to be of grace and not of debt. Whereof look the 8.
Section, and the 7. observation, the 9. Section and the second observation unto
the same Confession of Auspurge.

Obser. 4. pa. 438.
Upon the same.
The Pastors of the Churches do consecrate, etc. By the name of consecration
we understand no other thing, then the use of Christ's ordination by whose
blessing and power the elements are sanctified unto us, whereof depends the
wholl force and dignity of the sacraments.

Upon the same.
Obser. 5. pa. 438.
Every holy day, and other days also, if any be desirous to use the
sacrament, etc. Of holy days is spoken afterward in the 16. Section. But in
our Churches certain days by public warning are appointed, wherein if any
refuse to receive the Supper, they answer for it in the Consistory.

Upon the same, about the end of the 2. Article of abuses. Obser. 6. pa. 446.

And because that the parting, etc. This verily is one cause why the carrying
about of the Sacrament is condemned: yet neither the only cause, nor the
chiefest.

Upon the Confession of Saxony.
ANd that he is in thee, etc. This we admit, touching the Obser. 1. pa. 447.
spiritual efficacy, not concerning the very essence of the flesh: the which
is now in heaven and no where else, as has been before showed in the 1.
observation upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. pa. 448.
Neither are any admitted to the Communion, etc. This we allow, as being
understood of Catechizing or instruction. As for private absolution, how far
we think it to be required, it has bin showed of us heretofore, namely in
the 8. Section, and 1. observation, both upon this, and also upon the
Confession of Bohemia.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. pa. 448.
That Christ is truly and substantiallie present, etc. Look the 1. and 2.
observation upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Obser. 4. pa. 448.
That Christ witnesses, that he is in them, and does make them his members,
etc. Both these also we do embrace, as is contained in the word of God,
namely so, that this wholl dwelling be by his power and efficacy, and that the
flesh of Christ be communicated unto us, yet after a spiritual and mystical
manner, as has bin declared of us before, both in the Confession of Bohemia
and of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Obser. 5. pa. 448.
And lessons appointed, etc. How far we do allow this distribution of the
holy scripture* look the 1. observation upon the Confession of Bohemia, the
1. Section.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Obser. 1. pa. 454.
That the true body of Christ, etc. Look before in the first observation upon
the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Of the body of Christ being only absent, etc. We do believe Obser. 2. pa.
454.
out of the word of God, and by the perpetual and evident agreement of the
wholl ancient and true Church, that the body of Christ has always bin, is,
and shall be circumscribed and local* Wherefore, as when he lived upon the
earth, he was no where else, so now also being above in heaven, he is there,
and no where else in his substance, as Vigilius plainly affirms against
Eutiches. Yet for all that we do not affirm, that the very body of Christ is
only or simply absent, or that the bread and wine are only simple and naked
signs, or bare Pictures, or nothing else, but certain tokens of Christian
profession. For in this sense is there one only action of the holy Supper,
that yet notwithstanding it should be partly corporal, and celebrated upon
the earth (in which respect we doubt not to say that Christ's body is as far
distant from us, as heaven is from the earth) partly heavenly the mind and
faith lifting up the heart unto God: in the which respect we acknowledge, that
the body of the Lord is present in the Supper to our mind and faith. But that
they be bare and naked signs, how can we possibly affirm which so often and
so evidently have beaten upon this, that the things signified are no less
certainly given unto the mind, then the signs themselves unto the body.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. pa. 454.
Or else change them into the body and blood, etc. We se not how God may be
said to be able to do that which is manifestly repugnant to his own will,
concerning the everlasting truth of Christ's body, as it has bin opened unto us
in the word of God.

Upon the same.
Obser. 4. pa. 454.
But for the truth of the sacraments etc. The truth of the Sacrament we
affirm wholly to consist in this, that there be not any vain signification
of the signs: but that that which is signified unto them by the body, is
indeed given unto the mind to be received by faith. As has more fully been
spoken heretofore in the first observation upon the Confession of Auspurge.

Upon the same.
Obser. 5. pa* 455.
But that whole Christ, etc. But we say by the institution of God, that the
body* by the delivering of the bread, is given unto us as true meat: and that
his blood by the pouring of the wine is given unto us as distinctlie as true
drink* yet both of them to be received with the mind and with faith, and not
with the mouth. Notwithstanding that by this dispensation (which in respect of
the thing signified is distinctlie made, and in regard of the signs themselves
severally distributed) that nothing is divided in the humanity of Christ.

Upon the same.
Obser. 6. pa. 456.
Therefore to the right action of the Eucharist, etc. This we do so grant to be
true, that notwithstanding we do also know that the supper of the Lord is not
private unto two, but that it appertains to the wholl Church, or at the least
to some one part of the same.

IN THE 15. SECTION.
Upon the former Confession of Heluetia.
Obser. 1. pa. 4^8.
TO the people every day, etc. to wit, where it may be done commodiouslie:
but in other places as often as may be.

IN THE 16. SECTION.
Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
Obser. 1. pa* 506. 4^*
OF this sort be certain days appointed for fasts and holydaies, etc. And a
little after, to the remembrance of holy men, as of the Virgin Marie, etc. Also
a little after, in the 17. Chap. Holy days consecrated to the Virgin. etc.
Also, That the Saints are truly worshipped, etc As certain Churches do so
far submit themselves to the infirmity of them, with whom they be
conversant, as to observe these things, though they do disagree very much, yea
though they be altogether contrary in the manner thereof: so most Churches not
being compelled by any such necessity, have without the offense of other
Churches, utterly abolished even these things also, not only as unprofitable,
but as hurtful.

Upon the same.
Obser. 1. pa. 486.
Do make godly and Christian songs of her, etc. Also a little after, and sing
profitable songs, and such as are free from superstition, etc. Herein also let
the Churches use their liberty, to edifying: and let that be very carefully
avoided in this song, which has happened in extolling the praises chiefly of
the Virgin Marie: lest that whilst God seems to be praised in his Saints, the
Saints being transformed into Idols, the worship which is due to God alone, be
again transferred unto them. Howbeit they truly seem to be the wiser, who
do not suffer any thing to be either taught or sung in the Church of God,
beside the word of God, interpreted in a tongue peculiar to the people, and in
singing do keep this mean, that the greatest part of the time may be spent,
rather in hearing, then in singing of the word of God: and that which is sung
may so be sung, that the minds may rather be instructed, then the ears
delighted with any broken music.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
Obser. 1. pa. 495.
ANd meritorious works. Although we are persuaded, that such meritorious
works be not meant in this place, as by their own worthiness do deserve any
thing, but that they be acceptable to God, and are crowned, not according to
debt, but according to grace, yet we can not approve this improper speech, by
what interpretation soever it be qualified, as we have already in certain
places noted before, Sect. 8. obser. 7. upon this confess. Also Sect. 9. obse.
2. upon the same; and obser. 1. upon the Confess. of Wirtemb.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. pa. 498.
The order of lessons in the Mass, etc. Also we have declared before Sect. 14.
obser. 2. upon the same Confess. of Auspurge, why we do worthily detest even
the very name of the Mass, and as touching holidaies, or fasts, we spoke
thereof in the Confess. of the Waldenses, or Bohemia, going next before this.

Upon the Confession of Wirtemberge.
Obser. 1. pa. 506.
ANd to comfort them as well by the preaching of the Gospel, as by the
dispensing of the Lords Supper, etc. We do also understand this without any
prejudice to the liberty of other Churches, wherein the Supper uses not to be
administered but in the public assembly, lest that salvation might seem to be
tied to the Sacraments, or the fruit of the Supper of the Lord be bound to that
time only wherein it is received.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. pa. 506.
We think it is a profitable thing, etc. In this point also the Churches do
use their liberty to edifying, howbeit we think it the safer way, once to lay
aside funeral orations, and with honest simplicity to bury those that are
departed godlily, seeing that it is a very hard thing to keep a mean therein:
and we ought very carefully to take heed, that not so much as the least
entrance be opened to the reuoking of the opinion of prayers to be made for the
dead, then the which nothing can happen more pernicious in the Church of God,
as the lamentable experience of so many ages has taught.

IN THE 17. SECTION.
Upon the French Confession.
Obser. 1. pa. 523.
WE think it to be necessary. In all the French and Belgian Synodes, it was
decreed, that it is necessary for this people, plainly to reprove those that
be unruly or impenitent, and not to leave them to the discretion of their own
conscience, but whereas the lawful intelligence of the Presbytery goes
before, so long to exclude them from the Supper of the Lord, till they do
testify their amendment. By which custom notwithstanding they mean not to
preiudicate those brethren, who think that they can avoid the profanation of
the Supper of the Lord, although they do not so far extend the authority of
the Ecclesiastical Censure.

Upon the Confession of Belgia.
Obser. 1. pa. 524.
ANd hereunto excommunication is chiefly necessary, etc. Look the observation
which goes next before this, upon the French Confession.

Upon the Confession of Auspurge.
Obser. 1. pa. 527.
THe Bishops might easily, etc. Three kinds of Bishops may be reckoned up.
One which is in deed the Apostles Bishop, and is a Bishop in order, not in
degree, and is common to all Pastors, that is, to the Ministers of the word.
An other is not only in order, but also in degree, whereby the wholl clergy
of some Dioces is subject to some one man, and is even by the testimony of
Jerome himself, an old invention of man's appointment, and not of Gods
ordinance, limited and hedged in by very many ancient Canons. But as for the
third kind, which roueth far and wide, not only beyond the word of god,
but also beyond the most just Canons, and is in deed Satannical and
Tyrannical, and as yet flourishing in the Roman false named Church, we do
detest it, as a most certain pestilence of the Christian Church.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. pa. 528.
It were for the chief Bishops gentleness. We suppose that this is not meant of
the Popes gentleness, whom all the purer churches do at once detest as that
Antichrist* but of that kind of Bishops, which in the observation next before
this we called the second sort. Which though it be so, yet it seems to be
against the old Canons, that that should here ^e hanged upon the Bishops
gentleness which after lawful intelligence, they are* rather bound to do both
by Gods laws and by man's, or else they are to be removed from their
Bishopprick.

Upon the same.
To have rule taken from Bishops. It is without al controversy, that Christ
did not only distinguish, but also both by word Obs. 3. page 528.
and his own example sever the civil rule and jurisdiction from the
Ecclesiastical. Besides, that is also a plain case, that the goods purposed
and appointed to the uses of the Churches were in old time given not to the
Bishops own persons, but to the Church it self. Now how fare it is expedient
that the Bishops should carry the show and apperance of any civil rule and
jurisdiction, it is the duty of Godly Magistrates to consider.

Upon the same.
Obs. 4. page 532.
The Apostles decree touching things offered to Idols. to wit, touching that
sort of things offered to Idols, which is eaten at the tables of devils, or
by the eating whereof men sin against their weak brethren. Like as the
decree of the Apostles is expounded of Paul, 1. Cor. 9. and 10.

Upon the confession of Saxony.
NOt lawful for Kings nor Bishops to make laws or rites, that can not stand
with the word, etc. And therefore no mystical Obs. 1. page 533.
rites (that is, which carry some mystery or hid signification in them) though
not otherwise impious, as namely such as should be parts of Gods doctrine or
kinds of Sacraments: but only such laws as pertain to order and decency
(as is said in the end of this Article) and that not upon their private will
and advise, but by the judgment of a lawful assembly.

IN THE 18. SECTION.
Upon the former Confession of Heluetia.
Obser. ^. page 542.
But upon just cause, etc. to wit, taken from the word of God. For we do not
think that it is lawful for men, at their pleasure tomake laws concerning
diuorcements in marriages permitted, and already contracted, according to the
word of God, as they may do in contracts, which are meerelie civil: for the
Lord has said. That which God has joined together, let not man separate. But
the matter being diligently weighed by them, of whom it is profitable for the
Church that counsel should be asked, concerning such matters as be not merely
civil, the civil Magistrate may prescribe in his jurisdiction what
affinities, and upon what conditions, it may stand with the profit of the
common peace, to have permitted, or forbidden.

Upon the Confession of Bohemia.
Obser. 1. page 543.
EIther to choose it to himself, or to refuse it, to wit, if he be thoroughly
privy to himself of his own strength, and so that he do not bind himself by
a vow, as it is expounded a little after.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. page 544.
And women Ministers, that is, of those, who have willingly submitted
themselves to take care for the hospitalls, and for the poor, and those that
be sick: whom notwithstanding the Apostle does forbid to be received before
they be three score years old 1. Tim. 5. 9. And generally he forbids
women all other Ecclesiastical ministry, in the second Chapter of the same
Epistle.

Upon the same.
Obser. 3. pa. 544.
They do preserve the pureness as well of the spirit, as of the body, etc. to
wit, resisting the burning. For otherwise the pureness both of the body and of
the spirit is preserved in wedlock of married parties that use it holily.

Upon the same.
Obser. 4. page 546.
To take counsel of the elders, and gouerneres of the church, etc. understand
this of him who should be taken into the Ecclesiastical Ministry being a
single man, as for the most part it is used in the Churches of Bohemia, yet
without any vo^ (...) and with no prejudice to other Churches, which do not
observe this difference. For this necessity of going to, and asking counsel
of the Presbytery, it is not laid upon others. Concerning which thing we will
not think it much to set down in this place what the breethren themselves of
Bohemia did heretofore answer to a certain godly and learned man admonishing
them of these things, that no man may be offended with those things which be
read both in this place, and elsewhere in their Confession, touching the single
life of Ministers. The meaning, say they, of singel life is evidently declared
in the beginning of that article, that it is not ordained of God by any
commandment. Neither do we place any dignity of the ministry in single
life. We do without dout believe, according to the words of Christ, that that
gift is given to some, and to whom it is not given, for them it is free to
marry. We have by the mercy of God both married and unmarried Ministers, and
we endeavor to keep a mean in this matter. The Monkish custom, and other
absurd things we have by the grace of God removed far out of our Churches.
Thus did they write that they might the better expound themselves.

Obser. 1. pa. 565.
Upon the Confession of Saxony.
ALso we keep the rules of the Canon law, touching other nearer degrees, etc.
Our Churches also do herein attribute some thing to the degree of Cousin
Germans, to avoid the offense of those that be weak: seeing that even certain
profane lawmakers have forbidden this degree: and Christian charity does
command us to depart even from our right in those things which of themselves
be lawful, for their sakes that be weak. But we admonish the people
diligently that they do not think, that this degree is forbidden in it self,
that is, by the law of God, either expressed, or understood, which is the law
of nature. As for other inferior degrees of affinity, and whatsoever that
law, being not Canonical, but Tyrannical, has decreed, as though it were
spiritual* concerning corporal affinity, without the word of God, which is
agreeable to the civil laws, we do abolish and detest it, as proceeding from
the only inspiration of the lying spirit.

Upon the same.
Obser. 2. pa. 566.
Do agree with the Canon law, etc. We would have it declared unto us what
manner of law this Canon law is: seeing that there be many things, both in
certain ancient, and especially in the Canons of the Popes, flat repugnant
to the word of God, and to equity.

Upon the same.
Obs. 3. page 566.
As mortal sins and such as expel the holy Ghost, etc. why we do think that
this also has need to be more diligently expounded, we have showed not once
before. Look the 4. Sect. obseru. 1. and 2. upon this same Confess. Also Sect.
8. obseru. 4. upon the Confess. of Auspurge.

Upon the same
Obs. 4. page 568.
Where as the words of Christ did speak, etc. If so be that we should admit
that gospel according to the Egyptians, wherein those words be attributed to
Christ.

Upon the confession of Wirtemberge.
Obs. 1. page 571.
ANd that it is a mystery, etc. to wit, a spiritual marriage between Christ
and his Church, and not this carnal or corporal, and humane marriage: which
is not appointed to represent that other, which is spiritual.

Upon the same,
Obs. 2. page 571.
The politic laws which are the ordinances of God, etc. we also do approve
the politic laws touching these things, so that the consciences be not
snared, and that which in this contract is meerelie divine, be administered
according to the true word of god being distinguished from civil
controversies, whch fall out in marriage. Look before obseru. 1. upon the
former Confession of Heluetia

IN THE 19. SECTION.
Obs. 1. page 579.
Upon the latter confession of Heluetia.
WIth good laws made according to the word of God, th at is, with such as do
not forbid that, which god does command in the moral law, and by the voice of
nature it self, nor command that which he forbids. For otherwise by the
name of the word of god the Judicial civil law might also be understood, to
the which notwithstanding we are not bound in so much as it is civil, but
only so far forth as it is grounded upon a general and perpetual rule of
justice.

Obs. 1. page 580.
Upon the former confession of Heluetia.
ACcording to just and divine Laws, etc. That is, agreeable to equity and
righteousness, and to conclude, to the law of nature, whereof God himself is
the author.

Obs. 2. page 581.
Upon the same.
And the oath which we made to him, etc. that is an oath, whereby subjects are
bound to their Magistrates.

Obs. 1. page 581.
Upon the Confession of Basil.
IN the number whereof we also desire to be, etc. These things are spoken in
the person of the Magistrates themselves and not of the Pastors of the Church
at Basil, in so much as this Confession was published in the name of the
Magistrates themselves.

Obs. 1. p. 584
Upon the confession of Bohemia.
THe people is taught, that they ought to obey no man more then God. This is so
farie to be extended, as that we must understand, that we ought not to obey
any in these things which perteine to the conscience and to salvation, but God
alone, seeing that the Apostle does not except so much as the Angels
themselves, Gal. 1.

The end of the Harmony, and of the Observations.

