The strange and marvelous News lately come from the great Kingdom of Chyna*
which adioyneth to the East Indya.

Translated out of the Castly^ tongue, by T. N.

Imprinted at London, nigh unto the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas
Gardyner* and Thomas Dawson.

IN the month of March. 1577. A certain Merchant dwelling in the famous city
of Mexico, which is situated in the west India, now called new Spain, writes
among other things to his friend dwelling in the Province of Andoluzia, the
particular news, which at that instant were comen from the great dominion of
Chyna, which adioyneth unto the East India, saying as follows.

Unto this City of Mexico, within this month, is brought news from Chyna
worthy to be published. And because the volume thereof does conteyne more
then. xx. sheets of Paper, and are now sent in this Caiuell of advise unto
the Kings Majesty, the Copy remains only among worshipful personages:
wherefore I can not now send you the whole relation until the fleet depart
from hence, but the substance in brief, is (...)s follows.

Two ships came from Chyna, in one of the which came a credyble person, who
as a present witness does declare, that the Spanyardes which were enhabited
in certain Islands which stand(...) distant from that fyrme land, even as
th(...) Canaria Islands stands from Africa having abode nere two years in
those Islands, and being* 500* persons in number, did discover more then. 40*
league of coast of that fyrme land. The Gener(...) of the Spanyardes was called
Gandi who had battle with those Indian wherein was slain the Lieftenant of
t(...) field, and. 50. Spanyardes. And of t(...) Indians were slain. 5000.
whereupp(...) the Indians desired peace, and an agr(...)meant was concluded
betwixt them, th(...) guages should be given on both sides.

The Spaniards gave for their gua(...) two learned men and. 4. soldiers,
rec(...)uing the like pawn of the Indians.

The Indians carried their guages t(...) goodly City called Ander, which
st(...)death more then. 40. leagues within (...) main land. This City does
conte(...) more then six leagues in circuit, with a double wall. The inner wall
is hollow, and covered over as the floor of a Chamber to walk upon. The
utter wall is substantial, and of three fadome of height, wrought, as a
Gallerie with loopeholes for Hargabushe or other weapon. This wall is
replenished with ordinance, and covered with Penthouse. The City has seven
Castles equally divided.

In this City rules for Governor, a Uiceking, subject to the king of Chyna,
with many Doctors and Lawiers, which wear four cornered Cappes made of hear.
There are other Licentiats, who use round bonettes like unto Portugal
Priests. There are other Magistrates of justice, who wear the hear of their
head knotted, and upon their breasts and back, golden Lions sown upon
their garments.

There are also many religious per sons that go with shaven heads, saving one
lock of hear hanging over each ear. These persons are their Priests. They
make their sacrifice upon a table, using their accustomed Ceremonies, they
write and read, and pronounce their Orations and service unto their Gods, with
a loud voice.

In an Abbey of these Religious persons were our learned men lodged, for the
space of six months, in which time they saw many rich pieces of clothe of
gold: and all sorts of Sylke and Purple, they have brought unto this City
some of those pieces, which is a thing meruaylous to behold.

In this Country they have great store of Wheat, the which they do myxe
with Ryce, and thereof make their bread.

There are many Horses and Mares, better then the Spanishe kind. All sorts of
Spanishe fruits, and many other fruits that grow not in Spain* Except
Grapes, they have none. The people are of small stature. Their women when they
are borne, they use to wrest one of their legs, whereof they ever remain
lame, because they should continually keep their houses: and are kept so
close, that none may see them, except those of t^ household. For ou^ learned
(...) b^ there, as is said, six months, (...) not discrie fyftie women.

The men use their nails of (...) hands very long, for they fyn^ it a
^fitable thing for the war^es.

This people does wo^rshippe the Gods, that is to say, the Sun, the Moon,
and an Idol with three heads.

They hold opinion, that in ^yme (...), the heaven did join with the earth,
and that the heaven did disseuer from the earth, and ascend above, where i^
now a^deth. But yet say they, in time to come, it shall descend again, and
join with the earth.

They believe that the Sun is God of the wars, and the Moon is the God of
temparature, which is lesser in substance, than the Sun. They also believe
that al. 3. Gods are as one in Godhead, although they rule severally every one
by him self.

And having now understanding by our learned men, of the vlessed Trynitie, they
allow very well thereof, thinking that it is a similitude of their three Gods.

There has been made within this City of Mexico, general prayers and
supplications, beseeching the almighty God to lighten this strange people with
the knowledge of his holy faith and word.

When our learned men departed from this City, the Indian rulers sent about
five thousand Indians to accompany them, and presented unto them many pieces
of cloth of Gold, and many other things.

This guard of five thousand men was sent to defend our learned men from the
Turks, because at that time were ten Sail of Turks on the Coast, who did
great hurt unto them. These Tutkes gave chase to our men, and their company,
and slew thyrtie Christians, and many Indians. The Christians slew of the
Turks above five hundred. And the next day following, our men and their
Indians having refreshed them selves, set again upon the Turks, and slew
their king, and near two thousand persons of his army, and drove the residue
to flight.

When the Indyans that went to accompany our men, returned with that news, all
the Citizens rejoiced, and chiefly the King of Chyna, who was abiding in an
other City farther within the main land. And forthwith he sent a present
unto them for their King, which was a stature of Gold, in token of victory:
and advertised him of the valiantness of his subjects, which had slain the
mighty Turk King of Brazer, in remembrance whereof, he sent unto him the
image of the same God of Battle, saying, that he deserved that Idol, which
was made at the beginning and foundation of that land, and that the keeping of
that Idol was only preserved for him. And with this Present he sent 10000.
Indyans, and 10. vessels of war for wafters, to accompany them, until they
should ariue at their Island, laden with victual, and many rich things. Also
fruit, as Nuttes, Almondes, Chestnuttes, Pomgranates, Orenges, and Lymons,
with store of Rice, Kine, and Sheep.

The Christians had carried before that time, ky^ for to breed, which cattle
are lesser then ours, but better flesh and sweeter, and the Sheep also better
then ours. And with this fleet of Indians and. 300. Spaniardes, they proceeded
to seek the Turks Navy, which they met not, but they conquered in that
return homewards, other. 3. Islands, the which they left in subjection, to the
King our master.

And when the Indyan Fleet returned from the Island toward Chyna, two Ships
departed from the new Spain, for those parties in the which went. 12.
learned men, to preach the Gospel unto those Indyans, and to instruct them of
the mystery of the holy trinytie, I beseech God that the fruit thereof may
ensue, as we trust it will, and coming so to pass, it will be the richest
Land that ever was known.

We do now look for other two Ships, that the Uiceking pretends to
send for. 1000. men, to attempt the Conquest of Chyna, for he says that his
heart serves him to fynishe that enterprise with so many men, because the
Indyans are of small courage, yea, and though they have Hargabushes, and other
Artillarie, yet they know net how to use the^: so that now this city prepares
1000 men to send thither. And all the citizens of Mexico are moved with desire
to go thither, with love of the great quantity of Gold that is there.

Those that are come from them, do report, that they exchange more Silver for
Gold, then weight for weight, because those Indyans esteem Silver better then
Gold.

There is now brought for the Kings tribute, which is a fifth part of all that
is won, 600000. Dukets all in Gold.

They brought not the Idol of Gold to pleasure the Indyans, and also that
they should think that Christians do not so much esteem Gold.

They have also brought great quantity of Cloth of Gold, as fine as the
sorts of Calicute clothe, and of better workmanship, then any heretofore has
been brought. Likewise, pepper, Ginger, Cloves, and Sinamon.

They have brought fleeces of Wool for a moster, but not so fine as ours, and
much Rice.

They do also certify, that the Uiceking has woorkmen making. 4. Galleys like
unto ours, for to expulse* the Turks, and to aid the Indyans, which think
themselves happy to be defended from them.

There are many other things to write of, wherefore I will procure the copy of
the whole relation, and send it you in the fleet that is in a redynesse to
depart. etc.


