CERTAIN NEWS OF THE whole description, aid, and help of the Christian
Princes and Nobles, the which for the comfort and deliverance of the poor
Christians in the low Countries, are gathered together, and are now with
their armies in the field.

Drawn and Copied out of a letter, sent unto us out of the same Camp.

Apocal. 18. ver. 5. For her sins are gone up to heaven, and God has
remembered her wickedness.

Revvard her even as she revvarded you, and give her double according to her
works.

And pour in double to her, in the same Cup which she filled unto you.

Printed at Dordrecht. 1574.

Translated out of Dutche into English, the. 12. of April.

Beloved Reader, we find in the old and ancient Histories and Monuments,
and that amongst all other wise Monarchies and kings, we read how the great
and mighty Caugnista, king of Egypt, when he saw that he should dye, he
called unto him his seven sons, and having a Quiver of Arrows bound in a
bundel, commanded them one after another to break them in pieces, the which
when it was not possible for them to do, he caused the bundel to be unloosed,
and caused them to be scattered one from the other, commanding each of them to
break one of them, which then was very easy to be done: he wyllyng to teach
his seven sons by this example, that if so be they were divided in the
kingdom, and kept not them selves within the bonds of unity and concord,
that then they easily should be consumed, broken in pieces, and thrust out of
their Empire. In like manner we read of the old Granduellis, how he left
this for a Testament in his last will, unto that mighty Emperor Charles the
fifth, that if so be his Majesty would prosper in the Roman Empire according
to his will, that then he should endeavor him self to the uttermost of his
power, to raise all hatred and discord to be between the elected Princes, and
the other Princes of the Empire, that in the mean time, while they were at
strife, and warred one with the other, then the Eagle might eat and devour
them all: this subtle practice has that Antechrist of Rome, this seven years
here in these low Countries, and about ten or twelve years in France, not
without great bloodshedde and utter ruin of both these Countries practiced:
And except that the Almighty God with his strong arm had turned them from us,
that hellishe Dragon, with the water that proceeds out of his mouth, would
have drowned and devoured us up: And that this was their practice, we may
perceive, for if they had once overcome France, and these low Countries, they
would proceed further, against all the Princes and Nobles under the Empire,
which have and do confess the Gospel, spoiling them of all dominion and
liberty, yea, and of their lives also, as it may manifestlye appear by the
blooddy execution of that tyrannish Counsel of Trent, and the Spanish
Inquisition, which spares neither Dukes, Earls, nor Lords, of what state
soever they be, but against all promise, faith, and fidelity, like most wicked
periurers, have most pitiously murdered, beheaded, and taken their lives from
them.

By the which, through the illumination of God, there are moved the cheifest
Protestant Princes of the Roman Empire, who foreseeing what might come to
pass, have thought that if they should now hold their peace and be still,
and not assist their fellow members of the faith, in the time of their need,
that then so soon as the tyrant had quenched his ire in France, and in these
low Countries, with sheadding of Christian blood, and murdering all
Magistrates and subjects, unto the which he aspireth, that then he would
also proceed against them, and not put up his blooddy sword into the
Scabberde, till that he had rooted out of all lands, all those that deny the
Pope, and acknowledge Christ only to be the head of the Church.

And albeit that the godly and Christian Magistrates know of a surety, that
Almighty GOD, with his mighty hand, can deliver his Church, without the
assistaunce of any man, nevertheless we may find in holy writing, that God by
his appointed Magistrates, has always defended the same, and specially, how
the father of all the faithful, our father Abraham, when he heard that his
brother Lot, and all his goods and householde were taken and carried away
captive, he arose up with all his power and pursued the enemies and slew
them, and delivered those that were taken with all their goods, and restored
to every man his own, so that if all examples that could be showed should
here be brought in, it would be tedious for the Christian Reader: but this
must we well note and understand, that God has given the sword into the
Magistrates hand to defend the good and innocent, and to punish the wicked and
ungodly, Yea, that most unchristian Emperor Traianus, when he ordained any
Praetor, and gave to him the sword of justice, would say thus unto him, Use thy
sword against mine enemies, in just causes, and if I my self do otherwise
then justice, use thy power upon me also.

Let us then Christian Reader, give thanks unto the almighty God, who has
raised up these godly Princes and Magistrates, to be means for to deliver his
poor afflicted people, the which for their sins, have this while been
worthelye punished.

And therefore are we bound to pray to God from the bottom of our hearts, that
he will govern with his holy Spirit these Princes and Nobles, which are
gathered now together for our aid and comfort, that they may in all their
enterprises, seek nothing else but the glory of God, the honor of his holy
name, and the commodity of al Christendom, and that the Deuillishe, Popish,
and Antechristian Kingdom may be rooted out and utterly destroyed. Amen.

The description of the Princes and Nobles which are now gathered together,
and have to their advantage the City of Maseike: where as it is now very
commodious for them to pass over the Mase by Ship into Brabant.
AND therefore Christian Reader, that thou may Praise the great and
maruailous goodness of God, who as he has the hearts of all Princes and
governors in his hand, and has not only moved them to aid and assyst us,
but also has made them willing to turn that great tyranny back from us,
which truly the Pope by his enterprises would have brought on us, and all other
Godly Christians, in what Land or dominion soever they were: we have
therefore for your comfortes, caused their names, and Armies with their
preparations of Rutters and other Soldiers, here under to be written, that ye
thereby Christian Reader might have better entelligence thereof as follows:

Duke Magnus, brother unto the mighty and Renowned King of Denmark, a Noble
man, and very expeart in the Wars, he amongst all other is chosen chief
General of the field, and over all the rest of the other, wise Marshall
Princes and Nobles, and he has under his own government. 2500. Horse, and
4000. Gunners.

Duke Hans Cazimirus, and Philip Land grane of Hessen, they have both 1500.
Horse, and. 10. Ensigns of Soldiers.

Duke Christopher, Son unto the Palsgraue, has. 2500, Horse, and. 4000.
Gunners.

Grave Lodwicke, Grave John, Grave Hendrik of Nassow, Brethren unto the
renowned Prince of Orrange, they have between them. 4000. Horse, and. 8000.
Gunners.

Item Grave Lodwick has beside these 900. Light horsemen, and. 2000. Gunners,
which shoot with Corriers.

Also there is the renowned and Elected Prince, Duke Augustus, although not in
his own person, yet with his favorable aid, he is with the aforenamed Army.
And unto these also are joined the Duke of Saxon, and the Duke of VVymeren, for
that as yet they are vnmustered, we can add no certain number.

The other Army.
Besides these, Julius Duke of Bruynswick, a very Ritche and mighty Lord,
pitying the state of the poor Christians, and being one that has a true love
unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and a very enemy unto the Antechrist of
Rome, has joined him self, and given his consent to this great preparatyon of
these Wars, and has appointed the expert and courageous, Grave of
Svvartzenborch, so be general over his Army, which do gather them selves
together in field between Paterborne, and Soest in VVestphalen, and has
under his government these that follow:

Mandersloe has under his band. 4000 Ruitters, and two bands of Soldiers,
and there follows unto these Armies daily, many Barrons, Squyers, and
Gentlemen, with other credible Merchants and Citizens, the which being moved
with a Godly zeal, do not herein seek any of their own profit or gain,
but rather the glory of God, and the commoditye of the whole land and
Provinces, and that the consciences of the poor captives that are in Babylon,
under the hands of that mighty Hunter Nemrod, which is the Pope of Rome, might
be delivered.

The Conclusion.
For as much beloved Reader, that the almighty God has so mercifully appeared
unto us, and has offered this his present benefits and help, Let us not make
small account thereof, or lightlye regard it, but rather let us with a Godly
life and conversation, in prayer and thanks giving, attend and wait on the
good will and pleasure of God, not murmuring and saying, that the maintenance
of so many Ruitters and soldiers does impouerish, and bring the whole
country into great miserye, for this we may assure our selves, and therein
take comfort, if so be the Tyrant should get the vpperhande, they will not be
content with our Cities, Lands, goods, and possessions, but they would force
our Wives, rauishe and defile our Daughters, kill our young men, murder our
old men and women, and with penurye and hunger, famishe our Children and
sucking Infantes, and so bring us into such an everlasting thraldom and
bondage, that we should have wished rather to have died, if it were possible a
thousand times, then to live any longer in such a miserable captiuitye and
misery. Therefore most dear christians, let us think, although we are
hindered a year or two, of our goods and occupying, for to withstand the
enemy, we know and hope notwithstanding, that God by such means will give
unto us his holy word and Gospel, which is not to be bought for any worldly
goods or treasure: and for as much as we hope, that once within these few
days, God will drive the Tyrant away from us, and bless us with all manner of
blessings, we living godly and in his fear, our country shall prosper in
all godliness and other kind of occupying, the which God grant unto us for
his son Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS. BY THE STVDY OF LETTERS IMMORTALITY IS GOTTEN printer's or publisher's
device 1573



