Here begins a little treatise called the wise child of three year old. The
enfant sage being of three years of age demanded by Adryan Emperor. The
which him answered unto every thing he asked.


HEre follows the answers that the enfant sage the which ne had but three
years of age and was called little sone unto the emperor / and he was first
reco^mau^ded unto an archebysshop. and the said archebysshope reco^mau^ded him
unto a patryarche of Iherusalem. And the said patryarche reco^mau^ded him unto
a duke right sage right humble and the best understanding himself that was
in all the land. And when the child was comen in to the cite where this sage
duke was he yode to speak unto him. And than the knights of that duke told
him. Here is the enfant right sage. And than some him salewed and said unto
him. Sage enfant from what parties art thou comen. And the child answered I
am comen from my fader / and from my mother / and was create of our lord
Jesus christ. And some other knights of the duke said unto him thou art sage.
And the child answered him that he is sage the which is chastysed by him
self. And all these things above said were compted unto the Emperor Adryan
that than was at Rome / the which made him to come unto him / and said unto
him in this wise. Sage enfant how is the sky made. And the enfant answered
him in this manner if hit had been made by the hand of man it had fallen forth
with / and if it had be borne it had been deed longetyme sith. Also the
emperor demanded what god made first. And the child answered him light and
clerte at all times. Also the Emperor demanded him how a man may understand
that the trinite is one self god reygnynge in three persons. And the child
answered him by the son in whom thou shall find three things That is to
understand substance / shynynge / and heat / the which be in seperables for
the one ne may be without the other. Also the Emperor demanded him / who
yede first out from the mouth of our lord. And the child answered saint
John^ ye evangelist ye which said In principio erat verbum / et verbu^ erat
apud deum. etc. Also ye emperor him demanded if god created ye world
inlytell of time. And the child him answered / in a little while as the
opening of an eye. for he create all the world in a momente but after by the
space of.vi. days he made the things being in the world. That is to
understand / the sunday he create the angels. The mondaye he made the
fyrmament. The tewelday he made ye earth / the sea the froges / and the sweet
waters of the ryuers and fontaynes. The wennesdaye he made the birds and the
lysshes of all manners. The thursdaye he made the trees and the beestes of all
manyers. The frydaye he made and formed Adam unto his own lykenes.

The saturdaye he rested him / and blessed all that / that he had made and
formed. Also the Emperor him demanded what hope the merchants have. And ye
child answered him little for that yt they get they porchase often by
fraulde and desceyte. Also the emperor him demanded what say thou of
laberours. And the child him answered the most great part of them shall be
saved for they lyuen of the ire symplye. and the people of god seden of their
travail. Also the emperor him demanded what say thou of these children.
And ye child him answered that those that deyen In the age of three years and
under and the which ben baptized shall be saved. And the emperor him
demanded. It is written yt our lord Jesus christ is deed for to agenbye the
good and the evil. And the child him answered that Jesus christ is deed for
these ebryeux ye which weron than ill for they weren myserrau^tes. and also it
is in scripture that he is deed for all people* for by his death shall be saved
of all generacyons of people. Also the emperor him demanded in how many
manners a man may be saved, and the child him answered in seven / pryncypally
first by baptym. Secondely by martyrdom. Thyrdely by confession and penance.
Fourthly by terys weeping. Fythely by almesdedys. Syxtely by indulgences. That
is to understand that we pardon with good heart and with good will those the
which have mysoone unto us. The.vij. by the works of mercy. Also the emperor
him demanded what the confession auaylleth. And the child him answered that
confession and co^trycyon pourgeth all forfayres. Also the emperor him
demanded what pain those should have that be in this benefyces. And ye child
answered yt they shall perysshe with simon ye enchantour. And those that sellen
them shall be mesellys in the soul as tesse. Also the emperor demanded him
what pain the children should have the which dye without baptysme. And the
child answerde him that they should be in derkenes. And should be put from the
vysyon of our lord Jesus christ / but a man should not understand in such
derkenes that they ne se clearly the clerte of heaven for that should be pain /
and they shall have no pain / but they shall be moore cased than any mortal
man in this world. The emperor him demanded if it were sin to take his
cosynne unto wife or his gossyp / or his filliole / or any of his lygnage. And
the child him answered. it is no syn after nature / but it is after the
ordinance of the church as when Adam ete the appell it was no sin but for
that / that he trespassed the commandment of our lord and fauyour jesus
christ. And therefore was it a right grievous sin. Also the emperor him
demanded wherefore was than ye holy faders taken their cosyns and parents unto
wynes. And the child him answered / for that that they heden than leave to love
their prochyns and nereste of blood. Also the emperor him demanded what
say you of knights. And ye child answered I say neither ill ne good. The
emperor him demanded where was ye first woman create. And the child answered
him in paradis terrestre of the side of Adam. The emperor him demanded
wherefore was ye woman create of the side of Adam. And he answered to the end
yt they were by dyleccion all of one heart and of one will. Also ye emperor him
demanded wheder those ben happy yt have their desires and will in this
world. And he answered yt they be not happy / but those ben happy the which
god ne lets to do their wylles and desires in this / but correeteth them by
aduersyte. Also ye emperor him demanded what is orygynall sin. and he
answered it is fault of iustyee. Also he demanded if ye soul ne might grow.
And the child answered no not in quantite / but in good virtue and reason. Also
ye emperor him demanded wherefore is it yt some ben borne foles sens that they
have a soul reasonable. And he answered when they ben conceived of ill and
gross humors in the women of their mother some what ye soul is grieved for the
ylle dysposycyon of the body. Also ye emperor demanded him which is ye
thing most cruel unto the poor or unto ye rich / and he answered him the
death. Also the emperor him demanded what thing is man. And he answered that
it is ymagenynge of our lord Jesus christ. Also the emperor him demanded what
thing is woman. And he said / it is the ymagenynge of death. Also the emperor
him demanded at what hour ete Adam of the fruit that our lord him had
defended. And he answered at the third hour. and at the hour of none he was
cast out of paradyse. Also the emperor him demanded what thing is it
whereof a man may never feed him enough / and the child answered that it is of
gain / or winning. And the emperor him demanded how many sins ben there
the which ne ben pardonned in this world ne in like wise in ye other. And the
enfant him anishered twain. The first is who so that byleueth not in the
resurrece you of our lord Jesus christ. The ceconde is who so despeyreth him of
the grace of god. Also ye emperor him demanded what thing is best or worste
/ and the child him answered that it was ye word. Also ye emperor him
demanded by how many manners a man dies. and ye child him answered by.v. The
first is by pouerte. The.ij. by ignorance the.iij. is by pity. The iiij. is by
dread. The.v. is by iniquite. Also ye emperor him demanded how many langages
ben there in the world. and the child him answerde there are.lxxii. Also the
empereur him demanded how many manner of serpe^s ben there in the world. and
the child answered him yt there were.xxiiij. Also the emperor him demanded
what was he yt which put name unto all the beestes / and he answered that did
Adam. Also the emperor him demanded what is ye lest thing of all the
world. and ye child him answered ye it is ye body of ye man when the soul is
out. Also ye emperor him demanded which is ye most light thing of all the
world. and the child answered it is ye thought. Also ye emperor him
demanded what thing is ye sky. and the child answered that it is a light of
clerte divine. Also ye emperor him demanded / what susteyneth ye earth. and
ye child answered yt that does ye water. Also ye emperor him demanded / what
susteyneth ye water. and the child anwerede yt the.iiii. euange listes. Also
ye empereur him demanded / what susteyneth the.iiij. euangelisles. and the
child answered / ye spyrytuell fire. Also the emperor him demanded what
susteyneth the spyrytuell fire. and the child answered a tree ye which was
planted in paradse in the beginning when god came in to y^ vyrgyn mary. Also
ye emperor him demanded who was ye first hermyte. and ye child answered yt
was saint poll. Also the emperor him demanded / what thing is yt never may
be nor never shall be. and ye child answered that / yt is in ye valde of
gelboe. Also ye emperor him demanded who made ye first church / and ye
child answered him yt did saint pol. Also ye emperor him demanded / what was
he the which fasted three days and three nyghtes / and ye child answered him
that was Jonas in the whales womb. Also the emperor him demanded how many of
years had noe when he began to make the arche. and the child answered him five
hondreth of years Also the emperor him demanded / in how many years was the
said arche made / and the child answered in a hondreth years. Also ye emperor
him demanded / how many days the arche was on the water. and the child
answered / that it was thereon fortye days. Also ye emperor him demanded /
how long / how large / and how hye the said arche was / and the child him
answered that hit had.CCC. fadome in length.CCxxx. of heyght / and a.Clx. in
largenes. Also that emperor him demanded / In what place is the said arche
now / and the child answered him that hit is upon a hye mountain in armenie
that men call Archenclyn. Also ye emperor him demanded what was he that
planted and set first ye vine. and the child answered him that it was noe.
Also ye emperor him demanded. who made the first cite. and the child him
answered that it was zurie. Also ye emperor him demanded / what was he the
which demanded the most great gift that ever man demanded / and the child
answered that / that did Joseph of armathye the which demanded our lord
Jesus christ being on the cross whom he put in the sepulcre. Also the
emperor him demanded / wherefore is it that men should sonner fast on the
frydaye than these other days. And the child answered him. For.viij. reasons
pryncypally. The first is for that that on the frydaye our lord Jesus christ
formed Adam. The second for that / yt on the friday saint Iohu^ baptest
baptized our lord in the flome iordayn. The third is for that that on the
friday David ye prophet slew the great golyas. The.iiij. is for that / that
on the frydaye our lord took humayne flesh in the womb of the gloryouse
vyrgen marye. The.v. is for that / that the frydaye saint steven the first
martyr was stoned. The.vi. for that / that on the frydaye saint John^ baptest
was beheded. The.vij. for on ye frydaye our lord Jesus christ was crucified.
The viij. for that / yt on ye frydaye our lord Jesus christ shall descend from
heaven for to hold his Judgment in the vale of Iosepath. Also the Emperor him
demanded in how many manners a man may be dampened / and the child him
answered / in.iiij. manners pryncypally.

The first is by negligence. The second is by anger of tree and to show
openly his sins. The third is of the doubt of the pain that a man has to
amend himself The.iiij. is of ylle thing to be evermore in sin. Also the
emperor him demanded / what things they ben the which best pleases unto
our lord Jesus christ. And ye child answered / three things pryncypally. The
first is too do true penance of his sins. The second is largess and
pacyence in pouerte. The third is abstynence of sin. Also the emperor him
demanded what thing is that the which most dyspleased unto man. And the
child said it is life of his enemies and noysant Also this emperor him
demanded / how many sons and daughters hade Adam / and the child said.xxx.
sons and.xxx. daughters without came abell nor seph. Also the emperor him
demanded who was the first that sange mass. And the child answerde him that
is was melchesedech. Also the emperor him demanded who was ye first thief.
And ye child him answerde that it was Seph the first sone of Adam. Also the
emperor him demanded what was he ye was borne before his fader and bygoten
before his mother the.iiij. of the world he slew and had had ye maydenhede of
his grande mother. And ye child answerde that it was Cayn / for his fader and
his mother that is to understand Adam and Eve were create and also he slew his
brother Abel / for they ne were than but.iiij. in the world and had the
maydenhede of his grande dame the earth that labourede it. Also the emperor
him demanded what was he that entrede first in to paradys. And the child
answered that it was the good thief whom god pardonned on the cross. Also the
emperor him demanded which were the most noble weddynges that ever were.
And the child him answered that was the weddynges of Archideclin where god
changed the water in to wine / and there were our lord and the vyrgyn marye.
Also the emperor him demanded who be those that shall never deye till unto
the end of the world. And the child answerde him that it was Enoch and Helie
ye which ben in ye yate of paradys terrestre holding every of them a sword
brennynge in their mouths. Also the emperor him demanded what was he yt
despoyled his mother. and the child answerde him that it was Adam when he began
to labor the earth. Also the emperor him demanded what thing is it of the sea and the child answered that it is away in certain and merueyllous. Also
the emperor him demanded what thing is that as the death. and the child
said that it is a thing ye which ne may fynysshe ne enter. Also ye emperor
him demanded what was he that dyed two times. and the child him answered that
it was lazar the brother of marye magdaleyne and of marie march the which god
areysed. Also ye emperor him demanded of how many things was man formed.
and the child him answered of six things pryncypally. That is to understand
the fiesshe made is of the slyme of the earth. The blood is made of the water
of ye see. The bones were made of the stones the brethe was made of the wind.
The eyes were mage of the sone. And ye soul was treated of the holy ghost.
Also the emperor him demanded by what manner brings ye devil a man in to
helie. And the child him answered remember the that even in like wise as by
baptym is pardoned theorygynall sin. Also in like wise by confession and
penance ben pardonne all that other sins. Also the emperor him demanded is
ordained unto man ye term of his death or of his life / and the child him
answered that god all had ordained for our salvation. Also the emperor him
demanded in whom byleueste thou. And he answered In god almighty. That is to
understand in the father and in the sone and in the holy ghost the which ben
three parsones in one essence and in one holy trinite. Also the emperor him
demanded byleuest thou yt our lord Jesus christ shadowed him in the womb of
ye hloryous vyrgyn Marye and that he was borne of her very god and very man,
and the child answered that yes and I believe that he has suffered honger and
thorste and other trybulacyons for to again bye us sinners. And I believe yt at
the day of assencyon he mounted in to heaven. And that on whyght sunday he
sent his holy espirite unto his dyscyples and that he shall come upon the
earth to hold his Judgment / and that unto the good he shall give life and
glory in his paradis by all times and ye ylle he shall send in to hell from
whens they shall never depart. Also the emperor him demanded where our lord
held him before that he created the world. And the child him answered that
he was in a wodde there where he made fagotes for to bourne the and all these
the which will from hensforth enquere of the secrets of our lord in whom
there ne is beginning nor ending.

Imprynted in london in Fletestrete at the sign of the Son by wynkynde word

sun and stars, representing the sign of the Sun

W 47 C

Wynkyn de word.

Caxton's printer's device, appropriated by Wynkyn de Word


