APOLO^^ FOR THE TR^^TISE CALL^^ Trial of Fait^

CONCERN^ (...) The pr^cedenc^ (...) ^tance for sin^^ (...) Faith (...)

AT WILL. CHI^^

Ap^^ 22.^ Men, Breth^^n, and (...) ye my Apology w^^ (...) unto you.

LOND^^ Printed by (...) SAMVEL (...) sold at (...) Chu^^^-ya^^ (...) of the
(...) ^^24.

To the Courteous Reader.
IN a Defense of one point of my Trial of faith opposed by some, I took
occasion to write a brief explication of a second contradicted by others.

In the conclusion of that explication, I prayed the Reader to be content, that
of the later point, as yet I said no more, because as yet I saw no more.

By Gods providence I have seen more since that time ^^th the spectacles of
some which oppose that Doctrine.

It remains (because those words implied a promise) that now I write more of
that matter because I understand more, tha^ I say more because I see more.

But first when I say that now I see more, my meaning is not, that I am
s^aggered in my judgment, by somewhat la^^y seen and that therefore now I
understanding question otherwise then I did at th^^ (...) but that now I know
more of their (...) that oppose it, then I did before, and know better how to
confirm mine own opinion.

That this may appear I pray the Christian Reader to remember the state of the
question set down in my Treatise in these words, Repentance is begun before
faith in Christ, and therein to consider two things; first of whom I speak in
this question, secondly of what.

They of whom I speak, are the Elect only, who only are ordained by God to
eternal life, ^cts 23.48.
and who for that purpose are appointed also to all the means effectually
conducing thereunto, from the beginning to the end, in all the parts and
degrees of the same. For because this faith is only wrought in them, therefore
is it called the faith of the elect; Tit. 1.1.
and because these only are in the event saved by it, therefore do they receive
the end of their faith, 1 Peter 1.9.
which is the salvation of their souls.

That whereof I speak is contained in the words of the Question before
recited. Wherein I pray further that two things may be considered. First, the
Antecedent, subject matter of the question, or the thing that is spoken of, in
this word Repentance. Secondly, the consequent, predicat or saying that is
affirmed of this Repentance, in the rest of the words, is begun before faith
in Christ, for these terms must be rightly understood.

First, the subject matter or thing spoken in that Question, is Repentance,
Repentance.
and by repentance I mean not the practical repentance of the conversation or
practice of the purpose of amendment of life, in a constant, conscionable and
cheerful course of new obedience, but only the repentance of the heart: and
by the repentance of the heart I do not understand newness of heart or
rectitude of Spirit, or mortification, Psalm 51.10
and vivification, or habitual conversion to God with the whole soul in all
the powers and faculties of it, joined with a good conscience which all are
fruits and effects of faith in nature following it: But by Repentance I mean
only hearty sorrow for past sins already committed, and purpose first not to
commit the very same sins, if they were not already done, but were again to
be committed, and then consequently a purpose not to commit the like sins in
kind for time to come, namely a purpose in truth without hypocrisy and
dissimulation.

Repentance from dead works being a qualification to fit men for belief in
Christ, believing in Christ a qualification to fit them to receive benefit by
the promise of the Gospel unto justification, and amendment of life or new
obedience being a qualification to fit them to the further assurance of their
justification and of eternal life.

Secondly, in the predicate or saying that is affirmed of this repentance three
things are to be observed. 1. What is meant by being begun. 2. By Before. 3.
By Faith in Christ.

1 Is begun.
First by being begun, I do not mean a being of repentance in the heart
sufficient to salvation: but only a beginning of it in all the preparations
thereunto, as also a beginning of the habit it self, so far as concerns
sorrow and purpose, namely a being thereof in some measure without
dissimulation; and (if it may be proved sufficiently) that amendment of life is
a part of repentance, then I say, repentance is begun in some part, viz. in
sorrow and purpose touching past sins before faith in Christ, and finished in
another, viz. amendment of life after faith.

2 Before.
Secondly, by (Before) I do not mean a precedence some space of time: but in
nature only and in the order of causes.

Thirdly, by faith in Christ I do not mean a belief of the word and Gospel,
Faith in ^st.
for this of necessity must go before repentance, in as much as it is the
means to drive and to draw thereunto: Acts 2.32. Math. 11.68. Hebr. 11.6.
but I understand thereby a resting and relying upon Christ with our whole
hearts, or a trusting to and putting confidence in the merits of the death and
righteousness of Jesus Christ for and unto salvation.

In the second place in that now I say more, It is not because (I think) I
have not said enough all ready to the point it self for the proving of it: but
because I have not said enough to some for the persuading of them. Nor yet
because I have not sufficiently answered the objections which I knew: but
because I knew them not all then, to the end I might have answered them at the
first: for now I stop three or four gapps with one bush, and answer the
Exceptions of more then one man.

As in these regards, this further labor by way of Apology has been
undertaken not without some cause: so in other respects it ought to be well
construed, accepted and used, namely because (the Lord knows) my purpose herein
is not, to maintain my credit, but the cause of God and the Doctrine of the
Church of England, nor to strive for Triumph and Victory, but for Truth and
verity: muchlesse wilfully to oppose any that hold the contrary. Least of all
to detract from precious faith, or our blessed Savior in any the least measure
or meaning. ^. Pet. 1.1. ^uke 1 42. ^om. 9.5.


Of my sincerity herein the Christian Reader may the rather be persuaded by
considering these particulars.

1. I labor not to darken my opposite with disgrace, (except it be by
clouding their names with silence) but only to clear the point in question
with a larger explication and confirmation.

2. I seek not to shift of the force of an argument by evasions: but answer
thereunto with direct solutions, to my best understanding.

3. I study not to justify any thing that cannot be defended with truth and
plainnes: for I freely confess the weakness of my disputation where such
weakness is discovered.

4. I spend not my spirit to requite in kind, many unkind and some insolent
terms in their Exceptions: but only try my strength to untie the knots of
their objections, (I mean) not every idle cavil about words, or matter
impertinent to the clearing of the maine question, but to answer such reasons
only as make directest and strongest opposition to my Doctrine.

The maine purpose being good, and the mean proceeding fair, it remains,
that I humbly pray the Reader to peruse my Apology with patience and without
prejudice to compare reason with reason, with prudence and without partiality,
and to judge of truth by reason, rather then by human authority.

This if they shall do (it is reasonable to request it, it is equal to grant
it) It may come to pass (through Gods blessing) that hot and confident
opposers may be cooled and convinced, that moderate and unresolved Christians
may be persuaded and satisfied. That error may be discerned confuted and
avoided, and the truth more cleared and confirmed: which God the Father grant
for his Son Jesus sake, by the grace and wisdom of the Holy Spirit, to his
own glory and his Churches good, Amen.

Yours in the service of your Faith, William Chibald.

To the Christian Reader.
MAny of the Ancients observe, that St. James perceiving diverse unstable
Christians to suck poison out of the sweetest flower of paradise, by
misinterpreting and perverting St. Paul's most wholesome and comfortable
Doctrine of justification by faith without works; wrote his Epistle (after a
sort) purposedly to redress that abuse, and equally (as it were) to divide
between faith and works; Iam. 2.21 and 23
giving them both their several iustifications: for these two truths may and
must stand together faith iustifies our works before God: but works iustifies
our faith before men. Abacuc. 2.4. Romans 1.17. James 2.26.
The just shall live by faith, but faith it self must live by works: for as
the body without the spirit is dead: so faith without works is dead also. That
which moved this Holy Apostle to press so far the necessity of works as to
attribute unto them a kind of justification: James 2.26.
I verily persuade my self stird up the meek spirit of the modest and learned
Author of the Trial of Faith, and this Apology thereof so far to enforce
the necessity of repentance as to give it a kind of precedence to faith in
Christ: not any way to detract from the Dignity and Excellency of faith, which
he must, and does acknowledge to be the mother and Queen of all Christian
virtues, August. Enchir. ad Laurent.
(Fides enim impetrat quod lex imperat) but to keep men from bearing to much
on the right hand, and sailing to near to the dangerous rock of presumption:
upon which it is to be feared many more ordinarily make shipwreck of faith and
a good conscience, then upon the other opposite to it, of despair, o quam multi
cum hac spe ad aeternos labores, and bella descendunt, how many go to hell
with a vain hope of heaven: whose chiefest cause of damnation is their false
persuasion and groundless presumption of salvation.

To keep all true believers from this most dangerous rock, this Author
chiefefly penned his treatise entitled The trial of Faith, wherein he
discreetly advises all that sail toward those pulchri portus, fair havens
in heaven to endeavor to steare their course in the middle way between the
two rocks above named; and to this end substantially proves, that noe man
may rely on Christ with assured hope, and confidence of salvation and
remission of his sins before he find in himself a true sorrow for them, and
entertain an unfeigned purpose and desire to leave them. This I take to be the
scope and drift of his discourse which being tried by the touchstone of Gods
word has proved precious Doctrine, not as some have given out hay and
stubble, which terms better be fit their Weak exceptions against it. I
profess by weighing and pondering his positions and arguments, I find no
poisonous weed to lurk under his whosesome leaves. If any Psylli or Marsi by
any extraordinary exstractiue quality can suck out any such venomous juice, I
am persuaded the Author will as much distaste and detest the same as my self
do: For I find him ready and desirous to give satisfaction not only to
moderate examiners of his tenets: but also to violent, and priudicat obiecters
against it. hanc libertatem petimusque damvsque vicissim.

The Apologist freely acknowledges a belief of Christ and the Gospel to go
before the begun repentance he speaks of: nay farther also he professes
that faith in Christ precedeth that repentance, which the Divines commonly
handle in their common places under that Title they meaning, thereby new
obedience and a settled course and measure of sanctification. In which regard I
advise the violent opposers of his tenet seriously to consider whether their
arguments against it come home or rather in the end prove not mere (...),
especially since they cannot deny that remission of sins in Christ's blood is
no other ways offered unto us in the Gospel then upon condition of amendment
and newnes of life.

The undertaking therefore of the performance of this condition (God enabling
us thereunto by his effectual grace) which is a purpose of newness of life
must needs precede the laying claim or taking to our selves the benefit
offered by laying hold on Christ, and relying on him for this benefit of of
remission of sins. It is true a reward or benefit offered upon a condition
may be challenged and justly received also before the condition be performed
but not before the condition be agreed upon, and undertaken to be performed. A
man that has a lease dimised to him upon condition to pay his rent and fence
the grounds may take his lease and enjoy some benefit by it before he has
performed those covenants, but not before he has undertaken by covenant to
perform the same. This undertaking of the performance of the condition, viz.
newness of life, what is it else but a purpose and holy promise to God of
leaving our sins, which purpose he who has not wrought in him by
regenerating grace, does still and cannot but hold on his former purpose to
continue in his sins: now for a man yet holding his purpose to continue in
sin, to trust to Christ, or rely on him, for the remission of them, what is it
else but presumption.

As for many incident or consequent questions, which the nice-handling of this
point may breed in refined wits; as whether, the belief of the Gospel, which
we call Historical faith, and a belief and affiance in Christ which is
justifying faith in an elect, grow into on habit, and whether a purpose of
amendment before; and the amendment of life, or new obedience after faith in
Christ, belong to the same specificall virtue of repentance, and whether the
same grace of the spirit produce faith, and repentance in the soul, or a
diverse, and whether the grace which produces them, produce them both in the
same instant, or diverse, and whether these diverse instances must be diverse
instances of time, or of nature only, and lastly, it being granted that faith
and repentance are both produced in the same instant of time and nature,
whether the one begins to work before the other; and whether admitting that
the work of repentance is first felt in the soul before any work of a
justifying faith, yet that the work of a justifying faith, may not be in the
nature of the thing before it, as the thunder in nature is before the
lightning: yet we see the lightning before we hear the thunder.

I say for these and the like subtilties I hold it needless, and unprofitable
to employ the harvest of our time in tithing th^se minutas decimas of minte and
commin: It suffices that we Ministers of the Gospel in our Preaching, and
Gods people in their hearing, and all of us in our practice follow the method
used by the holy Ghost, and begin with John Baptist, and proceed to Christ;
begin with terror, and proceed to comfort, begin with sorrow for sin,
and proceed to joy in the Holy Ghost, having first a sense of our sin and
searching deep into our wounds; and then applying to our selves the sovereign
salve of faith in Christ's blood: being first weary and heavy laden, and then
expecting to be refreshed by Jesus Christ.

In whose bowels I ernestly beseech my brethren in the Ministry, not to
interfere, nor hinder one another in their holy courses, muchlesse virulently
detract from the persons or labors one of another, but to set aside all
preiudicat opinion, and allay all heat of passion, and contestation. Cyp. de
zelo and liuore.
Purgare mentem quam serpentinus liuor infecit and amaritudinem omnem quae
intus incedit Christi dulcedine lenire (...) as St. Paul exhorts, Ephesians
4.15. 1 John 3.18.
and (...). as St. John persuades, that as we all agree in the love of the
same truth, so we may seek, and follow after the truth in love.

Thine in the best beloved Christ Jesus. Daniel Featly.

To the Author.
GOOD Sir, I have perused your little Treatise, or Apology, which you committed
to me, and I see no cause why you may not safely send it abroad into the world
with his fellows, that have seen the light already, for as for your
conclusion (in mine opinion) it is sound and orthodox, and as you explain it
(to my thinking) not much different from theirs, who in words seem to speak
contrary. And for your proofs and answers though I hold not every particula^
to be demonstratiue and certain: yet (I think) there is enough in them, to
evict the cause you stricte for.

Notwithstanding you must not make account, that all men should presently yield
to be of your opini^n: for sober minds may dissent from you and you from them,
without b each of charity or love; and fiery spi^its will dissent from you, if
it be for no other cause, but only for that Salamanders cannot live out of the
fire. But I would wish you to consider of that Rule of ^he Apostle, 1 Cor.
11.16.
If any man seem to be ^ontentious, we have no such custom, ^or the
Churches of GOD, and (as much as may be) to imitate the stayed ^iscretion of
wise Trauailers, who for ^eare of letting their journey, will not ^tand still,
and strike at every dog that ^arketh at them.

For (as a Learned Writer upon the ^ormer words of Saint Paul notes to ^ood
purpose) There will never be an and of quarrelling, Nunquam enim contentionum
erit finis, si certando velis hominem pugnacem vincero, qui centies victus
nunquam fatigabitur. Call. in. 5. Cor. 11.16.
if you labor to get he mastery of him that is contentious, because though he
be an Hundredth ^imes foiled, yet will he never be ^earied.

We have all work enough to do in ecessary things, and therefore howsoever
kind of necessity for satisfying the world aue forced you thus far, as to
clear hat has been objected already: yet if ^ere shall come any new
repetition of ^d Arguments, or any futher friuo^us cauills, your good hours
may per^ps be better spent then in pursuing ^ngling disputes: which mine
opinion notwithstanding, I leave to your discretion to do as occasion shall
require; and s^ I leave you and your labors, to GODS blessed Protection and
Mercy,

Yours ever in the Lord Jesus. Henry Maso^

An Apology for the precedence of Repentance, unto faith in Christ.
IN the Treatise called a Trial of Faith, the Author intended to teach
Christians to examine rhemselues, whether they had a saving Faith, or no. As
means to that end, he propounded in the first book certain reasons to
persuade unto this Trial; and in the second, some rules to direct them therein.

Against the reasons there is no exceptions taken (for ought I hear) but
against the rules only: nor yet against all: but only the first, and the sixth
rule.

That which has been objected against the first, has been fully answered in
a brief defense not long since published, and that which is excepted against,
in the sixth rule shall now, (God willing) be cleared and satisfied, in a
further confirmation thereof. In handling the sixth Rule of trying our Faith, I
did three things principally.

First I proved generally, that there are some preparations wrought in men,
before they can believe in Christ, whereby God draws them thereunto. page 219,
220. (namely) that most usually and ordinarily it is so.

Secondly, and more specially, I showed what these preparations were, viz. Some
gifts and abilities wrought by the spirit of God, in the understanding, and
will, of those whom the Lord has a purpose to save, page 220, to 224.

Thirdly, and in particular, I affirmed that a beginning of repentance is one
of those preparations, page 224, to 229.

For making good of this third, and last point; I set down this proposition to
be discussed. Repentance is begun before faith in Christ. 1. e Sinners
begin to sorrow for their sins, and to purpose to leave them, before they
can believe in Christ, viz. So, as to have any benesit thereby.

First I proved this point by arguments, secondly, I cleared it by answering
some objections, and lastly, I applied it by making some further use thereof.

Against these general heads, and many particular members of each, there are
(I understand) exceptions taken by some, and their exceptions (to omit longer
introduction) are either against the fixed rule it self, or the handling of
that rule: not that they are propounded, in these very words and method: but
that in substance and effect, they import as much and therefore are they by me
reduced, to these two heads, for my more orderly proceeding, and the Readers
better understanding.

The Trial of Faith.
The Rule it self The Rule it self.
is laid down in the eight Chapter of the second book of my Treatise the 219
page, in these words, whether wast thou rightly prepared to believe in Christ
by other gifts of the spirit; which he works in men, before they have a
saving faith.

The Exception, against the Trial.
This Rule (say some in effect) is idle, because it pretends that men may try
their faith by it: but indeed no man can, for (say they) all men are either
regenerate, or unregenerate, (there is no third condition betwixt them, and
different from them) and neither the one, nor the other, can try their faith by
this rule.

Not the regenerate because there is no gift, power, quality, disposition,
habit, or affection (other then saving faith) that is or can be said, to be a
preparatiue to regeneration. Neither can unregenerate me^ try their faith,
because there is no gift in men unregenerate, whereby themselves, or other can
difference them, from those that remain in their natural estate, and that
shall perish for ever.

The Apology for the Trial.
I answer, first generally to both regenerate and unregenerate, that though by
their exception they seem to give two different Reasons, one for the
regenerate, and another for the unregenerate: yet the reason belongs to all
equally, because it denies either to the one, or the other, all or any
preparations before faith or regeneration, either to difference the regenerate
from the unregenerate: or one unregenerate man from another for ever.

Secondly, I answer to their reason concerning the Regenerate, that it is of
no force, why they may not try their faith by this Rule, because it affirms,
that there can be no preparations at all to Regeneration but faith it self
which cannot be true, because a belief of the Gospel which is a steadfast
assent to the truth of that doctrine, is a gift of the Spirit, It is not a
saving faith, but a Heb. 11.6.
means to it: yet is this belief a preparatiue to regeneration, and therefore
may a regenerate man try himself by some other gift then by a saving faith, as
by a preparation to Regeneration, and consequently try his faith by this rule.

Thirdly, I answer touching the unregenerate, that their reason is
insufficient, why they may not try their faith by this rule, because though
they have not a saving faith (as indeed they have not) yet may it not be in
vain for them to examine themselves concerning a s^uing faith by these
preparations, for they may think they have it, when indeed they have not, and
so may deceive themselves with a vain presumptuous hope of salvation. Now by
this trial with these preparations they shall clearly discern they have it
not: (for he that is far from the preparation to faith must needs be
further of from faith it self: he that has not the lesser which is more
common, has not the greater which is more rare,) whereupon they may be
occasioned, considering the danger of being without faith, and the benefit of
having it, to seek in the use of the means for it, and by seeking to find
and obtain it.

May not a man try whether he have a good lease or no, if he have any lease at
all though his lease be not good: yea, if he have any writing which he takes
to be a lease, though it be not, may he not try whether he have a good lease
or no?

Besides though unregenerate men have no such gift whereby they may be
differenced, from such as remain in their natural estate, and shall perish
for ever: ye^ may they try whether they have a saving faith or no: and by
trial know they have it not, because they have no such gift; for all that have
faith have such a gift: ever as the want of election into a College shows
that a man is not fellow there though he have no gift whereby to difference him
from all that are fellows o^ scholars in that College; for all that are
fellows or scholars of a College are elected into it.

If they had given some good reason why there can be no preparations at all to
faith in Christ, then had they spoken to purpose against my Rule; but seeing
they have not done it, therefore is the Rule good for the purpose to which I
intended it, for all their exception.

Fourthly, touching the proof of their exception, viz: that there is no third
state or condition betwixt men regenerate and unregenerate, I answer that they
bring no proof of it, therefore can I not allow of it; and besides the
contrary seems to me very probable, understanding this to be their meaning (as
it must be if it be to purpose) that there is no third condition betwixt a
mere natural man and one fully regenerate: for I think a third condition
somewhat different from both, may be assigned: and given namely, the condition
of preparation, which may be compared to the twy-light, that is betwixt clear
day, and dark night, wherein whosoever is (being elected) may be said to be in
his passage from the one, which is mere nature, the other which is perfect
regeneration, and between both: that is, some way forwarded unto regeneration,
and about to enter into Gods Kingdom, and yet not actually admitted thereunto,
as one conceived, not borne, or in the birth, not quite brought forth, for as
we read of some that were entered into Gods Kingdom and were Mat. 13.38.
children thereof, and of some that were Ephesians 2.13.14.
far from it, so do we read of some that were Mark 12 34.
not far from the Kingdom of God, and that Mat. 23.13.
were entering in, or about to enter, but not quite in.

I know there are but two places to be enjoyed by men after this life, Heaven
and Hell, and but two sorts of persons to inherit them, Elect and Reprobate:
yet may the Elect, before they come into Heaven, be said to pass through a
threefold condition, the first of mere nature, in which there are no works of
the Spirit toward Regeneration. The second of Preparation, wherein there be
some gifts of the Spirit bestowed on them to dispose them to Regeneration. And
the third is the full work of Regeneration it self.

And I can see no reason in the world why this should be counted a Paradox or
strange position, seeing (ordinarily) all they that are of age, pass through
this preparation, Mat. 11.28.
All that come to Christ and believe in him, must be weary and heavy laden. And
as long as it is confessed: first, that these d spositions, preparing unto
Regeneration are not the work of nature but Gods Spirit: (else they would be
in all mere natural men, and even in the very Elect, when they continue in
their state of ^eere nature, which experience disproues) ^econdly, that they
are not wrought ^y the Spirit always, but then of purpose, when the time of
their effectual calling is ^ome: thirdly, that they are not sufficient ^o
salvation, (if a man could be truly imagined being elected to die in that
estate;) but only that they are appointed as preparations to Regeneration in
the Elect, who because they are ordained to that end which is eternal life,
and to the means of that end which is Faith; therefore are they also
predestinate to the means of this faith which are these preparations, in which
when they are, they may be said to be in a condition, some way different from
men either merely natural, or fully regenerate, and consequently in a third
condition some way different from mere grace or nature. And so much for
answer to the exceptions against the Rule it self. Now follows the handling
of the Rule.

The Trial.
The Rule begins to be handled, Page 219. viz. That a saving Eaith, etc.

The Exception.
The handling of the Rule.
The first point in handling the Ru^ that is excepted against, is a general
pr^position, that there be some preparation wrought in men by the Spirit,
before the believe in Christ.

Against this there lie two exception^ first, that I do not distinguish the
gifts (...) the Spirit, which I say go before Faith (...) Christ as
preparations to it, nor show whither they be common graces to Reprobates, or
peculiar to the Elect, do tend n^cessarily unto salvation, and have the
promise: secondly, that the places allege by me to prove the general
proposition do not prove it: but only this, that Go^ works Faith, in those
in whom it i^ wrought, and that there is neither will, no^ deed in man's power
to believe in Christ for salvation.

The Defense.
^o the first ^xception.
To the first Exception I answer, tha^ though I do not make all those same
distinctions, of the preparing graces which they desire: yet do I distinguish
them a^ much as is needful: for in the Treatise they are divided into Legal
and Evangelical, which is enough to my purpose: secondly, I say that to the
proving of the point in question, there is no need of such distinctions, as
they propound, because in all that disputation, I speak of working of those
preparations in the Elect only (in whom only a saving Faith is wrought
because they only are to be saved, page 224. line 17.) So that as long as it
is evident, that the preparations to Faith that I speak of be ordinarily
wrought in all the Elect (that is in them that are of years and discretion) it
is no matter though some of them be common to Reprobates with the Elect: Act.
13.48.
for as long as they are wrought in Master Rogers 7. Treatises chapter 4. page 9.
Model of Divinity pa. 278.
them by Gods Spirit to prepare them to believe in Christ, and that they may be
saved, therefore do they necessarily tend unto their salvation, and
consequently must be such, as have the promise, being by Gods appointment,
ordained as means to that end: not in respect of themselves, singly considered
in themselves, and in their own nature, but in a threefold consideration.

1. In relation to the persons in whom they are wrought, which are the Elect,
to whom salvation, and the promise belongs.

2. In respect of the ground from whence they proceed, which is the lo^ of God
in their election, of which they a^ the fruits and effects, as well as justify
in faith it self.

3. In reference to the end for whic they are wrought in men ordained vnt^
eternal life, viz. to make them fit persons, in whom Faith may be wrought for
the obtaining of that salvation, to which they are elected.

So that as long as all Reprobates hau^ not these preparations wrought in them
but all the Elect have: As long as many reprobates have but some of them; but
the Elect have all ordinarily: and as long as by Gods appointment they do not
tend to the salvation of the Reprobat (because God never intended their
salvation) but of the Elect they do, therefore is there no need of making the
distinctions which they pretend and propound.

To the 2. Exception.
As touching the second exception my defense is this. Both the Texts alleged
by me, a^e expounded by the learned, not of working Faith it self: but of the
preparations unto Faith, as shall appear in the particulars.

Luke 3.4. Tertull^an de de baptismo chap. 10.
The first Text taken out of Saint Lukes Gospel, speaks of Preparing the way
to Christ: which not only Turtullian, but Master Calvin, and Master Piscator
expound of preparing the way by repentance; preparing the way to Christ by
repentance is not the working of faith in men, but working in them repentance
to the end they may be prepared to believe in Christ. The words I shall have
occasion to cite hereafter, among the testimonies of the learned, in proof of
the maine point, therefore will I respite the cyting of them till then. Ioa.
6.44, 35.


The second place of Scripture in Saint John's Gospel speaks of drawing men to
come to Christ, that is, to believe in him; which by the judgment of the
learned is not to be interpreted of working faith in men: but of preparing
them to the work of faith; namely, by illumination. Caluins comment on Ioh.
6.44.
He teaches (says Calvin) that those are drawn whose minds he does
enlighten, and whose hearts he does bend, and frame to the obedience of Christ.

That by the metaphor of drawing (says Piscator) Piscators comment on John
6.44.
is understood the illumination of the mind, the Lord himself declares,
where he says, every man that has heard and learned of the Father comes to
me. So that coming to Christ being believing in him; drawing to come, being
not coming it self; nor illumination being faith it self, therefore in the
judgment of those two learned men, the Text of John is not to be expounded, as
they have said: but as I have delivered it. This (I hope) is enough to confute
that which they object against my interpretation of the Texts which I alleged
to prove my general proposition: namely, that there are some preparations
wrought by the Spirit in men before they believe in Christ, The general
proposition concerning preparations.
which was the first general thing propounded in handling of the Rule.

The Trial.
The cords by which God draws man to believe, etc.

The Exception.
The second general herein, was a special recital of the particular
preparations which, and what they be, which I say go before faith in Christ.

This they first deny, saying that there are none such.

Secondly they disprove it, by giving two reasons why there can be none such,
or why some of them that I name can be none.

The Defense.
Against their bare Denial I will only oppose the testimonies of two learned
Divines of our own time and country Master Rogers, Master Baynes.

Master Rogers speaking how the knowledge of man's misery by sin, Master
Rogers Treatise 7, 8. c. 4. p. 9. ad 21.
and of redemption by Christ, does work in him on whom God will show mercy;
and how God by the light and help of it, draws him forward, until he
believe, for his own part, and in his own person (for these be his very
words in the beginning of that discourse) he does lay down six several
works of the Spirit, in six several sections of that fourth chapter, the
heads of them are these, and they are more at large there discoursed of.

1 God makes them to believe their misery, and to be troubled in mind for it,

2 They consult in this case what to do.

3 They are broken hearted and humbled.

4 They have a secret desire of forgiveness.

5 They confer and ask pardon.

6 They forsake all for it, and highly ^rize it, and then they come to apply
Christ, and the promise to themselves, which his judgment is a saving faith.

In like manner and to the same e^ Master Baynes speaking, Master Baynes
brief directions to a godly life.
how the kno^ledge of misery by sin, and redemption Christ, works on a man
toward faith Christ he says thus.

1 He is drawn by the secret work the spirit to believe that the doctrine
taug^ does concern him.

2 The Lord directs him to enter i^ further consideration with himself, of
and about his present state, and consulteth what do in this extremity.

3 From the former consultation, b^commeth to this holy resolution that he
(...) not return to his old ways, but in all hu^lity, meekness, and
holiness, say with (...) Paul, Lord what shall I do?

4 By this means he comes to an vnf^ned desire of forgiveness.

5 With earnest, humble and particul^ confession of his sins, he powers o^
prayers to God for the pardon of them Christ.

6 He having found this pearl, prize it as it is worth, and therefore sells
all the he has, and bids farewell to his sweet^ delights, for the obtaining
of it, and then (...) comes to apply the Gospel to himself and seals up
his salvation in his heart.

Neither is this the opinion of these learned and holy preachers, but of many
other in our own Church, Mr. Elton in his Catechism the four principle.
Model of Divinity, page 274, to 279. Mr. Wheatly of Regeneration chapter ^4. Mr.
Perkins Catechism, the fourth principle, and the state of a Christian. Sect.
6. to 16.

The next thing to be considered is their reasons whereby they would prove,
that some of those preparations which I mention, do not go before faith in
Christ, and they are two.

The Exception.
Those preparations do not go before faith in Christ. 1. Because they do not
draw all men to believe in Christ, in whom they are wrought for (say they) Gods
cords do draw, and have always irresistably coming joined with them. 2.
Because (I my self) in my Treatise say, that some of them are effects and
fruits of faith following it: Therefore cannot they go before it as
preparations, to which I will answer severally.

The Defense.
Their first reason To the first reason.
is of no force: First because though those preparations, do not in the event
draw all men to believe in Christ, in whom they are wrought: yet do they at one
time or other, draw all the elect so to do, that are ordained unto eternal
life, and to believe in him for that end. For of these only is the question.
Secondly, if their reason were good, then would it prove that a belief of the
Gospel, is none of Gods cords, to draw men to believe in Christ, nor the
Preaching of the Gospel none of Gods means, to work faith in Christ, for
neither the one does draw al men so to come to Christ, nor the other so work
faith in Christ, in all that have the one wrought in them, or the other taught
unto them: witness the Parable of the seed in the Gospel. Mat. 11.19. to 28.
Is not the act of generation Gods ordinance to the begetting of a child,
because a child is not begotten by every hand acts.

I confess Gods spirit does not only draw men to believe in Christ: but also
works it in them actually, at one time or other, after those preparations: but
drawing men to believe, or preparing them thereunto, is a different action,
from his working of faith, or enabling them to believe, and in the elect
coming follows drawing necessarily, in respect of the event.

Their second reason To the second reason.
whereby they would prove, that some of the preparations I name, cannot go
before faith in Christ, is of no power: because, though I say some of them may
go before it in one respect; yet may they follow in another.

Indeed I say, that a fear of God, goes before faith in Christ, as a
preparation to it, page 222. and that a fear of God follows faith in Christ,
as an effect thereof: page 304. but neither do I say, that a filial fear is
the preparation, nor a servile fear the effect: though the faithful after
believing in Christ, do fear to sin for fear of condemnation, else the
Holy Ghost would never diswade from it on that ground.

The like may be said of sorrow for sin, by comparing page 222. where it is
a preparation to faith, and page 301. where it is an effect of a saving faith,
(or rather of one that has it) for I do not say, that sorrow for sin on the
same grounds altogether, and in the same measure does go before and after
faith in Christ, and therefore their reason is but a Cavil, and so I descend
to the third general thing against which they except in handling the sixth
rule, viz. the particular naming of a beginning of repentance, to be one of
those gifts of the spirit, that prepare to faith in Christ.

Against this there are three exceptions, 1 against the position it self. 2
against the exposition of it; and 3 against the handling of the position.

The Trial.
The position it self that repent^nce is one of those preparations.
The position it self, is this, Repentance is begun before faith in Christ.

The Exception.
This position they dislike for two causes. First because it implies a
beginning of repentance before faith in Christ, some space of time. Secondly
because it supposes that repentance is begun at one time, in some part of it,
and finished at another in the residue.

The Apology.
To the 1. Excepti^n.
I do indeed often use the word Before to express the Precedence I mean, but
neither did I mean, a precedence some space of time, nor can they show it by
the words of the book, except I had added thereunto some other word as time,
space, season, or the like, to give light to such an interpretation, which is
not done in that whole disputation. Or except the word Before in the English
tongue, did always carry that sense only, which experience disprooues; seeing
one thing may be before another in nature, as fire before heat; in order, as
the second before the third; In dignity as an Earl before a Baron; and in
worth, as gold before silver: As well as in time, as the begetting of a child
is before his birth.

Secondly, they had reason to interpret my meaning of a precedence in nature,
rather then in time, because I made the beginning of repentance to be a means
unto Faith in Christ (as is to be seen by my two first Arguments and other
places of the book) and therefore before it only in the order of causes, and
consequently in the order of nature. 2. Because in my disputation, I oppose the
common opinion, and the received opinion concerning the precedence betwixt
Repentance and Faith, is, that faith goes before repentance not in time, but in
nature, therefore my opinion that contradicts theirs, should be understood of
the same manner of precedence viz. that repentance goes before faith in order
of Nature.

Thirdly, though I meant a precedence in nature, yet did I not mean that so
much, as the proof of this, namely a necessity of the being of repentance with
faith in Christ. For my chief intent was to show that sinners cannot,
warrantably with any expectation of benefit by their faith believe in Christ
for salvation, except they repent; when they do the on^ they must do the
other, as appears by this in that by way of exposition, I say men cannot
believe in Christ as long (...) they live in their sins, page 244, line 27
and that I expound the word Before b^ till or until. page 279. line 26, 27.
and 278 line 25; and 281. line 17.24. and 282. l. 25 27. and in other places.

In the fourth place. If I say to my Tenant, that owes me the rent of the two
la^ quarters: you shall not bring me the on^ quarters rent, before the other.
I will n^ receive the first before the last; can it be hence concluded
necessarily, that I mean he shall bring his first quarters rent in tim^
precisely before the last: may not my Tenant, with as good reason, conceive my
meaning to be, that I will have him bring both together, and if he do so, may
not he think I will be well content? In like manner, when I say sinners may
not believe in Christ before they have repented: It cannot be necessarily
concluded, I meant, they must repent some space of time before they believe in
Christ. They may with as good reason understand, they must do both at one
time, when they believe in Christ they must repent, and if they so do, it will
be well pleasing to God: Charity might have taught them to interpret me the
best way rather then the worst.

Fifthly, they that hold repentance and faith go together in time, (but give
the precedence to faith in nature) yet speak of the precedence of faith unto
repentance, and when they speak of this precedence they say faith goes before
repentance: and why then may not I which hold, repentance and faith go
together in time, but give the precedence to repentance in nature; speak of
this precedence, and say repentance goes before faith, why should I be
understood of predecency some space of time, more then they, and be blamed
therefore rather then they.

Lastly, (if I may freely speak my mind) I think it may be maintained, that
in some cases, and in some persons, in these days, repentance in some degree
may be wrought before faith in Christ some space of time, according as those
doctrines may be preached first or last in time, and be made effectual to the
good of the hearers by Preaching; for I could never yet conceive how it crossed
any commandment or promise of God, or hindered any duty or comfort of the
faithful, or discountenanced the sincerity of profession, or disparaged the
perseverance of the Elect, in the estate of grace, or derogated from the free
grace of God in Christ, or lifted up man in any proud conceit of his own free
will, as long as it is affirmed, that repentance is but begun only: that it
is wrought by the Spirit only, and by the word only, and in the Elect only,
and only as an effect of their Election, and only as a means to work Gods
will on them, by disposing them to faith in Christ, whereby they may be brought
to that supernatural end, to which they are ordained in him, and therefore
there needed no such clamor, as has been noysed about it, supposing the
position has been so understood.

But (it may be) others see what I cannot, they discern more untruth in the
Doctrine then I, and descry more mischief likely to ensue thereupon, then I
can apprehend; else there is no reason they should be so violent in opposing
it: be it so, then I hope it will appear by their arguments against it.

Surely if the opinion were so absurd and dangerous, I suppose the holy
Scripture would afford arguments many and strong enough to confute it, and if
they did, I make no doubt but they would be diligent enough to collect them,
and if they had, I guess shrowdly, they would be forward enough to produce
them, let us then take a view of them, to the end we may believe if it be
possible.

The Exception.
Their Arguments are four in number, and I will propound them in due form
that their strength may be better discerned. The first Argument.


If all saving graces be wrought all at once and together, so that when one is
wrought, the other is wrought also, then is not repentance begun in time before
a saving faith: But the first is true, therefore the second.

The Assumption they prove, as shall be seen by and by.

The Defense.
1 I answer, If by saving graces the mean such as are appointed by God (...)
save sinners instrumentally, then I deny t^^ consequence; and grant the
Assumptio^ for though all such saving graces (supp^sing there were many of
them) we^ wrought all at an instant; so that when o^ is wrought, the other is
wrought also: y^ might repentance be wrought in time before all these: for in
this sense only fait^ in Christ is a saving grace, because it onel^ apprehends
and lays hold on the Sauio^ Christ and his merits for salvation. Repentance is
no such saving grace: but if by saving grace be meant either those that ten^ to
salvation, or are wrought in all the^ that shall be saved, to make them person
capable of salvation, then I grant the consequence and deny the Assumption,
because some of these viz. illumination an^ belief of the Gospel, and the
beginning o^ repentance, may in time be wrought before faith, for ought this
argument prove to the contrary.

But let us see how they prove the a^sumption in which lies the strength o^
the Argument.

The Exception.
If regeneration be wrought all at once and together, so that when one grace of
regeneration is wrought, all other of the same kind are wrought also, then all
saving graces are wrought all at once and together.

But the one is true, therefore the other. The consequence (they imagine) is
good, because by the work of saving graces men are regenerated, and borne of
the Spirit.

The Assumption they will prove anon.

The Defense.
I answer by granting the consequence of the proposition: but by denying the
Assumption, and that for this ^eason. Illumination of the mind and
understanding, with the knowledge of the mystery of the Gospel in Christ, is a
grace of Regeneration, as well as the sanctifying of the will and affections:
yet may illumination be wrought in time before sanctification, in the Elect,
because it is wrought in the reprobates without sanctification at all, and
therefore regeneration is not wrought all at once and together, as they hau^
alleged. That Illumination is a grace of Regeneration I prove: first, because
it is a part of the new man: Colos. 3.10. Ephesians. 1.17. Ephesians. 4.23.24. Act. 26.19.
Ephesians. 1 18. and 21.
secondly it is a part of the renewing Gods image i^ us: thirdly, it is a part
of our turning an^ conversion: fourthly, because it is a part (...) our
spiritual quickening.

But let us hear how they prove the Assumption.

The Exception.
If all Gods works be perfect, in their several kinds; so that when part of
the^ is wrought, the other is wrought also then is regeneration wrought all at
onc^ and together; so that when one grace thereof is wrought, all other of the
same kind are wrought also at the same time.

But the first is true, therefore the second.

The consequence they take for good, because regeneration, is one of the worke^
of God that argue his perfection in working: yea, one of the chiefest of them.

The Assumption they think needs no proof.

The Apology.
I answer, by granting the consequence; but by denying the Assumption. 1.
Because the Creation of the world, was not perfected in all the parts thereof
all at once but successiiuely, and in six days. 2. The creation ^f Adam was
not, for his soul was created and put into his body (in likelihood) in time
after his body was framed. 3. Sexin lacte dies ter sunt in sanguine trinibis
seni carnem, ter seni membra figurant.
The generation of man man (which is Gods work) is not perfected all at one
instant; for neither is the body perfect all at one instant, but in some days
and weeks, after the child is conceived and begotten, nor is the soul put
into the body as soon as it is begotten and conceived; but some days and
weeks after the child is conceived and begotten, for the man is not perfect
till both soul and body be united together: fourthly, Jesus Christ does frame
the Church and make it perfect, not all at once and together, but successively
by calling one member after another, and adding them thereunto. Act. 2.47. Heb.
11.40. Ephesians. 4.12.

I grant all Gods works are perfect in their several kinds, with that
perfection which God intends them at several time but one time they may be
imperfect in regard of the whole; for unto some part that are already wrought,
others may b^ added at other times when God pleases

I grant also that if by regeneration, the mean Gods making a man actually h^
child, then is regeneration wrought all one instant and together, for that
gra^ that gives him prerogative to be God son, viz: faith in Christ is
wrought all (...) once and together: but if by regeneration be meant every or
any grace of the Spi^ tending or disposing thereunto, or a^ part of
regeneration; then I say regeneration may be begun in one part at one tim^ and
perfected in another grace at another time, as has been showed in the instand
of Illumination and Sanctification but ^uen now, and as may be further declare^
by peace of conscience, and joy in the hol^ Ghost, which are graces of
regeneration yet are not wrought all at one instant wi^ faith in Christ, (at
least not in all men) b^ some time after.

Neither can this be any way a disp^ragement to God, which works it thu^ if
he please so to work; seeing his wi^ cannot disparage his power, nor his
pleasu^ his wisdom: therefore their first A^gument is not strange enough to
prove the question, the second follows.

The Exception.
If a true change of the heart, The second Argument.
cannot be begun in time before a saving faith, then repentance cannot be
begun in time before a saving faith.

But the one is true, therefore the other.

The consequence they say is good, because repentance is a true change of the
heart, the Assumption they prove.

The Defense.
I answer, if by a true change of the heart, be meant the change of the whole
soul in all the parts and powers thereof, ^hen I deny the consequence, and
grant the Assumption. For the repentance I speak of is not such a change. But
if thereby he meant an hearty sorrow for sin and a true change of the purpose
of the heart, without hypocrisy to leave sin; then I grant the consequence,
and deny the As^umption, for this change of the heart may ^e begun in time
before a saving faith.

But they prove their Assumption thus.

The Exception.
If the beginning of a true change (...) the heart do presuppose that faith in
Chri^ death and resurrection, goes in time befo^ this change, then a true
change of the heart cannot be begun in time before saving faith.

But the first is true, therefore the second.

The consequence they think none wi^ deny.

The assumption they offer to proo^ out of my book, where page 301 refr^ning
sin is made a fruit of faith, an^ page 310. we are said to draw down ve^tue
from Christ's death to die unto sinn^ and from his resurrection to walk in
ne^nesse of life.

The Apology.
I answer, 1. generally that this argume^ directly crosses the first
Argument, for saving graces be wrought all at once a^ together, then cannot a
true change of t^ heart presuppose faith in Christ death to go before this
change in time. Secony, and more particularly I answer, the The consequence I
grant, the assumption I deny, for I do not say (which is the question) that at
the first conversion, when the heart begins first to be changed, this change
does presuppose faith in Christ to be in it at the same instant, and that there
can be no refraining of sin in any measure so much as begun till there be
in men faith in Christ, whereby they draw down virtue from his death and
resurrection, etc. But I only affirm there, that refraining of sin for
conscience sake in sincerity and in a settled and constant course is a fruit of
faith, and requires virtue from Christ's death and resurrection, to be drawn
down by faith in Christ, and so does power to mortify our corrupt nature in
the lusts of it, and to quicken us in our new man, to cheerful, constant, and
conscionable new obedience, require and presuppose this faith in Christ's death
and resurrection: faith that Christ's obedience Active and Passive, has merited
pardon, and that if we repent, and believe therein, we shall be pardoned, is
with Gods Spirit sufficient to soften and change the heart as far as in
repentance sticktly taken is required.

It is true, Repentance is a change o^ the heart, for in repentance the heart
(...) changed first in the affection of joy (...) sorrow; for whereas a sinner
before his repentance rejoiced in doing evil, now he sorrows for the evil
he has done. S^condly, in the purpose of doing; for where as formerly he
purposed to live in his si^ Now he purposes to leave them, but thi^ change of
the heart may be wrought before faith in Christ, as well as the chang^ of the
mind from darkness to light (...) wrought before it, Acts 26 18.
and the change may b^ true in the one, that is, the heart, as well a^ in the
other, that is, the mind.

Indeed the beginning of the chang^ of the heart, does presuppose that fait^
which is a belief of threatenings to the impenitent, and promises to the
repe^tant, which comprehends a belief of the truth of the death and
resurrection (...) Christ; and in the elect the beginning (...) this change of
the heart does suppose the faith in Christ's death and resurrection w^ follow,
for the perfecting of it, in mortif^cation and vivification. But it is not tru^
that the beginning of this change does p^ suppose this faith as present, at the
very i^sta^nt, when this change is a beginning, which is the question, and
which is not prove by this Argument, and therefore it proves nothing, the third
follows.

The Exception.
If a man can never begin to return, till he believe that God will be
merciful to him in special, The third argument.
then repentance is not begun in time before a saving faith.

But the first is true, therefore the second.

The Apology.
The consequence is naught, 1. because it takes for granted (which I deny) that
a belief that God will be merciful to a man in special, that is in
particular to John and William, is a saving faith. This is false. 1. because
this is but an assent to the truth of a proposition, such a belief is but an
Historical faith, and such a faith is not a saving faith. 2. because such an
assent cannot be faith, because it does not rest upon the authority of God,
revealing it in Scripture, for he has reuealeth no such thing, touching the
salvation of any particular man but generally to all, but upon this believing
in Christ.

Indeed it is revealed that God will be merciful, in general to mankind,
and in special to those of mankind, which believe in Christ, so that till they
believe in Christ, they may not believe, or persuade themselves that God will
be merciful to them in special.

Before sinners do believe in Christ they may believe and persuade themselves
it is possible for God to have mercy on them, and that God will certainly be
merciful to them when they repent and believe in Christ, but before this they
may not. For though exhortations to repentance are founded commonly upon the
mercy of God in the Gospel: yet no^ upon the Mercy of God already receiue^ by
justifying faith: but offered by God and to be received upon Repentance, an^
faith in Christ; for the conditions must be performed before we may expect the
accomplishing of the promise, and we mus^ feel in our selves by the reflexe of
our ow^ conscience, that we do indeed heartily sorrow for our past sins, and
purpose unfeignedly to leave them, before we may rest o^ Christ or trust to him
for salvation: for till then we are not persons well qualified to receive
mercy, nor fit to trus^ in him for it, so as to be sure to obtain it
certainly in the end: for though the Scripture say, Repent for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, yet does it not say repent for ye are all ready in the
Kingdom of Heaven by a justifying faith.

Secondly, the consequence is naught, because it proves no more but that
repentance is not begun till faith in Christ, and not that it is nor begun in
time before it: for betwixt these two propositions there is great difference as
has bin well observed by them in their answer to my 3 argument.

The Assumption likewise is not true, 1. because a man may begin to return
by illumination, for that is a turning of men from darkness to light, except
they need not repent of their ignorance and infidelity. 2. Acts. 26 18.
because a man may begin to return by a belief of that word that threatens
the impenitent and for fear of punishment, he may also proceed further
herein, by a belief of that word which promises mercy to the repentant, and
in hope of pardon, but a man must begin to return before he believe that God
will be merciful to him in special, or else he will never begin to return,
because there is no such special promise in the word, to be believed, as may
appear by this reason.

The belief that God will be merciful to a man in special, must be either
absolute or conditional. Absolute it cannot be, because no man can believe in
this manner absolutely, but he to whom such mercy is absolutely promised. Now
in the word there is mercy promised to none but under the condition of
repentance and faith in Christ, nor is this mercy promised in special and
particular, but in general to all mankind, viz. which believe in Christ.

If it be not absolute, then is it cond^tionall; if conditional, then may not
a sinner believe, that God will be merciful to him in special, till he have
performed the condition. And therefore for all this, their third reason is
weak, and sinners may begin to repent in time before they believe in Christ.

The Exception.
The fourth argument.
There is a fourth reason alleged to disproone my (supposed) position of
repenting some space of time before believing in Christ, viz. because I say,
page 231 301. 303. that the practice of repentance follows faith, meaning in
time.

The Apology.
This reason is not worth the framing, or answering, for it answers it self.
He that speaks of the practice of Repentance, following faith, and thereby
means the actual performing of that, concerning his former sins which he has
purposed, viz: the leaving of the^, necessarily implies that a purpose to leave
them, does go before faith in Christ. Oh but say they, the following of the
practice is in time, therefore the going before of the purpose is in time also.

I deny the consequence; because to the one, there is no need of time (that is)
betwixt a beginning to repent and believing in Christ, there needs no space of
time; but betwixt believing in Christ, and practicing repentance, there is
required space of time, viz: all our life after. Indeed in one place; I mean,
by the practicing of Repentance, Page 261. l. 25.
the action of Repentance with the heart, or purposing so to do, and this I
say goes before faith in Christ (that is, in nature, not in time) but by
practice of Rep^ntance, viz: I mean, Page 301. 303.
the putting in practice in our lives and conuersations, that which the heart
has purposed concerning the leaving of our sins, to the end the sincerity
of our Repentance may appear; And so much for answer to their Arguments,
whereby they indeauoured to prove against me (upon a misconstruction of my
meaning) that repentance is not begun in time before faith in Christ: and
consequently for answer to their first Exception against my position touching
the precedence of Repentance unto Faith in Christ, the second exception
follows.

The Exception.
Against my position they except in the second place, that saying, Repentance
is begun. I imply it is begun, in one port at one time, and finished at another
time in another.

The Apology.
I answer: first, Master Perkins speaks of Repentance, begun in his
Treatise of Repentance, chap. 1. will they make the like exception against him?
secondly, they have given no reason why repentance cannot be so begun and
perfected, therefore is their exception of no worth; but I will give one reason
why it may be so wrought: namely, because I have already proved, that
regeneration may be so wrought, that is, in one part of it, which is
illumination at one time, and in another part which is sanctification at
another. And so much for clearing my position the exposition follows. The
exposition of my position consists in this, that I mean by the Repentance I
speak of a true purpose of heart to leave our former evil lives, etc.

The Exception.
These words (say they) define repen^ance, The ezposition of the position.
but they think the definition ^aught: 1. because it makes repentance, ^onsist
in the heart only, which should be ^n the whole man soul and body. 2. because
it supposes that truth and sincerity ^f heart can go before faith in Christ.
(...) because it implies that true repen^ance may be before saving grace or
faith (...) Christ. 4. and lastly, because in hand^ing this point, I say a man
may die with his true repentance, and not be saved, to ^ll which I will answer
in order.

The Apology.
I answer first, To the first exception.
that I had reason to call ^rue repentance, a true purpose of heart to ^eaue
our former sins, etc. 1. because ^mpenitency or unrepentance, is a purpose of
heart to go on in our former evil ^ourses, and to live in them still. 2.
because Mr, Perkins so describes the nature of it. Mr. Perkins golden chain,
chap. 39.
Repentance (says he) is when a sinner turns to the Lord, this is performed
when as any one by the instruction of ^he Holy Ghost does purpose, will and
desire and endeavor, to relinquish his former sins and become a new man.

Secondly, I had no reason to make repentance to consist in the body and
outward actions. 1. because repentance is (...) virtue, habit, or quality, (and
so I describ^ it,) which only has his seat in the soul heart, will, and
affections, and not in an^ part of the body. 2. because the repentance of the
body (as they speak) is no^ the virtue it self, but the practice of it, o^
the actual leaving of our former sinne^ according to the purpose of our hear^
Now this is not a part of repentance, Math. 3.2. Acts 26.20. Model of
Divinity. pa. 290. Perkins gold, chain, chapter 37. Buc. iustit. loc. 30. page 289.
b^ an effect or fruits of that virtue, and wit^ this agree not only the
Scriptures, but the judgment of many learned Divines, (...) our own, and
other Countries.

If they say that only is true repentance which brings forth a godly life.

I answer, if by true repentance the^ mean that which in the event shall
stan^ for true before God, which in this worl^ shall help forward the
assurance of ou^ salvation, and in the end be crowned wit^ Heaven; then I say
that is true repentanc^ which brings forth a good life. But (...) thereby be
meant (as I understand it) the which in the nature of the thing is tru^
repentance, that is, Repentance without dissimulation, then I say true
repentance i^ an hearty sorrow for past sins, and (...) true purpose to leave
the same.

If I describe faith in Christ by it office, ^s it iustifies, then I will say
it is a grace of God, whereby a sinner trusts unto Christ for salvation: But if
I describe it as it may ^e distinguished from the faith of hypo^rites that
shall fail them, then will I say, ^t is a grace of God that works by love,
and stirs up unto good works: yet is ^ot working by love, and stirring up to
good works of the nature of Faith, as it ^ustifies (though it be of the
nature of that faith which iustifies) but an effect of that which does
justify, or rather a fruit of him, that is justified by faith, by which he is
declared and manifested to be justified in Gods sight.

Even so if I describe repentance properly, and by the nature which it has as
a virtue, or holy quality, distinct from other graces and virtuous habits, I
will say it is a grace of God whereby sinners sorrow heartily for their past
sins, and purpose unfeignedly to leave them. But if I discribe it so, as it
may be differenced from the repentance of hypocrites which will fail them,
then I will say it is a grace of God, whereby a sinner sorrowing for his
sins, and purposing to leave them, does accordingly leave them and amen^ his
life, yet is not this amendment of li^ a part of repentance the virtue it se^
but a effect of it, and an fruit of him that has it in his heart, which the
repentance of his heart is ^^clared, by the efficacy of it unto sal^tion.

And indeed (to speak as the tru^ is,) though in respect of the inward natu^
of the virtue it self, and as it is seated the heart, that is true repentance
which i^ sorrow for sins past, and a purpose leave them: yet in respect of
efficacy v^ salvation in the event, and in respect manifestation, that only is
true rep^tance and is declared so to be, whi^ brings forth a good life. And
if a m^ may not persuade himself he is ^^ued though he believe in Chri^
except this faith be accompanied (...) him, with inward fruits of other
gr^ces, and outward fruits of a holy lif^ then may not a man persuade himself
that he has repented, unto salvation (...) the heart, except his inward
repentan^ in sorrowing for sins, and purposi^ to leave them be accompanied
with outward amendment of life.

But they bring two reasons, to pro^ that true repentance is not this true
purpose of heart, etc.

The Exception.


The Apology.
I answer, 1. that if we consider this purpose and repentance, only in the
nature of them, they may fail: for there is nothing in their nature, as they
are in themselves considered, that can keep them from failing, but considering
them in relation to the ground from whence they proceed which is election; to
the end for which they are wrought in the elect, which is to make them persons
capable of the salvation, unto which they are elected; or to the efficient
cause which is the spirit, who perfects his graces begun, so they cannot
fail totally and finally: for in the elect this purpose of repentance is
seconded with practice accordingly, in the event.

2. Repentance not dissembled, (of which I speak) may fail both of the end
which is eternal life, and of the effect which is amendment of life. For a m^^
not having received the grace of perse^rance, may give over this purpose and
^turne to his former sins, and conseque^ly fail of eternal life, as may be
suppo^^ in Ahab, and the Ninevites.

The Exception.


The Apology.
I answer, as to the former argume^^ that true repentance, or a^ purpose (...)
heart to leave our former sins (not d^sembled) may be in Reprobates, as Ahabs
case, though true repentance whi^ brings forth new obedience in the li^
constantly, conscionably, and sincerely, cannot: So that for all this I might
warra^^ably describe the true repentance I spea^ of, by a true purpose of the
heart to le^ our former evil ways.

I did not write a Treatise of Rep^^tance, but of Faith (of repentance in (...)
Treatise I spoke, but by the way and occ^sionally) therefore was it not
needful^ should define repentance precisely, a description if it would serve
the turn.

If (of set purpose) I had treated of that common place I would have defined it
otherwise then I have done, and I would have showed that the object of it is
sin only and sins past, for of that only must a man repent, for the doing
whereof in time past, he must be sorry; and the doing whereof he must leave in
time to come; and what can that be but sin only, that is, 2. Cor. 12.21:
Act. 18.22. Reuela. 2.22.
sin past (for there is no reason we should repent of them before we have
committed them,) though we must endeavor to prevent them before we have
committed them.

And if I had directly meant to define repentance, I would have left out of
that which they call my definition, some words which are in, and have put in
some other which are left out.

That which I would have left out, which is in, should have been these words,
viz. and purpose to serve God better, for indeed they be but a consequence,
following upon our purpose of leaving our former sins, or rather an
amplification of it by the contrary, then any part of the nature of repentance,
the ob^ect whereof is only sin, and therefore not new serving of God. That
which would have inserted into the Definition which is left out, should have
been these words, is a godly sorrow for sin, for the is the first part of
repentance, as shall (...) seen by and by.

If any ask me why I meant to de^cribe repentance as I did.

I answer. 1. I added the form^ words, not because I meant thereby (...)
describe any part of repentance, but because they contain a necessary
conseque^^ and effect following, upon our purpose (...) leaving our former
sins. For to what (...) should we purpose to leave our sins (...) time
past, excepr we resolved in time (...) come to serve God better: how shall the
former be manifested without the latte^ 2. I omitted the other words not
becau^^ I thought not sorrow for sin, to be a^ part of repentance, which
shall be shew^ by and by, but because purpose to lea^ past sins necessarily
presupposes sorro^ for the committing of them, else wh^ should make a man to
resolve to lea^ them but the sorrow of his heart for (...) doing thereof. 3. I
only described rep^tance by a purpose of the heart to leave (...) former
sins, not because I thought t^^ to be all requisite in repentance, but
because this purpose and resolution is the last act of the heart as it repents,
or the last act of repentance, as it is seated in the heart.

Now that the nature of Repentaance consists in two things, vix: unfeigned
sorrow of heart for sins already committed, and purpose of heart not to
commit the same again, (to prove this) I shall not need to produce
testimonies of Scripture, for common sense teaches us, that Repentance in men
concerning things in the world, has for the object of it things hurtful
^nely: that is, that either are such, or seem to us to be such. I (mean) we
fear or feel for something, that we have done; and that our Repentance for
the things that we have done, and for the doing whereof we are sensible of
such hurt, consists in sorrow for the doing thereof; and in purpose to do so
no more, if it were to be done again: I will make it plain by a familiar
example.

I want a convenient house, hereupon I purpose to build one, I confer with
workmen about it, and the charge of the building, I am told it will cost me
but three hundred pound, upon this charge I reckon, and go about it, but
before it be finished I find it will cost me four hundred pound: when I see
this I repent o^ the building of my house: that is, it irke^ me, it vexes me,
and makes me sorry for the cost I have bestowed on it, and not only so, but I
wish it were undone, and resolve if it were to do again, I would never build
it: yea, I purpose never to vnde^take the building of a house again, but will
be sure it shall cost me no more then expect.

In like manner, for a long time a sinn^ goes on in an evil course of life,
without fear of Hell, and with a presumptuou^ hope of Heaven, at length when
the tim^ of his conversion is come, the Lord is pleased to let him see the
folly and fowlenes^ of his sins, the danger of his course, if (...) go on,
and the benefit of his repentance^ he return, these considerations believed
and laid to heart, makes him repent: that i^ to be heartily sorry: yea, pricked
in heart, f^^ his evil life past, and to resolve to live (...) longer in them:
yea, that now he would not do the same things again, if the were to be
committed, and were not a^ ready done, and thus much be enough (...) have
written in defense of those word^ wherein I describe the nature of the tru^
repentance which I say goes before fait^ in Christ, and for answer to the
first Exception against the Exposition, the second follows.

The second exception likewise is idle, To the second Exception.
for whereas for the ground of it, it is imagined and alleged, that there can
be no manner of sincerity in a man's actions before he believe in Christ. This I
shall easily disprooue by one that was no Proselyte, nor ever had faith in
Christ (for ought the Scripture says) yet does the Lord say of him concerning
one action, viz: Gen 20.6.
the taking away of Sarah Abraham's wife, that he knew he did it in the
integrity of his heart, now if the heart of one man may be sincere in respect
of Chastity, before he have Faith in Christ, why may not the heart of another
be upright in respect of Repentance before faith in Christ, I do not say, or
mean, with that integrity, that is acceptable to God unto salvation, but with
that which is some way acceptable viz: for the obtaining of temporal
blessings, and removing the like evils and punishments.

For as a regenerate man, though otherwise sincere and upright generally, yet
in some particular actions may dissemble and play the hypocrite, as David in
the matter of Vriah and Bathsheba: even so an unregenerate man, may in many of
his action generally, be naught, and unsound, deceitful and hypocritical; and
yet in some one, sincere and upright.

To the third Exception.
In like manner their third exception i^ frivolous; for it supposes an untruth
for the foundation of it, viz: that no true rerepentance can go before saving
grace, or faith in Christ: the contrary is plain in the Ninevites who are said
to repent, Jonah. 3.4 5. ^at. 12.41.
and ye^ is it not revealed that ever they had a saving faith.

If any say that theirs was not true repentance.

It is disprooued: first, because it was wrought through a belief of the word
preached: secondly, because the holy Ghos^ calls it Repentance: (...) Math.
12.41.
thirdly, because it was manifested so to be, by the signs of their sorrow for
their sins, in fasting and humiliation, and by the practice of their purpose
in leaving their sins.

Jonah 3.10.
Or if any chance to say, the Ninevites had saving grace or faith in Christ.

It cannot be proved, seeing the saving grace of Jesus Christ was never
preached to them by the Gospel for ought can be showed.

Indeed their repentance in some sense might be called a saving grace; because it
saved them from a temporal destruction threatened to come upon them within
forty days, if they had not repented: but it saved them not from the eternal
punishment of their finnes. And now to the last Exception.

In handling the exposition of my position; It is alleged that I say, To the
fourth Exception.
a man may die with this beginning of Repentance and not be saved. I answer
that they mistake and do me wrong in this collection, for it is not a flat
position, but a supposition: not that an Elect child of God may die with this
repentance; but that (if it were possible for him to dye in this state) having
only sorrow for his sins, and purpose to leave them, and not faith in
Christ; yet could he not be saved, and my reason is, because he has not that
grace, that entitles him to Christ's benefits, and unites him unto Christ for
the partaking of them; without which no man or woman of years of discretion,
and understanding can be saved.

If any object it was to no end to make a supposition of an impossibility.

I answer, it is indeed impossible any such event should fall out, as the
dying of an Elect vessel with a beginning of Repentance, and without faith in
Christ, and consequently without salvation, therefore in respect of the event
such a supposition is needless: but for all this there is some end of such a
supposition in regard of that use that may be made thereof, viz: to prove the
absolute necessity of faith in Christ, in all men and women of age and
discretion, which is so necessary, that with no other grace, either of
Repentance, Love, Patience, or Obedience, we can please Go^ unto salvation:
the reason is, because b^ no grace else (besides faith) have we Christ to
please God for us, unto our salvation.

Our Savior Christ makes a supposit^on about the deceiving of the Elect; when
he faith that the false Apostles should d^ceiue (if it were possible) the very
Elec^ shall any man say this supposition w^ idle? Math. 24 24.
because it was of an impossibility (God forbid) for though it were idle i^
respect of the event, because it is impossible for any of the Elect so to be
deceiue^ and corrupted by the heresies of false teachers; yet is it not idle in
respect of the (...) and end which Christ aimed at therei^ which was to show
that the subtilty (...) false Apostles, Priests, and Preachers in the
Antichristian Church, by the depth of Satan should be so great, and they
should so fair prevail with their pleasi^ doctrines, and lying words, that
(if it were possible) the very Elect should be deceived thereby, to the end
that they might take heed how they heard them, or gave credit to their
doctrine, but abandon it, and them, as appears by the 25. and 26. verses.

Secondly, I answer to their exception: suppose I meant positiuely that a man
might die with this repentance and be damned, yet is not this untrue,
understanding by this true repentance, that which I do, viz: only sorrow for
sin, and purpose to leave it without dissimulation, as in the case of Abab
and the Ninevites, and not the tree with the fruit, the purpose with the
practice, the change of the heart, with the change of the li^e.



I answer that there is no contradiction between these two places, Solut.
for in the former I do not say, it was not repentance sufficient unto
salvation; but that it was not grace sufficient to salvation (good cause by
reason of the supposition, that saving faith is not yet wrought, page 275.)
Neither do I say in the latter place, that the repentance of the Publicans was
grace sufficient to salvation, but that it was repentance sufficient thereunto;
for who knows not by all that discourse that I speak of repentance properly
and strictly therein, and take repenting for an action of the soul, and as it
is a virtuous quality seated in the heart, and what can be more required of the
heart for repenting, then hearty sorrowing for sins, and unfeigned purpose to
leave them?

Indeed God requires more of the repenting sinner, then this sorrow and
purpose, for he requires practice of this purpose, and new obedience; but
practice is not repentance it self, but a fruit of it, and new obedience in
life is not a part of repentance to constitute it: but an effect, to testify
it, not to be the nature of it, but the efficacy thereof unto justification.



True, but not directly or immediately, as if it were the hand to lay hold
thereupon, or the instrument to receive it; for that is faith only, which
lays hold upon Christ the Savior himself and receives him: but because it is
a way and means together with other preparing graces to fit us for faith,
whereby we are entitled to Christ and all his benefits; even as Heaven is
promised to patience, to love and new obedience, Ioa 3.16. Romans 1.17.
because in the Elect they are fruits of faith, to which it is promised
directly and immediately as the hand and instrument to apply and apprehend it.

The repentance I speak of, viz: sorrow for sin, and purpose to leave it, is
available to salvation: that is, to qualify us for it, but not that whosoever
has this and no more grace, shall be saved and forgiven: for what then should
become of faith in Christ? but because in the Elect they which have this
wrought in them, as a preparation to faith, shall in time have faith wrought in
them also, to the end they may be saved, Philip. 1.
for God will perfect his work in them when he begins it.

Now I come to the third and last thing propounded about the position it self
of the preced^^cy of repentance, The handling of the position.
unto faith in Christ which is the handling of the position: which is done
three ways 1. by proving it, 2. by clearing of it, and 3. by applying it.

The Trial.
The point is proved two ways: first by the testimony of a learned Divine:
s^condly, by reasons taken from Scripture and none of all these like them.

The Exception.
The proouing of the point, or portion by testimony.
The testimony is Mr. Perkins, and against it they except two ways: first, (the
say) I mistake the meaning of the autho^ for he is not understood to speak of
r^pentance, before or without faith in Chr^ but with it: secondly, though I had
n^ mistaken his meaning, yet is it but one si^gle testimony, because I had no
more: an^ thirdly, that his mind concerning the point is not there declared
directly and (...) set purpose, (as it is else where) but occ^sionally and by
the way only in another discourse, and that it is delivered in (...) book
that he never perused before he died, but was put out after his death.

The Apology.
I answer, to the end we may rightly conceive, To the first Exception.
and distinctly v^derstand the meaning of Mr. Perkins in the words alleged
we must take three things for granted which cannot be denied: first, tha^ he
speaks of a certain order betwixt that repenting and believing, and the
laying hold of the promise there spoken of: 2. That he says the order he
speaks of i^ Gods order. 3. That the order of God about repenting, believing,
laying hold of the promise, is to be observed in Baptism.

This being premised, In the next place we come to speak what the order is in
Mr. Perkins Judgment, namely whether repenting go before believing, or
believing before repenting.

Some say, his meaning is, first believe and lay hold of the promise then
repent of your sins, I say, first believe the Gospel, then repent of your
sins, then by hold of the promise of forgiveness and eternal life by faith
in Christ. For their conjecture at his meaning, they give no reason, but
against it, my reason is this.

If their conjecture were right, then the believing he speaks of, and the
laying hold of the promises, were all one faith, but that cannot be Mr. Perkins
mind, because he evidently distinguishes betwixt them, for the believing he
speaks of, he joys with repenting, and the believing that he ioynes with
repenting, he distinguishes from laying hold of the promises, that shall be
made clear thus.

The believing that he ioynes with repenting, makes men Christ's Disciples,
that appears page 257. Col. 1. B. in these words mark, first it is said, make
them my Disciples by calling them to believe a^^ repent, and the making men
Christ's Disciples, by calling them to believe and repent, does in the order
there spoken of b^ Mr. Perkins go before laying hold of the promises; because
speaking of propha^^ men that do not consider the order which God uses, in
couenanting with men i^ Baptism, he says, they deal prepost^rously
ouerslipping the commandment o^ repenting and believing, and in the first
place lay hold of promises made to them i^ Baptism, ibid Col. 2. B.

So that if the order of God perverted by profane man be (in Mr. Perkins
opinion) first to lay hold of the promises, and then to believe and repent,
then the order of God rightly kept by the godly must needs be first to observe
the commandment of God by believing and repenting, that is, first to believe
the Gospel and repent, and then to lay hold of the promises, that is, by faith
in Christ to rest and rely on his merits, for salvation; the rather is this
true because in the same place. Col. 2. C. and upon the former words, he
inferres that which I have cited in my Treatise. viz. we must as good
Disciples obey the commandment, which bids us turn and believe before we can
have any benefit or profit by the promise of God, etc.

Solut.


True, understanding it in respect of time, not of order, for repentance may be
with faith in time, and without it in nature, but the question is of the
precedence of repentance to faith, not in time but in nature, M. Perkins
meaning in that place (say I) is, that by the order of God (which is the order
of nature) repenting goes before laying hold of the promise, and therefore
repentance (by his judgment in that place) must go before faith in Christ, For
in his opinion faith in Christ is a laying hold, or an apprehending for a man's
self, Perk. on the Reave. chapter 2. v. 14. and an Iud. v. 1.
or applying the promises of God in Christ.

Perkins ioynes repentance with believing, therefore the repentance he means
is not without faith, but with it.

True, Solut.
but the believing he ioynes with repentance, is not saving faith (for that is
laying hold of the promises by faith in Christ, which he disioynes from
believing, joined with repenting) but a belief of the Gospel, which is the
means of repentance, page 257. Col. 1. A. and Col. 2. B.

Because in the second place, they except against this testimony, that it is
therefore in sufficient, because it is but one an^ it is therefore but one,
because I had (...) more, therefore now will I show, why cited but one, and
that I have more.

I brought but one testimony, because thought it enough, in regard it was the
t^stimony of so learned and godly a Divine (...) our age and Country, whose
works prai^ him in the gates of our Jerusalem.

And now will I add unto that o^ some other, to the end it may appear have
more, and I will begin with the Doctrine of our own Church of England, which
ought to prevail with us b^yond other testimonies of particular D^uines.

Homily of salvation the 3. part.
How can a man have this true fait^ this sure trust and confidence in God, the
by the merits of Christ, his sins are fo^giuen him, and he received to the
favor (...) God, and to be partaker of the Kingdom of Heaven, when he lives
ungodly, and d^nieth Christ in his deeds; and in anoth^^ Homily.

As he that reads Caesar's comment^ries, Homily of faith the 1. part.
believes the History of Caesar (...) be true: yet it is not properly said,
that (...) believes in Caesar, of whom he seeks (...) help or benefit: so
he that believes all the is spoken of God, in the Bible to be true, and yet
lives so ungodly that he cannot look to enjoy the promises and benefits of
God. Although it may be said, that such a man has a faith and belief to the
word of God, yet is it not properly said that he believes in God, or has such
a faith or trust in God, whereby he may surely look for grace, mercy, and
everlasting life at Gods hands, but rather for judgment and punishment,
according to the demerits of his wicked life.

With this agrees the Common Prayer Book, The Common Prayer book.
where in the form of administering the Lords supper, it exhorts the repentant
only, to come to Christ, that is, to believe in him for salvation, (in these
words.)

Hear what comfortable words, our Savior Christ says, to all those that
truly turn to him, come unto me all ye that travail and be heavy laden and
I will ease you: So God leued the World, that he sent his only begotten
son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life, According to which the Catechism in the common Prayer book requires,
those that are to be baptized, and are to come to the Communion, repentance or
a steadfast purpose to lead a new life, before a lively faith in Gods mercy.

After the Doctrine of our Church shall follow the testimony of some learned
Divines and Preachers of our Church.

If you have not found the Son (sait^ Mr. Fox) seek for him by repentance
seek and ye shall find, Mr. Fox of Christ crucified. fol. 16. B. in quarto.
repentance seeket^ Christ, faith finds him and obedien^^ holds him.

This faith is a great state, a Lady, (...) Duchess, (says Mr. Latimer) first
sh^^ has a Gentleman Usher, that goes before her, Mr. Latimers fourth Sermon
before K. Edward, page 57.
this Gentleman Usher is called the knowledge of sin. When we enter into o^
hearts and acknowledge our faults, an^ stand not about to defend them, he is
none of these winkers, he kickes not when he^ hears his fault. Now as the
Gentleman usher goes before her so she has a train^ that comes behind her,
etc. and these are the works of our vocation, viz. to be good to his
neighbor, D. Halls works page 147. of baptism.
and to obey God, etc.

Never will Christ come unto that soul, where the Herald of Repentance, has
not been before.

The Key of David, pa. 27. printed at London, 1610. in octa.
The Scriptures calls this work of the Holy Ghost, which is the beginning of
our regeneration, by the name of Repentanc^ even the thing whereby we are
prepared to receive the sanctification of faith. And afterward.

It is most impossible for any one, Ibid pa. 30. 31
to obtain this confidence of grace, except he first repent himself of his
former life, sincerely, and from the bottom of his heart: for even as the
faith of knowledge, namely to believe without all doubt, that God is, and that
he is a rewarder of all that seek him in Jesus Christ, and contrarily, one
that takes vengeance, on all those which turn away from him, for all their
sins and wickedness which ever they committed, as (I say) this faith must of
necessity go before true repentance toward God: so our repentance: namely,
that we converting from our own ways unto God, do return into the right
way, must needs go before that faith of Jesus Christ, and immediately after.

The beginning of the Gospel of God is repentance as it is written, The
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, prepare you the way of the Lord, viz.
perform repentance, and again.

True Repentance toward Gods, must of necessity go before the faith of Jesus
Christ, and lastly.

Repentance is the first beginning and (as it were) the entry of our
regeneration, but faith is the very perfection, and (as it were) the highest
top of our Regeneration, viz. the insculpture and engraving of the Holy
Ghost, whereby the repentant does assuredly believe, that all, his iniquities
are forgiven, and that he is united with God in everlasting love in Jesus
Christ.

Next to the testimony of our Church, and her Divines, I will produce the
witness of the Divines of other Churches, and first the ancient Doctors and
Fathers, and then the latter writers.

Of the ancient Doctors, these shall suffice.

Just. Mart. qua. 37. ad orthodoxos. (...).
The baptism of John, ( which was the baptism of repentance, Acts 19.4.) was
(says Justin Martyr) the beginning or entrance of the Gospel of Grace,
wherefore it was above the Law, otherwise he had not admitted them which had
sinned according to the Law, that hereby they might by repentance and faith in
Christ receive forgiveness of their sins committed.

Tertul. lib de. ^aptismo c. 10 ^uasi candida^u^ etc.
Tertullian speaking of the baptism of John, says that in those days,
therefore the baptism of Repentance was acted, as if the party baptized were
thereby declared to be a suter for remission, and sanctification by Christ, to
follow after. And in another place.

Tertul. lib de ^enitentia. ss. 6.
The lauer (of baptism) is the seal of faith, which faith is begun and
commended by the faith of repentance.

With what tears (says Basil) o^ght that soul burdened with many sins
depart from sins, Basil: mag: quest compendio explicat. quest: 10.
and with what hope and affection approach unto God? Respons. first it ought to
hate the former condemned life, so that it ought even to abhor the
remembrance of it, and to detest it.

St. Chrysostom speaking of John's ministry and baptism in the Wilderness of
Judea, says thus: Chrysostom in Matthew 3. Homil. 10.
Because he came to Preach the baptism of Repentance etc, he inferred for
remission of sins, as if he should say; I persuaded them to confess their
sins and to repent: not altogether that they might be punished, but that the
more easily they might receive the gift of remission; for unles they had
condemned themselves they had never sought for grace, and not seeking for
grace, neither could they obtain remission: for this Baptism prepares the way
to another Baptism that is of Christ, and therefore he said that they should
believe in one that was to come after himself.

Next to the ancient Doctors, follow the latter, (but learned) Divines.

Let us (says Calvin) prepare the way: Caluins comment on Luke 3.4.
that is, leaving our sins which stop the way to the Kingdom of God, let
us give access unto his grace.

^elancth pro^gom: on ^e Epistle to ^^e Romans.
Justification (says Melanct^on) ought to be understood of the good will of
God, accepting us, not infusing into v^ habits (that is, virtues) and yet there
ought to be virtues in us because the Gospel preaches Repentance, and Faith
cannot be but in Repentance, therefore to the end our faith may be increased,
^^scators commentary on Luke 3.4.
our repentance must be increased.

That Christ may come into us (says Piscator) as our Savior, we must prepare
the way unto him by true Repentance, and by bringing forth fruits worthy of
Repentance.

Faith (says Rolloc) does always follow a heart dejected and contrite in the
sight of sin and and misery. Rollocks commentary on Ioa. 5.44. Dietericus
Instit: Catecheticae page: 241. de aenitentia.


Good works follow Faith; but Faith is in none but th^se that are converted.

I know well, that they allege many testimonies against me, both out of
ancient and latter writers, but being well considered, they make nothing
against me; therefore one answer will serve for all: for if they say Faith
goes before Repentance, they speak either of a belief of the word, or of
amendment of life.

When they speak of Faith which is a belief of the Word, then the sense is, a
sinner must believe the threatening of the Word to the impenitent, and the
promises of it to the repentant before he will sorrow for his sins, or
purpose to leave them: and to this purpose spoke Clemens Alexandrinus of the
precedence of Faith unto Repentance: saying, Cle^: Alexand^ Stro: ^. 2 l^ et
graece p: 7
Repentance is the office and work of Faith; for unless (a sinner) believe
that there was sin, wherewith he was formerly held, he will not be removed;
and unless he believe that punishment hangs over his head which offends,
and that salvation is promised for him that lives according to the
commandments, he will not be changed.

Answerable to which is that known place of St. Ambrose. Ambros: de
penitentia. l. 1. c. 1


No man can repent rightly, but he that hopes for pardon.

In like manner when they speak of repentance, that is amendment of life,
their meaning is; a sinner must believe in Christ before he amend his life,
Augus: Se: d tempore Se^: 7. Hom: 10. Gal: 5.6.
and practice new obedience, and in this sense is St Augustine to be
understood, where he speaks of Repentance, saying; Nothing makes true
Pepentance but the hatred of sin, and the love of God; the fire of this
sacrifice is love; for that repentance that proceeds from the love of God, must
proceed from faith in Christ; for faith works by love, Gal: 5.6.
but faith works not by love our first repentanc^ (at our first conversion,)
which is sorrow for sin, and purpose to leave it, but amendment of life which
follows faith.

Far be it from me to presume to blame those worthy Authors, for speaking
promiscuously of Repentance the virtue, and amendment of life, the fruit
thereof; there is warrant enough from Scripture phrase so to speak, in regard
that where the one is, the other also is, or shall be in due time in the Elect;
for the one is the way to the other: the repentance of the heart is the means
to the repentance of the life, that is, amendment of the life: But I blame
those that oppose my opinion for producing such testimonies against me, when
either they speak not of the same faith, or not of the same repentance that I
do: for touching faith, they speak of a belief of the word, and I of
believing in Christ: and as for repentance, I speak of the virtue it self,
they of the fruit of that virtue: I of the purpose, they of the practice; my
repentance is inward in the heart, their outward in the life: mine in the
affections, their in the actions; for I have often and plainly affirmed, that
a belief of the Word and Gospel goes before any repentance, Jonah: 3 5.
and that faith in Christ goes before the practice of repentance in amendment
of life, and in the mortifying of our sinful nature, that it break not out to
the committing of the same sins again.

To the third and last exception, I answer that those allegations do rather
fortify the testimony for me then any way weaken it: To the third (...) last
exception against the testimony out o^ Mr. Perkins.
and make rather against them that allege it, for first in that it is urged,
the point was delivered but in a passage only, where he had no such cause to
discourse of that matter, this shows that he had the better mind to deliver
it (belike because he thought it needful and profitable to be opened, and that
he was more confident in the truth thereof: secondly, In that it is said, the
book out of which the testimony was taken, was the last of his writings, which
he had not leisure to peruse, and that it was put out after his death; this
implies, that he wrote that book when he was of most sound and settled
judgment, and that therefore the Doctrine in question was most free from
exception, and least needed correction: and therefore howsoever there may seem
some contradiction in his other works, to that which is here delivered: yet
must the last writing be esteemed a retractation of the first, rather then the
first of his writings should be produced against this last for the confutation
of it. And thus much of handling the point in question by proouing it, and of
proouing it by the testimonies of men; now follows the proouing of it by
arguments taken from Scripture, which of the six generals, was the fourth point
propound^d to be observed in discussing this question.

The Arguments are in number six: but in weight they are all found too light.
We will examine their exceptions in order.

The Trial.
Repentance is begun before Faith in Christ, The first Argument.
because the Repentance of the Publicans and Harlots. Mat. 21.31. was begun
before their Faith; and theirs was true Repentance and saving Faith.

The Exception.
To this they answer, by granting that the Repentance and Faith of the
Publicans and Harl^t, were true and saving, but by denying that their
repentance was to their Faith, as a means to an end, for (say they) the Text
in Matthew shows this only; that the Pharisees perseuered in their infidelity,
and abode in their unbelief, though the Publicans and Harlots believed: or
that the Pharisees, neither repented not believed, though the Publicans and
Harlots did both, before whom they should have gone into the Kingdom of
Heaven, and given them an example to follow.

The Apology.
This answer I will take away, by proving that the Repentance of the uPblicans
and Harlots, was to their Faith, as a means to an end; and this I will make
good two ways: first, by the context of the place, and a reason drawn out of
it: secondly, by the judgment of the learned.

First the context, or the precedent and subsequent matter of that place,
proves my interpretation, because the condition of the Publicans, touching
entering into Gods Kingdom is amplified, Ver. 28. and 29. by a parable of a
son, who when he was bidden by his father to go into the Vineyard and work,
the Text faith, He said he would not; but afterward he repented and went. ver.
29. Now because by that son is meant the Publicans, and of that son, it is
said not only and barely he went, (though he said he would not) but that
he repented and went; therefore this shows not only and barely he went: but
that therefore he went, because he repented first of his not going formerly,
and of his saying he would not go; and therefore consequently will it follow,
that the holy Ghost thereby meant, not only a^ barely that the Publicans
repented a^ believed; but that therefore they beleeue^ because they repented
first of their other sins: for as the repenting of the son f^ his not
going, and of his saying he would not go, was a cause why he went, a^ was a
means unto it (for sorrow for past fault, and purpose to leave it, mus^ needs
be a means to the amending of it so the repenting of the Publicans an^ Harlots
for their sins in time past, was (...) cause and means of their believing i^
Christ afterward, and therefore was to i^ as a means to an end, and
consequently was in nature before it.

The rather is this true, because when the holy Ghost comes to speak of the
Scribes and Pharisees described by the other son, which said, he would and
went not, ver. 30. he says they repented not afterward that they might
believe: what less can hence be gathered, but that therefore they did not
believe in Christ, viz: because they did not first repent of their former
wicked lives, nor were pricked in heart for them, nor purposed to leave them?

Secondly, I prove my interpretation, by the judgment of the learned: namely,
that the repentance of the Publicans was to their faith as a means to an end.

For in express words Mr. Beza says, Bezae annot. on Math. 21.32.
that the repentance there spoken of, was a way to the faith there mentioned. I
dispute not now what repentance Beza means, Iter igitur. ad fidem est (...)
I have proved it to be true repentance in my Treatise, and the reasons are
not answered, and besides now the point is granted by them.

Secondly, Morton of repentance, the argument of it toward the end
Mr. Morton a learned Divine of our Country does so expound the words, Matthew
21.32. you did not repent to believe, or that ye might have believed, and
thereupon concludes that repentance is distinguished from sanctification as
being but a preparation thereunto. For if the Pharisees did not repent to
believe or that they might believe, then on the contrary, the Publicans did
repent to believe, or that they might believe: and consequently, their
repentance was to their faith as a means to an end.

And verily if the words had gone thus in the verse, they believed to repent or
that they might repent. I believe they would have concluded quickly, that their
faith was to their repentance as a means to an end, and consequently as a
cause of an effect, and therefore in nature before which is more then that they
continued their belief, or that they both repen^ and believed.

Wherefore my exposition having w^rant from the grammar of the text, agre^ment
with the scope of the place, and consent with the opinion of the learned; a^
theirs being but a bare affirmatio^. therefo^ (I hope) it will hence easily
follow, that (...) Doctrine grounded thereon, concerni^ the precedence of
repentance to faith (...) nature, is warrantable, and consequently (...) first
Argument to prove it, good for oug^ has yet been showed to the contrary.

The Trial.
Repentance is begun before faith (...) Christ, The second argument.
because God gives men repentan^ to the end they may believe in Christ. 1. Tim.
2.25.

The Exception.
To this second Argument they answer that it proves not the question, because
the text of Scripture, on which it is founded is not rightly expounded. For
(say they) by acknowledging the truth, in Timothy 1. not meant believing in
Christ (as I have expounded it:) but professing the truth, not only in word,
but in life and conversation, accompanied with an inward change.

The Apology.
In defense of my interpretation, I have given four reasons, to three of which
they answer: let us examine the validity of their answers in order.

The Trial.
First, by acknowledging the truth, in Timothy is meant believing in Christ,
because by it we come out of the snares of the Devil, that is, of the Devils
children are made the children of God.

The Exception.
This (they say) is not a good reason, because we come out of the snares of
the Devil by repentance, as well as by faith.

The Apology.
Upon this I reply, that this instance overthrows not my reason, because
recovering out of the snare of the Devil, is a translation from being the
Devils child to be Gods child. Now we are not made Gods children by
repentance, but prepared to be Gods children, but it is directly said so of
Ioa. 1.12. Gal. 3.26.
faith.

It is plainly said of faith in Christ that 1 Joan. 5.4, 5.
it is the victory whereby we overcome the world. 2. Pe, 2 20.
To the acknowledging of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ, is attributed the
escaping of the pollutions of the world, namely for time to come 2 Pe. 1.3.
. Through the knowledge of Christ, is given all things, which appertain to
life and godliness, namely, to do good works and to perform new obedience in
a settled and sincere course which are no where said of repentance.

The Trial.
Secondly, by acknowledging of the truth in Tymothy is meant faith in Christ,
because in other places, Coloss. 2.2. 1 Timothy 2.4. Ephesians. 4.13.
this faith is expressed by this Phrase.

The Exception.
To this reason they answer, that though in other Scriptures, a saving faith
be expressed by that phrase of acknowledging the truth, yet here in Tymothy it
cannot, Why? because this exposition cannot stand with the analogy of faith,
and why? (forsooth) because repentance cannot stand without faith in Christ, or
be without it.

The Apology.
By this answer, a blind man may see, that they take it for granted, that if
by acknowledging the truth be meant believing in Christ, it cannot be avoided,
but repentance must go before faith in Christ. To the end therefore that they
may prevent this, they will disprooue my interpretation, saying, that by
acknowledging the truth in Timothy is not meant faith in Christ, why? because
it cannot. Why can it not be so meant? because it is against the analogy of
faith, why is it against the analogy of faith: because repentance cannot be
without faith, what is this but to run in a ring, and to hunt Counter,
without proouing any thing? who sees not that this is to beg the question; and
(upon the matter) to prove, ^dem per idem, mouere and non promouere?

I prove repentance goes before faith ^n Christ, because repentance goes
before the acknowledging of the truth, which is a saving faith. They answer,
^e reason is not good, because by acknow^edging the truth there, cannot be
meant ^aith in Christ, why cannot faith in Christ ^e meant there? because
repentance is not before, or without faith in Christ.

The Trial.
Thirdly, by acknowledging of the truth in Timothy, is meant faith in Christ,
because it is called the faith of the elect, Tim^ 1.1.
for only the elect have a saving faith, because only the elect have a
Savior and are saved by him.

The Exception.
To this they answer by denying my interpretation of the Epistle to Titus; for
(say they) the Apostle does not there explicate, what he meant by acknowledging
of the truth, namely the faith of the elect: For those words do not show what
the faith of the elect is, but distinguish it from the faith of the elect.

The Apology.
Upon this I reioyne in this manner. 1. Ancient Interpreters, both Gagneius.
Guilliaudus.
Papists and Calvin. Beza. Piscatur.
Protestants, do expound the words as I do, that the latter are put
exegetically, for the interpretation of the former.

2 My Adversaries barely say, the words distinguish, and not interpret without
any reason of their affirmation, and therefore it is not good.

3 If those words, acknowledging of the truth, be a distinction, between the
former words, viz. the faith of the elect, then do they distinguish two faiths,
then do they distinguish the faith of the elect which is a saving faith, from
an acknowledging of the truth, or an assent unto it, which is an Historical
faith, then by acknowledging the truth must be meant an Historical faith: but
by the acknowledging the truth in Timothy, cannot be meant an Historical
faith, because an Historical faith cannot follow repentance in nature, but go
before it, for the acknowledging the truth there spoken (whateuer it be) does
follow the repentance there spoken of, because it is thereunto as an effect
unto a cause, or as an end to a means: for so much they confess themselves,
in their exposition of the sense, of that place, which in their Judgment and
words runs thus, that God may give them repentance, that those which now oppose
the truth, may be won to the profession of it.

So that either those words the acknowledging of the truth, must not
distinguish that which is meant by them from the faith of the elect, and by
them must be meant an Historical faith, and then repentance must go before an
Historical faith, or a belief of the Gospel, or the acknowledging the truth
does interpret, the nature of the faith of the elect there spoken of, and then
repentance must go before the faith of the elect, vtrum horum? and so much in
defense of the reasons of my exposition of the text to Timothy, wherein my
second Argument is grounded, now a word only in answer to their
Interpretation of the place.

The Exception.
By acknowledging the truth. 2. Tim. 2.25. must be meant (say they) the
profession of the truth, and their reason is, because in Peter the phrase is so
to be taken. 2. Peter 2.21.


The Apology.
I answer, 1. Neither do they bring any good reason, why the phrase must be so
understood in Peter: nor (if they did) could that prove it must be so
understood in Paul, nor have they given any good reason from the text of Paul,
of their exposition, and therefore their interpretation, without reasons for
it, is not so good as mine with reasons.

2 In that place Paul speaks of the conversion of Infidels, in this conversion
a belief of the Gospel has the first place, then repentance, then faith in
Christ, then profession, as a fruit of faith, but if their exposition of the
words, acknowledging the truth, by professing of the truth were good,
profession must go in the first place, for there is no mention at all of any
other; so that either by those words, cannot be meant profession of the truth:
or men, must profess the truth at their first conversion, before they have
either an Historical or saving faith.

3 In their own words they expound what profession they mean, viz. not only
in word, but in life and conversation accompanied with an inward change. Now
hereby they confound repentance and acknowledging the truth, which are
different: for the one is a means to the other, whatsoever is meant by them,
for what is repentance in their judgment, but an outward, and inward change of
soul and body; of words, and works.

The Trial.
Repentance is begun before faith in Christ, The third Arment.
because men cannot believe in Christ, as long as they live in their sins.
Ioa. 5.44.

The Exception.
This Argument (they say) proves not the question, for it only proves, that
a man must repent of his sins, as soon as he believes in Christ, and not
that he must repent before he believes.

The Apology.
To this I say, that had I intended, to prove a precedence of repentance, unto
faith in Christ, some space of time, then (I confess) this answer had been
sufficient to that Argument, because (as it is propounded) it proves no more:
but forasmuch as my purpose was not so much but less, viz. a precedence in
nature only, therefore is not the answer to purpose, and consequently (for all
that) it is sound and good: for two things may be in time as soon one as
another, and yet in nature the one may go before the other, as fire and heat,
a father and a child, else how can they with any color hold faith and
repentance to be together in time, and yet faith to go before it in nature and
in order of causes.

Though my Argument be good as it is in the Treatise for all that which they
have answered unto it, yet (as I shall now propound it) it shall be more strong.

If living in sin go before not believing in Christ as a cause and means
thereof, then repenting of sin, goes before believing in Christ, as a cause and
means thereof. But the first is true therefore the second.

The consequence is good, because to live in sin, and to repent are contrary,
so are not to believe in Christ and to believe in him, so that if unrepentance,
impenitency, or living in sin, be a means and cause of not believing, and to
be a means and cause of a thing goes before it in nature, then penitency,
repentance, or not living in sin, is a means and cause of believing in
Christ, and consequently goes before it in nature.

The Assumption I prove by Joan. 5.44. Thomas Aqui. Calvin. Mus^nlus.
Illiricus. Rollocrus. Piscatori commentary on the place.
where by the judgment of learned Interpreters) the Holy Ghost assigns this
for a reason, and cause of the infidelity of the Scribes, and Pharisees, and
why they believed not in Christ, viz. they lived in worldly pride, ambition,
and couetuousnesse. And if this were truly verified of them in those days,
then may it be said of men in these days that living in their sins, is a
cause why they believe not in Christ, and consequently leaving of men's sins,
( viz. in purpose) is some cause or means of believing in Christ, and
therefore goes before it in nature.

The Trial.
The fourth argument.
Repentance is begun before faith in Christ, at the first conversion, because
sinners must first repent of their sins, committed after their first
conversion, before they can trust in Christ for the pardon of them.

The Exception.
To this they answer by denying the antecedent, for (say they) both the habit
of faith, and some acts of it, viz. uniting and ingrafting into Christ,
receiving and apprehending Christ do go before repentance: secondly by
denying the consequence, because through repenting after the first conversion,
in nature goes before faith in Christ, yet does it not follow, it must so do,
at the first conversion.

The Apology.
First their answer to my Antecedent, had been to purpose if they had proved
by some good reason, that in nature and order of working the habit of faith,
had gone before the habit of repentance, or that the act of faith which is
believing in CHRIST, had gone before the act of repenting, that is, of
sorrowing for past sins, and purposing to leave them: but seeing they do
neither of these, the Antecedent is good.

They say indeed, that these acts of faith, viz. uniting and ingrafting into
Christ, receiving and apprehending Christ, go before repentance: but neither is
this to purpose, except they proved they were all one with the act of
believing in Christ, for of that act is the question: nor do they prove what
they say, for they do barely affirm it: nor do I think it possible to be
proved, because in nature I think it impossible for any unrepentant sinner, to
be united to Christ, ingrafted unto him, and made a member of his mystical
body.

Indeed upon another occasion, they say repentance goes before these acts of
faith, viz. persuasion and assurance of salvation and praying for pardon: and
yet else where (in effect) they deny it, where they say to believe in Christ,
is to be persuaded and assured of salvation by Christ, and that no man can pray
for this pardon of his sins before he have faith in Christ, Mr. Eltons
Catechism 4. principle. Mr. Perk. state of a Christian, Sect. 14. Mr. Rogers
Mr. Baynes as is cited before.
the first of which points has been confuted by me in my Treatise, and the
second is contradicted by other Divines, where they say praying for pardon of
sins, goes before the application of faith, and the persuasion of Gods love
in Christ.

If they had given any reason, of their deni^ll of the consequence of this
Argument that had been sound, it would have answered my Argument, but seeing
they have not (good cause why? they cannot) therefore is the Argument as yet
good, because as yet it is unanswered. And indeed I know not how they should
answer it, as long as the habit of repentance and faith in Christ, are the
same virtues, both at and after men's first conversion, for nature and use, and
so are the acts of repenting and believing in Christ.

If any man can give me a good reason why the spirit of God should not incite
men, to repent and believe in Christ, i^ the same manner and order at the first
conversion, as he does after it, when through weakness they fall and offend
God, the^ would I say, the consequence of my Argument were weak, and
consequently m^ argument: but because (I think) they cannot: for if they
could, they would, therefore as yet, is my fourth Argument good.

^^^ect.
But (they say) this Argument implie^ a successiue working of says by God, an^
of pardoning sins, as if a Christian ceased to believe, when he falls into
an^ gross sin after his first conversion, an^ that therefore faith must be
wrought a new in them, and be pardoned a new.

I answer to the first, that though I do not mean that the habit of faith is
lost, Solut.
by the committing of any enormous sin, and therefore there is no fear of
need to have it planted in them again: yet do I think that a sinner falling
into enormous sin, does not exercise his faith, nor use the act of it, and he
may in some sort be said for a time to loose the use and exercise of this
believing in Christ: and that therefore after such a fall the Spirit of God
must incite him up again, to the use thereof, before he can trust in Christ:
and that the spirit does not thus incite a sinner to trust, until he have
stirred him to repent of those great sins which he has committed.

And as touching the second member of their exception, concerning successiue
pardoning of sins, I can see no reason, why we should every day ask pardon
of our sins, if God did not pardon them every day, I see not why this may not
be called successiue pardoning, Math. 6.11, 12.
for if the godly sin every day, must repent, and believe in Christ every day,
and crave pardon of the sins of every day, then will God forgive every day
(speaking after the Scripture phrase) and then there is a daily and successiue
pardoning.

The Trial.
Repentance may be begun before Faith in Christ, The fifth Argument.
because as great a work as the beginning of repentance is wrought before it.

The Exception.
To this Argument they answer, that i^ is naught, because it is founded upon a
false supposition, viz: as if I perswade^ my self they thought that therefore
repentance was not wrought before faith i^ Christ, because it could not be so
wrough^ by God; as if they thought any too hard to hard the Lord, and therefore
first or las^ wrought.

The Apology.
Upon this I reply thus; first as they use, so they muse, because they think
meanly of me, therefore do they persuade themselves I do the like by them,
as if my shoe were of their last, or as if they knew, they deserved I should so
judge of them; but (the Lord knows) I had never such an imagination of them,
or so mean a conceit of their judgment, that they should think that simply
God could work it so by his absolute power: but that by his actual power,
(which is limited by his will) he cannot: that is, looking to the order and
means, which God in his word has prescribed for the working of those graces,
he does not give power and efficacy enough to work repentance before faith in
Christ, and that therefore it cannot be so wrought.

Secondly, against them that hold repentance cannot be wrought before faith in
Christ, as well as that it is not begun before it (for this is their opinion,
as well as that, in the sense that I have named.) It is direct, to prove that
repentance may be begun before this faith; and to prove that repentance may
be begun before this faith; it is to good purpose to show, that as great a
work as the beginning of repentance is wrought before it, viz: a belief of
the Gospel: for the full working of one evangelical and supernatural grace
in all the parts of it, is a greater work then the beginning of another, and
the working of that by fewer means, is a greater work then the beginning of
this by more.

These points have been proved in my Treatise, concerning the working of a
belief of the Gospel, and the beginning of repentance, and (if they had
answered them well) they should have proved; either, that a belief of the
Gospel is not a harder work (in it self considered, and looking unto the
means of working) then a beginning of repentance: or (if it were) that it will
not follow thereupon, that therefore a beginning of repentance is not wrought
before faith in Christ: but neither of these are done, and therefore for all
this the argument stands upright, in that probability of truth which it has;
except they will take the state and authority upon them, that their very
denial shall be a sufficient confutation.

Indeed they cavil at some particular passages in the prosecution of this
argument, but they are not worth the answering here, because my argument is no
whit weakened by them, and besides they have been and shall be upon other
occasions answered else where, and so at last I come to my last Argument.

The Trial.
Repentance is begun before faith, because it was preached before faith, for
it was the first Doctrine that was preached by John Baptist, The sixth Argument.
by Christ, by his Disciples and Apostles.

The Exception.
To this Argument they answer: first, by saying it is but a weak one, and
that by the judgment of Mr. Calvin: secondly, by denying both antecedent and
the consequence.

The Antecedent, because (say they) God does not always call for repentance
first; but sometimes for faith in Christ. Acts 10.43. and though he did yet is
faith included.

The consequence; for (say they) it does not follow, that because repentance
was the first Doctrine that was preached, therefore it was the first grace that
was wrought in the hearers: first, because when God calls for any grace, none
of the rest are excluded; but included rather. Acts 16.31. Secondly, because
that which is first placed, is not always first wrought, the last in words may
be the first in sense.

The Apology.
First I answer generally to the whole Argument. If this were all the
Arguments that could be brought to prove the point, and that the weight of the
cause lay on this foundation, then would it be but weakly supported, it might
truly be said of it (as Mr. Calvin does) that it is too weak; Caluins
Institution, l. c. 5.
for Mr. Calvin speaks of such as only rely on this Argument, which I do
not: the contrary is seen by five other, on four whereof I rely, and not on
this sixth, nor the fifth.

Secondly, Musculus a learned interpreter, from hence, that repentance was the
first Doctrine which those preached, plainly collects that the Doctrine of
repentance has the beginning, and principles of the Doctrine of grace, his
words are these In this place (says Musculus) John requires Repentance,
Musculus comment: on Math. 3.2.
which the Prophets call turning to God, and of which the Angel p^ his father
in mind, when he said, he should turn many of the childaen of Israel to the
Lord: Luke 1.17. viz: to call sinners to the acknowledgement of their evil
life, and t^ a change of their mind and true piety t^ God, and this preaching
of repentance i^ such, that not only is it necessary to the e^ those that have
sinned may be capable of grace; but without which no man has access unto the
throne of grace, according t^ Heb. 6.12. And this is the Reason why John, and
Christ also, and after him the Apostles, did first preach repentance, t^ them
that were to be converted unto God.

So that in Musculus opinion, Repentance in nature goes before access to the
throne of grace, and before our being capable of grace, (and consequently
before faith, by which only we have this liberty,) viz: because Repentance
was the first Doctrine which they preached to their hearers.

Secondly and more specially in defense of the Antecedent, I say, that whereas,
for the confutation of my Antecedent, they bring two Reasons I will answer to
them severally.

First, God does not always call for faith in Christ first, for in that place
first he preached John's Baptism of Repentance, ver. 37. and of the day of
Judgment, v. 42. which (comparing, Acts 13.24. with Acts 17.30.31.) require
repentance.

Secondly, though faith were included in the Doctrine of repentance; yet the
including of it in that Doctrine, Acts 10.43. No more proves the precedence in
nature of faith in Christ unto Repentance, (which is their opinion,) then the
precedence of Repentance unto Faith, which is mine.

To the consequence I answer first, that (notwithstanding their Reasons) it is
very probable, if we consider these particulars.

First, that the preaching of John, Christ, and the Apostles, was effectual to
some of their hearers.

Secondly, that this efficacy of their preaching consisted in working (through
Gods blessings) in their hearers, an ability to do the duties they taught, and
whereunto they did exhort.

Thirdly, that this ability of doing those duties, was wrought in them as the
Doctrines were taught, or when they were preached (as appears plainly in the
Apostles for the rest.) Acts 14.1.2. Acts 18.8. So that if Repentance were the
first duty which all these taught, teaching were the means whereby they were
enabled to do it, and this ability were given to them, an^ wrought in them as
they preached it; the must Repentance be the first grace tha^ was wrought,
because it was the first tha^ was preached and taught in their ministry (I
mean usually and ordinarily, not limiting God always thus to work without
alteration:) the rather, because they were wrought by preaching to make them
capable of salvation, 1. Cor. 1.21. And they might as conveniently be wrought
in their hearers for that end, according to the order in which they are taught,
as any other way, or in any other order and manner.

Secondly I answer to the consequence, for as much as it is evident; that
neither John, no^ Christ, neither the Disciples no^ Apostles, did hit upon the
preaching of repentance first, by chance or fortune; but by the appointment and
direction of Gods Spirit, therefore must it be upon some good ground; and if
upon some, upon what more likely then this, viz: that the duty of repentance,
was one of the first duties that was required to be practiced of them that
were to be saved, and before they could believe in Christ for salvation.

Their reasons likewise brought to overthrow my consequence are insufficient.

The first because, though it be granted, that when God calls for any one
grace, none of the rest are excluded; but included rather: yet will not this
prove, that in nature repentance goes before faith, but only that they both
go together in time, and that both at one time, they are wroght together. Now
for all this circumstance, the work of Repentance may in nature go before
faith in Christ.

The second, because though that which is first placed, be not the first
wroght, in as much as that which is first in words, may be last in sense: yet
for all this, may repentance be first wrought, seeing it is first taught,
because GOD usually wrought graces as they were taught, as has been showed
out of the Acts, but even now; and therefore repentance may be first both in
sense as well as in words, because it is first in nature as well as in words.

If they had given any reason why repentance could not be first in sense or
nature though it were so in words, then had they indeed weakened my Argument,
but till then it is good enough.

The Exception.
But they will say Repentance was first preached, because it was first felt.

The Apology.
I answer first, if they could prove this to be the reason of their preaching
it first, I would discard my Argument, and the probability it seems to have,
2. I would feign know a reason why the duty of faith which is believing in
Christ (of which the question is) should not be as soon felt as the duty of
repenting, if the one be as truly wrought as the other?

Indeed the duties of repentance, which are hearty sorrow for past sins, and
purpose unfeigned to leave them, are sooner felt then the comfort of faith,
which is assurance and persuasion of salvation by Christ: but I can see no
reason why the one habit or virtue, should not be as soon perceived, and felt
in the duties of it, as the other.

The Exception.
But they urge in their answer to this Argument, that in my proof hereof, I
contradict something delivered else where: for first, in one place, I say, that
repentance is the first grace that is wrought in men by preaching of the
Gospel, page: 261. and in another place I say that other graces go before
rep^ntance, page: 259. 260. Secondly, there I speak of the practice of
repentance as soon as it is wrought; but in another, I say that practice of
repentance follows faith in Christ.

The Apology.
To the first I answer that I do not say simply, pa: 262. that repentance
goes before all grace, for I never meant it went before a belief of the
Gospel, the contrary is evident by the state of the question, page: 231. but
only that it goes before faith in Christ: of the two, that is, Repentance and
Faith, Repentance is the first. Besides, all those graces that are said else
where to go before Repentance; do but prepare to it, and so after a sort, may
be said to make up but that grace of Repentance.

To the second supposed contradiction, I answer, that the imputation is
unjust, for where p. 261. l. 21. I speak of the practice of repentance as
soon as it is wrought; I only meant the duty of repentance, in the heart or
the act of repenting, as it is, in the soul, viz: actual sorrowing for past
sins, and resolving to leave them: and in the latter place, page 231. 21. 22.
I speak of the practice of repentance in the life and conversation: that is,
of the effects and fruits of it, when the inward purpose of the heart to leave
sin, is brought unto an outward act and execution: and therefore betwixt
these (no more then betwixt the other two) is there any contradiction, as is
pretended either to the truth of Gods word, or of mine own opinion: and this
is sufficient to have said in defense of my six Arguments, against that which
by some has been objected against my opinion.

The Arguments I have already brought to prove my opinion, being defended
against the exceptions of some. It remains that as yet they stand for good: so
that the maine question needs no more confirmation. Notwithstanding it will
not be amiss by way of advantage to add one more to the former, to drive the
nail to the head.

If repentance go in nature before remission of sins, then it goes in nature
before Faith in Christ.

But repentance goes in nature before remission of sins.

Therefore repentance goes in nature before faith in Christ.

The consequence of the proposition, ( viz: repentance goes before faith,
because it goes before pardon) I prove thus.

If repentance go before remission of sins, and not before faith in Christ,
then either it must go hand in hand with justifying faith; or come between
justifying faith, and justification it self; neither of which are true.

First repentance does not go hand in hand with justifying faith: first,
because then it should have as great a hand in remission of sin, as faith in
Christ; or we must determine what part it has in remission: secondly, they
cannot answer so, because they say repentance is a fruit of sanctification
which follows justification, and therefore repentance cannot come before
justification with justifying faith.

Secondly, repentance does not come between justifying faith, and
justification it self; for the one follows so immed^ately on the other, that
nothing can come between: for no sooner can a sinner believe in Christ, but
immediately he has remission of his sins and is justified.

The assumption ( viz: Repentance goes before remission of sins) I prove by
testimony of Scripture.

The testimonies of Scripture are these, Deuteronomy: 30.2. Ier. 18.8. and 4.4. and
26.3. Ezekiel. 18 21. Zech, 1.3. Act. 2.38. and 3.19. and 26.18. 1. Ioa. 1.7.9.
whence I thus reason.

That which is required as a condition to be performed before we obtain
pardon is before it in nature.

Repentance in all those is required of sinners as a condition to be performed
before they obtain pardon.

Therefore repentance is before remission of sins: for it cannot be denied but
that howsoever the end (as apprehended possible to be had) may stir up a man
to use the means which be in order to the observing thereof: yet the means
must needs in nature be before the actual obtaining of the end; neither can
it be denied but that Gods Spirit in the place before named, directs us unto
repentance as a means of obtaining forgiveness, by the apprehension of it,
appointing us to use the means to get it. With this agrees the Doct: of our
Church. We have a perpetual rule (says the Homily) appointed unto us which
ought to be observed and kept at all times; Ser. of repentance, 1. part in the
beginning.
and there is none other way whereby the wrath of God may be pacified, and his
anger assuaged, that the fierceness of his fury may depart, and be removed
and taken away, where he says: But now therefore, says the Lord, Joel. 2.14.
return unto me. It is not without great importance that the Prophet speaks
so, for he had before set forth at large unto them, the horible vengeance of
God, which no man was able to abide, and so he does move them to repentance to
obtain mercy.

Answerable to this is the Catechism appointed to be taught in public
schools where he says, Nowels Catch. in quar. fol. 5.
Repentance is most necessary for sinners, to the obtaining of the mercy of
God: and afterward, Fol. 47. 48.
sinners for the obtaining of pardon have need of repentance.

And hereunto consents Doctor White, Doct. Franc s Whites defence^ page 17.
where he says. Ordinarily before the Lord forgiueth foul enormous and
monstrous sins, a sinner begins to detest and forsake them.

I might and could heap up many other testimonies, both out of the Fathers and
latter Writers for the further proof thereof; but that I think it needless,
for I suppose my adversaries will not deny it, and if they grant that
repentance in nature goes before pardon, then must they grant also that it goes
in nature before faith in Christ, Act. 10.43.
for we believe in Christ for pardon.

The Trial.
The first Objection.
Repentance is not begun before faith in Christ, for then it should be sin;
for whatsoever is before faith, is without it, and whatsoever is without faith
is sin. Romans 14. etc.

This they call a solid and sound Argugument, but it has nothing but a sound
and show of truth, or proof, as has, and shall appear yet more clearly God
willing.

To this Argument I answered by denying the Antecedent, viz: whatsoever is
without Faith in Christ is sin, and because the supposed truth of this
proposition stands upon the interpretation of a place of Scripture, Rom: 14.
therefore did I answer they did not rightly expound it: first, because the
faith mentioned in the place alleged, is not faith in Christ, the Faith
understood in the question, but another kind of Faith, viz: a persuasion to
the conscience of warrant to do the things we do.

The Exception.
To make good their interpretation of Romans 14. vlt. (and consequently their
Antecedent) they now bring testimonies of Divines, and reasons from Scripture.

First (say they) the text has been a thousand times urged by the learned
against the Pelagians and Papists in this sense.

The Apology.
I answer first it cannot be denied but the text Romans 14. vlt. has been
expounded by many Divines of faith in Christ, but neither do the ancients so
interpret it: Patres fidem, scientiam libertatis exponunt quae conscientia^
precedit, and vel bonam vel malam eam facit. Calvin Iustit. l 3. c. 13. ss. 17.
Zanchiusde operibus Dei lib. 4. chap. 1. page 420: Paraeas ad Romans c. 14. ver.
vlt.
(A learned Divine of Germany, upon the same place confesses as much in his
commentary.) Nor do all the latter Interpreters. For Calvin in his commentary
upon that place, and in his institutions, expounds it as I do, and Zanchius.
Nor if they did all interpret it, one after another, may their exposition be
admitted, against or besides the interpretation, which the Holy Ghost in the
precedent and subsequent verses of the text gives of that place it self, which
is the same with that I have alleged.

That this interpretation of Romans 14. vlt is not to be understood of Faith in
Christ, but of another faith as I have alleged, is evident, by considering
that v. 2. of the same chapter, Paul speaks of believing, that I may eat this
or that meat, verse. 5. of esteeming one day above another or all days alike,
and of full persuasion in our minds about the observation of them, verse 14.
of knowledge and persuasion concerning th^^ cleanenesse or uncleanness of
meats, that i^ the lawfulnes or the unlawfulness of the^ to be eaten, verse
22. of having faith with our selves, which is opposed to doubting or fear, and
lastly, verse 23 the (verse out of which the words are quoted) of allowing or
condemning our selves in the things we do, Neither of all which have any
affinity with the nature of a saving faith, which is the casting of our selves
o^ Christ; and the relying on his merits for salvation, or the believing in his
name for it, of which there is not one word in the whole Chapter.

Besides, the Apostle, Romans 14.23. does not deliver a rule for all our moral
actions, that are either commanded, or forbidden, the rule whereof is his
written law: but for those actions that be in nature such, as those of which he
speaks in that place, viz. indifferent actions, in themselves neither simply
commanded, nor forbidden, neithe^ good or evil, which may prove in the event
either good or evil, according as his opinion, judgment, and conscience is,
of the lawfulness or vn^^wfulnesse of them. Now in these acti^ns, for the
giving of us a warrant to do ^r not to do them, there is no need of ^aith in
Christ: the persuasion or belief ^^at we have in our conscience, by the ^^ght
of nature, true reason, or the word, is ^^le enough to warrant us in the doing
of them, or leaving of them undone, and this (...) that faith whereof Paul
speaks, ver. 23 Romans 14.

Add unto these two reasons, this for a third: the Apostle does not in the
place cited, set down a Rule how any or all our actions may be accepted of God
unto salvation, in which case he must have treated of faith in Christ, without
which it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Heb. 11.6.
but. how we may know whether in our own conscience, our actions are
warrantable for us to do them, or to leave them undone. Now in this case there
is no need of faith in Christ, the persuasion or belief, that we have upon
the former grounds of nature, reason or the word do warrant us in the doing, or
not doing of them, because these tell us, (and we believe it for truth) that
they be not unlawful and forbidden actions.

In my Treatise I have given one reason more, why in that place of the Romans
by faith should not be meant faith in Christ, but a belief of warrant to our
consciences, for the things we do, namely, because though a true believer in
Christ, ha^^ faith in him: yet he sins in the actions (...) does, if he have
not another faith the^ this, viz. a warrant to his conscience for the thing he
does upon some good grounds, for he cannot choose but sin, tha^ rushly
rusheth upon the doing of som^thing not being persuaded, he may lawfully do it,
but doubting hereof. But this Arg^ment, was not touched as being too hot for
them. So that it appearing by these reason, that the meaning of those words,
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, is not this, that whatsoever a man does
before he believe in Christ he sins: but whatsoever a man does doubting he
does ill, or fearing he does, not well, or not being well resolved in his
mind, it may lawful be done either in it self or by him, and yet will
venture to do it, he sins (says the Apostle) because this acton is not of
faith, (that is) not of that faith of which he speaks.

Secondly I answer, that they which urge this place in this sense, to prove
whatsouer is without faith in Christ is sin, do not well (reserving
reverence to their learning otherwise,) for the Doctrine of (...) text must be
according to the sense of the words rightly expounded. If then this place being
rightly expounded, speak not of belief in Christ, then must no Doctrine
concerning this belief be raised out of that text, Romans 14.23
except we will make the Scripture say any thing any where which is presumption.

Thirdly, I answer they which urge this place against the Papists, they do it
^o disprooue their will worship devised by man without warrant of the word, and
such points as these, and in this case the text may be alleged against them,
because all such worship is without faith, that is, a man can have no
belief, or persuasion to his conscience, that he may lawfully use it, but in
our question there is no talk of matters of this kind, and therefore their
alleging of it, is no disparagement to my interpretation or defense to their
Argument.

The Exception.
But they offer now to prove their exposition by reasons, to the end their
Antecedent may be made good thereby, to which I will answer severally.

The Apostle Romans 14.23. speaks of faith in Christ, To the first reason.
because he speaks of that faith which is faith of meats, or of liberty from
meats, and this is a saving faith because they that believe in Christ, ha^^
this liberty by faith.

The Apology.
I answer, first it is supposed that t^^ faith spoken of in the place quoted,
is (...) faith of liberty from meats, but it is (...) this only, but faith of
bondage conce^ning meats; for they are bound by the text, to abstain from
eating of the^ they have not that faith there mea^ (though they had a saving
faith) as w^ as they have liberty to eat them, t^^ have the faith there spoken
of, when the have a saving faith also: else by their ru^^ man that eats of any
meat, sins not ^^uing faith in Christ which is absurd: s^condly, though he
had spoken only faith of liberty from meats, etc. yet d^ he not say there,
that they have this libe^ by faith in Christ (which is the man question,) as
shall appear by these t^^ reasons.

First they have this liberty, to eaten the meats there spoken of, that have a
b^leefe and persuasion to their conscien^^ from some good grounds, that they
(...) lawfully eat of them: for this is the fa^ there spoken of, as has been
showed (...) three reasons even now, and this is not faith in Christ.

2 by faith in Christ all the elect have liberty a like from sin, hell and
the devil etc, that are bound by them: but the Apostle speaks of a liberty
from a bondage with which all men are not bound, for all men were not bound
with the bondage of observing of days and meats, but the Jews only and
Proselites, and therefore not all Christians, but the Jewish Christians, have
liberty by the faith spoken, from the things to which they are bound, and
consequently the faith there spoken of, must be not a saving faith (which
pertaines to all Christians, Jews, and Gentiles) but a faith which pertaines
to Christians which were bound, to the law of abstinence, viz. a belief or
persuasion of liberty to eat the meat there spoken of, though otherwise
forbidden.

Besides if it would follow that because only believers in Christ have liberty
from meats, therefore the faith there spoken of Romans 14.23. is faith of
liberty from meats, then by a like consequence might it follow, (but absurdly)
that because only believers in Christ are saved and sanctified, therefore
faith in Christ is sanctification and salvation.

The Exception.
Secondly, the Apostle Romans 14.23. speaks of faith in Christ, To the second
reason.
because he speaks of that faith whereby we are persuaded, we have warrant
and precept for liberty out of the word of God, for th^^ is a saving faith.

The Apology.
I answer the reason is not good, because this faith whereby we are persuaded
we have warrant and precept from the word for liberty out of the word of God
(suppose it be for Christian liberty else, I can make no sense of the word,) a
but a persuasion; of a truth, or an assured assent in my opinion and judgment
of the truth of this Doctrine, and this can be but an Historical faith, it is
not a saving faith.

The Exception.
But they will object though the Apostle Romans 14.23. do not directly intend to
speak of faith in Christ, yet by a consequence the Doctrine may be true from
that place: for if whatsoever be without a persuasion to our conscience and
this belief be a sin, then much more whatsoever is without faith in Christ,
which is a more excellent Faith, and more necessary then this,

The Apology.
I deny the consequence, except the want and absence of the one faith, made an
action to be sin, as well as the want and absence of the other. This cannot
be: First, because then I know not how it can be avoided, but that the presence
of faith in Christ, should make an Action not to be sin, which is absurd, in
as much as faith in Christ does not cause an action to be no sin: but not to
be imputed for sin unto us for our condemnation. Secondly* because that which
makes an action to be no sin, is the likeness and neernesse it has with the
Rule of Gods will, prescribed for the doing thereof: which in moral actions
commanded or forbidden is the Law of God, and in indifferent actions which are
neither commanded nor forbidden is this Faith, whereof the Apostle speaks
Romans 14. viz. a persuasion or belief we may do or may not do them: neither
of which is faith in Christ.

Indeed faith in Christ is more necessary and excellent unto salvation then
this persuasion, but this persuasion, is more proper and necessary then faith
in Christ, to warrant unto our consciences, the actions that we have to do,
that be indifferent.

But it may be, though the Doctrine, be neither directly, nor by necessary
consequence, to be proved from the text to the Romans, yet by other Reasons
taken from other places it may be. Let us hear and try them.

The Exception.
Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, because whatsoever is not of Christ is
sin, for to be without faith, and to be without Christ are all one.

The Apology.
I answer as touching acceptance unto salvation, it is all one in the event,
to be without Christ, the meritorious cause of salvation; ^arke 16.16.
as to be without faith the isntrumental. For a man cannot be saved without
either. Mar. 16.16. But to all intents and purposes, it is not all one to be
without Christ and faith, for it is not all one to the making of our actions to
be sin in the nature of sin.

It is neither being without Christ, nor faith, that does this (for these only
do cause, that our actions be not imputed for sin unto us, and not that they
be no sins) The sweruing from the law and Rule of God, is that only which
makes an action sinful.

The Exception.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, 1. Joan.
because whatsoever is done without spiritual life is sin.

The Apology.
I answer. How far and in what sense, faith in Christ is the spiritual life
of Christians, shall be showed (God willing) in the fourth objection. For the
present it is enough for the answer of this objection to say, that it proves
idem per idem, which is as much as to say, it proves nothing in the question:
for with them faith in Christ, is the spiritual life of Christians as shall
appear in the fourth objection, and the spiritual life of Christians is
faith, as appears by this objection.

If with them, faith be the spiritual life of Christians, and if the
spiritual life of Christians be faith, then that Argument that proves every
action sinful, that is done without spiritual life, namely because it is done
without faith: and again, that Argument that proves every action sinful that
is done without faith, namely because it is done without spiritual life: I both
their say, arguments prove nothing, for (upon the matter) in this question,
they beg the question.

The Trial.
To conclude in answer to this Argument, and for a reason of denying the
consequence, I said, that though Repentance be begun before faith, yet it is
not sin for all that, because a belief of the Gospel goes before faith in
Christ, yet is it not sin.

The Exception.
This instance they offer to take away, and give three Reasons, why an
Historical faith, going before a saving faith is sin, to which I will
answer.

An Historical faith without faith in Christ is sin, because it is no where
alone required.

The Apology.
I answer. First, to the Antecedant, that if (...) by these words required
alone, be meant that a belief of the Gospel is so required alone in one place,
that there is no more else where required of men to their salvation, then I
confess, that a belief of the Gospel is no where required alone: but if
thereby be meant (as it must be, if it be to purpose) that there is no place
of Scripture in which the duty of believing the Gospel is only taught: and
that in every place, where believing the Gospel is only taught, believing in
Christ is taught also, then I deny it: for the Scripture does not teach every
duty in every place, except we shall observe no rules of Art in expounding
Scripture.

Secondly, to the consequence I answer, that though believing the Gospel were
no where alone required: yet will it not be sin for all that; because it is a
duty in the word commanded to be performed of all the Elect, to make them
capable of salvation, and no such thing can be sin.

God does require of men that which is taught them, and as it is taught; and
sometimes it may fall out a Preacher, by occasion of his text, or in a
Catechism lecture may only teach men to believe the Gospel upon Gods own
authority: shall we say the Minister sins in teaching it alone, or the people
in learning it alone at that time, not having then a saving Faith? Surely God
is not a hard man that takes up where he lays not down, Luke 17.21.
nor requires that which he does not teach, or offer to work.

The Exception.
An Historical Faith without Faith in Christ, is sin, because God requires
more Faith then this.

The Apology.
To the consequence I answer, that though God require more Faith then the
belief of the Gospel, of them that shall be saved, yet is not this sin when
it is alone without a saving Faith, for God requires more then godly sorrow of
a Repentant sinner, viz: an unfeigned purpose to leave his sins, and in time
to practice new obedience: Is therefore godly sorrow for sin, sin indeed in
a man, because as yet he has not a godly purpose to leave his sins wrought
in him? surely such Divinity can never do good in the Church of Christ.

The Exception.
An historical faith without faith in Christ is sin, because it may be in
Reprobates.

The Apology.
It cannot be denied, but a belief of the Gospel may be in Reprobates; yet
will it therefore follow to be sin? Math.
was ^he gift of miracles sin, in the Reprobates because it was in them?
surely no.

It is not the having of the gifts of the Spirit, that makes them to be sin
to reprobates or in them, but the not using of them well to the honor of God,
and the good of the Church: and it is their contenting of themselves only with
those, when they should labor for other and more, that causes them to be sins
in reprobates: for as they be had, so they come from God; and as they come from
God, so they are good, and as they are good, they cannot be sin; though as
they are in them not used at all, or not well used, or not enough used, or
abused, they may prove sin in them, yet simply because they are in them, or
as they are in them, they are not: and so much in answer to their Defense of
their first objection, against my Doctrine of the precedence of Repentance unto
Faith in Christ.

The Trial.
Repentance is not begun before Faith in Christ, The second Objection.
because then it should proceed out of an heart vnpurified, for the heart is
purified by Faith, Act. 15.9.

To this I answered, that it proves not the question, because the proof of it,
out of the Acts is not to purpose: first, because it does not at all speak of
purifying by sanctification (of which the question is) but by justification of
which it is not: secondly, though it had spoken of purifying by sanctification,
yet does it not prove that Faith so purifieth the heart, that till Faith in
Christ come, there is not so much as the least measure of this purifying
begun, for so is the Antecedent to be understood.

The Exception.
To make their Argument good, they bring reasons: first, they prove that the
Text in the Acts is to be understood of purifying by sanctification, from the
filth of sin, as well as by justification from the guilt of sin: secondly,
they show that though it could not be proved by that place of the Acts, that
Faith purifies in that manner, yet by reason from other Scriptures do they
endeavor to prove it, to which I will answer in order.

The Text ( Acts 15, 9. is to be understood of purifying by sanctification, as
well as by justification, because it is Faith in Christ's blood, and Christ's
blood purifies both ways.

The Apology.
The reason is not good, because it takes for granted, that wheresoever the
holy Ghost speaks of cleansing by Christ's blood, both must be understood. The
contrary is clear by these places, To. 3.18. and 5.9. Ephesians. 1.7. 1. Pet. 1, 9.
Ioa. 1.7.9. which must be understood only of one, viz: purifying by
justification: for though Legal purifyings taught both, and Christ's blood be
effectual to the Elect in both kinds, yet will it not follow to be so
understood every where of both, and that the holy Ghost means both: and
therefore not Act. 15.9. Besides, the Text, Acts 15.9. by the precedent and
subsequent matter shows clearly it means but one, viz: justification in that
the words are an answer in part to a question, and that question was not
whether sinners were sanctified, but whether or no they were justified by faith
in Christ.

Men are not to make the Scripture a nose of wax, to say every thing in every
place, specially when it expounds it self directly of what purifying it
speaks: and the point of purifying by sanctification is not denied to faith
simply (for I confess it may be proved by another Text) but only to be
meant there, viz: Acts 15.9.

The Exception.
Secondly, the Text, Acts 15.9. Is to be understood of purifying, by
sanctification as well as by justification, because it speaks of purifying by
saving, and saving comprehends sanctification, as well as justification.

The Apology.
The reason is not good, because it is not true (which is supposed) that
wheresoever the holy Ghost speaks of saving, viz: spiritually, he comprehends
both: for these Texts, Romans 5.9. 1. Cor. 5.5. Io. 5.20. are understood of
saving by justification only. Indeed they that are saved are sanctified, yet
where saving faith is attributed to any, it does not follow, that there, by
saving should be meant sactifying.

The Exception.
Thirdly, Act. 15.9. must be understood of purifying both ways, because
sanctification is directly attributed unto faith, Acts 26.18.

The Apology.
I answer: first, that if it be a good rule, to expound one Scripture by
another, and the darker by the plainer, then may the Text, Act. 26.18. be
expounded by Acts 15.9. for the circumstances of the Text in the 26. chap. do
not show of what purifying it means, but the scope of the place in the 15.
Acts does. And therefore the clearer, Acts 15. should expound the darker in the
26. chapter, the rather because in the 26. chapter, sanctification is expressed
by other words of turning them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God, and therefore for all this, Acts 15.9. must not be understood of
purifying by sanctification.

Secondly, I deny not, but faith in some sense sanctifies us, viz: as it
teaches it, Tit. 2.11. as it stirs up to it by the comforts thereof, Rom:
121. Ioa. 2. but neither will it be proved from thence, that therefore
purifying, Acts 15.9. must be meant of purifying by sanctification, because it
is so understood, Acts. 26, 18. (unless the Apostle had in both places spoken
of the same matter, upon the same occasion, and to the same end in both, which
cannot be verified of these two places in the Acts.) Nor yet will it follow,
that before faith do sanctify the heart, it is totally impure, with the filth
of sin, notwithstanding any graces of the Spirit wrought therein, which is
the point to be proved in the Antecedent.

Indeed upon saying we are justified by faith, it will thereupon follow that
we are totally unjustified: that is, actually before we believe in Christ; but
in saying we are sanctified by faith, it will not thereupon follow that we are
totally unsanctified before faith come: and the Reason is because faith, by it
office does more properly justify then sanctify, and justification does not
suscipere magis and minus, a^ sanctification does; neither is wrought by parts
and degrees as sanctification is.

The Exception.
In the last place, they allege that many learned and sound Divines do
expound, Act. 15.9. of sanctification.

The Apology.
I grant it, but not to prove an absolute and total impurity in man's heart
before Faith, as they do: but that there is not purity enough to salvation,
without Faith in Christ, and that it stirs up the heart of a man more to
labor for an increase of sanctification begun. But though they had, yet do
not I think it reasonable or possible for every Writer among the Protestants
in these days to maintain every position in Divinity, of ^xposition of
Scripture, that has been given and delivered by others in former times.

To conclude, If a man be elected in Christ, and for his sake, before he be
actually in him, or have any faith in him, why may they not for his sake also,
be in part sanctified before Christ be actually in them by Faith, or Faith
be wrought in them actually?

The Exception.
The second thing undertaken for the proof of this their Argument is, that by
Reasons from other places of Scripture, it may be proved that Faith does
sanctify as well as justify though it cannot from Acts 15.9.

The reasons they bring are three, and I will answer them all briefly and in
one answer.

Faith (say thy) does purify by sanctification as w^ll as by justification:
first, because it is Faith in Christ's blood which purifies both ways:
secondly, because the larger Catechism says so: thirdly, because I my self
say so in my Treatise.

The Apology.
To all these three Reasons, I answer that neither any one singly, nor all of
them jointly, prove the point in question, which is, that Faith so sanctifies
the heart, that there is not so much as the least measure of sanctification
begun in the heart, till faith be wrought: for (at the most) they prove
that which I deny not, but confess as well as they, that faith in in Christ
teaches sanctification, increases it, and makes it acceptable to our
salvation.

The Exception.


The Apology.
Solut.
Before Faith be in men, Christ is not in them actually, by his sufficient
saving grace: but Christ may be in men, some way; namely, by his wisdom, and
enlightening grace before faith in Christ be in them.

Before Christ be in men there is not sanctification enough in measure, nor
sufficient unto acceptance for our salvation wrought in us; but before Christ
be in us actually by faith, sanctification may be begun, by the preparations
and dispositions to regeneration.

If God be moved for his infinite mercy and free grace in Christ, to bestow
faith upon sinners, when as yet Christ is not in them actually, why may he not
upon the same grounds, and for the same reasons, for Christ's sake begin
sanctification in them when as yet Christ is not actually in them.

The Exception.


The Apology.
I answer, First, 1. Cor. 1.30.
Christ is made unto us wisdom, as well as sanctification, and illumination
of one Elect descends from Christ's wisdom upon them, and this discends before
faith in Christ. Why then may not a beginning of sanctification? All our good
is from Christ; but all is not drawn from Christ by faith, for preventing
grace is not so drawn: Are we not called before we are justified. Romans 8.30.
In like manner, all that is drawn is not from Christ, as ours by justifying
faith; for faith it self is not so drawn, for that faith should be before
and after it self: and if faith be not so drawn, why should Repentance?

Secondly, For the Spirit blows where, when, and as it lists; so in what
measure, and order it pleases him to begin, and finish the work; so that as
long as the beginning of Repentance, and sanctification in the preparations
(though before faith in Christ) be not attributed to the work of Natute, or
good use of our own Free Will, but only to the work of the Spirit in the
Elect, (which yet is not sufficient to salvation; nor acceptable thereunto
without faith in Christ) I can see no inconvenience in holding a beginning of
Repentance or sanctification in the dispositions thereunto before faith, and
that therefore it will not follow that the Elect are wholly impure before faith
in Christ, in whom those preparations to Regeneration and faith in Christ, are
so wrought, as I have said.

Indeed, some challenge me for bordering upon Pelaganisme and Popery; as if I
divided some part of Repentance, betwixt the work of the Spirit, and of
Nature; because I said, Nature only does n^^ work the preparations to
Repentance and Faith recited Page 222. l. 24. But how they can conclude it
thence against me, (...) cannot see, and therefore do I refer it them to
conclude, and to the judicious Reader indifferently to determine. This I am
sure, I abhor Palaganisme and Popery, and I have often and plainly affirmed
them, al to be the work of the Spirit in the Elect; and have denied them to be
the work of Nature; yea, I have given reasons for it, both in my Treatise, and
in my Apology,. Indeed I say, Page 258. that by the light of Nature, a man may
know many actions be does to be sin, and that he ought to repent of them,
and leave them: yea, that hereby many are moved for a time to refrain some
evil actions: But this proves not that to repent, or to be prepared to
repent is the gift of Nature. I have often affirmed that the work of all those
preparations, is the work of Gods Spirit in the elect. If they can bring any
place out of my Book where I say any one of them is the work of Nature, in
them that do repent, then may they pooue my supposed Division: In the mean
time such wresting of a man's writing savors neither of love nor judgment.

The Trial.
Repentance is not begun before faith in Christ, because then it should be
acceptable without faith, The third Objection.
but no grace can be acceptable to God without faith, Heb: 11.6.

The Exception.
This Argument (they say) I can never answer; but whether I have or no, or now
shall, let the Reader judge.

The Apology.
To this Argument I answered, that i^ proves not the question, because the
Text out of the Epistle to the Hebrewe^ proves not the Argument; for both
qu^stion and Argument are to be vnd^rstoo^ of pleasing of God, any or every
way, b^ the proof out of the Epistle to the H^brewes, is of pleasing God one
way only viz: unto salvation.

To remove my answer, and maintain their own argument, they should have
done two things.

First they should have taken away m^ distinction, in one of the members there^
concerning acceptablenesse, and shewe^ that no repentance can be any way
acce^table without faith in Christ: But beli^ it was too hard a tas^e; for some
repetance is not at all acceptable unto sa^ua^on, as Ahabs and the Ninivites;
and y^ the same Repentance without Faith (...) Christ, is some way acceptable
unto Go^ namely, to the auerting of a tempor^ Judgment, as in the same
ex^mples.

Secondly, they should have proved, that the Text alleged out of the Epistle
to the Hebrews to prove their argument, is to be understood of a saving faith
only, for of that only is the question, which is not done.

I grant the Apostle in that chapter speaks of a saving faith, verse. 5. but it
seems that in the verse alleged, he speaks but of an assent to the truth of
the two propositions following in the next verse, viz: that God is, or there is
a God: secondly, that he is a rewarder of them that seek him, for he that
doubts of either of these cannot please God at all: for how should he please
God that believes not there is a God: But neither of these have they done, and
therefore for all this the argument is unsound.

The Exception.
Oh but will they say, though the Text, Heb: 11.6. do not prove that all our
actions done wiehout faith, are every way unacceptable; yet may it be proved
by reasons taken from Scripture: let us hear them, and answer them in order.

Without faith all our actions are every way unacceptable, because without
Christ they are every way unacceptable.

I answer: first, there is some pleasing God without Christ to the obtaining
of some blessings, as the examples of Ahab, and the Ninivites, and Iehu show,
and as the example of Cyrus will easily prove. Isay 44.28. and 45.1.2.3.

Secondly, I answer, that this reason begges the question, because to be
without faith, and to be without Christ, makes an vnacceptablenes to one and
the same end, viz: unto salvation and not any or every way, as the proof
should be; Faith in Christ makes us acceptable to God, with that
acceptablenesse to which we are elected in Christ, which he has purchased,
and which faith apprehends, but this is acceptablenes to salvation: for
spiritual and heavenly things are the treasures of the covenant of grace, to
which we are elected by the father, which are purchased by the Son, and which
we receive instrumentally by Faith.

The Exception.
But without Faith in Christ, all our actions are every way unacceptable,
because they are every way sin, and no sin can any way please God.

The Apology.
I answer, though all our actions done before faith in Christ, are
unavailable to everlasting life, yet are they not sin: Is the action of a
youth blessing his meat by saying grace before he have faith in Christ,
sin? I say not that any action of a man out of Christ is altogether void of
sin, but that some action of his, is not sin, and my reason is this.

No sin is any occasion, why God spares or blesses him that commits it. But
some action, of a man out of Christ, is an occasion that God spares or blesses
a man that does it, as may easily be seen in Ahab, Ninivey, Iehu, and Cyrus;
and therefore some actions of a man out of Christ is not every way sin.

This likewise may be seen in the action of the Midwiues of the Hebrew women
in Egypt, in saving the male children alive. This was without faith in Christ,
(for ought the Scripture says,) Exo: 1.17.19. It was sinful some way, viz:
as it was accompanied with a lie, which they told Pharaoh, concerning the
speedy delivery of the Hebrew women, before the Midwiues came to help them in
their office: yet was it not every way a sin, because it proceeded in part
out of the fear of God: that is, fear to murder young Infants, and it was
some way acceptable, because it is said, God dealt well with them, and made
them houses: that is, blessed them with posterity.

The Exception.
Without Faith in Christ, all our actions are every way unacceptable to God,
for the public great Catechism allowed to be taught in Grammar schools in
Englands faith as much.

The Apology.
I answer: first, the actions, whereof the Catechism speaks, are good
works, commanded in the law, which I acknowledge to be fruits of faith as
well as they, and to be made acceptable by it; but every action is not such a
work: there be some, that be neither commanded nor forbidden, but
indifferent: secondly, the acceptablenes which the Catechism speaks of there,
is but one way, viz: unto salvation, as appears by the place where he
interprets it, by the reward which God gives to the works he speaks of, and
that reward is heaven, as will easily appear to him that will peruse the
precedent and subsequent Question and Answer.

The Exception.
Oh but say they, the distinction of pleasing God unto salvation, and to some
other way, and to some other end is not good: first, because it is the
distinction of the Papists: secondly because to what other end should on
actions be acceptable but to salvation?

The Apology.
I answer: first, If all the Papists said were untrue, and all their
distinctions in Divinity unsound, and erroneus, then were this reason to
purpose, if they can prove they have made this distinction as Papists and
Heretics I will yield. For my p^rt, I do not think it fit to oppose Papists
in every thing they deliver; least by contradicting them in some thing which
may be true, we keep them back from being gained, and reclaimed from their
known errors, and expose our sel^es to just refutation, give them occasion to
glory over us, and move people to suspect our soundest truths.

Secondly, I say that our actions may be some way acceptable, and to some other
end then s^luation, for the repentance of the Ninivites, was acceptable to
corporal and temporal preservation, and salvation, not to Spiritual and
Eternal, to save from fire, sword, famine, pestilence or the like, which they
might have endured, and not from Hell fire; so that for all this, begun
Repentance may be acceptable to God before faith in Christ some way, viz: as it
is a pteparation and disposition thereunto, as it is commanded and commended of
God, and as it is his own work to make his Elect capable of salvation thereby.

They likewise cavil at other things, in answer to that objection, and give
reasons why Cornelius had a saving Faith, and why Ahabs and Iehus actions were
sin.

The Exception.
The reason to prove Cornelius had a saving Faith is, because he prayed and
was heard, which cannot be without a saving Faith.

The Apology.
I answer, a sinner may pray and be heard, before a saving Faith; else why
do our Divines make this as a preparation to it, viz: with an humbled and
sorrowing heart to approach to the throne of grace, to confess his sins, and
to crave pardon, as has been showed before. Surely obedience to Gods
Commandment, that bids us pray, and belief of the promise, to hear us, may
some way make our prayer acceptable, and to be granted, though we have not
Faith in Christ, though not auailable unto salvation: 2, Cornelius Faith was
not faith in Christ dead and risen, but an expectation of a Messiah to come;
for how can that be a saving faith, which ministers just occasion to doubt,
whether Christ be come in the flesh or no: 1. Ioa. 4.3. 2. Ioa. 7. Thirdly,
Cornelius was not a proselite; as yet he was unclean, as appears by the
vision: for Peter durst not Preach the Gospel to him being a Gentile and
uncircumcised: therefore is it not likely that as yet he had Faith in Christ.

Likewise the reason, why Iehus action and Ahabs, were every way sinful and
unacceptable, is not good; for the Rule propounded of the acceptance of our
persons in Christ; of aiming in our actions at Gods glory, and of sincerity in
the manner of doing them, does make a man that does such actions acceptable
unto salvation, the want of those does not make them every way unacceptable as
they imagine.

The Trial.
Repentance is not begun before a saving faith, The fourth Objection.
because then it should be begun in men before they have any spiritual life in
them, for faith is the spiritual life of Christian. Gal. 2.20.

To this Argument I answered in effect, that it proved not the question,
because the proote of ir, out of the Epistle to the Galathians was not to
purpose: first, because the place alleged is to be understood of the
spiritual life of justification with which we have nothing to do in our
question: secondly, because the question is of spiritual life but begun but
the proof is of spiritual life, perfect in resp^ct of being in all the parts
(not degrees) of it: thirdly, the question is that faith is so the spiritual
life of Christians, that there is not so much as the least measure of
spiritual life begun in men before they have a saving faith, but the proof
is of no such matter.

The Apology.
To this former answer of mine; I now add this: first, to the argument it sell
e, that if by spirtuall life, be meant the life of justification, or
sanctification, then I say repentance is begun before a man has this
spiritual life in him: but if sptrituall signify, whatsoever a man has in
him which is not natural, then I say repentance is not begun in a man before
he have something in him which is not natural: something is begun in a man
before a saving faith, which is not begun in him before he have any
spiritual life for there is something in a man (which he has not by any
strength of nature) before saving faith, as a belief of the Gospel, sight of
his sins, fear of damnation, etc.

Secondly, to the proof of this argument out of the Epistle to of the
Galathians, I answer: first, that where they say it is the spiritual life of
the soul every way. I answer, that neither does the Apostle say so; nor do
they prove it sufficiently. I have said enough to the contrary, page: 178.
which is not answered: secondly, I answer that saving faith is the life of a
Christian, in respect of justification, and sanctification: not in respect of
whatsoever is in him which is not natural.

The Exception.
To maintain their argument, now they iudeauour to prove two things: first,
that the text, Gal: 2.20. is to be understood of spiritual life every way.
Secondly, that though it could not be proved from that place: yet might it be
proved by sufficient reasons, grounded on other Scripture, that faith in
Christ is the spiritual life of Christians every way.

To prove the first concerning that Text to the Galathians they bring this
reason. The life spoken of, Gallat. 2.20. is life by salvation, therefore by
justification, and fanctification, therefore every way.

The Apology.
I answer, Paul's living by faith must be understood of such a life, as is
attributed unto others by faith in the same chapter and epistle, but to others
viz. all the elect, in the same chapter is attributed the life of
justification, and life is expounded thereof only. Chap. 2.16. and 3.11. and
therefore the life which Paul lived by faith spoken of in the 2. chapter and
20. must be the life of justification only, and not of sanctification at all.

The Exception.
Oh but will they say, I my self in my Treatise say that the text, Gallat.
2.20. is understood of spiritual life, unto justification and salvation. page
278.

The Apology.
True, but by mine own words it is evident what salvation I mean, viz.
Justification, or forgiveness of sins, or saving from hell: not salvation
which comprehends sanctification, as they would interpret me.

Besides neither the word save, nor Savior is used in all the Epistle to the
Galathians, therefore cannot be understood of such a salvation.

Add to this, that when we say Christ is our Savior, we do not mean he is
our sanctifier, but one that keeps us from hell, and brings us to heaven. For
the power of sin is a distinct thing from the punishment, and as the power of
sin is taken away by sanctification only; so is the punishment by
justification only: salvation is understood of Justification and of that which
as a consequence follows on it, our glorification.

Oh but may they say Paul's living by faith, ver. 10. was the same with his
living to God, ver. 19. and that is the life of sanctification.

I answer, living to God ver. 19. must either be the same with living in his
favor, and free grace by Christ, and then it is al^ one, wtih being justified
by God through faith ver. 16. or else it must be opposed unto death to the
Law; and death to the Law, is (in his meaning) renouncing it to justification,
as being unable to keep it, and by keeping it to be justified by i^; and
therefore living unto God, is seeking unto the means, appointed by him for
justification, and living in his sight by fait^ in his free grace. 2. If by
those word^ were understood, I am sanctified by faith, then must the meaning of
them be to this effect; in that I have had any motions to holiness,
preparations to sanctification, or any the least inclination thereunto, I have
had it by the faith of Jesus Christ; before I believed in Christ, I had not the
least beginning thereof in any kind: but this is contradicted by other Texts
of Scripture, where it is said of S. Paul, He was taught according to the
perfect manner of the Fathers, Act. 2.23.
and was zealous toward God, and that he had lived in all good conscience
before God, vnti^ that day, Namely, according to the light he had by the Law
and the Prophets. 3. Suppose it could be proved, that Paul lived unto God, any
way before he believed in Christ, yet will not this prove he had no beginning
at all of spiritual life before he believed in Christ, for to live to God is a
plain fruit of saving faith, and a man may have foam spiritual life begun in
some sense, and not live to God.

Lastly, though it could be proved, that Paul had no spiritual li^e begun in
him, before he believed in Christ, yet will not his example prove, that no man
has any spiritual life begun in him, before he believe in Christ, inasmuch
as P^ules conversion was extraordinary, for the gifts and graces of the spirit
needful to salvation, where in (all likly hood) wrought in him at once, and
together, in an enthusiasme, so are they not usual in all men and women in
these days, but one after another successively, Sermon after Sermon, and week
after week: and so much for answer touching their proof out of the epistle
to the Gallathians, the first thing propounded to make good their Argument.

The Exception.
The second follows which is to prove, that faith in Christ is the spiritual
life of Christians, every way, and that there is no spiritual life begun in
men, before they believe in Christ, and their reasons are four, to which I
will answer severally.

There is no spiritual life begun in men before faith in Christ, because
till then then they are dead in sins and trespasses.

The Apology.
I answer, in him that is dead in trespasses and sins, there is no
spiritual life, of justification or sanctification: but in him in whom
repentance is begun and other preparations, there is somewhat more then that
which is natural, whereby in some sort he is in a middle estate, although
indeed he be still a natural man, because nature has the predominancy in
him: and in this state he continues till he be regenerate in all parts which is
as soon as he believes in Christ, and in this state was Nicodemus Ioa. 3. who
came to Christ and was taught of him, and that which was not natural was
wrought in him, and yet he had not a saving faith.

The Exception.
There is no spiritual life begun in men before faith in Christ, because
till then they have not Christ.

The Apology.
The reason is not good, because though before faith in Christ, they have not
Christ in his righteousness, to their justification, and in his
sanctification, to their sanctification, and full conversion both of heart and
life: yet may they in whom repentance is begun, and these preparations, have
him in them some way, viz. in his wisdom to their Illumination, and the
beginning of their conversion.

The Exception.
There is no spiritual life begun in men, before faith in Christ, because
till then they have not the spirit. Gal. 3.2.

I answer, 1 the extraordinary gifts of the spirit, were not given but by
hearing faith preached, which is the meaning of that place, Gal. 3.2. For at
the preaching of the Gospel (the Doctrine of faith) and upon the believing
thereof, were they given, Act. 10.41.44. 2. The spirit of adoption is not given
before faith in Christ for that is the grace which instrumentally (and so
only) gives us prerogative and title to our adoption, even as it only (but
instrumentally only) receives Christ and his benefits. Ephesians. 1.13. Gal. 3.26.
Romans 8.13. 3. The gifts and graces of the spirit sufficient to salvation are
not given before faith in Christ, Heb. 11.6. Romans 5.1, 2. 4. The gift of
sanctification is not given before Faith in Christ. But for all this will it
not follow that before Faith in Christ, the spirit is no way given, the
contrary may be seen in illumination and a belief of the Gospel, for these
are gifts of the spirit, and therefore parts of spiritual life in some sense.
1. because they are supernatural, (all natural men have them not, nor are
they wrought by the work of nature in any, no not in the Elect) 2. because
blindness of mind, and infidelity which is contrary thereto, is a branch of
spiritual death. 3. The Spirit inhabitant cannot be in men before they have
faith in Christ: but the Spirit assistant may, and the exciting by assistance
may.

Indeed Illumination and a belief of the Gospel, are not spiritual life
enough to salvation: yet is it life enough (by Gods blessing) and further grace
to produce Faith in Christ in the elect, for within man and by the working of
the Spirit, there is no other work but these, and that which is wrought by
these, which persuades men to believe in Christ. If illumination and a believe
of the Gospel, etc. had no supernatural life at all: but were altogether dead
works, then could they produce no such effect as faith, and if they be not
dead works, then have they some life, and if they have some life, then from
the spirit, and if from the spirit, then may they be called branches of
spiritual life, and he that has them, may be said, to have some spiritual
life begun in him, because (as has been said) he has some life in him more
then natural, that is more then all natural men have.

The Exception.
There is no spiritual life begun in men, before Faith in Christ, or faith
in Christ is every way the spiritual life of Christians, because
sanctification goes before justification.

The Apology.
I answer, in nature saanctification is begun before justification. 1.
because regeneration is begun before justification, namely in illumination
and other preparations as has been showed before. Secondly, because faith it
self is a sanctifying grace, by their own confession from Acts 15.9. and
faith goes in nature before justification.

Indeed justification goes in nature before the perfection of our
sanctification in all the parts of it, and before the acceptance of it to
salvation, but justification does not go before any or every measure of
sanctification can any way be begun. The will of God in working is the Rule
of perfection to the work, and then is it said to be perfect, when it is
wrought in part, or in whole according to that perfection of parts, or degrees
which the Lord intends unto it, at several times, and by several means. The
Lord is no way tied, for showing the perfection of his workemanshippe, to
finish a work in all the parts of it, at sundry times, more then he is to
finish it in all the degrees thereof, at sundry times.

The Trial.
Repentance is not begun before faith in Christ, The fifth Objection.
because repentance is a proper effect and fruit of the Gospel.

The Exception.
This Argument is disclaimed, therefore is it vain to spend time about it, for
if they will not acknowledge and confess it: I have no reason to confute it
any further. Only I would have the world believe, I do not feign an enemy,
and then flourish against him. For two learned and godly Ministers, whose
worthy works are in print, have used the same.

They which bring this proposition, Repentance is the proper effect and fruit
of the Gospel believed, to prove that repentance is not begun before
justifying faith, must be understood to mean by a belief of the Gospel,
either that belief which is faith in Christ, or that only which is an assent
unto the truth of the Gospel. If they mean by a belief of the Gospel faith
in Christ, then must it be their argument which I have propounded, to prove
that repentance goes not before faith in Christ: If they mean but an assent to
the truth of the Doctrine of the Gospel, then do they mean that no other
faith goes before repentance but that, and then have they two Divines of our
own, less on their side, then they thought they had, and I have two more on
mine, for I hold that a belief of the Gospel goes before repentance, and
repentance before faith in Christ, and let this be enough for that fifth
Objection, the sixth follows.

The Trial.
Repentance is not begun before faith in Christ, The sixth Objection.
because it is not begun before regeneration, for regeneration is not begun
before faith in Christ.

This Argument was answered, by denying the Antecedent, viz. that Regeneration
is not begun before Faith in Christ, and the reason of the consequence, viz.
that repentance is not begun before regeneration.

The Exception.
For making good the Antecedent, viz. this proposition, regeneration is not
begun before faith in Christ, they bring two reasons, to which I will answer
in order.

Regeneration is not begun before Faith in Christ, because it issues from
Christ, and from our union with him by faith, 2. Corinthians. 5.17. Ephesians 2.10.
Colo. 2.11.

The Apology.
I answer, first if by regeneration be meant our being made Gods children
actually, then I grant, that our regeneration must needs flow from our union
with him by faith, but then it proves not the Antecedent, for the regeneration
we speak of is not our being actually made the sons of GOD, but a work of
the Spirit beginning to fit us for that: but if by it they mean any or every
work of the Spirit, beginning to fit us for regeneration, and tending
thereunto by GODS appointment, as any work of the Spirit in the understanding
or will, of one that is elected to salvation, to fit him for regeneration by
faith, then I say that such regeneration may be wrought before our actual
union with Christ by Faith, and does not issue from it.

It is true that Regeneration issues from Christ, in the elect whether we
consider him as the efficient cause, either by way of meriting it for us, or by
working it in us. Hebrews 12.3. Joan. 1.19. Ephesians 1.3. and 2.10. or as the
final cause, Galath. 4.19. But it is not true that regeneration so issues from
Christ, that there is not so much as any the least beginning of it wrought in
us till we be actually united to him by Faith, which is the question. The
contrary may be seen in illumination, a belief of the Gospel, and vocation
which are, and may be wrought in the elect, before this union, Romans 8.20.
though they tend to regeneration, (or rather) are a branch and member thereof,
and there can noe inconvenience follow, hereupon, as long as the regeneration
begun before this actual union, is the work of the spirit, in the elect,
and for Christ's sake, that shall be perfected in due time, appointed by God for
that end.

The Exception.
Secondly, they prove that regeneration is not begun before faith in Christ,
because I my self say as much in my treatise, page 310.

The Apology.
I answer, by acknowledging that faith in Christ, becomes effectual to bring
forth good works, and new obedience in a holy life, and to beget in us other
Christian graces as hope, joy, peace, newness of heart and uprightness, etc.
which are the fruits of faith in Christ, and it becomes thus effectual by our
union with Christ through faith: but I do not there affirm (which is
alleged, and is the point to be proved,) that no grace tending to
regeneration, as a disposition to it, is wtought before this our union, and
therefore for all these two reasons, their last Argument is weak and
insufficient.

As I have added to my six arguments one more, in defense of my opinion so will
I add one more objection (which is an argument of theirs) against it, and it
is this.

The Exception.
If faith in Christ go before love, and love before repentance, then faith
goes before repentance.

But faith in Christ goes before love, and love before repentance.

Therefore faith goes before repentance.

The consequence (they think) is good because that which goes before the
cause, goes before the effect, ergo if faith go before the cause of repentance
which is love: then must it go before repentance which is the fruit of love.

The Assumption they prove in the parts of it.

1 Faith goes before love, because faith works by love, Gal. 5.6.

2 Love goes before repentance, for the doctrine of the Church of England says
so.

The Apology.
I answer: 1. If by love be meant any kind of love to God, then I grant the
consequence and deny the assumption. But if thereby be meant that love of God
which proceeds from our actual being beloved of God in Christ, and our
apprehending of the same in our own particular justification, then I deny the
consequence and grant the assumption. Some love of God may be before iustifiing
faith, for God is the object of love, and God may be conceived and apprehended
as loving, not only in many temporal blessings, but even in some spiritual,
before men believe in Christ. For God may be apprehended loving in sending his
son to purchase redemption for man and manifesting in the means a
possibility of obtaining our share therein, upon repentance and faith in
Christ, and as preparing v^ by some works of Gods Spirit to faith in Christ,
and if we may be some way affected toward God upon these considerations and
grounds before faith in Christ, then may there be some love before faith, and
if our love to God be suitable to such preparing works of Gods Spirit, as
have yer bin past upon us, and such good as has bin manifested to v^ from God,
I say such love is true in it kind, as being answerable to that, which God
aims at, in such means, though not with that perfection which is requisite to
salvation immediately, yet with that which is requisite by way of disposition
and preparatorily. But that love of God which proceeds from the receiving and
apprehension of our justification is a fruit of faith in Christ, and follows
it. 2. I answer, that if by repentance be meant the practice of amendment of
life, and new obedience, then the love of God goes before repentance: but if by
repentance be meant hearty sorrow for sin past, and true purpose to leave it,
then I say the love of God does not go before repentance. Touching the first
part of their asumption, out of the Galathians that faith goes before love, I
say, it is not to purpose because it proves not that faith goes before all
love, but only that love which proceeds from our first being beloved of God,
which we apprehend by faith in Christ.

Neither is the doctrine of the Church of England out of the Homilies rightly
alleged to prove the 2 part of their assumption, viz. that repentance has an
ingredient charity, and that repentance is a fruit of the love of God: for the
repentance the Homily speaks of is not repentance strictly taken viz. sorrow
for sin and purpose of leaving it of which I speak, but the whole work of
Gods Spirit on man to make him capable of justification and salvation, or the
whole conversion of man in mind and will, in affections and actions, inward
and outward; and this appears in that it makes four parts of repentance there
spoken of, viz. 1. Sorrow for sin, 2. acknowledgment and confession of it, 3.
faith in Christ, and 4. amendment of life: in which sense it is no marvel if
he include love and charity in repentance: so that there is no reason to
conclude thence that love is included in repentance strictly taken (as I do,)
except they mean by love some affection to God for making it possible for us
to be saved and providing a means to that end, and not a love of God for our
being actually saved, or mean by repentance amendment of life: for this is a
fruit of love, and in this sense it is that St. Augustine speaks to this
effect.

Many do daily say, they are sinners, and yet still they delight to sin, this
is but profession, not amendment, the soul is accused, not healed, the offense
is pronounced, not taken away, August. 10. tom. Ser. 7. de tempore.
nothing makes true repentance but the hatred of sin, and love of God the
fire of this sacrifice is love.

Now at length I draw homeward, toward a conclusion of the whole, namely, to
the last thing propounded in handling this point, of the precedence of
repentance unto faith in Christ, which is the use and application, I made
thereof in my Treatise, with which, as with the rest there is fault found.

It will not be worth my labor to confute (muchlesse recite) the particular
faults and aberations, they epsy therein: The applying of the point.
because the answer unto them, will little serve to the clearing of the
Doctrine it self: partly because that which I should write in confutation
thereof, must be gathered out of that I have already said in this Defense, and
partly also because the whole frame of those exceptions, will of it self (upon
my Defense) fall to the ground.

For I think they would never have written against the application; but upon a
supposition, that the point whereupon it was raised, is unsound: for the use of
a Doctrine is good or bad, according as the nature of the Doctrine is true or
false, as well as if it be proper and natural, or streined and impertinent.

Now then if it may appear as I (hope it shall to all that are willing and
able to judge) that I have answered all their exceptions, then does my Doctrine
touching the precedence of repentance unto Faith in Christ as yet stand
upright, and consequently the application thereof by way of confutation,
instruction, reprehension, exhortation, and consolation, must go for current
being natural to the point and not wrested.

As it will not be needful for me to defend all those uses, so neither to
enlarge them, only I would add out more to the other five, and clear one of
them which I have already made.

That which I would add to the other should be by way of caution, which is to
advertise the Christian Reader, that in perusing this my Defense, and
meditating on the point it self, he would not do either the one or the other,
with a mind only intent to understand the truth of the point, but with a
heart to be affected with the truth, when it is understood: not laboring so
much, to enquire whether of repentance or Faith, the one or the other goes
before in nature or in time, as whether they have them both or no, and how they
may get them both, both being necessary in their kind unto salvation.

That use which I would clear, should be the fourth. (whence as also from
other places in the Treatise, viz. page 226. 233, 234.) some collect, that I
make that faith, not to be saving faith, which is not wrought after Repentance.

To this I answer, far be it from me to imagine, must less to determine, that
a true faith in Christ, (supposing it to be true) cannot be a saving Faith. For
Faith in CHRIST is a true saving Faith, let it be wrought by the Spirit of GOD
when it will, before or after repentance: for I think the hand of the Lord, is
not to be tied, in as much as he may work how, and when he will, with, and
by the usual means, and ordinarily, or without them, or against them, and
extraordinarily.

But this I say, that for as much as it has appeared, that usually, and in the
common order of Gods working, generally and in his ordinary course, God
prepares men to believe in Christ, by the fore-worke of some graces tending to
it, and that many will presumptuously say and persuade they believe in Christ,
when indeed they do not: and therefore to restrain men from presumption, I
say that such persons, may not persuade themselves, as yet they hau^ a saving
faith, 233. such may be conceived not to have a saving faith, 234. not when
they had it indeed, but when they thought they had it, and had it not: for how
can a man look for benefit by believing in Christ that continues in a purpose
of sinning.

And that this is so, may appear because in that use I speak only of carnal
Gospellers, who cannot have a saving faith indeed, yet may they presume they
have it.

May not a Minister of the Gospel, knowing that Preaching is the way and
means to work faith in Christ ( viz. ordinarily) reprove carnal Gospellers,
that neglect and contemn hearing of Sermons and yet think they have faith in
Christ: may they not say that their faith us not a saving faith, viz. because
they submit no^ themselves to the ordinary means which should beget it, may
not they say safely and truly that their faith is not a saving faith, though
God can, and will, and sometime does work a saving faith without these means,
viz. extraordinarily? why then may not I say, that the faith of carnal
Gospellers is not true saving faith, seeing they were never prepared to believe
in Christ by the dispositions, which Gods holy Spirit works ordinarily in
those in whom he begets a saving says, though sometime God can and will, in an
enthusiasme, and sudden rapture, work a saving faith, without these
preparations? Surely yea, for not Gods extraordinary ways and works but his
ordinary, are the paths wherein we must walk, the rule by which we must
proceed, and the Touch by which we must try our selves in cases of this
nature. To conclude.

By that which is written in this Apology, the Christian Reader may discern
the material Exceptions against my Doctrine, and the Defense of my Doctrine
against those Exceptions.

I know full well that a Master of Defense would have put by these thrusts,
with more skill, or have beaten them back with more strength, but I am only a
learner in this School, and therefore only as a Scholar in this faculty (pro
meo mart and art) I have played my prize.

That which by Gods providence I have seen materially objected against my
Doctrine, I have (with Gods grace) answered, the pertinency and sufficiency of
which answer I refer to the more learned and judicious Readers to be
determined.

Some object my Doctrine is new, but I answer it is not a new: but a renewed
Doctrine. Witness my testimonies, and reasons. It is not new though it seem
new, it skills not how new a doctrine be so it be true.

As it is not good to receive every Doctrine for this is to be carried about
with every blast. Ephesians. 4 14.
So neither is it safe to reject every Doctrine which seems new: for this was
the error of the Jews who refused the Gospel because to their judgment it
seemed a new Doctrine. Acts 17.19.


The way to prevent error by mistaking is to follow the rule of the Apostle,
Prove all things, 1. These. 5.21, 22
hold fast that which is good, abstain from all apperance of evil. that is,
Examine the Doctrines you hear by the word of God, and if after Trial they
evidently appear, to your judgment to be good and sound embrace and hold them
fast, if naught and erroneous, reject and let them go. If any man after Trial
shall dissent from me in this opinion, I will not be offended so he dissent as
a brother in judgment and opinion, and not in love and affection; and so from
answering Exceptions to my book in one point, I proceed and conclude with a
remouall of some imputations against it in another, the Authors in both not
being the same.

There came to my hands very lately certain papers, containing an accusation
against me concerning my first Book called A Trial of Faith, and my second A
Defense thereof.

The things laid to my charge, are no less then perjury, lying, and
contradiction, heresy, blasphemy, and aequivocation, as if my book were a
mirror of errors, and absurdities, and my self a monster of Ministers.

The matters being so foul, and the opportunity so fair to purge my self, I
thought good to add a sew leaves for the clearing of my innocence herein: For
in that these papers were brought me not knowing of them, nor looking after
them when this book was almost printed, I deemed that GOD (by his providence)
would have me defend my self for the credit of my Ministry, which is as
tender as the apple of mine eye, that cannot endure little motes of disgrace
unjustly to dim it, much less such great beams of slander to put it out if
it were possible.

Pudet hac opprobria nobis,
Et dici potnisse, and non potuisse refelli.
If the accusations were true, it were better my book were burnt in Paul's
Churchyard, then sold there, and it were fitter for me to stand at a stake in
Smithfield, then in a Pulpet in the Church, and if they be not true, then is it
not meet to suffer simple people to be seduced to believe them, nor my self
to be traduced by the report and belief of them, neither of which can be
avoided without some answer.

Whether they be true or no I refer to the Christian Reader to determine,
when he has read over the Defense of my Trial of Faith, and this Apology for
it.

In this action and accusation, I will be but a Defendant, I will not give
rebuke for rebuke, 1. Pet. 3.9.
only I say, the Lord rebuke him. This is not my rebuke but the Lords, nor is
it against him, but for him, (the Lord knows) even for his unfeigned
humiliation and consolation in Christ Jesus. And so letting pass in modesty
the very words of the accusation as offensive to moderate ears, I proceed to
answer the matter, and first the heresy and blasphemy.

The heresy and blasphemy is instanced in three particulars, 1. The first
heretical and blasphemous position is this, Trial of faith, p. 41. li. 30.
I say Faith in Christ is the only condition of the covenant of grace, that is
required of all those that are capable of salvation.

I answer, this, is not heresy nor blasphemy, because the Doctrine of our
Church says as much, where it says, Articles of religion in Q Elizabeth's
time. Art. 11. Ser. of salvation, 1 part toward the end.
that we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and that
Paul deelareth nothing. Romans 3.25. upon the behalf of man, Concerning his
justification, but only a true and a lively faith, and afterward, faith does
not shut out repentance, hope, love, dread and the fear of God to be joined
with faith, in every man that is justified, but it shuts them out from the
office of instifying.

2. A second Heretical blasphemous Doctrine is, I say, God as sovereign Lord
of all, can appoint what means he will to make us capable of life.

Neither is this an heretical and blasphemous position, because the power of
God is to be considered two ways, Perk. gold chai. chapter 3.
either actually or absolutely: Gods absolute power is that, by which he can
do more, then either he does, or will do, Math. 3.9. Phillip 3.29. Gods
actual power is that by which he causes all things to be, which he freely
wills. Psalm. 135.6.

Now then where I say, God as sovereign Lord of all, can appoint what means
he will to make us capable of life, I do not speak of his actual power, but
of his absolute, for I do not mean. Though the Lord has actually willed and
appointed that faith in Christ shall be the means to make us capable of
eternal life (that is, instrumentally only and in no sense meritoriously) yet
God as sovereign Lord of all, can now appoint another means to make us
capable thereof, as he would strain his wit to interpreat me. But my meaning
is (which is evident by the context) that before the Lord appointed and willed
that faith in Christ should be that means, by his absolute power, as
sovereign Lord of all, he might have appointed any other grace, to have been
the means (instrumentally and conditionally) to have made us capable of
Heaven. If God by his absolute power can do more then either he does or will,
(as is confessed out of Mr. Perkins) then in case God had not willed that Faith
in Christ should be this means, he might by his absolute power, have appointed
any other means, and consequently what means he would to make us capable of
life. For that action which depends upon Gods free will or ordination, that, by
his absolute power, he could have done otherwise, (for that is the nature of
free will to do so as that they might have done otherwise:) but the appointing
of the means to make us capable of salvation depends upon Gods free will and
ordination, therefore he might have done otherwise, and consequently by his
absolute power, he could have appointed what means he would, to make us
capable of salvation.

And that the appointing of the means to make us capable of salvation, depends
on the free will and ordination of God appears because the merits of Christ
depend thereupon, according to that of Mr. Calvin. Christ could not deserve any
thing, but by the good pleasure of God, Calvin Iustit. l. 2 1. 17. the 1.
but because he was appointed to this purpose with his sacrifice to appease
the wrath of God, and with his obedience to put away our offenses, etc. Now if
this be true in the meritorious cause of our salvation, which does purchase it,
much more is it in the instrumental, which makes us but persons capable of it
now it is procured by him; and so much for clearing the second supposed heresy
and blasphemy.

The third heretical blasphemous position is this that I say, the act of
faith, which is believing in Christ does justify us, and is our righteousness.

Of this sentence I will not say much here, because I have maintained it to be
sound Doctrine (in my sense) in a private writing to himself, which he
promised to answer, but yet has not performed it, as also in a public
defense in print, and in the view of the world, which was perused and also
allowed by two very learned and godly Doctors of Divinity, for that end (which
I humbly pray the Reader to peruse for his satisfaction, if he be doubtful,)
even as this Apology also has been proved and approved by the same worthy
Divines. And so I pass from the heresy and blasphemy with which he charges
me, to the perjury, lying, and contradiction, which is instanced by two
particulars.

The first instance to prove the perjury lying, and contradiction is this,
viz. because in my second Book, I protest I never wrote, that Christ has
merited that faith should be our righteousness, and justify us, Defense, page
35. and yet in my first book I say, the act of faith iustifies us for the
merit of Christ. Trial, page 196.

I answer, in these two sentences I do neither forswear, nor lie, nor
contradict my self, because I do not affirm and deny one and the same
proposition.

That I do not in the two sentences forenamed, Arist. deinter: lib 1. chap. 4.
(...). Ram. logi. l. 2. cha. 2. contradictio est quando idem axioma affirmatur
and negatur;
deny and affirm one and the same sentence, or proposition is plain because I
do not in one place deny, Christ has not merited that faith should be our
righteousness, and justify us, and in another place say, Christ has merited
that faith shall be our righteousness, and justify us, for I only say, faith
iustifies us for the merit of Christ. So that the same Martin in Ram. logis. l.
2 c. 2. Diasceps. quando idem consequens de eodem antecedente affirmatur and
negatur.
consequent not being affirmed and denied of the same Antecedent in both
propositions, therefore can there be no contradiction between them, and
consequently no lie, and therefore no perjury.

But it may be the propositions in the several books are the same in sense
and effect, therefore if in one place I deny, that Christ has merited that
faith should justify us, and in another place affirm as much in effect, then
have I contradicted, and consequently perjured and lied,

I answer, I have not in effect contradicted my self, first because
justification in the first sentence is taken for our being justified formally,
or for the nature and being thereof, and for that very thing, whereby man of a
sinner is made just, and in this sense it is true I never wrote that Christ
has merited that faith should be our righteousness and justify us. In the
latter sentence justification is taken efficiently, for our being justified, as
by an efficient cause, and in this sense I might truly say without
contradiction to the former, the act of faith does justify us, as the
isntrumental efficient for the merit of Christ, viz. apprehended thereby, that
is, faith as an instrument apprehends and applies Chri^ts merits for our
justification by them, and in this sense I say, in my first Book, Trial page
178. ^in. 1.
Faith iustifies us, not as it is in us: but as it rests on Christ, and in this
sense speaks the Synod of Dort, faith iustifies in as much as it apprehends
the merits of Christ. Synod of Dort in ^ng. pa. 23. er. 4
For even as if I say a spoone feeds a child, my meaning is not, that the
spone is the food and nourishment of the child, but only that it is the
instrument, whereby the food and nourishment is reached and conveyed to the
child, and by which he receives that food whereby he is nourished. Even so
when I say, Faith is our righteousness, and iustifies us, I do not mean that
faith is that righteousness it self, by which we shall be presented and stand
righteous before God in his sight, for that only is the righteousness (...)
Christ active and passive, but that faith (...) the instrument whereby the
righteousness of Christ is reached and communicated unto us, and whereby I
receive it to my justification. Of the manner of this participation and
communion or imputation I have declared my mind fully and plainly in the
Defense, Defense pa. 2^ to 30.
to which I refer the Reader.

Secondly, I answer: In the first proposition my meaning is, I never wrote;
that the merit of Christ is communicated to faith, and that by communion
therein faith iustifies us, (as the Papists speak of the merits of our works,
when they are dipped or died in Christ's blood:) For then should faith either
deserve, or be the justice whereby of sinners we are made righteous, both
which are far, and ^uer were from my thought (the Lord knows.) And in the
second sentence my meaning is, the merits of Christ come between our faith and
justification, not to give virtue unto faith to justify us: but to lead us
unto Christ by whose merit we may receive that righteousness, whereby of
sinners we are made just; Trial page 199.
and in this sense I say, in my first Book, that faith iustifies us rather
then any other grace of God, namely because it makes us go out of our selves,
to seek to the all sufficiency, of the death and obedience of Christ, to rest
and trust in him for justification and salvation, Ser. of salvation (...) part
the end.
according to the Homily, as great and as godly a virtue as the lively faith
is, yet it puts us from it self, and remitteth or appoints us unto
Christ, for to have only by him remission of our sins, and justification. So
that our faith in Christ (as it were) says unto us thus. It is not I that take
away your sins, but it is Christ only, and to him only I send you for that
purpose, forsaking therein all your good virtues, thoughts and works, and
only putting your trust in Christ.

The second instance by which he assayes to argue me of perjury, lying, and
contradiction, is, in my second Book, I protest I never wrote in my first
Book, that faith is our righteousness, and yet in my first Book I say, faith
is our righteousness.

I answer, that this does not argue me of perjury, lying, and contradiction,
because I do not speak of faith being our righteousness in the same sense
and respect in both, for in the first sentence righteousness must be taken
properly and formally for that very justice, whereby men are made just and
righteous, as by a form, and of sinners made righteous formally. And in the
second sentence, righteousness is taken improperly for an attribute given to
faith, and it is the same with obedience, which the Apostle Paul attributes to
faith. Romans 16.26. (For believing in Christ is obedience to that commandment
of God, which bids us believe in Christ, 1 John 3.23. and not believing in
Christ, is disobedience John 3.36.) and in this sense it is true, faith is our
righteousness, Romans 1.11.
when it is wrought in us, as well, as faith is ours, when it is wrought in us.
And when I say, faith is our righteousness, I do not mean it is the
righteousness, by which we stand truly and formally righteous before GOD,
and in which we shall be presented pure, and without spotte of sin before
Him, but in this sense, that it is all the righteousness and all the
obedience, which GOD works in us and requires of us, as an instrument
apprehending, to make us capable of Christ's righteousness. According to the
Doctrine of our Church, Paul declares here, (Romans 3.25. Ser. of salvation part
1 toward the end.
) nothing on the behalf of man but only a true and lively faith.

Not that the act of faith is our formal righteousness, and iustifies us
meritoriously for, or by any worthiness inherent in it self, or infused
thereunto by Christ's merits, but that it is called righteousness in a borrowed
sense, because it is only the instrument appointed by God, whereby we are to
apprehend, and lay hold upon Christ's merits which are our righteousness, and
the only meritorious cause of our justification.

In the second accusation he does argue me only of lying and contradiction,
which he endeavors to do by this, because in my second book, I say, my first
Book was not a Treatise of justification, and yet in the Title of my second
Book I name my first Book a Trial of Faith concerning justification by
faith, but this does not argue me of lying and contradiction which I thus
declare. 1. because I do not entitle my first Book a Trial of the Doctrine of
justification: but a Trial of Faith. 2. Forasmuch as faith is taken in
Scripture in one sense, wherein we conceit^ it not to justify, and in another
wherein we conceive it does justify. To the end I might fully declare, that my
intent was in my Book to speak of the latter, not of the former, I added in
the title of the second Book these words, viz. concerning the Doctrine of
justification in Faith: So that the sentence, wherein he supposes the
contradiction to be has this sense, the Trial of faith, viz. of that faith
which concerns justification by faith.

And that the latter words, viz. concerning the Doctrine of justification by
faith, do argue, that by Faith I meant justifying faith, this Argument will
show.

That Faith which concerns the Doctrine of justification by faith, is
justifying Faith, for no faith does concern that Doctrine but justifying faith.

But the Faith whereof I wrote, does concern the Doctrine of justification by
faith, so says the title of the second book. Therefore the faith whereof I
speak is a justifying Faith.

If he would argue me of lying and contradiction herein, it must be by such an
Argument as this.

That book which concerns the Doctrine of justification by faith is a
Treatise of justification.

But my first book concerns the Doctrine of justification by faith, so faith
my second Book in the Title.

Therefore my first Book is a Treatise of justification.

To this I answer, justification may be considered, either as it is explicated
and treated of, by all the causes thereof, and all the arguments incident
thereunto, or as it is considered only in one cause concurring thereunto.

In the first sense, I grant the proposition to be true, viz. he that writes a
book of justification and explicates it in that large manner, does write a
book of justification, but in this sense his assumption is false, for in the
sentence he alleged against me. I limit the Doctrine of my book to speak
concerning justification by faith, that is, of justification, so far as it is
by faith, and of faith so far as it concerns justification, which is to
speak of justification as it depends upon one cause, and of faith as it is
one cause of justification.

And so (I hope) I have cleared it, to the judgment of all indifferent and
judicious men, that I have not deserved to be accused of perjury, lying, and
contradiction.

I should now proceed to say something touching the last imputation objected
against me in those papers; which is acquiuocation, but this will need no
answer, for who knows not, that I am not a Jesuit, nor the son of a
Jesuit, whose practice and Art it is. I have solemly protested against it in
my Defense, page 35. and I hope my carriage in my Ministry, and conversation
these twenty years in the City and Parish where I dwell, will suffiently purge
me from the suspicion of it. In a word.

In moral Philosophy he is said to speak truth, who speaks as he thinks,
though he thinks not as the thing is, and in Logic he is accounted to
speak truth, that speaks as the thing is, though he thinks not as he
speaks. But in Divinity there is required a d^uble conformity and agreement,
with truth of the thing and the truth of the thought, and this I have observed
in the Defense of my Doctrine touching justifying faith. For writing the truth
of the matter, I referred my self to the judgment of the learned, by whom my
Defense and Apology were approved, and for the writing the truth of my meaning,
I appeal to the righteous Judge of the whole world. It may be that the Lord
will look on my affliction, 2 Samuel 6.^^
and that the Lord will requite good for his cursing this day.


