1587. A CHRISTIAN and wholesome Admonition, Directed to the Frenchmen, which
are revolted from true religion, and have polluted themselves with the
superstition and Idolatry of Popery.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, near the sign of
the Castle.

A song or sonnet of the author containing a grave contestation and complaint
of the Lord, against the unthankfulness, cowardlines, and disloyalty of the
French reuolts, a denunciation of their extreme woe, if they continue reuolts
still and an exhortation to turn to him.
Hear heaven and earth, and all things else,
Which th'ample cope of heaven co^tains:
Hear my just plaints touching the fall,
Of people which in France remains.
Whose faint and feeble faith did fail
When th'enimie did it assail.
What moved thee my covenant
Unthankfully thus to forsake:
That thou thy self might join to Baal
His cursed ways that thou might take?
O people most unthankful then,
O most ungrateful sons of men.
Tell me if that at any time,
I dealt with thee discourteously?
What means this change? hopst thou to find
Thy good or thy felicity?
If thou estranged be from me,
In whom all good things are that be.
O cursed wretch? O madding fool?
Thou have (that thou thy self might save)
Thy self bewrapt in Satan's nets,
Who both thy body and soul will have,
And sure he will thy goods destroy,
To thy great grief and sore annoy.
Bethink thy self. Condemn thy fault,
Return to me whose merci's great.
A pardon is prepared for those,
Which through faith shall it entreat.
Which tears from dewe^ eyes let fall,
And unto me for mercy call.
To the Christian Reader. O Lord strengthen us, that we may fight thy battle,
stand by us, or else we can not prevail. Give us faith, and we shall have
victory for ever. Amen.
Many men are of many minds. And few there are, that accept thankefully the
labors of other men, in these unthankful and last times. Yea it may be, they
will think the publishing of this book to be needles, considering that we,
neither (thanks be to God) now suffer, or are like to suffer persecution. For
amongst us, Gods word is preached, the Churches are in peace; and flourish: all
things go with with us, and not against us. Again, the gospel having
continued so long, by all likelihood, it takes such deep root, as we shall
not need to fear, the coming in, or springing up again of Popery. In deed,
if these things were as they ought to be, received, followed, and obeyed: if
men did know, and would confess the goodness of the Lord in calling them, and
vouchsafing them so many mercies, in waiting so long for worthy fruits of
their conversion and repentance: then no doubt, we should the less need to
fear that which our sins do threaten: that in so great light, and after so
many happy days: in the broad day of so many graces of knowledge and
wisdom of God revealed unto men, that ever either dark popery in the course
of Idolatry or heresy, atheism, or such like iniquity should ever so grow
again, as that persecution should be feared. But none of these things give us
any comfort. For howsoever Gods word be preached, (which yet is done with
great corruption, and that as scantly as may be) yet it is not followed. We
have in deed some outward peace, but the spiritual peace of God, especially
established in the Ministry of the Gospel, that is far from us: for alack,
we are waxed wanto^ at home, and we prescribe God abroad according to our own
lusts, in the matters of his own worship: we eat and drink with the
drunkard, and say: Our master is gone into a far journey, and will be long a
coming home. Gods enemies, the Amorites and Edomites may do what they will,
and the way is not taken that should stock up by the root these cursed
fruits and wicked generations. For they have long looked, though God in favor
and long patience have waited for our repentance and therefore disappointed
them, for the day, wherein they might once again lead us forth as sheep to
the cruel slaughter. And what shall we say. Is not God just, that he should
chastise his children and be obeyed of his enemies? Yes verelie. In all times
the godly have, and must bear their crosses. As long as Christ shall have a
Church on earth, Antichrist shall have his Sinagogue. There will ever be
children of the flesh, to persecute those that are of the spirit. And therefore
those that dream of an earthly kingdom, they deceive them selves: for it is
impossible that Gods servants should have their heaven in this world. God has
his cup in his hand fully mixed. His children must not only kiss the cup,
and drink the first draught, but also his enemies shall sweep up the dregs
even to the bottom. Wherefore my good brother, whosoever thou art, read such
like exhortations as this is. And howsoever God shall work, pray that thou
may abide such fiery trials as he does see meet and expedient for thee.
Look not upon men, but look upon the truth of thy God. All the men of the
world, shall not be able to stand to plead any thy least revolt from the truth,
before the almighty God. Therefore neither for living nor land, for life nor
limme, deny not the least jot of his everlasting will. In time of peace, while
it is yet summer, provide against winter. Before the storms come, prepare the
cables. Remember the anchor that may hold the ship fast in all dangers. For
surely God will come, he can not but visit, that he may purge this land from
hipocrises, will-worships, vanities and follies, wherewith it is in a manner
overwhelmed every where. And albeit this be to be looked for, yet fear not
thou, whosoever thou be that art Gods child. For these rods shall be for thy
good. Thine enemies cruelty shall bring thee to felicity, and themselves to
everlasting woe. God will make way for thee, to escape all peril. Though they
would send thee to hell, yet thou shall go to heaven. In killing thee, they
shall honor thee, and thou shall live for ever. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with thee. Amen.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT worshipful, godly, virtuous, and my singular good friends, M.
Henry Neuill Esquier, and Maistresse Anne Neuill his wife, grace and peace with
increase of godly zeal.
RIght worshipful, sithence my first acquaintance had with you^, such has
been the continual course of your manyfolde courtesies toward me, as that if
I should not seek in some, though not in semblable sort to requite them, I
might justly be counted a man most unthankful, if unthankful persons deserve
the names of men. And because mine ability is in no case such, as that I can
in such sort, as willingly I would make equal recompense for the same: I must
content my self in such sort as I can to do it. And therefore as one repaying
shales for nuts, or shreds for whole cloth, I thought meet to present unto
your hands these my simple labors, being the first fruits of my slender
knowledge in the French tongue, as a token and testimony of my thankfulness
and duty, which for good causes I owe unto you both, but principally in
regard of that zeal of Gods glory wherewith it has pleased him to inflame
both your hearts, and that in such sort as that you seem to be good means
appointed of God to provoke others. As touching the work it self (right
worshipful) and the necessity thereof, I need not speak, seeing it has
pleased God that somewhat should be said as may appear by my very loving
brother M. I. F. touching the necessity and times of the argument even for
these times whereto I refer you. And thus beseeching you most humbly to
accept this simple mite at mine hands, and to pardon my boldness in presuming to
make you patronize so simple a work, regarding mine own labors, I commit you
to the tuition of the Almighty, beseeching him to work farther in you a true
zeal of his glory, that you may zealously proceed in that course of godliness
which you have begun.

Your worships much bounden and at commandment in the Lord. Christopher
Fetherstone.
At Maighfield in Sussex this 24, of June. 1587.
A Sonnet made by way of exhortation to the Frenchmen which are revolted from
true religion, to the end they may return to God.
O Frenchmen which were once beloved,
With love surpassing that of men:
Of God, who had by sundry signs,
The same reueald to you as then.
But now that God you have forsaken,
And part with Romish idol taken.
What spirit? what counsel? or what rage,
So carries you? what hope? what fear:
Does make you turn: yea so revolt
From him that loved you so dear?
O blockishnes which Satan breeds,
Not once to see whither he you leader,
What? will you then forsake for earth,
The holy heavens? what? hazard all
To gain a thing that is nothing worth?
What thing more precious can you call,
Then God, the soul, and body neat,
And honor, which are riches great?
You loose all those if you proceed,
In course which you have erst begun:
Return to God. Up, courage take,
And to that path full swiftly run,
Which constant has proposde to you,
Up, up, I say and enter now.
A CHRISTIAN AND wholesome admonition, directed to the Frenchmen which are
revolted from true religion, and have polluted themselves with the
superstitions and Idolatries of Popery.
AMongst the effects of true godliness, this ought by good right to be placed
in the first place, as being chief, or to speak plainly, the only duty of
christians, forasmuch as under it, it comprehends all the rest: that is in
sum, that we be in such sort enforced with the zeal of Gods house, that when
we shall see his holy and sacred name dishonored and blasphemed by worldly
and profane men, and our poor neighbors forsaking the ensign of their
sovereign Lord and master, forsaking their fellows, and taking part with the
enemy of their salvation, we be thereby more moved and touched to the quick,
then by any thing that can befall us. By this moving or touching I mean
chiefly two things: the first is, that being displeased and grieved when we see
such offenses as redound to the dishonor of God, and to the destruction and
utter ruin of our poor neighbors, we humble our selves in the presence of our
God, renting, not our garments, but our hurt, with weeping, fasting, mourning,
and fervent prayers to the Lord, that it may please him to set up on foot
again those of his elect which are fallen through infirmity, and to strengthen
those other whom he has preserved by his goodness, giving them grace to
persist constantly even until the end, in the profession of his holy name.
The second is, that every man according to his vocation do faithfully employ
the gifts and graces which he has received at the hands of God, to the
maintenance of his glory, and to procure and further so much as in him lies,
the salvation of his neighbors.

And surely so it is, that the most faithful servants of God have always done
this: yea even at this day also many good men do it, whom the Lord has
preserved through his grace from the rage of this last tempest: which do not
only weep and mourn, being extremely grieved and vexed, to see the ruins
and desolations of the poor Churches in France, and to see the precious name
of the Lord blasphemed and dishonored by the most strange kind of reuolting
that ever was seen in the Church: but over and besides this, they strengthen
them selves every man according to his ability to repair the breaches, and
to do what in them lies, that this evil may go no further. Now as for me, I
have obtained this honor through the mercy of God, that I should be of the
number of those which being dedicated and consecrated to his service, have not
only their hearts wounded and pierced through with the beholding of such
disorders and confusions, which are as it were a deluge or inundation of evils,
wherewith the whole earth in a manner is covered: but also desire for their part
to procure some wholesome remedies for these maladies.

And therefore I determined to write some brief admonition, which I meant to
direct to those whom God had particularly committed to me: and not to publish
the same, directing it to all Churches in general. Which was not for want of
good will toward my brethren in the Lord, and toward all the Churches of Jesus
Christ: but knowing mine own infirmity and insufficiency, I never durst have
interprised it without the provocation or rather iniunction of my brethren and
companions in the Lords work, which have charged me with this, what reasons
soever I could allege for mine excuse. Which thing I meant to set down by way
of preface, that the causes which induced me to write this admonition might be
made known. The which I address unto all those in general, who having
sometimes made open profession of religion, have now forsaken the same: always
provided that there remain in them as yet some remnant of true godliness, of
good conscience, and of the fear of God, and some hope of conversion. And this
belongs principally to you Frenchmen, who heretofore have taken part with
true and pure religion, making protestation before God and his Angels, that you
would live and dye in it, and have so forsaken the impieties, superstition and
idolatries of popery, that you did solemnly promise never to return to the
same again, yea though you should loose not only your goods, honors, and
other temporal commodities, but also your lives. Notwithstanding the only
fear least you should loose these things, and the vain imagination least you
should suffer some discmomoditie by following Jesus Christ, made you break
your vow and promise to God, and has drawn you aside very quickly out of the
right way of his truth, yea even to the great dishonor of his majesty, to the
offense of his Church, and to your own utter destruction, unless you repent.
To you it is, I say, that I direct this my work particularly, that I may
lovingly and brotherly confer with you, touching the offense which you have
committed: beseeching you in the name of the living God, that you would find
some spare time to read it, pondering together with me the reasons which shall
be therein set down before your eyes, out of the word of God. And that not
only to the end you may approve the same (as all those will not stick to
do, which will not flatter them selves, nor stubbornlie withstand the truth
of God) but above all that having approved the same, there may be in you an
holy resolution, accompanied with the effect thereof: that is in sum, that
you may with speed repair by a true and ready conversion that fault which
you have committed. Which being well considered and weighed, as it ought,
together with the circumstances thereof, you shall full well know, and shall be
enforced to grant, that it is nothing so small and light as the enemies of
your salvation would make you believe, namely the devil, the flesh, and the
world, which endeavor moreover to cast you into a deep sleep, and so to
besot you, that you may not any longer have any feeling of your faults, but
may more and more plunge your selves in filth and mire, that you may there
continue, and finally become Antechrists, a people without God and without
religion, that is to say, being wholly become slaves to Satan, as is befallen
to more people in our country of France, then were to be wished, through the
just judgment of God. Furthermore, when you shall well perceive the greatness
and hugenes of your fall, it must needs come to pass that you shall see the
horrible and fearful judgments and vengeance, which the Lord brings upon
all those, who through their slacknesse an disloyalty, have been the cause
that his holy name has been profaned, and their neighbors offended. Which
knowledge may serve to bring you to a true deiection and humility before the
majesty of God: not that you may faint and sink down under your burden, and
so fall into despair, through the consideration of your transgressions, and by
the sight of Gods justice: but rather that being by this means humbled in the
presence of God, you may be the better brought to draw near unto him: or
rather to speak more properly, to provoke him to draw nearer to you: according
to that which the Prophet says, that The Lord is nigh unto those that are
comfortles, beaten down, and broken in heart, and saves them that be of a
contrite spirit, even through the feeling of their sins and iniquities: so
that a man may truly say, that such humility is as it were the first gate or
door to enter in unto the throne of the grace and mercy of God: who is in such
sort just to punish sinners in his wrath, even those which are obstinate, and
which harden their hearts when they hear his voice, and abuse his patience,
that he is also ready to show mercy, he is pitiful, gentle, and merciful to
all those which being convict in their conscience, and having accused
themselves before God, return unto him without faining, throwing them selves
as it were into the arms of his most bountiful father, to secke for grace at
his hands.

These are (my brethren) the principal points which I mean, by the grace of
God, to lay open unto you in this my present writing: that is, a brief
collection of that which you must do, that you may escape the just wrath and
indignation of the Lord, and be reconciled to him. This is that which I
require at your hands, for the glory of God, and for your own benefit and
salvation: this is that which all your brethren and members (whom God has
preserved) desire and crave daily at the hands of God with gronings, sighs,
and most fervent prayers. This is that which the Angels of heaven look for at
your hands, that they may rejoice and praise God for your conversion: Briefly,
this is that whereunto you are called and invited by the goodness and
clemency of our heavenly father, who stretches out his arms unto you, to
embrace you as his children. Wherefore it stands you upon to look to it: for
the case so stands that you must now either honor or dishonor God, you must
either be saved, or else condemned?

Now forasmuch as my desire is to help and comfort you therein, I will take
pain, through Gods help, to make these things more plain, and somewhat more
largely and in order to deduct them. First of al then, if you be desirous to
come to the true knowledge of your fault that you may detest the same, and
obtain pardon for it at the hands of God, you must beware that you weigh it
not in a false balance, such as is that of Satan's, the flesh, and the world,
ye sworn enemies of our salvation: for these shall not be your judges at ye
last day: but you must peyze the^ in the seals of the will of God, which is
declared unto us in his word: for that is the only most certain, and most
perfect rule whereto all our actions must be referred, and wherewith they must
al be hedged in, and according to the which alone men shall be judged of the
Lord.

I know full well that all those which have forgotten themselves in this case,
forsaking the profession of true religion, that they may raunge themselves
under ye banner Antichrist, must not be placed in one and the same rank. For
one sort is so fallen that they are as it were out of all hope ever to be able
to rise again, of which sort are that heap and rabble of hypocrites, which
had intruded themselves into the Church of God, making a show yt they would
follow Jesus Christ, and make profession of his Gospel: notwithstanding,
forasmuch as they never had any sparkle of true godliness, neither any will to
renounce their concupiscences, and the vanities of this world, that they might
dedicate and consecrate themselves to God, to follow Jesus Christ, and to
reform their life according to the doctrine of his Gospel, it is come to pass
yt their hypocrisy is discovered: for seeing they could not (so long as they
professed religion) give their lusts the bridle, and run into al filthiness,
dissolutenes, and infamous facts: give over themselves to their delights and
filthy pleasure, satisfy their ambition and covetousness, enjoy their ease,
delicates, and commodities of this life, take their pastime, and so live in
such rest according to ye flesh, yt they might not be disquieted or troubled
any manner of way Briefly, seeing they could not serve two masters which were
quite contrary ye one to ye other, yt is to say, God and the Devil, they
forsook God and gave themselves to follow ye world, which is as it were ye
devils bawd: other some staid not til they might be tried by the fan of
persecutions, and so to go out of the church, but they revolted of their own
accord at sundry times, and upon diverse occasions, either because they could
not abide to be reproved for their faults and offenses, or else because they
would not submit their neck to ye yoke of Jesus Christ, and range themselves
according to the order of the church as others did, or else because they could
not addict themselves to the affairs of ye world as has bin said. This was
the cause why they stu^bled at ye first stumbling stone whereon they light in
the way, nay rather they went purposely to seek the same. Othersome have taken
occasion at the cross and persecution. And albeit the most part of these men
make a show yt they approve our religion, and yet to the end they may be
counted good Catholics, are more superstitious, and addicted to ceremonies
then others, yet so it is that they be very Epicures and Atheists, which in
their hearts deride al religion. As for this sort of men, we may rather desire
it than ever hope for it, yt they will ever be brought to a true knowledge of
their offense, that they may turn unto ye Lord: For the Prince of darkness
has stricken the^ with such blindness, through the just judgment of God, that
they are in greater darkness of beastly ignorance, as touching the knowledge of
their fault, then they were before they came to the knowledge of the truth.
And it fares with them as with him that in a dark night comes to put out a
candle or light wherewith he was enlightened a while, for afterward his eyes
dazel more, and he is in worse case than before he had that light. Therefore no
marvel if these men be so turned out of the right way, that they cannot
return into the same again. For as the Apostle says, If those which have
once bin illuminated, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have bin made
partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of
the powers of the world to come: If these I say, fall away, it is impossible
that they should be renewed to repentance: seeing they crucify the son of God
afresh, so much as in them lies, and make a mock of him. Now then forasmuch
as these men are hardened in their wickedness, and so consequently incurable,
it were but lost labor to write to them, and to exhort the^ to acknowledge and
amend their fault, wherefore my meaning is not to apply my self to them in this
my writing, save only to denounce against the^ the sentence of ye holy ghost,
speaking by the Apostle to the Hebrews, that is, that seeing they have sinned
willingly after they knew ye truth, that is to say, seeing that being
altogether estranged and cut off from the Church of Jesus Christ, they take
pleasure in iniquity, and contrary to the testimony of their own conscience
do malitiouslie resist the known truth, there remains no more sacrifice for
sin for them, but a fearful looking for judgment, and a consuming fire
which shall devour the adversaries. And this is yt which we both can and will
say, touching these men at this time.

But as for you my brethren to who^ I now speak, God will not have me to recko^
you amongst those me^: for if it were so, then would not I take so much pains
as to write to you. But as I know yt in the more part of you there was more
frailty tha^ malice and hatred against the truth, so likewise I have a good
hope, yt after the lord through his goodness has beheld you with ye same eye
wherewith he beheld S. Peter, he will make you come out of the house of that
wicked Priest Caiphas, where Antichrist and his ministers pursue Jesus Christ
to death, and spit in his face with mockes, railinges and blasphemies most
horrible: I hope also that after you have wept bitterly for your fault, you
shall be reconciled to God, and received to mercy. Notwithstanding it is very
necessary yt you be awaked up and thoroughly touched, least you lie sleeping in
your sin, and so flatter your selves, whether by excusing or lessening your
fault, or by feeding your selves with I cannot tell what vain hope, and so fall
finally into the same hardness and obstinacy whereinto many are fallen: who
when they first began to fall away, made none account always to continue in ye
filthy sink: but did hope, yea and persuade themselves to come out thence in
time: notwithstanding they have suffered themselves to be lulled fast asleep by
ye world in ye bed of their tender and delicate flesh, they drive off from day
to day, waiting for some golden world wherein the Gospel of Jesus Christ might
be preached without contradiction, and the profession of religion should no
longer bring with it the cross and afflictions. But what? They see that in
steed of having an end, these afflictions continue, naie are redoubled
contrary to their hope: forasmuch as they never as yet learned this lesson
which Jesus Christ teaches all those which will follow him, that is, Mat. 16
that they forsake themselves, and take up their cross, that they may bear
it during their whole life, and that being thus prepared they follow him.
Forasmuch the^ as these men see themselves deceived by their vain hope, and
that they never took any time to bethink themselves and to ponder their
fault, and to mark and consider the judgments of God upon those that are so
slack and disloiall as to fly from their ensign, at such time as they are
to enter the battle: they are resolved to forsake all, and to lie tumbling in
their filth, that they may perish miserably, yea eternally, rather than they
will suffer even a little with Jesus Christ, that they may reign and be
glorified with him eternally. And now my brethren to the end you may make your
profit of their folly, and that by other men's harms you may learn to be
wise, you must beware that you take not ye same way which they have taken: but
contrariwise enter you rather into your selves, and examine your conscience
thoroughly without flattery, giving the same judgment of your fault, and
pronouncing the same sentence of comdemnation against your own selves, which
you sometimes gave upon these which had used the like slacknes and disloialty,
to the end that judging your selves you may not be judged of the Lord, as
says the Apostle. And that you may the better do this, you must rather hearken
to the voice of God, and to the witness of your own conscience which accuses
you, then to the enchaunting voice of that old Serpent, who to the end he may
seduce you (as he has already made too great a beginning) cease not to
whisper into the ear of your conscience, that which he sometimes said to our
first parents: and has God said, you shall not eat of every tree of the
Garden, etc. And if he cannot bring his matters so about that he can take from
you all feeling of your offense, and all perceiving and understanding of the
judgment and vengeance of God, he will suggest unto you by the flesh and the
world diverse excuses wherewith you may cloak and lessen the same, making you
believe (if possibly he can) that it is not so horrible as men say it is: or
else he will give you his accustomed cup of slumbering, besmeered with some
hope to return to God again, when the tyranny is ouerpast: but he will beware
that he do not tell you, that all that which he does, tends to draw you away
by little and little from the obedience of God your father, that he may hale
you to eternal destruction: but on the contrary he will persuade you, if he
can, that hereby you provide for your good, and comfort. Notwithstanding you
know that he is a lier and disceiuer: for when he went about to blind the eyes
of our first parents, he told them: your eyes shall be opened: and when he sought
to make them devils like to himself, he said unto them, you shall be Gods: and
intending to make them subject to the first and second death, he promised them
immortality and life, saying: you shall not die. Beware then how you give ear
to his deceitful and wicked counsels, to the inticements and inchauntments of
this inchaunter, who is an enemy to your salvation: but rather hearken to the
voice of that Sovereign Physician who will not only make you feel and know
your grief, the danger wherein you are, and the means whereby you may
provide for your curing: but will also heal you him self, if your selves be
not a stop and hinderance to it.

First of all then my brethren, I most earnestly beseech, and beseech you
again in the name of this great God and father of mercy, that you will
earnestly consider how many ways your fault deserves condemnation before
God. You know that the most vile vice and that which both most of all deserve
to be punished by all laws both divine and human, is this, to wit, if a
child do so degenerate that he withdraw himself from submitting himself to a
good father and mother, yea denies them to be his parents, and does become a
servant and slave to a stranger that is even their very deadly enemy, and
in whose house he shall be constrained to hear a thousand speeches tending to
their dishonor and reproach: or if a subject be so unthankful, unfaithful,
disloyal, and treacherous to his natural Prince (at whose hands he had
received many benefits and great honor) as to revolt from his obedience, and
to band himself with his mortal enemy which makes open war against him. And
yet you have dealt thus. For the Lord had sometimes granted you such favor
as to draw you out of Satan's family (whose slaves you were by nature) that he
might adopt you in his son Jesus Christ, that he might make you sit at his
own table, and train you up as his own children, and make you inheritours of
his kingdom, but you are departed out of his house, and having denied him to
be your father, you have quite forsaken him, that you might become slaves to
Satan, in whose Synagoge your ears shall be polluted with infinite and
horrible blasphemies against the Majesty of God. You had a good mother, which
is the Church of Jesus Christ, which had conceived you in her womb by the
incorruptible seed of the word of God, which had brought you forth not without
great panges and thrals of afflictions and persecutions, had given you suck
with her two breasts which are the old and new testament, and which had
brought you up and noursed you with great care, bearing your infirmities, and
covering and wiping away your filth: and in lieu of all this you have forsaken
her, denying her to be your mother, and have even as it were thrown your
selves into the arms of a strange strumpet, or rather of that great whore of
Babylon, which in steed of giving you good and wholesome nourishment, gives
you to drink the poison of her uncleanness and abominable whoredoms, that
your souls may thereby be infected and destroyed: and she cease not to make
deadly war against your chaste mother the spouse of Jesus Christ, and to
murder all her children. Furthermore, you had a good king and Sovereign Lord
even Jesus Christ the eternal son of God, who loved you so dearly that he
gave himself up to death for your sakes which were his enemies, who had
delivered you from the tirannie and slavery of the devil, who had redeemed
you, not with gold or silver or any other corruptible thing, but by his own
precious blood, which he shed for you: and not only so, but had over and
besides granted you so great honor as to make you his fellows, that he might
make you partakers of his graces, of his glory, and of his celestial kingdom:
and yet for all this, as soon as he summoned you to the combat of the
cross, that he might make you go the self same way which he had gone before
you, to the end that after the victory he might give you the crown of
glory and immortality: you turned your backs and forsook him, yea you
renounced him (if not al, at least the greater part of you) by the most
execrable abiuration which that infernal Dragon did ever spue out of his
stinking mouth against the Majesty of God: and that which more is, you have
enrolled your selves under the captain of all impiety, which is Antichrist of
Rome, the sworn enemy of the son of God and of your salvation. See what an
heap of backslidinges, disloyalties, and most vile unthankfulness here is. But
now I do well perceive that those which will not give glory to God, nor give
ear to his word, but take counsel of Satan, to confirm themselves in their
error, will not be unprovided of replies, and will not be ashamed (some such
there be) to seek to cover or lesse^ their fault, alleging that old saying
of time seruers and of certain backsliders, which know full well, yea in their
hearts condemn the abuses, impieties, superstitions, and Idolatries of
Popery, and are constrained to confess the truth, to wit, that that is the
very true religion which we profess through the grace of God. Notwithstanding
because they are afraid to bear the blows, they will not march on under the
banner of Jesus Christ: but to the end they may apply themselves to the
world, they follow the banner of Antichrist. Moreover if a man come to
admonish them and to tell them their duty, they replye, that albeit they
serve the devil with their bodies, yet they cease not to be Christians, and
children of God, forasmuch as they reserve him the chief, which is the
Spirit, wherewith they serve and honor him: and though they have forsaken the
church of Jesus Christ, and are fallen from their profession of the Gospel,
and have renounced religion, yet was not this in heart, and with affection, but
only in word. But all these allegations are so feeble, and these replies are
so friuelous, that they deserve none answer at all. And I am very certain
that the most part of you my brethren, have sometimes rejected them, as not
worthy to be received, and of none importance, when they would have paid you
with such money, yea I am sure you laugh at them even at this time in your own
hearts: and that for good cause. For where can you find that the Lord has
permitted us to make such a partition between our soul and body, as with the
one to serve God, and the devil with the other? Is not the Lord the creator
and savior as well of the one as of the other? Will not he be glorified in both?
We know that the Apostle will have us to offer not only our spirits, but
also our bodies to the Lord in Sacrifice, that is, that we consecrate and
dedicate our selves to the service of God, both in soul and body. And that
which more is, our bodies are called by the Apostle the Temples of God, and
must be made partakers of his glory as well as our selves: even then when we
shall be fashioned according to the glorious body of the Son of God. It
follows then that we must not serve the devil therewith, polluting them with
superstitions and Idolatries, but we must keep them in all pureness and holiness
for the service of our god. For what husband is he that is so foolish which
would take such an answer for paime^t at his wives hand, and that would suffer
her to make such a partition? If a woman were so impudent and shameless as to
speak to her husband on this wise: my husband, I prostitute my body indeed to
such and such, and make it common every day in the brothelhouse: but I
reserve ye better part for you, and that's mine heart, wherewith I love you,
serve and honor you. I pray you, should not such a woman deserve to be cast
off, of her husband as a mocker, or rather as a common, vile, and detestable
harlot? It is most certain that she should. What will the Lord then do, who is
ielous over his glory and our salvation, who has espoused us to himself,
that keeping our faith and promise made to him, we may be pure and chaste in
body and mind? What will he do, (I say) if we pollute our bodies in
Idolatry, which is spiritual whoredom? Wherefore we see that this is a vain
excuse: for indeed if this partition could have been made with a good
conscience, that is to say, to prostrate the body before Idols, and to keep
the heart for God, think we that Daniell and the three Hebrew children would
not rather have used this opportunity, then to have exposed their life to so
great dangers, seeing there was nothing required at their hands save only an
outward kind of worship. But what shall we say of so many martyrs, whose
memory is fresh as yet? Who would rather shed the last drop of their blood, or
be burnt alive with soft fire, then once to bow their knee before Baal, how
little soever it were? Why did they it not for safeguard of their life to
preserve it from so cruel torments, and from the fire? Because they feared
eternal torments, and the fire of Gods wrath, who abhors such Idolatry,
what protestation soever we make, that we keep our heart whole and pure for
him, for he will have both the one and the other. Now it may appear by that,
what account we ought to make of that other replye, which many amongst you
have in their mouth, when a man studieth to set before their eyes the filthiness
of their fault. If I tell you that you have abiured and forsworn christian
religion, and received and allowed all the abominations of the great whore:
also that you have denied the son of God, and acknowledged this Idol of
Antichrist, putting him as it were in his place, you will say that you did it
not with your heart and affection, but only in word, to content men, and you
think that you may escape by this goodly distinction. But the Lord will not
judge you after your subtilties and sophistry, which shall vanish away like
smoke, when we shall appear before the throne of his Majesty. He has not
said, He which shall confess me with the heart and affection, him will I
confess before my father in heaven, and before his Angels: and he which shall
deny me with the heart, him will I also deny: but he speaks of confessing
and acknowledging those which shall confess him before men, and of rejecting
and denying those which shall have denied and renounced him before men: And what
is it to confess Jesus Christ before men? It is to make open profession of his
Gospel, to make free confession of his truth, yea to feel it with our blood,
if need be, after the example of this cloud of martyrs, which shall stand
up in judgment against you at the great day. On the other side, what is it to
deny Jesus Christ before men? is it not to do even as you have done? And to do
that which you do as yet daily.

But least you think that I charge you to sore, and without cause, I beseech
you consider with an equal and quiet mind, what this cursed and detestable
abiuration which you have made, imports: the which I cannot read without an
inward trembling: especially when I behold the cursed and miserable estate of
so many silie souls, which by this means are caught in Satan's net, wherein
they continue entangled until such time as they be united again with the
Church of Jesus Christ. But admit there be some few among you, which have
exempted themselves from making the foresaid abiuration, yet you cease not to
deny Jesus Christ to be your sole Savior, to tread his blood under your
feet, and to renounce the merit of his death and passion, when by your
presence and assistance you approve that abomination of the mass, which is
the seal, and detestable sacrament of this abiuration, and renouncing of the
son of God, and as it were a poisoned heap of all the impieties of popish
doctrine.

But for the better explaning of all this, let us consider the things more
distinctlie: not that I purpose to rippe up all the points that are comprised
in this goodly form of confession and abiuration, and to refute them by
reasons and plain testimonies of Scripture: for then I should make a great
volume touching that matter alone: which should be a superfluous thing, seeing
I should then handle and do again that which has been already done most
excellently by many excellent servants of God in our time: and specially by
him who made not long ago, the answer to the profession of faith, published
against those of the reformed church, by the Archbishop and Munkes of
Bourdeaux, in which answer framed according to ye word of god, he does
plainly and amply depaint and point out all the abuses, impieties,
superstitions and idolatries of popery, which are gathered into their forms
of abiuration, so that they are made known to al even, to little children,
unless they be such as be blinded by the prince of darkness. Furthermore I
have not interprised here to dispute against those, which admit no reason, nor
no word of God, but only custom, the traditions of the fathers, their
opinions, their dreams and toys, the laws, ordinances, statutes and tyra^nous
decrees of their Antichrist: for this were but lost labor. And surely, I do
not write properly to those men: but unto you my brethren do I speak: to you I
say, which know these abuses by the word of God, which have condemned and
detested the^, and which are convict in your own conscience, that al ye points
of doctrine contained in this abiuration, are as many horrible blasphemies
against Jesus Christ, and the doctrine of his Gospel: except the Nicene creed,
the which these coseners have set in the very beginning of this goodlye
confession, which they have made, to bleare the eyes of the simple fools, as
if their doctrine were conformable to this creed, and as if we did reject and
reprove the same: whereas contrariwise it is we that receive it, confess, and
approve it in all points and throughout, as being grounded upon the word of
God: and on the other side they so pronounce it with their mouth in their
execrable mass, that they reject the most part of those points that are
contained in it, and in the Apostles creed: as we could depaint out before
their eyes, and make them touch with their finger, if they had eyes to see,
ears to hear, and an heart to understand that which should be set before
them out of the word of God. Forasmuch then as you are not ignorant of these
things which you have learned out of the word of God, it shall be enough for
me to touch them superficially, to put you in mind thereof, and by this
means to represent unto you in some sort, the filthiness, fowlenes, and
deformity of your fall, to the end you may be ashamed thereof, and confounded in
your selves, yea so grieved, that God may be glorified in your conversion.

First of all, consider I pray you how many impyeties and horrible
blasphemies are comprised in the second article which follows immediately after
ye recital of the Nicene Creed. You have thereby protested to receive and
allow, all the abuses, errors, superstitions, idolatries, and abominations of
the Church of Rome, and to renounce the truth of God, which has been taught
you out of his word: for you receive the holy Scripture upon such condition,
that it shall not be interpreted according to the Analogy of faith (as S.
Paul commands) yt is, that it shall not be interpreted according to the
Scripture it self, Romans 12.
conferring one place with an other, that there may such sense be gathered
thence as shall be agreeable to the grounds and articles of the christian faith:
but according to the sense and interpretation, which it shall please them to
give it, which falsely taking to themselves the right and authority to
interpret, do ordinarily and most manifestly corrupt and peruerte ye same
for maintenance of their dreams and inventions. So that by this one only
article you have promised to condemn (as being false) all the true and pure
doctrine of your salvation which you have learned out of the word of God,
interpreted by ye word of God himself: and on ye other side to approve all the
corruptions, lies, and falshoode of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is in
the doctrine of Antichrist, And what shall we call this, but to turn light to
darkness, to reject Jesus Christ as a lier, and to embrace Antichrist as being
true? Surely by agreeing to this one only article, you have (so much as in
you lay) given as great advantage to the enemies of the Gospel, as if a man
should deliver up into the hands of his adversary, all his papers, rightes,
and instruments giving him leave to turn them all to his most advantage, yea
to interpret the laws as he list, and to pronounce such sentence as he shall
think good, as if he were both judge and plaintiff. And surely there is no
error so absurd, no abuse so gross, no impiety so abominable, which
Antichrist and his ministers do not maintain by this means against the
truth of God: for when a man shall allege plain places of scripture in
defense of the truth, and to refute falsehood: and that the matter shall be
made so plain and so evident of it self, that they cannot tell what to answer
on the contrary, this shall be their last refuge: to wit, that our holy mother
the church understands these places otherwise: and that the Scripture
admits none other sense and interpretation, no yet any other authority, save
that which it pleases our holy father the Pope to bestow upon it. Thus will
they argue: so that by making you allow and approve this article, there rests
no more now, but that they may freely triu^ph over Jesus Christ, and his
doctrine, in so much that it was not needful to specify the rest which follow:
the proof whereof depends upon the granting of this alone. Notwithstanding
seeing that to the end they might more strictly bind you unto them they make
a recital of the principal heads of their false doctrine examine the^ al one
after another, and you shall full well know what reprehension your back sliding
deserves.

The third is no less pernicious tha^ ye second. For it follows upon it as a
general consequence, drawing after it all the special consequences and
co^clusions, which they make touching their inventions, and humane traditions,
whereby they have corrupted and perverted ye pure service of God as well in regard
of the doctrine, as of the ceremonies, which they could never maintain and
defend, were it not that their false gloses and interpretations which they give
upon the scriptures did help them. Wherefore seeing you have granted the^ this,
that it belongs to them to give the Scripture such sense and interpretation
as shall seem best to them, it follows thereupon, that you do likewise grant
to them, that all the abuses, all the dreams, and toies, all the ceremonies and
observations which Satan has brought in into ye church, whereof some are
altogether foolish, frivolous, and ridiculous, and other superstitious coupled
together with impiety and idolatry, without having any ground in the scripture,
yea being directly contrary to the same for the most part, and by the which
also ye purity and simplicity of Christian religion has bin turned into a
kind of Judaism and Paganism: you grant to them, I say, that al these bables,
all this filth and abominations are good and holy, as being parcels of the
service of God, being established in ye church by our Lord Jesus Christ and his
Apostles: as also these liars have bin so shameless as to call al these filthy
and stinking dregs, which have infected the Church: traditions, observations,
and ordinances of the Apostles. But you know full well that they agree as well
with the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, as darkness with light, and
falsehood with truth. For where can they find that Jesus Christ or his Apostles
did ordain ye mass together with the furniture and trappings thereof which are
full of foolish toies? Where can they find that filth, wherewith they have
corrupted holy baptism, as cream, salt, spittle, coniured water, lights and
such like things? Where ca^ they find the baptizing of Belles, holy water,
Processions, Prayer for the dead, and a thousand such bables, toies, and
trifles as were too long to rehearse? But chiefly an infinite number of errors
contained in the mass, and in all the rest of their book of ceremonies? Of
which sort is that execrable idolatry which they commit in worshipping a
morsel of Bread, the invocation and intercession of saints the adoring and
worshipping of the images, and relics of dead Saints, the fire of Purgatory,
the Popes pardons and indulgences, and such like impieties condemned by the
word of God. And yet for all this like seely souls you have miserably bound
your selves to receive and approve al these things. O eternal God is it
possible that you should have bin so indiscreet? Is it possible that you should
continue so blockish as to have no remorse of conscience in you.

But let us proceed: you have been taught out of the word of God that Jesus
Christ has for the continual use of his Church instituted only two
Sacraments, to wit, Baptism, and the holy Supper, to represent unto us the
holy mysteries of our salvation, that is to say, our regeneration, and the
spiritual life which we draw from Jesus Christ our head, in as much as we
are most strictly united and coupled together with him: and to seal up in our
hearts the promises of salvation and eternal life, which are there made unto
us by the Lord. You know moreover, that the Church of God must content it self
with these two, not only because they are sufficient to represent unto us all
the benefits of Jesus Christ, and to assure us of his grace and favor, but
also because it is not lawful for mortal man, no not for ye very Angels to
ordain any sacraments, or to establish any thing in ye service of God:
forasmuch as this right belongs to god alone. Notwtstanding mark what you
confess by the fourth article of this tyra^nous abiuration: you ackowledge yt
there be 7. sacraments in the law of grace, instituted by Jesus Christ: which
is most false. We confess indeed yt that which they call Confirmation (which is
nothing else but a receuing of such as are instructed and catechized in ye
church catechisms into ye church, yt is to say, of those which having bin
catechized and instructed in the doctrine of Christ, were received into ye
fellowship of the faithful with prayer to reco^mend the^ to God) is an holy
thing, which has bin practiced in the Primitive Church, even in the Apostles
time: also we do not deny but that repentance (which is nothing else but ye
acknowledging of our faults and the misliking of ye same, and the ame^dment of
our life) is a good and wholesome thing, ordained and commanded of God: we
confess also yt that which they call the order of Priesthood (yt is to say,
the laying on of hands, which was used in the Church in old time, and which is
used at this day in many reformed Churches, when Pastors, Elders, Deacons, and
other ecclesiastical persons are to be admitted unto the public charges of ye
church) we confess, I say, that this is a laudable and holy ceremony,
ordained and practiced by the Apostles. As for marriage we know also yt it is
an holy institution of the Lord, and that the custom of blessing the same in
the Church is Christian. We grant I say, that al these things are good and
holy, and are grounded upon the word of God: but we deny them to be
Sacraments. First of al because Jesus Christ has not instituted them to be
such: and secondly because they have not those things that are required
necessarily in true Sacraments: for then they must have been ordained by Jesus
Christ to continue in the Church until the consummation of the world: and for
the use of the whole Church in general, and of every member thereof in
particular. Furthermore, there should have been visible signs to represent
the invisible graces of God, and the promises of salvation and eternal life,
which things we see to be in baptism and in the holy supper only. As for
extreme unction as they call it, we do not deny but that the oil wherewith
the Apostles did anoint the sick, was an outward sign which did represent
the grace of God, even in that time of the said Apostles who had ye gift of
healing: but this Sacrament lasted but for a time, and had an end together
with the gift of healing and working miracles. We conclude then that there be
but two Sacraments in the Church of Christ, and that the other five were
invented by men. And yet you confess that all that was instituted by Christ
Jesus: and that which is worse, you avouch an horrible blasphemy, when you
grant that the Sacraments confer grace: for by this you attribute not only
to the true Sacraments, but also to men's inventions, that which belongs to
the holy Ghost, who alone conferreth the grace signified by them, and that to
the true faithful alone. And the Sacraments (as also the word) are only
instruments which he uses to this end: so that we receive by them nothing
appertaining to our salvation, unless the spirit of God work inwardly in us,
and unless we have a true and lively faith.

You have also learned by the same word of God that the said Sacraments must
be ministered with the same purity and simplicity wherewith they were instituted
by our sovereign Doctor and master Jesus Christ, Deuteronomy 4. and 12. Pro. 30.
Apo. 22.
and that it is an intolerable boldness to add any thing thereto, and
detestable sacrilege to take any thing, therfro^, how little soever it be:
forasmuch as this were to seek to be more wise than he who is the eternal
wisdom of the father. And yet nevertheless you approve by the first article
all those ceremonies which these men have annexed to the administration of the
Sacraments, which they have wickedly and ungodly profaned and polluted. Also
you allow al those things which they use in the administration thereof, which
they themselves have invented and ordained how foolish, superstitious and
wicked soever they be: as you know that ye more part of the^ do rather rese^ble
iuglers tricks and toies, or the superstitious and profane fashio^s of ye
heathen, then the simplicity and gravity of Christians. Moreover, you approve
by ye same article two horrible sacrileges which amongst others they commit in
ye administration of ye sacraments, to wit, yt they separate those things
which God has coupled together, yt is, the preaching of the word, which is as
it were ye soul of the sacraments: and the^ they rent in pieces the holy
Supper of the Lord, if that which they call their Communion, ca^ be the true
supper: for they exco^municat the simple people from one essential part of the
supper, namely from the cup, contrary to the express commandment of Jesus
Christ, who says, Drink ye all of this. And it is said in another of ye
Eua^gelists, that all of them drank thereof. Mat. 26. Mar. 14.
Consider then with what conscience you could assent to such falsehoods and
iniquities.

But this is not al: come to that which follows afterward, and consider I
pray you how many pernicious errors, and horrible blasphemies are contained in
ye sixth and seventh articles. First of al you have been taught by the word
of God that all hope of our salvation rests in the only oblation which Jesus
Christ made of his body upon the cross to appease the wrath of God toward
his elect, and that this sacrifice of the son of God was once so offered,
Heb. 7. and 9.
as says the Apostle, that it neither can nor ought to be reiterated, being
most entire and perfect and therefore most sufficient to reconcile us to God.
Notwithstanding you renounce this, or at least seem to make it imperfect and
insufficient, when you acknowledge that the mass is a propitiatory sacrifice
for the quick and the dead, that is to say, that it is of such power as to
purchase Gods favor, to appease his wrath, and to make satisfaction for
sins, and in sum to redeem and save us: so that you put the mass an
execrable idol in place of Jesus Christ, spoiling him of the honor which to him
belongs, which is to be our sole and soueraign priest, and only propitiatory
sacrifice which alone has this virtue to appease the Father, and to make him
become favorable to us. Furthermore you avouch an horrible blasphemy against
the manhood of Jesus Christ, when you confess this goodly doctrine of their
transubstantiation. And surely this error is of such importance, that it
brings wc it an infinite number of other errors, and spoyleth us of al hope
of salvation, if we receive it. For if Jesus Christ were not very man, he
should not have truly died for us, and so have satisfied Gods judgment for
the sins of men, and so consequently we should as yet remain in death. But
now he should not have bin very man like to us in all things except sin,
H^b. 2. and 4.
as says the Apostle, if his body had been invisible as some ghost, under a
morcell of bread at such time as he ordained his Supper together with his
Apostles: and if the Bread and Wine were transubstantiated into his body and
into his blood, by whispering certain words, which they call Sacramental
words (which is a kind of charm) so that he was there flesh and bone, as
thick and as great as when he was upon the true tree of the cross, as these
men most impudently affirm: it should follow that the wicked ones and
unbelieving of ye world could receive Jesus Christ, and that he should be in
danger to be gnawn of vermin, not to speak of a thousand other errors and
damnable absurdities which should require too long time if I should stand to
rip the^ up. Also if Jesus Christ should every day come down between the
Priests hands, that which is contained in ye articles of our faith should not
be true, that he is ascended into heaven, where he shall be (as touching his
humanity) until he come at ye last day to judge both ye quick and the dead: as
is confirmed by S. Peter, who says that the heavens must contain him, Act. 3.
until the restoring of al things, etc. Furthermore if he were at one time in an
infinite number of places as touching his humanitye, his humane nature should be
converted into ye divine nature which alone is infinite. To be short, if ye
doctrine of ye papists touching the ma^hood of Jesus Christ were true, the^
were he not very man, and so consequently not our mediator. And if this were
so, the^ sholud it follow that we should be as yet under the curse of God. Mark
the^ what you have done. But over and besides consider, that by allowing that
doctrine of transubstantiation, you make your self as guilty of that cursed
idolatry which is committed in worshipping a morsel of paste or bread, as if
it were the son of God. I omit to speak of another error which issues out
of their transubsta^tiation whereof they make mention about ye end of the
seventh article: where they say that under both kinds is wholly contained the
body of Jesus Christ. They had forgotten to say the blood, that they might
thereby continue their concomita^cy or accompanying of both kinds under one,
which they have forged in their own brain, to ye end they might maintain this
sacrilege, in yt they have robbed ye simple people of the use of the cup. But
there is not in all that so much as one sparkle of truth, and yet you allow all
these iniquities by this cursed abiuration.

As for Purgatory which you confess in the eight article, do you not
perceive what violence you offer to the son of God, John 1. 1. Ioh. 1. 1.
Ioh. 2. Heb. 1.
and what injury you offer to your selves? You know that Jesus Christ is that
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world: that his blood
cleanses us from all sin: that he is the atonement or propitiaton for our
sins, and that he hmselfe has purged them, etc. Lo it is he which is our true
Purgatory. And yet you confess another, making of none effect, so much as in
you lies, the virtue of ye precious blood of this unspotted lamb, and
renouncing the true purgation of your sins.

Furthermore, Mat. 4. Ioh. 14. Ioh. 15. 1. tim 2. 1. Ioh. 2.
know you not yt there is one only God whom we must worship and reverence, to
whom we must pray, and upon whom we must call, and that in ye name and
mediation of Jesus Christ alone who is our only mediator, advocate and
intercessour? And yet consider what confession you have made in the ninth
Article contrary to your own conscience: that is, that you must worship,
pray unto, and call upon Saints: which is manifest idolatry, forasmuch as
invocation is a kind of worshipping. And furthermore you avouch that the saints
are our advocates and intercessors, which is to rob Jesus Christ of that
honor which belongs to him alone. But you do worse then this comes too,
when you confess that you must woorshippe or reverence the relics of the
said Saints: under which words they comprehend not only the bones and
relics of dead Saints, but also the stinking and rotten carkaises of many,
whose souls it may be are tormented in Hell, as says an ancient Doctor?
and not only the bones of men, but also of beasts, which these deceivers make
the poor blockish people worship, that they may thereby get money. And is it
possible the^ that you should be come to such blockishnes?

But what will you say to that which they make you confess by the tenth
article? that men must not only have images of Jesus Christ, of the virgin
Marie, and of all the other saints, but also that they must worship and honor
the^. Know you not that this is contrary to the express commandment of the
Lord? and that such honor and worship is abominable idolatry? Exodus 20.
Moreover, have you so slenderly profited in the knowledge of God, and of his
holy truth, that you have not learned to abhor and detest that cursed and
damnable merchaundize which the Pope makes of his pardons and indulge^ces,
which he sells for good round sums of ready money, to the great dishonor
of the son of God, to the contempt of his precious blood, and to the hurt of
poor souls? Have you ever read either in the old or new Testament, that the
blood and merits of Saints ought to be coupled with the blood and merit of
Jesus Christ thereby to race out sins, and to satisfy Gods justice. Have you
ever read that Jesus Christ has commanded that of such a mingle mangle should
be made a treasure which should be at the disposing of that Antichrist of Rome,
to bestow it upon whom soever he will, or rather to sell it to those, that
would buy it, and that such pardons should be profitable for all
Christians, that is to say, such as should be able to save them from sin and
from eternal death. And yet they are so impudent as to say so, yea to affirm
that Jesus Christ is the author of such abominations, and that has he left
them to the church, that is according to their interpretation, to the Pope,
that he might be the keeper and steward thereof. And yet you have been so
blind as to grant such an impiety by the eleventh article. O immortal God,
who would ever have looked for any such thing at your hands.

And that which worse is, you do not only approve this cursed tyranny of
Antichrist, confessing by the twelfth article that the great whore of Babylon
(which they falselie call the holy Cathotholike and Apostolic Church) is the
mother and mistress of all other Churches, but you do also withdraw your
selves from the obedience and subjection which you owe unto the only, and high
Bishop of our souls, which is Jesus Christ, that you may become slaves and
servants to the tyrannous lordship of the Bishop of Rome, (yea binding your
selves with promise and oath thereto) who calls himself most impudentlie the
successor of Peter. But you know yt the life and doctrine of the one and other,
do plainly show that there is as great difference between S. Peter and the
pope of Rome, as between an Angel of God, and an angel of Satan. Which were
quickly proved, if it were needful to enter any farther into this matter: as
also that which he says of this holy Apostle, calling him Prince or chief of
the Apostles, to the end he may establish his own tyranous primacie. But you
know that this is a fair flat lie: for he cannot find so much as one syllable
in the whole scripture, whereby he can prove ye Jesus Christ appointed Peter to
be prince and chief over his other Apostles much less that this holy Apostle
did ever exercise any lordship over his companions: but rather we see that all
of them did faithfully exercise their ministry there where God called them,
with equal athoritie, without any pretense of primacie or superiority of one
over another. But admit we should grant the Pope that, yet he must prove many
other things before he can make this conclusion, that he is therefore chief
of all Bishops, and head of the Church. Which he shall never be able to do out
of the word of God. You are not ignorant how untruly this cursed creature
calls himself the vicar of Jesus Christ: who cease not to persecute him in
his members with desperate rage: yea who has corrupted, perverted, and
falsified the doctrine of the Gospel: who oppresses the Church of Jesus
Christ, constrayning her with might and main to forsake and renounce her true
spouse, to commit fornication with Satan in all manner of pollutions,
profanations, and abominable idolatries, that he may hale her headlong with
him to hell. You know that he is the man of sin, the son of perdition,
which sits in the temple of God, setting himself against God, and making
himself to be worshipped as God: yea boasting and vanting himself forth as
God: you know that he is in sum very Antichrist, that is, a sworn enimye of
Jesus Christ and his doctrine. To be brief, you know that he is the very
lieutenant and vicar of that murderer of bodies and souls, which is the
devil: whose commandments and ordinances he executes most exactly against
the poor faithful children of God: and yet you are so besotted that you
confess him to be the vicar of Jesus Christ. O what blindness is this? And what
brutish blockishnes.

Finally, to the end you might leave nothing undone which might appertain to a
full and perfect renouncing of christian religion, of the fellowship of Jesus
Christ and of his church, and to a full approbation and acknowledging of all
impieties and abominations which are in the kingdom of Antichrist, you
promise and vow to keep entirely and inuiolablie even until your last breat
all that which has been determined and concluded by their Canons, decrees, and
councels, and principally all the tyrannous and wicked decrees and ordinances
of the council of Trent: wherein the pure and true doctrine of Jesus Christ
has been accursed and condemned as false and erroneous: and contrariwise
wherein all the impieties and abominations of Antichrtst have been confirmed
and ratified: and all this without any hearing of the matter, and without any
deciding of any by the word of God: but only upon a certain absolute and
tyrannous authority, as appears by the articles of the said Council. This
is in sum that evil and offense which you have committed against God and
your own salvation by this wicked and devilish confession and abiuration:
there is some difference between that which was imprinted at Lions, which I
have followed, and that which is imprinted at Paris: first in that the order of
the second and third articles is changed: and also in that which is imprinted
at Paris, there be two other errors, the one touching free will, and the other
touching justification by works: upon refutation whereof, I will not stand any
longer, being well assured that you condemn the^, as well as all the rest. And
therefore you are so much the more blame worthy in that you avouch them
contrary to your own conscience. Consider then my brethren into what a danger
of destruction you have thrown your selves headlong, and how shameful,
cowardly, and vile your renouncing whereby you have renounced ye doctrine of
the gospel, is, so to return to those corruptions which you had before cast
up, and to welter again in that filthy mire from which you were once washed.
Open your eyes, and behold how great the foulenes and filthiness of your fault
is. Surely the more I consider the same, together with all the circumstances
thereof, the more damnable do I find it to be both before God and also before
men: for it co^prehendeth in it an infinite number of ye most monstrous crimes
yt could be committed against ye majesty of God. You may judge of it as you
shall think good, but it is so: you know how greatly we are bound to love him,
who has so dearly loved us that he has (as one would say) forgotten himself,
to save us, and to bring us from that cursed and miserable estate wherein we
stood through our own fault. He has not spared his only and well-beloved
son, but has delivered him up to death, yea even to the death of the cross,
for us that were his enemies: the son also for his part, who would have
thought it no robbery to make himself equal with God, (as says the Apostle)
did notwithstanding abase himself full low that he might lift us up on high,
Phi. 2.
he became poor to enrich us, he covered himself with our confusion and shame
that he might make us partakers of his glory, he became mortal, that we
might have immortality: to be short, he put himself in our place, he
presented him self guilty before Gods judgment seat, and descended into hell
that he might bring us thence and exalte us to the heavenly inheritance. Now
then ought not this infinite bounty, this incomparable love, this
incomprehensible favor, this deapth of compassions and mercies, inflame us
with a mutual love toward our good God, and toward his son Jesus Christ. And
what does this love import, save only that being dedicated and consecrated to
his service, we should glorify him in all and through all things, preferring
his honor and glory, the sanctifying of his name, the advancement of his
kingdom, the fear, the reverence, and the obedience which we owe unto him,
before all things that are pleasant to the eye, good, precious, and excellent
in this world, yea even before our very life it self. But mark I pray you
how you have done your duty in this point. You have preferred the love of the
world and of your selves before the love of god: you have dishonored and
defamed the Lord (so much as in you lies) a thousand thousand ways. For over
and besides that you have infringed and broken his covenant, you have denied
him to be your God and father, you have abiured his holy and sacred truth, you
have allowed and received in steed of it that which is falsehood, you have
denied the son of God, and taken Antichrist for your head, you have polluted
your bodies (which he had chosen to be his temple) by abominable idolatry, you
have made the holy ghost, and the holy Angels heavy and sorrowful, and grieved
the whole Church of God, which is ashamed and confounded by reason of your
backsliding, and even sobbeth and lamenteth for the same: besides all these
evils, I say, there is this also, that is, that now you open the mouth of the
unbelieving to blaspheme (more then ever heretofore) the holy and precious
name of God whereon you sometimes called. Know you not with what floutes,
scoffs, and scorns worldly and profane men were wont irreverently to speak
of Christian religion, even then when they had but small occasion? But now how
great occasion do you minister unto them by your backsliding? Will not they say
that the religion whereof you made profession, is not so good, so true, nor so
well grounded upon the word of God, as you have professed? Will not they speak
evil of the doctrine of the Gospel, yea and of Jesus Christ him self, as if
you had been deceived by him? Satan, Antichriste, and all his ministers, as
the Priests, munkes, and all that rabble which fight for their bellies against
the truth of god, al these I say will make bone fires for joy, will laugh with
wide open mouth, will triumph, and depresse the true doctrine of Jesus Christ,
and extol their errors, superstitions, and idolatries.

In like manner you are the cause that the Lord shall be blasphemed and disfamed,
that religion shall be despised and not regarded, that the doctrine of Jesus
Christ shall be mocked and scorned, and that the enemies shall set up their
horns on high, and triumph concerning the victory which they think they have
gotten.

And that which more is, you let and hinder so much as in you lies, the
kingdom of Jesus Christ: for if you would have done your duty, and have
constantlye persisted in the profession and confession of the Gospel, if you
had preferred (as you ought) the honor and glory of God, and your own
salvation, before your goods, pleasures, and commodities, before the honor of
the world, of your selves, and of your neighbors, and before your own life,
many should have been well edified thereby, whereas now they are greatly
offended and grieved by your fall: those that are strangers from the knowledge
of Jesus Christ, would have been brought nigh unto him to taste of the doctrine
of the gospel, if you would have stood to the defense thereof, though it had
bin with loss of your goods and lives: as in times past the holy martyrs wan
more souls to Jesus Christ by their invincible constancy, then by their
doctrine and instruction. But now those that never tasted of the same, will
more loath it then ever, seeing you make less account of it then Esau did of
his Birthright, who sold it for one mess of pottage. Those which began to
discover the abuses, superstitions, and idolatries, of popery, and to have
some smell of the Gospel, would have gone forward, and would have been confirmed
by your perseverance: but now seeing you forsake ye which they began to love,
they will also be out of liking with the same: and on the other side, seeing yt
you receive again ye which they began to disdain, yt shall confirm the^ in
their false opinions, or make the^ become athists. You know that in the church
of God there be many which make profession of Christian religion, and yet
there is in them great infirmity, whereof Jesus Christ will have us to have
regard that we do not offend them: these would have been fortified and
strengthened by your good example: but when ye poor simple people which had but
slenderlye profited and which had been but simplye instructed, saw that many
of you which had attained to so great honor as to be called to public
charges of the Church, or which were otherwise me^ of account, and such as were
had in great reputation amongst others, and which were reputed as torches and
lanternes to give light to others: I say when the poor simple people which
were but weak, saw you generally turn your backs so cowardlye, surely it was
unto them marvelous offensive, and a very great discouragement: so that a
great many did yield when they were tried, and fell through your occasion. And
surely it is no thanks to you that all of them did not the like: for surely I
will speak this to your shame, that many amongst you have been so miserable
and cursed, as to be Satan's to others, tempting and pricking them forward to
do as you did: O cursed wretches, was it not enough for you to destroy your
selves unless you must also become guilty of the destruction and ruin of your
poor brethren? And now assuredly you are such, if you and they die in this
estate.

You oppose your selves yet after another sort against the advancement of Gods
glory, and of the kingdom of his son Jesus Christ, yea you hinder it so
much as in you lies: for you have done what you can to spoil the the poor
church of Jesus Christ of Pastors: forasmuch as you do not only grieve them,
but also dishonor and disfame them: so that they must needs be ashamed and
confounded by means of you. For seeing you do so miserably and cowardly revolt
from Christian religion, and renounce the truth of god which they have preached
unto you, do you not secretly or rather openly declare yt you count the^ as
false prophets and seducers, which have deceived you, and fed you with lies?
Now God is witness, and your own conscience does reprove you of the contrary.
But notwithstanding seeing their hope to be frustrate, and that they are so
simply rewarded at your hands for their pains, yea yt they have evil repaied
unto the^ for good, shall not this discourage them from employing themselves
hereafter about the work of your salvation? Assuredly, if they had not greater
regard to the glory of God, then to your unthankfulness, and if they were not
more desirous of your salvation then you your selves, they would quite give
over all: and it may be there will be some that will do so indeed: and also
many young men which would have dedicated themselves to the study of
divinity, that they might serve in the ministry, will begin to loath the same
through your fault. So that it is to be feared that it will come to pass that
there will very few be found which will till and sow in such evil ground
whereof they shall reap so small fruits. And what can we expect from yt but
beastly and brutish ignorance, such as was sometimes and is as yet in popery:
corruption of ye pure service of God, and finally miserable desolation? Now the
Lord will not leave of to finish his work, and to send laborers into his
harvest, when he shall see time. Yet so it is that you shall nevertheless be
always guilty of the foresaid evils, in as much as they be fruits and
effects of your cowardlines and unthankfulness, howsoever the Lord do turn
them to some other end, by his infinite goodness.

You see then how many monstrous crimes are coupled with your fault and fall:
but yet this is not al, for there be an infinite number of other sins that
depend thereupon: whereof I touch only ye most notorious, and that without
using any great discourses and amplifications (as need does require) that I
may paint out the same unto you: for I content my self with setting the^ down
only, for avoiding prolixitie. Notwithstanding it stands you upon to think
upon them, and to weigh the^ well, yt you may be brought to detest the^:
otherwise they shall be ordered before your face in ye great day of ye Lord.
Consider then I pray you ye over and besides that which has been touched
heretofore, you have committed and do commit such an evil as is no small one:
for by your backslyding you condemn not only those which stand as yet at this
day through the grace of God in the profession and confession of the Gospel,
as if they were fools and senseles, or else mad men, but you do also condemn
all those which are dead in our Lord: and principally a great number of the
faithful servants of God and of holy martyrs, who have sealed with their own
blood that doctrine which you have abiured, and which did choose rather to
loose their goods, honors, and other commodities of this life: to be banished
and chased from their own houses, to be deprived of their fathers, mothers,
wives, children kinsfolk and friends: to be cast in prison amongst serpents and
toades: to be bound and chained, beaten, railed upon, racked and tormented by
tormentors, and to suffer all manner cruelties and torments: yea they chose
rather to die the most cruel deaths yt could be invented, then to pollute them
selves in ye superstitions and idolatries of popery, which you allow now by
your reuolting, and do miserably defile both your souls, and also your bodies.
You condemn all those I say, as if they had been indiscreet men, or some
wicked heretics: and on ye contrary you justify ye carnal and tyra^nous
barbarism of tyrants and persecutors, of unjust judges, and cruel torme^tors
who have murdered and put them to death. And yet your own conscience tells
you that they suffered for righteousness sake, and gave their lives for the name
of Jesus Christ: and that they are therefore blessed, as Jesus Christ
pronounces them to be. On the other side, that those which put them to death
are accursed, unhappy, and detestable, yea very instruments of Satan, for
whom there is prepared an horrible judgment, ye vengeance of God, which they
shall not escape, howsoever it be long a coming. Therefore you are so much the
more without excuse before God, seeing that you condemn those whom you know to
be just and innocent, and approve and justify those whom you know to be
wicked and ungodly. He which condemns the just, and justifies the wicked,
they are both alike abominable before the Lord, says Solomon. If you say
that you intend no such thing: you say nothing touching this matter which I
do not willingly believe: but I answer also, that the Lord does not judge
men according to their intentions, if they be not ruled according to his
word. Know you then that that which you have done and do as yet, so long as
you continue reuolts, makes you guilty of all the innocent blood which has
bin shed until this day by the executioners and Soldiers of Satan and of
Antichrist, and of all the injuries and outrages which the enemies of GOD and of
his truth have committed, and do as yet commit daily against the poor
members of Jesus Christ: who cannot but count you his enemies so long as you
are on their side which make war against him.

What answer will you make to all these points, when you shall appear before
the judgment seat of God? What excuses will you make? It may be you will say,
that that which you did was not done with a glad heart, and of set purpose, as
if you did approve Popery, and that you did intend to live and die in it, or
as if you did condemn that Religion which only you acknowledge to be good,
holy and approved of God, whereunto also you desire to return in time, by the
grace of GOD, but that you did it only to escape the violence of this outrage
which came upon you unawares. That is as much as if you should say, that you
were constrained somewhat to fashion your selves after ye world, to bear off ye
blows and to save your goods and honors, your selves, your wives, and
children etc. Othersome will make many excuses, saying: I had a charge and
family, I know no way nor means how to escape out of ye realm, I know not
whither to go to get my living, and to provide for the necessities of these yt
are mine: the time which was troublesome, the instance and importunatnesse of
my kinsfolks and friends, the tears of my wife, ye cries of my children, and
other trials did so shake me, that in fine I was glad to yield: and moreover
they will not forget to allege the infirmity of man, the example of David, of
S. Peter and others, as we are naturally very eloque^t and copious, to excuse
our faults. But if we must come once to peize them and to weigh the^
thoroughly, yt we may condemn them and humble our selves in the presence of
God, the^ we are as dumb as fishes, and we cannot in any case abide ye
another man should depaint and lively represent them unto us, yt by this
means we may be brought into the knowledge of them, and so to detest them. But
and if we be reproved for them, we do either flatly deny them, if any way
we can, or at least we seek to cover them and to lessen them by all means
possible. And whence comes that? Surely from our corruption, and from the
love of our selves, which Satan knows full well how to use, that he may
thereby bleare our understanding, or else strike us stark blind, to the end we
may not see the evil fauourednesse and filthiness of our faults, and that we
may not perceive the danger wherein we are, nor seek any way or means to
escape thence.

Now sure I am that there is no one of you that is come so far, as that he
will go about to deny so manifest a fault as yours is, that is to hold and
auouche that he has not offended, for such a one should show himself to be
too desperately hardened, blinded by Satan, and a sworn enemy to his own
salvation. But we may well presume and believe that sundry which have not as
yet forsaken the world, neither are gone far in renouncing themselves, will
have these and the like excuses ready to allege: which are even as many
pillowes or cushions which Satan, the flesh, and the world lay under your
elbowes, that they may lull and rock fast asleep your poor consciences, For
when al your excuses shall be well weighed and considered, it may be they shall
have some color, and be of some importance with men, which are naturally
moved with such affections and humane passions which corrupt their judgment:
but when they shall be examined according to the word of God, which peyzeth al
things aright, then they shall come short, and shall be of none importance. You
will say then first of all that you did not this voluntarily, and of purposed
malice. I grant you that, and yet God would not have any to come even so
far. But would you have done it if you had not had a will to do it? your will
could not be so driven and enforced, but that you might have avoided such a
mischief and inconvenience, if you had had a true zeal of the glory of God,
and an earnest desire of your own salvation, an holy affection to edify your
poor neighbors, and a right and good conscience. Now you are so convict in
your selves, that these things have bin so small and sle^der in you, that they
have bin weighed down with the weight of your affections, whereto you have
yielded your selves yea even with a strange kind of reuolting: for what manner
violence was this which you allege for your excuse? Have you resisted unto
blood? Have you been bound with chains and cast into filthy dungeons? Have
you bin racked by torments, or judged to be burnt quick? And albeit God had
laid all these trials upon you, and that he would have bin glorified in your
patience and constancy, what had bin your duty to have done then? ought ye
to have fallen back? ought you to have refused to have drunk of ye cup of the
son of God? to have borne ye yoke of his order, and to have bin associated unto
such a goodly and honorable company of martirs, whose memorial does and shall
remain for ever, not only honorable, but also blessed and holy, in ye church of
God, and who eue^ now reign and triumph with Jesus Christ, being crowned with
glory, and eternal immortality. If I say, god had brought such sharp trials
upon you as he brought upon the^, yt you might bear witness of his holy truth,
and it had so fallen out yt you had done then as now you have done, for ye
avoiding of torments, and so cruel death: you might by good right have bin
counted reuolts, disloyal and traitors to ye son of God, neither should you
have deserved to bear the name of Christians. How vile the^, how shameful, and
how damnable is your cowardlines and backsliding, seeing you should only have
bin deprived for a time of some temporal commodities? you have made more
account of a little pelf, the^ of the glory of God, of heavenly treasures, and
of your own salvation. You have bin afraid to loose your goods, and have no
whit feared to loose Gods favor, and to incur his wrath and displeasure. You
have quaked and tre^bled at the frivolous words of men which are naught but
worms of ye earth, when they threatened you with ye co^fiscation of goods and
have not tre^bled at the terrible threatenings of the judgments of God, neither
have you feared the fire of his wrath and curse more than your goods and your
selves. But I pray you what let you to save, if not all your goods, yet
the most part of them, seeing you had such leisure and time to bethink your
selves, and to set your things in order? Surely you cannot say that you were
taken at unawares as by some sudden clappe of lightning: For if you would
have opened your eyes you might have seen long before a cloud arising, which
did threaten to France some great tempest. You were oftentimes advertised by
your Pastors that the unthankfulness of men, the contempt of the graces of
God, the simple reformation which was to be seen in many, the coldness of
zeal and love, too too great liberty which every man gave himself to live
as he list, shaking off the yoke of Ecclesiastical discipline, and not
regarding any admonitions whatsoever, which were given and made in the name of
God: you have I say bin often told that all these things would without al
doubt provoke the Lord to wrath, and would bring upon us some great
calamities. This was done to the end every man might humble himself and
prevent the wrath of God, by true repentance and amendment: this was to the
end every man might be ready, and might make provision for patience,
strength, constancy, faith, hope, and for other such spiritual furniture,
Ephe. 6.
whereof the Apostle speaks: this was in sum to the end we might prepare
our selves for the battle, and that we might beg of God those things which
we had not of our selves. And without all doubt he would have given us it, if
every man had been ready and willing to do his duty. But what? we have done
quite contrary (we have kept our old course, and have become rather worse
than better: we have counted the^ busy and importunate fellows which threatened
us with ye judgments of God: we counted the^ too bitter and sharp which fought
our salvation by telling us the truth we would have had them to have preached
as we would have them, we had itching ears, and we would have had them fed
with some vanity of man's eloquence, for we loathed the plainness of the word
of God. To make short, there were in us so many wantes, that in stead of
preventing the wrath of God, we did more inflame the same: instead of
preparing and fortifying our selves that we might endure this assault, we
became rechlesse and careless, and at length so white liuered, so cowardly and
faint hearted, that the more part being terrified with the very sound of the
trumpe, did yield themselves to the enemy without making any resistance. O
what a shame was this? The^ is your backsliding so much the more to be
condemned, seeing you have despised the admonitio^s wherewith your ears were
beaten so long before. And ye which more is, this tempest came not at a sudden
or at unawares as that of the Massacre, but lumbered a long time in the air
before ye clap came. And he whom you had greatest cause to fear (as touching
men) seems to have bin raised up of God to admonish you of that which you
were to do; which was done by edictes and declarations sent abroad one after
another: as if he would have said, My friends, set your things in order, and
keep your selves from that evil which is threatened unto you. But you have
neglected all that, whether it were because you were drunken with some vain
hope which deceived you, or whether it were because you were resolved rather to
sit upon your own dunghils, and to abide by your garlic and onions of Egypt,
then to follow Jesus Christ any more through the deserts, and any longer to
bear his cross. which you loathed at length. Which appears by this, in that
in steed of preparing your selves to new afflictions, and of following Jesus
Christ, even to the end, as al those ought to do which are his true
Disciples, and desire to attain to the reward of the high calling: in steed
thereof, I say you have promised to your selves some rest and ease of the
flesh: but you were deceived, as al those shall be which so cast their accountes
without their hostess. This was then your overthrow.

Now I doubt not but that many ca^ say in truth yt they had many lets, and
were assailed by grievous temptations, seeing they were charged with a family,
and destitute of means. To be short, it may be, yt many other poor me^ had
many lets and hindera^ces: and for this cause they are rather to be pitied,
yet so it is yt they are not excusable before god for all this: and they must al
yield themselves as guilty: for howsoever it be, when it pleases ye Lord to
call us, we must follow him without looking back, and without looking upon the
hardness of the way by the which we must go. The Israelites could not see
with the eyes of the flesh, how the Lord did deliver them out of ye tyranny
and slavery of Egypt, how they escaped out of that distress wherein they saw
themselves, having the mountains on the right hand and on the left, and having
the read sea before them, and the host of the Egyptians behind them: also how
the Lord provided for their necessities in ye desert, and how he brought them
into ye promised land: they saw none of these things I say, notwithstanding
they followed ye calling of the Lord, referring the events and issues of al
things to his providence: which fell out well wc the^. And thus ought those to
have done which allege for their excuse ye foresaid straites: yt is, they
should have shut their eyes against al yt which flesh and blood could set
before the^ to turn them away, and they should have given up themselves to
the providence of this heavenly father, who feeds the fowls of ye air, and
who knows well ye means how to provide bread for his children, which follow
his calling, and not only the means, but has also a will to do it, as he
has promised. And indeed, even then, when we see nothing, which way soever
we turn our eyes, but matter of despair, the^ principally does our faith
show it self, when notwithstanding al lets and hindera^ces we trust in God,
and hope contrary to hope, after the example of Abraham. So yt al excuses
which these men can allege to ye Lord, cannot any way justify them. But and
if the hindrances were such, that they had no way nor means to escape out
certain it is that this was an evident argument yt the Lord called them to
bear witness of his truth: and therefore ought they rather to have died the
death tha^ to have denied the son of God so shamefully. To make short, it
behooued the^ either to fly, or else to suffer, seeing the Lord referred it to
their choice, and called them to do either the one or the other.

Now if these me^ be without excuse (as they be indeed) how much more those
which cannot so excuse themselves, if they will speak truth? And yet were
there any yt showed themselves so slack and so faint hearted, and more ready to
come to parle, and finally to yield themselves to ye enemy. Those to whom God
had given more means to resist and stand steadfast, those that might quickly
have escaped the danger, and even have comforted their poor brethren, by
encouraging them, and reaching them out the hand, to draw them out of the mire
and filth: those are they, I say, which have showed themselves most cowardly
and cold, either because they had more to loose (I mean more mire and earth,
and less godliness and fear of God) or else because it grieved them to forgo
their pleasures and commodities, to incur fear, to endure the disco^modities
and disturba^ces of banishment and such like things. They could well find in
their hearts to go into paradise by yt large and wide way and gate: but Jesus
christ says yt this is the way that leads to destruction, and yt the narrow
way and strait gate lead to eternal life. So that these men are the more
guilty before God, the less excuse they have. But furthermore you will object
yt I am too rigorous, and yt I have no regard to man's infirmity, and that
there is none so good but he does offend etc. I answer, that your fault cannot
be sufficiently exaggerate, it is so monstrous and scandalous: and it is most
necessary yt you be brought to ye sight of your malady and misery, that you
may be cured. And as for the infirmity of our flesh, I know (I praise God) yt
it is greater than I can express, the Lord knows it better than we, and he
takes pity and compassion thereon, but yet for all yt he will not take our
excuses, which we allege, for payment: for it arises from a corrupt
fountain, that is, from sin, yea it is sin in it self: and principally
he condemns it when we nourish it, cherish it, and entertain it in our
selves, when we take pleasure and flatter our selves in it, and when we will
make a buckler of it to cover and defend our faults: we ought rather, when we
proceed against our selves to begin here, that is, first of al to condemn our
infirmity, as being a fruit of our corruption, and afterward our sluggishnes
and slacknesse in that we despise the means which God sets before us to
strengthen our selves with all in the power of his spirit. If during the time
of your prosperity (at which time the Lord granted you grace to take some
rest, or at least to take some breath) you had well known your infirmity, and yt
this knowledge ingendering in you a distrustfulnesse of your selves, had
stirred you up to crave help at Gods hands even the strength of his spirit,
you should not have fallen into this inconvenience.

If you say that the love of your fathers, mothers, wives, and children, their
prouocations, their cries and their tears, the desire of their good and
commodity, and the fear you had to leave them open to all manner perils and
dangers, or to suffer and endure any harm: if you allege, I say, that al
these things were of great force to make you stagger and to abate your
courage: I grant that these are great trials, namely to those that have a
tender heart, and that a man must be furnished with singular strength from
above, that he may be able to overcome al those things: I say moreover, yt
this humane and natural affection is laudable, and approved of God, when it is
well ruled: for he that cares not for those yt belong unto him, is worse than
an Infidel, says the Apostle: 1. Tim. 5
but I say therwithall that this affection has not only been disordered in
you, Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 24.
but also stra^gely disordered and unbridled. For you know what that means
which the Lord requires at our hands, that we love him with all our heart,
strength, thought, and understanding: that is to say, that there be nothing in
the world neither without nor within us, that may be able to turn us aside,
how little soever, from the entire and perfect love which we owe unto our God
and father: moreover that we love nothing in this world, of all that which we
can and ought to love, no not our selves, but only in him, and for his sake,
or to speak plainly, that there be nothing which we love properly, but him
alone. You know also what Jesus Christ says, that if we prefer the love of
our fathers, mothers, wives, children, brethren, sisters, and of our own life
before the love which we owe unto him, yea if we hate not all these things for
the love of him, we can not be his disciples, and we are not worthy of him.

This was then a marvelous excessive and disordered affection that carried you
away so far, as to make you forget the love of your God and father, and of
your savior and redeemer Jesus Christ. Furthermore, I ask you this question,
what greater good and commodity, yea what greater honor you could desire and
procure for your wives and children, then to show them an example of true
godliness and of the fear of God, of patience and Christian constancy? To
carry the^ with you (if need had been) into some place of safety, where God
might be called upon, served and honored? And there to learn in good time to
bear the cross of Jesus Christ, that they might have this honor together with
you, namely to wear the liuerie and collar of his order, that you might
together be partakers of this blessing of the son of God. Man. 5.
Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven: and of that whereof S. Paul speaks that if we
suffer with him we shall reign with him and shall be glorified with him:
furthermore, how could you better save them from danger, and provide for their
safety and your own, then to bring them to this strong dungeon of the house
of God, that is into the church, which is without rifts and free from
undermining, and which is founded upon a rock, and guarded by the celestial
armies, which lie encamped round about, Mat. 16. Psalm. 34. Ps. 125.
being covered and environed on every side with the favor of the almighty,
being guarded, fortified, and defended by the invincible force of the spirit of
God.

To be brief, what better thing could you do for those that are of your blood,
and for your own souls, then to further and procure the salvation, the life,
and the eternal felicity of you all? But you have taken a clean contrary
course, for you have procured their perdition, their dishonor and eternal
confusion together with your own, and have drawn them and your selves into
far greater danger, then if with your own hands you had delivered them up
to the most cruel and bloody cutthroates of the world, or else if you had
committed them to the mercy of Lions, Tigers, and Bears, or of other bruit
beasts which are merciless. For first of al, of what benefits, favors and
blessings of God have you deprived your selves together, seeing you have cut
your selves off from ye church of Jesus Christ, and from the communion of
saints without which there is no blessedness felicity, salvation, neither any
life whatsoever, but all unhappiness, cursednes, death, ruin and destruction,
What duty have you done to edify them, when you showed them the example of
your cowardlines, treachery, and disloialtie? What account will they make to
come to Christian religion, seeing you make so small account thereof? What
reverence will thy give to Jesus Christ and his doctrine, seeing you renounce
the same so cowardly? To be brief, what constancy and stabilitie can be
expected at their hands, if they become members of the Church of God, seeing
you have so offended them and made them to stumble by your apostasy? In sum
then, so far of is it that you have procured their good and commodity, in
doing that which you have done, that on the contrary you have purchased them
the greatest evil and curse that could befall them: for you have drawn them
with you to the way of destruction, yea you have even thrust them into hell
there to abide for ever, if God be not merciful to them and you. Furthermore,
what honor have you procured them in teaching them by your example, and it may
be, by leading and carrying them your selves into the brothelhouse to commit
whoredom with Idols? Had not this been greater honor to have continued in
the house of the Lord, to have sit at the table with the son of God, to have
drunk of his cup, and to have eaten the bread of Angels with the Saints,
then to be in the infamous house of this great whore, to sit with her
ruffians and baudes, to receive at her execrable hands the cup of her
filthiness and uncleanness, which the Apostle calls the cup of devils?
Moreover, into what danger have you brought both them and also your selves?
Those to whom God has given eyes to see, see by the accomplishment of the
signs that were foretold by the spirit of God, that Antichrist does now put in
practice his last endeavors, seeing the measure of his impieties and
abominations is grown up to the full: as he does plainly declare in these
last times, by that outrageous violence which he uses now as if he were mad,
foming out his rage more furiously then ever against the Church of Jesus
Christ. And therefore they conclude by the word of God, that the Lord will not
be long, neither will he defer to display his fearful judgments upon this
cursed Babylon. For which cause the spirit of God exhorts us to come thence,
saying: Come out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, and
that you be not punished with her: for her sins are come up to heaven, and
God has remembered her iniquities etc.

Lo here then a trumpet from heaven which sounds and warns you that the
eternal will send out his thunder and lightning upon Babylon: and yet you are
so indiscreet as to run into her together with your wives and children, there
to save your selves. If you see an house on fire, or some lightning from heaven
fall upon it, will you be so foolish and mad as to run into it there to save
your selves and your young children, and that which is dear and precious unto
you? And yet you have done thus, seeking for life in the midst of death, for
happiness amidst cursednes, and for salvation there where there is nothing but
ruin and destruction. And moreover, you think your selves very wise and
discreet in that you have gotten you such a covert whiles the hail does fall
upon ye heads of others. But alas, this is a poor and dangerous couerture,
which will at last fall upon your heads, upon your goods, upon your wives and
children, if you come not thence with more speed.

You will say, that that is your desire, and that you are not entered into it
with any purpose that you will continue there always, and that you hope to
return to ye church, all this do I believe: but first of al I answer you,
that you must not thus dally with God, and that it has fallen out evil with
many which have thus dallied, and that by the just judgment of God, who will
not suffer those which mock him to escape scotfree, as me^ do. For you shall
very hardly find one of an hundred (of those which did sometimes revolt from
true religion) which has made his account to continue still in that filthy
puddle, and which has not fed himself with some vain hope to return to the
church again, when ye evil time should be over. But yet it came to pass ye
Satan taking occasion hereat, has by little and little extinguished ye small
zeal, and choked ye little quantity of good seed of godliness and of the fear
of God which was in them, that he might more and more tread them down in the
sink, out of the which they could never afterward arise by any force, or
leisure. I say nothing but that which you your selves know full well, and the
experience whereof you have seen in many. And how comes this to pass, if
not by the just vengeance of God, who depriueth those of his graces, which make
themselves unworthy thereof through their unthankfulness, and delivers those
up into the power of Satan which abuse his mercy? The Lord is not bound to
receive to mercy those that are mockers and contemners of his grace, that he
should grant it them so often as it shall please them to accept it, after that
it has been offered them sundry times, and that they shall have rejected and
despised the same, yea after that they shall have troade it under their feet,
and put it away from them with their haggish notes delighting more in filth,
then in this inestimable treasure and this great and precious pearl: for
buying whereof the good husbandmen and true marchantes of the Lord sell all
that they have: as Jesus Christ teaches us by those two parables which are in
the Gospel. Mat. 13.
It is the^ a just thing with the lord to punish such mockers and profane men,
and that diverse ways: for to some he denies the blessing of his grace,
whereof they made less account then of a mess of pottage, howsoever they come
to seek it with weeping and howling, as did that profane Esau. They shall cry
after me, says the Lord by Jeremy, but I will not hear them. O then some
there be whom in his just judgment he suffers to become so hardened in their
evil, and to fall into such brutish blockishnes, that being without feeling, and
not seeing the deep gulf of that wretchedness into which they are fallen, they
know not what need they have of the grace of God that they may be delivered
thence: whereby it comes to pass that they never crave it at Gods hands,
but dye like brute beasts. There be yet some others which are sorer stricken
with this lightning of Gods judgment: yt is, those whom Satan has cast into
such despair, that in steed of coming to god to crave mercy at his hands,
they fly from him, they hate him, they blaspheme him, and they despise him:
they are miserably vexed and tormented with remorse of their conscience, which
is as a worm which gnaweth the^ without end and without ceasing: or rather
like the infernal furies which pursue them, which torment them, which hale
them, toss them too and fro a thousand ways, not suffering them to take any
ease or rest: to make short, the rest of their miserable life which they lead
as it were in despite of God and of nature, is nothing else but a very
beginning of hell, and an hydious image of that cursed and more then miserable
condition wherein the damned are and shall be for ever. Thus fared it with Judas,
with Julian the Apostata, and with others. I would feign set before your eyes
that which in our time befell a certain Apostata called Spira, where you might
see that verified which has been said, for in him we have an example of the
terrible and fearful judgment of God against those which do so dally and
trifle with his majesty, renouncing the profession of his Gospel, for the
avoiding of persecutions: and which run after the world for a time, hoping
shortly after to return to the right way again. But for the avoiding of
prolixitie I send you to the history which is common, beseeching you to read
it and to meditate upon it diligently, not that you may do as this miserable
wretch did, but that you may learn what punishment your fault deserves which
is al one with his: for he had the same knowledge which you have, he at the
beginning of his reuolting did allege the same excuses, and made the very
same protestations, that in time he would return: But to the end the Lord
might avenge himself of so great backsliding, he would not give him grace so
to do: for after that Satan had once taken possession of him, he set before
his eyes the greatness and monstrousnes of his sin, together with such an
hidious and fearful representation of the judgment of god, that he despaired,
and ended his life so miserably, and with such an evident testimony of the
just furye and indignation of God against Apostacye, that it is a thing
impossible to see such a spectakle without great terror and fear. Now the
Lord does not show like judgments in this world against al reuolts: that is
true, yet so it is that the just punishment which he executes upon some one in
this world, shows how detestable a thing ye renouncing of the gospel is to
him. And if he defer his just vengeance and does not execute the same upon
some certain, yet they shall not escape scotfree, and their punishment shall be
no whit the lighter therefore: but on the contrary their condemnation shall
be so much the more grievous because they have abused the patience of God.

Romans 2.
Now true it is, my brethren, that I count you not amongst these, as I have
already protested: but so it is, yt you are entered into the self same way
which these are entered, and are in like danger, if God do not grant you grace
to retire thence by ready and true repentance. It remains then yt you awake
and that thoroughly at ye sound of this trumpet which the Lord causes to
sound in your ears, who grants unto you such grace as to advertise and
exhor you to turn to him. He grants you sometime to bethink your selves
and does now set before you ye means of reconciliation because he will not
loose you: take heed you despise them not: Ps. 95.
and seeing you hear his voice this day harde^ not your hearts: he calls you
with arms displaied, and offers you his grace, beware you despise it not
unthankfully, for fear least it be afterward denied you, for a just punishment
of your unthankfulness: the means to attain to this grace is, that you have
true repentance and true faith: repentance to humble you, and to throw you
down even to hell by a lively feeling and knowledge of your offense, and by a
true apprehending of the just judgment of God: faith to lift you up and to set
you on foot again in hope, by a right apprehension and acceptance of the
clemency and mercy of God. This is then the course which you must observe:
first of al examine and poys the fault which you have committed, together with
all the circumstances thereof, not flattering your selves any manner of way, and
you shall be constrained to confess that it is as yet greater and more
monstrous. more foul and vile before God then I am able to express and set
forth: know and acknowledge therein your backsliding, cowardlines, treachery,
disloyalty and unthankfulness most detestable: consider what dishonor, what
injury, what outrage you have done to God your father, to Jesus Christ your
Savior, to your selves, your wives, your children, and to all the whole
Church. Those which said they were Gods dear children, have forsaken and
denied him: his covenant is broken: Jesus Christ is renounced before me^, even
by those whom he had redeemed with the price of his blood, and by those which
had sworn faith and allegiance to him: the doctrine of his Gospel is cast of
and condemned as false, and the impieties and abominations of Antichrist are
received and approved as true and holy and that by a detestable confession and
abiuration: the Lord is dishonored and blasphemed, his holy name is polluted
and profaned by ye sacrilegious mouth of profane persons and infidels: religion
is contenmed and there is none account made of it: the kingdom of Jesus Christ
is hindered and kept back: your poor neighbors are offended the simple sort
is discouraged, by your evil example they are fallen and run headlong into the
same destruction whereinto you are fallen: your poor Pastors are confounded
and ashamed, and consequently discouraged by you from returning to till the
Lords field: lo the poor church is forsaken of those which said they were
her children, and a cruel and murdering harlot is received and acknowledged for
the true mother. Lo your true mother is forsaken, grieved, abashed, and ashamed
to see the shameful backslyding of her children: she weeps and wailes by
reason of their destruction: the Temple of God it is polluted, the holy Ghost
is made sad therewith, and the holy Angels mourn and lament for it: briefly
lo here a most detestable and abominable Apostacy, which comprehends so
great a number of so grievous and horrible crimes, as that the only rehearsal
thereof is sufficient to make the hayres of a Christian man's head, that fears
God, to stand upright. Thus then must you poys your fault, that it may seem
to you so black, so foul, and so ougly, as that it may make you ashamed in
the presence of God and of his Church.

Consider on the other side huw much wood and matter you have ministered to set
on fire the wrath of God against you. (...) 5.
You know that the scripture says of the wrath and indignation of the Lord,
that it is a consuming fire which spoileth, destroys and deuoureth all that
wherewith it meets: You know that he is an enemy to sin, and that his
justice requires that all that be punished which is contrary to his law,
Mark how many crimes and monstrous sins are comprised in your offense: is
not the smallest of them sufficient to provoke him to wrath? Know you not that
one only sin has sometimes so provoked the Lord to wrath, that to punish the
same he has caused the earth to open and to swallow up those also that have
committed it? that he has made fire come down from heaven to consume those
which were gilty thereof, Number. 16. Number. 21.
yt he has sent serpents in the wilderness the plague, ye sword, and the
destroier, and other scourges to punish the murmurings, Number. 14.
ye unthankfulness, and other sins of his people? The holy history declares
what judgments and vengeance ye Lord has sundry times and upon diverse
occasions used against the Israelites. Sometimes they were visited by ye
plague, sometimes by famine, sometimes by war. The lord has raised up diverse
enemies to execute his judgments upon them.

They have oftentimes had upon the^ ye army of the Philistines, oftentimes the
Moabits, oftentimes ye Ammonites and other enemies. Shortly after ye Syrians,
the Babylonians, Antiochus, and finally, ye Romans. They were oftentimes
overcome and discomforted, brought under subjection and led into captivity,
and in fine, quite disco^fited and destroyed by ye Roman empire. To be short,
ye Lord did displaie the severity of his judgments upon this people in
such sort, that there is not at this day any nation under the ^oape of heaven
more miserable: which has continued ever sithe^ce that fearful judgment of
God which was executed upon this people in the sacking and destruction of
Jerusalem: so that the very marks of the wrath of God do continue so deeply
engraven in all this miserable race, that those which perceive them not, have
none eyes to see withal. And wherefore came all this upon them? Even because
they had treacherously broken ye covenant of the Lord, because they had
forsaken his pure worship to run after the idols and superstitions of the
Gentiles, because they had unthankfully despised his graces and singular favor
which he had granted them of his own liberality, because they had rejected ye
salvation which was sent unto them: and finally because they had put to death
the Lord of glory, who came to save them. You will say that you are not
culpable of such crimes: and this is our undoing, when in steed of profiting
by the examples of the judgments of God which are proposed unto us in the
scriptures, we post them over unto others. But the spirit of God judges
otherwise touching them, 1. Cor. 10.
when he says by Saint Paul, that these judgments which came upon the people
of the Jews, were examples for us: and that these things are written to put
us in mind, upon who^ the ends of ye world are come. But what is the most
monstrous crime that ever the Jews did commit, and for the which they are set
before the eyes of the whole world for a spectacle of the just wrath and anger
of God? even because they had crucified the Lord of glory. And now the spirit
of GOD speaking by the Apostle to the Hebrews calls this which you have done,
Heb. 6
and do as yet contrary to your own conscience, the crucifying of the Son
of God afreshe, and the setting of him to be reproched. Then I pray you what
punishment does your fault deserve? call to mind the threatninges which are
contained in the Scripture against such backslidinges and trecheries, against
such unthankfulness, against such pollutions and profanings of ye name of God,
against such despising of his graces, against such Apostasies, abiurations and
renouncinges of the son of God, and of the doctrine of his Gospel: to be
short, against such offenses as yt of yours is. You know that the Lord calls
himself a ielous God, to show that he cannot abide such injury to be done to
his majesty. Wherefore he does also threate^ that he will visit the iniquity
of the fathers upon the children until the third and fourth generation of
those that hate him. Ex. 20.
Now I have already showed you that after you had forsaken his side, that you
might associate your selves with his enemies, he cannot take you for any
other but for haters of him, so long as you continue with them. And
furthermore, this is to hate the Lord, when a man cleaves to impieties and
idolatries whereby he is dishonored.

Wherefore this threatening appertains to you, as does that also which he
uses against those that take his name in vain, saying, that he will not
hold them guiltless. Exo. 20.
And have not you taken his name in vain when you became unfaithful and
perjured persons breaking and violating the faith and promise which you had
made to him? Do not you as yet take his name in vain, when you, through your
reuolting are the cause that it is polluted, dishonored and blasphemed by the
wicked once? Moreover, consider I pray you a little what the threatening
imports which the son of God uses against those which shall forsake him,
and join themselves with his enemies: which shall be ashamed of him and of his
Gospel: which shall renounce him before men, which shall seek to save their life,
by renouncing ye truth. Mat. 12.
He that is not with me, says he, is against me, and he that gathers not
with me scatters abroad. And what is it to be against Jesus Christ and to
scatter abroad, but to be counted his enemies. And what intertainment can you
look for at his hands at that last day, and how miserable shall your estate
be, if he account you such? Furthermore what means that threatening which
he pronounces against those which shall be ashamed of him and of his words,
saying that he will also be ashamed of them: when he shall come in the glory
of his Father with the holy Angels? Surely the meaning thereof is, that he
will not account them his, but will reject those which shall show themselves so
unthankful as to be ashamed of the son of God, Mar. 8.
who was not ashamed of our poor and miserable nature, but has done us so
great honor as to join and couple himself with us, honoring us with this
title of brethren that he might unite and knit us with God his father. Moreover,
consider what that denying and renou^cing which he threatens to those shall
have denied and renounced him before men, does import when he says, that he
will deny the^ before God his father, and holy Angels: which is confirmed by
Saint Paul, who says, Mat. 10.
that If we deny him he will deny us also. You are not ignorant that this
is even the extremest woe and curse, to be denied and rejected of the son
of God. Mark also what a curse he pronounces against those that give
offense, when he says: Woe be to him by whom offenses come: Luke 17. Mat. 18.
it were better for him that he were cast into the sea, and that he had a
millstone hanged about his neck. And indeed, what punishment think you be
deserves who by his evil example shall be the cause of the destruction of his
poor brother, for whom the son of God did shed his precious blood? Romans 14.
Set before you the threatninges which are denounced against those that pollute
the temple of God, 1. Cor. 3. Ephesians. 4.
which make sad the spirit of God, the holy Angels, and all the whole
Church. Remember that which you once learned, Luke 12.
that the servant which knows his masters will and does it not shall be
punished double: and that it shall be easier for those of Sodom and Gomorrha at
the last day, Mat. 12.
then for those that have despised the day of their visitation. To be brief,
judge you what pain and punishment he deserves, who puts in place of Jesus
Christ, ye execrable idol of Antichrist, abiuring the truth of the one, and
approving the falsehood of the other. Finally, fear least you be inwrapped in
that fearful judgment which the son of God denou^ceth against that cursed
Babylon, Apoc. 18.
into whose bosom you have thrown your selves: and return into Noah's arc
again, if you will escape the flood of the wrath of God, which threatens the
whole earth. Heb. 10.
It is a fearful thing says the Apostle, to fall into the hands of the living
God. The temporal judgments which ye Lord did execute upon Sodom and Gomorrha
upon the Jews and others, and which he executes daily upon his enemies, are
in very deed terrible and fearful, and make men's hair stand upright when they
hear of them. But this is nothing in comparison of the fearful judgment
which must be executed against ye wicked after this life: Es. ^4. 2. Cor. 2.
for as ye eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, and man's heart has
not conceived, nor comprised the good things which ye Lord has prepared for
these which love and honor him: so likewise on the contrary we may say and
that truly, that the pains, the anguishes, ye eternal torments which are
prepared for the damned in hell cannot be comprehended by man's understanding.
For if we could comprehend the^, the only thinking thereupon should cause in us
an intolerable astonishme^t and fear. The holy scripture does sometimes
represent them unto us by utter darkness, by ye prison, by eternal bands, by
weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 12. 1. Pet. 3. Apoc. 20. Mat. 13. Es. 66.
Mat. 9. mat. 19. mar. 9.
by the worm that gnaweth without ceassing, and which never dies, and by fire
that never is quenched: not that there is any proportion between the eternal
torments, and the most extreme dolours and distresses yt a man can imagine in
all these things: but to ye end it may apply it self to our dulnes, and give
us some understanding of those infinite and unspeakable pains, which the
damned shall suffer, it describes them unto us by similitudes taken from
things which are terrible and fearful. Now this is not to the end we may be
put in any vain fear, as little children are made afraid with scarrebugs, but
that we may be thoroughly afraid indeed of the judgments of God: that we
may walk before him in fear: yt we may hate sin which inflameth Gods
wrath against men: and that it may make us seek peace and reconciliation with
God when we have offended him. This is i^ also ye end for which (my brethren)
I put you in mind of these things, forasmuch as I desire your conversion and
salvation. What must you do the^? you must set before your eyes the greatness,
ye foulenes, the filthiness, and deformity of your fault, yt you may be
confounded and ashamed in your selves that you have showed your selves so
cowardly and so unthankful toward so good a father: that you may be beaten
down with terror and trembling, and with fear of ye judgment of God which
you have deserved: 1. Cor. 11.
that you may judge and condemn your selves, that you be not judged and
condemned of the Lord: to make short, that you may come like poor offenders
with ropes about your necks, to crave pardon at Gods hands, casting down your
selves at his feet by true humility, yea even plunging your selves (as men
say) in the deep dungeons of hell.

Mark here where your conversion must begin, to wit, at true repentance,
if you desire to be received into favor: for an ancient father says, Hell is
the way to come to heaven: that is to say, that such casting down and
humbling of poor sinners, confessing and detesting their faults, accusing and
condemning themselves, and which think themselves worthy to be drowned in the
deep pit of Hell, is the true preparation and disposition to receive the
grace of GOD. For he which humbles him self shall be exalted. The Lord is
nigh to hearts that are desolate, Mat. 23. Luke 14.4. Pet. 5. Psalm. 34.
contrite and humble. He saves those that are broken in spirit, etc.

Afterward, being prepared by such a compunction and contrition of heart
proceeding from a right knowledge and displeasure conceived of, and for your
sin, and therewithal from a true knowledge of the just judgments of God,
you must come out of this depth by the means of faith: which shall comfort
your broken hearts: and will assure your fearful consciences, and will
comfort your desolate souls: it will teach you that the Lord wills not the
death of a sinner, Ez. 18.
but rather that he be converted and live: also that he has promised to
poor and miserable sinners which shall turn from their wicked ways, that he
will cast all their sins into the bottom of the Sea, so that they shall
never be any more remembered. Turn you, turn you, Mich. 7 Ez.. 18.33.
from your wicked ways: why will you die you house of Israel? says the
Lord. Return then, and repent of al your transgressions, and your iniquity
shall not be imputed and laid to your charge. Turn you unto me with all, Io.
2.
your whole heart with fasting, weeping, and mourning. Rent your hearts, and
not your garments and turn to the Lord your God, for he is gentle and
merciful, slow to wrath and of great pity, and such a one as is sorry for
your afflictions. Es. 1.
Though your sins were, as red as scarlet, yet shall they be as white as
snow: and though they were as purple, yet shall they be made as white as wool.
But who is he that shall make them white? Faith shall teach you that it is
the blood of the son of GOD which cleanses you from all sin: that it is he
who died for our sins, and rose again for our justification. The fault which
you have committed is great and monstrous, and deserves great and grievous
condemnation, as you have already heard, and as the truth is: but yet not so
great but that you may have forgiveness of the same, unless you through
your obstinacy and want of repentance do make it irremissible.

The Lord is just, yea and a severe punisher of the offenses of all those
which do obstinately persevere therein, Psalm. 103. Ezech. 18.33.
and which will not give place to his admonitions: but yet he is also full of
compassion and pity toward poor sinners which acknowledge their faults,
which humble themselves before him, Ioh. 1.
which with weeping tears, sighs and fervent prayers ask pardon at his
hands. If we confess our sins says Saint John, the Lord is faithful to
forgive us them. He which confesses and acknowledges his trespasses, and
forsakes them, Prou. 28.
shall obtain mercy, says Solomon. I grant your sin is great: but yet
Gods mercy is greater. Romans 5. Heb. 4.
Where sin has abounded, says the Apostle, there grace has abounded much
more. Let us draw near then with assurance to the throane of grace, that we
may obtain mercy, and find grace to be helped in due time. This is the
exhortation which the spirit of God makes unto you, speaking by the Apostle
to the Hebrews, that he may take from you all distrust of reconciliation and
of grace. There be examples in the Scriptures which will well fit your
purpose for this matter: as that of David, that of Manasses, and that of Peter.
Which I pray you read and meditate upon them diligently, not to the end
you may flatter and bring your selves fast on sleep in the infirmity of your
flesh, and that you may thereby cover, excuse, and lessen your sin, as
many do to their judgment and condemnation: for such examples are not set
before us to this end, but rather to ye end you may stre^gthen and arm your
selves against the temptations of Satan, who, if he see that God touches your
hearts with any repentance, will do what he can to cast you headlong into
despair: moreover, it is to the end you may come to ye throne of the grace of
God by the self same way, and may enter in by the very same gate whereby they
came and entered in thither. And what way and gate is this? it is true
repentance, and a true and lively faith, accompanied with true amendment
without which all the rest is as nothing.

Mark what David did. So soon as he was told of his fault by the Prophet
Nathan, he sought no starting holes or frivolous excuses to cloak or cover
the same any manner of way, but on ye contrary he confesses it, and does
freely acknowledge it: he himself condemns it, and accuses himself before
God: he does wonderfully humble himself with weeping, sobbing, sighing, night
and day. And as he was not ashamed to commit the sin, no more was he
ashamed to confess and acknowledge the same openly, and as it were to make an
honorable amends for the same before the whole Church that was in his time,
and that was to come afterward. For the Psalms which he made are as it were
a public confession: to be brief, he shows all tokens and testimonies of a
true penitent heart, which was contrite and humbled through the feeling of
sin, and by the knowledge of the wrath of GOD, which beats him down even
to the depth, afterward he rises again by the means of faith, which
sets before him the greatness and ye multitude of the compassions and
mercies of this most merciful father: to whom he makes recourse with fervent
prayer to crave pardon and mercy. Which thing he does with certain
persuasion and assurance that the Lord would receive him to mercy, as he did
through his grace. Mark then what manner repentance and faith that of David's
was, and what was the fruit thereof. Now all this was acompanied with a
ready amendment: for after that the Prophet was humbled before the Lord,
after that he had craved pardon, and after that he perceived that the wrath
of GOD conceived against him was appeased, and that his conscience was at rest,
what does he? Does he lie wallowing still in his filthe? Does he drive
off to amend him self, and to repair his fault until such time as he
might commodiouslie do it without any let or hinderaunce of other
business? Not so, but he resolves out of hand to walk all the rest of his
life in the fear and obedience of the Lord, consecrating him self wholly to
his service.

Thus did Manasses king of Judah: for after that he was told of his faults
and iniquities, not by some Prophet, but even by the Lord himself, who because
he would not loose him, 1. Chr. 33.
spoke to him with his fatherly rod, delivering him up into the hands of
the Assyrians, which bound him with manicles, and chains, and carried him to
Babylon.

After that he was thus visited by the Lord, it is said that he humbled
himself before him, that is to say, that he acknowledged and confessed his
faults with grief and sorrow, when he perceived the wrath of God which he had
deserved. It is said further, that he prayed unto the Lord, that is, he had
recourse unto his grace and mercy, with full confidence and assurance that he
should obtain it. As indeed the Lord was merciful unto him: for it is said
that he heard his prayer, he received him into favor again, and made him
return to Jerusalem that he might establish him again in his kingdom.
Hereupon insued a ready change and amendment: for he took away the strange
gods and idols that were in the house of the Lord: he broke down all the
altars which he had built contrary to his commandment: he reedified the true
altar of the lord, and offered thereon peace offerings, and sacrifices of
praise. Also he gave commandment throughout al Judah that they should serve
the Lord the God of Israel: to be short he made such and so ready an
amendment of all his faults, that he did indeed declare that there was no
feigning nor hypocrisy in his repentance and in his faith, but that it was
pure, entire, and sincere. Such was his reuersio^: such was that of Saint
Peter. True it is indeed, that there is not so ample mention made of it in the
Gospel, as of that of David, and that of Manasses: for it is only said that
after that Saint Peter had denied his master, and that Jesus Christ had
beheld him, the Cock cruel then was he so well awaked and touched at the
quick, Mat. 26. Mat. 14. Luke 22.
that he rushed out of the Priests house, and wept bitterly. Now that which
followed thereupon, shows plainly that his fault was forgiven. For Jesus
Christ took him afterward for his disciple, and continued him in his office of
an Apostle. Then we may conclude that this faith and repentance was true and
entire: for that his bitter weeping showed that he was thoroughly touched with
his fault, and that he was extreemely grieved at it, not only because he saw
the punishment which he had deserved if God would have handled him sharply
and severely, but principally by reason of his too monstrous unthankfulness,
backsliding, and disloyalty which made him ashamed before God and men. If then
his repentance were true and entire, whereby he was beaten down even to hell,
we may well say that his faith was of the self same stamp, and that this
look which the Lord gave him was of marvelous force and efficacy: seeing
that being fallen so far, and having committed such an horrible sin, that
(as they say) he was not sufficient enough to punish it: yet was he not
swallowed up with despair, but he was raised up out of that dungeon of
destruction, even by apprehending a greater depth then that was: that is the
infinite depth of the riches of the grace and mercy of God, whereunto he had
recourse, with full assurance that this most bountiful and merciful father
would take pittye and compassion on him. You see then the repentance and the
excellent faith of this holy Apostle: and also how he seals and confirms
all by a sudden and true amendment: for immediately after that he saw the
breaknecke of destruction, and the woeful and miserable estate whereinto he was
fallen, he came thence without delay, and then went to seek his brethren and
companions, that is, he came within the lists of the Church again how small
soever it were at that time, and in how poor and miserable estate soever it
was according to the world, so that the poor faithful could look for nothing
but for the cross, tribulations, and persecutions, considering the sharp
intertainment which the sovereign master and head of the Church had and found.

This then was the way and gate whereby David, Manasses, and S. Peter had
access unto the throne of that grace and mercy of God. The very self same
thing is taught us by the history of the prodigal son, which Jesus Christ
sets down in the Gospel, Luke 15.
to show us on the one side how greatly they are blindes and void of
understanding, which upon any occasion whatsoever forsake the house of their
heavenly father, without yt which there is nothing but mere hunger, poverty,
misery, woe and cursednes. On the other side this serves to teach us by what
means we may come and be received into favor. This was then a foolish son,
yea blind and bewitched of Satan: who finding (it may be) his fathers
government and discipline too hard and austere, and being desirous to follow
his foolish affections and disordered desires, does withdraw himself from his
said father, goes out of his house, and runs after his own lusts: he
falls shortly after into a most pitious and miserable estate: he which
refused to sit at his fathers table, does now sit at table with hogs: he
which disdained good and honorable intertainement, the exquisite and delicate
meats and iunkates whereof he had sufficient, cannot now fill himself with
the meat of hogs: he which despised the goodly and precious ornaments
wherewith he was clothed when he was in his fathers house, goes now all
tattered and torn like a beggar: to make short, he which might have been in
full good case, if he had would, is now accursed and brought to utter
destruction through his own folly, and consequently unworthy ever to come
within his fathers doors, and to have so much as a good look of him whom he
had so grievously offended. Lo here then a child that was utterly lost,
deprived of al goodness, honor and felicity, and plunged as it were in a gulf
of woe, shame, and reproach. What remains then for him but to despair? And
yet he takes not that course, but the quite contrary: for he comes to
himself, he perceives his wretchedness, he bewaileth his estate, he is
displeased with himself for his sin, he resolves with him self to come
and humble himself before his father whom he had offended, he purposes to
crave pardon of him, assuring himself of his goodness and mercy, finally he
comes out of that filth, and without any more a do to his father he comes,
he confesses and acknowledges his sin to him, saying that he had sinned
against heaven and against him, and he counts himself unworthy to be taken
for his son, and having none other means left but to fly to his mercy, he
beseeches him to take pity and compassion upon him, and to grant him this
grace that he would receive him into his house, if not as his child, yet at
least as one of his hired servants: acknowledging with David that the
condition of the poor porters of Gods house is far more blessed and
honorable then Ps. 84.
that of the greatest monarchs of the earth which are without the Church.

Thus did this poor prodigal child, that he might escape out of that woeful
misery into which he was fallen, and that he might recover that good, that
honor, and that felicitye which he had lost: as indeed all fell out so well,
that he finds his father better disposed, more ready, and better inclyned to
receive him (not as a servant, but as a son) then he durst desire. In like
manner you see that the true and only means to obtain grace and mercy at the
Lords hands, is true repentance, a true faith, and true amendment.

Lo then, my brethren, what course you must observe: lo here the way which you
must follow: lo here the gate whereby you must enter in unto the Lord to
obtain his favor. But mark well the band and conjunction of these things
which cannot be answered: for deceive not your selves, unless you amend your
fault you may well say that you acknowledge it, yt you are grieved at it, that
you condemn it, and that you count it so grievous and so monstrous, as that it
deserves a thousand deaths and a thousand hels, if there were so many, yet
all this is nothing but mere hypocrisy and mocking of God and men. In like
manner if you say that you have a true and certain assurance in the goodness
and mercy of God, Exodus 20.
that he will take pity upon you, and will give you grace to return to his
Church: that also shall be nothing but a false and perverse persuasion, and
rather a carnal assurance and confidence then a true faith: to be short, all
that shall be nothing but a mere mockery of God, and an abusing of his
patience, and consequently a means to inflame his anger so much ye more
against you, if there withal you show not in effect that you do truly repent,
and that your faith is free from al dissimulation, and hypocrisy. This effect
is nothing else but a ready change and amendment whereunto you are exhorted in
the name of God. For execution whereof we need not here stand upon particulars,
you know my meaning well enough. There remains nothing for you to do but to
have a good and freewil, proceeding from a true zeal of God, and from a
fervent desire of your salvation, coupled with an holy affection to advance
the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to edify his church.

If the very same occasions which made you fall, do now present themselves
before your eyes and keep you from amending and redressing your offense,
whether it be in regard of your affairs, of your goods, of your commodities,
or whether it be in regard of your own persons and of your kinsmen, or be it in
regard of your other circumstances: be you full well assured that is Satan's
doing, whose drift it is to plunge you deeper in the dunge and filth, and more
and more to inwrap and entangle you in his nets, that you may not escape him.
But give no place to the subtilties and false persuasions of this enemy:
resist him and he will fly from you, says ye Apostle. He will set before you
a thousand difficulties and impossibilities thereby to astonish you, and to
keep you back, if possibly he can, that you may not be resolved to enter
into the way of true conversion: and if you enter the same he will lay a
thousand disturbances and stumbling blocks in your way to stop and stay you,
and to make you retire: he will set before your eyes the might, the means, and
the multitude of your enemies, and the small means you have, so that you
cannot in long time escape out of this babilonish captivity: he will set
before you the cross, the afflictions, the sufferings, the persecutions, the
poverty, the contempt, the perils and dangers, whereunto those which follow
Jesus Christ are daily subject. On the other side he will promise you all rest,
all assurance, all good things, the honors, pleasures, delights and
commodities of this life, if you will worship him and continue in his service.
But you must make him the very same answer, and give him the repulse after the
self same sort as Jesus Christ did, that is by the word of God: Mat. 4.
come behind me Satan, for it is written etc. You must then here take the
Spiritual armoure of a Christian knight which the Spirit of God sets down
unto you by Saint Paul, Ephesians. 6.
that is amongst the rest, fervent and continual prayers to the Lord, the
buckler of faith, and the sword of the spirit which is the word of God, to
beat back the fiery darts of this wicked one: you must oppose against all
that which he shall purpose unto you through the inticements of the flesh and
the world, that which you sometimes learned in the School of Christ. If then
he lay stumbling blocks cross your way to keep you from returning to God,
beware you stumble not at them, but strengthen your selves in the power of the
Spirit of God, and leap over them, remembering that grave sentence of Jesus
Christ, whereunto but a few have regard: Blessed is he, says he, that is not
offended at me: that is, which shall not be let or hindered, by any occasion
whatsoever, to come unto me, You know full well what we must conclude on the
contrary, that is, that he is unhappy and more then unhappy the which shall
be offended through him: for in very deed it were better for us never to have
been borne in this world, then to be separated from Jesus Christ.

As for that which Satan can set before you touching the might, means, and
multitude of your enemies thereby to make you astonished, and touching the
feeblenes and infirmity of the poor Church, and the small means it has
according to the world to help it self, that hereby he may discourage you:
remember that which is spoken so often in the Scripture, 2. Tim. ^.
that the Lord he is a God of power and of hosts: remember that which
Eliseus says to his servant: Those that are with us are mo then those that
are with them. Romans 8.
Strengthen your selves with that which Saint Paul says: If God be with us
who can be against us. His meaning is not yt if god be on our side there shall
not any longer be any enemies to make war against us, but his meaning is, yt if
we have God on our side, we may despise al ye strength not only of me^, but
also of Satan and of hell. And indeed what ca^ al ye powers and forces of al ye
kings and potentates of the earth do if they be coupled together, and what are
they able to do against ye power of ye most mighty? Surely they are nothing but
a vapor of smoke that vanishes away, and as wax that melts at the fire,
Ps. 58.
as says ye prophet. How is it then, will some say, yt the lord deferreth ye
deliverance of his church so long? Because ye time is not yet come: without all
doubt he will deliver it, howsoever it be long first, and he will break ye
head of his adversaries in pieces eue^ as an earthen vessel, Psalm. ^.
yea even by his iron rod. For seeing he begins his judgment at his own
house, it is a most evident token that he will end it with those that are
rebellious against his Gospel, and that their end shall be most miserable: 1.
Pet. 4.
For they shall drink the dregs of the Lords cup when he shall visit the^, 1.
Pet. 4.
not in his gentleness and benignity, as he deals with those that are his
own, but in his anger and in his wrath: notwithstanding this shall come to
pass at ye time which he has appointed and ordained. Wherefore it behooves us
to watch, and in our patience to possess our souls, and the Lord shall show
us wonderful things. Luke 21.


But and if you be terrified through ye horror of the cross, of afflictions
and persecutions which are proposed unto all those which will be true disciples
of ye son of God, and desire to be made partakers of his celestial kingdom,
call to mind yt which you have learned out of the word of God: to wit, that
the afflictions of the faithful are blessed with God, forasmuch as he has
sanctified them in the person of his son: also that they are honorable,
forasmuch as by the^ they are made partakers of the sufferings of Jesus Christ,
and are made like to his image, 2. Pet. 4. Romans 8.
bearing and wearing his liuerie as knights of his order: also that they are
tokens and testimonies of the favor and fatherly will of God, who chasteneth
those whom he loves, and scourges every child who^ he receives to himself:
Pro. 3. Heb. 12. Apoc. 3.
also that they be but light and of small continuance being compared with that
weight of most excellent glory, which they work in us: For if we suffer with
Jesus Christ we shall reign and be glorified with him, 2. Cor. 4.
says the Apostle. And blessed are they which suffer persecution for
righteousness sake for theirs is ye kingdom of God says Christ Jesus. 2. Tim.
1. Mat. 5.
Also ye afflictions are not only profitable for the faithful, but also
necessary, forasmuch as by them the Lord corrects that natural corruption
and perverseness which does incessantly drive us to rebel against his holy
comma^dements: they tame our flesh, and bridle it, for fear least it wax
wanton and go astray: it teaches us how to know our selves, to forsake ye
world, to wax out of love with it, that we may so much the more desire to
attain to eternal life: by this means we are provoked to pray and earnestly to
call upon God, and to put our trust in him: our faith and our patience are
exercised, proved and fined: to be brief, afflictions are a mean whereby ye
Lord procures and furthereth our salvation so many ways, yt those which
fly from the^ and which abhor the^, show themselves not only unadvised, but
also altogether blind and sworn enemies to their own good and salvation.

Furthermore, Romans 8.
like as afflictions (as also all things else whether prosperity or adversity
fall out to ye good and salvation of those which love and fear the Lord: so
likewise on ye contrary we may say that al things turn to a curse to those
which are out of Gods favor. Wherefore this rest, this ease, these good
things, these honors, and these temporal commodities which the world
promises you, to hinder you from turning to God, ought not to prevail with you:
And surely if you suffer your selves to be made drunke^ with such deceiuable
allurements, it will go ill with you: for he which makes you such fair
promises has no power to perform them: so that you shall be frustrate of your
vain hope, and shall become twice miserable. But put case you should enjoy al
these things peaceably, you should yet be more accursed: for they shall be given
you in the wrath of God, and the use thereof shall be accursed to you so long as
you continue separate from Jesus Christ and his Church. Furthermore, what
profit should you reap by this to have the full and whole fruition of all
beautiful, precious, and excellent things yt are in the world, if you loose
your own souls? and what will you give in recompense thereof says Jesus
Christ? Mat. 26.
What is there in this world which we ought to count so dear and so precious
as the eternal salvation of our souls? The son of God made so great account
of it yt to purchase the same for us, he shed his most precious blood, and
suffered a most cruel and a most horrible death: not only in his body, but
also in his soul, forasmuch as he was put even as in the press of Gods wrath,
and suffered the heavy burden of his just judgment for us, so that he was in
a manner oppressed with it, so that he said, My God, my God why have thou
forsaken me? We must the^ needs say yt our salvation is a thing of great price,
seeing it cost the son of God so dear. Will you then show your selves so
unthankful toward him as to contemn and tread under foot so precious and
so inestimable a treasure? Will you be so cruel and so discourteous to your selves
as to deprive your selves thereof for ever, to enjoy transitory commodities,
and to escape certain light and small discommodities which are not worth the
naming?

What man is he so mad that will stick to forgo three or four pence, to gain
a treasure of one thousand crowns? Or who is he that is so dainty as that
he cannot suffer a little prick of a pinnes point, the pain whereof is gone
in ye turning of a hand, that he may be blessed and enjoy perpetual
pleasures during his whole life? In like sort what man is he that is so
foolish as to hazard the loss of all his goods upon hope to get one poor
penny: or rather a thing of nothing what man is he that is so mad and void of
reason, who to enjoy a quarter of an hours pleasure would bind him self to
go up at the end thereof upon a scaffolde, and there to have his head cut off,
or else to be tormented upon a wheel. And what are al torments, yea even the
most cruel torments that a man can endure in this world, being compared with
the eternal torments, as has bin said.

For the honor of God therefore, my brethren, bethink your selves. Come out of
ye cursed Babylon, return to your fathers house, who is ready to receive you as
his children, and to kill the fat calf to the end to feast you and to make you
good cheer, yea, to apparel you with the precious ornaments of his son Jesus
Christ, after that he has forgiven you al your offenses. Take heed yt you
drive not off from day to day, abusing his patience, for fear least his wrath
wax hoater and hoater against you, and least he shut the gate of his grace
against you, when, after you have stopped your ears against his aduertiseme^ts
you shall come to seek him in vain. follow him now seeing he calls you to him:
harde^ not your heart against ye sweet voice of this most merciful father. You
have dishonored him by your falling away, honor him now, and give him glory
through your conversion: you have cowardly forsaken the banner of Jesus Christ,
gather fresh strength and courage now, so that it may appear that you gave
back to thend you might leap better, and that you might fight more valiantly
then ever heretofore: you have denied and renounced him before men, and have
abiured the truth of the gospel: make now a quite contrary abiuration and
denial: renounce Antichrist in the face of the whole world: abjure all his
impieties and abominations: cast up al his filth and infections out of your
stomach: you have offended, dishonored, and grieved the poor Church of Jesus
Christ: edify it now and repair the honor thereof: you have made sad the
holy Ghost and all good men, and have made glad Satan and Antichrist together
with their ministers, do now the quite contrary: make glad all those to whom
you have ministered matter of sorrow, and let all those be confounded and
ashamed which rejoice at your fall, and which triumph over it: you are gone
astray, and are again entered into the way of destruction, whence the Lord had
drawn you, return now again to the right way which you have forsaken, Mat.
12.
for fear least that wicked spirit which was gone out of your heart, return
again, that he may enter in again with seven other spirits worse then
himself, least after they have gotten possession of you they make your last
estate worse then your first: that is most cursed and most miserable. Now the
father of all mercy vouchsafe in mercy to behold you: the high shepherd and
bishop of your souls vouchsafe himself to look out his wandering sheep, and
to bring it again to his flock. The spirit of strength and of wisdom
vouchsafe to strengthen and prudently to direct you in all your actions: that
all this may redounde to his honor and glory, to your good and salvation, and
to the edification of his church, for the love of his son Jesus Christ Amen.


